MAJOR CONFL/CF
The UN's main goal is to maintain world peace, especially by
contributing to the resolution of major confrontations
THE BERLIN BLOCKADE
hl948, 1948, the city of Berlin was divided into
two zones : West Berlin under British, French
and American occupation, and East Berlin
under Soviet occupation. in a bid to curb infla-
tion, on 18 June the United States, France
and the United Kingdom introduced a mone-
tary reform which was meant to include West
Berlin. On 23 June, Stalin intervened and
barred ais land and river access to the city
from the western sectors.
The Western powers mounted an emer-
gency airlift, which kept the city supplied for
almost one year. ln September, they brought
the issue before the Security Council. The
Secretary-General, Trygve Lie, organized con-
sultations which reached a successful con-
clusion on 4 May 1949 and led to the lifting
oftheb ! ockade.
The Security
Council meets in
Paris in 1948 at the
time of the Berlin
blockade. Seen here
at the entrance to
the meeting room
are. from left to
right :Philip Jessup
(United States),
Juan Bramuglia
(Argentina),
Alexandre Parodi
(France), Sir
AlexanderCadogan
(United Kingdom).
The origins of the partition of Korea date back
to the end of the Second World War. ion 1948,
in spite of United Nations efforts to estab-
lish a united Korean State, the country was
split in two. The same year, the General
Assembly created the United Nations Com-
mission on Korea, which was replaced in 1950
by the United Nations Commission for the
Reunification and Rehabilitation of Korea.
On 25 June 1950. the Korean War broke
out. On 7 July, the Security Council reated
an international force under unified command.
Contingents from 16 countries joined the mil-
itary forces of South Korea.
THE KOREAN WAR
The Soviet Union, having refrained from
occuPYlng its seat on the Security Council for
SIX months*, consldered that the Council's
decision was Illegal because it had been taken
in ! ts absence. but this had no effect.
On 1 August, the Soviet Union declded
to return to the Council and vetoed ail the
draft resolutions put to it.
On 3 November. Dean Acheson. the Ameri-
can Secretary of State, secured the adoption of
a resolution authonzing the General Assembly
to deal with matters blocked by a veto in the
Security Council and, in case of need, to allow
the use of force by a two-thirds majority vote.
! n thé same month, volunteers from the
People's Republic of China joined in the war
alongside North Korea. The Council requested
the withdrawal of the Chlnese troops, only to
be faced with the Soviet veto. in response,
the Assembly formed a group to examine the
conditions for a cease-fire.
On 18 May 1951, the General Assembly
decided to impose an embargo on China. On
30 June, North Korea accepted an armistice
o ffer. A preliminary agreement was reached in
February 1952. On 27 July 1953, at Pan-
munjom, the United Nations command and
the Chinese-North Korean command signed
an armistice agreement, th us brlnging the
Korean War to an end.
A joins communiqué issued by the two
governments on 4 July 1972 announced that
their common aim was to promote national
unit y and to seek reuniflcation by peaceful
means.
! n 1991. thé two countries were simulta-
neously admitted to the United Nations.
* Disapproving of the fact that China was represented
lu the United Nations by the delegates of Chiang Kai-
shek. the Soviet Union temporaClly wlthdrew Irom the
CoufiC as a sig'l of protest
Signature of the
armistice at
Panmunjom
(Démocratie
People's Republic
of Korea) on
27Juiyl953.m

ARAB-) SRAEL) WARS
The question of Palestine is at the origin of the Arab-Israeli conflict in the
Middle East. ! n 1947, when the General Assembly had to decide on its
future, this territory administered by the Uni edKingdom had a popula-
tion of about two million inhabitants (composed of two-thirds Arabs and
one-third Jews).
On 29 November, the General Assembly adopted a partition plan pro-
viding for the creation of an Arab state and a Jewish state, with Jerusalem
coming under an international regime administered by the United Nations. ln
December, this plan was rejected by the Arab Summit meeting held in Cairo.
On 14 May 1948, the United Kingdom relinquished its mandate over
Palestine. The state of Israel was proclaimed. On the following day, the
Palestinians, together with the armies of Syria, Lebanon, Egypt and
Jordan, opened hostilities against the new state. in 1949, these four
countries and Israel signed armistice agreements. The United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) assisted the parties in com-
plying with the provisions of these agreements.
However, border incidents continued.
Following the nationalization of the Suez Canal announced by
Egypt on 26 July 1956, Israeli forces invaded Sinai, while British and
French troops landed at Suez at the end of October.
On 4 November, the General Assembly, meeting in special session,
called for a cease-fire and created the first peace-keeping force, the
United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF), which supervised the pro-
gressive withdrawal of the Israeli, British and French troops, patrolled
the demarcation line between Egypt and Israel and brought relative
quiet to the area.
UNEF was withdrawn at Egypt's request on 16 May 1967. On 5
June, war broke out again between Israel on the one hand, and Egypt,
Jordan and Syria on the other. The Security Council called four times for
a cease-fire, which was eventually concluded on 11 June. At that date,
Refugee camp at Baq'a (Jordan). ! n foreground,
school buildings of the UN Relief and Works Agency
for Palestinian Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
Israel occupied Sinai, the Gaza strip, the West Bank of the Jordan,
including East Jerusalem, and part of the Syrian Golan Heights. The Secu-
rit y Council sent observers to monitor the cease-f ! re.
On 22 November 1967, the Council unanimously adopted resolu-
tion 242, which laid down the general principles lor a peacefu ! and
lasting settlement : the wìthdrawal 01 Israeli armed forces from terrils-
ries occupied in the most recent conflict ; the termination of ail claims or
states of belligerency ; respect for and recognition of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence 01 every state in the area ;
the guarantee of free navigation through international waterways in the
area ; and the establishment of demilitarized zones.
Between 1967 and 1973, the Secretary-General's representative,
Gunnar Jarring, had talks with the countries concerned (with the xcep-
tion of Syria, which did not accept resolution 242), but without reachlng
a successful outcome. On 6 October 1973, hostilities resumed.
On 24 October, the Security Council created the second Un ! ted
Nations Emergency Force (UNEF I The deployment of 7, 000 men from
twelve countries brought the October war to an end.
The ensuing withdrawal 01 lorces took place under United Nations
supervision.
CR) S) S) N THE CONGO
in 1960, shortly after the Congo gained inde-
pendence, inter-ethnic disorders broke out
and Belgium, the former colonial power, sent
troops to the country.
On 11 July 1960, Moise Tshombe, a polit-
icalleader in Katanga province, announced the
secession of Katanga. On 12 July, Congolese
leaders Joseph Kasuvubu and Patrice
Lumumba requested UN military assistance.
! n iess than 48 hours, contingents provided
by more than 30 countries started to arrive in
the country, along with UN civilian experts,
whose task it was to help maintain public ser-
vices. On 25 July, Belgian troops withdrew
from the entire territory except for Katanga.
On 17 January 1961, Patrice Lumumba
was assassinated. One month later, the
Security Council authorized the use of force
to prevent civil war in Congo. UN forces took
controi of the territory between Kabalo and
Albertville. The secessionist forces, led by for-
eign mercenaries, clashed with the United
Nations forces. On 17 September, the Secre-
tary-General of the United Nations, Dag Ham-
marskjôtd, was killed in a plane crash on his
way to Ndola to meet Tshombe.
Initially responsible for ensuring the with-
drawal of Belgian troops from the Congo, the
UN Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld in
Katanga, Congo (now Zaire) in August 1960.
United Nations Operation in the Congo
(ONUC) became an operation to maintain the
country's territorial integrity and political inde-
pendence, It prevented civil war and ensured
the evacuation of ait foreign military and para-
military forces, and ofaii mercenaries.
By the time it ended in June 1964, this
operation-one of the largest in the history
of the United Nations-was responsible for
implementing a vast long-term programme of
technical assistance, employing some 2, 000
experts at its height in 1963-64.
THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS
With the comingto power of Fidel Castro, rela-
tions between Cuba and the United States
deteriorated. ln April 1969, Cuban exiles
armed by the United States landed at the Bay
of Pigs. Their plan to trlgger off a popular
uprising came to nothing. ! n thé face of con-
tinuing American hostility, Cuba appealed to
the Soviet Union for assistance.
On 18 October 1962, the Americans
detected work being carried out on the installa-
tion of Soviet rockets capable of reachingAmer-
ican territory. Four days later, U. S. President
John F. Kennedy imposed a complete blockade
of the island and sent out naval patrols. Soviet
and American warships encircled Cuba. A con-
flict between the two great powers was only one
step away.
TheSecretary-GeneraoftheUnited
Nations, Sithu U Thant, then intervened per-
sonally, sending messages to President
Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita S,
Krushchev, and holding separate meetings
with representatives of the two parties. The
Soviets agreed to withdraw the missiles and
the United States confirmed its undertaking
to withdraw its missiles from Turkey.
Members of the
Security Council
view photographs
and maps during
debate on the
Cuban missile crisis
(Octoberl962).
m

THE IRAN-IRAQ WAR
After the conflict of the 1970s, when the
United Nations contributed effectively to the
conclusion of an agreement between Iran and
Iraq, hostilities flared up again in September
1980. On 28 September, the Security Council
gave urgent attention to the matter and
requested the two parties to settle their dis-
pute through mediation or conciliation.
Between 1980 and 1986, the Security
Council adopted seven resolutions and dis-
patched several missions to Baghdad and
Teheran. UN experts confirmed that chemical
weapons were being used, and this was con-
demned by the Security Council and the secre-
tary-General.
On 20 July 1987, the Security Council
Offi cers of the United Nations Iran-
Iraq Military Observer Group
(UNIIMOG) at their Sector
Headquarters at Sulymaniyah (Iraq).
unanimously adopted resolution 598 which, a
year later, was to become the framework for
reaching a cease-fire agreement.
The Secretary-General engaged in intense
diplomatic activity and established direct con-
tacts between the two governments. Discus-
sions under the auspices of the United
Nations continued after the signature of the
armistice. The United Nations Iran-Iraq Military
Observer Group (UNIIMOG) supervised and
verified the withdrawal of troops to the inter-
nationally recognized boundaries. Its man-
date was terminated in 1991.
CAMBODIA
in 1989, the five permanent members of the
Security Council embarked on a series of dis-
cussions and in November 1990 prepared a
document setting out the mandate of a
future United Nations Transitional Authority
in Cambodia.
in June 1991, the Cambodian parties
decided to apply an unlimited cease-fire and to
stop receiving military assistance. in October,
the United Nations set up the United Nations
Advance Mission in Cambodia (UNAMIC),
which helped the parties concerned to main-
tain the cease-fire and until March 1992
engaged in alerting the civilian population to
the danger of land mines and in training people
to detect and clear them.
On 23 October 1991, the Cambodian
parties signed the Cambodia Agreements in
Paris (France) and assigned to the United
Nations ait powers necessary to ensure their
application.
h March 1992, the United Nations
launched a programme of repatriation and
resettlement for some 375, 000 refugees and
displaced persons and established the
United Nations Transitional Authority in Cam-
bodia (UNTAC). UNTAC supervised the cease-
fire and the withdrawal of foreign forces, dis-
armed a ! ! armed forces of the Cambodian
parties, supervised the activities of the
administrative structures, and organized free
elections.
The elections took place from 23 to 28
May 1993, after which the new Cambodian
government was formed.
RWANDA
Fighting between the Armed Forces of the Government of Rwanda and
the Rwandese Patriotic Front first broke out in October 1990 across the
border between Rwanda and Uganda. in spite of a number of cease-fire
agreements, hostilities resumed in February 1993. The United Nations
Observer Mission Uganda-Rwanda (UNOMUR) supervised the border
area and became an important factor of stability inthe region.
On 4 August 1993, a comprehensive peace agreement was signed
in Arusha, providing for the installation f a democratic government,
the repatriation frefugees, the intégration of the armed forces of the
two parties and the deployment of a neutral international force to
assist in its application.
in October 1993, the military observers of UNOMUR were placed
under the command of the new United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda (UNAMIR).
The deaths of the Presidents of Rwanda and Burundi in a plane
crash on 6 April 1994 triggered off a resumption of the civil war in
Rwanda. The situation changed radically. UN troops were attacked and
killed, and the Belgian battalion pu lied out.The"blue helmets"never-
theless continued their humanitarian activities incollaboration with the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
On 22 June 1994, the Security Council decided to authorize the
mounting of a multinational operation. This was Operation Turquoise-
a French initiative with the assistance of African troops-which
ensured protection of safe areas in July and August, until the UN con-
tingent returned in strength.
UN peacekeepers
with the United
Nations
Transitional
Authority in
Cambodia (UNTAC)
teach a Cambodian
soldier how to
deactivate mines.
THE GULF WAR
On 2 August 1990, the day of Iraq's inva-
sion of Kuwait, the Security Council
imposed mandatory sanctions and under-
took diplomatic moves in a bid to avoid war.
It set 15 January 1991 as the deadline by
which Iraq was required to comply with its
resolutions.
Since Iraq did not comply, on 16 Jan-
uary the multinational forces launched air
attacks, and these were fo ! ! owed, on 24 Feb-
ruary, by a ground offensive. This operation,
known as Operation Desert Storm, con-
sisted of troops from 28 countries acting
on the authorization of the S curity Council
under U. S. command.
On 27 February, the Iraqi forces left
Kuwait.
The United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Obser-
vation Mission (UNIKOM), established in
April 1991, provides for international moni-
toring of the cease-fire line and of the
weapons held by Iraq.ID
Rwandese refugees on the road to
Goma (Zaire) in 1994.

SOMALIA
The downfall of President Siad Barre in Jan-
uary 1991 triggered off an increasingly bloody
struggle for power. Political chaos was com-
pounded by famine, disease and banditry.
Hundreds of thousands of Somalis died and
more than one million fled into exile.
The United Nations was fully engaged in
humanitarian activities, with which FAO,
UNDP, UNICEF, UNHCR, WFP and WHO were
associated. The United Nations Operation ln
Somalia (UNOSOM 1 : April 1992-April 1993)
constantly had to contend with attacks and
looting by armed bands.
On 9 December 1992, the first elements
of the Unified Task Force (UNITAF), led by the
United States, were deployed in Mogadishu,
with the mission of supporting the humani-
tarian assistance missions. Its activities were
taken over by UNOSOM If in May 1993.
UNOSOM If achleved remarkable results
in providing humanitarian assistance. How-
ever, in spite of the conciliation agreements
signed between the Somali polltical move-
ments (in January 1993, March 1993 and
May 1994), it did not succeed in carrying
through the agreed disarmament process,
which was the basic prerequisite for the Oper-
ation's success.
The 29 countries which provided a total of
28, 000 troops and some 2, 800 civilians decided
each in turn to withdraw their contingents.
in March 1995, the last UN troops left
Somalia, but the humanitarian agencies of the
United Nations and non-governmental organi-
zations stayed on.
Unloading sacks of food supplied
by the World Food Programme
(WFP), Somalia, August 1992.
CONFLICT BETWEEN INDIA AND PAKISTAN
! n 1947, under the partition plan provided for
under the Indian Independence Act, the State of
Jammu and Kashmir was free to accede to India
or Pakistan, with both of which it has a common
border. The Maharaja of the State requested its
accession to India. This choice was at the raot
of an armed conflict between India nd Pakistan,
which has been under United Nations surveil-
lance for almost the past fifty years.
On 31 December 1947, the matter was
referred to the Security Council which on 20 Jan-
uary 1948 established a United Nations Com-
mission for India and Pakistan (UNCIP), with a
view to putting an end to the conflict. The cease-
fire came into effect on 1 January 1949. The first
UN military observers to arrive in the area on 24
January formed the nucleus of the United
Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pak-
istan (UNMOGIP). ! n Juiy, thé two countries
signed the Karachi (Pakistan) Agreement estab-
lishing a cease-fire line to be supervised by the
observers.
in August 1965, hostilities again broke out
and spread to the international border between
India and West Pakistan. The Secretary-General
established an administrative adjunct of
UNMOGIP, the United Nations India-Pakistan
Observation Mission (UNIPOM), which was
required to supervise the cease-fire beyond the
borders of Kashmir. The Security Council cailed
for a cease-fire with effect from 22 September
1964. The opposing troops were withdrawn in
February 1966. UNIPOM's task was accom-
plished.
On 3 December 1971, hostilities brake
out yet again on the cease-fire line in Kashmir.
The next day, the General Assembly called for
a cease-fire, which was accepted on 17
December. h July 1972, India and Pakistan
signed the Simla Agreement defining a Line of
Controi in Kashmir.
UNMOGIP continues to exist, but with a
reduced contingent. It task consists in
observing compliance with the cease-fire of
17 December 1971 and in reporting thereon
to the Secretary-Generai.
FORMER YUGOSLAVIA
The disintegration fYugoslavia sparked off a
civil war which, between June 1991 and June
1992, extended from Croatia to Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
in March 1992, the United Nations Pro-
tection Force (UNPROFOR) was deployed with
the mission of supervising the demilitariza-
tion of the areas protected by the United
Nations and, later, the Dubrovnik region.
h view of the deterioration of the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the mandate and
strength of UNPROFOR have been enlarged sev-
eral times. Its task is to ensure the operation of
Sarajevo airport, the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, and the control of military flights n
the airspace over Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
cease-fire agreements in Bosnia and Herze-
govina have not been respected.
in December 1992, UNPROFOR was
deployed on a preventive mission in Macedonia.
From 1994 onwards, NATO engaged in
military strikes in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
On 31 March 1995, UNPROFOR was split
into three separate but interdependent peace-
keeping forces : UNPREDEP (former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia), UNPROFOR (Bosnia
and Herzegovina) and UNCRO (Croatia).
Bosnian cemetery in
Sarajevo (Bosnia and
Herzegovina), June 1992.
la
The Security
Council votes for
sanctions against
Iraq in August
1990.
A member of the
United Nations
Military Observer
Group in India and
Pakistan
(UNMOGIP) on dut
in Kashmir in 1955.
