From HIV to Aids
by Robin Weiss
Is the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) the result of
germ warfare, genetic manipulation or monkey cell
cultures? Is HIV really the cause of Aids?
The human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) is a new virus to humankind.
Actually, there are two main types of the virus:
HIV-1 is responsible for the worldwide pan¬
demic of Aids; HIV-2, which can also cause
Aids, occurs mainly in West Africa but is now
spreading rapidly in some Asian countries such
as India. There is evidence from stored blood
samples that HIV first started to spread epide¬
mically in the late 1970s, but Aids was not reco¬
gnized as a distinct new disease until 1981.
Regrettably, although HIV and Aids are
new, they are here to stay. HIV belongs to the
family of retroviruses, in which the viral genes
become inserted into our own genetic material
in the chromosomes. Because HIV establishes
long-term, persistent infection in this way there
is no possibility of eradicating Aids, as the World
Health Organization succeeded in doing with
smallpox in 1977 and may achieve for
poliomyelitis by the turn of the century.
When we are faced with such an appalling
catastrophe as Aids, it is tempting to look for
someone or some organization to blame for the
situation. The world is not short of "conspiracy
theories" on the origin of HIV that it arose
from germ-warfare research, from new genetic
engineering technology or from growing the
polio vaccine in monkey kidney cells. None of
these fanciful, exciting ideas holds up to what we
know about HIV, and its origin in humans may
be much more mundane.
HIV-1 is related to a virus found in some
chimpanzees and HIV-2 is even closer to a virus
occurring naturally in sooty mangabey monkeys
in West Africa. Thus it seems likely that HIV
originally transferred from these animals to
humans (a process called zoonosis), although HIV
has now become a human-to-human infection.
Turning into Aids
HIV-1 is a usually fatal infection, whereas some
people infected with HIV-2 get Aids and others
remain well. HIV-1 actually kills a higher pro¬
portion of the people it infects than smallpox
ever did, but unlike smallpox, the incubation
period takes years, not days. During these years
of relatively good health, the HIV-infected
person may pass the virus on to others through
sexual intercourse, from mother-to-child or via
blood contamination. On average it takes about
nine years to develop Aids in western coun¬
tries though some infected people succumb to
Aids much more quickly, and others have sur¬
vived over fifteen years. In developing countries
progression to Aids may occur two to three
years earlier. During the long incubation period,
HIV is active, particularly in the lymph glands.
Yet it takes time to cause severe disease because
the body has considerable reserves of the
immune system to call upon which only slowly
become exhausted owing to HIV infection.
A few investigators have queried whether
HIV really is the cause of Aids, blaming life¬
style, especially drugs, instead. However the
evidence for HIV's causing Aids has now
become overwhelming. Quite simply, wherever

Opposite page, schematic
illustration of the structure of a
retro-virus such as HIV-1. At
centre are strands (red) of
genetic material consisting of
ribonucleic acid (RNA) enclosed
in a core protein shell (green).
The outer envelope (yellow)
consists of a lipid bi-layer with
protein spikes (orange). In HIV
the spikes consist of
glycoprotein gpl20. They
recognize CD4 markers on
white blood T-cells, causing the
cells to become infected. The
virus kills T-cells after infection,
damaging the human immune
system.
Aids occurs, HIV has preceded it. HIV-negative
people do not develop Aids, although there are
some rare inherited or acquired immunodefi¬
ciencies that might occasionally be mistaken
for Aids.
The only factor common to Aids, for
example, in young adults in Africa, teenage girls
in the sex bars of southeast Asia, homosexual
men in North America, haemophiliacs in Europe
or Japan and injecting drug-users .in South
America is HIV. Moreover, those infants who
acquired HIV from their mothers die of Aids


while those who escape the virus, even if their
mothers have it, remain healthy.
Thus HIV is both necessary and sufficient to
cause Aids. Yet many "co-factors" influence
the speed at which Aids develops in the infected
person. These co-factors include individual
genetic make-up, age at the time of infection
(older people tend to develop Aids quicker),
nutrition, life-style including drug abuse and
exposure to other infections.
How does HIV cause Aids?
There are four main attributes to Aids, namely,
immune deficiency, tumours, wasting disease
and brain disease.
(a) Immune deficiency. HIV infects cells of the
immune system, especially a certain type of white »
blood cell, and also scavenger cells in the tissue
known as macrophages. It infects the cells by
docking onto the CD4 molecule on the surface of
these cells and gaining entry into the cells in this
way. CD4 cells are crucial for other lympho¬
cytes that make antibodies or kill cells infected by
other germs. If there are not sufficient CD4 cells
in the blood and body tissues, then the immune
system cannot work properly, and the body
becomes susceptible to all sorts of other infections
as a result of this immune deficiency. That is why
"I waver between
states of great
anxiety and calm.
Sometimes this has
helped me to tight.
1 talk myself into
believing that when
treatment finally
becomes effective
I'll actually slip
through the net."*
the fatal illnesses in Aids
are usually secondary
infections by microbes
other than HIV, because
HIV has led to the
depletion of CD4 cells,
and the other microbes
only then have the
opportunity to grow.
Hence they are called
opportunistic infections.
These opportunistic
infections include well-
known disease-causing
germs such as the tuber¬
culosis bacterium,
which cause much more
widely spread and
severe infections in
HIV-infected people. However, opportunistic
infections also include microbes such as Pneu¬
mocystis carinii, which is quite harmless in healthy
people but causes a fatal pneumonia in Aids.
(b) Tumours. Only a few kinds of cancer are
common in Aids, particularly lymphoma and
Kaposi's Sarcoma. The same kinds of tumour
sometimes appear in other immune deficient
conditions, such as patients with organ trans¬
plants who are deliberately immuno-suppressed
so that they do not reject their transplants. These
tumours are probably themselves caused by
viruses. They can be regarded as opportunistic
cancers in the sense that a healthy immune system
would prevent them from developing. Thus their
appearance is akin to opportunistic infections.
(c) Wasting disease. Many Aids patients lose
weight drastically and become emaciated. That
is why Aids was often called "slim" disease
when it first began to spread in Africa. The
wasting away of body fat and muscle is another
effect of HIV infection. It is partly due to poor
A false-colour scanning
electron micrograph of a T-
lymphocyte infected with HIV.
An infected T-cell typically has
a lumpy appearance with
irregular, rounded surface
protrusions. The tiny spherical
virus particles (coloured in
green) on the surface are in the
process of budding away from
the cell membrane. This
intensive reproduction of the
virus leads to the destruction of
the host cell. Depletion of the
population of T4 lymphocytes
through HIV infection is the
main reason for the destruction
of a person's immune system
in Aids.
* AH the personal
statements by patients
quoted in this issue have
been extracted from
Vivre le sida Le livre
blanc des états généraux,
published by éditions du
Cerf, Paris, 1992.

"When I learned 1 was HIV-positive, I thought Id be dead in
three months, that death was inevitable. But I started doing
research, and the medical team following my case were always
forthcoming with information. I finally understood how the virus
works, and that helped me to accept it. It became clear that
despite the onus of the treatment it was possible to lead an
active, intense life."
appetite, but more important is a change in the
body's balance of tissue growth and wasting as
a result of macrophage cells becoming infected
by HIV. After HIV infection, cells release the
wrong chemical signals (called cytokines) which
leads to wasting as well as to immune deficiency.
(d) Brain disease. Patients with Aids develop
impaired brain functions leading in severe cases
to dementia, i.e. the loss of conscious thought and
normal behaviour. In patients with Aids dementia,
HIV has invaded the brain. A particular type of
cell in the brain, called microglia, resembles
macrophages and these cells are sensitive to HIV
infection. They in turn affect the maintenance of
healthy nerve cells in the brain, again via local
cytokine signals. Thus when the microglial cells
become infected with HIV, the surrounding nerve
cells begin to die, leading eventually to the
demented states.
Thus the different illnesses apparent in Aids
depend on which cells and tissues become infected
with HIV. The virus does not necessarily kill these



cells outright. It can induce immune destruction
through the presentation ofviral components and
reduced replenishment of cells through the aber¬
rant cytokine signals. What is surprising is how
long it takes HIV to cause Aids.
Because HIV infects the immune system it is
invading the very cells that exist to combat
infection. A balance of power ensues in which at
first the immune system makes all the right
responses to combat HIV, but in which HIV
eventually gains the upper hand and slowly
destroys the immune system. In fact, some sci¬
entists believe that HIV somehow persuades
the immune system to autodestruct.
Right, HIV particles emerging
from the surface of a
lymphocyte. Each tiny sphere
measures 100 nm in diamètre
(l/10,000thofamm).The
photo was taken using an
electron microscope.
8
ROBIN WEISS,
of the United Kingdom, ¡s
Director of Research and
Professor of Viral Oncology at
the Institute of Cancer
Research, London. A specialist
in retroviruses, he has
conducted research on HIV since
1984 and has played a
pioneering role in understanding
the structure and biological
behaviour of the virus.
H IV variation
One reason why HIV usually wins this battle
between invading infection and the body's
response is that the virus is very mutable, that is,
it changes its genes and outer coat so rapidly that
the immune system has difficulty keeping up.
This induces an overactivation of immune
responses that eventually leads to immune exhaus¬
tion and destruction. As HIV infection progresses
to Aids, more virulent forms of the virus often
arise. There is also some evidence that those indi¬
viduals who become infected by HIV from others
who have already developed Aids tend them¬
selves to progress to Aids more quickly.
The variation in HIV strains is even greater
between individuals than within an infected person
and in different geographic areas different sub¬
strains of the virus may prevail. This extensive
variation makes the development of a universal
vaccine all the more formidable. The propensity
for variation is also one of the major stumbling
blocks to anti-viral therapy in Aids. The virus
soon evolves resistance to the drugs like AZT
that would otherwise block its reproduction. So
each drug is only effective for a short time. Com¬
binations of anti-virais, however, have more hope
of preventing or at least delaying Aids, but they
will be far too expensive for global use.
Exceptional cases
Despite the gloomy view that HIV has been
winning thus far, I am optimistic that we shall
make genuine strides in controlling infection
and disease. HIV is as intensively studied as
any virus has ever been, and some of our new
knowledge has quickly been adapted to improve
human health. For instance, within one year of
confirming HIV as the cause of Aids ten years
ago, blood tests were refined from being exper¬
imental research tools to be applied as mass
screening tests to protect the world's blood sup¬
plies from HIV contamination. No other diag¬
nostic medical test has had such a rapid and
important impact in preventing disease.

As we gain a better understanding of why
infected individuals progress to Aids, so may our
means of halting that process improve. Cur¬
rently medical researchers are focusing on a
minority of individuals who have been infected
with HIV for more than ten years without
showing any signs of progression to illness.
These people have a relatively low level of virus
in their bodies and are able to maintain normal
levels of CD4 cells. In one case, at least, the
person harbours a defective form of HIV, rather
like a form of simian virus that protects monkeys
from Aids. The more we can find out about
how such individuals suppress their HIV infec¬
tion, the more chance we have of discovering
treatments that may enable all infected people to
shift the balance of power in favour of keeping
the virus under control.
There is some new evidence that a few indi¬
viduals may be exposed to HIV infection
without the virus's actually colonizing their
bodies. A small number of women who sell sex
seem to be permanently resistant to HIV infec¬
tion even though they frequently entertain HIV-
positive partners. These women have specific
and effective immune responses to HIV. Finding
out why will help vaccine-development because
we can regard the women as being naturally
immunized against HIV.
In summary, the pace of scientific discovery
about Aids and HIV has been rapid indeed, far
faster than in many other diseases such as malaria,
tuberculosis and cancer. At the moment Aids is
winning the race, but there is the opportunity to
catch up provided the right effort is made.


