Our common home
by Edgar Morin
We should abandon the Promethean dream of
dominating the universe and aspire instead to live
together on earth
The preamble to UNESCO's Constitution makes
the correct diagnosis that, "since wars begin in
the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that
the defences of peace must be constructed".
Today, although the illusions and enthusi¬
asms of 1945 are gone, we are again confronted,
in an acute form, with the same fundamental
problems that led to the establishment of
UNESCO, the problems of peace and war, the
problems of material, technological and eco¬
nomic underdevelopment facing the countries
of the South and the East and the problem of
psychological, moral and intellectual underde¬
velopment, which is universal.
As we look back over our millennium, the
three questions raised by Kant two centuries ago
come again to mind: "What can I know? What
must I do? What can I hope for?"
A WORLD IN DISARRAY
The planet is in turmoil: the crisis of progress
affects all of mankind, everywhere creating dis¬
array, causing old bonds to break and communi¬
ties to turn in upon themselves; the fires of war
are again being stoked; and the world is losing
hold of the global outlook and the sense of the
common good. Faith in science, technology and
industry is everywhere running up against the
problems that science, technology and industry
are themselves causing. Science is not only a
source of enlightenment, it is itself blind as to
where the scientific adventure is leading, an
adventure that is slipping beyond its control and
beyond the reach of its conscience. Like the bib¬
lical tree of life, science is a tree of knowledge
whose fruit contains both good and evil.
The vast apparatus we call science and tech¬
nology produces not only knowledge and
insight but also ignorance and blindness.
Progress in the various branches of science has
produced advantages arising from the division
8
of labour but also the drawbacks of over-spe¬
cialization, compartmentalization and the frag¬
mentation of knowledge.
With so many dramatically interrelated
problems, the world would seem to be not just
in crisis but on its last legs, in that violent condi¬
tion where the forces of death grapple with
those of life. Despite all our common interests,
we are still one another's enemies, and the
unleashing of racial, religious and ideological
antagonisms continues to generate wars, mas¬
sacres, torture, and humiliation. Humanity
cannot overcome man's inhumanity to man.
What we do not know yet is whether this is
merely the death rattle of an old world,
heralding a new birth, or whether these are
really the world's death throes.
We had already lost sight of the principles
that anchored us in the past; now we have lost
sight of the certainties that guided our steps into
the future. There is no law of history that auto¬
matically guarantees progress.
We are simultaneously experiencing the crisis
of the past, the crisis of the future, and the crisis
of transition. Contained within these crises are
the crisis of development and the crisis of our era
of planet-wide consciousness, comprising such
increasingly grave problems as the urbanization
of the world, economic and demographic dis¬
order, lack of progress or reverses in the devel¬
opment of democracy, and the uncontrolled
onward march of science and technology.
Inherent in all this is the danger that civilization
will become homogenized and cultural diversity
will be destroyed, a risk inseparable from the
equal and opposite danger that the nations will
split up into small, conflicting communities, ren¬
dering a shared human civilization impossible.
Our planet is indeed, in keeping with the
etymology of the word, a "wandering star". We
are embarked upon a great adventure into the
unknown.
LIVING TOGETHER
ON EARTH
The earth itself has lost its old familiar universe:
the sun has shrunk to the size of a Lilliputian star
among billions of others in an expanding uni-

verse; the earth is lost in the cosmos, its surface
a small, tepid patch of living mould in a glacial
expanse where stars and black holes devour one
another with incredible violence. As far as we



know at present, this small planet is the only
place where life and consciousness exist. It is
the common home of all human beings. We
need to acknowledge our consubstantial link
with it, relinquish the Promethean dream of
becoming masters of the universe and aspire
instead to living together on earth.
Instead of seeing "the universal" and our
various "homelands" as opposites, we should
link our homelands family, region, nation
into a concentric pattern and integrate them
into the concrete reality of our earthly home¬
land. We must stop contrasting a radiant future
with a past of servitude and superstition. All
cultures have their own virtues, their own store
of experience and their own wisdom, as well as
their shortcomings and areas of ignorance. It is
in its past that a community finds the energy to
confront its present and prepare for its future.
Since all humans are children of life and of the
earth, "rootless cosmopolitanism", which is
something abstract, must be discarded in favour
of "carthling cosmopolitanism", citizenship of
our extraordinary little planet. The re-establish¬
ment of ethnic or national roots is justifiable as
long as it goes hand-in-hand with a deeper re-
rooting in our human identity as citizens of earth.
The distinguishing feature of mankind is
unitas multiplex, unity in diversity, the genetic,
cerebral, intellectual and affective unity of our
species, whose numberless potentialities find
expression through the diversity of cultures.
Diversity is the jewel in the crown of human
unity and, conversely, unity is the jewel in the
crown of human diversity.
Just as living, ongoing communication
needs to be established between past, present
and future, so living, ongoing communication
needs to be established between distinctive cul¬
tural, ethnic and national characteristics on the
one hand, and, on the other, the concrete reality
of one world, the homeland of all humanity.
CIVILIZING THE EARTH
And so we must civilize the earth. This means not
only creating a confederation of humanity, while
respecting existing cultures and homelands, but
also promoting democracy and solidarity.
Democracy presupposes and also fosters
Love, by 11-year-old Nadia El
Saqed (Egypt).

diversity of social interests and groups and diver¬
sity of ideas. In other words it must not only
cause the will of the majority to prevail but it
must also acknowledge the right of minorities
and protest movements to exist and express
themselves, and allow heretical and deviationist
ideas to be expressed. It requires consensus
about respect for democratic institutions and
rules, but also needs conflicts of ideas and opin¬
ions to make it lively and fruitful. Conflicts can,
however, only fulfil that function if they comply
with the democratic rules of conduct, which
keep antagonisms in check by substituting the
combat of ideas for physical combat and which
decide the provisional victor among the contes¬
tants by means of debates and elections.
As to solidarity, a society cannot increase in
complexity without an accompanying increase
in solidarity, since more complexity means
more freedoms, more opportunities for initia¬
tive and more possibilities of disorder, which
can be both fruitful and destructive. Carried to
extremes, disorder ceases to be fruitful and
becomes mainly destructive; carried to
extremes, complexity deteriorates into disinte¬
gration, the breakdown of a whole into its con¬
stituent parts. The cohesion of the whole can, of
course, be maintained by reverting to coercion,
but to the detriment of complexity; an integra¬
tive solution conducive to complexity can only
be achieved by developing true solidarity, a sol¬
idarity that is not imposed upon people but that
they feel within themselves and experience as
fraternity. What is valid for any homeland, is
now valid for the whole human community.
This brings us to the problem of reforming
our thinking and of rethinking education.
Awareness of all these issues can only be
achieved when our thinking is capable of recon¬
necting concepts that have become discon¬
nected and areas of knowledge that have been
compartmentalized. The new areas of knowl¬
edge whereby we discover the place in the
cosmos of the earth as humanity's homeland are
meaningless as long as they remain separated
from one another. The earth is not the sum of
the planet, the biosphere and humanity. It is a
complex physical, biological and anthropolog¬
ical totality wherein life springs forth from the
history of the planet and humanity springs forth
from the history of life on earth.
Piecemeal ways of thinking that split what is
global into fragments naturally ignore the
anthropological complex and the planet-wide
context. But waving the global flag is not
enough; the component parts of the global
whole must be joined together in a complex,
organized system of linkages, and the global
whole itself must be put in context. The reform
of thinking that is required is one which will
generate attitudes that take account of the con¬
text and of complexity.
A MULTIDIMENSIONAL
WAY OF THINKING
As regards the context, we need to think in
planet-wide terms when considering politics,
economics, population questions, ecology, the
preservation of biological and cultural diversities.
It is not enough, however, to set all objects and
events within a planet-wide "framework". What
is needed is always to seek out the relationship of
inseparability, interaction and feedback between
any phenomenon and its context, and between
any context and the planet-wide context.
As to complexity, there is a need for a way of
thinking that brings together again that which has
been put asunder and compartmentalized, that
respects diversity whilst recognizing individu¬
ality, and that tries to discern interdependences.
In other words, wc need a multidimensional way
of thinking, an organizing approach that takes
account of the two-way relationship between the
whole and its constituent parts, an approach that,
instead of studying an object in isolation, exam¬
ines it in and through its self-organizing relation¬
ship with its cultural, social, economic, political
and natural environment, a way of thinking that
acknowledges its own incompleteness and
knows how to deal with uncertainty, particularly
where action is involved, since action can only
take place where there is uncertainty.
In the course of history we have often seen
the possible become impossible, but we have also
seen hopeless dreams come true and improbable
events occur.
We now know that the potential of the
human brain is still very largely under-exploited.
Since the possibilities of social development are
related to the brain's potential, no-one can say for
certain that our societies' capacities for improve¬
ment and change are exhausted and that wc have
reached the end of history.
The anthropological and sociological possi¬
bility of progress re-establishes the principle of
hope for the future, but without "scientific"
certainty and without "historical" promises. It
is an unsure possibility, greatly reliant upon
raised awareness, willpower, courage and luck;
the raising of awareness is therefore an urgent
task.



We are engaged, on a world-wide scale, in
life's essential undertaking, that of resisting
death. Civilizing the earth and promoting soli¬
darity, converting the human race to humanity,
such is the basic, all-embracing aim of any pro¬
ject that aspires not only to progress for
mankind but to its very survival. An awareness
of our common mortality should lead us
towards solidarity and reciprocal commisera¬
tion one with another, by all and for all.
EDGAR MORIN
is a French sociologist who is emeritus director of research
with the French National Centre for Scientific Research
(CNRS). His most recent work published in English is Towards
a Study of Humankind. Vol 1: The Nature of nature (1992).
)0 v è
ö°oooocoo
ÄVAAMM
n wonder tree,
by 7-year-old
Ulrike Terpetschnig
(Austria).
10
