'New ways of being together'
by Daniel Bougnoux
8
Communicating means sharing and establishing relationships. This
being so, the extraordinary growth of the contemporary media, which
is being accompanied by a transformation of cultures, identities and
modes of exercising power and authority, is leading to the invention
of new ways of being together.
j The history of civilization is intertwined
with the history of the gradual depar¬
ture from rural areas that had been occupied
for thousands of years, with the dematerializa-
tion of the instruments and products of human
work, with the promotion and rapid distribution
of signs (foremost among them being currency),
with growing desacralization and increasing
mobility as part of the phenomenon of urbani¬
zation. The peasantry no longer gives society its
direction; culture has ceased to be synonymous
with agriculture.
Communication, modernization and ratio¬
nalization advance hand in hand. By destroying
the rural base of society (by the year 2000, one
half of the world's population will be living in
cities), the modernization that began in Europe
in the late Middle Ages has taken people away
from the fields and brought them into the orbit
of historical time. According to Max Weber,
historical time is fashioned by three great
"machines": the market economy; activities
which require calculation and analysis (techno¬
science); and the bureaucratic nation-state.
This threefold opening may also be experi¬
enced as a loss of roots. Admittedly it has
enabled contemporary individualism to
blossom, but only at the cost of a radical revision
of old forms of identity. People no longer live on
stable ground. With the onset or progress of

"The history of civilization is
intertwined with urbanization.
The peasantry no longer gives
society its direction".
Opposite, New York City.
Below, Berber village women in
the High Atlas, Morocco.
communication technologies, we are witnessing
a transition:
- from the vertical to the horizontal: the media
which open up the world are irresistibly eroding
the old transcendent values. Hence the advance of
secularism; but after the Church, education and the
state are experiencing the same levelling process;
- from stock to flows: in banking, in companies
and in the knowledge-based economy, wealth is
now measured less in terms of fixed capital
assets than by the capacity of operators to mobi¬
lize those assets and bring them into circula¬
tion; currency itself has become increasingly
abstract and impalpable;
- from content to relationships: it is no longer
enough for a product to be good; it must also
find a buyer. On the market, the value of an
object is governed by its appearance; it is not
substance or content that count but attraction or
visibility. The public relations imperative extends
to all who take part in public life politicians,
show business or cultural stars, to wherever
"what you are is what you are seen to be";
- from heteronymy to autonomy: people who are
called upon to express themselves and be them¬
selves without fear or favour are ideal participants
in this slow process of detachment and analysis.
But this utopia of modern times cannot keep
its promises. People do not receive their identity
from themselves but from a place, a family or
some other symbolic upstream factor. People are
territorial beings who have everything to fear
from a culture which has lost contact with the
soil or is exposed to the onslaught of unbridled
communication.
Are we heading for cultural
standardization?
The more a message circulates, the more it is
liable to lose its particular savour or information
content. Thus the new imagery of communica¬
tion which has become a world of its own can
engender an indifferent and superficial cos¬
mopolitan subculture, whose emblem might be
the smiling face of Mickey Mouse. When we sit
in front of our television sets and play with the
globe as Chaplin did in The Great Dictator, we
get an overview of the life and death of others
that cannot be called knowledge. All television
viewers know something about Bosnia and
Rwanda, but that awareness does little to change
the course of history. In this case the commu¬
nication window merely engenders a feeling of
powerlessness and shame.
New fears are also emerging. Who will ben¬
efit from the information superhighways of the

'The peasant's field of olden times has been replaced by the
page, and ploughing has given way to a thousand different
forms of writing, to hardware and software and computer
screens which multiply our impressions and memories to an
extraordinary degree.'
future? How can we be sure that globalization,
or the "global village" of which we have heard
so much, will not amount to Americanization?
How can we safeguard our own identity or cul¬
tural "exception"?
While the waning of the idea of territori¬
ality may suit a few modern people who are
fully committed to nomadic cosmopolitanism,
for most it is frustrating their sense of identity
in many ways. Whereas people have tradition¬
ally been "placed" by their jobs and their
housing, the modern world will increasingly
require them to change their occupation and
place of residence in the course of their lives to
adjust to a rapidly changing world. Hence a
sense of meaninglessness and confusion. Faced
with growing mobility which inevitably spells
the end of old forms of solidarity and creates
exclusion, an immense need for identity is being
expressed through the come-back of religion, of
charismatic father-figures and "populist" politi¬
cians who promise tangible identifications and
warm organic relations.
However, it is by no means certain that the
modern media manufacture homogeneity. The
German philosopher Theodor Adorno saw
them as an instrument for the standardization of
culture; but the very notion of mass turns out
here to be misleading or otiose, and mass com¬
munications, like mass consumption, tend on the
contrary to become ramified and individual-
"When we sit in front of our
TV sets ... we get an overview
of the life and death of others
that cannot be called
knowledge." Below, a British
television crew in a Rwandan
refugee camp in Zaire.
10
ized, revealing what is specific, occasional or
distinctive.
Finally, at world level, it seems that the
mosaic of races, cultures, beliefs and histories is
far more opaque than the superficial imagery of
"communication" would have us believe. Surely
the best way to have something to communicate
is to acquire a deeper familiarity with one's own
culture.
Transmitting to unpredictable receivers
We must take care not to extrapolate from the
relative standardization of transmission and
conclude that the effects, or the messages that
viewers receive (and process) in their own
worlds, are themselves uniform. The standard¬
ization of mass communications may be a
worldwide phenomenon, but the fact remains
that we do not know how people watch and
we cannot foresee what they will remember.
Identity is neither a thing nor a deposit that
can be manipulated or exchanged at will, but an
active system of relationships and representa¬
tions. Each individual lives in his or her "own
world", entrenched behind a filter that may be
compared to an immunological barrier. That is
why the transmission of information is not a
linear process but circular (with feedback to
the transmitter and/or coproduction of the mes¬
sage by the receiver) and haphazard.
We moderns have no vertical roots in the
soil; nor are we confined to a particular piece of
territory. Our roots spread out horizontally;
they follow the network of signs and knowledge
that we are capable of processing. The peasant's
field of olden times has been replaced by the
page, and ploughing has given way to a thousand
different forms of writing, to hardware and
software and computer screens which multiply
our impressions and memories to an extraordi¬
nary degree.
The extension of these new machines there¬
fore announces the end of the (single, panoramic)
world. Under the onslaught of diversity, our
reality is receding or breaking up, to be replaced
by a plurality of worlds. Everywhere the com¬
munication of signs is outstripping the produc¬



tion of goods and services, and from their
coloured cloth each one of us cuts a Harlequin
suit which prefigures new norms of knowledge,
new frontiers and affinities, new ways of being
together and being onself.
DANIEL BOUGNOUX,
of France, is professor of communication at the Stendhal
University of Grenoble-3. His published works include La
Communication par la bande (La Découverte, Paris, 1991) and
Sciences de l'information et de la communication (Larousse,
Paris, 1993).
