Yesterday's
images for
tomorrow's eyes
by Thereza Wagner
At Unesco's Paris
Headquarters on 19
October 1994 Unesco
Director-General
Federico Mayor
appointed French
actress Catherine
Deneuve Unesco's
Goodwill Ambassador
for the safeguard of the
cinematic heritage.
T, he advent of the talkies in the
1930s coincided with the
\ founding of the first film
archives. The Swedish Film
Institute was created in 1933; the
Reichsfilmarchiv in Berlin was founded in
1935 (it ceased to exist after the Second World
War), as were the Museum of Modern Art
Film Library in New York and the National
Film Library in London. The French Ciné¬
mathèque was established in Paris in 1936.
Even then, it was estimated that 80 per
cent of the negatives of silent films had been
lost, either because of destruction on a mas¬
sive scale with the coming of the talkies, or
because they were gradually withdrawn
from the market, stored, and then disposed
of to make room for more recent works or
as a precaution against fire*.
The first task awaiting the film libraries
was thus to persuade the major producers to
lend or give a copy of each of their films for
safe-keeping. Although at first considered an
unusual request, this initiative eventually
came to be accepted by the film industry as a
way of helping to maintain the commercial
value of films in a volatile market.
Different approaches To begin
with the libraries had two distinct func¬
tions. One was that promoted by Ernest
Lindgren, the first director of the National
Film Library in London. Lindgren argued
that film libraries should collect films, pre¬
serve them, make inventories of them, store
them in decent conditions, establish national
filmographies and index collections. A dif¬
ferent point of view was put forward by
Henri Langlois, founder of the French Ciné¬
mathèque, who wanted to encourage research
into and study of the art of cinema, a field
which until then had been hardly explored.
This meant that films held in archives should
be shown to the public.
These two viewpoints soon became
antagonistic and divided archivists who after
1936 were affiliated to the International Fed¬
eration of Film Archives (FIAF). This con¬
flict only came to an end in the 1980s.
It was around the same time that the
"vinegar syndrome", a process whereby film

Thereza Wagner is a
staff member of
Unesco's Section for
the Promotion of Arts
and Creativity.
UNESCO's Federico
Fellini medal, designed
by Italian artist Valerio
Adami and executed by
French sculptor Robert
Michel, is awarded in
recognition of efforts by
cinema professionals to
promote the seventh
art. It was presented for
the first time on 24 May
1995 to Mr. Pierre Viot,
president of the Cannes
Film Festival.
stock deteriorates, whitening the images,
appeared in films produced between 1950 and
1960 using cellulose-acetate film stock. This
kind of film, which was widely used in the
1950s because of its non-inflammable nature,
proved to be unreliable. About 60 per cent of
acetate film is presently endangered.
The figure is considerably higher for film
in developing countries where poor storage
conditions accelerate deterioration. Unfortu¬
nately very little is being done in these coun¬
tries, for people are not yet really aware of
the immense loss the disappearance of the
world's film heritage would represent. Fur¬
thermore, in this case restoration costs arc
proportionately far higher than the original
production costs of the films themselves. In
developing countries facilities for the
storage, preservation and safeguarding of
film are usually rudimentary.
Steps to save the film heritage
The size of the task is so great that sev¬
eral questions arise. What should be restored
and what restoration methods should be
used? Where should the restored heritage be
kept?
Film archivists in the developed countries
must preserve all "nitrate" films (those pro¬
duced before 1950) because of their rarity. It
is estimated that around three-quarters of
these films have already been lost. Decisions
must be taken concerning acetate-based films.
In the United States, Martin Scorsese,
Francis Ford Coppola, Woody Allen and a
few other highly respected film-makers grew
concerned that the colour of their films was
deteriorating and in the late 1980s decided to
create a company to protect them.
There are around a dozen film archives and
libraries in the United States. They are cur¬
rently restoring nitrate films with help from
private foundations, but their collections are
large and the work is far from finished.
Four years ago the Commission of the
European Communities launched the
"Lumière Project" to save the nitrate collec¬
tions in member countries of what is now the
European Union. With a similar end in view,
UNESCO has decided to initiate a far-reaching
international programme called "Let's Save the
Cinematic Heritage", aimed especially at the
developing countries. The programme is being
carried out in co-operation with FIAF, to
which more than 100 film libraries in some
sixty countries are today affiliated.
Films to encourage tolerance
The programme covers the promotion,
safeguard, protection and distribution of
films and the cinematic heritage.
In terms of promotion, UNESCO is exam¬
ining the possibility of drawing up a list of
films that should be considered as national
and international heritage. Work on this is
being done within the framework of
UNESCO's "Memory of the World" pro¬
gramme, in co-operation with states, film
libraries and archives. In the same perspective,
an international festival of restored and
rediscovered films on the theme of tolerance
was held in January 1995. It will be followed
up by a publication for primary and sec¬
ondary schools which will contain a list and
description of the sixty most important
films ever made on this subject.
As far as preservation and safeguard are
concerned, UNESCO has recently created a
fund with a special account for the restora¬
tion and protection of the cinematic heritage.
A major international appeal will be made
later this year for contributions to finance
the fund, whose president is the French
actress Catherine Deneuve, UNESCO Good¬
will Ambassador for the safeguard of the
cinematic heritage.
UNESCO will also encourage the imple¬
mentation of co-operation agreements
between film libraries and archives in the rich
and poor countries. With this in view, an
extensive public information campaign will
be held in order to promote the cinema and
the moving image. This is a long-term
undertaking and should be carried out in
each country through film festivals, publica¬
tions and other activities.
* Until 1950 film negatives were made of nitro-cellulose,
a highly inflammable substance prone to deterioration.
g
