Many people were shocked when the
1991 Gulf War was turned into a world
media event; they complained that by turning
the conflict into a giant video game, commu¬
nications had exceeded its mandate. They
forgot that the media have never been neutral
and that, like war, they heighten and make
visible our most diverse and contradictory
thoughts and actions.
And yet when I ask my students in Brazil
what effect the Gulf War had on them, they
seem surprised, as if that war were not a
part of their personal experience. Perhaps,
like their parents before them, they believe
that the notion of experience encompasses
only what happens near to home. All the
same they are forced to admit that media
events have an impact, however slight, on
their daily lives and, even though they may be
unaware of it, inevitably influence their ways
of acting and thinking.
The modern media are frightening because
they are correctlythought to be capable of
influencing people's judgment. Modern com¬
munication calls into question the autonomy
and freedom of the individual, the great myth
of our time. But is this really new? People's
judgment and the way in which they perceive
their experience have always been deter¬
mined by the group to which they belong.
With the globalization of communications,
however, this phenomenon has taken on
exceptional scope. In addition to the modes
of perception inherited from the "ancestral
homeland" come others which are shared by
people all over the world.
The modern media make us aware of the
limits of human freedom and of the relative
nature of the reality in which we have always
been immersed.
M isplaced fears
Theorists of communication are also afraid of
the media, often because they make a
methodological error. Using ideas applied to
exchanges between individuals, they can only
envisage exchange within the framework of a
single linguistic unit. Looked at in this way the
global communications media seem like an
immense sound and visual backdrop that
destroys dialogue and replaces it with a mono¬
logue that is listened to passively.
By using criteria of another age to assess
the modern media, these thinkers forget that
the media can have a civilizing effect and
can create a new balance in today's ways of
seeing, talking and acting.
To exist is to transcend one's condition.
And the human condition today includes the
media world whose existence we must
accept.
Standing beneath an open-air screen in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazilian soccer fans watch a World Cup
match transmitted live from the United States In
1994.
Let us take the soccer World Cup as an
example of the huge media events that inter¬
national sporting competitions have now
become. The 1994 World Cup was organized
and orchestrated by the United States, where
it was followed with a certain indifference. In
Brazil, however, a country which was simply
a receiver of the media coverage, it generated
tremendous enthusiasm. The intensity was
greater in Brazil than in the United States,
where the sport is not part of the national con¬
sciousness.
We must stop being afraid of losing our
identity. We must understand that modem
communication is flexible and that its mes¬
sages and images can be made ours just as
easily as our parents appropriated those
offered by television and the cinema, and
earlier, by the theatre, music, poetry and
painting.
MONCLAR EDUARDO GOES DE LIMA VALVERDE,
of Brazil, heads the programme for advanced studies
in contemporary communications and culture at the
Federal University of Bahia. The author of many
articles published in Brazilian journals, he is
presently preparing two books, one of which deals
with "the communication experience".
15
