The World Solar Summit
interview with Boris Berkovsky
A solar highway to sustainable development
July 1993 marked the start of Unesco's "World
Solar Summit Process". What is involved in this?
The "World Solar Summit Process" is a cam¬
paign launched as a result of a successful meeting
on the theme of "The sun in the service of
mankind" that was held at UNESCO Headquar¬
ters in July 1993. Experts from all over the world
attended the meeting in a personal capacity and
contributed to highly specialized discussions
on renewable energy sources, including solar
energy. Over sixty assessment reports were pre¬
pared, covering all aspects of research, devel¬
opment, production, marketing and public atti¬
tudes. As a result of these reports, we launched
a campaign with specific projects, targets and
evaluation systems.
What are the goals of the campaign?
They are clear and detailed. The major aims
are to enhance understanding of the role that
renewable energy sources can play in safe¬
guarding the environment; create a global infor¬
mation network using state-of-the-art commu¬
nications technology; promote and harmonize
co-operation in training and research; demon¬
strate that the use of solar energy is a cost-effec¬
tive and rapid way for many developing coun¬
tries to reduce energy costs in remote rural
areas; and to identify and define strategic projects
of exceptional quality and global importance.
In practical terms, what is the field of appli¬
cation of solar energy?
It could be far broader than it is today. Solar
energy is not a miracle solution, but it has not
been widely used until now because of lack of
investment. Solar energy should be given the
place it deserves in the mix of energy sources. It
is available, flexible and ecologically viable.
Considerable progress in exploiting solar energy
has been made, and today it is realistic, not
Utopian, to be optimistic about its prospects.
Where has the most progress been made in the
past few years?
Notable progress has been made in research
and technology. Solar energy has a leading part
to play in all fields where only small amounts of
power are required, especially in remote rural
areas not covered by the grid. In this context, Ol

solar energy is being widely used to generate
electricity for telephone systems, and in devel¬
oping countries it is also providing much of the
power for refrigerating vaccines. Solar cookers
have been developed, and after proving their
worth in India, they are now being used in
Nigeria and are being produced locally in other
parts of the world. Solar pumps are increas¬
ingly being used in Mali.
Has North-South co-operation encouraged the
development of new technologies?
The countries of northern and southern
Africa are making growing use of renewable
energy sources, and this means that there must
be a gradual transfer of technology to ensure that
the aid they receive is effective. In the field of
photovoltaic electricity, where the number of
uses is still growing, specialists must be trained
so that solar energy can be rationally used for
pumping water, providing community lighting
in remote villages, refrigeration in dispensaries,
for telecommunications and various other appli¬
cations.
A World Solar Charter is currently being pre¬
pared. What is going into it?
This document is intended to define uni¬
versal principles, rules and procedures of the
World Solar Programme. It will stress a number
of priorities such as the creation of national
infrastructures to act as focal points; the
matching of social and economic development
aspirations in rural areas; development of global
networking systems; and the adoption of new
education and training programmes at all levels.
What will be the next important meeting of the
World Solar Summit process?



The World Solar Programme, which will be
carried out between 1996 and 2005, should be
approved by a World Solar Summit scheduled to
be held in March, 1996 in Harare, on the invi¬
tation of Mr Robert Mugabe, the President of
Zimbabwe. The Summit will put us on a solar
highway towards sustainable development.
Interview by Juliette Boussand
32
BORIS BERK0VSKY
is head of Unesco's Engineering and Technology division, and
president of the organizing committee of the World Solar
Summit.

