Justice on 6 Februarv. Mr. Trygve Lie, thc Nor-
wegian Minister of Foreign Affairs, is appointed
Secretary-Generat on 2 Februar\'.
4 February : Syria and Lebanon request the
Security Council to ensure the immediate
withdrawal of French and British troops, who
leave the following summer.
12 December : The General Assembly con-
demns the Franco regime and asks Member
States to break off relations with Spain.
14 December : New York (U. S. A.) is chosen
as Headquarters of the Organization.
20 Octaber : The General Assembly approves
the officiât emblem adopted in 1946 as the
United Nations flag.
29 November : The General Assembly
endorses the plan to partition Palestine into an
Arab statc and ajewish state, as recommended
by the UN Special Committee in August. The
plan is rejected in December at the Arab
Summit in Cairo.
14 May : The state of Israel is proclaimed.
Arab forces intervene. The Secunty Council
orders a truce (sec page 13).
ln the Security Council, the Soviet Union
vetoes discussion of thé Februarv"Prague
coup", which has led to the establishment of
the communist regime in Czechoslovakia.
17 September : Count Folke Bernadotte,
appointed as UN Mcdiator in Palestine on 14
May, isassassmatcd in Jérusalem.
10 December : Meeting in Paris, the General
Assembly adopts the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
.
"January : The Uniicd Nations Military
Observer Group in India and Pakistan
(UNMOGIP) starts operating in Kashmir fol-
lowing the cease-fire decreed on 25 December
(see page 15).
28 January : The Security Council adopts res-
olution 67 concerning the cease-fire in the con-
flict between the Nether ! ands and Indonesia
and creates a good offices commission. UN
mediation aids Indonesia's accession to inde-
pendence on 27 December, except for the terri-
tory of West Irian (West New Guinea), which
is later to become a bone of contention.
4 Mas : The Soviet blockade of Berlin, begun
on 23 June 1948 b,-Stalin, cornes to an end (see
page 12).
December : Jerusaiem is placed under inter-
national status seven months after Israel's
admission to the United Nations on 11 May.
a
28 June : Signature of the Treaty of Versailles
and creation of the League of Nations.
 25 Apri1-26 June : Representatives of 51 states
meeting in San Francisco (U. S. A.) draft the
Charter of the United Nations, which is signed
on 26 June. The convening powers of the San
Francisco Conference are China, the United
States and the United Kingdom. Invited 10 the
Conference are those powers which have fought
against the Axis under the name of"United
Nations"or those which"declared war on the
common enemy before 1 March 1945".
24 Octaber : The Charter, ratified by China,
France, the United Kingdom, the United States
and the U. S. S. R. (the five future permanent
members of the Security Council), and by the
majority of the other signatory countries, cornes
into effect.
10 tOJanuary-2 February :The first session of the
Gênera ! Assembtv is held on 10 Januarv in
London ; the Security Council is constituted on
12 January ; the Economic and Social Council
on 13 January ; and the International Court of1]

:'-s..-'-%  :  ?/'-'. \ : -
7 Jury : Following the invasion of South
Korea by North K. orcan forces on 25 June, the
Security Counciiestabhshes an international
force under umficd command in South Korea
(sec page 12).
21 October : The General Assembly con-
demns the invasion of Tibet by China.
3 November : The Gênera ! Assembty adopts
thé Acheson resolution whereby, in the event
of there being a veto in the Securitv Council, a
majority of Member States can cali for the con-
vening of an emergency special session of the
Assembly. The Assembly can then take deci-
sions in the place of the Security Council by a
two-thirds majority.
:
4 February : After the arrest by thé French of
Habib Bourguiba (who later negotiates the
independence of Tunisia and becomes the
country's President in 1957), 15 countries bring
the Tunisian question before the United
Nations. In Octobcr, the General Assembly
takes up the cases of Tunisia and Morocco and
in December places its trust in France to
resolve the problems involved.
10 November : Boycotted by the Soviet
Union since the beginning of the Korean con-
fhct, Secretary-Genera ! Trygve Lie resigns.
-
United Nations Conference on opium and
adoption of the International Protocol on
Drug Control.
27 March : Dag Hammarskjöld, Swedish
Minister of State, becomes Secretary-Genera !
of the United Nations.
September : Renewed tension between the
Netherlands and Indonesia over the territory
of West New Guinea (West Irian), which ends
in its being placed under United Nations
authority from October 1962 to May 1963.
!'August :Fifteen American airmen shot down
over Chinese territory in 1952, and subse-
quently judged and sentenced on spying
charges, are freed following negotiations con-
ducted by UN Secretary-General Dag Ham-
marskjöld.
''Thé First United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders meets in Geneva (Switzerland).
1 i  
4 November : Deployment of the United
Nations Emergency Force (UNEF) in Sinai,
bringing temporarily to an end the conflict
between Israel and Egypt triggered off by the
nationalization of the Suez Canal on 26 July of
the same year (see page 13).
27 October : The Soviet Union uses its veto to
prevent action by t6e Security Council fol-
lowing Soviet intervention in Hungarv on 22
Octobcr. The General Assembly calls for the
withdrawaiof Soviet troops.
"First United Nations Conférence on the
Law of the Sea, in Geneva (Switzerland).
 22 May : Following the nationalist uprising
against President Camille Chamoun, Lebanon
goes before the Security Council and claims that
the insurrection is supported by Syria. In June,
the Security Council creates the United Nations
Observation Group in Lebanon (UNOGIL).
This crisis is resotved after a United Nations
special representative is sent to Jordan and Pres-
ident Chamoun foregoes claims to a second
term of office.
18 September : Nikita Khrushchev puts a
general disarmament plan before the United
Nations.
 Declaration of the Rights of the Child.
12 November : The General Assembly calls
on France not to carry out nuclear tests in the
Sahara. The first test takes place on 13 Feb-
ruary 1960.
 July : At the request of the Congo (now Zaire),
thc Security Council sets up a military and
civilian assistance operation-the United
Nations Operation in the Congo (ONUC)-
which comes to an end in June 1964 (see page 13).
December : Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
a. re __ i 
18 September : Secretary-General Dag Ham-
marskjöld is killed in an air crash on his way
to Ndola (Northern Rhodesia-now Zambia)
in connection with the settlement of the con-
flict in the Congo.
3 November : Sithu U Thant, of Burma (now
Myanmar), becomes Secretary-General of the
United Nations.
December : The Indian army invades and
occupies the Portuguese enclave of Goa. The
Security Council can take no action owing to
the imposition of the Soviet veto.
 The United States and the Soviet Union jointly
chair the Committee of 18 on Disarmament.
23 October : Meeting of the Security Council to
discuss the installation of Soviet missiles in Cuba,
denounced by the United States (see page 13).
 The Security Council decrees a voluntary
arms embargo against South Africa.
5 August : Moscow Treaty Banning Nuclear
Weapons Tests (partial test-ban Treaty).
° March : Creation of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP).
18 June : The Security Council condemns
apartheid in South Africa.
September : Resumption of hostilities between
India and Pakistan over Kashmir (see page 15).
Ml Novembcr : Thc Unitcd Kingdom alerts
the Security Council following the declaration
of independence of Rhodesia (which becomes
the independcnt state of Zimbabwe in 1979)
by the country's Prime Minister, Ian Smith,
who sets up a white minority government.
24 Novembcr : Sanctions against Portugal
because of its colonial policy in Africa.
a
 Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities
of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space. The States Parties 10 the Treaty undertake
not to place any nuclear or other weapon in orbit.
27 Octaber : The General Assembly revokes
South Africa's mandate over Namibia.
M 6 December : The Security Council imposes
mandatory sanctions against Southern Rhodesia
(now Zimbabwe).
 Treaty of Tlatelolco (Mexico) for the Prohi-
bition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
and the Caribbean.
The General Assembly entrusts the direct
administration of Namibia to the Trusteeship
Council.
· April :"Quiet diplomacy"mission to Asia by
United Nations Secretary-General Sithu U
Thant, aimed at putting an end to the war in
Viet Nam. Peace talks commence a year later
in Paris (France).
1t-18 May : UNEF withdraws from Sinai at
Egypt's request. Egyptian President Gamal
Abdel Nasser closes the Gulf of Aqaba and
imposes a blockade on the Israeli port of Eilat.
Þ-12 July : The General Assembly annuls the
reunification of Jérusalem decided on by Israel
following the Six-Day War (5-10 June).
IÞ-22 November : The Security Council demands
the withdrawal of armed forces from the occu-
pied territories of the Middle East (see page 13).
 1 July :Signature of the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
which comes into force on 5 March 1970.
IÞ-20 August : Warsaw Pact forces invade
Czechoslovakia and put an end to the attempted
liberalization of the regime (the"Prague
Spring"). The Soviet Union vetoes the question
in the Security Council.
il-4 January : The International Convention on
the Elimination of AU Forms of Racial Discrim-
ination (adopted in 1965) cornes Into force.
Iì-The General Assembly adopts the Declara-
tion on Social Progress and Development.
M 18 January : Conference on Viet Nam, in
Paris (France) ; start of peace talks.
IÞ 9-17 July : World Youth Assembly.
Il

:
°The International Court of Justice declares
illegal the continued presence of South Africa
in Namibia.
January : The United Nations Volunteers
commence activities.
25 October : The People's Republic of China
is recognized by the Gênera) Assembly as the
sole representative of China in the United
Nations.
IÞ 22 December : Kurt Waldheim (Austria)
becomes the fourth Secretary-General of the
United Nations.
 Convention on the Prohibition of Biological
and Bacteriological Weapons.
IÞ 5 June : United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment, in Stockholm
(Sweden).
IÞ The General Assembly adopts the Interna-
tional Convention on the Suppression and
Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid (which
comes into effect on 18 July 1976).
IÞ 24 October : The Security Council creates a
new United Nations Emergency Force
(UNEF II) in the Middle East (see page 13).
þ-South Africa is stripped of its right to sit in
the United Nations. Liberation movements
recognized by the Organisation of African
Unity obtain observer status at the United
Nations.
þ-First World Population Conference, in
Bucharest (Romania). A second Conference is
held in Mexico City (Mexico) in 1984, and a
third in Cairo (Egypt) in 1994.
18 18 January : Under UN auspices, Egypt and
Israel sign a cease-fire and disengagement
agreement (the so-called"kilometre 101"
agreement).
 May : Creation of the United Nations Disen-
gagement Observer Force (UNDOF) to super-
vise the disengagement of Israeli forces on the
Golan Heights in Syria.
II< July : The strength of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP),
stationed in the country since March 1964, is
doubled following the coup d'état in which
the government of Mgr Makarios III is over-
thrown.
ÞO November : The World Food Conférence is
hetd in Rome (Italy). The World Food Council
is created in December.
ÞO 22 November : The Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) is accorded observer
status at the United Nations.
 Creation of the United Nations Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People.
19 June-2 July : The World Conference of the
International Women's Year, meeting in
Mexico City, adopts the Declaration on the
Equahtv of Womcn and thcir Contributions to
Development and Pcace. Conférences on
women are held subsequentlv in Copenhagen
(Dcnmark) in 1980, Nairobi (Kenya) in 1985
and Beijing (China) in 1995.
aa r"5
 The Security Council condemns the actions
of South Africa on several occasions.
 The UN Conference on Human Setttements
(Habitat) is held in Vancouver (Canada). A
second such Conference (Habitat II) is sched-
uled for 1996.
iÞ-United Nations Water Conference, in Mar
duel Plata (Argentina).
First special session of the General Assembly
on Disarmament. Two others are held in 1982
and 1988.
19 March : The Securitv Council demands
the withdrawal of the'Israeli army from
Lebanon. Creation of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). A cease-
fire is decreed on 22 March.
9 November : The Security Council
requests-without success-the liberation of
the staff of the United States embassy in
Teheran (Iran), taken hostage by Iranian stu-
dents on 4 November. Thé hostages are freed
on 20 January 1981.
- 27 December : The Soviet armv enters
Afghanistan. The Soviet veto in the'Security
Council prevents the adoption of a resolution
on the question.
 11 January : The General
requests-without success-the
and unconditional withdrawal
troops from Afghanistan.
September : The conflit between Iran and Iraq
flares up again. The Security Council asks the
two countries to setde their dispute through
mediation or conciliation (see page 14).
a _ a
International Drinking Water Supply and San-
itation Decade
 Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions
on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons.
'"United Nations Conference on New and
Renewable Sources of Energy, in Nairobi
(Kenya).
1 September : First United Nations Confer-
ence on the Least Devetoped Countries, in
Paris (France).
10 December : Javier Pérez de Cuéllar
becomes the fifth Secretary-Generat of the
United Nations.
"
International Year for Mobilization of Sanc-
tions Against South Africa
World Assembly on Ageing, in Vienna (Aus-
tria).
 3 April : The Security Council calls for the
withdrawal of Argentine troops occupying the
Falkland Islands.
 1 May : Start of the conflict between the
United Kingdom and Argentina. Thc United
States and the United Kingdom veto the cai !
for a cease-fire. The Argentine troops surrender
on 14 June. On 14 November, the General
Assembly calls for a peaceful solution.
 June : UNIFIL is unable to counter the
"Peace in Galilee"operation launched by the
Israeti army in Lebanon. The Security Council
demands that Israeli troops be withdrawn.
The United States vetoes thé French plan for
making West Beirut a neutral zone. A multina-
tional force evacuates the Palestinians from
Beirut.
10 December : Signature of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, at
Montego Bay (Jamaica).
United Nations Decade of Disab/ed Persons
Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination
liÞ-19 May : The Security Council requests the
Contadora Group (Mexico, Colombia,
Panama and Venezuela) to find a peaceful
solution to the problems of Nicaragua and El
Salvador.
liÞ-August-September : International Confer-
ence on the Question of Palestine, in Geneva
(Switzerland).
liÞ-25 October : The U. S. A. vetoes a resolution
condemning its military intervention on the
island of Grenada.
sl,
The Security Council rejects the South
African Constitution.
i
Transport and Communications Decade for
Asia and thé pacifie
Treaty of Rarotonga on the South Pacific
Nuclear-Free zone.
IIÞ'March : International Conference on the
Emergency Situation in Africa, in Geneva
(Switzerland).
liÞ-March : The Security Council condemns the
Pretoria regime (South Africa).
22 March : The Security Council condemns
Iraq for using chemical weapons.
liÞ-9 July : France and New Zealand accept the
UN Secretary-General's mediation in the
Rainbow Warrior incident.
World Decade for Cultural Development
 April : After six years'negotiations, a peace
agreement is signed in Geneva between the
governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Creation in May of the United Nations Good
Offices Mission in Afghanistan and Pakistanlm

(UNGOMAP), which iuncrions until March
1990.
20 A ugusr : The cease-lìre berween Iraq and
Iran co mes inro iorce aiter acceprance by rhe
two parties of résolution 598 (20 July 1987).
International Decade for N atural Disaster
Reduction
Third Disarmament Decade
United Nations Decade of International Law
International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism
September : Wor) d Summit for Children in
New York (U. S. A.)
20 September : The Security Council adopts
resolution 668 sctting out the broad lines of the
Cambodia settlement (see page 14).
.
Fourth United Nations Development Decade
Second Transport and Communications
Decade in Africa
United Nations Decade against Drug Abuse
16 January : The Security Council authorizes
Operation"Desert Storm"against Iraq (see
page 14).
JìÞ June : Dispatch of the United Nations
Observer Mission Uganda-Rwanda
(UNOMUR), which ends in September 1994
(see page 14).
July : Dispatch of the United Nations
Observer Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL).
25 September : Embargo on arms sales to the
former Yugoslavia.
23 October : Signature of the Cambodia
Agreements (see page 14).
_ v  ;, Wi r y 
International Space Year
 Boutros Boutros-Ghali (Egypt) becomes
the sixth Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
16 16 January : A Peace Agreement signed in
Mexico City puts an end to 12 years of lìghting
in Et Salvador. The Security Council broadens
the mandate of ONUSAL.
 March : Deployment in the former
Yugoslavia of the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR), created on 21 February
(see page 15).
 April : Launching of the United Nations
Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM I), which
cornes 10 an end in April 1993 (see page 15).
3-14 June : United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development (the"Earth
Summit"), in Rio de Janeiro (Brazil).
9 December : Operation"Restare Hope",
designed 10 protect humanitarian activities in
Somalia, is carried out by the Unifies Task
Force (UNITAF)- (see page 15).
,
Second Industrial Development Decade for
Africa
International Year for the World's Indigenous
People
13-15 J anuary : The Convention banning
chemical weapons is signed in Paris (France).
Mamy : United Nations Operation in Somalia
II (UNOSOM II), which cornes to an end in
March 1995.
14-25 June : The World Conference on
Human Rights convened by the United
Nations in Vienna (Austria) adopts the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action.
- September : Dispatch of the United Nations
Mission in Haiti (UNMIH).
International Year of the Family
22 June : The Security Council authorizes
"Operation Turquoise"in Rwanda (see page
14).
September : The Security Council authorizes
the landing of American forces in Haiti in
order to secure the return of President Aristide.
5-13 September : World Population Confer-
ence, in Cairo (Egypt).
1 December : World Conference on Aids, in
Paris (France).
tr. 
United Nations Year for Tolerance
February : United Nations Angola Verifica-
tion Mission III (UNAVEM III).
1>. 6-12 March : World Summit for Social Devel-
opment, Copenhagen (Denmark).
 March : Termination of UNOSOM II : the
last troops of the UN contingent leave
Somalia.
1> April : Success of the United Nations mission
in El Salvador (ONUSAL). UN troops with-
draw in May.
Sources :
- Basic Facts about the United Nations, Department of
Public Information, United Nations, 1992 ;
United Nations Peace-keeping, Department of Public
Information, United Nations, New York, 1994.
Yearbook of the United Nations, 1992, Vol. 46, Department
of Public Information, United Nations, New York, 1992 ;
"The United Nations for a Better World", special fortieth
anniversary issuc, Ui\'Chronicle, Vol. XXII, No. 4, 1985 ;
- L'ONU pour quoi faire ?, André Lewin, Gallimard, Paris,
1995 ;
- ! 7, Maurice Bertrand, La Découverte, Paris, 1994.
m
