The mystery of Persepolis
by Charles-Emmanuel Doxuan
40
Tust as Persepolis had surpassed
other cities in prosperity, so too
it surpassed them in misfor¬
tune!" With these words the Greek his¬
torian Diodorus Siculus commented on
the destruction of the Achaemenid holy
city in 330 B.C., two centuries after its
foundation by Darius the Great. The
fall of Persepolis symbolized the end of
the immense Persian empire that Cyrus
the Great and his successors had carved
out from the Nile to the Indus.
The city fell without a fight to
Alexander the Great's cavalry, who
found there an amazing treasure trove:
40,000 silver talents and such a profu¬
sion of riches that, according the Greek
historian Plutarch, at least 10,000 pairs
of mules and 5,000 camels were needed
to carry them away. Darius III, the last
Achaemenid king, had taken refuge in
Ecbatana after suffering a bloody defeat
at Alexander's hands at Gaugamela,
close by the ruins of the ancient Nin
eveh. At least for the time being Ms forces
presented no serious threat to the con¬
querors. So why did Alexander raze
Persepolis?
Had not Babylon, which had also
opened its gates to the young emperor,
been spared? And at Susa Alexander
had sat on Darius's throne without
spilling a drop of blood. . . .
FIRE AND SWOKD
It is true that Alexander's army had had
to fight a hard battle at the pass of the
Persian Gates, which was defended by
40,000 men under the command of Ari-
obarzanes, the satrap of Persia. Later, as
the troops marched across the plain,
they saw straggling towards them a
raggamuffin band of 800 old Greek pris¬
oners, most of them horribly mutilated.
They had been left with only their
"useful" limbs, i.e. those needed to carry
out the tasks assigned to them. Feelings
had run high in the Greek ranks.
When most of the army joined
Alexander in Persepolis, a council of
war was held at which the conqueror
came out in favour of looting the city
and destroying it. Parmenio, one of his
lieutenants, tried to dissuade him. Why
should he destroy something that now
belonged to him? And why run the risk of
rekindling local resistance by a wanton
act of cruelty? Alexander rejected his
arguments but agreed to spare the royal
buildings. Thus the residential part of
the city was abandoned to the ferocity of
the Greek soldiers. The Roman histo-
rian Quintius Curtius Rufus, author of
The History ofAlexander, tells how the
Persian leaders, dressed in their finest
robes, threw themselves from the tops of
their walls or burned themselves alive in
their houses rather than fall into the
hands of their enemies. Bands of sol¬
diers ran in every direction, slitting the
throats of their prisoners or killing one
another when they fought over the

Royal residence and spiritual capital of the Persian empire, Persepolis (Takht-e
Jamshid in present-day Iran) came to a tragic end when it ivas destroyed by
Alexander the Great. Excavations on the site, which ivas abandoned for many
centuries, have yielded a mass of information about Achaemenid Persia. Persepolis
was placed on UïiESCO's World Heritage List in 1979,
Above, the Hall of a Hundred
Columns occupies a large part of
the northeastern terrace at
Persepolis.
Above right, the king is shown
fighting a lion in this detail from a
door in the Hall of a Hundred
Columns.
plunder. The carnage lasted several
days.
Persepolis 's misfortunes were not yet
over, however. Back in the city after a
swift expedition against a mountain
people, the Mardi, Alexander decided
to march against the remnants of the
Persian army. Before sending his pha¬
lanxes onto the road to the northwest, he
offered his entourage a magnificent ban¬
quet. It was held on the very spot where
the Great Kings of Persia had enter¬
tained their guests, on the vast stone ter¬
race where stood the palaces and gardens
that had been saved by Parmenio's sup¬
plications. Wine flowed in rivers, and it
was not long before everyone was drunk.
Suddenly Thaïs, an Athenian courtesan
famed for her beauty and quick wit,
began to harangue the crowd, urging
them to burn the palace of Xerxes, who
had once destroyed her native city, and
thus avenge Greece. Her words were
greeted with a roar of approval, and
Alexander, swept along in the general
enthusiasm, grabbed a torch and led the
crowd on its way. The revellers made
their way to all the palaces of the royal
city and, to the sound of flutes and pipes,
set fire to anything that would burn.
It is a moot point whether or not
Alexander really intended to go so far.
Although Plutarch seems to suggest that
an outburst of orgiastic madness took
place, he does not say so categorically.
The historians of antiquity each give
their own version. What is certain is that
on the following day Alexander ordered
the fires to be put out and, when a few
days later the body of Darius was dis¬
covered where he had been left to die
by traitors, ordered that the Persian
leader be buried with due honours.
The flames of a single night did not
destroy the whole of royal Persepolis.
Only the superstructures of the buildings,
mostly made of cedarwood, perished
immediately. What fire began, however, 41

time and neglect concluded. The walls of
Persepolis, like those of Mesopotamian
cities, were of mud brick, and the cen¬
turies eventually got the better of them.
Persepolis (meaning the "city in ruin" in
Greek) sank into oblivion. Its destiny had
been both short-lived and improbable.
A MONUMENTAL BLEND
Darius I, the city's founder, was probably
not of royal blood. His seizure of the
throne marked a break in the dynasty
and was fraught with dangers for his
future reign. In order to highlight the
refoundation of the empire he ordered
two new capitals to be built, one at Susa,
the other at Parsâ, the site of an impor¬
tant temple in the heart of Persis, 80 kilo¬
metres from present-day Shiraz (Iran).
At Parsa, against the side of Kuh-i
Rahmat, the Mount of Mercy, Darius laid
the foundations of a vast terrace 18
metres high, 530 metres long and 330
metres wide, and then began to build on
it. First he built a monumental double
stairway leading up to it, and then, on
another terrace, a grand audience hall
whose cedarwood ceiling was supported
by 36 columns almost 20 metres high.
This state chamber, which could hold
thousands of people, was known as the
Apadana. It opened out onto three por¬
ticoes, one of which looked out over the
plain below. Behind the Apadana Darius
built a smaller palace, the Tachara, which
was used for state banquets. His succes¬
sors, especially his son Xerxes (486-465
B.C.) and his grandson Artaxerxes (465-
424 B.C.) continued the construction
work. Persepolis never entirely ceased
to be a building site. The terrace was
gradually covered by buildings: porti¬
coes, a council hall, and a throne room,
a harem and a treasury. The Achaemenid
kings intended Persepolis to be an archi¬
tectural expression of their greatness.
They brought in workmen and
foremen from all the provinces of their
empire: Achaemenid royal art borrowed
styles from the different peoples under
Persian domination. These influences,
which are clearly visible, produce an
overall effect that is undeniably orig¬
inal. A striking example of this blending
is to be found in the columns which, with
the plant motifs at their base, their tall
shafts and their zoomorphic capitals,
simultaneously recall Egypt, Ionian
42
The Apadana, the royal audience
chamber, was flanked by two
monumental staircases. Above, part
of the eastern staircase, adorned with
magnificent low-relief sculptures. On
the lower retaining wall a lion is
shown fighting a bull in a setting of
cypress-trees. Lines of guards adorn
the upper wall.
Below, a stairway in the Tachara, or
small palace, of Darius I. A combat
between a lion and a bull is depicted
on wall in foreground. The wall beyond
is adorned with carvings of vassals
bearing tribute.
Greece and Assyria, while remaining
typically Persian.
The blend owes much, it is true, to
the personality of the first master-builder.
After Darius, Achaemenid art veered
towards the colossal. At the head of the
great staircase Xerxes built a massive
portal defended by two huge human-
headed bulls. In the recesses of his hall of
a hundred columns, he had himself
depicted as a giant killing equally gigantic
monsters. Artaxerxes, on the other hand,
did not follow his father's example and
opted for greater refinement. This was the
time when Phidias was supervising the
construction of the Parthenon in Athens,
and the flowering of Greek art probably
had an influence in the Great King's
court. The successors ofArtaxerxes, with
the exception of Artaxerxes III, who
added a building to the terrace, simply

embellished buildings, that existed
already.
What did Persepolis stand for in the



Persian empire? It was neither a political
capital nor a centre of economic activity.
Nor did it have any great strategic impor¬
tance. The king spent only a small part
of the year there. In autumn and winter
he was usually in residence at Susa; when
the warm weather returned, he and his
retinue went up to Ecbatana. These were
the two cities from which the Achaemenid
sovereigns promulgated their decrees,
dispensed justice and conducted diplo¬
macy. Persepolis became a kind of spir¬
itual capital of Persia.
A SPIRITUAL CAPITAL
Each spring, at the vernal equinox, the
King presided over a great celebration to
mark the New Year, the Noruz. No for¬
eign envoys were ever invited, which
probably explains why neither the fes¬
tival nor the city where it was held are
ever mentioned in western sources. The
perpetuation of an ancient Persian feast,
Noruz was a religious celebration held
under the auspices ofAhura Mazda, the
supreme god of the empire, whose winged
symbol was everywhere to be seen, but it
was also a great political communion to
which the King of Kings invited his sub¬
jects. Everything in Persepolis seems to
have been designed to celebrate Noruz,
and the ruling dynasty visited the city
each year to re-establish its power sym¬
bolically by receiving tribute from the
Persian and Mede nobility and submis¬
sion from the empire's twenty-three
nations. The ceremony ended with a
magnificent banquet at which guests were
offered all kinds of meat, from camel to
ostrich, before leaving with the silver
dishes from which they had eaten.
Today, twenty-five centuries later,
only the barest of bones remain of Perse¬
polis. A strange army of ruins, of empty
door frames and the bases of stone
columns, seems to gaze out over the
immense plain, eternally expectant.
These vestiges provoke speculation, as
they have done for centuries. Since the
1930s, excavations at Persepolis have
yielded a mass of precious data about the
civilization of ancient Persia. But the
city's mystery remains. It is not hard to
imagine Darius emerging from his tomb
in Naqsh-e Rustam a few kilometres
away to review the Immortal Ten Thou¬
sand of his praetorian guard.
CHARLES-EMMANUEL DOXUAN
is a French dramatist and screenwriter with a special
interest in ancient history.
Above, a detail of the eastern staircase of the Apadana showing two groups of tribute-bearers bringing their
countries' finest products to the Persian king. Above, the Babylonians. Below, the Lydlans.
TRIBUTE FIT FOR A KING
On the monumental staircases of the Apadana, the royal audience chamber, splendid bas-reliefs depict a
procession of astonishing diversity.
Delegations of the tributary nations of the vast Persian empire come forward laden with gifts. The Baby¬
lonians are about to offer the King a zebu, fine woollen scarves and beautifully crafted vessels. The
Scythians have brought a stallion, jewels and furs. Here are Cappadocians, and there Cilicians, leading two
magnificent rams.
A royal audience is taking place. The Great King Is on his throne with his golden sceptre in one hand
and a lotus in the other. He is receiving tribute from a figure, apparently a Mede, who is bowing slightly and
kissing his hand to the monarch. This is Oriental proskynesis, a form of homage that provoked great indig¬
nation among the Macedonians when Alexander demanded it from his own men. The crown prince and two
dignitaries stand behind the throne.
It is late in the day. The tribute-bearers are probably in a hurry to join the king's guests who have already
begun to gather in the gardens of the Tachara, the smaller palace. One group can be seen passing in front
of a row of Susan guards. Persians wearing long pleated robes with broad sleeves, and Medes with their
horsemen's cloaks thrown casually over their shoulders, are talking and laughing as they wait to be
admitted. In the background a whole army of servants are at work. Their task is to bring hundreds of chickens,
goats and sheep into the palace.
And here is the king coming out of his audience chamber. His diminutive parasol bearer and fly¬
catcher follow as close behind him as they can.
C-E.D.
43
