Egypt through
e looking-glass
Maâda Wasse
Omar Sharif and Faten
Hamama in Salah Abou
Seif's psychological
thriller No Sleep (Egypt,
1957).
The development of
Egyptian cinema has
followed, the vicissitudes
of a nation's life
Magda Wassef is an Egyptian film and
theatre specialist. She is the author of
several studies on cinema including
one, written for Unesco, on "The
cultural heritage in Arab cinema".
ETgyptians have been film fans ever
since 1896 when the first
Lumière shorts were shown in
Alexandria, only a year after
' their projection in Paris. By the
turn of the century there were several cin¬
emas in Cairo and Alexandria, mainly
showing American and European films.
The first entirely Egyptian film was The
Civil Servant (1922), a short feature
directed by Mohamed Baoumi. In spite of
the prevailing climate of misogyny, how¬
ever, the real pioneers of Egyptian cinema
were women such as Aziza Emir, Assia
Dagher and a few others. The tenacious
g

ISR STUDIOS
Misr Studios, known as "the Hollywood of the East", were
the first fully equipped modern cinema studios not only in
Egypt but in the Middle East and Africa. Opened in 1935 on
the Avenue of the Pyramids in Giza, less than fifteen kilo¬
metres from Cairo, they were the brainchild of Talaat Harb,
director of the Misri Bank, the first wholly Egyptian bank.
Since 1917 anumbei of studios had been built in Egypt, but
their resources were extremely limited. Talaat Harb sent
Ahmed Badrakhan and Maurice Kassab to France to study
directing and Hassan Mourad and Mohamed Abdelazim to
Germany to study photography. The first film made at Misr
Studios was Wedad, starring the great singer Umm Kulthum
(at centre of poster above). It was a smash hit and was
shown at the 1936 Venice Film Festival. Although Wedad was
co-directed by the German Fritz Kramp, the studios' tech¬
nical advisor, and Gamal Madkour, Misr's next feature, Al
hall el akhir ("The Last Hall", 1937), was made by an
Egyptian, Abdel Fattah Hassan. Most of the important films
made in Egypt between 1935 and 1955 came from Misr Stu¬
dios. Between 1936 and 1960, when the studios were nation¬
alized, 182 features were made there. H
Aziza Emir was both producer and leading
lady of Egypt's first full-length feature,
Leila (1927), which was a smash hit and
launched the Egyptian motion-picture
industry. Notable among the dozen or so
films made in the late 1920s was Mohamed
Karim's Zeinah (1929), an adaptation of
Mohamed Hussein Heikal's novel, the first
in Arab literature.
Early musicals Egyptian talkies of
the early 1930s were strongly influenced
by popular love songs. Mohamed Karim's
The White Rose (1933), starring the great
singer Mohamed Abdel Wahab, entranced a
vast public both in Egypt and abroad. It
made the name of the Egyptian cinema and
introduced it to a new genre, the musical.
Every film-maker had his own singing star.
Mohamed Karim, for example, directed all
Mohamed Abdel Wahab 's films, and Ahmed
Badrakhan directed five of the seven films
starring the famous woman singer Umm
Kulthum. Kamal Selim's Determination
(1939) signalled a move away from these
light-hearted productions. By showing the
life of Cairo slum dwellers, Selim brought a
new, more realistic atmosphere to Egyptian
cinema.
ESCapist films During the Second
World War packaged Hollywood-
inspired musical comedies were all the rage.
Films, studios and cinemas proliferated. The
actress-singer Leila Mourad became Egypt's
Mary Pickford in Egypt's Sweetheart, a role
recreated by Togo Mizrahi in Leila (1942),
the first in a series made over a ten-year
period. Singer Farid El Atrash and dancer
Samia Gamal were a famous double act.
Following in the footsteps of Kamal
Selim, Ahmed Kamel Morsi (The District
Attorney) and Kamel El Telmessani (The
Black Market) set out to deal with contem¬
porary problems. Both these films were
shot in 1943, but neither was shown until
1946 because of a tacit form of censorship.
In 1947 a censorship code along the lines
of the Hays Code in the United States was
officially introduced. Many subjects became
taboo, and as a result specific references to
real-life situations tended to disappear. Puri¬
tanism and conservatism were the pretext
for this.

The revolutionary ferment of the 1940s
was stifled by increasingly repressive mea¬
sures that affected all aspects of cultural life.
Only musicals, comedies and melodramas
were given free rein.
Years Of paradOX New archetypes
emerged after the Nasscrite revolution
in 1952. Patriotic films such as Rodda Kalbi's
Give Me Back My Heart celebrated the rev¬
olution and railed against the old social
values.
Yet a few talented film-makers continued
to explore a realist vein. Among them were
Salah Abu Saif, who took the side of the
most underprivileged, especially women, in
The Leech (1956) and / Am Free (1959);
Henri Barakat, director of the classic Song of
the Curlew (1959); Atef Salem, one of
whose best-known works is We Students
(1959); and Kamal El Sheikh, who made Life
or Death in 1954. Youssef Chahine showed
an instinctive concern for contemporary
problems in films like The Nile's Son (1951)
and Cairo Station (1958).
But important though they were, these
films were only a drop in the ocean of
Egyptian cinema. With an average output of
sixty movies a year, the industry continued
to satisfy the escapist desires of the mass
public and meet producers' and distributors'
demands for profitability. A change of
course only came at the beginning of the
1960s.
Acinema revolution After i96i the
state exercised almost complete control
over the cinema. The size of the private sector
was considerably reduced. For the first time
film-makers were free from the restrictions
imposed by the external market that had
previously held sway.
Ideology began to infiltrate into scripts
and lead them into unexplored territory.
One favourite theme was the world of the
peasantry, which featured in Tewfik Salah 's
pioneering The Heroes' Struggle (1962),
Salah Abu Saif's The Second Wife (1967) and
Youssef Chahine's The Earth (1969). Yet
most of these films only attracted a limited
public, compared with that of films which
gave comic treatment to serious subjects such
as the population explosion and the equality
of the sexes.
Youssef Chahine's
Central Station (Egypt,
1958). The director
plays a newspaper
vendor, and Hind
Rostom a fruit-juice
salesgirl.
Mohamed Karim's Vive 1'amour
(Egypt, 1938), a musical starring
singer Mohamed Abdel Wahab
and Laila Mourad.
Mohamed Khan's
The Wife of an
Important Man
(Egypt, 1988).
i

Kamal Selim's
Determination (Egypt,
1939), the first major
Egyptian realist film.
Kamal El Sheikh (The Thief and the
Dogs, 1962) and Salah Abu Saif (Cairo 30,
1969) were among a number of film-makers
who were sympathetic to the social insights
of Naguib Mahfouz (Nobel Prize winner
for literature in 1988) and adapted several of
his works to the screen. But the ideals and
structures of Nasserism collapsed with
defeat in the Six-Day War of 1967.
Rejection and renewal The ten¬
sion was relaxed by success in the war of
1973. Nasserite protectionism was replaced
by the economic liberalism of Anwar El
Sadat. The State Broadcasting Authority,
hitherto responsible for production and dis¬
tribution, was dismantled, and there was a
return to the law of the market-place. Shadi
Abdel Salam, who had directed The
Mummy in 1968 in exceptional conditions,
tried for fifteen years to make Akhenaton,
but in vain.
Ali Badrakhan's El Karnak and Mam-
douh Shukri's The Dawn Visitors, both
made in 1975, harshly criticized the excesses
of the Nasser regime. A new generation of
film-makers, trained at the Cairo Film Insti¬
tute, came on the scene and showed with
uncompromising realism the explosion of
free-wheeling capitalism in a society where
social climbing has become an ideal.
Violence and mockery After the
sensational assassination of Sadat in
1981, violence became the keynote of the
first half of the 1980s. Some twenty films
that came out in 1983 alone ended with the
murder of a corrupt person. On screen pop¬
ular justice exacted revenge in Samir Saif's
The Monster and Saad Arafa's Marzouka.
Discontent also gave rise to mockery, a
favourite Egyptian form of expression
whose symbolic figure in cinema is the actor
Adel Imam. A typical film in this vein was
Raafat El Mini's The Lawyer. Some films
took on the subjects of sex and drugs.
Actress Nadia El Guindi became their muse
after appearing in Hossam El Din Mostafa 's
El Bateneya (198Q).
Several directors brought new life to the
cinema during these years. Among them
were Atef El Tayeb (The Innocent), Raafat
El Mini (The Last Love Story), Mohamed
Khan (The Wife of an Important Man),
Kha'iri Beshara (Bitter Day, Sweet Day),
Mounir Radin (Days of Anger) and Hani
Lashine (The Puppet Player).
In the 1990s the Egyptian film industry
is again in thrall to a paradox. On the one
hand, output is declining (barely twenty
films were made in 1994) and unemploy¬
ment is rising. On the other, film quality
and viewing facilities are improving (cinemas
are being renovated). Satellite has revolution¬
ized the audiovisual landscape (for worse
rather than better).
Fortunately a director of the quality of
Youssef Chahine is still making films. Others,
including Mohamed Khan and Atef El
Tayeb, who emerged in the 1980s, are contin¬
uing to show their originality. Bright new
talents such as Sherif Arafa, Yousry Nas-
rallah, Asma El Bakri and Khaked El Hagar
are showing great promise.
