In medieval times
the pilgrimage to
Santiago de
Compostela in
Spain was a major
attraction for
western Christian
Europe
The road to Compostela
by Milien Bravo Lozano
Pilgrims gather in front of the
cathedral of Santiago de
Compostela on 25 July to
celebrate St. James's day.
! "Who can this great and powerful figure
be to whom Christians from both sides of
the Pyrenees throng to address their prayers? So
mighty are the multitudes journeying back and
forth on the road westward that there is hardly
any room to move on it. We have been told that
the person in question was 'St. James, the apostle
of our Lord and Saviour', whose body is buried
in Galicia, and who is venerated as patron and
protector of all the lands of Christendom:
France, England, Italy, Germany and, first and
foremost, Spain.""
Thus wrote the ambassadors of the Emir
Alf ben Yussuf (1 106-1 142), full of wonder as
they took the road leading to Santiago de Com¬
postela in northwestern Spain. ("Santiago" is
the Spanish for St. James). Where had they come
from, these crowds of pilgrims who obstructed
their way? When had this pilgrimage begun?
The pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela
honours the apostle St. James the Great. The son
of Zebedee (a fisherman on the Sea of Galilee)
and Salome (one of the holy women who habit¬
ually accompanied Jesus), St. James was the 21

brother of St. John, another apostle and a key
figure in the New Testament.
After the death of Christ, St. James preached
the gospel in Palestine until he was beheaded on
the orders of Herod Agrippa I, nephew of the
notorious Herod the Great. He was probably
executed in 44 A.D., thus becoming the first
apostle to be martyred. According to legend, he
also preached in Spain, where his mortal remains
were taken and buried in Galicia.
The mythical Moor-slayer
In 71 1 A.D., a Muslim army from North Africa
landed on the Spanish coast near Gibraltar. The
Visigothic kingdom of Spain was in decline,
and within seven years the entire peninsula had
succumbed to these courageous and well-
trained invaders. For the next eight centuries,
throughout the Middle Ages, the history of
Spain was to be determined by the relation¬
ship between the opposing religious and cultural
powers of Islam and Christianity, a relationship
which was difficult but not always hostile.
St. James was to become the symbolic fig¬
urehead of the "reconquest" of Spain by the
forces of Christianity, and a knowledge of his
mythological role in this struggle is essential to
an understanding of medieval Spain. Known as
Santiago Matamoros ("St. James the slayer of
Moors"), he is traditionally depicted as a warrior
armed with a sword and sitting astride a white
horse.
An opportune discovery in the ninth century
revealed the legendary burial place of St. James
near the town of Iria Flavia, at the westernmost
tip of the Iberian peninsula.
For some time previously, the hermit
Pelagius and the natives of this area had been
troubled by strange and mysterious phenomena.
At night the air would be filled with supernat¬
ural light and the sound of sweet canticles, sung
as if by angels. Bishop Theodemir was informed
of these occurrences, and their source was imme¬
diately identified as a tomb, undoubtedly that of
St. James the Great. When news of this felicitous
discovery reached Alfonso II the Chaste (759-
842), ruler of the small kingdom of Asturias
and León, whose capital was Oviedo, the king
wrote, "... the presence has been revealed to us
of the most precious treasure of the blessed
apostle, namely his sanctified remains. Learning'
of this, my spirit filled with devotion and sup¬



plication, and with my court I immediately hur¬
ried to worship and venerate this precious relic,
and we paid homage with great shedding of
tears and prayers to the patron saint and pro¬
tector of Spain."
The origins and history
of the pilgrimage
In contemporary documents, this discovery is
described as an inventio, in the sense of an
encounter that was so unexpected and marvel¬
lous as to be considered supernatural. The king
made arrangements for a chapel to be erected on
the site of the tomb, and shortly afterwards this
was enlarged and transformed into a basilica.
The town of Santiago de Compostela grew up
around the tomb, which was to become so pow¬
erful a symbol of Christianity in Spain that the
victory of the Christian armies at Clavijo in 844
was attributed to the direct intervention of St.
James. The town was ransacked by Almanzor

(Al-Mansur) in 997 and rebuilt in the eleventh
century. The romanesque cathedral was built
between 1075 and 1188.
It is difficult to date precisely the first pil¬
grimages to Compostela. The above account
by Alfonso II is the first written evidence of
such a "pilgrimage", and not long afterwards the
faithful began to arrive in Compostela from all
the provinces of northern Spain, forming a con¬
stant stream of pilgrims which continues to this
day. According to the records, the first pilgrim
from outside Spain was Godescale, Bishop of Le
Puy in France, who travelled with his entourage



to pray at Compostela 100 years after the visit of
Alfonso II.
From this time on, most of the pilgrims were
foreigners. People began to travel from all cor¬
ners of Europe along the old Roman roads, and
very soon specific routes were established and
came to be known as the "road to Santiago".
The tenth, eleventh and twelfth centuries
were undoubtedly the Golden Age of the pil¬
grimage to Compostela, and a long line of dis¬
tinguished figures came to pay their respects
before the Saint's tomb. The pilgrimage of
Charlemagne, however, is probably apocryphal.
Similarly, accounts of a journey by St. Francis
(around 1213) may well be unfounded, although
numerous monasteries along the road to Com¬
postela claim to have been founded by the
"pauper from Assisi".
A long and hazardous journey
The pilgrims generally set off in groups from
their home towns, and their departure was the
occasion for much celebration, with the blessing
of their obligatory apparel: cloak, beggar's
bundle, staff, gourd and wide-brimmed hat. In
the early days, the pilgrims returned home with
a sea-shell to show that they had reached their
goal. In time, this became a distinctive emblem,
and pilgrims would even wear several shells,
earning themselves the nickname "shell-
wearers" from the Galicians.
Those who made the journey to Compostela
left their families, responsibilities and livelihoods
for between six months and two years, and faced
such hazards as sickness, accidents or attacks. It
has been estimated that at certain periods as
many as half of the pilgrims never returned.
Some simply decided to stop and settle down
somewhere on the road, especially once they
had reached Spanish territory. In many of the
towns on the road to Compostela, quarters
sprang up that were populated by foreigners
who had settled there to ply their trades . Most
of these settlers were French, and thus we find
"French quarters" in Pamplona, Burgos, León
and Compostela itself. Sometimes these "one
way" pilgrims would even set up their own towns
called "Villafranca". An anonymous chronicler
of the town of Sahagún described how "as the
King had decided that a town should be con¬
structed there, from all parts of the known uni¬
verse thronged townsfolk of many and various
trades, namely blacksmiths, carpenters, tailors
furriers, cobblers, armourers and learned men
from numerous and diverse provinces and realms,
namely Gascony, Brittany, Germany, England,
Burgundy, Normandy, Toulouse, Provence and
Lombardy, and many other tradesmen con¬
versing in various foreign tongues."
In the course of time, and principally in the
wake of the Reformation, Compostela lost some
of its importance. Nevertheless, a recent resur¬
gence of religious zeal has again peopled the
road to Compostela with thousands of pilgrims
from all over the world.
From a marble column in the main portico of
the cathedral of St. James of Compostela a mag¬
nificent statue by Master Matthew welcomes
pilgrims as they approach the goal of their
journey. According to an age-old tradition, vis¬
itors should place their right hand on the column
as a sign of devotion to obtain the favour of the
Saint. How many millions of hands have
touched this marble column for it to be worn to
a depth of a centimetre and a half?
* Historia Compostellana, written by the canons of the
cathedral of St. James of Compostela, Munio, Hugo and
Girardus (11th century).
A huge incense-burner is
swung during the high mass
held in the cathedral on St.
James's day.
MILLAN BRAVA LOZANO,
a Spanish university teacher and
specialist in Latin philology, is
the founder-director of the
"Centro de estudios del Camino
de Santiago" (The Santiago Way
Study Centre) at Valladolid
(Spain). Among his many
published works are A Practical
Guide for Pilgrims. The Road to
Santiago (Everest publishers,
León, 1994) and The
Unforgettable Pilgrims' Route to
Santiago (with 258 photos,
Everest publishers and The
Santiago Way Study Centre,
1994), which have also
appeared in Spanish, French and
German.
23
