THE BALANCE SHEET
- 1-
The rand to peace
by Maurice Bertrand
To improve its response 0 crises,
the United Nations will probably have to
rethink its structure
There are two conflicting theories
about the future of the United
Nations. According to the more widelv
accepted one, the structure of international
organizations can only change after the end
of a world war, as history would scem to
demonstrate-the League of Nations was set
up in 1919 and the United Nations in 1945.
This argument rests on the observation that
it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, ta
obtain a consensus within the"international
community"for alterations to the legal
framework governing relations between
states. Only a universel surge of emotion
such as that caused by the ending of a war, or
rather the victory of a coalition on a world-
wide scale, could therefore create the condi-
tions for such a consensus.
In this view, unless there were to be a
third world war the United Nations, what-
ever the difficulties it might encounter,
would be fated to survive as it is for many
decades, and the appropriate response to i ts
fiftieth anniversary would therefore be to
wish it many happy returns. While con-
ceding that we Iive m a changing world and
that ideas, including ideas about peace,
evolve, proponents of this argument bclieve
that the existing institutions will manage ta
adapt to such changes without needing in-
depth reform.
The other theory, proceeding from a more
complex analysis of institutional change, calls
for reforms, or an aggiornamento, of the
system as a whole to be carried out without
delay. However, it concurs with the previous
theory in believing that it was the thinking
on the subject of peace summed up by U. S.
President Woodrow Wilson'that shaped the
League of Nations in 1919, and it further
observes that the same thinking-corrected
and supplemented by"functionalist"ideas
 on the pooling of efforts in science and tech-
... notogy-lay behind the Roosevelt adminis-
tration's setting up of the Bretton Woods
institutions (the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank) in 1944 and the
United Nations in 1945.
Statesmanship in the post-war world
This theory therefore readily accepts 1919
and 1945 as being crucial dates since they cor-
responded to exceptional situations, but
points out that other institutional changes
have corne about at other times and in other
circumstances. One of these changes is of
especial importance, the ongoing process of
European construction since the 1950s, from
the establishment of the European Coal and
Steel Community to the Treaty of Rome
and then the Treaty of Maastricht.
The fact is that European construction
has had a far more effective influence on the
establishment of world peace than the
League of Nations or the United Nations,
insofar as it has succeeded in rendering
almost unimaginable an outbreak of war
among France, the United Kingdom, Ger-
many, Austria and Italv, countries that until
1945, and for a thousand years before then,
had been involved in innumerable conflicts,
including the two world wars.
On the global scale, other important
institutions have been founded since 1945 : in
1956, the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) ; in 1975, the G7 group, a
summit gathering of the Heads of State or
Government of the seven leading Western
industrial countries which provided previ-
ousiy tacking opportunitics for exchanges of
views between the gréât powers and set up
the equivalent of a world"board of direc-
tors" ; and in 1994, the World Trade Organi-
zation (WTO).
These examples suffice to show that fun-
damental institutional changes corne about
when statesmen, whose position allows
Above, the Conference at San
Francisco (U. S. A.), which
ended on 26 June 1945 with
the signing of the United
Nations Charter.
Opposite page,
an incident in the civil war in
Liberia, August 1990.

ouf 1) ll'\, 1klll \ il'\\S, lhout thl'Ilel, d 10 leguLlll'
illll'lîl. nioll, ll lr. ldl', 1 ( thl'lime \\. hell thl'
W'j' () WJS eSL1blished.
The need for reform
AIlI Jttempt tu dehne lhe futule of the
United N, nions ill the light of this secnnd
theorv wnuld ent, lil consideratinn of the hve
factorsoudinedbciow.
There is now a ven'bload measure of
Jcknow1cdgment of the need for wide-
rangi Ilg, rapid"change"i n the \Vorld. Political
discourse abounds) increasingly in clichés
about the constraints of mterdependence, a
sing1e \Volld market, acid rain"knowing no
fronicrs", thc évolution in information
technologv and communication, and the
"gioba) vrillage". Thc free-market tdcology,
with its accompanying monetarist view of the
econom y, predomi nates and, though mcreas-
ingly challenged, monopolizes thinking in
thèse matters. Thc end of thc Cold War has
not had thc samc kind of répercussions as the
end of the tao wortd wars but has led to a
graduai calling into question of thé type of
sooctvinwhichwenowlive.
This reassessment has in large part been
brought about by the gênera) sense of frus-
tration arising from the failure of attempts
to setttc the growing numbcr of intra-state
conflicts that arc breaking out in various
parts of thc world (Yugos) avia, thc Cau-
casus, Somalia, Nlexico, Rwanda) and also
from the increa. sing) v vast floods of rcfugees
ficcing from thèse conflicts towards theb
industriahzcdcountries.
Furthermore, the threat of economic
destabilization on a \Vorldwide scale, as in
the case of the Mexican crises of rebruary
1995 and the periodic bouts of exchange-rate
speculation, are worrying not onlv to public
them to influence the political class and
world opinion, are convinced that such
changes are necessary. This was the case when
Jean Monnet and Robert Schuman launched
European construction in ] drawing on
the ideas concerning European unitv held bv
manv thinkers since the eighreenth centurv
and ral1ying a considerable section of the
pohiica) class to the cause of a"U nired States
of Europe".
Further evidence that institutionai change
can occur at other times than following rhe
victorv of an international coalition in var is
given bv U. S. Président Dwight D. Eisen-
hower's influencé on the establishment of
the IAEA, by that of seHral European
leaders, inctuding French President Valéry
Giscard d'EsL1ing, at thé time of thé estab-
lishment of thé G7 group, or again b\ that

An A) gerian f) ag carhed
symbolically through the
streets of Atgiers during a
demonstration against
terrorism (Algeria, January
1992).
A clash between polie and
skinheads near a hostel for
immigrants at Rostock
(Germany) in August 1992.
opinion in general but also to the heads of
the major business enterprises and those in
charge of the economy and public finances.
Added to ais this, the profound changes
in the mode of production brought about
by rapid progress in electronics and commu-
nications are aggravating unemployment,
bringing down wages and contributing to
marginalization in the rich as weIl as in the
poor countries.
Yet neither governments nor the interna-
tional institutions have any solutions to offer
to these new threats. The credibility of the
entire political class is thus being undermined
in very many countries. It is as though nation-
states had become incapable of solving their
own problems because they have become
world-wide problems, while at the same time
the international institutions have failed to
acquire the powers needed in order for them
to be able to make up for these shortcomings.
Public anxiety about this situation may
give rise to one of two attitudes. On the one
hand, racist, nationalist, populist and fascist
trends may grow stronger in the rich coun-
tries while at the same time the poor coun-
tries turn inwards on themselves in the search
for ethnic identity or under the influence of
nationalism or religious fundamentalism. On
the other hand, there may be a renewal of the
democratic ideology that opposes fascism and
defends human rights, leading on to calls for
institutional reform on a global scale.
The first of these trends is already mani-
festing itself in the rise of populist and
extreme right-wing parties in Europe, the
spread of nationalist and militarist ideas in the
United States and the exacerbation of various
forms of fundamentalism in many countries
of the South. However, the unease caused by
this trend is provoking résistance In thé form
of movements by citizen groups and by a sec-
tion of the general public in support of
stronger defence of human rights, democracy
and peace.
The kind of society that should be set up
in order to ensure the success of the humanist
and universalist ideology remains, however,
ill-defined, especially as regards peace and the
share-out of political responsibilities at the
global, regional and national levels.
Underrated proposais
As a result of this state of uncertainty, much
thought has been given and many suggestions
have been made in the last ten years or so as ta
the reform or complete reorganization of
international institutions. This is something
new ; until 1985 ail thinking on this subject
was paralysed by forty years of the Cold War.
Not only are Germany and Japan, at the most
officiai ! evel, ciaiming their places as perma-
nent members of the UN Security Council
but other institutional proposais are begin-
ning to win approval from the majority of
experts and at least some politicat ieaders m
various countries.
These proposais include : the establish-
ment of an Economic Security Council, a
body of limited membership comprising
representatives of the major powers-in eco-
nomic or demographic terms-and the var-
ious regions of the world (equivalent to
envisaging an enlargement of the G7) ; the
introduction of international taxation ta
replenish the budgets of the international
organizations ; making good the"democratic
deficit"on a global scale by means of
improved representation of civil society or
even a World Parliament ; defining and imple-
menting a"conflict-prevention strategy"
instead of relying solely on the inefficient
methods of"preventive diplomacy"or
trusting to those of"collective security",
illusory as they have proved to be ; thor-ID

ough-going reform of the International
Monetary Fund or its possible replacement
by a body akin to a"World Central Bank"
providing better guarantees of stabiiitv in
exchange rates.
The tendency emerging from the efforts
undertaken, this year alone, in over a hun-
dred commissions, symposia, seminars and
research programmes, is towards recognition
of thé fundamental requirements that
modern international institutions should
meet : an effective system of joint consulta-
tion by the world's politicat ieaders ; démon-
ratic representation of citizens ; a security
System making it passible to prevent the
outbreak of civil wars ; and better safeguards
of economic stability.
These proposais continue, however, to
run up against national potiticat leaders'tack
of interest in problems of this kind and the
public's lack of information about them.
There is thus a long way to go before they
can be seen as viable political responses to the
most urgent probicms.
The future of the United Nations is in fact
tied up with the evolution of the world polit-
ical situation itself and with the nature of the
crises arising therein in the years ahead. Should
serious crises of security occur-such as the
mass migrations caused by civil wars in coun-
tries near to the industrialized world, which
are in danger of provoking a sharp increase in
racist and ultranationalist reactions in the rich
countries-they could lead to the rejection of
thé United Nations or even to its démise, as
the world reverts to national rivalries and the
compétitive struggle for hegemony.
On the other hand, crises which, though
less grave, neverthetess sound serious warn-
ings, in the field of economic security for
instance, could induce those statesmen who
take the long view and who are concerned to
avoid a disastrous outcome to recommend
and put into effect reforms broad enough to
allow for the graduai reorganization and
reinforcement of the international institu-
tional structure.
The future of the United Nations will
thus depend, in thé final analysais, on the
ability of siaiesmen to suggest, and to put
into effect, visionary solutions-before) it is
taro latte..
1 In his Fourteen Points.
N eison Mandela, at the time
Vice-Président of the African
National Congress (ANC),
addresses the Special
Committee against Apartheid
at the United Nations in New
York (U. S. A.) on 22 June 1990.
MAURICE BERTRAND,
of France, is an honorary
counsellor of the French Cour des
Comptes and a former member of
the United Nations Joint
Inspection Unit. His published
works include L'ONU (La
Découverte publishers, Paris,
1994).
Ii
