The Maghreb: Women in the front line
by Hakima Himmich and Latifa Imane
Two members of Morocco's anti-Âids association
explain why women in the Maghreb are particularly
exposed to HIV infection
14
More than four million women are now
I infected with HIV. Over 3,000 more are
infected each day. Most of them are between
fifteen and thirty-five years old and live in the
Third World. The disease is taking the heaviest
toll of African women. According to WHO
one out of every forty African women is
affected.
The latest reports show that the epidemic is
spreading rapidly in the Maghreb. In Morocco
(the situation is pretty much the same in Algeria
and Tunisia) the percentage of women among
Aids sufferers rose from 8 per cent in 1988 to 25
per cent in 1994.
myriem, widowed at 25 and
HIV-positive
The figures indicate the vulnerability of women
like Myriem, who was widowed seventeen days
after her wedding. The virus was a legacy from
her forty-eight-year-old husband, who had mar¬
ried her after the death of his first wife. Contrary

r
A wedding ceremony in the
High Atlas Mountains,
Morocco. The shape of the
bride's headdress indicates
that she is a virgin.
A family planning session in a
village near Marrakesh.
to a widely held prejudice in the Maghreb Aids
is not only a disease of "loose women" who
have left the "straight and narrow". In over 55
per cent of female Aids cases in Morocco the



only known risk factor is marriage. Like half of
the women infected each day in the world,
Myriem had had only one sexual partner, her
husband.
Myriem found it hard to understand what
the doctor was saying when he explained that
she was the carrier of an invisible virus that is
spread mainly through sexual intercourse. She
was born in a rural area and never went to
school. Of course, she had heard of "Ades",
but she didn't know what it was. How could she,
a "clean" women, have become infected with a
"dirty" disease?
Myriem is the archetypal example of a
young, inexperienced, dependent and ignorant
woman who is defenceless against the infec¬
tion. There are many Myriems in the world,
especially in Africa and Asia. They are ideal
prey for a virus that chooses the weakest as its
targets.
To begin with, they are biologically vulner¬
able. We know today that in unprotected love-
making, men are three times more infective than
women. The more fragile female genital mucous
membrane encourages transmission of the virus
contained in sperm. Adolescent women whose
mucous membrane is not fully mature are at
even greater risk. This explains why young
women aged between fifteen and twenty-four in
developing countries have a much highter infec¬
tion rate than young men of the same age.
Another possible reason for this is that young
women often have sexual relations with sexually
experienced older men.
This fragility is often aggravated by the exis-
"When someone
tells me, 'You've
got to tight. It'll
help your
chances of
survival, ' I
always want to
ask what they
mean by 'fight'.
Fight what? And
how?"
tence of sexually trans¬
mitted diseases (STDs) that
generally reveal no symp¬
toms in women. Women
keep quiet and are rarely
treated. And even when
they have symptoms,
women in the Maghreb
prefer to keep their intimate
forms of suffering to them¬
selves rather than face
examination by a doctor. In
the absence of a public
health system adapted to
their needs, many women
turn to traditional medicine.
More than 70 per cent of
Moroccan women still give
birth to their children at
home, and consequently the
mortality rate is high.
Female sexuality: what goes unsaid
But the health system is not the only problem.
The most important issue is the way in which
female sexuality is perceived both by women and
by men. Although Islam only accepts sexual
activity within marriage, for men as well as for
women, the social balance of power enables
men to cheat. Sexual appetite in men is a sign of
virility and power. Female sexual appetite is
regarded with contempt. Men are expected to
have gained experience prior to marriage; but a
woman must be a virgin on her wedding night.
Myriem was a virgin when she got married.
Her husband, who knew he was ill, demanded
a certificate of virginity. Marrying a virgin is
supposed to have purifying virtues.
After marriage our societies continue to
show indulgence towards men's sexual
"excesses". Women must remain faithful, but
men are occasionally allowed to go and see
whether the grass is greener elsewhere. They
may even indulge in polygamy and take up to
four wives. They are men, after all, and as our
grandmothers said before us, "The eye (the
woman) cannot rise above the eyebrow (the
Today, as they face the threat of Aids, women
realize how little power they have. "I'm afraid,
really afraid. I know my husband is unfaithful to
me, but what can I do? How can I tell him my
fears without making him angry? People here
don't talk to their husbands about that sort of
thing." How many times have we heard that said
on our telephone help-line or in our information 15

sessions. More and more Moroccan women are
afraid of Aids and know they are at risk, but
they find it hard to talk about it. Only rarely do
they dare insist that a flighty husband use a
condom.
"I can't stand the pill, but my husband refuses
to use a condom. He says it's a piece of rubber that
reduces his pleasure. And I've had six children!
But there's nothing I can do. If I nag him about
it, he'll find another wife and I'll be out in the
street. Of course I'm afraid of Aids, but I'm even
more afraid of being kicked out. So. . . ."
Zahra, a thirty-three-year-old housewife, is
entirely dependent on her husband, and so she
has little chance of negotiating with him about
limiting the number of pregnancies or pre¬
venting STDs and
Aids. More than 69
per cent of the"The only friends I
could rely on are
dead."
women suffering
from Aids who are
being treated at
Casablanca Univer¬
sity Hospital are
jobless, like Zahra, and 57 per cent of them have
never been to school.
Their economic dependence and lack of
education seem to be additional risk factors.
Caught between the fear of Aids and anxiety
about being left on the shelf, women feel
trapped. In many cases the prospect of divorce
frightens them the most. "Of course I have
heard about Aids," said Zahra, "but I have
never seen anyone suffering from it. On the
other hand, I have seen plenty of divorced
women. So I know what I'm talking about.
When you don't know how to read or write,
your only security is marriage."
In the Maghreb there are millions of illiterate
Even when they
have symptoms,
women in the
Maghreb prefer to
keep their intimate
forms of suffering
to themselves
rather than face
examination by a
doctor.
A nurse with a patient in the
infectious diseases department
of Ibn Rochd Hospital in
Casablanca.
16
women like Zahra. Schooling is only compul¬
sory in theory. According to a study carried
out in 1990, one out of every two girls attends
primary school; one out of three attends sec¬
ondary school, and only six in a hundred reach
university. Access to school, especially in rural
areas, is still a privilege reserved for boys.
Lacking educational qualifications, these
women have no choice but to get married, or else
work for a pittance as housemaids or factory
hands. Some who have been abandoned or wid¬
owed turn to prostitution, which exposes them
to all kinds of abuse and danger but enables
them to support their families. This is what hap¬
pened to Zoubida, a thirty-five-year-old widow
with three daughters. "When my husband died,"
she explains, "he left me a small house, but my
in-laws sold it, and I found myself in the street
overnight. What else could I do? I started 'going
out' to feed my children. I had no choice."
Zoubida has been selling sex for ten years in a
small Casablanca street. No one knows about it
in her family, who live some fifty kilometres
away and think she works in a factory.
Zoubida only uses condoms when a cus¬
tomer asks her to. "A lot of men don't like con¬
doms," she says. "And there's so much compe¬
tition. All these high school students. If I refuse
to do it, there are a hundred girls ready to,
without condoms or anything." Zoubida has
such a low image of herself, her body and her
status that she feels she has nothing to lose. If she
contracts Aids or anything else, so what?
In any case, the infection process is often
incomprehensible. There are radio and television
programmes about it, and articles in the press,
but for Zahra and Zoubida, who have had no
schooling, media language is hard to follow.
What's more, talk about prevention is first and
foremost aimed at men.
Is Aids revealing the cracks in our social,
health and legal systems and in our traditional
ways? Perhaps the urgent need for specific
answers to the challenge of Aids will at last
force us to rethink our societies.
HAKIMA HIMMICH,
of Morocco, teaches at the Casablanca Medical School. A
specialist in infectious diseases, she is particularly interested
In HIV Infection and the vulnerability of women to HIV/Aids.
LATIFA IMANE,
a Moroccan journalist, is responsible for communication and
training with the Moroccan Association against Aids,
Casablanca.
