M
South Africa: leaving apartheid behind
by Roger Meunier
A reconstruction
programme for a
country with a
ruinous heritage
20
ROGER MEUNIER,
of France, is a staff member of
the School of Advanced Studies
in Social Sciences (EHESS) In
Paris. A member of the southern
Africa research group at his
country's National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS), he
is currently working on problems
of agriculture and agrarian
reform in South Africa.
I The new South Africa is on the move.
I Representatives of the whole nation, now
headed by Nelson Mandela, are still working on
a final draft of the constitution. Meanwhile, they
have already embarked on a reconstruction and
development programme. This is a package of
social and economic measures which will make it
possible, now that political equality has been
achieved, to erase the terrible consequences of
over a hundred years of colonial plunder and
nearly half a century of government whose very
foundations rested on a policy of social exclusion.
The task at hand is all the more daunting
because the final years of apartheid resulted in
a serious economic crisis, a downturn in invest¬
ment, an appreciable decrease in national wealth
and the institutionalization of regional inequal¬
ities. The self-governing and supposedly inde¬
pendent Bantustans (Transkei, Ciskei,
Bophuthatswana and Venda), which now once
again form an integral part of the South African
national framework, were pockets of destitution,
overpopulation and environmental disaster.
Even today, there are those who refuse to
accept the apartheid regime's responsibility for
the maldevelopment of South Africa. The appro
priation by the white minority of the lion's
share of the country's wealth tends to be
regarded by its beneficiaries more as the natural
result of economic laws or a legitimate reward
for hard work and expertise than as the product
of massive overexploitation based on political
domination and racial discrimination.
A ruinous social and economic
heritage
In fact, the years of growth leading up to 1980
were a time when inequalities increased in every
sphere and the great majority of the rural black
population were impoverished. The scale of the
phenomenon can be gauged from the findings of
a nationwide survey on poverty carried out by
hundreds of researchers in the early 1980s.
The survey painted a damning picture of the
predicament faced by millions of South Africans
in meeting their basic needs for water, energy,
food, housings work, medical care and education.
The problem of water is particularly
revealing. White homes have two or three water
taps per inhabitant, and middle-class residences
are often graced with a swimming pool. But in

the townships (black suburbs) in the east of
Cape Province, it is not unusual for several hun¬
dred inhabitants to share the use of a single
water-supply point. In rural areas the situation
is often even worse: a study of three Transkei vil¬
lages showed that members of each household
spent an average of more than three hours a
day fetching and carrying water. The quality of
the water available to the poor is so low that they
have to buy drinking water at a price tens of
times higher than that paid by the more privi¬
leged. The same goes for energy: photographs
showing women carrying heavy loads of fire¬
wood against a background of electricity pylons
are familiar to everyone.
Uemocracy and the fight against
poverty
In a speech he gave at Atlanta University a few
months before coming to power, Nelson Man¬
dela summed up the situation as follows: "A
democratic constitution must address the issues
of poverty, inequality, deprivation and want in
accordance with the internationally recognized
standards of the indivisibility of human rights.
A vote without food, shelter, and health care
would be to create the appearance of equality
while actual inequality is entrenched. We do
not want freedom without bread, nor do we
want bread without freedom."
Representatives of the nationalist movement
(the African National Congress) long believed
that the best way to achieve this kind of justice
was to bring the whole economy under public
control in a manner modelled on the Soviet,
Chinese and Cuban revolutions. This approach
has been comprehensively called into question.
The reconstruction and development pro¬
gramme now being implemented by the gov¬
ernment of national unity is clearly geared to a
market economy. It gives priority to the absolute
need for national cohesion rather than the redis¬
tribution of wealth. It takes for granted that
there can be no policy of growth without the
confidence of domestic and international
investors, or without the trust of the nation's
elites, whose departure could result as it has
elsewhere in South Africa making a great leap
backwards.
The aim is to meet people's basic needs while
making as few changes as possible to South
Africa's general macro-economic equilibrium
and production structure. As regards housing,
ambitious targets have been set: within five
years, the number of homes built annually is due
to rise from 50,000 to 300,000. By the year 2000,
2.5 million homes and all schools will have elec¬
tricity. Running water and medical care will
also become generally available. Sweeping
agrarian reforms will provide for part of the 85
per cent of land appropriated by whites to be
returned to the dispossessed. The public works
policy that is part of the programme should
create many jobs.
There remains the problem of financing such
a programme. Several possible solutions are being
looked at. They include a rationalization of the
administrative system, a decrease in some military
spending, the creation of a development fund
for certain long-term investments, and a limita¬
tion on the use of international financing.
'The reconstruction
and development
programme being
implemented by the
government is
geared to a market
economy.'
Opposite page, this inhabitant
of Orange Farm, a black
township in South Africa,
belongs to a group of citizens
who make bricks to build their
houses and for sale.
Right, standing in line to vote
in a black township during the
1994 elections that took
Nelson Mandela to the
presidency of the Republic.
21

'Sweeping agrarian reforms will
provide for part of the 85 per cent
of land appropriated by whites to
be returned to the dispossessed.'
But the crux of the programme is the redis¬
tribution of existing resources so that the needs
of the most underprivileged can be met. It is
impossible, for example, to increase education
spending on a massive scale (it already accounts
for 7 per cent of GNP and 24 per cent of the
budget). But it will be possible to devote a bigger
slice of it to the generalization of high-quality pri¬
mary education by calling on higher education
institutions to shoulder a greater share of their
costs. Similarly, the agrarian reforms will be partly
funded by reducing the subsidies that now go to
big commercial farms run by whites. In the elec¬
tricity and water sectors, new pricing systems
will provide the necessary funding: a transfer of
resources will take place between the present
beneficiaries of existing networks, who are often
large-scale consumers, and those who have not
yet been connected up to the network.
Quite apart from the purely financial aspects,
the success of such a programme hinges on two
crucial factors. First, there must be a social and
political consensus. The well-to-do minority,
consisting overwhelmingly of whites, will have
to accept a number of sacrifices. As for the vic¬
tims of apartheid, they will have to curb their
impatience and accept that priority be given to
the most underprivileged members of their com¬
munity. The second key factor is the ability of
the new government to marshal a competent
and highly-motivated administration. Given
the difficult situation it has inherited, this will be
no easy task.
Primary school children
in the black township of
Katlehong.
22
PETER ANYANG NYONG'O
is a Kenyan political scientist who Is currently Secretary-General of the
African Association of Political Science. He Is co-author of Popular
Struggles for Democracy in Africa (1987) and Hope Born out of Despair:
Managing the African crisis :1988).
