FREDERIK WILLEM DE KLERK
a conservative revolutionary
by Anthony Johnson
Frederik Willem de Klerk must be one of the few
leaders in the world of politics to have voluntarily
set in motion events resulting in the inevitable sur¬
render of his personal power and the demise of his gov¬
ernment. Just a few short months after he became
leader of the then ruling National Party (NP) in South
Africa in 1979, he embarked on a bold gamble which
ushered in an era of rapid transformation which saw
the nation reinventing itself after more than three
decades of apartheid rule.
The decision of the former State President in early
1990 to unban political parties representing the
majority of unenfranchised South Africans, release
Nelson Mandela and hundreds of other political pris¬
oners and follow the route of peaceful negotiation, vir¬
tually ensured that he would become South Africa's
last white president.
By playing a pivotal role in breaking the mould of
race-based politics, De Klerk paved the way for South
Africa's peaceful revolution at the very time when
many observers believed the country was headed for a
period of unparalleled strife and inter-racial conflict.
The fifty-eight-year-old politician now deputy
executive president in South Africa's government of
national unity is still confronted with the fears and
grumbles of NP supporters grown used to the security
and patronage that comes from having forty-five years
of virtually untrammelled power.
Despite his demotion as a result of the sweeping
election victory won by the African National Congress
(ANC) in the country's first democratic elections, in
April 1994, De Klerk maintains that his job satisfac¬
tion is as high as ever. He emphasizes that he does not
lie awake at night worrying about whether he has
chosen the correct course.
To this day, however, many political observers and
even colleagues find it hard to explain how a man with
the political background and track record of F.W. de
Klerk was capable of the momentous changes which
transformed the very fabric of South African society.
LIKE FATHER, LIKE SON?
De Klerk comes from a family environment in which the
conservatism of traditional white South African poli¬
tics is deeply ingrained. His great-grandfather was a
,'22~"
Vice-President
Frederik de Klerk and
newly-elected
President Nelson
Mandela on 10 May
1994.
ANTHONY JOHNSON,
a South African
journalist and
university teacher, is
the political
correspondent of
the Cape Times
newspaper in Cape
Town.
Senator, his grandfather stood twice for the white par¬
liament unsuccessfully, and his aunt was married to NP
Prime Minister J. G. Strydom. In 1948, the year when
the NP swept to power in whites-only elections on an
apartheid ticket, F. W. de Klerk's father, Jan de Klerk,
became secretary of the NP in the Transvaal province
and later rose to the positions of cabinet minister and
President of the Senate.
After receiving his early political training in the
youth section of the NP, De Klerk became a Member of
Parliament in 1972 and was appointed to the first of
his many cabinet portfolios in 1978. Significantly, he
became leader of the NP in the politically conservative
Transvaal province in 1982 the year when a split in
the ruling party resulted in the formation of the far
right-wing Conservative Party.
During his eleven years in the cabinet before
becoming NP leader, De Klerk demonstrated that he'
was a highly effective politician but showed few signs
of being a great reformer-in-the-making. When polit¬
ical scientists and analysts categorized cabinet minis¬
ters during the 1980s into those who were hardline or
enlightened in their thinking on racial matters, De
Klerk was rarely placed in the latter grouping.
In Parliament De Klerk assumed the mantle of the
champion of "own affairs" a euphemism for
apartheid and he betrayed very few liberal tenden-

cies in his handling of the many portfolios with which
he was entrusted. But his colleagues recall that De
Klerk was a wily political operator who refused to
become too closely identified with the ideological
camps that emerged during the frequent debates over
the future of the country. This no doubt gave him
greater room to manoeuvre when he took over the lead¬
ership of the NP at the end of the past decade from an
ailing P. W Botha.
A BURST OF REFORM
The courage and speed with which De Klerk as new NP
leader and State President went about transforming the
apartheid state left many observers wondering whether
he had undergone some sort of religious, Damascus-
Road-type of experience. De Klerk has always denied
that the burst of reform that he ushered in culmi¬
nating in his opening address to Parliament on 2 Feb¬
ruary 1990 in which he summarily ended the thirty-year
ban on political movements representing the unenfran¬
chised black majority was the result of a sudden reve¬
lation. He has endeavoured instead to spread the credit
for the changes, insisting that the new NP was really
born in 1986 when a special federal congress of the
party approved, in broad principle, the concept of polit¬
ical power-sharing between whites and non-whites.
However, De Klerk confidants and party insiders say
the NP leader realized when given the responsibility
of office that the white minority and its surrogates
could wage an eighty-year war in a bid to stave off
black majority rule but would eventually lose.
A series of other momentous events on the interna¬
tional scene the demise of the Soviet Union, the end of
the Cold War, and also the withdrawal of Cuban troops
from Angola no doubt created a climate in which
reform in South Africa was seen by the NP hierarchy as
less threatening. Whatever the complex dynamics which
spurred De Klerk and other political leaders in South
Africa to opt for peaceful negotiations instead of naked
confrontation, the international community was anxious
to assist the process and acknowledge those leaders who
had the courage to choose the peaceful options.
WHAT PRICE PEACE?
De Klerk lists the receipt of the Nobel Peace Prize
(jointly with Nelson Mandela) as one of the important
milestones of his political career. Nevertheless, he is
adamant that the fateful day in 1989 when he became
the leader of the NP was the proudest moment in his
public life. He notes that none of the dramatic changes
which followed in the ruling party would have taken
place when they did had he not been entrusted with
the leadership of the NP. He certainly could not have
had a better foil than the hard-nosed and authoritarian
P. W. Botha, who ran the party with an iron hand.
During his steady rise in the NP, De Klerk was even
regarded as something of a fence-sitter. On the other
hand, his undoubted intellectual ability as well as his
logical and relatively unemotional approach to prob¬
lems was highly regarded in party circles. Colleagues
are fond of recounting how after hours of often divisive
and heated discussion De Klerk would be invited to
summarize the feelings of the meeting in a few crisp
sentences or a resolution. This he was almost invariably
able to do, leaving colleagues wondering what they had
been arguing about for so long.
These skills in finding compromise solutions and
maintaining a clear head during the heat of debate stood
De Klerk in good stead during the years of multi-party
constitutional negotiations and bilateral talks with the
ANC that preceded the April 1994 elections. At a time
when a number of his colleagues were suffering burn-out
under the intense pressure of rapid change and his sup¬
porters were voicing grave reservations about the course
of the talks, De Klerk remained unflappable and main¬
tained his faith in the negotiation process.
A number of the four million voters who backed De
Klerk and his party in the April 1994 elections are uncom¬
fortable with the comparatively low profile he has
adopted since becoming one of the two executive deputy
presidents in South Africa's government of national unity
(the other being Thabo Mbeki). They would also like him
to be more strident in his criticism of the ANC, which
many have been brought up to regard as "the enemy".
Because of the hectic schedules of President Man¬
dela and Thabo Mbeki, De Klerk is often required to
chair cabinet committee meetings and is also the chair¬
person of the hugely influential cabinet security com¬
mittee. He dismisses criticism that he is a spent political
force or has lost interest in politics since surrendering
office to Nelson Mandela. He insists that he has as great
a role to play in forging the new South Africa as ever, and
remains upbeat about the course the country is fol¬
lowing. He told Parliament recently that despite a
number of problems confronting South Africa, the
country remained well placed to develop its "rainbow
nation" into a successful co-operative society. I
Frederik de Klerk,
then President of
the Republic of
South Africa, during
a visit to Paris in
1990.
23
