Thé struggte for hunun rights
 Philip Alstan
Thé international system for the defence of human rights
bats made real progress, but much still remains to be done
When the Universal Declaration of whatsoever to respond in any way to viola-
Human Rights was adopted in Paris in tions of human rights. A procedure which
1948, virtually ail governments said the stan-examined complaints was correctly described
dards were not to be legally binding upon by a senior UN officinal as"the world's most
PHILIP ALSTON, them. At that time, no specinc human rights elaborate waste-paper basket".
of Australia, is chairperson of the violations, apart from slavery, genocide and In 1948 many governments specifically
Un ! ted Nations Comptée on gross abuses of the rights of aliens, were rejected proposais to move to the adoption
Economic, Social and Cultural ff'1. b d. Il Il f b. d. bl"d b
Rights and Professor of Law and e ectlve y proscn e. Vlrtua y a states ot m mg treaty 0 19atlOns an, y 1953,
D ! rectorof thé Centre for shielded themselves happily behind Article the United States had informed the world
International and Public Law at the 2 (7)' of the United Nations Charter in that it would have nothing to do with any
Australian National University. He arguing that any other human rights matter human rights treaty that might be adopted
ils the author of a number of was strictly an internaI affair for the state by the United Nations. The Cold War
bocks, the most recent of which....
is The Best Interests of the Child : concerned. While a UN Commission on ensured that the draftmg of the two Interna-
Reconciling Culture and Human Human Rights was set up, its work was tional Human Rights Covenants was not
Rights (Oxford University dominated entirely by governments and its completed until 1966. It then took another
Press, 1994), and is the editor of mandate was largely confined to the drafting decade before thirty-five states ratified them,
te English aversion ouf Te f. d h 1 1. h b.. h.. l 19 6
thé 0 new treatles an ot er ega mstruments. t us nngmg t em mto operatlOn. n 7,
InternatIOnal Dimensions of....
1 Human Rights (2 vols. UNESCO, Governments wasted no tlme m declanng m therefore, less than twenty years ago, an1982). 1947 that the Commission had"no power"assessment of the United Nations' chieve-

Left, the World Conference on
Human Rights, convened by
the United Nations, was held
inVienna (Austr ! a) froml4to
25 June 1993.
M ozambicans wait to vote
dring UN-assisted elections in
Octoberl994.
ments and prospects in this area provided
few grounds for optimism.
From theory to practice
Since then, however, very significant progress
has been made. The standards contained in
the Universa ! Déclaration are, in practice,
applicable to every state, whatever its formai
attitude to their legal status. The view that
human rights violations are essentially
domestic matters, while still put forward in
an almost rital manner from time to time,
receives very little credence from the interna-
tional community.
The Universal Déclaration has been sup-
plemented by a vast array of international
standards, the most important of which are
the six"core"human rights treaties-the
two Covenants and Conventions dealing
with racial discrimination, discrimination
against women, torture, and children's
rights. In addition to the six expert treaty
bodies created by the United Nations to
supervise the compliance of states parties
with their obligations under those treaties,
regional human rights conventions, and
implementing machinery, have been set up in
Europe, the Americas and Africa, and the
United Nations has created a complex array
of other monitoring mechanisms.
In the mid-1960s the Commission on
Human Rights began responding to human
rights violations, albeit in a very limited
number of situations. Since 1979 it has gradu-
ally and persistently expanded both the
number and diversity of countries subjected
to public monitoring and the range and
intrusiveness of the procedures it has been
prepared to apply. Ever-increasing numbers of
non-governmental organizations and victims
of human rights violations now participate in
the work of one or more of the bodies set up
by the Commission or its Sub-Commission,
and governments attest to the growing
potential of the United Nations to be effec-
tive by the lengths to which they go in order
to achieve membership of the Commission
and to influence its deliberations, as well as by
the occasional harshness of their denuncia-
tions of its actions.
Most recently the United Nations has
become heavily involved in the administra-
tion of human rights programmes of
unprecedented scope and importance in
countries such as El Salvador, Cambodia,
Haiti, Rwanda and Burundi. Electoral assis-
tance, which was such a novelty in Namibia
as recently as 1989, has developed into a
major United Nations activity, and technical
assistance in the human rights field has been
provided to a significant number of coun-
tries. The 1993 World Human Rights Con-
ference held in Vienna definitively identified
women's rights as having been subject to
unacceptable neglect in the past and as a
major priority concern for the future. The
following year the first United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights was
appointed. In brief, the international human
rights system has developed to an extent that
would have been considered inconceivable by
the vast majority of observers in 1945.
The challenge of universality
One of the biggest challenges facing interna-
tional human rights law in the post-Cold War
era is to establish beyond doubt its univer-
sality. When thé Universal Declaration was
drafted, many Third World countries had not
attained independence and were thus unable to
contribute. When the two International
Covenants were adopted in 1966 a far larger
number of them participated. Nevertheless the
Cold War tended to discourage adéquate dis-
cussion of cultural concerns because of the
pressure on many states to support either East
or West in the global ideological struggle. It
was only in the late 1980s that an energetic
debate began at the international level over
whether human rights are indeed universally
valid or are relative to each specific society.
Subsequently the Vienna Conférence2 reaf-
firmed that"the universal nature of these
rights and freedoms is beyond question".
Démonstration by North
American Indians in front of
the United Nations building in
Vienne on the occasion of the
World Conference on Human
Rights (1993).
Il

While this is a vitally important development,
it does not once and for att eliminate the need
to take cultural diversity into account.
Once we move beyond the core rights of
physical integrity, the nature of the society,
its traditions and culture and other such fac-
tors become highly pertinent to any efforts
to promote and protect respect for the
rights concerned. We must recognize that the
intransigent approach that is appropriate in
relation to such core violations will simply
be less productive and achieve far less
enduring results than a more sensitive, open
and flexible approach which situâtes thé goais
sought within the society in question. The
precise requirements of what is often termed
the right to democracy is a case in point.
Human rights efforts will be enriched, not
compromised, by an approach that is, in
appropriate respects, more probing, more
self-conscious and more selective than that
which many countries have achieved to date.
It is also important to recognize that there
are conflicts among rights and that the reso-
lution of such conflicts requires greater
openness about the difficulties and a more
concerted attempt to accommodate the dif-
ferent values involved.
The problem of relativism
On the other hand it is essential to scruti-
nize claims of relativism on cultural, philo-
sophical or religious grounds. Many of the
claims made essentially reflect no more than
the age-old tendency of governments to jus-
tify thé cynicai and self-interested proposi-
tion that their own citizens neither want nor
need the protection of human rights.
In the development of the international
human rights system and in its application at
the national level, non-governmentai organiza-
tions have played an indispensable role. They
have contributed to the drafting of many of
the international standards ; they have devel-
oped a much greater awareness of human
rights among the public at large ; they have
constantly prodded governments to respect
their obligations, and they have assembled the
facts that have compelled other governments
to react to gross violations of human rights in
a wide range of situations. They have also
played a central role in responding to human-
itarian emergencies. Ironically, the fact that so
many governments have sought to suppress or
subvert them should be seen as a tribute to
their effectiveness.
There are various challenges ahead for non-
governmental organizations. They must be
accorded greater opportunities to contribute
to the work of international organizations,
including the United Nations, the United
Nations Development Programme, the
World Bank, the Organisation of African
Unity and the Organization of American
States. At the International ievet they need to
become both better co-ordinated and more
systematicaHy critical. They as a group need ta
work out how they can ensure that adequate
attention is accorded to economic, social and
cultural rights. Too many of the major
groups currently do no more than pay lip
service to these crucial rights.
Matching words with deeds
Thus while much has been achieved in half a
century, there remain many challenges. In the
years ahead governments must match their
fine words with deeds. The United Nations
human rights programme is radically under-
resourced and clearly incapable of dealing
with the tasks assigned to it. Economie,
social and cultural rights continue to be
largely neglected by the vast majority of
governments, despile thé rhetoricat commit-
ment of many. The result is that large-scale
problems such as chronic malnutrition and
lack of access to clean water, primary health
care, primary education and adequate shelter
are not considered human rights problems.
This approach is morally and legally unten-
able and the obligations undertaken by gov-
ernments and the international community
must be taken seriously. Universat ratifica-
tion of the six basic international human
rights treaties should be an urgent objective.
It must be followed by further strength-
ening of the Institutional arrangements
designed to help and, where necessary, to
pressure governments into respecting the
full range of their citizens'human rights,
just as they are pledged to do under the
Charter. M
10 rch-Iit vigil in New York at
the World Summit for
Children, which was held at
UN Headquarters in
September 1990. UNICEF
provided thé secrétariat for
the meeting.
1"Nothing contained in
the present Charter shall
authorize the United
Nations tointervene in
matters which are
essentially within the
domestic jurisdiction of
any state...."
2 See the UNESCO Courier,
March 1994,"Human
rights-the unfinished
task".Il
