What can be done?
by Michael Merson
Aids is gaining ground everywhere, but we now know much
about how to slow the spread of HIV
Below, a child victim of Aids at
a summer camp in Middleville,
New Jersey (U.S.A.).
Globally, the World Health Organiza¬
tion (WHO) estimates that around 4
million women, men and children developed
Aids between the start of the pandemic and
mid-1994. That figure included a rise of 1.5 mil¬
lion in just one year, and the total may approach
10 million by the year 2000.
The numbers of Aids cases are rising every¬
where. Proportionately the increase is greatest
in regions where the epidemic is newest, such as
Asia. Asia's share of global Aids cases rose eight¬
fold in the year to mid-1994. In absolute terms,
however, the heaviest impact is still being felt in
the parts of North America and Africa where
HIV struck first.
In New York City, for example, Aids is the
leading cause of mortality among men and
women aged twenty-five to thirty-four. In
the Masaka district of Uganda, Aids accounts for
close to half of all mortality in the total popu¬
lation.
In Africa Aids is having an economic and
social impact out of all proportion to the num¬
bers dying. Employers face higher medical costs
and the loss of staff with valuable training or
skills. Communities witness the break-up of
their basic units, i.e. families, as more and more
children are orphaned. WHO estimates that up
to eight million children could lose their mothers
to Aids by the year 2000.
As far as infections are concerned, WHO
estimates that 17 million had occurred by mid-
1994 three million more than a year before. A
little over 60 per cent of all infections to date
have been in sub-Saharan Africa, but the wave

of HIV is now crashing over Asia, home to
more than half of the world's population. WHO
estimates that the total number of HIV infec¬
tions in south and southeast Asia surged by one
million to 2.5 million in the year to mid- 1994.
China is very vulnerable, as shown by a sharp
rise in the reported incidence of sexually trans¬
mitted diseases (STDs), which make HIV trans¬
mission more likely. If HIV takes a strong hold
in the world's most populous country, the
impact on Asia could be huge.
In the countries of central Asia and eastern
Europe, WHO estimates there have been some¬
thing over 50,000 infections, although the figure
may have to be revised upwards when HIV data
on people practising high-risk behaviour
becomes available. In North Africa and the
Middle East another region where the Aids
threat once seemed remote there have been
an estimated 100,000 infections.
Latin America and the Caribbean have had
an estimated two million infections so far. More
and more parts of Brazil, which may hold the
key to the ultimate extent of the epidemic in this
region, are seeing rising HIV prevalence in their
STD clinics.
Prevention strategies
We now know a good deal about how to slow
the spread of HIV. There is no easy solution, no
single recipe. But there are effective strategies
and approaches in Aids prevention, based on
knowledge and experience acquired from many
countries.



Like syphilis and other sexually transmitted
diseases, HIV can be transmitted through trans¬
fusion of contaminated blood and the sharing of
needles. The world must do all it can to ensure
the safety of the blood supply. It is unacceptable
for a procedure designed to save lives to
A giant "Bleachman" roams
the streets of San Francisco
(U.S.A.) handing out packets of
bleach so that drug users can
sterilize their needles and avoid
infection.
Eastern Europe and Central Asia
Western Europe
50,000 +
Mi
North America 500,000 + East Asia
1 Million + ^fl
North Africa
& Pacific
50,000 +
& Middle East South & Southeast Asia
Latin America
100,000 + ^ ^L 3 Million
& the Caribbeau kfc A KrS
2 Million
Sub-Saharan
^^ «
Africa Australasia
11 Million 25,000 +
GLOBAL TOTAL: 18 MILLION
Left, estimated distribution of
total adult HIV infections from
late 1970s until late 1994.
(Source: WHO-Global
Programme on Aids, January
1995).
11

"To some extent the answer is inside each of us. I produce
psychological antibodies, and I create the best possible
environment for myself so as to make a little progress each day.
What hurts the most is the pity from the hospital people. When
the nurses sgueeze my hand, look at me full ofpity and wish me
luck, it hurts."
Sexual intercourse is
the main mode of
transmission of HIV,
and it is in this area
that we must focus
our efforts.
endanger them. For drug injectors, WHO rec¬
ommends harm reduction programmes which
give legal access to sterile injection equipment.
But sexual intercourse is by far the main mode
of transmission of HIV, and it is in this area
that we must focus our efforts.
To prevent sexual transmission, we must
change people's sexual behaviour or make sure
it is safe from the start. Safer sexual practices
include abstinence, mutual fidelity, non-pene¬
trative sex, and protected sexual intercourse the
use of condoms. All sexually active people must
know about these options and follow one of
them as a protection against infection. Media
campaigns and special activities targeted at the
most vulnerable groups can reduce the number
of HIV infections, especially in a non-discrim¬
inatory environment that respects the rights of
individuals.
Young people are particularly vulnerable.
Worldwide, half of HIV infections to date have
occurred in people aged fifteen to twenty-four.
Children must be educated about sex and the
risk of HIV infection before they become sex¬
ually active. Research has proved conclusively
that sex education in the classroom does not
lead them to early sexual experimentation or
promiscuity. It gives them the skills to avoid
risk situations and leads to more responsible
sexual behaviour. Out of school, peer educa¬
tion and face-to-face contacts should be used
with young people.
Apart from the promotion of safer sex,
including condom use, the second main way to
prevent sexual transmission of HIV is the early
diagnosis and treatment of conventional STDs
such as syphilis, gonorrhea and chancroid. For
the treatment of STDs, WHO is now recom¬
mending the use of simple flowcharts to help
decide how to treat STD patients appropriately
at their first visit. WHO believes STD services
should be part of primary health care facilities,
to make them more accessible. At the same time,
special STD services should be set up for those
most at risk.
A necessary part of any Aids/STD preven¬
tion programme is condom promotion. There
are now many examples of condoms proving
12 Young Tanzanians orphaned
by Aids.

A pig-rearing project for former
prostitutes in Thailand. Its
objective is to generate income
as an incentive to discourage
girls from returning to
prostitution.
MICHAEL MERSON,
of the United States, is a
specialist in infectious diseases.
From 1990 to 1995 he was
Director, then Executive Director,
of WHO's Global Programme on
Aids (GPA). He left the GPA
earlier this year to become Dean
of Public Health and Chairman of
the Department of Epidemiology
and Public Health at Yale
University Medical School, New
Haven, U.S.A.
effective in Aids/STD prevention. In Thailand,
for example, a recent 100-per-cent condom-use
campaign in brothels has reduced STD rates to
almost zero.
Safer sex campaigns and better STD treat¬
ment can achieve impressive results in a relatively
short time, but we must not neglect more long-
term action to address social factors which fuel
the spread of HIV. Prime among these is the
status of women.
The Aids pandemic has not only drawn
attention to the vulnerability of women to HIV
infection and STDs, it has also highlighted the
inequalities that affect most women, particu¬
larly in developing countries. These social
inequalities sometimes push women to the point
that they take up sex work, with its associated
risks of acquiring a fatal infection.
For women to be able to insist on safer sex,
to have the choices that too often are not theirs,
their social and economic status must be raised.
They must have equal access to education and
employment and supportive laws to protect
them from violence and abuse.
Vare for the infected
Prevention is only one side of the response to
Aids, of course. The other is care for the infected.
What is needed is a continuum of care, from
the home to the community to the hospital. For
developing countries facing many health prob¬
lems, this will be difficult to achieve. At a min¬
imum they must reorient national spending so
that health care gets its due. Donor countries,
too, should play their part by providing more
resources for care.
Both in prevention and care, the response of
any country must be truly national, embracing
health and non-health sectors, communities and
individuals. Non-governmental organizations
can play a key part in taking safer sex messages
to people government services find hard to
reach, and in providing care in the community
for the infected or ill. In many countries, people
living with HIV/Aids are invaluable partners.
The international response should also be
multisectoral. This is one reason why WHO
and five sister United Nations agencies the
United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Population Fund, UNESCO,
UNICEF and the World Bank are currently
setting up a joint and co-sponsored UN Pro¬
gramme on HIV/Aids. The new programme
aims to unite and co-ordinate UN support to
national Aids programmes and make the best use
of limited resources.
"I'm from Nantes in western France. I'm
HIV-positive. I got the news on 22
November 1989. That day my life was
totally changed. There's nothing left of
me. I try to live from day to day, but I feel
there's nothing left of me."
