The search for a vaccine
by Marc Girard
The development of a vaccine against HIV raises highly complex scientific and
economic problems
Chromatography (below) is
one of many purification steps
used in the final stages of
production of an experimental
anti-HIV vaccine being
developed in the United
Kingdom.
The development of a vaccine to prevent
infection with the Acquired Immunode¬
ficiency Syndrome (Aids) presents biomedical
research with an urgent and serious challenge.
Simple prophylactic measures that could
prevent transmission of HIV, such as the
screening of blood donations, the proper steril¬
ization of surgical equipment and needles, or the
use of condoms, are often not a practical propo¬
sition in developing countries because of their
cost and/or because they meet with behavioural
or cultural barriers that are very difficult to
overcome. A vaccine against HIV is therefore
badly needed. (Vaccines are the most efficient
known way of dealing with virus diseases.)
However, in spite of almost ten years of
intensive research, HIV vaccines still elude us.
Nobody can be sure when a vaccine will be
available, nor even if there ever will be a vaccine
to cope with the seemingly endless variation of
HIV and its ability to hide and persist in the
body of infected individuals.
A persisting disease
Why can we not produce a vaccine against HIV
by using the classical methods that have been so
successful in developing vaccines against "clas-
32
sical" virus diseases? The answer to this question
lies in the very properties of HIV and in the
fact that Aids is a persisting disease. HIV is a
retrovirus and as such inserts its genome into the
chromosomes of the cell it infects, then transmits
it as a piece of chromosome from one cell gen¬
eration to the next.
The HIV virus actually does even "better"
than most retroviruses. Classical retroviruses
grow at low levels in infected cells, and cell
growth is usually compatible with virus pro¬
duction: the virus does not kill the cells. HIV,
however, has evolved a series of accessory genes
that allow it to grow very rapidly once it is acti¬
vated and to kill the cell after large numbers of
progeny virus particles have been produced. It
has been estimated that an asymptomatic HIV-
positive individual can produce more than 2
billion HIV particles per day.
Another reason why HIV persists in the
human body is that it can avoid the neutral¬
izing antibody response of the host. The virus
can persist in a latent state inside the infected cell,
remaining dormant and escaping surveillance
by the immune system. It can be transmitted
directly from an infected cell to uninfected cells
by a process known as cell fusion, in which the
virus particles do not come into contact with cir¬
culating antibodies. HIV can also be transported
by the infected cells to organs like the brain
where immune surveillance is minimal.
Finally, the reason why HIV persists so well
is that it attacks two of the major players of the
immune system, the CD4+ T-lymphocyte (also
known as the helper T-ccll) and the macrophage.
At the same time the virus perturbs the com¬
munication network between the different cells
of the immune system, leading to profound
dysregulation of the immune response.
The HIV virus has also developed a remark¬
able ability to change, both within infected indi¬
viduals and from individual to individual. Intrin¬
sically, it is no more variable than viruses such as
the influenza virus or the polio virus. But
whereas the influenza virus actively multiplies
in the infected host for only a few days, HIV

This Ugandan district nurse
(left of photo) visits Aids
sufferers and provides them
with medication and
counselling.
multiplies in its host for years, providing ample
time for variants to emerge and be stabilized.
Prototype HIV-1 vaccines
Most of the potential vaccines against HIV-1, the
cause of the Aids pandemic, that have been
tested in chimpanzees and human volunteers
so far have been of what is known as the "sub-
unit" type, consisting of purified viral proteins
mixed with an adjuvant. Such protoype vac¬
cines have demonstrated their protective efficacy
in animal models such as chimpanzees. More
recently it has been shown that immunization
with antigens substances that stimulate the
production of antibodies from one virus strain
(HIV-1 MN) could provide protection in chim¬
panzees from challenge with another virus strain
(HIV-1 SF2). This opens the possibility that
HIV-1 subunit vaccines may provide cross-pro¬
tection from infection with different virus strains
provided they belong to the same subtype.
Although extremely encouraging, these results
are still only preliminary. First of all there has been
no test for protection from infection by the sexual
route in the animal models. Challenge of immu¬
nized chimpanzees has been by intravenous injec¬
tion of the virus; whereas in nature HIV is essen¬
tially transmitted by sexual contact.
Secondly, it has been found that the HIV-1
strains used for challenging the animals are dif¬
ferent from the wild HIV-1 strains that are iso¬
lated from human patients. The challenge strains
have been selected to grow in the laboratory and
are easily neutralized by neutralizing antibodies,
whereas clinical isolates are not neutralized.
Thirdly, challenge of the animals is usually
MARC GIRARD,
a French biochemist, is Deputy
Director and Head of the
Molecular Virology Laboratory of
Paris's Pasteur Institute. He is a
member of the Steering
Committees of WHO'S Global
Programme on Aids (GPA) and of
its Global Programme for
Vaccines and Immunization.
"When I first knew I was HIV-positive, I thought I had Aids. I thought they
were the same thing. It took two weeks' reading before I understood. . . .
The doctor who had told me the news said that in these cases the family is
the best support. I phoned my family, and my father took it very badly. He
scolded me for spoiling the new-year festivities. 'You might have waited,'
he said."
33

All potential vaccines must
first be tested on animals, and
so far only chimpanzees seem
subject to infection by HIV-1,
although they do not develop
Aids. This is another of the
many difficulties in Aids
vaccine research.
done very shortly after a booster immuniza¬
tion, i.e. at or very near the peak of the immune
response. The fact that the antibody response
elicited by HIV-1 vaccines appears to be tran¬
sient in chimpanzees raises the question of
whether the vaccines would induce sufficient
immune memory to provide long-term protec¬
tion in a natural setting.
Finally, it has not been possible from studies
on animals to identify in a reproducible manner
correlates of protection that could be used to
predict vaccine efficacy. In other words, no
yardsticks are available by which to measure
potential vaccine efficacy.
Ohould prototype vaccines be tested
on humans?
Before undertaking large-scale (Phase III) effi¬
cacy trials in populations at risk, in which a
vaccine would be compared in a blind fashion
with a placebo, trials must be conducted to
assess the safety and immunogenicity (capacity
to stimulate immunity) of candidate vaccine(s)
in small numbers of human volunteers. Some
subunit vaccines have been tested on human
volunteers, and shown to be safe and immuno¬
genic. This does not mean, however, that these
vaccines would protect humans against infection.
To find this out, an efficacy trial is needed.
The National Institutes of Health of the United
States recendy decided not to proceed in expanding
efficacy trials of HIV-1 subunit vaccines, arguing
that more predictive scientific data were needed
that would make one reasonably confident that
protection could be achieved by the administration
of the vaccine. Furthermore, it was felt that vac¬
cines based on more than one viral antigen might
have a better chance of being effective. Finally, the
fear was expressed that individuals taking part in
an efficacy trial might perceive that they were
protected, which could make them change their
behaviour and be at higher risk of HIV infection.
34
Testing a vaccine in a developing
country which would not be able to
afford it later because of excessive
pricing is difficult to accept. It is also
clear that the concept of developing
a safe, sophisticated but expensive
medicine for the industrialized



countries and unsafe,
unsophisticated but cheap vaccine
for the developing countries is
ethically unacceptable.
At a recent WHO meeting, however, it was
decided that "Phase III efficacy trials . . . could be
conducted to obtain definite information on the
ability of candidate vaccines to induce protective
immunity in humans". This different attitude
reflects the fact that public health needs may differ
from country to country, resulting in different
recommendations in different parts of the world.
However, there should be no scientific or ethical
shortcut in planning an efficacy trial in any country.
Vaccine testing in developing countries
The prospect of launching efficacy trials in
developing countries is presently meeting many
difficulties, some technical and others ethical.
One technical problem is the fact that it has
not been possible so far, in spite of repeated
attempts, to develop a multivalent, "universal"
HIV-1 vaccine based on conserved antigenic
determinants. It is therefore necessary that spe¬
cific vaccines be developed to match the circu¬
lating HIV-1 isolates in the developing countries.
Another technical problem stems from the
need to strengthen local infrastructures in these
countries, i.e. hospitals and laboratories, and to
train local personnel. It is impossible to plan an effi¬
cacy trial that would involve from several hundreds
to a few thousand volunteers without appropriate
logistical and professional support in the field.
Among the many ethical problems that may
arise, that of the modification of sexual behaviour
that might possibly be induced by a large-scale
vaccine trial is of serious concern. Such a trial
would be dangerous if the attitude of the volun¬
teers towards prevention was significantly altered
as a consequence of their enrollment in it. Edu¬
cating the people is, therefore, one of the most
important prerequisites to a large-scale trial. It is
noteworthy that even some elites in developing
countries confuse the use of vaccines in prevention
and their use in immunotherapeutic interven¬
tions. Unreasonable expectancy of protection
from highly exposed and poorly educated people
is much to be feared. This could be overcome
only by repeated counselling and education.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 36

36
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 34
Another problem is that of the subsequent
availability of the vaccine. Testing a vaccine in a
developing country which would not be able to
afford it later because of excessive pricing would
be difficult to accept. It should also be made
clear that the concept of developing a safe,
sophisticated, but expensive vaccine for the
industrialized countries and an unsafe, unso¬



phisticated but cheap vaccine for the developing
countries is ethically unacceptable.
Making HIV-1 vaccines available to
developing countries
It is obvious that the success of vaccination
against HIV will depend on the characteristics
of the future HIV-1 vaccines on their safety,
efficacy, duration of protection, stability, the
number of doses required for full immunization,
and last but not least, their cost. There has been
very strong political pressure to make HIV-1
vaccines available to developing countries at a
marginal cost. Even though we are still years
away from marketing such vaccines, it is appro¬
priate for the public health community to set the
stage for an effective global Aids-prevention
effort. One should realize, however, that the
cost of developing a new vaccine has reached
fantastic heights due to the enforcement of
stricter regulations, tighter quality controls,
higher safety standards, and to the very high
cost of clinical studies, not to mention the cost
of research itself. Aids-vaccine research for the
past ten years in the United States and Europe
has already cost several billion dollars.
The financial returns to be expected by the
vaccine manufacturers will obviously be low,
vaccines being quite different in this respect
from pharmaceutical drugs. How could a vac¬
cine be made available to developing countries?
One possibility would be to sell the vaccine to
these countries for a low price and for a compen¬
satory high price on the Western world market.
But how low is low? It has been estimated that an
HIV-1 vaccine would be administered yearly to
about 300,000 persons worldwide, which could
involve 1,200,000,000 doses, not counting subse¬
quent booster doses. Manufacturing, controlling
and distributing such an enormous number of
vaccine doses would cost several billions of dollars.
It is clear that we will have to invent a mech¬
anism, such as direct payment from an interna¬
tional agency to the manufacturing companies, to
provide the companies with sufficient reward
while at the same time supplying the Aids vaccine
to the developing world at a rock bottom price.
This is basically what UNICEF (the United
Nations Children's Fund) and the Pan-Amer¬
ican Health Organization (PAHO) are trying to
do for classical vaccines. But the chances of suc¬
cess of such an operation will depend strictly on
the goodwill of the industrialized nations.

