Johan Bojer Men oflittlefaith
The letter published below appeared in Correspondance, thejournal ofthe
International Institute ofIntellectual Co-operation, in 1934. In it the Norwegian
novelistJohan Bojer (1872-1959) spells out the dangers ofa divorce between public
and private morality. His letter is a reply to thatfrom the Chinese thinker Cai
Yuanpei which was published in our December 1994 issue ('Religion and politics
today', page 46).
To Mr. Cai Yuanpei
Dear Sir,
Oslo
You say that Chinese thinkers are
extremely astonished by the idea
that there should be one form of
morality for the private individual and
another for the state. And you call upon all
those who wish to work for better co-ordi¬
nation between the countries to organise
their own lives so that they can provide a
model of this.
If I understand you correctly, you mean
that the world political and economic crisis
can be reduced to a question of individual
morality.
That reminds me of something that a
Chinese philosopher wrote some thirty
years ago about Western civilization. He
stressed that the Christian countries have
constructed a vast system which com¬
prises a God in heaven, a devil in hell, and
a third God who saved men by dying for
them, whereas a thoughtful Chinese
believes that the highest thing a man can
aspire to is to behave well.
But it might well be asked: "What is
meant by the expression to behave weW.
On this point Chinese wisdom and the
Christian religion agree. To do unto others
wit
Text selected by Edgardo Canton
as you would have them do unto you. Con¬
fucius and Jesus Christ both believe that it
is only by starting from the individual that
the world can be improved. Start with
yourself.
They would certainly not be happy if
they were told: start with your own
country.
This is because the great ideals are
readily thought to be something unreal
something that can be discussed or pro¬
fessed and even written into an electoral
programme. But who will accept that they
commit him personally?
And so we have pacifists who wage war,
priests who believe in the religion of
charity but sow hatred of a neighbouring
people and incite to vengeance and vio¬
lence, and socialists who curse capitalism
in public speeches but are themselves mil¬
lionaires and live in great houses. One of
the first things young people learn from
their elders is: preach some great and
noble idea but you will only practise it if
you are a simpleton.
In 1914 there were two world powers
which could have stopped the war. One
was the Church, the other was socialism.
Both had the duty to curb hatred between
peoples and to assert that all men are
brothers, in spite of frontiers. Both failed to
do their duty. The two camps threw them¬
selves into the slaughter.
A state does not need
to behave well
A congress was held to lay the founda¬
tions for lasting peace, and at the same
time surreptitious preparations were made
for war. The delegates were suspicious of
each other, knowing that it is praiseworthy
to lie, deceive and commit perjury when
you do so in the name of your country.
The person who utters the finest words
about peace is perhaps the representative
of an arms factory and makes a fortune
Christ the King, a mural painting
(12th-13th centuries) in the Roman crypt of the
cathedral of St. Etienne, Auxerre (France).
through war. We have reached the point
where a man can feel delighted by another
man's success while a state is jealous of
others. A decision whose purpose is to be
useful to everyone makes a patriot furious.
How? Would his own country not profit
from it? If the world can be saved from a
new catastrophe by the disarmament of
his own country, whose military power
and prestige will perhaps be slightly
reduced, this patriot is indignant. What
treachery! Let the rest of the world go to the
devil as long as your own country is on
the winning side. A state does not need to
behave well.
Is it forces outside mankind that are
sending us the next war, that black cloud
on the horizon which fills our nights with
bloody ghosts? No! So can't men do any¬
thing about it? They don't dare. So do they
want war? No . . . and yet . . they do.
For our thinking is chaotic. We profess
humanism and venerate brute force. We
love our brothers, and hate them too. We
like to build, but we also like to destroy. The
Christian believes and does not believe
47

ARCHIVES anniversary Louis
48
in his doctrine. He talks movinglywhen he
accuses capitalism of causing wars
between peoples; but he preaches civil
war himself.
A scientist may be pious and go to
church on Sunday, but work for six days a
week on the development of a new gas
that will destroy a city in a few seconds. For
he believes in God, and he does not believe
in God.
Take a Christian pacifist who fought
againstweapons while he was in the oppo¬
sition. Make him prime minister and
everything changes. He has to choose
between his own convictions and the
machine. His country has become great
and powerful because ofwars. It must arm
indefinitely to preserve its gains. Can the
pacifist stop armament? No, he does not
even want to do so. He also has tradition in
his mind. He continues to manufacture
guns, bombs and tanks. Nothing has
changed.
We lack faith and we lack confidence.
We do not believe in political parties
whose programmes are as garish as neon-
lit advertisements. We do not believe in
the press, for we know that it sows hatred
and lies, with the sole aim of increasing
sales. We do not believe in parliamentar¬
ians with their stock-in-trade of convic¬
tions, nor even in priests who all too often
adapt their God to the needs of the gov¬
ernment.
However, the glimmerings ofa renais¬
sance are starting to appear. The Oxford
Movement, for example, is a peaceful rev¬
olution against torpid Christianity and
spineless idealism. It is Christian without
building churches, formulating dogma or
electing popes. It knows no frontiers and
does not divide men into races or classes.
Its religion is action. Its highest duty is to
carry out God's will, that is to behave well.
When this movement, which is
spreading more quickly than most people
think, reaches parliamentarians and gov¬
ernments, we shall see even politicians
feel confidence in each other, the disar¬
mament conference will not end in an
arms race and even states will start to
behave well.
Hoping, dear sir, that you will excuse a
peasant from such a small country as
Norway, who has taken upon himself to
impose on your time, I remain
Your respectful admirer,
JOIIAN BOJER
* The Oxford Group or Moral Rearmament
Movement was founded in the 1920s by
Frank Buchman (1878-1961), who launched a
worldwide evangelistic campaign for moral
and spiritual revival based on God's
guidance, moral absolutes and the "life-
changing" of individuals through personal
work.

