Hollywood
»:^ro
M
A
How the major studios
"became a dream factory for
America and the world
Tino Balio,
of the United States, is a
professor in the
Department of
Communication Arts at
the University of
Wisconsin-Madison. His
most recent published
work is Grand Design:
Hollywood as a Modern
Business Enterprise,
1930-1939 (Charles
Scribner's Sons, New
York, 1993).
Hollywood did not become the
motion picture capital of the
United States until nearly
twenty years after the inven-
.! tion of the new medium. Pro¬
duction was centred in the greater New York
City area from 1894, when Thomas Edison
introduced his Kinetoscope peepshow, until
1908, when American producers began
migrating to southern California to take
advantage of the temperate climate and the
region's varied scenery to produce films year-
round and supply nickelodeon theatres with
westerns, comedies and other types of
simple story films. The queues at the box-
office were created mostly by immigrant
workers and their families in search of cheap
entertainment.
From these humble beginnings the
movies soon became a national art form.
Two innovations stimulated the transition:
feature films and the star system. The
growth of motion pictures from single
reelers lasting fifteen minutes to features
lasting ninety minutes and longer made it
possible to tell complex and compelling sto¬
ries that competed with the stage for the
patronage of the more affluent middle-class.
The creation of motion picture stars such as
Mary Pickford, Charles Chaplin and Douglas
Fairbanks created film fandom which enthu
siastically endorsed the high salaries paid to
these personalities by buying tickets that
escalated in price.
Hollywood was one of several players in
the world film market until the outbreak of
the First World War, when indigenous film
production in Europe came almost to a
standstill. Rushing to fill the void, Holly¬
wood underwent a period of rapid expan¬
sion, and film-making became a major
industry. Producers sought market security
by acquiring large chains of theatres; large
chains of theatres sought a steady supply of
films by acquiring studios. To finance these
mergers, companies turned to Wall Street.
The advent of the talkies in 1926 created even
closer bonds with banking interests. Only
the strongest film companies had the finan¬
cial resources or connections to make the
conversion to sound, with the result that by
1930 Hollywood emerged as a virtual oli¬
gopoly consisting of eight companies, most
of which continue to dominate the business
to this day.
The most powerful of the eight were the
"Big Five": Loew's (MGM), Paramount,
Warner Bros., Twentieth Century-Fox and
RKO. These five companies were fully-inte¬
grated, meaning they produced nearly all the
important motion pictures each year, oper¬
ated worldwide distribution systems and
owned the largest and best-situated theatres
where their films were guaranteed a showing.
Allied to the "Big Five" were the "Little
Three": Universal, Columbia and United
Artists. Universal and Columbia were pro¬
ducer-distributors that supplied the bigger
companies with low-budget pictures for
double features. United Artists was solely a
distributor for a few quality independent
producers. "Poverty Row" existed on the


periphery. Small studios such as Monogram,
Republic and Producers' Releasing Corpora¬
tion served small towns and rural areas. As a
group, they had a marginal impact on the
business.


The Studio System Hollywood
reached the height of its influence during
the 1930s and 1940s. After a brief decline
during the Great Depression movie theatre
attendance in the United States rose steadily
until it reached nearly 80 million a week by
1946, a figure that nearly equalled the entire
population of the country. To keep cinemas
well stocked with films, Hollywood had
perfected an efficient form of mass produc¬
tion called the studio system. Studios were
organized by departments such as screen-
writing, art direction, costumes, cinematog¬
raphy, editing and sound, all headed by a
production chief who oversaw operations.
The major studios turned out two types of
pictures: class A, with name stars, big bud¬
gets and high production values, and class B,
economy films to play the lower half of
double bills. To maintain audience interest,
studios produced an array of genres
including musicals, screwball comedies,
biographies, gangster films, westerns and
melodramas. And to satisfy the concerns of
motion picture censors, the industry
adopted the Motion Picture Production
Code in 1930, a form of self-regulation
whereby producers voluntarily agreed to
make their pictures simply with a generally-
accepted code of behaviour.
After the Second World War, Hollywood
experienced a series of upheavals that drasti¬
cally changed its operations. In 1948 the U.S.
Supreme Court charged the major companies
with having violated antitrust laws and
MGM cameramen film a
speeding train.
MGM films open with a
shot of a roaring lion.
Below, Leo recording his
first roar for the screen
(18 December 1928).
forced them to sell off their profitable
motion picture theatres and to abolish
restrictive trade practices. Soon after, the
same companies were also hard hit by the rise
of television, which caused box-office atten¬
dance to drop by 50 per cent during the
1950s. In Europe, the largest overseas market
for American films, Hollywood encountered
restrictive trade barriers as nations worked to
rebuild their devastated economies and
attempted to revive their flagging film indus¬
tries. Hollywood responded to these condi¬
tions by producing fewer pictures and laying
off redundant workers to reduce studio
overheads by making widescreen block¬
busters in colour to differentiate its product
from television, by producing pictures
abroad to take advantage of government
subsidies, and by collaborating with televi¬
sion to participate in the growth of the new
medium.
These measures revived Hollywood and
prepared it to meet the arrival of new televi¬
sion distribution technologies such as cable
television and home video in the 1970s and
1980s. The rising demand for entertainment
of all kinds created by these technologies
together with the commercialization of
state-controlled broadcasting systems in
Europe, the end of the Cold War and rising
standards of living in emerging economies,
made the film business truly international in
scope. The major Hollywood companies
have become huge entertainment conglomer¬
ates with interests in recorded music, televi¬
sion programming, book publishing and
cable communications in all the principal
world markets. Three studios Twentieth
Century-Fox, Columbia Pictures and MCA
have foreign owners. Hollywood will
remain the motion-picture capital of the
world but will maintain this position only
by strengthening alliances with foreign
interests.
1

/
> r
C «y
W
V
L*j7 I
\ >
The legendary couple Clark Gable
(Rhett Butler) and Vivien Leigh
(Scarlett O'Hara) in Victor Fleming's
Gone with the Wind (United States,
1939).
W
Gary Cooper as the frontier-town
marshal in Fred Zinneman's High
Noon (United States, 1952).

1
