The specialized agencies are autonomous organizations which collaborate with the United Nations and
among themselves through the Economic and Social Council. They have broad international
responsibilities in the economic, social, cultural, educational, health and related fields. They submit regular
reports to the Economic and Social Council.
International Labour Organisation (ILO)
Headquarters : 4, route des Morillons
CH-1211 Geneva 22-Switzerland
Telephone :(41-22) 799 6111
Telefax : (41-22) 7988685
Cable : INTERLAB GENEVE
Telex :415647
tNumberof member countries :171
1 Director-General : Michel Hansenne
Origin : The ILO was established on 28 June 1919 (its
Constitution having become operative on Sil April)
by the Treaty of Versailles (France) as an autonomous
body associated with the League of Nations. On 14
December 1946, it became a specialized agency associ-
ated with the United Nations.
Administration : The International Labour Confer-
ence, a world parliament on labour issues, meets once
a year and is attended by delegations from ait the
member countries. Each delegation is composed of
two government delegates, one delegate representing
workers and one representing employers. The Gov-
erning Body, ILO's executive organ, comprises 28
government delegates (including 10 permanent dele-
gates, the others being elected for a term of 3 years),
14 employer delegates and 14 worker delegates. The
International Labour Office is the permanent secre-
tariat of the ILO.
Objectivés : To promote social justice and raise living
and working standards throughout the world.
Fonctions : Adopting international abour standards
(in the form of conventions and recommendations).
Every state ratifying a convention undertakes
thereby to apply it and accepts de facto the principle
of international monitoring. Recommendations,
which are not subject to ratification, provide guid-
ance for national législation and practice. Since it was
founded, ILO has adopted 174 conventions and 181
recommendations constituting the International
Labour Code in such areas as the fundamental rights
of working people (freedom of association, prohibi-
tion of forced labour, elimination of discrimina-
tion), wages, hours and conditions of work, public
employment services, social services, welfare protec-
tion schemes, job relations, protection of mothers
and children, migrants and certain categories of
workers, and labour inspection.
Activities : Activities connected with the setting and
monitoring of standards draw on work done in con-
nection with research and publications and on the
organization of technical meetings,'ln addition, a
wide-ranging technical co-operation programme is
carried out in liaison with other United Nations
organs. Through a policy of active partnership, ILO
provides Member States with expertise and advice in
aU its fields of competence, such as employment pol-
icy, vocational training, management techniques,
occupational safety and health, improvement of
social security systems, sectoral activities, co-opera-
tives and the strengthening of employers'and work-
ers'organizations. 
Observations : With a view to strengthening the effec-
tiveness of its legal arsenal against child labour (sev-
eral conventions on which were adopted between
1919 and 1973), in 1992-1993 ILO launched an Inter-
national Programme on the Elimination of Child
Labour (IPEC). This Programme is already opera-
tional in some ten countries and is making rapid
strides.
1. Additiona/research and trainingfaci/itie, are offered bythe
Intemationa/Institute for Labour Studie, at ! LO Headquarters in/  ; fn ! < !; f) M//Mttt «tf/or .itoor &e ; M tt//. 0 MMrr : m
Geneva and by thé Intemationa/Centre for Advanced Technical
and Vocational Training (125, Corso Unita d'Italia, 10127 Turin,
/M/
2. 1 LO ! iI. S a ! ilarded the 1969 Nobel Peace Prize.
Food inculture Organization of the United
Nations
Headquarters : Ma delle Terme di Caracalla
1-00100 Rome-Italy
Telephone :(39-6) 52251
Telefax : (39-6) 5225 3152
Cable : FOODAGRI ROME
Telex :610181 FAOI
E-ma ! k tetexroom@fao. org
tDirector-Genera ! : Jacques Diouf
t Number of member countries :169, plus the
European Union and one associate member (Puerto
Rico)
Origin : Founded in Quebec on 16 October'1945, in
succession to the International Institute of Agricul-
ture (an intergovernmental organization founded in
June 1905).
Administration : The General Conference, composed
of the representatives of the Member States, meets in
odd-numbered years to determine the policy of the
Organization, define its work programme and adopt
its budget. The Council, composed of 49 members
elected by the General Conference in accordance with
a precise geographical breakdown', serves as the gov-
erning body between sessions of the Conference.
Objectives : To raise levels of nutrition and standards
of living ;improve the production and marketing of
ait food and agricultural products from farms,
forests and fisheries ; promote rural development ;
and eliminate hunger from the world.
Functions : Encouraging investment in agriculture,
stockraising, soil and water management and aqua-
culture ; promoting the transfer of technology and
the development of agricultural research in develop-
ing countries ;encouraging the conservation of nat-
ural resources ; combating animal diseases ;through
its Global Information and Early Warning System,
helping countries to prepare for emergency food sit-
uations and providing relief when necessary.
Activities : As the lead agency for rural development in
the United Nations system, FAO manages the World
Food Programme (WFP) in collaboration with the
UN, as tell as special programmes for the prevention
of food crises and the improvement of seed produc-
tion and distribution. On request, it provides coun-
tries with technical assistance in aIl its fields of compe-
tence. FAO collects, analyses and distributes
information, advises governments on planning pol-
icy and acts as an international forum for discussing
issues connected with food and agriculture.
1. Since 1981, this date has been observed annually as World Food
Day.
2. Africa-12 ; Asia and thé Far East-9 ; Europe-JO ; Latin America and
thé Caribbean-9 ; Near East-6 ; North America-2 ; and Soute-test
Pacifie-1.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
Headquarters : 7, place de Fontenoy
F-75352 Paris 07-SP-France
Telephone :(33-1) 45 6810 00
Telefax : (33-1) 45 67 1690
Cabale :UNESCO PARIS
Telex :270602 F, 204461 F
Press (Telefax) : (33-1) 44 49 06 92
tNumberofmemberMunthes : 184
tDirector-Benera ! : Federico Mayor
Origin : Established on 4 November 1946, one year
after the drafting of its Constitution in London
(United Kingdom), UNESCO replaced the Interna-
tional Institute of Intellectual Co-operation' (which
had been founded on 9 August 1925).
Administration :UNESCO's General Conference, com-
posed of representatives of all the Member States,
meets biennially to decide on the Organization's pol-
icy, programme and budget. The Executive Board,
consisting of 51 members elected by the General
Conference, is responsible for supervising the execu-
tion of the programmes adopted. The staff of the Sec-
retariat, in which more than 130 nationalities are rep-
resented, is divided between Headquarters in Paris
(France) and fifty field units in all the world regions.
Each member country has a National Commission
for UNESCO, which is an organ for liaison, informa-
tion, consultation and execution.
Objectives : To contribute to peace and security in
the world by promoting intellectual co-operation
among nations through education, science, culture
and communication.
Functions and activities : Education : combating illit-
eracy, fostering the development of basic education
for ale and of higher education ; he) ping to rain teach-
ers and local administrators ; promoting thé con-
struction and equipment of schools ; and correcting
the imbalance in the worldwide distribution of sci-
entific and techno) ogicai expertise.
Natural sciences : furthering international co-opera-
tion concerning the biosphere, geology, oceanography
and hydrology ; alerting public opinion to threats ta
the environment ; contributing to a better understand-
ing of the relationship between science and culture.
Social and human sciences :strengthening teaching
and research in these fields ;promoting human rights
and democracy ; combating ait forms of discrimina-
tion ; encouraging action to solve problems connected
with the status of women, youth, urbanization and
the development of the least developed countries.
Culture : highlighting the cultural dimension of
development ; safeguarding the world's natural and
cultural heritage ;preserving cultural identities and
traditions ; encouraging creation and creativity ; pro-
moting books and reading and the plastic and per-
forming arts ; protecting copyright.
Communication, information and informatics :
promoting the freeftow of ideas by word and image ;
working for the freedom of the press ; contributing to
the strengthening of communication capacities in the
developing countries and the application of new tech-
nologies in this field ;encouraging the modernization
oflibraries, archives and information and documenta-
tion services ; providing training for specialists.
1. See thé introduction t  the"Archives"feature in the UNESCO
Courier (September 1993).
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
Headquarters :P. O. Box 400, 1000 Shërbrooke Street
West
Suite 652, Montreal, PQ, Quebec, H3A 2R2-Canada
Telephone :(1-514) 285 8219
Telefax : (1-514) 288 47 72
Cable : ICAO M NTREAL
Telex :05-24513
1 Number of member countries :183
1 President of the Council :Assad Kotaite
1 Secretary-General : Philippe Rochat
El

Origin : The International Civil Aviation Organiza-
tion (ICAO) was founded with the signing of the
Convention on International Civil Aviation in
Chicago (U. S. A.) on 7 December 1944. The Conven-
tion entered into force on 4 April 1947 after its ratifi-
cation by 26 States. ICAO became a specialized
agency in October 1947.
Administration : ICAO is administered by an Assem-
bly comprising representatives ofaU its member coun-
tries, and by a Council composed of the representatives
of 33 countries elected by the Assembly for a term of
three years. The Assembly meets at least once every
three years to decide on the Organization's policy. The
Council is the executive body which applies the direc-
tives of the Assembly and administers the Organiza-
tion's finances ;it may act as a tribunal for the settlement
of any dispute relating to international civil aviation.
Objectives : To ensure the safe and orderly growth of
international civil aviation ; to encourage the design and
operation of aircraft and the development of airways,
airports and air navigation facilities for peaceful pur-
poses.
Functions and activities : Setting international stan-
dards governing practices for the design and perfor-
mance of aircraft, he qualifications and performance
of airline pilots, flight crews, air traffic ontrollers,
and ground and maintenance crews, security
requirements and procedures at international air-
ports, and the interdiction of illicit drug transporta-
tion by air ;formulating flight rules and aeronautical
charts used for international navigation ; helping
developing countries to establish or improve their air
transport systems and train their personnel. The har-
monization of international aircraft elecommunica-
tions systems-radio frequencies and security pro-
cedures-is also ICAO'S responsibility.
World Health Organization (WHO)
Headquarters : 20, avenue Appia
CH-1211 Geneva 27-Switzerland
Telephone :(41-22) 7912111
Telefax : (41-22) 7910746
Cab le : UNISANTE GENEVE
Telex :845415416 OMS CH
Þ Number of member countries : 190
1 Director-General : Hiroshi Nakajima
Origin : Came into being on 7 April 1948, after its
Constitution had been ratified by 26 United Nations
Member States'.
Administration : The World Health Assembly, com-
prising representatives of ait the Member States, meets
each year to review the Organization's work and
decide on its policy, programme and budget. The
Executive Board has 32 members, who are appointed
for three years and do not sit as government represen-
tatives. The six regional offices in Copenhagen (Den-
mark), Washington (U. S. A.), Brazzaville (Congo),
Manila (Philippines), Delhi (India) and Alexandria
(Egypt) form an integral part of the Organization.
Objective : To ensure that aU peoples attain the high-
est possible level of health
Functions : Promoting good nutrition and food supply
(in collaboration with FAO) ; taking steps to ensure the
provision of safe water and sanitation and, where neces-
sary, supplying suitable equipment (in collaboration
with UNDP) ; working to promote maternât and child
health (including family planning) and immunization
against major infectious diseases (m collaboration with
UNICEF) ; activities related to heaith éducation, and the
training of medical personnel (in collaboration with
UNESCO) ; encouraging work on the prevention and
eradication of diseases ; and catering for pharmaceutical
needs. Encouraging and co-ordinating research in a
wide range of health-related fields, particularly incom-
bating tropical diseases and Aids.
Observations : According ta its Warld H ealth Report
1995, WHO's goals are to eradicate polio, eliminate
measles and neonatal tetanus by the end of the cen-
tury, and ensure that there are no new leprosy cases
or infections of guinea worm. Other goals include
reducing maternât mortality to half of its 1993 toll of
500, 000 deaths and lowering infant mortality to no
more than 50 péri, 000 hvebirths.
1. 7 April has been proclaimed World Health Day.
World Bank Group
Headquarters : 1818 H Street, N. W
Washington, D. C. 20433-U. S. A.
Telephone :(1-202) 4771234
Telefax : (1-202) 4776391
Cable : INTBAFRAD WASHINGTON
t President :James D. Wolfensohn
tNumberofmemberceuntries : 178
Origin : The World Bank is composed of four institu-
tions : the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD or the Bank), which was estab-
lished in 1945, a year after its Articles of Agreement had
been drawn up by a United Nations monetary and
nnanciai conference attended by 44 Governments at
Bretton Woods (U. S. A.) ; the International Finance
Corporation (IFC), created in 1956 ; the International
Development Association (IDA), created in 1960 ; and
the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
(MIGA), created in 1988.
Administration : Ali powers in the Bank are vested in
the Board of Governors, composed of one Governor
and one alternate from each Member State. The Pres-
ident of the World Bank is ex officia President of the
four institutions.
The Development Committee is a forum bringing
together the Boards of Governors of the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to dis-
cuss international economic co-operation. The Inter-
national Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID) is managed by a Board composed
of one representative of each Member State and
chaired by the President of the Bank.
Objectives : To improve living standards in develop-
ing countries by granting them financial resources
provided by the industrialized countries.
The International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD)
tNumberofmembercout) tries : 178
Functions : Assisting in the reconstruction and devel-
opment of territories ofits members by facilitating the
investment of capital for productive purposes (agricul-
ture, energy, education, health, family planning, roads,
telecommunications) ; promoting private foreign
investment on reasonable terms ; contributing to the
long-term development of international trade.
Activities : ln addition to granting loans, IBRD pro-
vides a wide range of technical assistance services. The
Bank's capital is subscribed by the Member States.
However, it finances its lending operations primarily
from its own borrowings in world markets, as we) t as
from retained earnings and repayments on its loans.
Observations : ln accordance with its Statutes, IBRD
can only make loans for productive purposes ; each
loan must be guaranteed by the Government con-
cerned and, except in special circumstances, must be
for spécifie projects. IBRD's lending decisions are
supposed to be based only on economic considera-
tions, but since 1980 it has also supported pro-
grammes for the readjustment of economic policies
and institutional reform.
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)
tNumberot member countries :162
Functions : Helping to finance private enterprise with-
out guarantee of repayment by the government con-
cerned ; bringing together investment opportunités
and stimutating the flow of private capitan, domestic
and foreign, into productive investment in member
countries.
Activities :Invests prirnarily in manufacturing, but
also in mining and energy, tourism and agriculture.
Observations : While closely associated with the
Wor) d Bank, the IFC is a separate legal entity and has
its own resources, which chiefly corne from the sub-
scriptions of its member countries and from accu-
mufatedpronts.
Activities : Grants credits over a period of 50 years,
usually interest-free. Repayment of principal do es
not begin until after a 10-year grâce period.
Obseroations : ID lis resources come from the net earn-
ings of the World Bank, capital subscribed in conveI1ible
currencies by its members, and contributions from its
richer members. In order to borrow from IDA, a coun-
try must meet four criteria : it must be below the
"poverty line" ;it must have sufficient economic, finan-
cial and political stability owarrant long-term develop-
ment lending ;it must have serious batance-of-payments
problems ; and it must have a genuine commitment to
development as re ftected inits policies.
The International Development Association (IDA)
. Number of member countries : 157
Functions : Providing the poor countries with loans
on much more flexible terms than IBRD.
The Multilaterallnvestment Guarantee Agency
(MIGA)
. Number of member countries : 128
Functions : Facititating the flow of private investment
for productive purposes by offering investors insur-
ance against long-term (up to 20 years) political and
non-commercial risks, such as currency non-con-
vertibility, expropriation, war and civil disturbance
and by providing advisory and consultative services.
International Monetary Fund (tMF)
Headquarters : 70019thStreet, N. W
Washington D. C. 20431-U. S. A.
Telephone :(1-202) 623 7000
Telefax : (1-202) 623 4661
Cable : INTERFUND WASHINGTON
Telex :248331 iNFUR
1 Managing Director :Michel Camdessus
tNumberof member countries :179
Origin : Established on 27 December 1945, following
the ratification of the Bretton Woods Agreements
(U. S. A., JuIy 1944-see entry on the World Bank).
Administration : The Board of Governors, composed
of one representative and one alternate for each mem-
ber country, meets annually ; it decides quotas and the
conditions of accession to the Fund. The Executive
Board is responsible for the conduct of the day-to-day
business of IMF. It is composed of 24 members (5 of
them appointed by the member countries having the
largest quotas'and 19 elected'by the others) and is
chaired by the Managing Director, who is elected by the
Board.
Objectives : To exercise surveillance over the eco-
nomic policies of its member countries ;foster mone-
tary co-operation, exchange-rate stability and the bal-
anced growth of international trade ; administer a code
of conduct regarding exchange-rate poiicies ; promote a
multilateral payments settlement system ; provide
member countries with the financial resources neces-
sary to help them correct their payments imbalances
without jeopardizing national prosperity ;foster their
mutual collaboration ; and provide technical assistance
as required.
Functions and activities : The IMF has the power to
allocate international reserve assets in the form of
SDRs.'It also provides financial support on conces-
sional terms for low-income member countries
under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility
(ESAF). The resources which the IMF can lend
corne mainly from the quotas of the member coun-
tries, in other words from their subscriptions to the
Fund's capital.'Each country pays a contribution cor-
responding to its economic size.'The IMF is autho-
rized to raise loans from officiai lenders m order to
supplement its resources, It may also draw on a line
of credit of SDR18. 5 billion (US$27 billion) which has
been opened by various countries under the"Gen-
eral Arrangements to Borrow" (GAB).
Observations : The IMF's lending policy is guided by
the following principles :any member country bor-
rowing a given currency is expected to return it as
soon as its payments problems have been solved, so
as not to limit other members'access to the same cur-
rency ; before taking a loan, the country must demon-
strate how it intends to solve its payments problems,
so that it can repay the Fund within a repayment
period of three to five years (but which may, if neces-
sary, be up to ten years).
1. France, Germany, japan, the United Kingdom and the United
States.El

2. Elections are veld every two years.
3. Special Drawing Rights. The SDR is the [MPs unit of account. As
of 17 August 1995, SDR7. 00 was equal ta US$I. 4823J
4. As of 30 June 1995, the total volume of Fund credit outstanding
amounted ta SDR37. 0 billion (US$54. 8 billion).
5. As of 31 August 1995, the [MPs quotas stood at SDR144. 9 billion!  op  « g «! t 99, t/) c/f' ! « o !stoot K. 9 ; ; mn
(US$ 214. 7 billion).
Universal Postal Union (UPU)
Headquarters : Weltpoststrasse 4,
CH-3000 BERNE 15-Switzerland
Telephone :(41-31) 350 3111
Telefax : (41-31) 350 3110
Cable : UPU BERNE
Telex :912761 UPU CH
tNumberof member countries :189
1 Director-General : Thomas Leavey
Origin : UPU was established by the Berne Treaty (9
October 1874), which came into force on 1 July 1875.'
It became a specialized agency of the United Nations
on 1 July 1948.
Administration : The U niversal Postal Congress,
UPU's supreme body, is composed of representatives
of atl UPU member countries. It meets every five
years to review the Universai Postal Convention,
define UPU's générât pohcy, adopt its operating bud-
get and assign tasks to its different organs. The
Council of Administration (41 members elected by
the Congress) ensures that the policy laid down by
the Congress is applied. The Postal Operations
Council (40 members elected by the Congress) deals
with the operational and commercial aspects of
postal services. The International Bureau is the
Union's permanent secretariat. The Director-General
is elected by the Congress.
Objectives : To develop communication between
peoples by the efficient operation of postal services ;
contribute to international collaboration in this
field ;provide technical assistance requested by mem-
ber countries. The member countries form a single
postal territory ; freedom of transit is guaranteed
throughout the Union's territory.
Functions : Fixing rates, maximum and minimum
weight and size limits and the conditions of accep-
tance of letter-post items ; prescribing the methods
for calculating and collecting transit charges ; estab-
lishing regulations for objects whose transport
requires special precautions, such as infectious and
radioactive substances.
Activities : UPU engages in technical co-operation
projects relating to planning, organization, manage-
ment, security, marketing, training, financial services
and new technologies. Assistance to developing
countries takes the form of training or further train-
ing fellowships, the secondment of experts or con-
sultants, and the supply of equipment.
Observation : A country that is not a member of the
United Nations may become a member of UPU if its
application is approved by at teast two-thirds of
UPU's member countries.
1. 1 January 1876 in France.
International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
Headquarters : Place des Nations,
CH-1211 Geneva 20-Switzerland
Telephone :(41-22) 730 5111
Telefax : (41-22) 733 72 56
Cable : BURINTERNA GENEVA
Telex :421000 UIT CH
E-mail :X 400 : C=CH ; ADMD=ARCOM ; PRMD=ITU ;
S=ITUMAIL
Internet : ITUMAIL&commat;ITU. CH
1 Number of member countries :184
1 Secretary-General : Pekka J. Tarjanne
Origin : ITU was founded in Paris (France) in May
1865 as the International Telegraph Union. It became
a specialized agency of the United Nations in Opta-
ber 1947.
Administration : The Plenipotentiary Conference,
which meets every four years, lays down ITU's basic
policy ; it alone is empowered to revise ITU's Con-
vention. The Administrative Council, composed of
46 members elected by the Conference, co-ordinates
thework of the General Secretariat, the Radiocom-
munication Sector, the Telecommunication Stan-
dardization Sector and the Telecommunication
Development Sector.
Objectives maintain and extend international co-
operation between all the Union's members for the
improvement and rational use of telecommunication
systems.
Functions : Promoting the creation, development and
efficient operation of technical facilities, with a view
to improving the efficiency of telecommunication
services, increasing their usefulness and making them
generally available to thé pubtic ; encouraging interna-
tional co-operation to provide the developing coun-
tries with the technical assistance they request ;
extending new telecommunication technologies to all
the countries of the world and co-ordinating the har-
monization of national services.
Activities : lTU lays down the rules applicable to the
allocation and registration of radio frequencies
throughout the world and to the assignation of the
orbital positions of geostationary satellites, inorder
to avoid interference between radio stations of dif-
ferent countries. It encourages agreement between its
members on rates that are as low as possible. In col-
laboration with the international funding and devel-
opment agencies, ITU endeavours to promote the
setting up of preferential ines of credit, so that
telecommunication services can be extended to the
most isolated regions of countries.
World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
Headquarters : 41, avenue Giuseppe-Motta, Case
postale 5
CH-1211 Geneva 20-Switzerland
Telephone ;(41-22) 730 8111
Telefax : (41-22) 734 23 26
Cable : METEOMOND GENEVA
Telex :414198 OMM CH
. Number of member countries : 178
t Secretary-General : G. O. P. Obasi
Origin : As the successor'to thé International Meteo-
rological Organization (IMO) founded in 1873,
WMO became a specialized agency of the United
Nations on 20 December 1951.
Administration : The World Meteorological Con-
gress, the supreme body of WMO, meets every four
years to détermine gênera ! pohcy, programmes and
budget. The Executive CoùncH, composed of 36
directors of national meteorological services, meets
once a year, Six Regional Associations'are fora for
members of WMO and are responsible for supervis-
ing the implementation of the resolutions of the
Congress and the Executive Council. Eight technical
commissions are responsible for studying various
branches of meteorology and operational hydrology.
Objectives : To facilitate worldwide co-operation in
meteorology, climatology, operational hydrology
and other related isciplines.
Functions : Promoting the establishment and mainte-
nance of meteorological centres and systems for
making and exchanging information ; promoting
standardization and uniform publication of meteo-
rological observations and statistics ; furthering the
application of meteorology to aviation, shipping,
water resources, agriculture and other human activi-
ties ;encouraging research and professional training.
Activities : WMO's main programmes are the World
Weather Watch (WWW) ; the World Climate Pro-
gramme (WCP) ; the Atmospheric Research and Envi-
ronment Programme ; the Applications of Meteorol-
ogy Programme ; the Hydrotogy and Water Resources
Programme ; the Education and Training Programme ;
and the Technical Co-operation Programme.
Observations : The World Weather Watch, WMO's
basic operational programme, consists of global
observation, telecommunication and data processing
systems. The Global Ozone Observing System-
coming under the Global Atmosphere Watch3-and
the World Climate Programme serve in particular ta
ensure the early detection of any atmospheric con-
centrations of greenhouse gases, changes in the ozone
layer, acid and toxic rain and tropical cyclones.
1. Although WMO was established by Convention in October 1947,
it did not become operational until23 March 1951, and IMO
continued to function on an interim basÍ5 in the intervening period.
2. Africa, Asia, Soute America, North and Central America, Europe
and South-West Pacifie.
3. The GlobalAtmosphere Watch ìs one of the four components of
te Atmospheric Research and Environment Programme.
International Maritime Organization
(IMO)
Headquarters : 4 Albert Embankment,
London SEl 7SR-United Kingdom
Telephone :(44-171) 735 7611
Telefax : (44-171) 587 3210
Cable : INTER MAR LONDON SE
Telex :23588
1 Number of member countries :152 + 2 associate
members
1 Secretary-General : William A. 0'oeil
Origin : The Convention establishing IMO (for-
merly called the Inter-Governmental Maritime Con-
sultative Organization-IMCO'), which was drafted
in Geneva (Switzerland) on 6 March 1948, came inta
force on 17 March 1958, after it had been ratified by
21 states, including seven with at least 1 million gross
tons of shipping each. IMO was recognized as a spe-
cialized agency of the United Nations in January
1959.
Administration : The Assembly, consisting of repre-
sentatives of atl Member States, lays down IMO's
policy and priorities. Every two years it elects a 32-
member Council, which is the governing body
between the Assembly's biennial sessions. Four prin-
cipal committees (on legal matters, marine safety,
marine environment protection and technical co-
operation) submit reports or recommendations to
the Assembly through the Council.
Objectives : To assist in the development of shipping
services and the expansion of maritime trade ; to
encourage the elimination of restrictive practices by
shipping companies.
Functions and activities : Setsstandards, by drawing
up conventions and adopting recommendations
aimed at improving maritime safety, preventing
marine pollution by ships, and training maritime
personnel ; promotes the adoption of international
agreements.
Observation : IMO provides a forum for member
governments and interested organizations ta
exchange views on technical, administrative and legal
problems.
1. IMCO became IMO on 22 May 1982, following the entry into
force of the amendments to the Convention estahlishing it.
World Intellectual Property Organization
(WIPO)
Headquarters : 34, chemin des Colombettes
CH-1211 Geneva 20-Switzerland
Telephone :(41-22) 730 9111
Telefax : (41-22) 733 54 28
Cable : OMPI GENEVE
Telex :412912 OMPI CH
1 Number of member countries :155
1 Director-General : Arpad Bogsch
Origin : The Convention establishing WIPO, which
was signed on 14 July 1967, came into force on 26
April 1970. WIPO became a specialized agency of the
United Nations in December 1974. Its origins go
back to the 1883 Paris Convention for the Protection
of Industrial Property (the Paris Union) and the
1886 Berne Convention for the Protection of Liter-
ary and Artistic Works (the Berne Union), whose
two Secretariats merged in 1893.
Administration : WIPO has three governing bodies :
the Conference of representatives of aU WIPO Mem-
ber States ;the General Assembly composed of those
member States which are also members of the Paris or
Berne Unions (these bodies meet In bienniat sessions
to adopt the programme and budget and define the
Organization's policy) ; and the Co-ordination
Il

Committee, which consists of states elected from
among the Member States ofWIPO and the Paris and
Berne Unions and meets once a year. The Secretariat
of WIPO is the International Bureau.
Objectives : To maintain and increase protection of
intellectual property throughout the worid by
encouraging co-operation between states, and by
promoting industrial and cultural development, cre-
ative activity and the transfer of industriel technolo-
gies to the developing countries.
Functions and activities : Setting international norms
and standards in the field of intellectual property
(industrial, literary and artistic) ; encouraging the
conclusion of new international treaties ; promoting
wider acceptance of existing treaties and their revi-
sion ; assisting in the development of nationat iegis) a-
tion ; providing legal technical assistance to develop-
ing countries ; facilitating the protection of patents
and trademarks among the Member States of the
Unions' ; to disseminate information relating to
intellectual property.
1. The Trademark Law Treaty was adopted in 1994. This Treaty
considerably simplifies registration procedures.
International Fund for Agricultural Development
(IFAD)
Headquarters : ViadeiSeraficol07,
1-00142 Rome-Italy
Telephone (39-6) 54591
Telefax : (39-6) 5043463
Cable : IFAD ROME
Telex :620330
t President :Fawzi H. AI-Sultan
tNumberofmember countries :158
Origin : The Agreement establishing the Fund was
adopted by a United Nations conference held in
Rome in June 1976 and came into force on 30
November 1977.
Administration : The Governing Council comprises
representatives of att the Member States, who are
divided into three categories, each with the same vot-
ing power : developed countries (members of
OECD'), key contributor member countries (mem-
bers of OPEC') and other developing countries,
which are mainly the beneficiaries. Each category has
equal representation on the Governing Council and
the Executive Board, which is responsible for super-
vising the Fund's operations.
Objectives : To mobilize resources for improved
food production and better nutrition among low-
income groups in developing countries.
Functions and activities : Fostering the development
of the poorest rural communities ; helping to
increase food production ; improving local prospects
for employment and nutrition ; designing and
financing proj ects, with or without the participation
of other institutions uch as the World Bank and the
regional development banks (the African, Asian,
Inter-American and Islamic Development Banks).
Observations : IFAD pays special attention to grass-
roots development in rural areas through an innova-
tive approach to problems and the preservation of
naturel resources. For every dollar contributed in
support of its projects, it has mobilized two dollars
from other external donors. By the end of 1994, it
had invested almost $44. 5 billion in nearly 400 pro-
jects in 102 developing countries. When they have
been completed, they are expected to benefit some
230 million people.
1. Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.
2. Organization of Petro/eum Exporting Countries.
United Nations Industrial Development
Organization
(UNIDO)
Headquarters : Vienna International Centre,
Wagramerstrasse 5,
P. O. Box 300, A-1400 Vienna-Austria
Telephone :(43-1) 211310
Telefax : (43-1) 232156
Cable : UNIDO VIENNA
Telex :135612
tNumberofmembercounthes : 166
t Director-General : Mauricio de Maria y Campos
Origin : Created by the General Assembly of the
United Nations in November 1966 as an
autonomous organ within the UN Secretariat,
UNIDO was transformed into a specialized agency
after the adoption of its Constitution in 1979. It
became fully autonomous on 1 January 1986, after
its Constitution had been ratified.
Administration : UNIDO's principal organs are the
General Conference, which meets every two years to
determine the Organization's policy, approve its
budget and adopt conventions and agreements ; the
Industrial Development Board, composed of 53
members elected by the General Conference, which
meets annually to review the Organization's work ;
and the Programme and Budget Committee whose
27 members are elected for two years.
Objectives : As the United Nations system's central
co-ordinating body for the industrialization of the
developing countries, UNIDO is a forum for con-
tacts, consultations and negotiations.
Functions and activities : Encouraging investments
and technology transfers into and between develop-
ing countries ; providing technical assistance for
industriai deveiopment purposes ; helping countries
to obtain fair and equitable external financing ; orga-
nizing training programmes ; facilitating the plan-
ning of regional industnat devetopment ; analysing,
publishing and standardizing industriel statistics.
World Trade Organization
(WTO)
Headquarters : Centre Wiam Rappard,
154, rue de Lausanne
CH-1211 Geneva 21-Switzerland
Telephone :(41-22) 739 5111
Telefax : (41-22) 73142 06
Telex :4123240MC/WTOCH
t Number of countries when launched' :79
tCurrentnumber : 105
t Director-General : Renato Ruggiero
Origin : The World Trade Organization was estab-
lished on 1 January 1995, replacing GATT (thé Gén-
eral Agreement on Tariffs and Triade2) upon comple-
tion of the Uruguay Round negotiations'. Whereas
G ATT was a multilateral treaty applying on a provi-
sional basis, WTO has the legal personality of a
fully-fledged international organization, like the
International Monetary Fund or the World Bank.
Like GATT, however, it does not have the officiaI
status of a specialized agency of the United Nations,
although links have been established with it.
Objectives : To increase production, trade and
investment ; further the active participation of the
developing countries in world trade.
Functions : Administering and implementing the
whole range of multilateral trade agreements which
together form the Organization's structure ; fur-
thering international trade negotiations ;endeavour-
ing to setde trade disputes ; overseeing national trade
policies ;co-operating with the other international
institutions which participate in the formulation of
world economic policy.
Activities : The new multilateral trade system-
which is subtended by a number of fundamental
principles aimed in particular at ensuring the secu-
rity and predictability of trade in goods and ser-
vices-covers a volume of trade amounting to a value
of close on $6, 000 billion.
Untike GATT, WTO rules will cover commercial
activities such as trade in services, intellectual prop-
erty and investment. In GATT's traditional sphere
of activity, the rules on international competition
have been spelt out much more clearly, and tariff
barriers to trade will be significantly lowered, by an
average of 40 per cent over a six-year period. GATT's
conciliation system, which enabled it to settle dis-
putes between its members in a) i its areas of activity,
has been considerably strengthened. Technical co-
operation in favour of the developing countries has
also been improved.
1. Thèse are member countries of GATT which have completed
their legislative ratification procedures. Their number is expected ta
increase (o150 by thé end of 1995. GATT currently has 125
members.
2. GATT came into force on 1 January 1948.
J. ln order ta make for a smooth transition between GATT and
WTO and enable thé largest possible number of countries ta
complete theirratification procedures, GATT will continue to
function in parallel with WTO untilJl December 1995.
International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA)
Headquarters : Vienna International Centre
Wagramerstrasse 5, P. O. Box 100
A-1400 Vienna-Austria
Telephone :(43-1) 2060-0
Telefax : (43-1) 2060-7
Cable : INATOM VIENNA
Telex :112645 ATOMA
1 Director-General : Hans Blix
t Number of member countries : 122
Origin : IAEA commenced its activities in Vienna
(Austria) in July 1957. In November of the same
year, the General Assembly of the United Nations
approved an agreement governing relations between
IAEA and the United Nations. IAEA is an indepen-
dent intergovernmental organization created under
the aegis of the UN. Although it does not have the
o fnciat status of a UN specialized agency, it submits
an annal report to the General Assembly and, if
necessary, to the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council.
Administration : The General Conference, omposed
of aU the Member States, meets annually to adopt
the Agency's policy, budget and programmes. These
are implemented by the Board of Governors, which
is composed of 35 members (22 of whom are elected
for two years by the General Conference and 13 are
appointed for one year by the Board).
Objectives : To seek ta accelerate and enlarge the con-
tribution of atomic energy to peace, health and
prosperity throughout the world.
Functions : Ensuring that nuclear materials and
equipment intended for peaceful use are not
diverted to military purposes ;setting standards for
nuclear safety and environmental protection ; serv-
ing as an intermediary between Member States ;facil-
itating the transfer of technology, and providing
advisers, equipment and training services for the
developing countries ; managing an international
nuclear information system.
Activities : IAEA manages, jointly with UNESCO,
the International Centre for Theoretical Physics in
Trieste'and also maintains three laborataries'for
studies in basic nuclear physics applications and
practical uses in chemistry, physics, industrial
hydrology and oceanography.
Observation : Various types of safeguard agree-
ments can be concluded with IAEA. In accordance
with the terms of the agreements concluded in con-
nection with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the Treaty for the Pro-
hibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(Treaty of Tlatelolco) and the South Pacific Nuclear
Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Rarotonga), non-
nuclear-weapon states are required to submit their
entire nuclear-fuel-cycle activities to IAEA safe-
guards.
1. International Centre for Theoretical Physic"Box 586,, trada
Costiera 11, Miramare, Trieste (Italy).
2. IAEA Marine Environment Laboratory, B. P. 800, MC 98012,
Monaco Cedex ;IAEA Laboratories, A-2444, Seiber, dorf, Au, tria.Il
