The heart's infinity
by Abdelwahab Meddeb
The visit to the Kaaba is the crowning moment of
the great pilgrimage to iecca, one of the three
holy cities of Islam. In the mystic tradition it is
identified with the heart. Here a modern pilgrim
describes his innermost feelings.
34
I A mere speck in the crowd, I follow the
* human tide and enter the sacred domain.
The Kaaba looms up, a cube in a black dress with
eye-catching fringes and a headband of callig¬
raphy in gold letters.
It is a great shock. I come closer to the black
Kaaba, making my way through the dense white-
robed crowd that throngs the vast courtyard.
I realize that I am in the spot where sense of
direction disappears. Wherever I was in the
world, from east to west and north to south, I
directed my gaze towards the qibla, the target of'
prayers: here, wherever I stand, the Kaaba is in
plain view, and from every side it makes this
qibla visible. No need to find the right direction:
it is for the pilgrim to make for himself the
square that will receive his prostrate form, and
his prayer will be accepted.
Such is the Kaaba, a black-robed cube peti¬
tioned by requests since ancient times, by a
myriad entreaties renewed down the centuries,

"*.''
r* ,**. ig
|i >*., , «1.1*1 «*>.*
*
V
In Mecca (Saudi Arabia),
pilgrims gather round the
Kaaba, the cubical shrine that
stands in the vast courtyard of
the Great Mosque and has the
famous Black Stone of Mecca
embedded in Its masonry. The
Kaaba Is the point towards
which Muslims all over the
world orient themselves to pray.
Wearing sacred garments, the
pilgrims circumambulate the
shrine seven times.
Kight, pilgrims exhausted by
the heat refresh themselves
with a little shade and water.



bombarded by all the world's mihrabs, apses
pointing their blind walls towards it blind,
yet opened by the pilgrims' eyes. O Kaaba, so
ancient and yet daily rejuvenated by the eyes that
converge on you from every side! How many
words in every tongue have saturated your black
dress and nourished your walls and stone foun¬
dations! You are made of stone, you grow out of
the bedrock that is rooted in your foundations,
always adopting a humble posture, only suf¬
fering to be raised up when driven by a will
that is alien to it.
Rabi'a, the great eighth-century woman Sufi,
said: "O Kaaba, idol worshipped on earth, never
has He entered into it, yet never has He left it."
Obsessed by this paradox, I go towards this
cube, which embodies belief in a God at once
present and absent, visible and unportrayable,
palpable and transcendent, near and remote.
This is why His vocation is to be solicited in the
third person, which is how Rabi'a, like all Sufis,
speaks to Him.
I know that by my movement I revive the
myth. Under the burning sun I make my way
through the white throng. I know that I am
ncaring the Temple, the Abode: I am a pilgrim,
I direct my steps towards it. All my energy is
absorbed by such a target.
I draw nearer still. I enter the circles of the
Kaaba. I wish to hurry during the first three
circumambulations, as the ritual prescribes, and
so as to escape the destiny of the marks inscribed
within me, to efface them and to hasten my
entry into a new beginning.
An inner thought sprouts within me, and
directs me towards the solution of the paradox
propounded by the great Rabi'a. The Kaaba
cannot contain Him as much as the human heart.
Faced with this revelation, I exult. Half laughing,
half crying, I feel that I am nearing the cube. On
one side I receive its shade. I honour my cir¬
cumambulations, whilst continuing to hearken
to my inner conversation. The human heart is an
inner temple far greater than the heavens and the
earth. Nothing equals the heart's infinity. The
thoughts that now come to me melt and spread
as they orbit my heart: they are like the people
who circle the Temple with me.
A gold tablet in an unknown script
God deposited a treasure in the Kaaba. The
Prophet wanted to get hold of it and spend it.
Then he repented and left it where it was hidden.
The second caliph, 'Umar, also tried to dig it out,
but turned away from this plan and remained
true to his imitation of the Prophet. This treasure
is still lodged within the Kaaba: I can see tiny
gleams from it. I recall an anecdote told by the
Andalusian theosophist Ibn 'Arabi. When Ibn
'Arabi was in my dear city of Tunis in the year
1201, he received a cracked gold plate out of
this treasure, one finger thick, one span wide and
a little bit longer, containing a script unknown
to him. But Ibn 'Arabi refused to accept this
sample, and asked for it to be put back in its
place. He too wanted to comply with the
Prophet's example, as was fitting. He knew that
it was no accident that the Prophet had decided
not to touch it. He reckoned that if he had used
it, blind sedition would have ravaged the uni¬
verse. Only the Mahdi who was to herald the
end of time could possess it.
Bit by bit the parallel between the Kaaba as
the human heart and as the Throne of God
grows stronger. In this sense the Kaaba is like a
double display screen: on the one hand it dis¬
plays man's interior and everything recorded
or inscribed thereon, on the other the next
world, metaphysical space. The Kaaba represents
this twofold extension into the unseen: it is the
link between the inwardness of the initiate and
the celestial theatre.
It is very hot. The sun holds sway. The white
of the vestments and the marble under foot
make the light more dazzling, more glaring. I am
still circling the Kaaba. I am elated. I think of
what awaits me for my pilgrimage to be com¬
plete and for myself to be born again. I observe
the heroism such a visit demands. And I cannot
repress the image of Hallaj that comes to me
from long ago in the ninth century, when the
martyr-to-be was discovered at Mecca, not far
from the Temple precinct, sitting on a boulder
in full sun, with sweat streaming down him so
that the rock was wet. A witness who saw him
thus noted his proud, heroic emulation of the
Absolute, and predicted to this Sufi the fate that
*1.
ff i ¿n
1
" ^ 1% ^
*W*> '
, * »* T***1
V' ~ >A
t -:WaS*¡F¿
.
-
^m~ ^^^-^^jf, jQ
1 35

I know that I am nearing the Temple, the Abode: I am a
pilgrim, and I direct my steps towards it. All my energy
is absorbed by such a target.
would be his: such a path can lead only to death.
The door of excess unlocks the house of sacri¬
fice. Challenging excess is fatal. I ask myself: am
I going to melt in this sun? No, I am protected
by whiteness, ally of the angelic host.
I want it to be night, not only because night
would provide a respite, a rest, but also because
it would confirm the very name of the Temple.
It was not by a whim that it was named "the
Abode". In order to confirm the correctness of
this name you feel a compelling urge to abide
there by night, to sleep in the sacred precinct, so
as to view the truthful visions on the stage of
your dreams: also so as to be introduced,
through the analogy of sleep, on to that other
stage that creaks under your ghostly feet the
stage of the other world. Should we not be ready
to decipher whatever presents itself to our minds
and feelings through the manifestation of the
occult? Great spiritual experiences have often
come about in pitch darkness. Darkness is
favourable to perception and clairvoyance. The
Prophet's celestial journey, his ascension into the
heavens, his scaling of the ladder all that hap¬
pened by night. It was in the middle of the night
that he was enabled to go to the limits of per¬
ception, to the lotus-tree of the end. It is said also
that God comes down from His throne at night.
Waiting for nightfall
36
ABDELWAHAB MEDDEB,
of Tunisia, is a writer and
associate professor at Yale
University (United States) and at
Geneva University (Switzerland).
Notable among his pbulished
works are Tombeau d'lbn 'Arabi
("The Tomb of Ibn Arabi"; 1990)
and, to accompany his
translation of Suhrawardi's "The
Western Exile's Story", L'Autre
exil ("The Other Exile") with
calligraphy by Hassan Massoudy
(Fata Morgana, Montpellier,
1993).
Waiting for nightfall, I try to perfect my knowl¬
edge of the Temple by following the ritual. I
realize that when I know the Temple I shall
know my true self. How many return journeys
there are between the Temple and the heart!
The stations of the pilgrimage correspond to
the effort to be made on oneself, to introspec¬
tion, to the exercise that probes a person's inner
discourse.
I know that in putting off my clothes I put
off all possessions; in ridding myself of sewn gar¬
ments I disencumber myself. I feel at home in a
setting of simplicity, and turn away from com¬
plexity; I wash and purify myself. To do this I go
into the bath-house: and there I find the dark¬
ness in which mysteries are revealed. There I
achieve the experience of death; I have a
forestaste of the other world: collective nudity
puts me in a sort of rehearsal for the Resurrec¬
tion and the Day of Judgment. In this hot and
humid place I shall from the outset and in
advance have known the two features that struc¬
ture a living person.
Like the ground plan of the Temple, the pil¬
grimage rests on four foundations: circumam-
bulation of the Kaaba, preceded by consecration
(resulting, I repeat, from purification and the
wearing of a white sheet, a living person's
shroud), then the halt at Arafat and the race
between Safa and Marwa.
Kevolve around me!
The halt at Arafat brings perfection of knowl¬
edge (as its name indicates: arafa means "to
know"). The halt is in the profane part: it is
outside the area covered by the domain of the
forbidden. The pilgrimage, in its various stages,
takes place via the dialectic between the sacred
and the profane, between the prolongation of a
prohibition and its cancellation. In this profane
area communal prayer takes place: the pilgrims
find each other in disarray, their hair dishev¬
elled, covered with dust, stripped of all sewn
garments, bare-headed, standing until their heels
are sore, bereft before Him. Their reading will
be secret, internal, whispered: it is spoken from
self to self, in silence, in the crowd, so that He
may speak to each one personally, intimately,
secretly, on the journey of the inner voice,
within.
Between Safa and Marwa I hurry from one
state to another: from sadness (caused by
remorse) to the gift of self. At the bottom of the
valley I go fast, I run, so as to stay as short a time
as possible in this low-lying place, the abode of
Satan. Here, where stone reigns supreme, the
twofold truth of stone is revealed to me: on the
one hand it is from between the stones that the
spring gushes out (and water is the life prin¬
ciple), on the other hand stone is the only being
that always seeks out the low point, i.e. bondage
and refusal to emulate God's plans: Stone does
not rise up of itself, and if it is lifted up an irre¬
sistible force drags it downwards. These two
truths I adopt in the heart's refuge.



With a heart ready for the invention of my
Lord, I shall proceed to the seven circumam-
bulations (on arrival, in the middle of my stay,
and to complete my farewell) for the first three
circuits I shall walk fast; for the last four I shall
go at a normal steady gait. As I circumambulate
I shall liken myself to the barefoot angels that
revolve around the Throne.
I also recall that the Kaaba spoke to Ibn
'Arabi in articulate speech. It said to him:
"Revolve around me!" Centuries later, it repeats
these same words to me. Water from the spring
Zemzem (which gushed out before Hagar and
Ishmael in the middle of the desert) spoke also
to me in audible words. It said to me: "Drink,
slake thy thirst, refresh thyself, take thy fill of my
water!"
I recall to mind the long sequence that made
up the special link between Ibn 'Arabi and the
Kaaba. One cold night with a full moon the

Sufi got up: beset by a state of great perplexity,
he could not sleep. He made his ablutions and
went out. The night was damp, and the fine
moon was lightly veiled by a sort of curtain of
dew. Ibn 'Arabi made for the precinct, and went
into the courtyard where the Kaaba stands.
Only one person was there, and a strange tension
vibrated in the air; the Sufi felt highly uneasy, and
decided to place himself in the path of the cir-
cumambulations.
Let us strain our ears and listen.
"That night I came down, kissed the Stone
and began to circumambulate. When I was
opposite the drain-pipe, behind the Stone, the
Kaaba lifted its dress, rose up above its base, and
then pushed me away. It would not allow me to
circle around it, and spoke to me in a sharp
voice. I was afraid, nay more: I was seized with
great terror. To take refuge and avoid its aggres¬
siveness, I sheltered behind the stone as behind
a shield, for it was hitting me fierce blows. In the
end it shouted angrily: 'Take one step forward
if thou durst, and thou wilt see what thou wilt
see. So dost thou prefer initiates and famous
men? Dost thou prefer them to me? By God,
never will I allow thee to circle around me!'
"Gradually I lost the fear that had paralysed
me. I calmed down. The Kaaba had torn itself up
from the ground, and had lifted its dress as a
person does when trying to get up from a sitting
position. So it appeared to me. It had lifted its
dress in order to pounce on me. I quickly impro¬
vised some lines of verse, I talked to it, I recited
my celebration, my eulogy. My rhymed, rhyth¬
mical words placated its wrath; my panegyric
made it subside on to its foundations again. It
was happy with the words I heard. It returned
to its place and gave me its trust once more. It
gave me the order to resume my circumambu-
lations.
"Then I threw myself on the Stone and
kissed it again; I was moved, and trembled in all
my limbs. I was dumbfounded, and had to make
a great effort to impart to it the declaration of
Oneness: 'There is no God but God.' These
words came out of my mouth in the form of a
thread. The Black Stone opened like a wardrobe,
and I saw the bottom of it. Its depth measured
one cubit, and my testimony rolled itself up
into a ball and ensconced itself at the bottom of
the Stone, which closed up again. Then the
Kaaba said to me: 'This is a forfeit: I will give it
back to you on the Day of Judgment.' Since
then, peace has been concluded between us."
All this ecstasy, all these hallucinations and
sublimations unfolded in my head, and delighted
me. What pictures, what thoughts taken from
the memory and the corpus of all those who
down the centuries have borne witness and
bequeathed their evidence to posterity, so that
we might have them to enjoy in our beliefs and
unbeliefs!
r ilgrims on Mount Arafat near
Mecca.
37
