R H
Salvador de Madariaga
Intuition, intelligence and the makingofmodem man
The Spanish diplomat and writer
Salvador de Madariaga (1886-
1978) was a humanist and
democrat whofoughtagainst the
Franco dictatorship (he left
Spain in 1 936 and did not return
until 1976, afler Franco's death).
He was one ofthe originators of
the idea ofa united Europe. A
prolific author ofpoems, novels
and plays, he was a particularly
brilliant essayist and biographer
ofhistoricalfigures. In April 1935
he tookpart in a meeting on "Tlie
Education ofModern Man",
organized in Nice by the
International Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation.
46
Text selected by Edgardo Canton
We need to strike a balance
between "intuitive brilliance"
and "intellectual
development"; we mustfoster
the intelligence that mobilizes
all thefacets ofa human being
(including the imagination)
rather than that which reflects
a compartmentalized,
technocratic approach.
If we think of an organized society
with a certain continuity, a certain
history and a certain tradition such
as a European nation we find that the
hierarchization that takes place
throughout its history arises from two
sources: firstly from practice or tradition,
based on heredity and transmitted social
privilege, and secondly from individual
worth, which is positive in those who make
their way gradually upwards and negative
in those who let themselves be carried
away by their natural instincts. By and
large I see little point in changing this
system, which has always existed and
seems to me to have all the advantages.
As to natural hierarchy, I think it is very
evidently characterized by a certain
number of faculties, or (in less vague
terms) non-physical qualities. First there
are the people of spiritual worth, who are
at the top of the human hierarchy. They are
not at the top of the social, i.e. mechanical,
hierarchy of the state, because that does
not interest them. They usually withdraw
from the public eye. They are the
dreamers, the loners, the hermits, even if
not officially.
Then there are the people I have here
called the elite, those who are at the head
of the state, who make up what (in a par¬
allel with the army which in political
terms I would not accept) I would call
the officers or generals of the state. They
are the people who stand out because of
their more highly developed intellectual
qualities.
Lastiy, there are the ordinary people, in
whom in general (I will say in a moment
what I think about this) we find above all
a great wealth of intuition. I said "in gen¬
eral". I think it is hard to generalize. For
instance, take a people like the French,
who are an intellectual people. Even when
a Frenchman is stupid, he is a stupid intel¬
lectual. This is very important; it is possible
to be an intellectual and completely
stupid. When a Frenchman is a genius he
is an intelligent intellectual, but an intel¬
lectual. Among ordinary French people
even the shopkeeper on the corner has
his centre ofgravity in the intellect. It is not
the same in Spain. Spanish people are
deeply intuitive, and this is something that
has greatly concerned me, since it makes
for great difficulty when it comes to dis¬
cussing a topic such as ours today. In Spain
I have often found that teaching a peasant
to read is almost certain to spoil him;
developing the intellectual faculties of
people who have very deeply intuitive
minds is a very dangerous operation. I
was a student when I met Miguel de Una¬
muno for the first time, and I heard him
say something whose wisdom has struck
me more and more ever since. He said to
me, "The difference between a Spanish
workman and a Spanish peasant is this: a
Spanish peasant has five hundred ideas
and five hundred words to express them in,
and every time he speaks he says some¬
thing. A Spanish workman also has five

Salvador de
Madariaga
(1886-1978).
Photo taken in
1965.
hundred ideas, but because he reads the
newspapers he has five thousand words to
express them in, and he never says any¬
thing." Please ponder on this great diffi¬
culty; I do so all the more humbly because
I can offer you no solution.
So the distinctive feature of the elite
is intelligence. Are you sure that in opening
wide the door to intellectual development
you are not destroying a balance? For
myself, I do not know. I am not sure
whether a certain energy of perception
and synthesis found in human beings is
not generally impoverished when it
becomes intellectual and moves into an
environment that is not spontaneously
familiar to it. Nevertheless, despite this
risk, I believe that the state's need to create
an intellectual elite is such that in practice
it is essential to have as perfect or as little
imperfect a policy for primary educa¬
tion as possible, in order to enable all the
people to provide the state with the intel¬
lectual elite it needs.
There is another consideration. I am on
the side of the individual rather than the
state. Hence the interests of the state
would not, for me, suffice to justify the
development ofprimary education. There
are also the interests of the individual.
Among the mass of the people who in gen¬
eral except for some particularly intel¬
lectual peoples like the French stand out
for their intuitive ability, there are never¬
theless potentially many people whose
normal existence is in the sphere of the
intellect. We have no right to deprive these
individuals of a chance to achieve a level to
which they could naturally aspire in the
state, still less the level they ought to
occupy in their own lives, by denying them
access to schooling.
Hence I believe that for both these rea¬
sons we must very boldly and openly
adopt a primary education policy, even at
the risk, as I said just now, of a consequent
impoverishment of intuition.
Having said that, we must distinguish
very clearly between the culture of the
greatest number and the culture of the
group. These are two entirely different
things, but they interpenetrate because
the culture of the greatest number would
be impossible to achieve without the cul¬
ture of the group.
We must think of culture as an orga¬
nized whole. For instance, a family must
have a family culture; a state must have a
state culture, and the organized humanity
we are painfully trying to build must have
an organized human culture.
Can this group culture be ttansmitted to
the masses by intellectual means? I do not
think so, and I believe that modern states
have sorely neglected this aspect of the
transmission ofculture an aspect which
was never neglected during the periods of
richness and unity of culture, for instance
during the great periods ofdie Church. The
Church managed to propagate Catholic
culture, group culture, by the only means
that are effective in reaching the masses, i.e.
through mythology and symbolism. Now in
my opinion, however bad mythology and
bad symbolism are misused nowadays or
rather, however mythology and symbolism
are misused nowadays in order to propa¬
gate a bad culture (for there can be bad
culture) we must learn to formulate, or
rather to create, myths and symbols in such
a way as to propagate this group culture
among our peoples.
So far as I am concerned, I am con¬
vinced that if the League ofNations has so
far failed (as it obviously has) to create an
international atmosphere ofpeace and co¬
operation, it is because the efforts made in .
this direction have been directed towards
intelligence, because the realm ofsymbols
and myths has been abandoned.
These are the ideas I wanted to convey
to you, because the topic you have just
started to tackle is perhaps the trickiest and
most difficult part of our proceedings.
47
