An art and an
industry
iiCT^Macra.H'.MM'JH
Torn from the start
between money-
spinning and
creativity, the
cinema took a long
time to win
acceptance as an art
in its own right
All through its first century,
cinema has enjoyed an
immense following, but it
, has also been feared and
scorned. Both the educated
bourgeoisie and the working-class public
were excited by the Lumière brothers' Ciné¬
matographe shows in Paris and Edison's
Kinetograph shows in New York at the end
of the last century. Soon, however, the cul¬
tural establishment became concerned about
Above, "Black Maria",
Thomas Edison's motion
picture studio in West
Orange, New Jersey
(United States).
I

Toshiro Mifune (as
Tajomaru, the bandit)
and Machiko Ryo
(Masago) in Akira
Kurosawa's Rashomon
(Japan, 1950).
the enormous popularity of the new medium
and began to dismiss it as a vulgar and even
harmful symptom of modernity.
"Cinema materializes the worst popular
ideal," wrote the French writer Anatole
France (1844-1924). "It is not the end of the
world, but it is the end of civilization." His
opinion was echoed by his fellow Nobel
Prize-winner, the German novelist Thomas
Mann (1875-1955), who said: "It seems to
me that film has very little to do with art".
The French novelist Georges Duhamel
(1884-1966) and many other critics saw film
as a symptom of "Americanization", a vul¬
garization of the European spirit.
As recently as 1961, the American histo¬
rian Daniel J. Boorstin wrote that "Even at
its best, the movie remains a simplifying
medium," and in the present decade, the
outstanding film director Krzysztof Kies-
lowski has said, "The goal is to capture what
lies within. But there's no way of filming it.
Literature can do this, cinema can't. It can't
because it doesn't have the means. It's not
intelligent enough."
How far are these criticisms of cinema
justified?
Stories from the dream factory
At the Lumière brothers' first public
show in Paris on 28 December 1895, a short
film was shown about a boy who teases a
gardener. The naughty boy makes the gar¬
dener spray himself with water and eventu¬
ally gets his deserved retribution. This early
short, L'arroseur arrosé, marks what was to
become the main attraction of film, its
capacity to tell stories in a powerful and
popular way.
The medium started out mainly as a form
of expression based on imitation of theatre
and painting, but gradually it developed a
language and aesthetics of its own. A peak of
cinematic story-telling was reached in 1915,
with the great American director D.W. Grif¬



fith's The Birth of a Nation, a monumental
demonstration of the technical and stylistic
possibilities of the new art form (although,
with its racist depiction of the American
Civil War, it also showed the medium's con¬
troversial potential).
In the 1920s, film developed in relative
isolation from the other arts. While Marcel
Proust and TS. Eliot revolutionized litera-

ture, Picasso, Kandinsky and Duchamp
showed new ways for painting, and
Stravinsky, Schoenberg and Bartok broke up
the tonal system of classical music, the
cinema was mainly trying to establish tech¬
niques of logical storytelling rooted in
Dickens' novels and nineteenth-century
popular fiction and melodrama.
Avant-garde cinema did exist in the 1920s
nonetheless. French experiments in Surre¬
alism and Dadaism, German Expressionism
and the Russian montage style were
attempts to explore new approaches to
cinema as an art. Films like Luis Buñuel's Un-
Chien Andalón, Robert Wienc's The Cab¬
inet of Dr. Caligari and Sergei Eisenstein's
The Battleship Potemkin are considered as
landmarks of cinema and are widely admired
for their originality. But they had little
influence on the mainstream of films.
Meanwhile Hollywood was building an
enormous entertainment industry and, despite
important European counter-currents such as
French Poetic Realism in the 1930s and
Italian neorealism in the 1940s, soon gained
worldwide dominance. The period from the
1930s to the 1950s was the era of classical
Hollywood storytelling, with the "star
system", the "genre system" and the "studio
system" as the main pillars of the dream
factory.
Challenging the system The cinema,
more than any other artistic medium,
depends on acceptance by and money from
the economic system, since the production
costs of a film are so much higher than those
of a book, a painting or a piece of music. As
a result, the "system" has always had more
influence over the cinema than over the other
arts. The history of the cinema records a con¬
tinuous tension between the inertia of the
system, geared to seeking easy money, and
film-makers seeking to fulfil their artistic
ambitions. There is film as art, created by
individualist geniuses who quixotically chal¬
lenged the system, and there is film at the
service of prevailing ideas and values.
The popularity and fascination of film
have been used for art and entertainment,
but abused for manipulation and falsifica¬
tion. Lenin called film "the most important
Peter Schepelern, of
Denmark, is a professor
in the Film and Media
Studies Department at
the University of
Copenhagen. He has
written several books
on film theory and film
history and contributed
film criticism to various
periodicals.
A still from the famous
Odessa Steps sequence
in Sergei Eisenstein's
The Battleship Potemkin
(U.S.S.R., 1925).

7 J tâBI
Alain Resnais's ¿así Year at Marienbad
(France, 1961) with Delphine Seyrig.
WE m m a 1
iafl bT^V
"2fc> 3
Il l 1* ^ä
V
r V ffl »7^1
-* **\ijr
B^^^fc . H t^H ^ta
Michael Curtiz's Casablanca (United States,
1942). From left to right, Humphrey Bogart,
Claude Rains, Paul Henreid and Ingrid
Bergman.
of the arts" (1922), and during the 1930s film
became a political instrument of propaganda
in the hands of the totalitarian regimes
Stalinist Russia, Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy
and Spain. Leni Riefenstahl's Triumph of the
Will alone, in spite of its repugnant deifica¬
tion of Hitler, stands out as an original
work of art. Hollywood answered back with
films glorifying the democratic countries,
their values, their courage and resistance.
New waves and complexities The
first decisive breakthrough made by
cinema into the established culture came after
the Second World War, when a new generation
of film-makers gave form and feeling to the
post-war experience, perhaps more effectively
than their colleagues in the older arts. Vittorio
De Sica's The Bicycle Thief, Federico Fellinis
La Strada, Akira Kurosawa's Rashomon,
Ingmar Bergman's Wild Strawberries, Andrezj
Wajda's Ashes and Diamonds and Satyajit
Ray's Apu trilogy dealt movingly with the
search for humanism in an era of doubt and
shaken beliefs. This was cinema of great drama
and high artistic quality, but it was still largely
conventional and based on the premises of a
literary culture
In the 1960s film art broke new ground,
but remained within the popular mainstream.
The French New Wave films by the humanist
François Truffaut, the misanthropic Claude
Chabrol and the radical Jean-Luc Godard,
and films such as Michelangelo Antonioni's
L'Avventura, Federico Fellini's 8 1/2, Alain
Resnais' Last Year in Marienbad and Ingmar
Bergman's Persona were works that marked a
new modernism. Unlike earlier avant-garde
works, however, they were seen by a wide
general public. Film had finally gained accep¬
tance as an artistic medium.
Great films, contrary to other art forms,
often transcend the conventional distinction
between low and high culture. Virtuoso
Hollywood pieces such as Ernst Lubitsch's
erotic comedies, John Ford's westerns, Max
Ophuls' melodramas and Alfred Hitchcock's
thrillers contain no literary profundities,
but seen as visual art, as examples of pictorial
story-telling, they established a new concept
of film culture. Reluctantly the bastions of
high culture have come to realize that film as
a medium has its own value.
