The road to 1945
by Chikh Bekri
mjmmamÊmm
The long-cherished idea ofcreatingpeace in the minds of
men took form in the watershedyear of1945
UNESCO did not spring forth fully armed, like
Athene from the head of Zeus, out of the
smoking ruins of London one foggy day in
November 1945. As British Prime Minister
Clement Attlee said at the opening session of
the London conference for the establishment
of UNESCO, the idea of an intellectual organiza¬
tion to promote co-operation among the
nations and serve the cause of mutual under¬
standing between the peoples had been around
since the French Revolution or even earlier.
The relationship between culture and peace
has not always been obvious, however. It was
only with the gradual establishment of democ¬
racy in the nineteenth century and the assump¬
tion of responsibility for public education by
the state that the new concepts of the right to
knowledge, equality of opportunity and educa¬
tion for all emerged.
THE PIONEERS
In the late nineteenth century the Dutch educa¬
tionist Herman Molkenboer wrote, with
touching naivety, that "School is therefore the
power to which the future belongs and teachers
are the factors whose joint action should bring
the fruits of the moral order in the universe to
maturity", and the German educator Kurnig
drew up a plan for peace through education.
These forerunners often found themselves
swimming against the tide, without resources
or supporters. At the beginning of the twen¬
tieth century they were drawn largely from
associations of intellectuals and feminists. They
learned to frequent the corridors of power and
to lobby politicians. After the First World War,
the Belgians Henri Lafontaine and Paul Otlet,
fjrjboo oa
¡OOOoOO o o Afj^
who had founded the Union of International
Organisations in 1910, tried without success to
persuade the politicians to create an interna¬
tional organization of intellectual workers.
Fannie Fern Andrews, who established the
American School Peace League in 1908, later
worked on a project for an "International Edu¬
cation Bureau".
But these pioneers of culture for the sake of
peace could not make themselves heard. Prepa¬
ration for war was part of the training of the cit¬
izen, i.e. of culture, which, like education,
remained the exclusive preserve of the state.
The victors of the war made the vanquished
pay dearly for their defeat, while the latter
dreamed only of revenge, and thus the rise of
nationalism was exacerbated by the confidence
that comes from victory and the resentments
that rise from defeat. The maxim "Let him who
desires peace prepare for war" was quoted as a
self-evident truth.
At that time, few countries paid any attention
to intellectual co-operation, which was not
regarded as an important, or even a useful, factor
in international relations. Some governments
even regarded this form of international co¬
operation as suspect. The Covenant of the
League of Nations is silent on the subject of cul¬
ture. Peace remained the preserve of politicians,
diplomats and, in the last resort, the military.
PEACE IN THE MINDS
OF MEN
The Second World War was to change this situ¬
ation and to win acceptance for the idea, set
forth in UNESCO's constitution, that "since wars
begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of
men that the defences of peace must be con¬
structed", that "a peace based exclusively upon
the political and economic arrangements of
governments would not be a peace which could
secure the unanimous, lasting and sincere sup¬
port of the peoples of the world", and that "the
11

peace must therefore be founded, if it is not to
fail, upon the intellectual and moral solidarity of
mankind."
Most of the speeches made at UNESCO's
founding conference took up this theme. The
general atmosphere in London was neither one
of rejoicing in victory over the forces of evil
nor even one of relief at awakening from a
nightmare but rather reflective and subdued.
As Jaime Torres Bodet, who headed the Mex¬
ican delegation and was later to become
UNESCO's second Director-General, put it, "the
gratification of triumph would be madness if we
were to neglect the immediate need of finding
some guarantee against the recurrence of such
perils". The fear of a war that would annihilate
human life on earth was in everyone's mind,
and Archibald MacLeish, the leader of the
United States delegation gave direct expression
to it when he told the delegates: "We must
choose to live together or we must choose,
quite literally, not to live."
CULTURE FOR PEACE
Tribute was also unanimously paid to the
courage shown and the sacrifices made by intel¬
lectuals and to their decisive contribution to the
triumph of democracy. In her opening address,
British Minister of Education Ellen Wilkinson,
who was President of the Conference, referred
to the part intellectuals had played in these
words: "In every land which the totalitarians
overran, it was the intellectual who was picked
out first to face the firing squad teacher,
priest, professor. The men who meant to rule
the world knew that first they must kill those
who tried to keep thought free".
The founding fathers also knew that culture
in itself was not enough to guarantee peace. The
totalitarian ideologies had been thought out by
philosophers before being put into practice by
politicians, and the deadliest weapons whose
devastating effects conference delegates could
see for themselves, in London had been
devised and developed by scientists before
being used by the military.
Knowledge cannot do without morality.
War, even more than a matter of armies, is a
matter of ideologies. As Léon Blum, Associate
President of the Conference, said, the war "has
shown us how education, culture (in the strict
sense) and science itself may be distorted
against the common interests of humanity. . . .
Expansion and perfecting [them] are therefore
not enough. These institutions must be steered
in the direction of that 'ideology' of democracy
and progress which is the psychological condi¬
tion and psychological basis of international sol¬
idarity and peace."
FROM UTOPIA TO
THE CULTURE OF PEACE
The British scientist Julian Huxley, who in 1946
became UNESCO's first Director-General, was
asked to draft a document on the new organiza¬
tion, to which he gave the title UNESCO, its pur¬
pose and its philosophy. The goal that Huxley set
for UNESCO was not only that of près erving the
peace, which is obviously the ultimate aim of
the whole United Nations system, but of con¬
tributing thereby to the fulfilment of humanity,
of those unique beings who have still to explore
and exploit all their possibilities but who are hin¬
dered in so doing by the obstacles they have
themselves raised, in the form of beliefs, ideolo¬
gies, cultures and so forth, which Huxley
regarded as the root cause of the divergences
between them, of conflicts and of wars.
Arguing from the viewpoint of an agnostic
biologist, Huxley was convinced that it was not
by integrating all cultures and all beliefs, with
their differences and contradictions, that
UNESCO could help to usher in peace as
humanity's natural state, since it would be lacking
that which he considered essential, a coherent
overall philosophy in conformity with its ideal.
No philosophical, religious, social, political or
economic system in the world could of itself sat¬
isfy the ultimate purposes of the new organiza¬
tion. The dream of this scientist, whose view of
humanity was both optimistic and Utopian, was
to lay the foundations of an organization that
would "help the peoples of the world to mutual
understanding and to a realisation of the
common humanity and common tasks which
they share, as opposed to the nationalisms which
too often tend to isolate and separate them."
But Huxley's ideas were rejected. Most of
the delegates to the London conference wanted
UNESCO to preserve the diversity of identities
and cultures. As the French jurist René Cassin,
the guiding spirit behind UNESCO's Constitu¬
tion, was to say, summing up the founders'
viewpoint, the new organization should not
"affirm any uniform philosophy, which would
strike a blow at the diversity of thinking, not
only of nations but even of individuals".
NO SCIENCE WITHOUT
CONSCIENCE
What sets UNESCO apart within the United
Nations system is not only its intellectual nature
but above all its moral basis. For the founding
fathers in London, it was above all an ethical
organization operating in a technical field: the
conscience of the world, as Jaime Torres Bodet



liked to call it. Its main task along the hard road to
peace is to contribute to the qualitative improve-
12

i/ream,
by 7-year-old Xiao Han
Qiu (China).


ment of humanity through education, science
and culture, to put the relations between individ¬
uals and peoples on a moral footing, and to help
to establish greater justice, fraternity, under¬
standing and solidarity among them.
Paulo de Berrêdo Carneiro, another emi¬
nent figure in UNESCO's history, insisted that
"We cannot regulate the human forces con¬
ducive to peace save by establishing above
purely political authority a spiritual force
common to all peoples".
NO PEACE WITHOUT
DEVELOPMENT
UNESCO's founders specified in its Constitution
the paths it should follow in order to reach out
towards the peoples, not over the heads of the
states but through those in government. These
paths are followed by educators, scientists,
writers and artists, working under the aegis of
UNESCO National Commissions and their com¬
mittees, within non-governmental organizations,
among the general population, young and old,
within UNESCO Clubs and Associated Schools, in
short, in the whole of civil society and among its
elites a vast field of operations in which to sow
the fragile seed of peace in the minds of men.
But culture alone is not enough, for the
hungry have no ears to hear, and nothing is more
terrible than culture when it makes educated
people aware of their unjust situation as those
whom fate has forgotten. The founding fathers
knew and said these things. Torres Bodet ended
his remarks with the following words: "The
world is waiting for something more than the
delimitation of frontiers and zones of influence,
something more than a system of agreements for
the exploitation and marketing of its products,
something more, in short, than an interim system
of security. It is looking for the establishment of a
new kind of relationship between nations and
between men. Hence the urgency of assigning a
common denominator to its development. And
that common denominator can be supplied only
by the moral solidarity of mankind acting through
knowledge and on the basis of education.
CHIKH BEKRI,
of Algeria, was an Assistant Director-General of Unesco
from 1976 to 1987. He is the author of L'Unesco: 'une
entreprise erronée '? (Publisud, Paris, 1991).
13
