Why is the Beijing Conference being
held?
It is the fourth in a series of major inter¬
national conferences on women, the first of



which took place just twenty years ago in
Mexico City during International Women's
Year. Thirty-six thousand women are
expected to participate in the Forum of
Non-Governmental Organizations that
will be held from 30 August to 8 September,
and from five to ten thousand people will
attend the official conference from 4 to 15
September.
The Conference is a sign that "women's
issues" are gradually ceasing to be seen in iso¬
lation and are coming to be regarded as of
concern to the whole of society, with their
dimensions of justice, human rights and
human resource development. They are
issues of concern to men as well as women.
If the questions that have been raised at
meetings of UNESCO's Consultative Com¬
mittee on Women are anything to go by the
delegates will have plenty to do. Those
questions have focused on issues relating to
tolerance, respect for individual rights,
freedom of opinion and expression, and
the fight against illiteracy and poverty.
These are all matters that call for radical
change, and we hope that the Conference
will be an opportunity to take a step in
that direction.
What progress has been made in the
last twenty years?
In many parts of the world there have
been reductions in infant and maternal mor¬
tality, improvements in nutrition and
hygiene, increasing life expectancy, increased
school enrolments and female rates of adult
literacy, but the fact is that these social gains
are unequally shared. The gap between the
rich and poor is widening, both between and
within countries. Wide gender-disparities
prevail, more and more of the world's poor
are female, and discrimination and violence
against women continue.
The situation of the majority of the
world's women therefore seems to be dete¬
riorating, especially in the least developed
countries. In sub-Saharan Africa, they bear
the brunt of cuts in social welfare policies

THE ROAD TO BEIJING
THE FOURTH WORLD CONFERENCE ON WOMEN
Ingeborg Breines, Special Adviser on Women, Gender and Development to the Director General of UNESCO, .
talks to the UNESCO Courier.
induced by structural adjustment pro¬
grammes. Around half a million women
still die each year from pregnancy-related
causes, most of them in the developing
countries.
But much also still remains to be done
in the most "democratic" countries, espe¬
cially in politics. The average proportion of
women in positions of political responsi¬
bility is less than 10 per cent. In working
life, statistics show that women work far
longer while often receiving much lower
wages than men, either because they work
part-time, because they do low-paid jobs in
the informal sector or simply because they
are paid less than men for equal work.
Women's work barely figures in official
economic statistics and is therefore seri¬
ously underestimated. This also hampers
women's access to credit.
H What can be done in concrete terms?
From UNESCO's point of view, access to
knowledge and quality education for girls
and women is the most important key to
women's empowerment and to their full
enjoyment of human rights. At present
nearly two-thirds of the world's illiterate
are girls and women. One out of three
adult women in the world today cannot
read or write. In most parts of the world,
girls are under-represented at every school
level. In general, their representation
lessens the higher one rises in the educa¬
tional system. The obstacles appear early
on: economic constraints, son preference,
distance from school, early marriage and
teenage pregnancy.
Unless the world community targets
female illiteracy and commits itself more
profoundly to removing the obstacles to
girls' and women's access to good quality
education and training, this gender gap will
continue to exist. This is one of the twelve
critical areas that form part of the Platform
for Action to be adopted at Beijing.
What are the other main issues that will
be raised?
They range from the increasing burden
of poverty on women, to inequalities in
health care, violence, inequalities between
men and women in power-sharing and
decision-making, the promotion of uni¬
versal human rights, women and the media,
women and the environment and the situ¬
ation of girl children.
Has everything been decided before¬
hand and will the Conference simply meet
and rubber-stamp an agreed programme?
Shortly before the Conference opens,
there is still no consensus on large and vital
parts of the Draft Platform. The most con¬
troversial issues relate to women's health, in
particular women's reproductive health,
and the human rights of women. The main
confrontation is not between North and
South, as was the case at the case ten years
ago in Nairobi, but between fundamen¬
talist groups of different religions and the
women's human rights movement.
9 What are you hoping will come out of
the Conference?
So much remains to be done. Take the
question of development, for instance,
which has been a main theme of all the
women's conferences since 1975. Whilst
development must always be rooted in its
given social and cultural context, it has
become legitimate to question traditions,
norms, practices, cosmologies and religious
customs that are based on the hypothesis of
male superiority and that obstruct equality,
especially at a time when traditional patri¬
archal ideas on women's place in society are
gaining force.
We hope that the Conference will refine
our understanding of the mechanisms of
discrimination, exclusion and violence
through the findings of research and through
the unique experience and struggle of
women. We hope that the participants will
commit themselves politically and finan¬
cially to the goals of the Conference, thereby
providing an important incentive to trans¬
form societies away from the culture of vio¬
lence and towards the building of a culture
of peace. Such a culture can only be achieved
within the context of equality between
women and men, acknowledging that nei¬
ther is in any way morally, spiritually or
intellectually superior to the other.
