From pictograms to pinyin
by Rinnie Tang-Loaec and Pierre Colombel
The Chinese still use a form of writing that originated well over
3,000 years ago
14
RINNIE TANG-LOAEC,
of France, was formerly an
ethnologist at the Musée de
l'Homme in Paris. She is co¬
author (with Léo Landsman) of
Le mouvement qui apaise, a
book about Chinese boxing (Epi,
Paris, 1984).
PIERRE COLOMBEL,
a French specialist in cave
paintings with his country's
National Centre for Scientific
Research (CNRS), is attached to
the Musée de l'Homme in Paris.
A very old tradition has it that writing
consists of more or less figurative signs
which represent beings and objects or evoke
natural phenomena.
A popular legend tells how Fu-Hsi, who
introduced laws to China and is regarded as the
mythical inventor of Chinese writing, drew
inspiration from the claw marks left by birds in
the snow.
A more sophisticated version of the same
legend is to be found in a text dating from the
T'ang dynasty (618-907) in which the author
recounts that Fu-Hsi had four eyes so that he
could watch the earth and sky simultaneously.
Observation of the Kui constellation in the sky
and of the marks of birds and tortoises on the
earth inspired him to develop writing.
From the early days of Chinese writing, dif¬
ferent types of signs appeared and went on to
evolve and become the "keys" to the system.
The basic elements which lie at the origin of
this script are iconic. The most ancient known
forms are human figures painted or engraved on
rock faces, for instance in the rock art sites in the.
Yinshan Mountains of inner Mongolia.
With the passage of time, these simple pic¬
tograms gradually became more stylized. From
them developed ideograms, which arc combina¬
tions of two or three pictographic signs depicting
actions, basic ideas and more complex notions.
The notion of light, for example, is a combination
of signs depicting the sun and the moon.
In modern writing, characters developed
out of these pictograms are few and far between,

Legend has it that the mythical
inventor of Chinese script took
the idea from animal tracks in the
snow. Facing page, tracks made
by turtles in the sand.
Right, three families of Chinese
characters.
Xiangxing: characters representing forms. Initially schematic, they developed by stages into conventional
signs.
initial early modem
woman s f^ . "Jt
heart ^ 'Ù
mountain |nl UJ |i|
Zi-shi: characters representing a state, an idea or an act. The meaning of these characters is more abstract and is
expressed by suggestion.
initial early modern
above or on
beneath or under 7
Hueyl: a category of characters based on a combination of two or three elements from the preceding categories. The char¬
acter for "confidence" is a combination of the character for "man" and the character for "word". The character for
"autumn", the season when straw turns golden in the fields, is composed of the characters for "cereal straw" and "fire".
The same autumn sign placed above a heart means "sadness".
but they constitute the "radicals" or "keys"
forming the basis for the classification of char¬
acters in dictionaries which was to remain in
use until the creation in the 1950s of the pinyin
system for the phonetic transcription of Chinese
characters into the Roman alphabet.
The appearance of a Chinese script enabling
texts to be written dates back to the transitional
period between the Hsia (twenty-second to
eighteenth centuries B.C.) and Shang (eigh¬
teenth to eleventh centuries B.C.) dynasties.
This was the time when a hierarchy became
established in Chinese society and the power of
the state was solidly based.
N atural selection
Archaeological discoveries have so far enabled
an inventory to be compiled of some 4,000 char¬
acters engraved on more than 10,000 pieces of
material tortoise shells and flat bones that
were used both for divinatory purposes and
also to record events or draw up inventories.
These ancient characters retrace the genesis and
evolution of Chinese writing. More than a thou¬
sand of them have so far been identified. They
are in a sense "stenographic drawings" which are
schematized and obey a strict rule: a word and
its expression correspond to each character.
In the Shang period, this type of writing,
which was the outcome of a long period during
which the characters had changed, was already
in current use, but not all the characters cre¬
ated in this way were in fact retained. Some
which were difficult to communicate, had little
significance or were hard to memorize, were
destined to disappear. Others on the contrary
which more effectively evoked specific con¬
cepts and were more widely accessible, became
the first elements of a script used by a people
who shared the same cultural background.
Chinese writing thus consisted originally of
simple, stylized forms (pictograms) or combi
nations of pictograms which evoked an action or
a concept. It might be said that, at its birth, this
writing was created independently of the lan¬
guage and that the equivalence which exists
today with the spoken word is the outcome of
a long process of natural evolution.
These divinatory inscriptions on
bone are among the earliest
known traces of Chinese writing
(16th-llth centuries B.C.)
15
