A new beginning
by Federico Mayor
FEDERICO MAYOR
is Director-General of Unesco.
For many years world events moved slowly
because the two super-powers took all the
decisions, and it seemed that the rest of the
world had been side-tracked away from deci¬
sion-making. Now, suddenly, we realize that
we are facing new threats for which we are
unprepared overpopulation, poverty, intol¬
erance, the knowledge gap and the inability of
different ethnic groups and cultures to live
together.
The Secretary-General of the United
Nations recently offered some ideas for con¬
sideration in his Agenda for Peace. The
Agenda for Peace has two main facets: peace¬
keeping and peace-building.
PEACE-KEEPING AND
PEACE-BUILDING
Peace-keeping is at the very core of the UN
mandate. It is implemented by the Security
Council. Peace-building, on the other hand,
is a more complex and long-term preventive
activity to which all UN institutions and spe¬
cialized agencies must contribute. We are
sometimes successful at peace-keeping, but
as yet we arc unprepared for peace-building.
We are used to relying on force, and our
budgets make provisions for the armed forces
and their weaponry. Our war machines exist
because we think that the hawkish inclinations
of others can only be discouraged by our own
capacity for destruction.
Some of today's peace-keeping operations
require an investment of 1.5 billion dollars.
Meanwhile, it is impossible to raise even 30
million dollars for peace-building operations
because the latter do not yet fit into our order
of priorities and therefore do not form part of
our budgets.
This is not a new situation. To take one
example, we are willing to provide 526 million
dollars in food aid to fight the effects of
drought in Africa, but all this money remains
in the North because that is where the indus¬
tries that provide the food are located and so
are the aircraft and ships that transfer it. But
when we ask for a million dollars for endoge¬
nous capacity-building, to provide stricken
countries with intensive learning pro¬
grammes so that they can be better prepared
for future droughts, we get a flat refusal.
Why? Because we are not ready to provide
that kind of peace-building operation.
Peace-building means taking preventive
action. Not only must we be prepared to act
when a conflict has broken out; we must also
be able to detect warning signals early enough
to nip conflicts in the bud. Just as we have
smoke detectors in buildings, so we should
have an early-warning system that would
enable us to act in time, before conflagrations
occur.
The problem is that preventive activities
attract neither recognition nor thanks. If a
conflict does not break out, nobody is going
to congratulate you for having prevented it.
The same thing happens in medicine. If you
prevent an epidemic or stop a disease from
spreading, parents are not going to come
along and thank you for protecting their chil¬
dren, for the simple reason that there has
been no outbreak of disease. If a surgeon
removes a tumour, the operation is
applauded as an achievement of modern

medicine. But if you manage to avoid surgery,
no one will congratulate you. Decorations go
to generals who win minor battles, not to
those who avoid major wars. Preventive
action produces intangible results; and we
have not yet learned to invest in intangibles.
We are only used to tangible results that
can be splashed across newspapers or televi¬
sion screens. If nothing happens and this is
exactly what we want no one will accept
that we are in any way responsible. We must
be prepared to use the media to inform
public opinion about how important it is to
take preventive- measures to stop problems
from degenerating into conflict. In other
words to establish peace in hearts and minds.
In culture.
EVERYBODY'S BUSINESS
With the growing power of civil society, the
situation has rarely been more propitious.
Every action, even the most trivial, counts.
Creating a culture of peace is now every¬
body's business. Peace can no longer be
regarded as an agreement between the pow¬
erful, as a state of grace that sometimes
descends on a lucky country. It is a social
condition to which every citizen can con¬
tribute at every moment.
It would of course be ridiculous to deny
that this condition depends largely on deci¬
sions that only politicians can take. But the
opportunities for individual and collective
action on behalf of peace are certainly greater
than is usually thought. The cause of peace
must be defended in everyday life at home,
at school, in the workplace, in parliaments
and cafés. Independent actions can interact
and strengthen one another. In this way we
shall gradually move from a culture condi¬
tioned by centuries of war to a culture
existing in the name of peace.
The supreme expression of a society's cul¬
ture is the behaviour of its members in their
everyday lives. The framework of justice,
dignity, equality and solidarity which is what I
mean by the term "culture of peace" will be
built, day in day out, by way of such behav¬
iour, at last free from all interference and con¬
straint.
Constructing
the defences of
peace is not an
exercise in damage
limitation but a
preventive effort
to which every
citizen can
contribute
Left, The dream of an angel,
by 8-year-old Gao Yan (China).
