INTERVIEW



RÉGIS
DEBRAY
talks to
Daniel Bougnoux
The French philosopher, essayist and novelist Régis Debray, who was
born in 1941, is one of the most brilliant thinkers of his generatioa A grad¬
uate of the prestigious Ecole Normale Supérieure, in 1967 he joined Che
Guevara's guerrilla movement in Latin America, which led to three
years' imprisonment in a Bolivian jail. Back in France, he worked on the
Committee for Studies on Freedom established by François Mitterrand
who, after being elected President of France in 1981, appointed him for¬
eign affairs adviser and later assigned him to a post with special
responsibilities for the Third World. Régis Debray's studies of the
world of images, carried out over the last ten years, have led to the devel¬
opment of a new discipline called mediology. His main works on this
theme are Cours de médiologie générale (1991), Vie et mort de l'image,
une histoire du regard en Occident (1992) and Manifestes médiologiques
(1994), all published by Gallimard, Paris.
You have proposed a new discipline
with a rather enigmatic namemediology.
What exactly is mediology?
Mediology is a discipline that is still on
the drawing board. It seeks to examine the
relationship between the higher social func¬
tions (religion, politics, ideology and mental
attitudes) and the technical structures used
for the transmission of information. It there¬
fore looks further than the media that actu¬
ally carry information. It is concerned first
and foremost with symbolic effectiveness:
how do symbols words, writing and fig¬
ures manage to produce specific effects
and become material forces in a given
society? Communication in the modern
sense of the term is a specific, if belated,
response to a much more difficult and per
manent issue, that of mediation. This is a
fundamental notion which has been at the
heart of Christian theology. After all, Christ
is the archetypal mediator: "And the word
was made flesh". The mcdiological assump¬
tion is that it is possible for each period in
history from the neolithic or the invention
of writing to the electronic era to establish
verifiable correlations between the sym¬
bolic activities of a human group, its forms
of political organization and its method of
recording, storing and disseminating
"traces" (ideograms, letters, characters,
sounds and images).
Could you define the field of mediology
and its neighbouring areas rather more
precisely?
The field of mediology? All the interac¬
tions between technology and culture, even
the most tenuous and minor such as
newsprint or radio waves but also trans¬
port networks, the organization charts of
churches and political parties, and so on. The
neighbouring areas of mediology? Semi¬
ology, but semiology does not take account
of material supports and historical discon¬
tinuities and is not interested in power, but
only in the meaning of signs. Sociology,
which does take account of the environ¬
ments in which ideas and images are
received, but disdains technical events and
the impact of all kinds of equipment. Per¬
haps our closest neighbour is the history of
mental attitudes, because a problem cannot
be analysed without looking at the period in

'Leading journalists, singers
and stars have become
strong competitors of
teachers as poles of
authority, and the small
screen is becoming a more
important centre of learning
than the traditional school.'
which it occurs. Mediology is built up from
a multitude of empirical works centring on
the materialities of culture.
In this context, what is the role of the
state?
The European nation-state is a child of the
printed word (without which mass education
was inconceivable). In France, the Revolu¬
tion created a state with a mission to educate,
the Republic, based on the ideas of Con-
dorcet. The cult of knowledge and reason,
subordination of the individual to the general
form of the law, order and progress all of
that presupposed control of images by
writing. This system continued to function
until around 1968 when it was destroyed
by the new video techniques the
videosphere. In the videosphere, the impor¬
tance of symbolic (written) and institutional
(parliament, political parties, trade unions)
mediations is diminished, and they are
replaced by the emotional immediacy of
images and sound. Direct broadcasts take
precedence over recordings, the short-term
over the long-term; visible personalities dom¬
inate invisible policies (which cannot be
shown on a screen).
This spells the end of party programmes
and official grand designs. The media state
is programmed by the broadcasting
machine, to whose ideology it subscribes.
Inherent in this ideology are the atomiza-
tion of the social body into categories to the
detriment of the general interest; the wor¬
ship of majorities and consensus; the ele¬
vation of usage to a norm (since the prin¬
cipal social use of the written word is
newspaper reading, let us teach school¬
children to read newspapers); the need to
fabricate events and create sensations. Pri¬
vatization of the state is accompanied by
market-oriented government: the customer
is king; government follows the vagaries
of social demand. The logic of demand
overturns the logic of supply. Each ministry
is guided by its "communicators".
Do these new technologies threaten or
enrich education today? How are our
memory and knowledge evolving in the
era of multi-channel TV, home computers,
CD-ROM and data banks?
Leading journalists, singers and stars
have become strong competitors of
teachers as poles of authority, and the small
screen is becoming a more important centre
of learning than the traditional school.
This is a very serious trend because knowl¬
edge cannot be reduced to knowing facts.
Knowledge is more than mere informa¬
tion; culture bears within it the memory of
meaning, it is more than today's news blot¬
ting out recollection of the past. The mes¬
sage recorded in a text has more content
than a live broadcast of images and sounds.
So it would be wrong to suppose that
an image culture can dispense with the
need for the rigours of discursive and
abstract thinking. At heart it presupposes
their existence. An aerial photograph will
be meaningless to an observer who does
not have some experience of archaeology.
Unless we teach children to read at least a
little, we cannot teach them to see. If we
place the broadcasting of messages above
the training of the human mind, we are
putting the cart before the horse.
The problem is that a basic course in
musical notation brings less credit to a
government leader today than the inau¬
guration of a new music festival which will
receive wide press coverage. But the former
is more essential to the development of
musical culture than the latter. It seems to
me that the traditional library of books is
the best path towards the video library,
whereas the reverse is not the case. Those
who replace history lessons by showing
historical films on video cassettes in the
classroom are merely helping to bring
supply and demand a little further into
line in the cultural sphere.
Having said that, the real problem, or
rather its pedagogical solution, is the com¬
puter. The computer should be capable of
enhancing the role of distance education at
university level, of providing continuing
education for adults and of offering greater
equality of access to knowledge.
What about the idea of the global vil¬
lage, of which so much has been made
since McLuhan?
The missing dimension of the McLuhan-
style global village is what I would call the
"jogging effect". With the invention of the
motor vehicle, the futurologists of 1910 said
that town-dwellers stuck in their little box
on wheels would soon be unable to use their
legs. But when urban man stopped walking,
he began to run instead. As the objects of our
planet become increasingly globalized, so its
subjects are more and more tribalized. Each
step forward towards the economic unifi¬
cation of the world is accompanied, through
a process of compensation, by a step back¬
wards in the cultural and political spheres.
Technology does of course oblige us to stan¬
dardize the media and so also to some extent
the messages carried by them. But the dif¬
ferences in mental outlooks and memory
rise up in opposition to that trend. Each
imbalance created by a new form of tech¬
nical progress is accompanied by a reshaping
of the ethnic balance. Hence the confusion
between the process of European unification
and a phenomenon of Balkanization,
between the progress of science and the
advance of superstition, between economic
imperatives and territorial aspirations.
Our village, which is both increasingly
global and narrow-mindedly patriotic
the one because of the other lives in an age
of nationalism, separatism, irredentism and
tribalism, the dark faces of which are called

segregation, war and xenophobia. The cen¬
trifugal forces which are threatening to frag¬
ment the great multinational states do not
spare the centralized countries of Europe
with their very old "civilizations".
What do you feel about what has been
called "the cultural exception", the idea
that cultural products should be given
some form of special protection from glob¬
alized free trade?
The purpose of the cultural exception is
to prevent the Spanish, Brazilian, Argen¬
tine, Canadian, Indian and other cinemas
from being relegated to a ghetto, turned
into folklore and confined to a small local
market of 10 per cent the sop given by the
imperial power to the cause of fringe enter¬
tainment. The survival of the people
without a voice and without images is at
stake here, whatever their language may be.
'The traditional library of
books is the best path
towards the video library,
whereas the reverse is not
the case.'
The real question is this: are we entitled
today to allow several different visions of
the world to circulate or just one? And if
we do want more than one, are we pre¬
pared to make the necessary resources
available with public aid for production, a
redistribution of profits and broadcasting
quotas?
Edison once said that "whoever con¬
trols the cinema industry will control the
most powerful means of influencing the
people." Today, he would have to say: all
peoples. The image governs our dreams and
dreams govern our actions. Political hege¬
mony always presupposes the destruction of
different outlooks. The cultural proletariza-
tion of three-quarters of all mankind is liable
to give rise in the twenty-first century to
even more resolute and numerous rebels
than the economic proletarians of the nine¬
teenth century. Is the whole planet to be
converted into a supermarket where the peo¬
ples will have no choice between the local
ayatollah and Coca-Cola? Natives versus
yuppies: this is a split that exists in all coun¬
tries. Let us heed the warning and see to it
that the soul of the minority cultures,
drowned under the waves of uniform images
and sounds and deprived of any outlet for
self-expression, does not look for a way out
in the worst forms of indigenist or funda¬
mentalist regression.
