The African cinema
aston Kabore
Without firm economic and
cultural roots in the soil of its
own continent, African cinema
faces an uphill struggle for
survival
In the last twenty years the number of
festivals, retrospectives, film weeks and
special shows devoted to African
cinema has increased steadily in western
Europe as a whole, and nowhere more
remarkably than in France. That success
needs to be set against the sad fact that it is
extremely difficult to see African films in
Africa.
The number of film festivals organized
in Africa itself can be counted on the fingers
of one hand. The hundred-odd features
produced annually in African countries
(including Egypt) account for less than 0.1
per cent of films released for commercial exhi¬
bition. It is the congenital fragility of the
African cinema which, paradoxically, is
responsible for its extraordinary success out¬
side the continent.

in crisis
;. *
Aoua Sangaré in
Souleymane Cissé's
Yeelen ("The Light",
Mali, 1987).
1

A young face from
Gaston Kaboré's Wênd
Kuuni ("The Gift of
God", 1982).
ACultural fashion The African film
industry has no economic or cultural
foundations at home, and so is under the



control of people who organize events
devoted to African cinema in Europe and in
North America and who, although they
are convinced and sincere champions of
African film, tend to live in a dream world.
Only a few of them have any real idea of
what is really involved in promoting such
films through a festival. There is often a great
deal of confusion in people's minds when it
comes to concrete questions such as media
impact, the creation of a real public, back-up
and distribution.
African directors are of course under no
obligation to respond to the many invita¬
tions they receive from abroad. But they are
independent film-makers, whose isolation
and lack of funding encourage them to look
where they can outside Africa for the recog¬
nition they so much need. For many direc¬
tors from the Maghreb or sub-Saharan
Africa, an air ticket to or via Paris is often
the crucial factor in their decision to take
part in a festival. But the proliferation of fes¬
tivals is not in itself enough to give the
African cinema the commercial value it is
entitled to expect.
No one knows when African films will
go out of fashion. And if and when they do,
what will be left of the African cinema?
Little-known, and treated like a foreign
product on its own territory, the African
cinema seems to have lost its way. It is in
danger of yielding to the first siren voices that
come from the North. Moreoever, given its
financial dependence on Europe at produc¬
tion level, the worst scenario is to be feared
a total extroversion of a cinema with no roots
of its own. That makes it all the more urgent
to root the African cinema in its own soil.
Idrissa Ouedraogo's Yam
Daabo ("The Choice",
Burkina Faso, 1986).

airroring African society But how
I V lean that be done when Africa boasts less
than one cinema seat per 100,000 inhabitants,
when ticket prices produce such low returns,
and when the whole of the film industry is so
disastrously disorganized? Attempts have
been made to remedy this situation. A wel¬
come step was the setting up of the Consor¬
tium Inter-Africain de Distribution Ciné¬
matographique (CIDC), a common market
of film covering ten French-speaking countries
which was in operation from 1979 to 1985. It
went bankrupt when vital economic and pro¬
fessional considerations were ignored under
the pressure of political and administrative
constraints. The CIDC raised tremendous
hopes among professional film-makers in
Africa. Its failure left them in a state of shock,
and raised doubts as to whether African states
genuinely wanted regional integration.
Few countries continue to show any
interest in combining to create a single film
distribution market. Yet national markets
remain too small for companies to be able to
cover their production costs. The only answer
is to set up regional structures. The still infant
African cinema has already been seriously
jeopardized by the arrival of satellite dishes.
Sadly, many countries will doubtless see this
as a welcome excuse for doing nothing. On the
contrary, the present situation makes the need
to turn back the tide all the more urgent.
With a multitude of images now being
beamed into people's homes, it is more than
ever necessary to produce endogenous images
that will perform the vital function of mir¬
roring African peoples, their societies and
their concerns.
Gaston Kaboré,
of Burkina Faso, is the
director of Wend Kuuni
(The Gift of God), which
won a French César
award in 1985, Zan Boko
(1988) and Rabi (1992).
Since 1985 he has
headed the Pan-African
Federation of Film
Makers, a professional
organization that
promotes the
development of the art
of film and the film
industry in Africa.
Sembène Ousmane's
Guelwaar, An African
Legend ofAfrica in the
21st Century (Senegal,
1991).
1
