anniversary F U Z U L I
poet ofdivine love
FuzuLi, whose real name was
Muhammad ibn Süleyman, is thought
to have been born in 1495 in a small town
in the region of Baghdad, Karbala or per¬
haps Najaf, where he served in his youth as
keeper of the tomb of Caliph Ali. Later, he
moved to Baghdad which he only left in
his old age to make a pilgrimage to Kar¬
bala where he died, probably from the
plague. He never saw Tabriz, Anatolia or
India, which were so dear to his heart, just
as he was never to become poet to the Court
of Istanbul.
Although he won a high reputation
among his contemporaries, earning for
himself the tide "prince ofpoets", he spent
his life torn between impossible dreams of
travel and glory and a relatively mundane
daily routine. He wrote many odes in
honour of potential patrons, singing the
merits of Shah Ismail, founder of the Per¬
sian Safavid dynasty, who conquered
Baghdad in 1508, and then hymned the
brilliant exploits of the Ottoman Sultan
Süleyman the Magnificent, who became
lord ofBaghdad in 1534. But all these eulo¬
gies brought him little profit. Worldly
goods and honours were always to elude
this poet "whom God had destined for
misfortune". Only love was left for him.
_ "I have spoken of love and so it would
W be unfitting to complain," he wrote, sum-
The Ufe of Fuzuli (c. 1495-1556),
whom Arabs, Persians and
Turks alike acknowledge as one
of their greatest mystical poets,
is an enigma. Apart from a few
details contained in a
1 7th-century Turkish
biography (from which the
portrait, left, is taken) which
describes him as a jovial and
pleasant man, all we know
about him is what we can
deduce from his work.
marizing the essential features of his life
and work: an incessant quest for true love
whose paths are known only to poetry.
But what is the true nature ofsuch love
that is apparently capable of compen¬
sating for so much solitude and sorrow? In
the true mystic tradition, Fuzuli sees the
human being as a projection or "witness"
ofGod. His love for his fellow (whose name
and sex are never revealed) is so sublime
that it transcends physical love, whose
fleeting nature is constantly denounced
by the poet. Metaphorical love is seen as a
bridge towards true love, the love of God.
Fuzuli demonstrates this in one ofhis
major works, a verse novel inspired by the
old Arab legend ofLeyla and Mejnun. Fol¬
lowing a galaxy of Persian and Turkish
authors, he turned to the subject of this
lyrical epic and used it as an opportunity
to deploy his own ethic and philosophy
of sublime love.
The history of the two lovers lent itself
well to that purpose. Ever since his ear¬
liest childhood, Qaïs Ibn Mulawwah, nick¬
named Mejnun because he was possessed
by djinns, had loved Leyla, a daughter of
his tribe to whom he dedicated ardent
poems. But Leyla's parents refused to give
her to him as his wife. The poet lost his
mind and his beloved was married to
another man. The reasons for the parental
refusal and descriptions of the fate ofLeyla
differ from one author to another.1 But
everyone agrees that Mejnun, who was
smitten by this impossible love, went out
into the desert to die, with wild beasts as
his sole companions.
Fuzuli dramatizes the plot to an
extreme degree. He suggests that Leyla's
father saw the feverish verses of the young
suitor as an attack on his daughter's
honour. Mejnun is therefore condemned
to madness and death precisely for having
sung his love. Married to another man,
Leyla went on to die of sorrow.
In Fuzuli 's work, the love of these two
young people which would be termed
platonic in the West and "udhrit" in the
East (a reference to the Yemeni tribe of
the Banu Udhra whose poets are dedi¬
cated to this fatal form of love) embodies
the ideal of passion pushed beyond
human limits and rejecting all form of
physical fulfillment. Fuzuli also uses it to
illustrate the sacrifice which such a passion
calls for: instead of trying to forget his dis¬
tress, Mejnun implores God to make his
love grow stronger so that his suffering
may exceed the bounds ofanything that a
human being can bear. At the same time
Leyla deliberately succumbs to a fatal
sorrow and "melts like a candle held too
close to the fire".
Love, which haunted Fuzuli all his life,
did not prevent him from writing about
many other issues, ranging from theology
to medicine, ethics and astronomy. Set
out in a number of diwans (or collections),
some 700 ghazals (short lyrical poems)
and a hundred or so qasida (elegiac
poems) written in Azeri Turkish and in
Persian, and the dozen surviving qasida'm
Arabic all bear witness to a great wealth of
inspiration. A passionate lyricism, an acute
sense of humour, a profusion of images
and a dionysiac impulse provided a sen¬
sual counterpoint to his learned
researches. They also inspired him with a
power of evocation and an emotional
charge which have remained intact for
500 years.
	^S.
1 See "Why Ulysses?" by Mahmoud Hussein
in the Unesco Courier, April 1993, pp. 34-36.
