PRONASOL:
Mexico's bid to fight
by Jaime Marques-Pereira
poverty
Above, fetching water in a
Mexico City suburb.
I Pronasol, the National Solidarity Pro¬
gramme launched by the Mexican gov¬
ernment in 1989, is regarded in many quarters as
a model in the fight against poverty. It has three
priorities: to improve the living conditions of the
rural population, the Indians and people living
in working-class urban districts; to promote
regional development and create the produc¬
tive basis for a higher standard of living; and to
strengthen the participation of social organiza¬
tions and local authorities in development.
It is guided by two principles. It seeks, firstly, 23

A demonstration for peace and
human rights in Mexico's
Chiapas state, January 1994.
24
JAIME MARQUES-PEREIRA,
a Belgian sociologist and
economist, is a lecturer in
economics at the Institute of
Advanced Latin American
Studies (IHEAL) in Paris. He is
the author of "Le développement
est-il dans l'impasse?", a study
which appeared in Amérique
latine 19e et 20* siècles,
Territoire et héritages (Armand
Colin, Paris, 1993), a collective
work edited by Hélène Rivière
d'Arc.
to concentrate public action on extreme poverty
and, secondly, to make contracts with the social
groups concerned so that they can share the
costs and assume administrative responsibility
for social projects carried out jointly.
The aim is to limit and reduce the costs of
social intervention by the state, but above all to
make this aid more effective and more equi¬
table. After 1981, economic management
marked by an increase in external debt led to the "
worsening of inequalities and poverty in Mexico.
Between 1981 and 1987, the number of poor
people rose by 9.2 million and the number of the
extremely poor by 3.6 million (the population
increased by 9.8 million in the same period).
While unemployment and underemployment
among the active population rose (from 12.8
per cent to 29 per cent between 1982 and 1989),
social expenditure decreased.
Nobody denies the beneficial effects that
Pronasol may have on social infrastructures,
but it seems doubtful whether it can eliminate
poverty. All the same, it remains a valuable
supplementary policy which has the merit of
stabilizing the number of poor people, if not the
ranks of the extremely poor. Will it be enough
to prevent outbreaks of popular discontent?
By responding after the event to the deteriora¬
tion of poverty and inequalities, the state is
acting as a social fire brigade. The shocks stem¬
ming from economic liberalization measures
and the resulting trade deficit are paralyzing
the resumption of growth. The Chiapas upris¬
ings may simply mark the beginning of a
broader movement.
Little room for manoeuvre
PronasoFs record shows how narrow is the



path, for all Latin American governments, which
reconciles opening up the economy with polit¬
ical democratization. The priority given to the
fight against extreme poverty soon proved inef¬
fectual without an economic recovery that
would improve the distribution of income by
raising levels of employment and earnings and
providing room for manoeuvre to finance social
expenditure.
The Mexican case seems to be particularly
significant. The fight against extreme poverty
which is waged on a broad and deep front in this
society (this is not just a pilot experiment of
the kind that can be observed in some other
Third World countries) also reflects the limits

'An effective fight against poverty
must be accompanied by a return
to economic growth.'
encountered by all reform in the direction of lib¬
eralization. A social policy of this kind is no
remedy for extreme poverty; at best, it helps to
integrate people who are excluded from the
social protection linked to paid employment.
Certainly this is a "consolidation" of democ¬
racy which extends citizenship to a growing
percentage of the population. One of the most
original features of Pronasol is that its corner¬
stone consists of more than 80,000 "solidarity
committees" which put forward requests for
action and follow them up. Through their num¬
bers and the flexibility of their organization,
they provide a new sphere of collective decision¬
making open to those who have hitherto taken
no part in the corporative structures which con¬
trol the distribution of social benefits. The inno¬
vative feature is the room for manoeuvre open
to community leaders, who can either use these
structures or not, as they see fit.
The distribution of Pronasol's financial
resources establishes a direct link between the
central government and local authorities. Many
analysts believe that Pronasol points the way to
a kind of neo-corporatism which could mod¬
ernize clientelism by giving it roots not only in
the trade unions, as in the past, but also at the ter¬
ritorial level and by giving political weight to the
new social actors who have emerged from the
neighbourhood associations.
Pronasol thus reflects a remarkable social
opening. All the parties agree that it is evidence
of a new political determination to broaden the
social base of the state. But it is clear today that
it guarantees neither social peace nor the tran¬
sition to democracy. What some observers had
called the "Mexican model to recover from
crisis" is certainly not a panacea.
With the passage of time, the limits of
Pronasol have become clear. An effective fight
against poverty must be accompanied by a
return to economic growth. But it is hard to
imagine how growth could resume without
more resolute public intervention designed to
improve the job situation and wages, thus revi¬
talizing the domestic market. Social policy must
be the spearhead of a development strategy that
lives up to its promises.

