GREENWATCH
Turkey, land of
diversity
by France Bequette
Right, a
"spontaneous"
settlement in
Ankara.
FRANCE
BEQUETTE
is a Franco-
American
journalist
specializing in
environmental
questions.
Apeninsula 1,565 long and 550 km
wide, Turkey has an extraordi¬
nary diversity of natural habi¬
tats and a correspondingly rich animal
and plant life. It shares borders with
Syria, the former Soviet Union, Iran,
Iraq, Bulgaria and Greece, and its 8,372
kilometres of coastline are washed by
the Mediterranean, the Aegean, the Sea
of Marmara and the Black Sea. All kinds
of terrain are found in Turkey: moun¬
tains, especially in central and eastern
Anatolia, with an average altitude of
1 ,250 metres, plateaux, fertile plains and
extensive beaches. The climate is equally
varied. The Mediterranean seaboard has
dry, warm summers and rainy winters,
while central Anatolia has a raw, dry
continental climate.
Turkey's population increased from
13.7 million in 1927 to 37.3 million in
1991 and may reach 70 million by the
year 2000. As part of a massive and con¬
tinuing east-west migratory trend, rural
populations are moving into the cities,
especially those on the coast. Today 59
per cent of Turks live in cities, particu¬
larly Ankara, Istanbul and Izmir, and
this is giving rise to serious environ¬
mental problems. Istanbul, straddling
the Bosphorus with one foot in Europe
and one in Asia, is not even sure of the
number of its inhabitants. Figures of
10, 13 or 15 million have been advanced.
New arrivals, mostly from Anatolia,
build dwellings wherever they can, with
little regard for hygiene or the dangers
of flooding. From time to time bulldozers
flatten these "spontaneous" settlements,
and their owners are relocated.
No such instant "solution" exists
for air pollution, which sometimes
reaches alarming proportions. Last Feb¬
ruary thick fog covered Istanbul, and
the sulphur dioxide level rose above the
alarm barrier of 400 micrograms per
cubic metre in seven of the city's dis¬
tricts. In some it even reached 680
micrograms.
In a recent interview, Ms Nesrin
Algan, head of the department of inter¬
national relations at the Ministry of the
Environment in Ankara, talked about
another problem facing Turkey. "Ero¬
sion is ten to twelve times worse than the
African average," she said, "and eigh¬
teen limes worse than the European. The
culprits are deforestation, fires and over
grazing in our mountainous areas." More
than a quarter of Turkey is covered by
woodland, mostly in the coastal areas.
Although nine million hectares are in sat¬
isfactory condition, eleven million have
been damaged by rampant urbanization,
by tourism, agriculture and pests.
MIGRATORY BIRDS AND MARINE
TURTLES
Nevertheless, Turkey continues to be a
veritable botanical treasure-trove. Some
12,000 different plant species have been

u
I-
<
S
LU
LU
K
O
This drawing by 9-
year-old Orner Erol
Is entitled "You are
right to cry, pretty
bird!" It won an
award in a drawing
competition
organized by the
Turkish Society for
the Protection of
Nature (DHKD) on
the theme of the
threats to
migratory birds.
recorded, a number almost as high as
that for the whole of Europe, and there
are about 80,000 animal species, more
than in Europe. Twice a year the
country is crossed by masses of migra¬
tory birds. The government has
launched a number of programmes to
protect the birds' stopover sites, espe¬
cially in wetlands. One site, the Manyas
Reserve, has been designated a Euro¬
pean diploma site by the Council of
Europe: three million birds belonging to
250 different species land there each
year. An association comprising gover¬
nors, mayors and local village dignitaries
is currently being set up to ensure the
Reserve is protected. Leaders of local
industry will be invited to join in order to
involve them in environmental protection
and the struggle against pollution.
Another important ornithological
site, the Menderes Delta, is seriously
threatened- by drainage, pesticides,
insecticides and poaching. The pres¬
sures from tourism are also consider¬
able. Plans are afoot to build roads and
vacation villages throughout the area. In
1992 a multidisciplinary study carried
out jointly by Turkey's Society for the
Protection of Nature (DHKD) and the
World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF)
made some preliminary suggestions
about conservation measures that need
to be taken, such as extending the
boundaries of the Dilek national park to
the Delta and to Lake Bafa, limiting
"wildcat" aquaculture and improving
the river basin. An information centre
open all the year round distributes doc¬
umentation to schoolchildren, organizes
seminars for teachers and advises
tourists about bird watching.
Turtles are less lucky than birds,
for they share with people a penchant
for beaches of fine sand that slope gently
to the sea. Turkey has seventeen main
nesting sites for two threatened species
of marine turtles, the loggerhead
(Caretta caretta) and the green (Che-
Ionia mydas), about 10,000 of which
are killed (accidentally or intentionally)
in the Mediterranean each year. Many of
these beaches have extensive dunes;
some are coastal wetlands that are also
important for fisheries and birdlife.
Patara, Belek and Akyatan are sites
where the dunes are still intact; the
dunes at Anamur were destroyed long
ago by illegal sand mining. Most of the
sites are affected by this practice and by
domestic and industrial pollution.
In 1988 WWF and a number of
Turkish universities began an ambitious
survey, co-ordinated by the DHKD, of
2,456 km of coastline. The survey orig¬
inated when a German-Turkish project
to build a huge tourist complex on
Dalyan beach, which has been a turtle
nesting site for millions of years, brought
protests from environmentalists in
Turkey and from a number of interna¬
tional institutions, including the World
Bank. The project was eventually can¬
celled and the area named a "specially
protected area" (SPA). Subsequently a
pressure group was formed (including
the Ministry of Tourism, several big
investors in the tourist industry and the
DHKD) to draw up a plan for managing
the Mediterranean beaches used by the
turtles. A project to build a road along
one of the main turtle nesting sites was
scuttled thanks to a court decision and
a vigorous press campaign.
The hue and cry in the media alerted
the public and also aroused the interest
of scientists, who began to study the
behaviour of the turdes, their choice of
nesting places , the number of their young
and the size of their population. On
Dalyan beach a thirty-five-metre-wide
zone was marked off by sign-posts in
order to protect the nesting area from
bathers. From May to October guards
are posted to keep out nocturnal
intruders whose lights would disturb the
turtles. Other places too, like Fethiye,
Patara and the Göksu delta, have been
named as SPAs although they have not
yet been given any specific protection.
MONK SEALS AND FLOWER
BULBS
Turtles are not Turkey's only endan¬
gered species. There are only about 400
monk seals (Monachus monachus) left in
the world, and half of them are found in
the Mediterranean region of Turkey and
Greece. The other half live in the
Atlantic. Turkey is a contracting party
to the Bern Convention on European
Wild Life and Their Habitats and to the
An anemone (right) and a snow¬
drop (left), two bulb plants
threatened by uncontrolled picking
for the export market.

Barcelona Convention for the Protec¬
tion of the Mediterranean Sea Against
Pollution, and its Ministry of the Envi¬
ronment decided to act when the United
Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) noted that the number of monk
seals was at a critically low level. In
1991 Turkey's National Committee for
the Protection of the Monk Seal chose
the villages of Foça, on the Aegean Sea,
and Yalikavak as pilot areas for the con¬
servation of the species. Field surveys
were carried out, educational materials
were given to teachers, and brochures
were distributed to tourists to encourage
them to help to protect the seals' habi¬
tats. Artificial rocks were even placed in
the sea to prevent fishing boats from
coming too close.
Back on dry land, plants grown
from bulbs are at risk. Turkey is the
world's leading exporter of wildflower
bulbs (some 71 million annually in the
late 1980s). Uncontrolled bulb-gath¬
ering, paid for by big international com¬
panies, was endangering the survival of
certain species such as the snowdrop,
the anemone, the winter aconite, even
the Crocus olivieri istanbulinsis. The
DHKD, the Flora and Fauna Preser¬
vation Society (FFPS) and WWF
responded by encouraging villagers to
produce and market artificially propa¬
gated plants.
Turkey is also saddled with other
serious pollution problems, mostly due
to thermal power plants, the iron and
steel industries, petrochemicals and
automobile factories. Polluted seas,
rivers and soil are also causing concern.
In an attempt to find a solution, the
Ministry of the Environment is moni¬
toring the import and use of coal, lignite
N ITI ATI VES
8m95Miy«iy*k .Jfc I luw bm tot tor
bu*l»y«ti.l&«j? M 9S 000 000 )*ia And»«?
£ &
"I've been here for 95 million years. How
about you?" asks this sea turtle (Caretta
caretta) depicted on a poster produced by
the Turkish Society for the Protection of
Nature and the World Wide Fund for Nature.
The turtles are threatened by tourist
pressures at their nesting sites.
and other fossil fuels, and chemical
products. The collection, transporta¬
tion and recycling of domestic waste
have been improved. Lessons on the
environment are given in all primary
schools. Since 1993 any new tourist or
industrial project is legally obliged to
include an assessment of its environ¬
mental impact. I
