Editorial
The human immunodeficiency virus strikes at chil¬
dren and adults, at rich and poor, at blacks and whites,
in both North and South. Like pollution, it knows no frontiers.
It is a danger for us all, and no country, however well endowed
in specialized scientific resources or in institutions, can tackle
it alone. Humanity must unite to defeat it.
Many have already fought against the disease, in the United
Nations system, in national teams working on a professional
or voluntary basis, in local associations and movements.
Thanks to them, considerable progress has been made on a
number of fronts research, care and prevention.
Progress has been made, but it is not enough. Because of its
far-reaching human implications and its impact on economic
and social life, Aids has acquired a multidimensional quality
which is not yet fully appreciated. It is increasing the already
vast differences between countries and hindering the devel¬
opment efforts of the poorest of them. It is highlighting the
effects of ignorance and extreme poverty and the flagrant
inequalities of our world in the areas of health, information and
education.
In view of the nature of the pandemic, the difficulty of the
problems associated with it and the need for better co-ordi¬
nated action at the international level, the United Nations
has decided to set up a joint HIV/Aids programme. Under this
programme, UNESCO will be working alongside the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Bank, the United Nations Development Programme
and the United Nations Population Fund.
exchanging information and changing behaviour
UNESCO will draw on the experience it has built up, notably
through its preventive education programme, not only in
order to pass on information but also to bring about changes

by Federico Mayor
Aids: a worldwide emergency
in people's behaviour with regard to Aids both as a disease and
as a social phenomenon.
Since action to provide information and establish com¬
munication is effective only if it is adapted to the socio-cultural
environment in which it is carried out, UNESCO will make avail¬
able to its partners the benefits of its research and experience
on that pervasive and elusive factor which is cultural specificity.
UNESCO will also continue to assist research through its var¬
ious networks concerned with molecular and cell biology
and microbiology, and through the World Foundation for
Aids Research and Prevention that Professor Luc Montagnier
and I set up at the beginning of 1993. Our first concern is to
develop exchanges of information and co-operation among
researchers in all the disciplines involved and to promote the
participation of specialists from the countries hardest hit,
especially African specialists.
International mobilization
UNESCO's task also involves perhaps most importantly pre¬
venting or checking, with the agreement of the communities
concerned, any measures including legislative ones that
would tend to exclude or discriminate against people who
are suffering from the disease or are HIV-positive, or to vio¬
late human rights and fundamental freedoms or the dignity of
the human person. This is vital for the preservation of the
"intellectual and moral soli¬
darity of mankind".
Aids is clearly not just a
medical problem. It under¬
lines the interdependence of
our world and the need for an
interdisciplinary strategy
implemented with the close
co-operation of all con¬
cerned. The international
mobilization needed for this cannot be confined to action by
the United Nations system.
It must be backed by states and their political leaders,
since the aim is the rational organization of efforts and funding.
Within each country, those in charge of health and also of the
economy, finance, and education have a crucial role to play in
fighting the scourge. They will have to encourage practical pre¬
ventive action and make all aspects of Aids an integral part of
their policies and development projects.
The resources available for combating this great collective
threat are limited, particularly when compared with the
resources of all kinds devoted to defence. In our budgets we
have funds to pay the price of war, but we have made no pro¬
vision for the cost of the fight against Aids, malaria, pollution
or ignorance, i.e. the cost of peace. The transition from a cul¬
ture of war to a culture of peace must be speeded up.
International action would stand little chance of success
unless it was supported by the mobilization of everyone in
civil society: non-governmental organizations, foundations,
associations and the private sector. Only solidarity in its most
elementary sense that which binds together the representatives
of a species in the face of a common foe will enable us, through
an alliance of science and wisdom, to overcome both the med¬
ical epidemic and the social, cultural, economic, political and eth¬
ical offensive that Aids has unleashed on humanity.
The great Italian tenor Luciano
Pavarotti (centre) offers his support
to the World Foundation for Aids
Research and Prevention, created in
1993 by Professor Luc Montagnier of
the Pasteur Institute, Paris (at left in
photo) and Mr. Federico Mayor,
Director-General of UNESCO (right).
