FROM THE COLD WAR
TO THE ERA OF NEW TECHNOLOGIES
by Alain Modoux
LSome fifty years ago, the founders
of UNESCO singled out the "free
flow of ideas by word and image" as an
essential factor in the development of
collaboration among the nations. For
this fundamental principle to become
effective, however, it would have to be
practised by all states, and unfortunately
it was incompatible with the totalitarian
system existing in the countries of the
East. This incompatibility became one of
the key issues of the Cold War, which
was indeed partly a communication war.
In the 1970s and 1980s, therefore,
UNESCO became one of the hottest
arenas of East-West confrontation. As
the German philosopher Hannah
Arendt put it, "the force possessed by
totalitarian propaganda lies in its ability
to shut the masses off from the real
world".1 Arguing that there could not be
a totally free flow of information as long
as the dissemination of this information
was so strongly imbalanced in favour
of the North (i.e. the West), the Soviet
Union skilfully took advantage of the
understandable frustration of the devel¬
oping countries to impose within
Unesco its own interpretation of the
so-called "New World Information and
Communication Order" (NWICO). Its
objective was to limit, and if possible to
prevent, the penetration of the big
Western media into the territories it con¬
trolled. This was one reason, although
not the only one, why the United States
and the United Kingdom decided to
leave UNESCO respectively in 1984 and
1985.
The end of the Cold War gave
UNESCO a unique opportunity to work
out an approach to the communication
issue that was adapted to the needs of
both the emerging democracies in
Eastern and Central Europe and the
developing countries. In November
1989, UNESCO's General Conference
adopted by consensus at its twenty-fifth
session a "new communication strategy",
the objective of which is "to ensure a
free flow of information at international
as well as national levels, and its wider
and better balanced dissemination,
After being a hostage of the East-
West confrontation in the 1970s
and 1980s, Unesco can now
encourage a wider and better
balanced flow of information without
any obstacle to freedom of
expression.
without any obstacle to the freedom of
expression	"
Communication and democracy
The first objective of this "new commu¬
nication strategy" commits UNESCO to
promote freedom of expression, which is
the corner-stone of the human rights edi¬
fice, and freedom of the press, which is an
essential component of any democratic
society. UNESCO supports the action of
the intergovernmental and nongovern¬
mental organizations specialized in the
defence of these fundamental freedoms,
while preserving and developing its own
means of action. Furthermore, in a number
of countries it is helping to pave the way
for the creation and strengthening of plu¬
ralistic and independent media.
In certain contexts of ethnic and/or
sectarian conflicts, UNESCO, in liaison
with the United Nations and various
international media organizations, is also
supporting the local media that are inde¬
pendent of the parties to the conflicts, as
long as they provide non-partisan infor¬
mation and promote coexistence between
ethnic and/or sectarian groups.
Finally, UNESCO must react against
the growing use of violence in the mass
media cinema, television, video, comic
strips, electronic games which provide
people, in particular children, with a
vision of human relations which is in
total contradiction with the spirit of the
Organization. "Violence on the screen" is
one of UNESCO's priority concerns. There
is no doubt that it would be very difficult
to set up and enforce universal standards
in this area. Moreover, such an approach
might be used as a pretext to prejudice
freedom of expression. Hence UNESCO is
eager to foster dialogue with and among
those responsible for creating, publishing
and broadcasting, with a view to encour¬
aging them to determine themselves the
limits that should not be overstepped,
bearing in mind the cultural context and
the public these works and products are
addressing.
Communication and development
The second objective of UNESCO's new
strategy is to strengthen communica¬
tion capacities in the developing coun¬
tries, where the participation of the
people at grassroots level in the com¬
munication process remains in general
very low. Such causes as the struggle
against poverty, education for all, the
preservation of the environment, the
fight against Aids, the promotion of
human rights and of a culture of peace
will come to nothing if they are not
taken up by those directly concerned
people living in the rural areas and on the
edges of big cities. These people should
be given the means and the skills to voice
their opinions and aspirations. Devel¬
opment, participation and communica¬
tion form part of a continuum.
In February 1992, the International
Programme for the Development of
Communication (IPDC) decided to
modify its rules in order to accept projects
emanating from the private sector. In so
doing, it was following up a recommen¬
dation made a few months earlier by a
seminar held in Windhoek (Namibia),
which was attended by some sixty pub¬
lishers and journalists representing the
independent African media. Unfortu¬
nately this change did not bring about a
substantial increase in the financial con¬
tributions by the countries of the North
to the IPDC budgets. While more than 10
per cent of the national product in the
countries of the North is related in one
way or another to the communication
and information industry, it is hard to wl

accept that less than 1 per cent of the
programmes of national development
agencies is devoted to the development
of communication.
32
New issues
A third objective is related to the
emerging multimedia era, which is raising
fantastic expectations as to the sharing
of knowledge and the fostering of intel¬
lectual co-operation. Here the principle of
the free flow of ideas by word and image
has a boundless field of application.
UNESCO provides the international com¬
munity with a forum of reflexion where
the effects and possibilities of the new
applications of communication and infor¬
mation technology can be examined.
The prospects offered by these new
technologies, especially in the fields of
distance education and continuing edu¬
cation, are promising. But there is a great
risk that only a minority of humanity,
among and within nations, will take full
advantage of them. UNESCO should there¬
fore focus its efforts on countries which are
facing difficulties in this sphere. Situated in
both North and South, these countries
are in danger of becoming mere consumers
of the products and services provided by
the new technologies (transnational tele¬
vision programmes, audiovisual produc¬
tions, data banks, electronic games, etc.).
The stakes in terms of cultural and edu¬
cational values are extremely high, ranging
from the preservation of cultural diversity,
especially the survival of minority lan¬
guages, to education in non-violence, in
tolerance, in human rights and interna¬
tional understanding, and the achieve¬
ment of the necessary balance between
the education and the entertainment pro¬
grammes which the multimedia industry
will soon be able to offer.
Finally, UNESCO will do its utmost to
prevent the trend for cultural unifor¬
mity based on certain dominant models
from endangering the timeless values of
small and medium-sized nations in both
North and South. This will be a difficult
task but not an impossible one, to the
extent that dialogue, open-mindedness
and tolerance are the rule of conduct
within Unesco.
1 Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism
(Part 3), Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc., New
York and London, 1966.
ALAIN MODOUX
is the Director of Unesco's Communication Division.
A FEW TERMS
Interactive: allowing a continuous
two-way transfer of information
between a user and the central
point of a communication system,
such as a computer.
CD-ROM (Compact disk read¬
only memory): A digital-sound
laser disk that cannot be modified
but is able to store a large amount
of data in the form of text, images,
sounds and computerized data. A
12-cm disk can contain 2,500,000
pages of text or 70 minutes of
moving pictures. CD-ROM
appears to be the ideal medium not
only for providing access to data
banks, dictionaries and ency¬
clopaedias but also to more com¬
plex forms of information (e.g. the
contents of a museum).
Binary code: a notation system
consisting of only two digits, 0 and
1, which enables letters, numbers,
sounds and images to be coded. It
is used by computers to carry out
all their operations.
Digital imaging: digital recording
of an image by breaking it down
into lines and dots ("pixels", or
"picture elements") enables it to
be modified and to produce all
kinds of special effects. The
sequence of binary values (0 or 1)
that define the initial image can be
interpolated, modified or recalcu¬
lated. The same principle enables
the computer to generate images.
Information highways: Advances
in digital technology are erasing
the boundaries between the text,
sound and images that a single
communications system can
transmit. The media, telecommu¬
nications, electronics and com¬
puters can now converge in one
big digital, multimedia and inter¬
active network incorporating and
distributing services that have hith¬
erto been separate. On a single tele¬
vision or home computer screen it
is now possible (for a fee) to
receive, store, process and dialogue
with all sorts of data, e.g. access
library books without having to
borrow them, visit a museum from
the comfort of home, or "teleshop"
in a department store. The inte¬
gration of these high-yield infor¬
mation networks has become an
economic and political battlefield.
The Commission of the European
Union in Brussels has estimated
that it would cost 67 billion Ecus to
fund an information highway pro¬
ject in Europe over the next ten
years.
