least the wind of change has blown into Brazil.
ACF's optimism is that of people who know that
the struggle has only just begun.
Hoping against hope
by Edgar Morin
Development is a key word which has run through all political ide¬
ologies, but it has never been thought out in depth. At present three
revolutions are taking place in the field of knowledge, particularly in
science. They will give rise to a new analysis of development:
Science used to think that it could state certainties: we now know
that room must be found for uncertainty;
Science used to think it could deal with problems separately from
each other, but everything that is linked to a context and to a
system can no longer be isolated;
It used to be accepted that a single rationalizing logic sufficed
for understanding reality. Rationality has now opened itself to new
logics.
DOUBTS ABOUT DEVELOPMENT
These revolutions have thrown doubt on the presupposition that
progress has only positive consequences and leads inevitably to the
development of humankind. We now know that technology is ambiva¬
lent and that both people and nature need to be protected from its
negative effects.
We can see that economic issues cannot be separated from
social, human and cultural issues. So long as the link between eco¬
nomic and non-economic factors was concealed, everything that could
not be quantified was neglected. Intellectually satisfying economic
models were constructed, but they were not capable of taking
account of reality. We have so far not taken account of the destruc¬
tive effects of technical and economic development on our cultural
heritage and on nature. These destructive effects explain why fun¬
damentalism is gaining many devotees and finding leaders among intel¬
lectuals who possess the tools of modern knowledge but have been
disappointed by it.
So it is the end of the euphoric concept of development, which
favoured the idea of a single model applicable to ail situations.
A NEW APPROACH
nbleThe notion of development must be put back into an ensem l
encompassing nature, history, society and culture. But we still lack
an awareness of a common earthly destiny. We must foster the
growth of a kind of human solidarity based on a uterine link between
people, for instance the idea of an earth-motherland. As the poet
Machado put it, "Hiker, there is no road; you make the road by
walking". We need to seek a new way, trying to draw inspiration from
Heraclitus's thought, "You cannot hope if you do not seek the
unhoped-for".
EDGAR MORIN
is a French sociologist who is emeritus director of research with the
French National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS). His most recent
work published in English is Towards a Study of Humankind. Vol T. The
Nature of nature (1992)
29
