listening
A TIMELESS
MOMENT
Isabelle Leymarie
talks to
DEYASMITA
PATNAYIK
Among India's countless forms of tra¬
ditional dance, Bharata Natyam has
experienced a remarkable revival and achieved
International renown In the last fifty years.
The same period has seen the steadily rising
prestige of another very ancient sacred dance
form, known as Odissl, whose home is the
state of Orissa In southern Bengal, tradition¬
ally believed to be ksetra or sacred land.
The golden age of Odissl was In the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries, when It was per¬
formed In the magnificent temples of Shiva at
Bhubaneswar and of Jagannath at Purl and In
the temple of the sun at Konarak. Today
Odlssi still draws inspiration from the sculp¬
tures and friezes that adorn these holy places,
from sacred Inscriptions and from classic
treatises on abhinaya, the art of representa¬
tion. Graceful, expressive and lyrical, ¡ts lan¬
guid fluent gestures are Imbued with nobility.
The origins of Odissi can be traced back
to the second century B.C., the date of carv¬
ings In the grotto of Udayaglrl, near
Bhubaneswar, which show ritual dances with
poses that are still used today. In the fourth
century B.C. a remarkable theoretical treatise
on dance known as the Natya Sastra mentions
a choreographic style known as odhra mag-
adhi, from which contemporary Odlssi ¡s
derived. According to myth, Shiva and his son
Ganesh, the elephant god and lord of the
dance, taught certain poses to Manirambha,
a celestial dancer who transmitted her knowl¬
edge to temple dancers (Devadasl). The devel¬
opment of Odlssi was encouraged in the tenth
century by King Chodagangadeva, the enlight¬
ened ruler who built the temple of Jagannath,

and 300 years later a sacred dance festival was
held at Konarak. During the Mughul Invasions
of India young women stayed In their homes to
protect themselves against the Invaders, and
male dancers who dressed like women and
were known as Gotlpua kept the tradition of
Odlssi alive.
Influenced by Jainism, Tantrism, Buddhism
and Vlshnulsm, Odlssi was danced by temple
dancing girls called Mahari, court dancers
known as Nachuni, and the Gotipua, who per¬
formed In public. Some time around the sev¬
enteenth century the Mahari and Nachuni faded
from the scene, and only the Gotlpua were left.
During the period of British colonial rule
Odlssi gradually shed Its sacred aspect and
became a form of entertainment for the ruling
class. As before the Gotlpua carried on the
tradition, Introducing supple and complex move¬
ments that were In some ways similar to gym¬
nastics. The great practitioners of our times,
Kelu Charan Mahapatra, Deva and Pankaj
Charan Das were once Gotlpua. Since inde¬
pendence In 1946, Odissi has recovered Its
former glory thanks to scholarly research and
the interest of choreographers.
One of Odlssl's most accomplished expo¬
nents, Devasmita Patnaylk, gave a performance
In Paris In 1991 during a series of cultural
events organized as part of UNESCO's Silk
Route Programme. On that occasion we asked
her some questions about her art.
Are there certain basic poses in Odissi?
there are three, the chowka, the four¬
square posture of the god Jagannatha, sym¬
bolizing equilibrium; the tribhanga, a triple body
movement (head, hips and knees), a position
that Is commonly shown In ancient sculpture
and Is absent from other dance styles; and
the abhanga, In which the weight of the body
rests on one foot. Starting with these basic
poses, modifications can be made which use
the whole bodyhands, head, eyes and other
facial muscles.
Are the movements codified?
Odlssi you find the same symbolic gestures
and mudras (hand positions) as In other tradi¬
tional Indian dance-styles. There are nine eye
movements, nine head movements, thirty-six
mudras executed with one handto evoke
clouds, for example, or a forest, a river, a bud,
a peacock and other birds, animals and natural
elementsas well as mudras executed with
both hands. Other gestures signify a window, a
bow, a kiss, candlelight. ... A typical Odlssi
movement consists in backing up on one's
heels then pirouetting on one foot. Combining
these movements and poses offers a wealth of
possibilities. One can also Improvise using this
basic vocabulary. These movements are ben¬
eficial for both body and soul, for dancing com¬
municates energy and encourages fulfilment. It
raises awareness both of oneself and of the
audience, transmits Veda (knowledge), and
unites men and women with the divine.
What is the significance of the costumes you
wearthose wonderful, purple, blue, red and
grey saris, face, foot and hand make-up, and
the headdress with white ornaments?
dance Is an offering, a devotional act
and a search for perfection, the dancer must be
beautiful, especially since she repeats the
poses shown In magnificent ancient sculptures.
The headdress symbolizes jasmin buds, which
were often given as offerings in temples, and
the make-up is governed by certain rules. In
order to make the gestures more visible, the
hands and feet are painted reda colour sym¬
bolizing prosperity. My saris come from Orissa,
and the "fan" (the central pleating) is very typ¬
ical of that part of India. Every item of clothing
has its own significance, and the saris of Orissa
(like Odissi Itself) are coming back Into fashion
all over India. You can even see them on tele¬
vision. The area between Puri and Bhubaneswar
is also well known for its colourful appliquée!
fabric. I wear silver jewellery because silver Is
the only metal worn in Orissa.
Does the dancer follow the music, or, as in
many African dances, does she dictate her
own beat to the musicians?
She has to follow the beat, and since she
wears bells on her feet, she can't afford to go
wrong.
You sometimes do your own choreography.
Does it follow any particular theme?
I have created a dance based on
the nine navarasa (main emotions). The emo¬
tions are love, heroism, sadness (or pathos),
laughter, fear, anger, disgust, wonder and
peace. (The term rasa means "savour, relish,
juice").
Devasmita Patnayikthen demonstrated the
nine navarasa. First of all her feet took root In
the fertile ground before beating the rhythm as
her head and torso thrust heavenwards.
Changing emotions flickered across her mobile
features. Her face puckered in sadness, her
eyes became fiery with anger and then rolled
upwards in disgust. At last her body found
peace, fulfilment and serenity. I watched this
graceful and supple dancer, whose hands drew
skilful arabesques, joined by the magic of move¬
ment In transcendent harmony with the forces
of the universe. I felt the richness of her Inner
world, and left her with the feeling that I too had
participée!, for a moment, in the divine.
ISABELLE LEYMARIE
is a Franco-American musicologist.
47
