Alfonso Reyes
The Latin American intellect
The Mexican miter Alfonso Reyes, a
passionate humanist, historian, poet
and critic, was one of the leading
«Latin American thinkers of the first
half of the twentieth century. He was
among the first intellectuals ofLatin
America to take an active interest in
the International Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation. The text
published below consists of extracts
from Reyes' opening address al a
meeting entitled "Europe-Latin
America" that was organized by the
Institute and held in Buenos Aires
from 11 to 16 September 1936. In it
he brilliantly defines the distinctive
nature ofLatin American culture and
its place in the world.
44
Text selected by Edgardo Canton
This is not the place to talk about
Latin American civilization: that
L would lead us off into the field of
archaeology, which is outside our sub¬
ject. To speak of Latin American culture
would be somewhat ambiguous: it would
make us think only of one of the branches
of the European tree, transplanted into
the soil of the Americas. We may, how¬
ever, speak of a Latin American intel¬
lect, its outlook on life and its impact on
Ufe. This will enable us to define, albeit
tentatively, the subtle gradation that is
specifically Latin American.
A DIFFERENT TEMPO
Our drama has a stage, a chorus and a
protagonist.
By stage I mean not a space but
rather a time, in the almost musical sense
of tempo or rhythm. A latecomer at the
banquet of European civilization, Latin
America made up for lost time by cutting
corners, quickening the pace, hurrying
from one form to another without giving
the previous form time enough to
mature. The leap is sometimes a bold
one, and the new form comes out, as it
were, half-baked. Tradition weighed less
heavily, which explains the boldness.
But the question needs to be asked as to
whether the European rhythm, which
we try to follow by making great
strides being incapable of the mea¬
sured steps with which one should prop¬
erly keep up with it is the only histor¬
ical "tempo" possible, and there is
nothing to show that it is unnatural to
speed up the process somewhat. Therein
lies the secret of our history, of our pol¬
itics and of our life, one of the watch¬
words of which is improvisation.
As to the chorus, the Latin American
population is drawn mainly from the old
indigenous elements, the massive influx
of Spanish conquistadors, missionaries
and settlers, and the subsequent immi¬
grations from Europe as a whole. Clashes
between the different bloodlines, prob¬
lems of interbreeding and attempts at
adaptation and absorption have all
ensued. Depending on the region, it is
sometimes the Indian and sometimes the
Iberian element that predominates; the
intermediate colour of the mestizo, the
white of the European immigrants and
the vast patches of African colour intro¬
duced into our land by the former colo¬
nial administrations in centuries gone
by every shade is included. Gradually,
and not without effort, this heteroge¬
neous substance has been absorbed and
mixed in the bowels of Latin America,
and now there already exists a Latin
American humanity characteristic of
this Latin American spirit.
This is where our actor, our protag¬
onist comes in: the intellect.
AMERICANISTS VERSUS
1IISPANTSTS
The Latin American intellect operates
on a series of alternatives. Fifty years
after the Spanish conquest, in other
words as early as the second generation,
a Latin American identity was to be found
in Mexico: under the combined influ¬
ences of the new environment, the dif¬
ferent economic system, the contact with
the Indian sensibility, and the propri¬
etorial instinct originating from the pre¬
vious occupation period, the Mexican
Spaniards developed a colonial-aristo¬
cratic attitude that was at odds with the
arriviste inclinations of the Spaniards
coming straight off the boats. Literary
criticism has picked out as central to this
phenomenon, like a light source, the
person of the Mexican dramatist Juan
Ruiz de Alarcón who, via Corneille, influ¬
enced Molière, and the French theatre of
manners. The same could, however,
apply in varying degrees to any of the
countries of our part of the Americas.
Within this as yet inchoate unease, the
age-long desire of the Americas for inde¬
pendence was already throbbing.
This brings us to the second alterna¬
tive: no sooner had independence been
achieved than the inevitable conflict arose
between the Americanists, who accentu¬
ated the new reality, and the Hispanists,
who accentuated the old tradition.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 48

ARCHIVES
48
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 44
Sarmiento1 was primarily an Americanist,
Bello2 a Hispanist. This clash has
expressed itself many times in history as a
duel between liberals and conservatives.
Emancipation was so recent that neither
fathers nor sons could easily come to terms
with it. In the fullness of time, all the dif¬
ferent metals melted, as in the great fire of
Corinth, into one flowing stream ofmetal.
Shod with our seven-league boots, we
now come to the third alternative: one of
our poles is in Europe, the other in the
United States. Both influence us and we
draw inspiration from both; but it seems
-that our Latin American intellect encoun¬
ters in Europe a view of the human con¬
dition that is more universal, more essen¬
tial, and more in conformity with its own
sensitivity (which is not to deny our affini¬
ties with the elite of the other America,
and disregarding certain historical mis¬
understandings, for which there is now,
happily, less and less justification and
which are irrelevant here). We dislike
the tendency towards separation of the
races. We do not like to consider a given
human type as a mere curiosity or an
exotic, amusing case, for such a view is
not a basis for genuine spiritual fellow
feeling. The conquistador Cortés himself
pierced the secret of his conquest while
pillowed on the breast of Doña Marina':
it was maybe there that he learned to
love his prey, where other, colder-hearted
commanders, like Caesar in Gaul, were
never able to do so, and began to nurture
in his bosom certain ambitions towards
autonomy that, in the privacy of the
family, he was to pass on to his sons, later
to be tortured for plotting against the
Spanish motherland.
SYNTHESIS AM» ACTION
Such is the stage, such are the chorus
and the protagonist. I have outlined the
main choices open to the latter. I must
now explain what I meant by the watch¬
word of improvisation.
The Latin American intellect is of
necessity less specialized than the Euro¬
pean. Our social structure makes it so.
The writer has more tics, he usually holds
several posts and seldom manages to be
only a writer. He is nearly always a writer
plus something, or some things, else.
There are not, there could not be, any
ivory towers in our part of the world.
This further antithesis of advantages and
disadvantages finds its synthesis, its bal¬
ance, in a particular way of under¬
standing intellectual work as a public
service and a civilizing duty. This con¬
ception fortunately does not rule out the
possibility of interludes, pure literary
self-indulgence, fountains to which one
must frequently return to bathe in the
health-giving waters. In Europe, such
interludes may be the writer's normal
state. It is as if the European writer was
born on the top platform of the Eiffel
Tower: just a few metres' effort and there
he is, lording it on the spiritual summits.
The Latin American writer, on the
other hand, starts fife in the fiery central
regions. By dint of colossal effort,
exhibiting a vitality carried to so high a
pitch as to resemble genius, he barely
manages to raise himself a little above
the earth's crust. I do not believe that
this subtly characteristic feature of Latin
American culture is fraught with any
danger of detachment, quite the con¬
trary. I have a presentiment that the
Latin American intellect is destined for
the noblest complementary function, that
of establishing syntheses, tentative though
they may be and hasty though they may
prove; of putting the outcome of thought
rapidly into practice, testing the value
of theory on the living flesh of action.
SOLLS WITHOUT PASSPORTS
The Latin American spirit yields with
singular pliancy to the purpose of
achieving that magnificent harmony to
which I look forward. The fact is that
our spirit, however deeply rooted it may
be in our soil, is internationalist. This is
not only because our part of the Americas
fulfils all the requirements to be a melting
pot for the future "cosmic race" dreamed
of by Vasconcelos,4 but also because we
have had to fetch our cultural instru¬
ments from the great European centres.
We have grown accustomed to treating
others' concepts as our own business.
This internationalism, inseparable from
our nature and strengthened by the his¬
torical ties of brotherhood that bind us to
so many republics, is the cause of an
undeniable pacifist tendency within the
Latin American intellect.
The generation immediately pre¬
ceding ours still felt that it had been
born in the prison cell of several con¬
centric circles of fatality, experienced
by the most pessimistic members ofthat
generation in the following order.
The first great fatality was of course
that of being human, in accordance with
old Sileno's maxim as recorded by
Calderón: "For the greatest crime/ Of
man is to be born." Inside that first circle
was the second, that of coming too late
into a world too old. The echoes of
romanticism could still be heard, dis¬
tilled by the Cuban poet Juan Clemente
Zenea into two lines: "My time is that of
ancient Rome/And my brothers died with
Greece." In our literary world this sense
of being born at the wrong time domi¬
nated the average mentality.
There was a third circle: in addition
to the misfortune of being human and
living in the modern age, there was the
specific misfortune of being Latin Amer¬
ican, being born on and rooted into a soil
that was not the present seat of civiliza¬
tion but a branch office of the world. To
quote Victoria Ocampo,5 our grandpar¬
ents felt they were in possession of souls
without passports.
Of all these ghosts that are gone with
the wind, that the dawning light of day has
illuminated with a new meaning to the
point of making them at least acceptable
realities, something yet remains in the
nooks and crannies of Latin America,
something that has to be driven out by
flinging wide the windows and by calling
superstition by its name, which is the best
way of exorcising it. In the main, however,
all that has already been put right.
Having laid down these premises and
having examined the case, I shall make
bold to employ the style of a speech for the
defence. Between Spain and ourselves
there has long existed a feeling of levelling
out and of equality. Now, addressing the
court of thinkers of all nations, I say,
acknowledge the rights we have won, as
citizens of the universal homeland. We
have come of age. You can no longer delay
taking account of us. I
1 Domino Faustino Sarmiento (1811-1888),
Argentinian statesman and writer. His works
include Facundo (1845), in which his liking and
regard for the gauchos are evident. Editor
2 Andrés Bello (1781-1865), Chilean writer and
politician of Venezuelan origin. Poet,
philologist, grammarian and critic, he had a
considerable influence throughout Latin
America, where he is regarded as one of the
makers of the region's cultural consciousness.
Editor
3 Marina, also known as Malinalli or Malinche,
an Indian noble of Náhuatl origin who was
Hernán Cortés' consort, counsellor and
interpreter. Editor
4 José Vasconcelos (1822-1959), Mexican
politician, writer and philosopher whose works
include La Raza Cósmica (1925). Editor
5 Victoria Ocampo (1882-1970), Argentinian
woman of letters, founded and directed the
review Sur (1931-1970), contributing to the
dissemination of world literature in her
country. Editor.
