The written word
by Xavier Perret
\ \ 1 ï
Around 35,000 years ago, prehistoric man made the first
paintings on cave walls and ceilings. It was not until much
later that the earliest writing systems using signs emerged in
Mesopotamia and in Egypt.
The appearance of writing
coincided with the birth of cities.
Above, detail of an Assyrian relief
from the palace of Sargon II at Dur
Sarrukm (8th century B.C.) shows
a man holding a model of a city.
Writing, as a system of symbols repre¬
senting a structured language, made its
appearance only in the middle of the fourth mil¬
lennium B.C. in the land of Sumer, Mesopo¬
tamia. This system, consisting originally of pic-
tograms, evolved gradually in the direction of
abstraction, thus increasing its capacity to repro¬
duce the whole of human discourse. Some time
later, at the beginning of the second millennium
B.C., and on the other side of the world, Chinese
writing emerged, also in pictorial form, while
the Egyptian and Mayan systems, whose origins
are still unknown, were likewise based on the
use of pictures as signifiers.
The figurative look of these early graphic
symbols recalls humanity's very first attempts
to depict things, the cave paintings of the Palae¬
olithic period. What are we to make of the rep¬
resentations of beasts and men to be seen in the
rock art of 35000 to 18000 B.C.? Though we
cannot find any correspondence with a struc¬
tured language in them, what we do observe is a
desire to represent subjects in graphic form that
bespeaks the existence of a common language
or at least of common referents within the
iSLiinaàQiL^f
fjjjj rH«_M
Tfi^íi ¥: *'
k J*P
BÎ
7Wk 1
v._ ^^^^^H
!
i
«1
&
V
Above, sacred inscriptions
painted on stone by Tibetan
£ refugees in Ladakh (India).
Left, pictograms carved in wood
around 1900 by a craftsman of
the Dayak people of Sarawak, on
the island of Borneo.

group, and hence the existence of a common way
of thinking.
Thousands of years, however, separate the
paintings left behind by the Aurignacian and
Magdalenian cultures from the earliest non-fig¬
urative graphic symbols, i.e. numbers, whether
they be the ancient Chinese system of rods or the
Sumerian system of keeping accounts with incised
hollow clay balls.1 It was in the course of this very
long period that the Neolithic revolution took
place, and the relationship between human beings
and their environment underwent a radical
change, the hunter-gatherer becoming a pro¬
ducer.
By the stylization and combination of the
original icons, writing systems arrived at the rep¬
resentation of speech and thought.
The earliest Sumerian logograms, for instance,
like ancient Chinese pictograms, represented
basic concepts that needed to be interpreted for
the reader to reconstitute the message. Castes of
scribes spent centuries improving this method of
representation before finally arriving at systems
whereby all the nuances of language could be
set down.
rrorn symbols to sounds
While the emergence of forms of writing in
Sumer, in China and, perhaps, in Central America
can be explained in terms of evolution, the various
phonetic systems (alphabets or syllabaries) found
all over the world are thought to have originated
from the dissemination of a primeval model that
was borrowed, imitated and appropriated by one
society and language after another.
The first system of phonetic (probably syl¬
labic) transcription seems to have been the
Phoenician system, the earliest signs of which
may be traced back to the thirteenth to eleventh
centuries B.C. Although the precise origin of
"T x
ya/t iyj nft i
V r( J fty àd'rtVff^iOU (l/toîv«WfT^ "
A 4th-century Byzantine
illuminated manuscript.
í '.. r

Top, detail of a Hittite
hieroglyphic inscription (9th-8th
centuries B.C.) bearing the
names of King Telipinus and his
son Suppliluliuma, who conquered
Aleppo around 1354 B.C. The
Hittites, who for 5 centuries ruled
much of what is now Asian
Turkey, used ideograms borrowed
from the Babylonians.
Above, the oldest known
example of the Phoenician
alphabet. An inscription on the
tomb of king Ahiram of Byblos, it
dates from the 13th century B.C.
The pictograms drawn on this
16th-century parchment from
Bolivia, right, were intended to
explain the catechism to the
Indians.
Phoenician characters remains obscure (they
were probably derived from Sumerian
ideograms), experts now agree that, certainly in
a majority of cases, they were the matrix from
which have developed the various phonetic alpha¬
bets now in use throughout the world.
The use of phonetic scripts was propagated by
population movements like the migration of Ara¬
maean nomads into Mesopotamia, by the activ¬
ities of traders such as the Phoenicians in the
eastern Mediterranean, and by the establishment
of political power (e.g. the Dorian invasions in
Greece), or religious power (e.g. Christian, with
the translation of the Bible into Slavonic); but the
success of these scripts was undoubtedly due in
the main to the fact that they were so much easier
10
XAVIER PERRET,
of France, is a translator and
teacher of English.
to use than clumsy cuneiform or the complex
hieroglyphics of ancient Egypt.
Each of the societies that, one after another,
borrowed the Phoenician system had to adapt it
to its own requirements. Thus it was that the
Aramaic, Hebrew and Nabataean scripts came
into being, subsequently giving rise to other
scripts, again adapted and transformed Greek
and Arabic, which in their turn gave rise to others.
At this point we are no longer dealing with
dissemination or evolution but with contam¬
ination.
The return of the image
What function does writing then serve? To begin
with, it had two distinct purposes. In China, it was
primarily used to communicate with the other
world, as is shown by such archaeological objects
as incised tortoise shells and "oracle bones". Its
function was thus, initially, a magical one, quite
unlike what was happening in Sumer, where its
first use was for keeping accounts. Elsewhere, in
Egypt or among the Maya, writing was known
only to the priesthood and served a religious
purpose, while in Europe at a later date it was for
a long time the exclusive preserve of the clergy.
Since both the spiritual and the temporal
power were very often in the hands of the same
individuals, writing, which was linked, whether
closely or distantly, to magic, became involved in
the establishment of the legal and political
authority. Long the prerogative of rulers, it fil¬
tered down only slowly to the other strata of
society. When the Maya priests disappeared, for
example, the secrets of Maya writing died with
them, and it was centuries before the Egyptian
demotic script appeared, to be used in public
administration, commerce and literature. In the
West, widespread literacy dates back only to the
late nineteenth century, and even today none of
the modern industrialized societies can boast a 100
per cent literacy rate.
Paradoxically, it is in these latter societies,
where the law is set down in writing and writing
therefore often has the force of law, that com¬
munication through images has been gaining,
ground considerably for the last century and a
half. Whilst the invention of printing may for a
while have halted the evolution of writing or
held it in check, the return of the image, together
with the fact that new ideograms and pictograms
are constantly appearing all around us, seems to
show that that evolution has taken off again.
1 Sec the Unesco Courier, November 1993
("The Story of Numbers").
