Windows of
opportunity
Jerry Palme
Countries where the
film industry is
trying to find a niche
between television
and the powerful
international
distribution networks
The animation
department at the
Uzbekfilm studios in
Tashkent (Uzbekistan).
Some years ago, when I was in
Budapest, Hungary, researching
an article about Hungarian
cinema, I found that each of
Hungary's four film studios had
an annual budget sufficient to produce
around ten films, roughly equal to the spe¬
cial effects budget for a single Hollywood
major film.
Recently I read in a report from India
that in the villages local businessmen rent a
satellite dish that is capable of receiving the
output of Star TV from the Asiasat satellite
and run cables to rented TV receivers. This
makes television reception extremely cheap.
How can locally produced films or even
television compete with this satellite
which transmits old American TV series
bought at a bargain price?
But neither of these stories has quite the
ending we might expect. The Hungarian film
industry has survived the transition to the
free market. And in India the availability of
cheap cable television has produced a rapidly
expanding market for local language TV
showing Bombay-made films and local pro¬
gramming.
These stories from Hungary and India
illustrate the threats and the opportuni¬
ties that are offered to world cinema by
television and the American film industry.
Both the threats and the opportunities are
complicated, and neither derive only from
the fact that America is the majority pro-
|

Beqabu, an Indian
film by M. N.
Chandra, was shot in
studios located in
the Bombay
suburbs.
Jerry Palmer,
of the United Kingdom,
is Professor of
Communication at
London Guildhall
University. He is the
author of books about
popular fiction in the
novel, film and
television, and has
been a film reviewer
for British magazines
and BBC radio.
ducer of films and TV programmes in the
world.
Does Hollywood dominate world
cinema? It is no longer the world's biggest
producer of films. The Indian film industry
produces more feature films per year than the
United States. Japan and China are big pro¬
ducers, too. On the other hand, Indian, Chi¬
nese and Japanese films are only viewed by
local or expatriate populations, whereas
American films are seen more or less all over
the world. Certainly few Japanese viewers will
have seen Indian films, and vice-versa, but
substantial numbers of viewers in both these
countries will have seen many American films.
Thirty years ago most of the revenue
from U.S. films came from sales inside the
United States. In the last year for the first
time U.S. films made more from their sales
outside the United States than from the U.S.
market. U.S. control over foreign distribu¬
tion has increased in importance recently.
Although there is nothing in the logic of
distribution systems to prevent the U.S. stu¬
dios distributing foreign films as well as U.S.
ones, in fact the U.S. market is so huge in
comparison to most other national markets
and American audiences so much prefer
home-produced films, that the Hollywood
studios place most emphasis on selling
home-made products.
For as long as international distribution
networks are U.S. -dominated, Hollywood
will dominate world cinema. This is not
because home-based movie industries in
other countries are incapable of producing
material that their local audiences prefer we
know in the case of the Asian countries that
this is not so. And the case of European tele¬
vision is interesting here too. In Europe
during the last few years home-produced
programming has started to pull in bigger
audiences than imported U.S. programmes.
The message is clear: where home-produced
material that appeals to the local audience is
available, and a distribution system which is
not American-owned is in place, American
culture finds it more difficult to penetrate.
This introduces the second point: to
what extent is television a threat to world
cinema? To understand this, we must be
clear about what the differences between film
and television are. They are not primarily
distinguished by their systems of represen¬
tation despite differences in picture
quality but by their systems of transmis¬
sion. Although films are of course shown on
television, the television system is funda¬
mentally different from the cinema system
because it is (potentially if not actually)
multi-channel, because it reaches directly
into the home and because it is transmitting
more-or-less permanently a mix of pro¬
gramme types. If the current experiments
with high-definition TV turn into broadcast
or cable systems, the differences in picture
quality between film and television will vir¬
tually disappear.
Film and TV: an ambiguous rela¬
tionship Indeed, one of the ways in
which television has most fundamentally
influenced cinema is in the restriction of
cinema to narrative fiction "feature films",
as they are called in English. Before televi¬
sion, cinema was used to make documen¬
taries, newsreels and advertising. The cine¬
matic forms of the first two have been killed
off completely by television, the latter mar¬
ginalized. That is to say, the differences in
the transmission systems have created what
are apparently the differences in the systems
of representation. Film and television tell
different types of story because of these
restrictions in film story-telling.
For many years film-makers blamed televi¬
sion for the decline in cinema audiences. But
research in Britain suggested that it was not
television that stole the audiences, but home
entertainment in general, in combination
with the shift away from the large urban cen¬
tres whose inner city population was the
source of the enormous cinema audiences
between 1930 and 1960. Television also offered
new opportunities to film-makers, both in
the form of extra revenue through TV screen¬
ings of movies and through commissioning

feature films that probably would not have
been made without this support.
The relationship between film and televi¬
sion is very ambiguous. On the one hand, the
presence of television sets in every home pre¬
sents an alternative to cinema. At the moment
differences in picture quality, plus the social
value of going out to the cinema instead of
staying at home, reduce the competition
from television. But the differences in picture
quality will probably be removed by high-
definition TV. If the information super¬
highway becomes a transmission system for
entertainment, it is possible that we will be
able to select movies from a "movie bank" for
transmission into our own homes. But it is
likely that the movies in question will only
be the most popular ones, since a system
which would allow anyone to select any
movie they liked for transmission would
probably not be economically viable.
If only the most successful movies are to
be transmitted, they will probably be
American because those are the films which
attract the biggest audiences internationally.
This means that the cost of each viewing can
be reduced because of the likely number of
viewings. On the other hand, local distribu¬
tion networks using the superhighway (if
there are to be such things) might be able to
benefit from a high number of local view¬
ings of films made on a relatively low budget
for local audiences. Here another factor
comes into play: it is already technologically
possible to show a film on a video disc
which has several alternative sound-tracks in
different languages. This potentially enlarges
the audience for films in non-majority lan¬
guages without using sub-titles, which tend
to put audiences off.
It is likely to be control of distribution
systems rather than production systems
which determines whether world cinema can
survive the threats from new TV systems
and American predominance and turn them
into opportunities.
Steven Spielberg's E. T.
(United States, 1982)
unites a gentle creature
from outer space and
his young earthling
protector.
Filming at the National
Picture Studios in
Rangoon (Myanmar).
I
