'r À ;
Going it done
by Christine Catarino and Laura Oso
Why are there so many women-headed households in
countries of the South?
Above, a businesswoman and
family head in Douala
(Cameroon).
18
I According to the usual definition, the
head of a family is the person recognized
as such by him- or herself and by the other
members of the household. In some countries of
the South a patriarchal conception of the family
has discouraged women heads of household
from considering themselves as such, and as a
result their numbers have been underestimated.
Governments, development aid organiza¬
tions and non-governmental organizations
channel goods and services towards the family
head, who is supposed to be the family's main
source of support. This is why the social recog¬
nition of women as family heads is so important.
In addition to the accepted situations in
which a woman is the mainstay of the family
(widowhood, a partner's migration, single moth¬
erhood, an unstable marriage and polygamy
without cohabitation), there are cases where
the woman lives with a man who is not able or
willing to support the household.
matrilinear societies
In Africa women were heads of family in certain
traditional matrilinear polygamous societies
such as that of the Kwahu of Ghana, where
women inherit through the maternal line. Other
cultures in Ghana and elsewhere allow women
approaching forty to "withdraw from the insti¬
tution of marriage".
But the practice introduced in Africa by
colonialism causing men to migrate to work in
the mines and on the plantations of white
farmers, followed by post-independence devel¬
opments such as urbanization, increased migra¬
tory flows and changes in traditional family

structures combined to increase the number of
households run by women.
A number of demographic factors are also
involved, including women's longer life-
expectancy and the age difference between mar¬
riage partners, which means that more women
are widowed than men.
Kegional variations
United Nations statistics show that in the early
1980s women-headed households constituted
some 30 per cent of all households in Latin
America and the Caribbean, 20 per cent of those
in Africa and less than 15 per cent of those in
Asia. The lowest proportions of women house¬
hold heads are found in the countries of the
Sahel and North Africa (due to the influence of
religion, the strongly patriarchal nature of these
societies and traditional forms of cohabitation)
and in other Islamic countries such as Iran,
Kuwait, Pakistan and Indonesia.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, low
wages and unemployment due to economic
recession prevent men from performing their
traditional role in society. The resulting sense of
failure may lead them to abandon their families.
Macho attitudes, involving men in flashy expen¬
diture designed to reinforce their prestige as
males, may lead them to opt out of their respon¬
sibilities as fathers and leave the family home.
In Africa, the migration of a male spouse
may impose increased responsibilities on the
woman, who has to farm the family's land, while
a woman who leaves home may have to provide
economic support for the members of the family
left behind in the village. This feminization of
households is also encouraged by the form of
polygamy in which the man lives with only one
of his wives, while the others set up their own
households. Another form of non-cohabita-
tional polygamy exists when a male spouse
migrates to the city and takes a wife there, so that
he has both rural and urban households. Finally,
separations and divorces reflecting a decline in
customary family institutions take place because
the possibility of resolving marital conflict by the
community has ceased to exist.
L he age fiactor
The chances of women becoming family heads
generally increase as they grow older. The prob¬
ability is low for very young women, starts to
rise after the age of thirty-five and rises steeply
after age sixty-five. In Africa and in Asia and the
Pacific nearly half the women household heads
arc widows as opposed to 28 per cent in Latin
America and the Caribbean (36 per cent are
single). More women household heads are mar¬
ried or single than divorced, particularly in Asia
and the Pacific where the proportion of divorced
women is especially low.
The possibility that a woman will become the
head of a household thus fluctuates with age; she
may acquire and lose this status several times in
her life.
Low-paidjobs

A Cameroonian notable and
some of his wives.
19

poverty. Furthermore, a number of migrants'
wives, as de facto heads of families, receive eco¬
nomic support from their husbands.
A mother and her baby on a
collective farm in Tadjikistan.
20
CHRISTINE CATARINO
is a Franco-Portuguese
sociologist whose fields of
interest include women's
migrations and health-related
issues.
LAURA OSO
is a Spanish sociologist who
specializes in international
migrations and questions related
to women and development.
services simply because they are women. This
clearly limits their resources.
Often required to combine motherhood and
money-earning activity, they tend to find jobs in
the informal market sector (domestic work,
street vending, menial tasks that require little
training) because of its flexibility. In many cases
these are part-time jobs with proportionally
lower wages typical of this sector and limited
opportunities for improving social status. One
explanation given for women's lowly position on
the job market is their educational level.
In many countries women do not have the
right to own land, and as the traditional
authority-figures men may be given preferential
treatment in access to credit, technology and
social programmes.
Support networks, in many cases based on
female family links, do exist and help to relieve
Lihoice or constraint:
Do women choose to become family heads, or
are they forced into it by circumstances? In
Latin America and the Caribbean there are two
distinct approaches to this question. According
to one, underemployment and unemployment
prevent men from acting as the main family
breadwinner, and as a result women do more
paid work. According to the other, the growing
number of woman household heads is a conse¬
quence of women's greater autonomy due to
an increase in their income from paid employ¬
ment. In both cases the increase in women's
income boosts their role in the family. Their
new-found autonomy sometimes leads them to
terminate unsatisfactory marital relationships.
Other researchers believe that in Africa and
Latin America, women feel a strong desire to
withdraw from a social situation where macho
values prevail.
Do women become household heads vol¬
untarily or involuntarily? This raises the wider
question of whether their status is a form of
emancipation or the sign of a deteriorating sit¬
uation. A woman's deliberate choice to be head
of a household is often part of her search for an
identity outside that based on the family and the
conjugal unit; for a woman to accept such a role
involuntarily, on the other hand, is to accept
limitations on some of her aspirations.
A village meeting in Lesotho.
Most of the men work In South
Africa, and the women keep the
local economy going, although
tradition requires that they
recognize the authority of the
village chief (right).
