JIMMY CARTER
by Flora Lewis
the pilgrim-presi¡dent
When Jimmy Carter left the White House in 1981
after one term as president of the United
States, he was not popular with Americans. Since then,
more and more of his compatriots have come to say,
"Carter is the best ex-President we've ever had." He
had chosen neither to retire in sour resentment at the
electorate's ingratitude nor in fading but leisurely emi¬
nence, but to dedicate himself with undiminished
energy to the causes that grip him. They cover a broad
spectrum, and usually he pursues them quietly. But
now and then there are spectacular, news-making
bursts.
His trips to North Korea, to Haiti and to Bosnia in
rapid succession in 1994 were so startling that cartoon¬
ists were inspired to draw a desolate, hopeless war
scene or even a furiously quarreling husband and wife
over a caption that said some version of "Send for
Jimmy Carter." A miracle worker? A meddler? A right¬
eous, naive moralizer? He was accused of all, and he
didn't seem to care.
In those three mediations, he brought spectacular
results in one case Haiti where he persuaded the
governing military junta to depart peacefully, permit¬
ting the elected president, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to
return under protection of an American invasion force
without a shot being fired. In North Korea, he also
defused an imminent threat of war, on terms accept¬
able to the U.S. government but criticized by its
domestic opponents as giving insufficient guarantees
that Pyongyang was abandoning its ambition to build
nuclear weapons, the issue of the crisis. In Bosnia, he
achieved no more than a tenuous four-month cease-fire,
less than fully observed but still bringing more respite
Managua
(Nicaragua), 1990.
Jimmy Carter heads
an international
observer mission
during the
presidential election.
than dozens of previous cease-fires and providing
breathing space for more negotiations which may or
may not get anywhere. This is a mixed score, but in all
cases lives, perhaps a great many lives, were saved.
Problems were left, of course, but he had achieved the
purpose of giving peace a chance.
Mr. Carter has been embarking on such missions for
quite a while, and he brings to them not only his
stature and prestige but an accumulation of tech¬
niques and attitudes developed by hard, and some¬
times negative, experience. He explained some of them
in an interview in the New York Times magazine with
Jim Wooten, an American journalist who had written
his biography.
For one thing, he isn't afraid of failure. This was
critical in Pale, where he made clear to the Bosnian
Serb leader Radovan Karadzic that he would just walk
away empty-handed if minimum terms weren't
accepted. He had no personal stake in the appearance
of success. Further, he was aware that Karadzic had
already lied to him, as so often to others. That
encounter had begun when a delegation of American
Serbs called on him in his home town of Plains,
Georgia, with an invitation from Karadzic to take part
in peace efforts. "I knew he wanted to use me," Carter
told Wooten, "so I told them I'd consider it only if the
Serbs would agree to a cease-fire."
DOING THE RIGHT THING
Word came back that Karadzic would go much fur¬
ther. He would end the war, free all UN hostages,
reopen Sarajevo airport, allow free movement for
peace-keepers, release all Muslim prisoners under nine¬
teen, respect human rights, and accept a cease-fire in
Sarajevo before Carter's arrival. None of that hap¬
pened by the time he got to Bosnia, shortly before
Christmas, as many had warned Carter to expect. Hé
wasn't optimistic, but he went to Karadzic's head¬
quarters at Pale with his proposals nonetheless.
There, he took care to observe another of his nego¬
tiating precepts. No recriminations, suspension of
judgment, allowing enough time for interlocutors "to
understand that there's nothing on the table except a
mutual effort to reach some sort of agreement. Of
course, there has to be a table. People in conflict have
to be willing to talk about ending it, or at least
30

FLORA LEWIS,
a noted American
journalist
specializing in
foreign affairs, is the
author of several
books, including
Europe: Road to
Unity (1992).
Jimmy Carter acted
as an observer
during the
presidential election
in Haiti (1990).
changing it, and there has to be someone willing to talk
to them, however odious they are and that's where I
come in."
Carter is a deeply religious man, a "born again
Christian", which means an adult rededication to the
ideals and principles of his faith. It has brought a rec¬
titude and austerity to his own behaviour and a confi¬
dence that he knows precisely what is right that can
seem chilling at a distance. But he can also muster a
tolerance and indulgence for others, whatever despi¬
cable things they've done, that give him an apparent
belief that no one is beyond redemption, everyone
should be given the chance to be humane and resolve
conflict.
His words of kindness and sympathy for the Haitian
leaders who had such a murderous record shocked
many. But he thought it worthwhile and wasn't
ashamed to tell what he called "a little white lie"
about President Clinton's acceptance of the Haitian
pseudo-President's signature on their departure agree¬
ment if that's what it took to get them out of the way
without war. He isn't interested in retribution, but in
solutions. He's after getting something done, and he is
remarkably resistant to personal attack. Nothing said
about him seems to irritate him more than the sugges¬
tion that his motivation is personal enchancement, that
his goal is the Nobel Peace Prize.
"I do what I do because I think it's the right thing
to do," he told Wooten. "Most of the time, believe it or
not, I enjoy myself. Sometimes I even have fun doing
my duty. Imagine that," he said with a chuckle.
All recent American presidents have set up libraries
and sometimes foundations, but unlike the others
which are essentially devoted to history, the Carter
Center at Emory University and the adjoining Carter
Library, in Atlanta, are action-oriented. They run lots
of conferences, the modern version of monastic convivi¬
ality, but also a surprising variety of programmes that
deal with regional problems, health scourges, agricul¬
tural innovation, human rights and, of course, conflict
resolution.
Carter has established a Council of Freely Elected
Heads of Government, which sends teams to monitor
elections in Latin America and has on occasion made the
difference between rigged and reasonably honest votes
that actually brought a democratic transfer of power.
Nicaragua and Guyana are examples. He has been per¬
sonally involved in peace negotiations in Liberia, between
Ethiopia and the Eritrean rebels, and in Sudan. Some¬
times there is a long preparation, many trips establishing
personal contacts, before he gets results. Sometimes
there are no results. He shows no discouragement, as he
shows no triumphalism when he succeeds.
FORCE OF CONVICTION
There are aspects to his personality that were abrasive
and hurt him with the American public when he was in
office. He ran against Washington, as an outsider, one of
the folks, and it got him elected. To prove he hadn't
become pompous and self-inflated, he was pho¬
tographed carrying his own suitcase on official trips,
even revealing anguished exhaustion while jogging.
Many Americans weren't comfortable with that much
show of being "just like us"; they weren't sure they
wanted that un-presidential looking a president. His
toothy smile was taut, and he spoke earnestly of
national "malaise," put in sharp contrast by his suc¬
cessor Bonald Beagan, who always assured Americans
they were "Number One" in the world and looked
relaxed and cheerful whatever happened. It may be a
flaw of human nature, but it shouldn't be surprising
that people found Dr. Feel-good more appealing than
Dr. Do-right.
Even Carter's name somehow set him apart, instead
of giving him the aura of friendly familiarity he seemed
to suppose. His proper name is James Earl Carter, Jr.,
and when he became president many thought it
unseemly to call him by the nickname Jimmy. But he
had grown up and governed Georgia as Jimmy, and he
insisted that he hadn't changed and neither should the
name he went by.
To look at, he is a medium sort of man, neither
large nor small, overwhelming nor reclusive, impressive
31


nor indistinguishable, not the type that immediately
draws the eye of strangers. His force lies not in person¬
ality but in conviction. He eschews florid rhetoric and
sets himself clear and narrowly defined objectives,
wiping out the plague of guinea worm in Africa, getting
a cease-fire in Bosnia. He wants to change the world,
but accepts that it can best be done in specific, modest
steps, and his persistence in pressing them is relentless.
No doubt historians will give his presidency better
marks than did his contemporaries. His contributions
to America's relations with the world were lasting: the
Panama Canal treaty, the Camp David peace treaty
between Egypt and Israel, the nuclear arms reduction
treaty with the U.S.S.R., establishment of diplomatic
relations with China, and perhaps most important of
all and undoubtedly of great personal satisfaction to
him, the establishment of human rights as a functional,
significant part of the international agenda. The
Helsinki accords, which made the way a government
treats its own citizens a legitimate international con¬
cern and not an exclusive sovereign matter, were signed
by his predecessor, Gerald Ford. But it was Jimmy
Carter who gave substance to the paper promises.
AN ITINERANT PRIVATE CITIZEN
Somehow, it has turned out that the 39th president of
the United States has won more affection and admira¬
tion as an itinerant private citizen, sticking his nose into
other people's quarrels, than he did as the head of a
super-power. At a time when U.S. involvement in the
world seems to be shrinking and others worry more
about the country's indifference than what they used
to consider a will to dominate, Jimmy Carter's almost
ubiquitous efforts have a special value. He admits he
shares the common human pleasure at being appreci¬
ated, but he isn't much moved by criticism or reward
because he has his own sense of fulfilment in doing.
When interviewer Wooten insisted that he must
really want the Nobel peace prize, saying, "But you
wouldn't reject it, would you? I mean, you'd like to be
chosen, right?" Carter replied, "Of course, but I'm
telling you that isn't what this is all about. Doesn't even
come close. My goodness, what if it were? What if the
Nobel were the be-all and end-all of my existence? And
what if it never happened? . . . Well, what sort of dried-
up, shriveled-up, disappointed old prune of a man
would I be then?"
That he isn't. He is still running to see to the things
he sees a need to do. And then he goes home, to his
modest house in Plains, Georgia, a modest country
town, and walks the land that gives his sense of place
and permanence. It is a 2,000-acre spread, some of it in
the family for 150 years, and on parts of it he farms
the lowly peanut. Nothing grandiose, but his earth, his
feeling of having a purpose and serving it to his utmost
capacity.
