INTERVIEW



ERNEST J. GAINES
talks to Bernard Magnier
Ernest J. Gaines (born 1933) grew up on a
Louisiana plantation where, at the age of
nine, he started work as a potato picker,
earning 50 cents a day. When he was fifteen
he joined his mother in California, where he
began to study and discovered a passion for
reading. Disappointed to find in books
nothing about the world he knew, he decided
to start writing himself. His first short stories
were published in 1956 and were followed by
novels including Of Love and Dust (1967) and
The Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman
(1971), which brought him to the attention
of a wide American public. Considered a
major "Southern novelist", in 1994 he
received the U.S. National Book Award for A
Lesson before Dying.
Tell us something about your child¬
hood and family background.
For more than a century my family
lived on a sugarcane plantation in
Louisiana and I am the product of a mix¬
ture of Africans, Indians and whites.
That's all I know about my ancestors. I
don't know which African country or
which Indian tribe they came from.
So I was born on the plantation where
my parents worked, and that was where I
first went to school. Later I attended
school at New Rose, a nearby town that I
call Bayonne in my books, until I was fif¬
teen. Then my parents separated. My
mother went to five in California and I fol¬
lowed her there to continue my studies. It
was then that I became interested in
writing and started to frequent public
libraries, which in California were open to
everyone, not just whites.
What were the first books you read,
the ones that most influenced you?
I liked to read fiction. There were no
black writers and so I started by reading
Southern writers. But I didn't think much
of the demeaning way they spoke ofblacks .
I turned to European writers, particu¬
larly the Russians Gogol, Turgenev and
Chekhov who described peasant life in a
rich and interesting way. My first novel,
Catherine Carmier, was inspired by Tur¬
genev 's Fathers and Sons. Later I discov¬
ered Maupassant and Flaubert.
Did you take these writers as your
models?
All these European writers only half
satisfied me because they only talked
about their own people, and I couldn't
find myself in their work. I wanted to
talk about my people, so when I was
around sixteen or seventeen years old I
started to write.
When I was twenty, after I had done
my military service, I went to college,
where I studied creative writing and Eng¬
lish literature. It was there that I discov¬
ered Hemingway, Steinbeck, Joyce and
others. But none of these great novelists
had any particular influence on me. As
someone once said, to take from one
person is plagiarism but to take from
everybody is genius!
What was your first published work? 5

INTERVIEW
AH the great writers
are regionalists.
Faulkner wrote about
Mississippi, Homer
about Greece, Balzac
about Paris,
Shakespeare about a
kind of England. But
that doesnt mean
they're not universal.
A short story called Tiw Turtles, which
appeared in 1956 in a college literary
review in San Francisco. The turtles were
a kind of challenge for two young fish¬
ermen. Both of them are taken by their
fathers to a young lady to initiate them to
sex. The little boy who is afraid of the
turtle is also afraid of the girl. The little boy
who's brave enough to fish and catch the
turtles obeys the father. I am very proud
of this short story. It has just been repub¬
lished by the journal of the university
where I teach now. Thirty-five years later!
When did you turn to writing novels?
A literary agent read The Turtles
and liked it. She contacted my professor,
and she encouraged me to write my first
novel. I had already written what I
thought was a novel when I was nine¬
teen years old. I sent it to a publisher,
who turned it down and sent it back to
me. I threw it on the fire. Ten years later
I went back to this novel, which took
me five years to finish and gave me a lot
of trouble. But all the time I was learning
how to write. After it had been substan¬
tially rewritten a dozen or more times
and returned to me seven times by the
publisher, it was finally accepted. That
was how Catherine Cannier came to be
published by Athenaeum. Thirty-five
O hundred copies were printed, and I
doubt even twenty-five hundred were
sold. The rest were remaindered at 25
cents. If you could get your hands on
an original copy today, you'd have to
pay more than a hundred dollars for it.
In the United States you are thought
of as a "Southern writer". Do you think
that label accurately describes a lit¬
erary category or is it too narrow?
It's too narrow. I have been catego¬
rized "a black writer", "a Southern
writer", "a Californian writer" because
I lived in California, "a Louisiana writer"
because I wrote about Louisiana. ... I
don't feel I fit into any of these cate¬
gories. I just try to be a decent writer.
And yet almost all your novels are set
in a small area, Bayonne Parish	
All the great writers are regionalists.
Faulkner wrote about Mississippi,
Homer about Greece, Balzac about
Paris, Shakespeare about a kind of Eng¬
land. But that doesn't mean they're not
universal. People write about what they
know best, and readers respond to that
wherever they happen to live. The Auto¬
biography ofMiss Jane Pittman has been
translated into several languages, and
readers of all races have written to me
and said they felt that the old lady was
somebody they recognized.
In a way, isn't your Bayonne Parish
the Louisiana equivalent of Faulkner's
Yoknapatawpha County, in Mississippi?
I did get the inspiration for the parish
of Bayonne from Faulkner's mythical
Yoknapatawpha County and the use of
the multiple point-of-view in the novel.
But Faulkner himself was influenced by
Sherwood Anderson, whom he knew,
and by James Joyce's writings about
Dublin. So just as Faulkner inherited
from them, I inherited from Faulkner.
It's a continuing process.
I certainly feel close to Faulkner. We
both belong to the South. We write about
the same things life in small towns, the
everyday struggles of poor people, the
influence of big land-owners on small
farmers, race problems. And Mississippi
isn't far from Louisiana.
In your novels a breaking point often
occurs as a result of a love affair, as if
this kind of relationship is a crucible for
all kinds of taboos and conflicts.
That is true of some of my novels , but
not all. A Lesson before Dying is the story
of an uneducated young black condemned
to death for a crime he did not commit and
a black schoolteacher who restores his
dignity before he dies. Love relationships
are not the only situations that breed con¬
flict; it is constant. The major conflict in
my work is when the black male attempts
to go beyond the line that is drawn for
him. But you've also got conflict between
young and old, between the desire to go
back to the place where you were born or
to stay where you are, between religious
feeling and atheism. . . . There has to be
a conflict before there can be a story and
before the story reveals racial tensions.
Early in their careers, the French-
speaking writers of black Africa and the
Caribbean gathered beneath the
banner of the "négritude" movement to

ERNEST J. GAINES
assert black cultural values. Do you
think this movement is still relevant?
Yes, I do. Even if I don't belong to this
school or to any other school, I accept
that this idea of négritude, put forward
by writers who express themselves in
French, can provide young writers with
the bearings that are so lacking. In my
own little sphere I do the same thing as
these African and West Indian writers. I
try to describe the daily lives of African-
Americans as well as I can. I think I'm
doing the same thing as they are without
putting myself in a box.
What are your feelings about
Africa?
I have never been there. I feel very
close to Africa because of my origins
but also because every human being
ought to feel concerned about the very
serious things that are happening there.
I sympathize with the sorrows of Africa
because they are similar to those we
experienced in the South forty-odd
years ago. But there arc problems in
the rest of the world, too. I like African
literature and music just as I like those
that come to us from Europe and the
Americas. My culture is, perhaps above
all, Western.
Do you read African writers?
A little. Not nearly as much as I
should!
Do you feel that there is a black cul¬
tural community in the United States?
I don't think there is any kind of
school ofblack culture in the United States
today. The expression "black commu¬
nity" is very vague. Is there a white com¬
munity? I don't know. Nevertheless, black
writers tackle the problems they know
well, but with different approaches. Toni
Morrison, Alice Walker, Maya Angelou
and I share common preoccupations.
These days there are plenty of meet
ings, anthologies, book series and crit¬
ical works on black African and Afro-
American literature and so on. Do you
think it's ludicrous to lump together
writers from the United States, the
Caribbean and Africa because they are
black?
No, not at all! I approve of this kind
of thing. It is important for us black
writers to meet and talk because our
works are not taught as much in colleges
as those of whites. All the same I don't
spend too much time at those gatherings;
I prefer staying at home and writing.
In my own little
sphere I do the same
thing as these
African and West
Indian writers. 1 try
to describe the daily
lives of African-
Americans as well
as I can.
Louisiana is presented in your work
as a land of conflict but also as a place
of meetings, of peace and compro¬
mise. In spite of "the sound and the
fury", your writing seems more serene
than that of other black writers.
I write from my own viewpoint. I
don't see the world as Jimmy Baldwin or
Richard Wright did. I may not have suf¬
fered racism as directly as either one of
those men did, and I haven't lived in
large cities as they did in Harlem or
Chicago's south side but we have fought
for the same causes. I went to California
when I was very young, to a decent, small
town where I was completely integrated
into the school. There were people of all
backgrounds. There were whites, his-
panics, native Americans and Asians.
That doesn't stop me from writing
about serious subjects. In/1 Lesson before
Dying an innocent person is sent to the
electric chair. I was criticized for The
Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman,
because at the time of the civil rights
struggle the life of a woman aged 110 was
not a topical subject! For me it was pri¬
marily a piece of literary work, sure, but
I also described in this book terrible events
that were not unconnected with what was
going on. I'm doing what the others are
doing, just more quietly.
Do you think that things have
changed in North America in this
respect?
There have been some changes in the
last forty years, but I don't feel that
writers and artists have changed very
much in their choice of subjects. The
change has not been substantial enough to
halt the struggle against racism. The race
problem still exists that's why I have
been writing about it for forty years. On
the other hand, the work of black writers
is certainly far more widely accepted now.
Today I am accepted on the same footing
as others, and that would have been
impossible thirty years ago.
Have things changed in everyday
life?
Some people have changed, especially
in educated circles. The situation has
changed for some people, progress has
been made. People have accepted black
people's participation in public life. Times
have changed from the days when Nat
King Cole had his show cancelled simply
because he held a white female's hand up
on the stage at the end of a show when the
credits were going on. But so many serious
problems are still unsolved education
and unemployment, for example. There's
still a long way to go. I
BERNARD MAGNIER
is a French journalist specializing in African
literature.
