Methuselah
or
Peter Pan?
n wanji
t is very hard for us not to realize we are
100 years old, for everyone keeps on
telling us so: the cinema is about to clock
up the first century of its existence.
Is the cinema young or old? Has it,
within a mere century, come full circle? Is it
not beginning to repeat itself, to show signs
of senility and approaching death? Could
this first century also be its last?
It is certainly true that the language of
film has evolved incredibly fast. The gulf
Is the cinema young or old? asks
a leading French scriptwriter in a
forceful article on the dilemmas
facing the seventh art, including
the tensions between America and
Europe over the liberalization of
trade in audiovisual products.
that separates a monologue in Racine from a
Surrealist poem, or a Giotto from a
Kandinsky, was bridged by the cinema in
less than fifty years. It is an art in a hurry
and ever on the move, a form of expression
that is constantly being manhandled and
mauled. This sometimes leads film-makers to
regard straightforward shifts of syntax, or
state-of-the-art equipment, or satellite
broadcasting, or so-called "new" images, as
profound or even revolutionary changes.
That great inventiveness, which has been a
characteristic of the cinema since its very
beginnings, tends to generate a state of exhil¬
aration in practitioners of film, which
encourages them to confuse, not for the first
time, technique with thought, technique
ES

with emotion, technique with knowledge.
Signs of change are mistakenly identified
with the deeper substance of film. The won¬
derful proliferation of images that dog us
wherever we go only aggravates this feeling
of intoxication. Struck dumb by each new
marvel of technology, we obstinately over¬
look the most fundamental thing of all: the
true and singular meaning of what we see.
Yet what we see is a repetition of the same
familiar patterns in different technological
disguises. We talk of eternal youth and
renewal, and we applaud. This explains our
sense of utter confusion, our feeling that
everything we thought we knew is con¬
stantly being called into question. It explains
our permanent state of feverish dissatisfac¬
tion, our almost unhealthy need to switch
from one form to another and to regard
that process as real change.
It also explains our weariness, which
arises from the repetition of an illusion. We
Pierre Brasseur,
Arletty and
Jean-Louis Barrault in
The Children of
Paradise
(France, 1943-1944),
directed by
Marcel Carné
and written by
Jacques Prévert.
know full well that at a time when we are
swamped by images it is increasingly diffi¬
cult to create an image a truly dense and
radiant image which our brain immediately
locks into and never abandons.
So is the cinema old? In its 100 years of
existence, it would seem to have gone
through every conceivable phase: primitive,
classical and baroque periods, followed by a
renaissance (also known as the "NewWave"),
a Surrealist, symbolic and even abstract
period, all jumbled together and overlapping
each other without any chronological rhyme
or reason. The result today is that film¬
makers seem to have lost their productive
ambition and are resigned to working in an
often conventional narrative form or pro¬
ducing remakes of the same old stories.
Amazing maturity There was a time,
thirty or forty years ago, when the
cinema vowed it would swallow up all other

forms of expression, from architecture and
painting to music, drama and, of course, lit¬
erature. It was hailed as the complete art, the
art we had been waiting for since the begin¬
ning of History, the art of the twentieth
century and the centuries after it.
Naturally, the dream fizzled out. Litera¬
ture is not dead, nor is painting; and the the¬
atre all over the world seems more thriving
than ever. Film has had to resign itself to
being nothing but film which is already
quite an achievement. And the technical
exploits which brought it such loudly pro¬
claimed glory are now a nuisance and even a
hindrance.
Sooner or later we may enter the universe
of virtual images and be able, in our drawing
rooms, to act out scenes with utterly sub¬
missive creatures that are the spitting image
of Marilyn Monroe or Napoleon. But that
day is still several decades away, and in the
meantime the cinema remains an image lim¬
ited by a frame and projected onto a flat
screen, either large or small. That projection
has to obey a certain pace and send out a pre¬
cise number of frames per second, otherwise
the film being shown becomes an incompre¬
hensible mishmash of images or else, on the
contrary, slows down and stops.
Paradoxically, then, what was once the
very strength of the cinema may today be its
weakness. Film is a technical exploit, but an
exploit limited by the technique itself. It is
far from certain that we shall succeed in
extricating ourselves from that contradic¬
tion.
The cinema has also aged in another, even
more alarming way: it has lost its inventive,
investigative streak, selling its soul to com¬
mercial forces and giving up the notion of
original expression. As a result, a great debate
continues regularly to pit American distrib¬
utors against European film-makers. Let us
examine that issue in a little more detail.
TWO traditions The American cinema,
or rather the American sound image as
conveyed by both cinema and television,
seems to be spreading into every corner of
the world, rapidly destroying all local pro¬
duction. This conquest is in fact a recon-
quest. At the beginning of the 1920s, Holly¬
wood enjoyed a virtual monopoly in the
manufacture of moving pictures about 80
per cent of world production. That per¬
centage fell during the decades that followed,
as a result of the rise of national film indus¬
tries and the advent of the Second World
War, which cut off many countries from the
American distribution network.
Ever since 1 945, a clearly defined and fully
avowed process of reconquest has been
underway. The bosses of this industry
regard film as a commodity that is in no way
cultural in nature. The American distribu¬
tors' firm and sincere message to us is: the
cinema is our patch why don't you go and
manufacture something else?
Rather than spend time on the superficial
slanging match in which the Americans are
regularly described as "imperialists" and the
French as "chauvinists", it is important to
remember, I think, that our two opposing
stances, which were brought into confronta¬
tion during the GATT1 negotiations, are the
product of two parallel traditions.
The older of those traditions is Anglo-
American and goes back to an eighteenth-
century statute on copyright passed in Eng¬
land during the reign of Queen Anne. This
statute enabled printers to buy a work from
an author and do what they wished with it.
In the last three centuries that tradition has
been kept alive although it has had a
bumpy ride in northern Europe and, at a
later date, in the United States.
Another tradition, which began with
Beaumarchais in France in the eighteenth cen¬
tury, holds on the contrary that the person
who writes a work is its actual author and
has financial and moral rights to it. That
view, which was vigorously promoted by
Victor Hugo, gained currency and resulted,
at the end of the nineteenth century, in the
Bern Convention, to which nearly 100 states
throughout the world now adhere
Jean-Claude Carrière,
French writer,
playwright and
scriptwriter, is
President of FEMIS, a
Paris cinema and
audiovisual school.
Erich von Stroheim
(centre) with (from his
left) Pierre Fresnay and
Jean Gabin in Jean
Renoir's The Great
Illusion (France, 1937),
the story of a group of
Frenchmen in a German
prisoner-of-war camp
during the First World
War.
|

This radical difference between two con¬
ceptions explains why the American cinema,
never regarded as an art, has been very much
the work of producers. In Europe, on the
other hand, and especially in France, the
notion has grown up that the cinema is a
means of expression and even an art in its
own right. For this reason, the author or
authors of a film, by virtue of the fact that
they enjoy rights to their works as a result
of the Bern Convention, regard themselves
as artists on a par with painters or writers.
The immediate upshot of all this has been
that if the cinema is an art it should be con¬
nected with the Culture Ministry and be
helped and even protected. This help has
taken various forms in France since 1947, but
consists mainly of a tax on cinema takings,
which finds its way back into the hands of
producers when they produce a new film.
Adangerous misunderstanding The
various debates that pitted the French
against the Americans during the GATT
talks have not affected our longstanding and
unshakable admiration for the great Amer¬
ican cinema. Film seems to have been etched
into the very substance of America. It is hard
In Luis Buñuel's The
Discreet Charm of the
Bourgeoisie (France,
1972), written by Jean-
Claude Carrière, the
colonel's guests
discover they are on
stage before a theatre
audience.
to imagine one without the other. The dis¬
agreement is in fact based on a misunder¬
standing. Once that is realized, it becomes
clear that our two traditions, which have
always existed alongside each other, and very
often harmoniously, cannot possibly merge
into a single tradition.
Neither of the two can be wiped out by
the other. They have to go on coexisting.
Any monopoly of images in the world of
Celia Johnson
and Trevor
Howard in Brief
Encounter
(United
Kingdom,
1945), directed
by David Lean.

the near future would be unfair for some
and dangerous for everyone.
The argument one most often hears is
that of "free competition". The trouble is
that these two words do not mean the same
thing everywhere. It is obviously absurd to
claim, for instance, that Mali and California
are "free" to compete with each other. As
someone put it, it is a case of "a free fox in a
free henhouse".
A straightforward trade clause in a treaty
could well result in the demise of a means of
expression something which even the most
ferociously dictatorial measures have never
been able to achieve in the history of the
world. And that has already occurred in
many countries. Producers and authors have
not always spotted the danger. They have
preferred to throw in the sponge on the pre¬
text of "allowing a free play of market
forces". And the fox got in through the
main door, bringing with him basketfuls
not only of sounds and pictures, but of var¬
ious products represented and often extolled
by those sounds and pictures, such as
clothes, drinks, cars, cigarettes and even the
ordinary things of daily life. We now know
that no image is innocent. An image is much
more than an image.
AVital language Thus, at a deeper level,
the question we have to ask ourselves is:
is the filmed image necessary for a people? Is
this way of telling ourselves our own sto¬
ries, of holding a mirror up to our own faces
with today's techniques, a simple pleasure of
life or a vital necessity?
I would answer that it is a vital necessity.
American distributors would argue the con¬
trary: it does not matter, they would say,
that the Africans, the Brazilians or even the
Europeans can no longer make films. We'll
make them for them.
African television viewers already have no
choice: they are given a forced diet of for¬
eign-made police series and sentimental soaps
that never address their own concerns.
And the same lurking danger threatens
Europe. The French production system,
which is possibly the most sophisticated in
the world in that it allows public subsidies to
be used along with private money, is Europe's
last bastion of resistance against the American
invasion. If it were to be swept away, not only
would the death knell be sounded for the
French cinema, but we could kiss goodbye to
the last remnants of a European cinema Wim
Wenders, Andrzej Wajda, Pedro Almodovar,
Theodoros Angelopoulos and many others
and indeed to the last surviving examples of
ambitious, individual and experimental film¬
makers in the world, whose films are always
co-produced according to the French
system Akira Kurosawa, Nikita Mikhalkov,
Zhang Yimou and Souleymane Cissé.
By sticking up for ourselves we are
sticking up for others. It has nothing to do
with chauvinism. On the contrary, the aim
is to defend a "different cinema" wherever it
emerges in the world. Two radically different
conceptions have clashed. The two countries
which invented the cinema, the United States
and France, are confronting each other once
again. This is no doubt a great pity, particu¬
larly as this trade war is one-way. No one in
Europe wants to see the American cinema
disappear. It would be absurd and unreal.
The American cinema has long been very
widely shown on French screens, and I only
hope that this continues to be the case.
French films, on the other hand, are virtu¬
ally nowhere to be seen in the United States.
So, when it comes down to it, is the
cinema young or old? The answer can be
provided only by those who will work in
the cinema of the future. There is no way
that it can disappear as a product. But as a
means of expression, a form of artistic exper¬
imentation or a way of looking at the
world and not as "entertainment", which
makes us turn away from the world it is
indisputably under threat.
Even so, let's lay our bets on the younger
generation, on the indomitable forces that
are ours, on the obscure, startling and
breathless leap from one century to the next.
1 GATT: General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. A set of
international agreements (now superseded by the World Trade
Organization) concerning some 140 countries and aimed at the
liberalization of world trade. An agreement reached between the
United States and the European Union on 14 December 1993
maintains protection for the European audiovisual industry in the
name of what has been called the "cultural exception". (Ed.)
Theo Angelopoulos's
The Suspended Step of
the Stork (France,
Greece, Italy and
Switzerland, 1991)
features Marcello
Mastroianni and Jeanne
Moreau in the story of a
reporter who
recognizes a writer who
has supposedly
disappeared.
M
