Solar panels supply power for a
water pump (above right). This
pump in the village of Sarwal in
Bihar (India) has been powered
by solar energy since 1982.



India's self-help solar villages
by Sanjit Bunker Roy
India is full ofcontrasts and contradictions. On the one hand there is "Bharat"* or traditional
India with its 600,000 villages, where life moves slowly, where centuries-oldsocial structures
remain unchanged, and where 70per cent ofthe country 's 940 million people live and die. And
then there is "India", a young country struggling to overcome the usualproblems of
underdevelopment, "India", argues Bunker Roy, has often optedfor large dams or electrification
projects that sometimes fail to respond to the needs of the humbler inhabitants of "Bharat". Here
he talks about two successful community-basedprojects which, with the use ofsolar energy, have
transformed the lives ofpoorfanners in depressed regions ofBihar and Orissa and ofpeople
living in remote Himalyan villages.
rit takes twenty-nine-year-old Tsewang
Narbo two days to walk across the 6,000-
metre-high Khardungla pass, the highest in the
Ladakh area of India's northern state of Jammu
and Kashmir. A further 60 kilometres by bus
and army truck bring him to the district head¬
quarters in Leh. Here he picks up distilled water,
fuses and other equipment before beginning the
long trek back home to his wife and five children.
But Tsewang Narbo does not mind the hard¬
ship or the strain. Since 1993, this barely literate
man has become one of the most important per¬
sons in the remote Himalayan village of Diger
where he is responsible for the upkeep and main¬
tenance of 59 solar photovoltaic units (SPVs)
which provide lighting for his and surrounding
villages and which have transformed life during
the long-snow-bound winters when tempera¬
tures can reach -30°C.
Until 1989, the energy needs of these far-
flung villages had been most inadequately met by
Diesel Generating (DG) sets which are costly,
centralized and unreliable, as well as using fossil
fuel that pollutes the environment.
Since it takes twenty-five days to haul up as
many litres of fuel to these villages located at a
height of 5,000 metres, the inhabitants used it
extremely sparingly to make it last the six months
ofwinter. At night, entire families huddled around
a single light no stronger than a candle flame.
Solar lighting therefore seemed nothing short of
a miracle.
When the idea of training semi-literate, unem¬
ployed rural youth to install, maintain and repair
solar units was first put forward by an organiza¬
tion called the Social Work and Research Centre
inTilonia, Rajasthan, engineers and government
officials felt it would never work. They were
convinced the rural poor were too backward and
illiterate to be given so much responsibility. There
was also resistance from contractors and trans¬
porters who supplied DG sets, transmission
wires, poles and diesel, and who stood to lose
their business.
But the response from the villagers was so
enthusiastic that it ground out all opposition.
They were even willing to pay one dollar per
unit per month for solar lighting; paying for such 29

At night, entire families huddled
around a single light no stronger
than a candle flame. Solar lighting
therefore seemed nothing
short of a miracle.
In Tllonia, a village in India's
Rajasthan state, "barefoot
engineers" operate solar
installations and teach young
people about solar energy.
30
SANJIT (BUNKER) ROY
is director of the Social Work
and Research Centre at Tllonia,
Rajasthan state, in northern
India. He is also chairman of the
Environmental Liaison Centre
International (ELCI), a non¬
governmental organization
based in Nairobi.
services, however heavily subsidized, is unheard-
of in Ladakh. So far, nearly $3,000 have been
collected from the 28-village community.
Tsewang Narbo, who was selected for the job
by the village community in June 1993, is now
capable of fabricating invertors devices that con¬
vert direct current into alternating current and
other apparatus, repairing fuses, changing tube
lights, filling batteries with distilled water, and
installing solar units in villages which can only be
reached on foot. (When the SPVs were installed in
1993, the batteries and panels were brought up by
yaks and then airlifted by helicopters of the Indian
Air Force.) His job has so far brought him a total
of $260, a welcome addition to his meagre earnings
from goat farming.
Tilonia's efforts have also brought about a
change in the energy policy of the State Govern¬
ment of Jammu and Kashmir. There are now
about a dozen trained persons like Tsewang
Narbo who look after solar units installed in 500
individual houses in over twenty villages.



Solar pumps bring life to dying villages
The large-scale use of solar energy in India was
first promoted by Pierre Amado, often described
as "a Frenchman with an Indian heart". Amado,
who served as French Cultural Attaché in India
between 1953 and 1960, was so fascinated by
Indian culture that he specialized in the Ganges
Valley civilization and now teaches post-graduate
courses on the subject in Paris.
"As I became older," he explained, "I began to
ask myself: 'I have taken so much from India, but
what have I given back?' I thought the time had
come to pay my debts to India. Since I knew the
villages in the Ganges valley particularly well, I
decided to launch a project there. I talked to sev¬
eral researchers and came to the conclusion that
the use of solar energy for pumping irrigation
water would be most appropriate."
India has over 90 million farmers with small
land holdings. Most of them remain without
water during the summer months. There is water
but no power to pump it and so many farmers are
being forced to migrate to the cities. "I realized
that unless something was done to help these
very tiny hamlets inhabited by very poor people
they would be condemned to underdevelopment
for centuries to come. The villages I am talking
about are not connected to roads and have not
been electrified," says Amado.
In 1979, Pierre Amado launched an associa¬
tion called ASVIN (Application of Solar Voltaics
in Villages in India and Nepal), which in Indian
mythology signifies the twin sons of the sun,
symbolizing agriculture and animal husbandry.
Working with local voluntary organizations in the
villages of Sarwar (Bihar) and Gobalpur (Orissa),
ASVIN has been able to demonstrate that if the
community is taken into confidence during the
planning process, and if local skills are mobi¬
lized, barely literate villagers are capable of
installing, maintaining and repairing solar pumps
for irrigation on their own.
"I remember the ceremony to inaugurate the
solar pumps in the village of Sarwar in Bihar in
1982," says Amado. "The Development Com¬
missioner gave wheat and vegetable seeds to each
family. Since in this region wheat has not tradi¬
tionally been cultivated, I thought the villagers
would either sell the seed or grind it for flour. But
not one of them sold the seed. They told me 'We
want to eat the wheat grown with our solar
water.' I call it harvesting the sun."
* Bharat ¡s the traditional Sanskrit name for India. Editor
