Betty Friedan THE NORTH
A DISTURBING INDEPENDENCE
8
The well-known American feminist writer and organizer Betty Friedan is the
author of TheFeminineMystique (1963), a classic of feminist literature. In 1966 she
founded the National Organization for Women (NOW), whose goals included the
legalization of abortion and recognition of the principle of equal pay for equal work.
Women's movements are now at least thirty
years old in the West. What progress has been
made in that time?
The modern women's movement began thirty
years ago, but the battle for women's rights began
a hundred years ago and seemed to end, in the
United States at any rate, in 1920 when women
won the right to vote. In 1963, when my book The
Feminine Mystique came out, the only image of
woman was that defined solely in terms of her
sexual relation to man as wife, as mother, as house¬
wife not as a person defining herself through her
own actions in society.
That image became especially pervasive in the
years after the Second World War when the men
came back from the war and took their jobs back,
and women, who had been working, had to return
home again. During the Depression and the war
there had been two generations of women who
had not had babies. Now they started to have babies
again, and industry needed them as housewives to
sell to. The old image of a woman's place being in
the home came back in the majority of women in
America used to work a little before marriage, but
basically they married and had children. Very few
women who didn't marry worked outside the
home. Anyway, the story of the battle for women's
rights seemed to be over.
History books date the beginning of the modern
feminist movement to my book because I broke
through the feminine mystique and stated that
women are persons and as such are entitled to their
human and American birthright: equality of oppor¬
tunity and the right to have their voices heard when
society takes decisions.
Over the last thirty years in the United States
and elsewhere women's movements have been
fighting for equal opportunities in education and
employment, for women to control their own
bodies, for the right to choose. Women have fought
to define ground-rules in fields and professions
such as the law and medicine which had hitherto
been defined only by men in terms of male experi¬
ence. In the United States we have succeeded to a
large extent in achieving those objectives. We have
laws on equal opportunity, employment and edu¬
cation. We have made sex discrimination illegal in
the way that race discrimination is supposed to be
illegal.
Women now occupy management and leader¬
ship positions in every field and profession. They
make 70 cents for every dollar men make. Their
enrolment rates in medical and law schools have
risen from 4 per cent to nearly 50 per cent. Women
who used to cook the church suppers are now
preaching the sermons. They are showing new
styles of leadership in management. They have
become empowered politically, and their votes can
be decisive in elections. Far more women have been
elected to national, state and city offices than ever
before, and more women are being named as judges.
What areas remain unconquered for women?
Has there been a backlash?
It's hard to overestimate how vast the changes
have been! In most Western countries and increas¬
ingly in the developing countries there is a growing
feminist consciousness. Women take for granted
that they are entitled to equal opportunity, that
they have the ability and the right to choose.
But yes, there has been a backlash in the United
States, and it is partly due to economic turmoil.
There has been increasing economic polarization
the top 1 per cent control 40 per cent of the wealth
of the nation. The ranks of the poor and homeless,
large numbers of whom are women, are growing,
and the middle class has its back to the wall. Middle-
class families in America survive because there are
two incomes, and the great majority of women
work outside the home and earn roughly half the
family income. But women's jobs are increasingly
contract-work, without health benefits and security.
Downsizing means that jobs are disappearing and
more and more workers are being laid off. The
main victims of this are men, the so-called "angry
white males." Their frustration is funneled and
manipulated into a backlash against women and
racial minorities. In the United States, they are
trying to cut out programmes for women, chil¬
dren, the elderly and the poor. They are pitting
white men against blacks, women and immigrants,
and they are trying to get rid of affirmative action
CONTINUED ON PAGE 10

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 8 the enforcement of the laws on sex discrimination
and race discrimination.
The backlash is also taking the form of attempts
by fundamentalist religious groups to undo the
right to abortion, the right of women to control
their own bodies, in short, to push women back
into the home again. I think in many countries
there is an uneasiness about women's growing
independence.
Is the quest for equality between women and
men continuing?
There must be equality of opportunities
between men and women. In many countries
women have no control over property or inheri¬
tance, and aren't allowed to earn. They are depen¬
dent on men, and in every single profession the
ground-rules are defined by men. When women can
move as equals in society because of what they
have achieved, their voices and experiences have a
special value because they have fought for equal
opportunity.
well as an ability to mobilize people for a common
goal and a common vision.
What are your hopes for the Beijing conference
and for the future?
It is clear that women will not be pushed back
and that going forward no longer means just the
fight for women's rights; it's no longer just a ques¬
tion of women being paid equally to men. There
must be a bridging between women and men. There
must be a new vision of community that inspires the
restructuring of work and home. New importance
must be attached to community networks and ser¬
vices. The priority must be to achieve a good life for
everyone women, men, children, the elderly and
the poor, young and old, black and white and to
bring to an end the polarizing differences that are
still tearing our nations and our world apart.
Interview by Judithe Bizot
10
In all societies, in both the North and the South,
the liberation of women has led to outbreaks of vio¬
lence against women. Why is this?
Violence is a symptom of the prevailing eco¬
nomic stress and the polarization between the
wealthy and the poor. In the United States men,
including college-educated whites, can no longer
take a career, a profession and life-long dominance for
granted. These are times of turmoil. Men are more
dependent than ever on women. Also women are
now reporting the violence battering and rape
more often than they did. Before, it was considered
a man's right to beat up his wife. But this violence
shouldn't be seen in terms of sexual politics. Women
are being treated as a scapegoat for the increasing eco¬
nomic pressures on men. It is not enough to have
shelters for battered women and to take punitive
measures against men. Women must come up with
a new vision of community with men.
What particular qualities do women bring to the
workplace and to management?
Women are showing new styles of leadership in
management that seem to be very well geared to
today's society and economy, which put a pre¬
mium on flexibility and the ability to adjust to
change. What seems to emerge from studies as I
know from my experience as a consultant to a
number of large companies and to the U.S. army
is that in a crisis and conditions of enormous change,
the hierarchical chain of command and the military
model of control break down. There has to be flex¬
ibility, there has to be non-hierarchical, autonomous
responsibility. Women bring this to the table as
A demonstration of
solidarity at the Third
United Nations World
Conference on Women,
held in Nairobi (Kenya)
in 1985.
