THE BALANCE SHEET
- 2-
The development debate
by Christian Comeliau
Can development be the same for ail ?
; S : : ; '' Has thé United Nations contributed
to development in its fifty years of
existence and if so, to what kind of develop-
ment ? What roule can we expect to see it play
in this field in the coming years ?
In a short article it is scarcely possible to
present a complete assessment'. To do so
would, for a start, be a technically challenging
undertaking : how could precise demarcation
Thé World Food Programme
(WFP) distributed 3. 35 million
tons of food in 1994. Above,
pupils at a school in Paraguay
are given food supplements
under a WFP programme.
Right, food distribution to
people participating in a WFP
food-for-work programme in
Sri Lanka.
CHRISTIAN COMELlAU,
of France, is a Professor and
Deputy Director of Research at
the University Institute of
Development Studies (IUED)
in Geneva. His publications
include Les Relations Nord-Sud
(La Découverte publishers,
Paris, 1991).
lines be drawn between action in support of
development and other related fields such as
international security, human rights, humani-
tarian activities or many specific areas such as
childhood, food, labour and health ? It is dif-
ficult, if not impossible, to give an overall pic-
ture of activities that are many-sided and com-
plex and are carried out by a large number of
specialized agencies and programmes.
Another difficulty in the way of this
assessment is that it is the subject of heated
controversy : given that development results
from a political process rather than from mere
technocratic know-how, it entails choices
between different objectives and arbitration
between different interest groups, and hence a
constant interplay of power relationships,
ideological confrontations and negotiating
stratégie.
An uneven track record
1 should like to emphasize four points.
Firstly, the challenge of meeting the
overall demands of development on a world-
wide scale is an enormous one, made even
greater by recent political and economic
upheavals. No organization is capable of
meeting that challenge single-handed in a sat-
isfactory way. The question thus arises :
should the role of an international organiza-
tion be limited to a few day-to-day manage-
ment tasks, or can it be expected to corne up
with the new ideas and carry out the changes
that such a challenge calls for ? The initial
temptation, as regards the second half of the
question, would be to answer no, but that
would be to overlook the conceptual and
methodological value of ideas recently put
forward by the United Nations such as"sus-
tainable"development,"human"develop-
ment and"social"developmem-even if the
uses to which these concepts have so far been
put fall short of the potential they represent.
Secondly, in the matter of development,
the United Nations has served as an arena for
dialogue and confrontation between North
and South. Confrontation has, however, had
the upper hand over dialogue, and has provedID

Above, a malnourished Somali child is treated in a clinic assisted by the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF). Above right, a girl with goitre is
examined during a UNICEF-assisted campaign against iodine-deficiency
disorders in Bangladesh.
fruitless : either the end result has been incom-
patible sets of demands, as was the case of the
debates surrounding the"New International
Economic Order"in the 1970s, or poorly
presented and inappropriate demands have
been repeatedly put forward, as was the case
with increased public aid to development,
which was supposed to have reached 0. 7 per
cent of donor countries'GNP but still stands
at half that rate !
As to the confrontation between the cap-
italist and socialist theories of development,
no serious debate on the subject ever took
place, with the very regrettable result that
simplistic conceptions of the role of market
forces now hold sway.
Thirdly, the weak point of the United
Nations is that it has never had a proper body
of principales as regards development. It has
always fallen into line with the viewpoints of
the financial institutions, which are them-
selves dominated by neoclassical orthodoxy
and the vested interests of the North, albeit
with a few of the demands of the South,
irreconcilable as they are with that ortho-
doxy, thrown in for good measure. The
United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) itself long felt compelled to mimic
Il
Below, Tajik refugees return home under
the auspices of the Offi ce of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR). Right, a Bhutanese refugee
camp in Nepal.

The makeshift facilities of the
Palestinian refugee camps in
the Gaza strip were severely
damaged by heavy rainfall in
the winter of 1993. Since then,
the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) has upgraded
conditions in the camps.
M exican children take part
in a polio immunization day
demonstration as part of a
campaign held under the
auspices of the World Health
Organization (WHO).
the principles and outlook of the World
Bank, which accounts for the incoherent
nature of the"development decades"and
suchlike solemnly proclaimed events.
Fourthly, this being the case, it cornes as
no surprise to see the very uneven quality of
the development activities of the United
Nations, not only regarding population, the
environment or children but also in the
fields of structural adjustment, industrializa-
tion, food and international trade. This
uneven track record, parti inevitable
though it may be, is particularly regrettable
since the United Nations has shown on
many occasions that it is capable of doing
excellent work in these fields, work that is
now more than ever needed.
Making the UN a more global
organization
How could performance be improved in the
future ? The record shows serious shortcom-
ings that can only be put right by means of a
comprehensive overhaul of the entire United
Nations system. The primary need is to take
steps to make it a truly global organization.
This means, in the first place, allowing the
major players in the development process ta
be more fairly represented at the world level.
The United Nations cannot go on letting a
minority of states, albeit the richest ones,
hold the financlal and monetary levers of
development in their hands, as they do today.
The institutional solution is not, however, an
easy one : the richest countries cannot be
required to provide most of the funding for
organizations over whose decisions they have
no control.
Next, the new organization must be able
to act in an integrated and coherent manner
upon all the dimensions of development and
not be limited to only some of them, as was
seen to be the case during the preparations
for the Copenhagen Summit for social
development. The view was expressed on
that occasion that the United Nations
should specialize in"social"development
and leave the economic aspects of develop-
ment to other bodies. Such a break-up
would be both absurd and disastrous, espe-
cially as one of the most urgent tasks for
thinking and planning in relation to devel-
opment is that of integrating its economic,
social and political dimensions. It is a task
the United Nations cannot shirk.
Lastly, such an organization should
understand the expression"development"as
encompassing a much wider range of social
needs than just the need, as set forth in the
model that prevails today, for access to greater
and greater consumption of goods. Not only
must the structures of production and con-
sumption that characterize growth be recon-
sidered ; we must also accept pluralism in the
définition of development, of the elements of
which it is composed, of the way in which it
is shared out, and of the models of social
organization upon which it depends-in
political terms, a much harder task.
These reforming ideas have far-reaching
implications. They confer upon the United
Nations a power of arbitration in the alloca-
tion of collective resources to the satisfaction
of needs that are considered, world-wide, as
having priority, such as the reduction of the
least acceptable forms of physical depriva-
tion or social oppression, the banning of
trade in certain weapons or the protection of
the basic conditions for the survival of the
ecosystem, whether or not these needs meet
the criteria of the dominant economic
approach.
Thus enlarged, the conception of the role
of the United Nations runs the obvious risk
of suffering from the same lack of realism as
has marked the Organization in the past-one
need only think back to the grandiloquentm

Two activées supported by
the United Nations
Development Programme
(UNDP). Right, installing a
wind-powered generator in
Mauritania. Far right,
cultivating and gathering
seaweed boost the earnings of
Philippine fishing families.
Below, a radio relay station
at Greenlowther (United
Kingdom) of a type used by the
International
Telecommunication Union
(ITU) in a number of its
development projects.
declarations about the"right of ail peoples to
self-determination"or the"right of aU people
to health by the year 2000". The risk is a
double one : on the one hand, the danger is
that the political and social basis for defining
these priorities wu be lacking ; and on the
other, an even worse danger, that a cosmetic
consensus wiH be arrived at around a few gen-
eral objectives to which nobody is committed.
This lack of realism could, however, be
avoided by sticking to precise, spécifie com-
mitments, entailing well-defined strategies
and resources. l shall cite two examples.
The first relates to international trade. In
this field, the prevailing model imposes a
spécifie orientation on all countries through
the action of the Bretton Woods institu-
tions and the GATT'accords, in particular
the fullest possible integration of national
economies into international trade in accor-
dance with the often obscure rule of"com-
parative advantages". The social costs of this
narrow, mercantile conception of develop-
ment have, alas, been proven beyond ail
doubt, yet the United Nations has never
made any serious attempt to reverse it.
The second relates to the new ways of
funding deveiopment and in particular to
the role that a world-wide taxation system
might play. This idea, recently taken up by
the United Nations Development Pro-
gramme, has the advantage of being rela-
tively paintess while potentially bringing in
considerable resources. A much clearer com-
mitment by the United Nations, or by a
renovated world organization, to such a
scheme would doubtiess be much more
effective than any number of generous-
sounding but empty speeches,
The task of thinking these questions out
and, in particular, of making spécifie pro-
posais is going ahead, but remains inadequate
and needs to be tackled more thoroughly. The
stakes are high. It is not a matter of promising
a"radiant future"but, by trying to eradicate
certain unacceptable factors, of ensuring the
survival of the present worid. t
1 See L'ON U (The UN)
by Maurice Bertrand,
published by La
Découverte (Paris, 1994) in
its"Repères"series. The
present article draws
heavily on this work,
which presents a critical
overview of the complex
working of the United
Nations.
2 See in particular Pour un
développement social
différent : recherche d'une
méthode d'approche, the
report of a working group
for the UN Conference on
Social Development held
in March 1995 in
Copenhagen (Institut
universitaire d'études du
développement, Geneva,
July 1994).
3 GATT : General
Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade, now being replaced
by the World Trade
Organization (Ed.).
4 Human Development
Report 1994, United
Nations Development
Programme, Oxford
University Press, New
York, 1994.
ri
