Change from within
by Peter Anyang Nyong'o
Governments in the South are kept in power through a combi¬
nation of internal and external factors. In the 1960s and
1970s, it was easy for authoritarian regimes to remain in power in
Africa. Thanks to revenues earned from mining and agriculture, and
with the help of the West, a cohabitation could easily be sustained
between bureaucratic elites and popular masses. The state had
enough resources to maintain the elite while supporting the con¬
sumption of the masses. But this led to an increase in state debt, and
when state revenues began to decrease and foreign aid diminished,
cohabitation between the bourgeoisie and the mass was blown away
and popular rebellion exploded. This rebellion took the form of ethnic
conflicts, religious and secessionist movements, and various move¬
ments in the name of democracy. . . . While it is true that popular rebel¬
lion now expresses itself through a strong demand for democratization,
it should not be forgotten that the success of democratization will
depend largely on the availability of resources such as land for agri¬
cultural production, technology to transform raw materials into man¬
ufactured goods, and a trained and skilled workforce, workers and deci¬
sion-makers alike.
THE DEMOCRATIZATION OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
But if the powerful continue to deny the developing world its share of
development resources, to maintain unfair trade relations and biased
investment protocols, it will not be possible to establish the proper con¬
ditions of development without breaking away from these patterns.
Global economic policies and relations must be democratized.
There are many examples of inept projects conceived by Western
companies and supported by their governments and by the corrupted
elites of countries of the South. Whenever the forces of opposition have
wanted to establish responsibility for the failures which resulted from
these projects, Western governments have sided with the corrupt gov¬
ernments in power. The success of inner change necessarily depends
on how international relations evolve.
DEVELOPMENT, CHANGE AND DEMOCRACY
Of course nothing will be done without a leadership that is com¬
mitted to the well-being of populations. Some believe that non-gov¬
ernmental agencies can take over responsibility for development In the
Third World. That is an illusion. These organizations may provide
medicine and dispensaries, and help women's groups in their endeav¬
ours, but they will not be able to construct roads or railways or create
an infrastructure for health and education. Only national governments
can fulfill that role.
Most of all, change has to come from within. The emergence of
new leaders has to be encouraged, leaders who can guide their fellow
citizens and who are genuinely committed to development and change,
without ever losing sight of democratic principles. Otherwise, debt and
underdevelopment will be perpetuated and governments will con¬
tinue to repress and neglect people's demands. These new leaders
should be real trustees of the people and not mere inheritors of on-going
privileges.
