UNESCO'S STRATEGY
Interview with Henrikas Yushkiavitshus
Unesco's Communication, Information and Informatics Sector,
created in 1990, plays a leading role in the Organization's activ¬
ities. The goals of its 1994-1995 programme, entitled "Com¬
munication, Information and Informatics in the Service of
Humanity", are to encourage the free flow of ideas, promote
the development of communication, safeguard the heritage of
archives and libraries, consolidate international co-operation
in the field of information and strengthen countries' infor¬
matics capacities. Here Henrikas Yushkiavitshus, the Assis¬
tant Director-General of Unesco who heads this sector, presents
the main features of this programme.
What is Unesco's strategy in the communication
field?
Our key words are media pluralism and indepen¬
dence. Since 1992, 30 per cent of the funds allocated by
the International Programme for the Development of
Communication (IPDC), the main operational arm of
UNESCO's new communication strategy, have gone to
private press projects. In order to ensure the free flow
of information and eliminate all restrictions on it, we
have concentrated our efforts on professional training
and know-how. In the present world situation, in which
an independent press is taking shape in countries whose
experience of democracy is still in its early days, it is
essential for journalists to understand exactly what a free
press means. Furthermore, while it is true that there can
be no democracy without a free press, it is equally true
that a free press cannot exist without democratic leg¬
islation. And so we have compiled basic information on
legislation in certain democratic countries in order to
help states which have asked for such data, and we
have proposed solutions to their problems.
In addition to the problem of democracy, the devel¬
oping countries are faced with severe financial con¬
straints. One of UNESCO's fundamental objectives is to
help them produce their own programmes and news¬
papers. There is a lot of talk today about "information
superhighways", but we forget that they can often be
littered with roadblocks. In partnership with the Inter¬
national Telecommunication Union UNESCO has devel¬
oped a study on telecommunication tariffs, an impor¬
tant factor in the flow of information.
What important projects are under way?
We recently approved forty-two new projects in
developing countries, and in a sense they are all impor¬
tant. There are several priority areas Africa and the
least developed countries, the situation of women
We have, for example, a project on the "Development
of the independent press in Africa", which has been co-
funded since 1993 by Denmark, France, Italy and the
United States, and an international symposium on
"Women and the Media" was held in Toronto (Canada)
in March 1994.
The media have an important part to play in peace-
building, and this is why we are giving support to
Oslobodjenje, a daily newspaper published in Sara¬
jevo, and to the humanitarian radio station Gatashya in
Rwanda. UNESCO has also contributed to plans to
restructure the audiovisual media in Cambodia, Haiti
and Mozambique. With the International Press Insti¬
tute we helped monitor the press situation before and
during the April 1994 elections in South Africa, and we
are currently supporting a new programme for training
journalists and strengthening media structures in a
post-apartheid society. We are also involved in setting
up a Palestinian broadcasting corporation and mod¬
ernizing the Palestinian news agency.
We attach great importance to the creation and
development of regional news agencies such as the
Caribbean News Agency (CANA), which is now
working independently, and the Pan African News
Agency (PANA), which has been completely restruc¬
tured.
Many of our projects are connected with local radio
stations, which are becoming increasingly popular
because they allow members of society to express
themselves freely. Here too, UNESCO is active in many
parts of the world the Philippines, Nepal, Mauri¬
tania, Gambia	
Your sector also handles questions relating to infor¬
mation and informatics.
Yes, communication and information cannot be dis¬
sociated. We have some very interesting projects in this
field. One of them, "Memory of the World", is designed
to introduce and facilitate the use of new technology for
the preservation of rare manuscripts. In conjunction
with the Czech National Library in Prague we have
brought out a CD-ROM reproducing highly precious
manuscripts. In Latin America we are helping to make
an inventory of nineteenth-century newspapers. We are
also working to safeguard manuscripts from the great
mosque of Sana'a in Yemen, some of which date from the
first century of the Hegira (A.D. 622).
UNESCO has helped set up the International
Freedom of Expression Exchange network (IFEX),
which enables network users to receive daily infor¬
mation on their computers about violations of press
freedom and about journalists in danger.
