Baldomero Sanín Cano
Sensationalism and the popular press
Inl933theInteniatioMlInstituteofIntellectualCo-operationaskedanumber
ofjournalists to give their views on the educational role ofthepress. In his reply,
extractsfrom which appear below, tlie Colombian writerBaldomero Sank Cairn
(1861-1957), a columnist with the leading Buenos Aires daily In. Nación,
expressed his concern about thegrowingdifficulties ofreconciling "the lustfor
sensation which is a publicfailing in all latitudes" and the duty ofan open-
minded press dedicated to intelligentpopularization.
Text selected by Edgardo Canton
In the course of its transformation
into an industrial enterprise, a com¬
pany of shareholders, the modern
newspaper has naturally been compelled
to give priority to dividends over all other
interests. To maintain the popularity of
his paper and its daily sales, the editor of
a widely read organ is obliged to cultivate
the sensational taste of his readers.
The fascination of crime
The realms of science, morals and philos¬
ophy are, by their very nature, almost inca¬
pable of producing facts or phenomena
calculated to appeal to that lust for sensa¬
tion which is a public failing in all lati¬
tudes. From time to time, a discovery such
as the application of the theory ofHertzian
waves to wireless telegraphy or the first
aeroplane flights provide matter that
appeals to the masses; but the need to
keep the reading public in a perpetual
state of tension in order to maintain or
increase sales forces newspaper propri
etors to seek the sensational item in other
aspects of human activity.
In this branch of information, crime
provides usable material every day. There
is no need to recall that criminal news
items exercise a veritable fascination on all
classes of readers. It seems that the record
of crime in all its odious fecundity would
suffice to slake the daily curiosity of the
public. But the papers are often compelled
to resort to an inordinate amplification of
detail in order to arouse more interest;
and there are undertakings which do not
hesitate to invent a crime if the annals of
criminality do not furnish one.
Bread and circuses
Sport and the social column provide the
modern newspaper with another kind of
publicity which is easily explained. From
the point of view of publicity, these sub¬
jects differ from that of crime, insofar as
the illustrious actors on these stages of
modern life seek an advertisment which
others endeavour to elude.
The press has greatly contributed to
the propagation of sport, and it accepts
complacently the plaudits which the
public unjusdy lays at its door for the wel¬
come effects of such activity upon the
sociability and the health of the human
race; but the truth is that such influence is
reciprocal, and that the press would lose a
great number of its readers if it devoted to
other forms ofcontemporary life the space
which is taken by tennis, football, pelota,
golf and portraits of champions.
Sport is developing because those
45

46
interested in its practice know that by this
means they achieve the honours of pub¬
licity, and the press occasionally gives inor¬
dinate space to its sporting chronicle in
order to recruit an assiduous reading
public of professionals and amateurs
whose number increases thanks to the
encouragement of publicity.
In the course of its natural interests,
the press tends to attach to certain activ¬
ities more importance than they deserve.
News concerning literary and artistic
trends, the theatre and other manifesta¬
tions of taste and intelligence occupy less
and less space, unless they have a sensa¬
tional flavour. The literary chronicle,
which, half a century ago, was the main
attraction of the better papers in France,
England, Italy and learned Germany, has
been abandoned to monthly or weekly
publications specializing in this type of
study.
If perchance the great daily press pub¬
lishes literary news of some length and
real interest, the public smiles disdain¬
fully, for it regards such news as publicity
at so much a line, inserted by publishers.
Cut-throat competition
In all aspects of journalistic activity, the
absorbing and to a certain point deplorable
influence of commercial interests can be
discerned at a glance. It would be unfair,
and, above all, vain to demand that the
press should renounce commercial activity
because it was originally an educational
medium; what the writer of these lines
would desire is the reconciliation of two
apparently contradictory tendencies.
To this must be added that the great
commercialized press as it exists today
has been suddenly confronted with a
menace, in the form ofcompetitors whose
means of dissemination for certain
branches of trade are superior to its own.
The wireless, which derives its nourish¬
ment from the daily press, is tending to
supersede it in certain activities. This
mode ofdissemination, intelligently com
bined with the cinematograph, could
easily become the most effective of edu¬
cational mediums; but, fortunately for
the newspapers, both wireless and cine¬
matograph have up to the present been
commercial experiments whose devel¬
opment is governed by exactly the same
principles as that of the powerful rival
which they are seeking by merciless com¬
petition to supplant.
To sum up, it is necessary to put quite
frankly a very serious question: Can it be
said that there is not only a danger, but
also the possibility that the press, byvirtue
of its unlimited power, may voluntarily
exert its influence in the service of ten¬
dencies contrary to the progress of civi¬
lization, provided the exploitation ofsuch
tendencies results in a pecuniary gain for
the newspapers thus proceeding?
The disclosures made on this point
during the past few years, according to
which certain newspapers have not hesi¬
tated to make a dangerous appeal to
national feeling in order to realise mas¬
sive profits, unfortunately warrant the
conclusion that, in more critical circum¬
stances, they would not hesitate to dis¬
turb the peace, if, by so doing, they
achieved a durable and profitable increase
of influence and revenue.
Having stated the above considera¬
tions, I must ask the following question,
"Does the information, habitually fur¬
nished by press to public, tend in general,
by its nature, to develop the education
and the general knowledge of the latter?"
From the foregoing, it is clear that this
question must be answered in the nega¬
tive. The education received by the public
from large-circulation newspapers is of a
bad quality. Special literary preparation
and a very lively sense of reality are nec¬
essary in order to combat the evil influence
of the daily press and to derive from it
useful knowledge. So long as big newspa¬
pers are guided by the principles that make
for commercial success, it is impossible
for them to become a factor in education.
What is newsworthy?
When the reader has devoured the sen¬
sational paragraphs devoted to crime,
championships, war, earthquakes, railway
and other accidents, he has just time to
read the Stock Exchange prices and per¬
haps an esoteric political leader. His mind
is too weary to read articles on the new
atomic theory or to assimilate the latest
discoveries about the stratosphere.
Information about foreign nations and
culture is provided by newspapers in
accordance with local requirements. In
Buenos Aires, where there are a million
foreign residents, a majority ofwhom have
retained a business or sentimental con¬
nection with their home country, infor¬
mation about foreign events occupies as
much, if not more, space than the local
news. This predominance offoreign infor¬
mation has widened the outlook of the
reading public of this city by the influence
it exercises on national feeling.
As a matter of fact, up to recent years,
the Buenosairean followed international
questions with great equanimity, toler¬
ance and detailed knowledge. The quan¬
tity of foreign information in the press of
this capital had produced this result on
popular education.
But it must be admitted that the abun¬
dance of foreign news daily offered the
public by the Buenosairean press was in all
probability not so much the result of an
educational endeavour as a calculation
based on the need to increase the sales of
the papers. At all events, this instance
shows that abundant information is of
indisputable educational value, ifnews is
published without interpretations foreign
to its real significance and historical value.
To sum up, if a newspaper is to become
a conveyor of useful notions, an instru¬
ment of civilization, if it is to serve the real
cause ofmankind, it must begin by casting
off its character of a commercial under¬
taking, a role too dependent upon con¬
tingencies in a world exclusively governed
by the law of competency.
