Perched 3,000 metres up in the high plateaux of the
Andes, Ecuador's capital has a remarkable historic
centre which in 1978 won it aplace on UNESCO's World
Heritage List.
Once upon a time a Spanish
hidalgo is supposed to have said
to his architect: "Draw me the
plans for a big square patio with a few
rooms around it." Even today, in the his¬
toric centre of Quito and on the outskirts
of the old city, there arc still some low,
white houses of this kind, their red tiles
darkened by time. Each one has a wood
and wrought-iron gate opening onto a
large inner courtyard where grey paving
stones and inlaid yellow ox-hones form
geometric motifs around a fountain. The
"master of the great house" would ride
into the courtyard on horseback, and his
tenants would unload the farm produce
they had brought on mules or carts.
Around the patio were rooms with barred
windows. Here, at dusk, came girls
seeking to escape the tedium of their
secluded lives or be serenaded by their
official suitors.
It is bard to say whether this type of
architecture sprang from or gave rise to
a specific conception of urban plan¬
ning. What is certain is that the con¬
quistadors were instinctive if untutored
town-planners and that here as in all
other American cities they first marked
out a central patio-like square around
which they built a church, a governor's
residence, an archbishop's palace and
a town hall. Then, after the land had
been divided between the conquista¬
dors and the religious authorities, they

Quito, a city
near to heaven
by Jorge Enrique Adoum
drew up a regular street-plan. To recap¬
ture something of old Quito, the munic¬
ipality is restoring to these streets their
original names: the Street of Forges,
the Jewellers' Street, the Street of the
Seven Crosses; the Hill of Sighs, the
Hill of the Torrent; the Crossroads of
Souls, of the Virgin, of the Toad. These
narrow streets were intended for horses
and carriages no vehicle could even
enter the Street of the Night Watch, a
winding alley lit with ancient lanterns
and the buses that pass through them
today almost scrape the walls.
From the city centre to the suburbs
narrow streets lined with little houses
stretch like the open fingers of a hand,
following the haphazard contours of
the city until they reach the clouds at an
altitude of almost 3,000 metres. Is it
the rarefied air that imposes on Quito
Left, the fine view of Quito from the peak
of Panecillo, 183 metres above the city. .
Above and below, the domes and façade
of Quito's church of La Compañía de
Jesus. (17th century).
the slow rhythm, the sense of time to
spare that made Henri Michaux say:
"Here we all smoke the opium of high
altitude, speak in low voices, take short
steps, are short of breath. The dogs
fight little, and so do the children; there
is little laughter."?
A mayor of Quito once decided that
the walls of the houses should be
painted white and the woodwork of
doors and windows blue, with the
result that the city came to resemble (in
this respect only) certain Mediter¬
ranean towns. Then someone remem¬
bered that in the eighteenth century
the main buildings in the city centre
had had coloured facades (in 1757 a
traveller noted that "Façades white¬
washed from top to bottom in gaudy
colours are not rare") and so they were
repainted yellow, green or blue. In the
modern public buildings in the resi¬
dential area in the north of the city on
the other hand, the dominant colour is
the grey of concrete and the smoked
glass windows that protect against the
bright sunlight which because the sky
is so near? is unlike that found any¬
where else in the world. 35

36
The ornate interior of the Cathedral (1559-1562).
SYMBOLS OF POWJElt
Plaza Mayor, also known as Plaza de la
Independencia because of the inde¬
pendence monument put up there in
1906 or simply as Plaza Grande, is
the symbol of the life of the city. This
place where people met to exchange
political gossip and rumours, to show
dissension, to fetch water, listen to a
band or be photographed, is freer,
more open and peaceful than it once
was. The prison-like iron railings that
once surrounded it have been removed
and its fountains have gone; it has been
beautified with flower beds and benches
for the retired and the unoccupied.
On one side of the square is the
cathedral. Originally a modest wattle
and daub construction, it has con¬
stantly been extended and embellished
since the sixteenth century. Its coffered
ceiling, the copy of a Spanish Moorish
original, dates from the mid-nineteenth
century. The "cinderella of American
cathedrals" in comparison with those of
Mexico or Lima, it has wonderful gilt
altars on a par with those of other Quito
churches, whose insolent splendour
overwhelms the visitor and contrasts
with the poverty of the faithful and the
wretchedness of the beggars at their
gates.
Opposite the cathedral, symbol of
divine power, is the archbishop's
palace, the encapsulation of ecclesias¬
tical power. Two dates, 1852 and 1920,
arc inscribed in Roman figures on its
façade. A surprising feature of this neo
classical building is a loggia on its upper
storey whose symmetrical columns are
joined by a balustrade and surmounted
at each end by a triangular pediment.
The governor's palace is equally neo¬
classical. Inside, on each side of a mon¬
umental staircase, is another patio. Its
façade is adorned with a massive doric
colonnade giving onto the square and
two lateral structures surmounted by
triangular tympani. Inaugurated in
1830 when the Republic was pro¬
claimed, it was the last architectural
project of the colonial power. A plaque
indicates the place where a theocratic
One of the old city's most picturesque streets,
Calle de La Ronda.
The church of San
Francisco took so long to
build that the emperor
Charles V emerged every
evening onto the balcony
of his palace in Toledo,
convinced that he would
be able to see its towers
in the distance. Later
they were reduced to
rubble by an earthquake.
tyrant was assassinated in 1875 with a
machete wielded by a jealous husband
(although he was not necessarily moti¬
vated by jealousy) and, decked out in
his ceremonial uniform and seated on a
throne, presided over his own funeral
in the cathedral.
In the lower part of the building,
whose stones are thought to have been
brought from a distant Inca monument,
are a number of small shops where sou¬
venir sellers will sell you trashy objects
which are poor imitations of the tradi¬
tional indigenous craftsmanship which
has for generations produced wonders
in gold, filigree, wrought iron, wood,
wax and vegetable ivory, and will even
propose counterfeit "shrunken heads."
The building which has had the most
checquered career is the municipal
building. It began as "a hut on a plot of
land belonging to the king" in 1538 a
rough-and-ready town hall for a city
bursting at the seams with gold. It was
rebuilt many times before being demol¬
ished and its site used as a car park.
The height, colour and proportions of
the present building, which dates from
1974, seek to harmonize with the other
buildings around the Plaza Grande.
Strangely enough, a campaign' to
restore the historic centre led to the
JORGE ENRIQUE ADOUM,
an Ecuadorian poet and novelist, was formerly a
member of the editorial staff of the Unesco Courier.
His most recent publications include El tiempo y
las palabras ("Time and Words", 1992) and a
bilingual Spanish/French anthology of 20th-century
Ecuadorian poetry (Fondation Patino,
Geneva, 1993).

expulsion of the Indian and mestizo
women who sold rag dolls, ribbons,
buttons, crocheting hooks and knitting
needles at the entrance, and were; a
familiar feature of the Quito landscape.
Today, only five of them are left and
they have moved to the entrance to the
Plaza de Santo Domingo. On the Plaza
Grande they were for a time replaced
by itinerant vendors of smuggled
watches, cigarette lighters, spectacles
and personal stereos, and hawkers of
cigarettes, chewing gum, razor blades
and lottery tickets.
AN ASSORTMENT OF
ARCHITECTURAL STYLUS
Around the turn of the century, a
number of buildings in a variety of
styles were constructed around the
Plaza Grande: the old university, a
bank which is no longer a bank, a hotel
which used to boast of offering its cus¬
tomers the opportunity to see parades,
processions and revolutions "from their
bed". The hotel is an example of.what
might be called architectural esperanto:
each of its storeys is built in a different
style to produce what has been called "a
highly interesting piece of eclecticism".
In Garcia Moreno street, once the
street of the seven crosses, an assort¬
ment of civil and military architecture
spanning the sixteenth and the twen¬
tieth centuries arches, columns,
vestibules, porticos is concentrated
into barely 200 metres. Religious archi¬
tecture is represented by the churches
of the Sagrario, La Compañía de Jesús
and San Francisco. All of them house
art treasures paintings, sculptures
and gold leaf of the celebrated Quito
school, works by indigenous artists such
as Caspicara and Pampite and mestizo
artists such as Miguel de Santiago who
have been compared with Zurbarán.
The church of San Francisco and
its adjoining convent occupy three
hectares in the centre of Quito. They
have been dubbed "an Escurial in the
Andes", although their construction
began before that of the Escurial in
Spain barely fifty days after the foun¬
dation of Quito by the Spaniards on 6
December 1535. It is said that the fore¬
court was completed in a single night by
the devil in order to gather in a tor¬
mented soul who was eluding his grasp.
The work took so long, and the Fran¬
ciscans asked Charles V for so much
money to build the towers, that the
emperor emerged every evening onto
the balcony of bis palace in Toledo,
convinced that he would be able to see
them in the distance. Later they were
reduced to rubble by an earthquake.
On the church's curious perron of
concentric semi-circular steps all kinds
of spin-off of faith are for sale: incense,
medallions, sacred images, decorated
candles. And on the vast square, where
until the beginning of the century water
carriers filled their buckets at the foun¬
tain with water to sell from door to
door, all kinds of people come and go,
including the Indians whom Michaux
saw, "thick-set, broad-headed, walking
with short steps", wrapped in blue, red
or grey ponchos and carrying on their
backs a refrigerator or a cupboard
roped to their forehead. On Good
Friday this is the culminating point for
a procession of hooded figures who fla¬
gellate themselves with thongs and
chains, a form of penitence not uncon¬
nected with masochistic exhibitionism.
a si im:kis mountainous
KACKOROl*
The tutelary summit of Pichincha and
the anonymous mountains which form
part of the Andes provide Quito with a
superb backdrop. In the evening, from
the top of Ichimbia or Panecillo where
the Indians went to worship the sun and
where a winged statue of the Virgin
An open-air market.
Mary has been erected the city can
be seen chessboard-like, marked out
with lines of light and sprinkled with
yellow, red and green dots. Glaciers of
light leading nowhere descend from the
hill of San Juan, where needy citizens
and the flotsam and jetsam of the rural
exodus colonize the hitherto bare slopes.
It is true that tunnels, jerry-built
mini-expressways, level and unlevel
crossings, supermarkets, ministries and
impersonal hotels have been built, but
only in the residential north, a city
apart which has nothing in common
with that which UNESCO has proclaimed
part of the "universal heritage of
mankind" except its proximity to the
mountains. Quito obstinately refuses
any kind of modernization, as ifwisliing
to continue to merit the titles of "Flo¬
rence of America" or "Rome in the
tropics" which it owes only to its geo¬
graphical situation. Other names
"Quito, ante-chamber of paradise",
"Quito two steps away from heaven"
or an old popular refrain, "On earth
Quito and in heaven a window to see
Quito" situate it near to the empyrean.
In one film a gangster dreams of doing
one last job before retiring to Quito,
"where you can touch the stars with
your hand". Quito has also been called
"the face of God". Perhaps, but if so it
is a sombre face, like that of the skinny
girls, shivering with cold at night, glued
to the doors of restaurants and offering
diners and passersby flowers which are
as sad as they are and which, like them,
have faded too quickly. I
37
