Singin' in the Rain
(United States, 1952), a
classic musical directed
by Stanley Donen and
Gene Kelly.



Perchance
to dream
Lionel Steketee
Economic muscle is not the only
explanation for the power of the
American cinema
Is cinema an art or a commodity? Is it
culture or commerce? The big American
studios made their choice long ago:
cinema is an industry, and every film is a
product. But things are not quite as
simple as that.
How is it that American cinema can make
people all over the world dream, laugh and
cry, and has done so for the last hundred
years?
As early as 1916, when Europe was
embroiled in war, D. W. Griffith's Intoler
ance laid the foundations of a new means of
communication that, in addition to its
artistic qualities, would vehicle not only a
message meant for a universal audience but
also the image of an entire country. Wit¬
tingly or unwittingly, the American film
industry has always been the instrument of a
certain kind of propaganda on behalf of
values specific to the United States. Without
it, people in America and elsewhere would
clearly be less aware of the American myth.
But this desire to propagate a way of life
is not enough to explain the impact of the
American cinema. Its openness has also,
played a role. It has always welcomed non-
American creators with open arms. Charlie
Chaplin, Frank Capra, Alfred Hitchcock,
Billy Wilder and Elia Kazan of the older gen¬
eration, and George Miller (Mad Max,
1979), Peter Weir (The Dead Poets' Society,
1989) and Ridley Scott (Thelma and Louise,
1990) today, all have one thing in common:
the universality of their language. It is pre-

Lionel Steketee,
who was born in
France of American
parents, is a
director, translator
and scriptwriter. He
has directed a
documentary on
contemporary music
in New York.
cisely because they were foreigners that they
had to, and did, use the camera to tell stories
that all kinds of audience, irrespective of
frontiers and languages, could understand.
One of the keys to this language, and
thus to the American cinema, is the explicit
use of emotion. "The most important thing
is to move the audience," said Alfred Hitch¬
cock, who is, nevertheless, one of the sev¬
enth art's "coldest" directors. In classics like
Michael Curtiz's Casablanca (1942) and a
recent production like Robert Zemeckis's
Forrest Gump (1993), American film-makers
make audiences laugh and cry by getting
them to identify with the characters,
whether they are larger than life or just ordi¬
nary people. What counts is getting people
to fantasize and have fun, and putting us
back in touch with the lost simplicity of
childhood. "Adulthood leads to the loss of
dream and adventure, the gradual numbness
of imagination and freedom," says Steven
Spielberg.
This very American idea of getting people



to dream by means of cinema has a long his¬
tory. As early as 1909 the American sociolo¬
gist Jane Adams dubbed the cinema a "house
of dreams" and wrote, "By going to the
movies, today's young people living in
industrial towns can satisfy their needs for a
richer existence than that the world offers
them at present." This desire to induce
people to dream and to give them models to
identify with led to the creation of thrillers,
Bambi (United States,
1941-1942), a Walt
Disney-produced
feature-length cartoon.
A pioneer in the field,
Disney was the world's
undisputed cartoon king
for many years.
Francis Ford Coppola's
Apocalypse Now (United
States, 1979), an epic
rendering of the Viet
Nam War.
westerns and musical comedies, all typically
American genres.
Yet the American cinema provides some¬
thing more than dreams and entertainment,
even if its watchword was summed up by
Frank Capra when he said, "There are no rules
when it comes to film creation, only sins.
And the most deadly is boredom." Holly¬
wood has produced many films attacking the
"American model", and has on occasion
indulged in ruthless self-criticism (Joseph L.
Mankiewicz's All about Eve, for example). In
the wealth and diversity of American cinema
everyone can find enjoyment as well as the
expression of their anxieties.
1
