ANNIVERSARY
Interview with Chingiz Aitmatov
ABAI
KUNANBAYEV
(1845-1904)
One of the few
photos of Abai,
here seen with his
two sons.
The ivork of the Kirghiz writer Chingiz
Aitmatov (b. 1928, the grandson of a
nomadic shepherd)powerfully illustrates the
conflict between modern society and ancient
civilizations in the former Soviet Union, as
well as confronting the problem of thefuture
state ofhumanity and the world. Among his
many short stories and novels translated into
English are Jamilia (1958), The White
Steamship (1970) and The Day Lasts More
than a Hundred Years (1 980). Here, to mark
the 150th anniversary of the birth of Abai
Kunanbayev, Aitmatov explains why the
Kazakhpoet's work is still relevant today.
What docs (his commemoration
mean to you?
Historical changes in a society are often tied
to a negative reappraisal of the values of the
past, particularly in the perception of the impor¬
tance of great figures from national and world
culture. One only need remember how artists
such as Gorky and Mayakovsky were treated
during our Soviet era, whose embers are still hot.
Abai is above history: he served no govern¬
ment or ideology. He embodies both an ethnic
and a personal inspiration, which has come to
be identified with the destiny of his people, their
struggles and their tragedies. Rooted in the
spirit of his nation, he lived during an excep¬
tionally complex period of Kazakh history. How
could such a brilliant mind have emerged
during this time in the remote steppes, so far
from world events? It's impossible to explain.
He is not a story-teller who respects tradi¬
tion and its rules, he is a civilizing genius,
capable of reconstructing everything through
his creative originality, of enriching the past
and developing a new personal view of the
world.
"I am without strength, I ain here
all alone. . . ,"' Abai lamented. "My
soul is in mourning . . . my efforts
arc sterile. . . ." What if he had not
been born "in a century of wolves,
among a pack of wolves"? If be
had lived in a more civilized age,

might he have developed his great
talent even more?
No. Abai emerged at a time when he was most
needed. For the first time in its history,
Turkestan was discovering, through Russia, the
European ideas of the Enlightenment, which
would have enormous consequences for the
nomadic masses. Shortly after, these people
would be hurled into destructive upheavals
and live through two revolutions: that of 1917
and that of the 1990s, which rejects, annuls
and disavows totally and categorically the revo¬
lution of 1917.
What was the significance of
Abai's work during the period
between these two revolutions?
What role did it play during the
Soviet era?
In a context in which totalitarianism was
based primarily on the negation of the idea of
the nation in the name of proletarian interna¬
tionalism, Abai and the spiritual force that he
represented were a shield that protected us.
Abai was a kind of sanctuary, a bastion for
the Kazakh people. He enabled them to survive
spiritually, to resist the power of imperialistic
absorption. The heritage of his work preserved
and inspired the Kazakh intelligentsia at a time
when the dangers of nihilism were at their most
critical and troubling. The neighbouring peo¬
ples are also deeply indebted to the greatness of
Abai, in their struggle to preserve their distinc¬
tive languages and national spirit.
Like a tall,
shady cedar in the mountains. . . .
Born in the Chingiz author of an epic novel a positive role in Kazakh
mountains, into a nomadic about him (The Journey culture. The third
tribe, the Kazakh poet ofAbai), summed up in source is Russian, and



Abai Kunanbayev (1845- an article written in through it, the whole of
1904), usually known as 1954 Abai's unique world culture. In Abai's
Abai, transformed his contribution to Kazakh time, tapping this source,
people's language and culture: "Abai's literary particularly the great
the thematic range of work (his lyric poetry, Russian classics, which
their poetry through his maxims and translations) before Abai were
work and the far-reaching was fed and watered completely unknown to
influence of his from three major sources the Kazakhs, was a
personality. He which blend decisive force for
denounced feudal harmoniously."First, the progress.
customs, and called on ancient Kazakh culture "However, Abai and
his people to educate as established in the oral this is the sign of his
themselves and to unite. and written works of the great originality and
This year marks the past. . . . Second, the exceptional gifts
150th anniversary of his best examples of Eastern succeeded in remaining
birth. culture: classic poetry true to himself while
In describing the great written in Tadzik, Azeri drawing on these three
Kazakh poet as "standing and Uzbek. Discernible sources. Like all creators
out in the history of his since the beginning of of stature, he immersed
people like a tall, shady the century, this himself in a new culture
cedar in the mountains", tendency to turn towards without losing his strong
his compatriot Muktar neighbouring cultures individuality as an artist
Auezov (d. 1961), the has undoubtedly played and thinker."
I

Reach deep into your soul,
remain true to yourself.
To you I am an enigma, I and
my journey.
Understand, you who come after
me, that I am opening the way
for you.
1 have had thousands of
adversaries, dont reproach me
for it!
Abai
"After a harsh, snowy winter,
doesn't spring follow, with its
flowers, high waters and
splendour?" Abai wrote. Arc his
ideas and his writings still
relevant today?
Today we are confronted with another pic¬
ture, another era, another aspect of Abai. I am
thinking of our everyday life today, at a time
when the democratic process has led to a radi¬
cally different situation. We are faced with
another extreme. Populist nationalism is playing
a reactionary, illogical role, that of a blind
driver on whom it would be dangerous to rely.
When it is out of control, the euphoria of the
national independence, sovereignty and freedom
that actually have been won during the democ-
An illustration
by K. K. Kongir
(1914-1986) fora
collection of Abai's
poems published in
the late 1940s.
' t
W. V' ""4- ¿r,U . £$& *r <*. 'u . - ;

ratization process, through the joint action of
entire peoplesby the liberation of the centre
as well as the old peripheryis transformed into
ambition run riot. It has become a disintegrating
force, ruling out much-needed co-operation
between all national cultures.
Abai openly warned against all
forms of obtuse and blinkered
nationalism. . . .
Populist and chauvinist demagogy, which is
so fashionable and seemingly productive in the
short term, actually exacerbates the vanity of
national self-satisfaction. This leads to a provin¬
cial outlook and, ultimately, to isolation, an
inferiority complex and a weakening of the role
of elites who cease to take part in the develop¬
ment of common values. Without such values,
a people ceases to develop.
On the horizon of history, Abai appears as
an astonishingly contemporary figure, a man
endowed with a particularly penetrating vision,
a true prophet. Today is a good moment to think
of his ideas about the need for an ecumenical
approach to the world's diversity, and in partic¬
ular about reconciling the cultural values of
East and West that is, the values of our Asian
background and those of Russian culture,
whose historical mission is to act as a link.
Abai attached great importance to this char¬
acteristic of Russian culture. At the same he
remained profoundly Kazakh in his way of
thinking. He loved his people and was proud of
them, but he also called on them to be self-crit¬
ical. He presented his compatriots with the
unvarnished truth, refused to indulge a mis¬
placed national pride, and denounced the
defects and obscurantism of an ignorant nation.
All this has great relevance today, at a time
when nationalism is becoming a reactionary
political force, when the great democratic fig¬
ures of the past as well as the great Russian
philosophers are being reassessed in a national¬
istic perspective.
During the totalitarian era, Abai embodied
the national spirit and encouraged the survival
of the Kazakh nation. Today, in the post-totali¬
tarian era, his role is that of a spiritual unifier of
national cultures, based on a democratic vision.
His message lives on in a new age. H
Interview Iiv
Gulzatla Miirzalimetova
The School in the
Steppe (1911),
oil on canvas by
N. G. Khludov.
M
