Interview
Maurice Béjart
A journey of initiation
When you started out in the 1950s,
ballet was still very much in the
classical mould. You gave it shock
treatment, as Nijinsky had done. He
shocked in order to rejuvenate dance.
Maurice Béjart: My aim has never been
to shock, but rather to help awaken
people's sensibilities. My revolution has
not been an aesthetic revolution, like
Nijinsky's, but a social one. Nijinsky
introduced a completely new aesthetic
in music, decor and acting. But he
would give only four or five perfor¬
mances of each ballet in opera houses
and before an audience of connoisseurs.
What I wanted to do was to change
the venue and the public. I hired 5,000-
seat sports stadiums for a month and
offered seats at prices people could
afford. I got dance accepted at the Avi¬
gnon Festival, in open-air amphitheatres
and popular venues. In my view dance
can no longer be elitist. It's a universal
language, a universal means of bringing
people together. In popular dances all
over the world, the first thing people do
is join hands. Dance is a means of social,
political and religious communication.
And members of the public are caught
up in that magic, in that moment of
empathy. Their hearts miss a beat, their
minds broaden and their bodies yearn to
unfold. I agree dance should break
the mould and move to the rhythm of
passions and impulses, death and
rebirth. The aim should be to put
across not a coded, highly symbolic mes¬
sage, but an inner élan.
Hence one of your innovations:
immobility and meditation within the
framework of dance itself.
M. B.: This is an area where I have been
greatly influenced by certain Oriental
disciplines. My father spoke and wrote
Chinese. I myself studied Zen under the
master Deshimaru. Zen teaches us a
bodily attitude to time and space which
is very different from the Western one.
It is based on the principle that empti¬
ness is something beneficial. The idea of
emptying the egg of the world of all its
dross and filling it with the transparency
of light and air is something that con¬
cerns the choreographer and the
dancer. Through dance I try to make an
offering of serenity and unity to Western
man, who is so atomized, fragmented
and compartmentalized.
You have also been influenced by
the martial arts, haven't you?
M. B.: Yes. The martial arts suggest one
way of reintegrating our bodies into the
cosmos. They are not about combat or
competition, but rather an internal dis¬
cipline that enables us to regulate the
energy within us. Human beings are sub¬
ject to a process of ebb and flow, yin and
yang, and continuous change of one into
the other, and the other into one. They
are therefore closely bound up with the
unity and multiplicity of the world,
which abounds with possibilities and is
at once unchanging and in a state of per¬
petual flux. They are subject to
rhythms which mark their daily lives
and which dance tries to put across:
activity and rest, absorption and elimi¬
nation, budding, flowering and death.
They are an integral part of that uni¬
versal order. Dance should above all cel¬
ebrate that fact.
A droj) of rain falling on the tree out
there in the garden will change a leaf,
which will change a fragment of an
oxygen molecule, which in turn will
change the way we breathe. Everything
is closely interconnected. Wc are
nothing but flux, as we go from one
moment to the next. That is why it is so
important to be present, undividedly
and concentratedly, in each of those
moments, in each of our actions. The
smallest leaf or tiniest drop of water can
contribute to the equilibrium of the
world. Dance must become part of that
general momentum.
Is there a dividing line in your work
between the sacred and the profane?
M. B.: There is no such thing as the pro¬
fane. Everything is sacred, from eating
and sleeping to making love and dancing.
If God were not constantly present in
each of our lives, there would be no
point in giving him a name. God isn't a
bearded old man who rules the world
from afar. He is among us, within each
of us. That's why fanaticism, intoler¬
ance and social exclusion are all insults
to the divine. The divine is unity. To my
mind, Islam answers that yearning for
unicity, union and simplicity. Islam is a
religion which is thoroughly integrated
with the cosmos, a religion where every
daily act is marked by a belief in indivi¬
sion, where the practice of the sacred
is daily and constant. But all religions
are linked to the divine. They are all of
equal worth when we practise them
with faith and purity, and when we
strive to discover our divine essence
through them.
I try to make an offering
of serenity and unity.

The French-born dancer and
choreographer Maurice Béjart
is one of the great creative
figures of modern dance. The
hallmark of his ballets, from
Symphonie pour un homme
seif J (1955) to Nijinsky, Clown
of God (19%), has been a
rejection of aestheticism in
favour of dance as a universal
language and total theatre.
Here he talks about some of
the themes that frequently
crop up in his work.
Does the theme of the androgyne,
which recurs again and again in your
ballets, refer to that notion of unity,
the unity of an absolute human being
before division?
M. B.: Precisely. Obviously it's absurd
and unnatural to try and argue in favour
of some supposed superiority of man
over woman, or vice versa. The world is
inseparably male and female. It is sheer
madness to want one half to commit
genocide on the other. Man can do
nothing without woman, and woman
nothing without man. In the beginning
of time, their union existed within a
single body. This theme has always
obsessed poets, writers and painters.
Honoré de Balzac's masterpiece
Sêraphita treats that myth, in which
oppositcs identify with and espouse one
another. This is the vital principle of
complementarity between yin and yang,
and the constant resonance between the
female and male poles that are in all of
us. Separation of the two is a wound
which we try to heal through artistic
expression. The essential thing is whole¬
ness, union and identity, not division.
M Why are you so attracted to the Far
East, and especially to Japan?
M. B.: I'm drawn to the whole of Asia.
It's a continent that contains the origins
of our past and of all the great religions:
Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Bud¬
dhism, Hinduism, Shintoism. Asia con¬
sists of three and a half billion men and
women, who form a mosaic of peoples,
languages and skills. But it is also the
centre of tomorrow's technological
developments. Asia will be the third
millennium's centre of gravity.
Then there is my personal experi¬
ence of the Ear East. I was taught by a
great Japanese master of Zen, and many
of my (lancers are Japanese. But I have
also been deeply influenced by India
and Iran. I'm of mixed blood. My
maternal grandmother was Kurdish, my
maternal grandfather Catalan, and my
paternal grandmother Breton. I have
roots all over the world. I'm a nomad
and feel at home wherever I am. I don't
live anywhere. Wherever I go, I just
pitch my tent, then set off somewhere
else. But aren't we all made up of a
patchwork of cultures?
Your father once said: 'Space is
more real than time'. That seems
to be a theme that runs through your
work.
M. B.: We live in space, we project our¬
selves into it, we inhabit it. Time, on the
contrary, is something which inhabits
us; and it slowly destroys us. It grows
iij) and grows old with us. Time is the
heart, with its relentless tick-tock beat.
Space, on the other hand, exists only

interview
Maurice
Béjart
ofinit
through objects. And we are an object
like any other in that space like that
car over there in the car park, or that
tree in front of me. Dance enables us to
sculpt the space surrounding us, to
structure it. As long as we live in the
present tense. The present is linear,
serene and pure. The present is time
that has become eternity.
You create your ballets intuitively.
The body creates the substance of your
figures, and the scenery is often
reduced to a few lines in space.
M. B.: Yes, first comes a corporeal intu¬
ition, which forms a canvas. But after
that I need to work on the idea for a
very long time. For some ballets, I gath¬
ered material for two years and read
hundreds of books. Ultimately, intuition
and knowledge go hand in hand. The
dancers themselves also suggest figures
to me as they project their bodies into
space or inform them with certain
rhythms. The architecture of dance is
transparent, helping it to achieve grace
and escape its material trappings.
Modern dance means the end of an arti¬
ficial aestheticism tacked on from the
outside. It still makes technical
demands, but aims to be increasingly
expressionistic and energetic. The torso
is as bare as an unfurled sail; the gaze is
more intense; the arms, which are also
bare, suggest the flight of the body
more effectively. Classical dance con¬
cealed the dancers' bodies beneath
tulle and embroidery. Today the flesh
reveals itself; it glorifies impulses and
passions that would have caused a
scandal in the past. If Nijinsky shocked
the bourgeoisie, it was because the por¬
trayal of ecstasy had hitherto been
regarded as obscene. With him it
became maieutic, a catharsis to be
shared with the public. Dance is now a
ceremony of sharing, of participation.
So how does Saturday night
dancing in nightclubs fit in?
M. B.: Nightclubs are ersatz. They are
an artificial substitute, like the ersatz
coffee we drank during the war instead
of real coffee, the ersatz bread we ate
instead of real bread. Human beings
need dance. But since it no longer exists
in its truly ritual context, since there
are no longer popular get-togethers in
village squares or in churches, where
people used to join hands so that they
could open their hearts, since we have
deprived ourselves of these simple, pow¬
erful joys, we make do with Saturday
night revels. Human beings lose a cer¬
tain dimension of their presence in the
world if they are deprived of dance. Sat¬
urday night substitutes are obviously
"anti-dances", yet in a very diluted way
they do remain a form of dance a way
of releasing natural forces and sensing
one's body, which during the previous
week has been little more than an
empty husk dragged from one seat to
another, from office to car to home. Sat¬
urday night dances are full of sweat,
drink, desire, high jinks and hidden
exultation. I'm not sure what they all
add up to, but they are necessary to
people's psychological equilibrium.
People dance at times of ceremony,
but also at times of crisis.
M. B.: Times of ceremony are becoming
less frequent. There are fewer and
fewer festivals and more and more holi¬
days. Festivals were rituals, and were
accompanied by dances and communion.
Holidays are no more than an empty
moment in life a mechanical, robot
like period of rest during which indi¬
viduals are even more divided and even
more separated from their bodies, from
others, from the cosmos.
In your ballets there are often
disjointed bodies which seem to suffer
as though they were giving birth or
emerging from a chrysalis.
M. B.: In some ballets, such as Pyra¬
mide, I prefer more rounded body
movements, with less rhythmic disrup¬
tion. But sometimes one needs to man¬
handle harmony and aim for a daring,
baroque visual effect, with lopsided
movements, twisted bodies, jerky ges¬
tures and arms that seem to reach up
for some impossible flight. Human
beings will always be tempted to follow
Icarus, because they are like Sisyphus.
We are all temporarily blind as we move
from one threshold of our lives to the
next, straining towards the eternal light.
It is that initiatory journey which I
portray on stage. Some dance figures
show a man unfurling himself after
nestling on his mother's lap. Dancers seek
their point d'appui in a geometry that is
at once pure and baroque, where lines are
broken and movements sometimes clash
so as to show the dislocation of the world.
Habit is a terrible straitjacket which I've
always sought to destroy. As a result of
habit, we can no longer see, smell, hear or
sense. I try to show births, to write "the
gospel of universal harmony" that Niet¬
zsche talked about. Modern dance has, I
believe, the ability to tune in directly to
the earth and to humankind. Thus,
ballet's quality of poetic celebration can
temporarily dispel the misfortune of the
modern individual. That miracle is pos¬
sible because the individual possesses all
the components of his or her illumination
and metamorphosis. Dance does no more
than reveal them.
And communication is achieved.
The public is caught up in that
We are all temporarily blind as we move from one
threshold of our lives to the next, straining towards the
eternal light.

empathy where those who dance and
those who watch, the mobile and the
immobile, become one.
M. B.: Theatre is about watching and
being watched. It's about a child who
dances or acts out a La Fontaine fable
for its mother. It's that kind of contact,
and nothing else.
You're fascinated by kabuki. Is it
because it's a complete art, whose
components include make-up, words,
theatre and philosophy?
M. B.: Yes, I like complete theatrical
forms. In Greek tragedy, the chorus sang
and danced, the actors mimed, acted
and spoke. The kabuki actor is a great
dancer and a profound thinker. He
shows us the ineffable, the point at
which divisive thinking is stopped in its
tracks and replaced by unifying silence.
I am in love with unity. I work for the
unity of human beings, who are torn
apart because their bodies, souls and
minds never have time to come together.
Art must provide them with an opportu¬
nity for that union, so they can counter
the daily threat of disintegration.
The Rite of Spring (1988).
Choreography by Maurice Béjart.
You say we need myths.
M. B.: Myths are not of secondary
importance. They are central to our
being and therefore to our art. No civi¬
lization can do without myths. Ours has
tried and failed. Myths are phoenixes
which always rise from their ashes
transformed and travestied, but
eternal. They are a compost of eternity
which tells the modern generation
about the gods of the distant past.
Myths are human beings who sheathe
themselves in a superior skin, become
invulnerable, travel down the centuries
and transport themselves from one
point to another in time and space, but
remain, with all their strengths and
weaknesses, utterly human. The divine
and the demoniac rub shoulders within
human beings. That is their permanent
duel. But they need that duel to
emerge from nothingness, just as they
need myths, icons and glimpses of a
superior world to give their existence a
name. Myths form the foundation on
which people can shape themselves and
find their creative energies. Dance
sculpts those myths on stage, live, and
in front of audiences who will make
that metamorphosis an integral part of
their daily lives and a way out towards
higher things.
I work for the unity of human beings,
who are torn apart because their bodies, souls
and minds never have time to come together.
