Africa:
a fresh start
Pupils of a Bamako (Mall) school
take their desks home for the holidays.
by Fay Chung
The quest for a blend of African
traditions with the universal values
that will shape the next century
FAY CHUNG,
of Zimbabwe, has served as
her country's Minister of
State for National Affairs,
Job Creation and Co¬
operatives, and as Minister
of Education. She is now
with UNICEF (the United
Nations Children's Fund) In
New York.
More than any other continent, Africa
I needs to rethink its education systems.
All too often, the systems of education inher¬
ited from colonialism have been preserved in
Africa more or less intact, generally on the
grounds of "maintaining standards". What
this actually means is that a very small elite
enjoys exactly the same kind of education as it
would have in Europe, while the vast
majority are deprived of any form of modern
education whatever.
The failure of these educated elites to
transform their countries from feudal social
structures and traditional subsistence agricul¬
ture is in marked contrast with the success of
the East Asian elites who have managed to
make their economies more efficient than the
Western economies that they began by imi¬
tating. Why have African elites failed whereas
their counterparts in East Asia have suc¬
ceeded so spectacularly? What role has edu¬
cation played in this?
The Japanese model
East Asia has been strongly influenced by the
Japanese model. In the nineteenth century,
the Japanese realized that it was essential for
their survival as a nation to appropriate
Western mathematics, science and tech¬
nology, whilst eschewing Western culture
and social values. Compulsory primary edu¬
cation for all existed in Japan by 1870. The goal
29

of secondary education for all was subse¬
quently achieved, and after the Second World
War access to post-secondary education
became available for the majority. But while
they sought to imitate, and later to surpass,
Western science and technology, the
Japanese insisted on the primacy of their own
language, literature, culture and religion.
Africa has not made such a conscious
choice. The introduction of Western education
into Africa by Christian missionaries meant that
the educated elite was more steeped in Chris¬
tian theology, history, literature and culture than
in science and technology. This strong bias
towards the humanities still exists today.
Probably the most visible symptom of
this Western orientation was the rejection of
African languages in the education system.
Even now African languages are not taught in
most French- or Portuguese-speaking coun¬
tries, and even some English-speaking coun¬
tries have denigrated the use of African lan¬
guages as "divisive" and "tribalistic". To the
African Christian convert African culture
was synonymous with superstitition and
Graduation day at the
University of Nairobi (Kenya).
Below, a primary school class
in Eritrea's Asmara region.
Below left, students at the
University of Lusaka (Zambia)
familiarize themselves with
the computer.
backwardness and was generally rejected as
"uncivilized". In other words, the educated
African adopted the European conception of
' kM traditional African culture.
Redefining the purpose of education
Very few African countries have attained pri¬
mary education for all, despite the fact that
many have been independent for some thirty
years. At the secondary level, the record is
even worse. Many African countries only
provide secondary education for 4 or 5 per
cent of the appropriate age group. In most
African countries, less than one per cent of
the relevant age group goes on to any form of
post-secondary education, compared to
between 25 and 75 per cent in the industrial-,
ized countries. Those who do are unlikely to
specialize in science or technology.
It is within this context that we need to re¬
examine the connection between education
and economic development on the one hand,
and education and cultural values on the other.
"Development" must be defined more
clearly. At present Africa's development
strategy appears to be based almost exclusively
on structural adjustment, although this is
clearly a far too narrow and economist con¬
ceptualization of development, which does
not take into account such extremely impor¬
tant factors as a country's level of human-
30

resource development or its level of eco¬
nomic diversification and industrialization.
Education also needs to be redefined. The
systems and structures of the past should not
be retained uncritically. Education must serve a
purpose, and Africa needs to decide what that
purpose is. While it has a critical role to play in
economic development, it has an equally
important role in creating and defining the
values that will make Africa politically and cul¬
turally united, coherent and forward-looking.
Only when the purpose of education has been
clearly defined can Africa decide what type of
education is suitable for its development.
In deciding on that purpose the global vil¬
lage and the global market must be kept in
mind. It is no longer possible for Africa to
perpetuate its colonial and feudal heritages by
continuing with the educational systems and
structures of the past whilst ignoring the
transformation of the rest of the world into
technologically advanced industrialized
economies. On the other hand, Africa is the
least polluted and least environmentally dam¬
aged continent. As the latest entrant into the
modernization process, it may be able to
avoid the terrible environmental and human
damage caused by that process.
Pupils from several Niger
villages gather for a morning
P.E. session before getting
down to their classwork. Only when the purpose of education has
been clearly defined can Africa decide what
type of education is suitable for its
development.
H omework (Botswana).
