COMMENTARY BY FEDERICO MAYOR
'THE VOICE OF THOSE
WHO NEVER SPOKE'
The suffering of the indigenous communi¬
ties that were subjugated and deprived of
their most elementary rights the right to
cultural identity, to the land of their ancestors, to
their language, freedom and beliefs is one of the
disasters of recent centuries that must be etched
in the collective consciousness alongside slavery
and other affronts to humanity. It happened slowly
and silently and it has lasted to the present day in
the form of social prejudice and economic struc¬
tures, of education systems and political power
machines that perpetuate discrimination and
neglect.
The Indigenous Initiative for Peace inspired
and guided by Nobel Peace prize-winner Rigob¬
erta Menchú is a sign of how far the situation of
indigenous people has changed in recent years.
The concept of "initiative" implies that these
peoples have decided to make a dynamic response
to the many problems, old and new, that beset
them; that they have the will to identify, study and
seek solutions to them that are consonant with the
times; that they are prepared to undertake this task
without falling back on imported models that dis¬
tort their cultural heritage and without repeating
the mistakes of the past; that they are resolved to
shape their own destiny.
This attitude is in itself a revolution, one of dia¬
logue and indocility after the centuries of silence
and submission that these communities have suf
fered. It is a creative and peaceful revolution,
which presupposes a huge effort to achieve edu¬
cational renewal and social transformation, access
to full citizenship and participation in decisions
great and small, and which will henceforth make a
difference to their shared lives. Rigoberta Menchú
has summed up that hope in these lines:
A long darkness obscured my face;
long are my dreams, immense my hopes.
But the dawn will come, brightness will come.
To the utmost height of the azure vault shall
soar



the voice of those who never spoke.
Joining the two hemispheres
In many countries, particularly those of Latin
America, the lot of the indigenous peoples is a lin¬
gering blight on the progress of democracy. On
the one hand, there is the continuing problem of
their incorporation into the life of the nation,
under conditions of full and effective citizenship.
On the other, these peoples, after falling prey to
historical iniquities (such as those that occurred in
America in the sixteenth century) went on to
suffer at first hand from political strife and civil or
international wars whose effects were added to
those of exclusion and marginalization.
So it is important to highlight the peace-
seeking ingredient of this Initiative because
without peace the political, social and economic
36

goals that these communities have set themselves
cannot be realized.
The construction of peace involves more than
efforts to prevent the outbreak of armed conflict.
It means removing the causes of individual and
collective violence that spark off wars in the first
place. Such violence may take many forms: at the
political level it emerges as oppression and
tyranny; in economic life, as exploitation and
poverty; in the social sphere, as exclusion and
intolerance. Any effort to establish a culture of
peace must be targeted at the roots of violence and
make a priority of communicating values, forging
attitudes and devising institutions that will extir¬
pate violence from human minds.
Industrial civilization and indigenous cultures
must engage in a dialogue that cannot fail to be of
mutual benefit to them. The former is the reposi¬
tory of a great deal of knowledge, particularly
technical know-how, but is short on wisdom; it
has lost a sense of human fulfilment. Peoples living
in precarious conditions of material development
still possess this wisdom and contact with nature,
but they lack the technological expertise that
abounds in the industrialized countries. To join
these two hemispheres of humanity is tantamount
to curing humanity of its hemiplegia. Still, these
material comforts and facilities do not suffice to



make us respect the natural environment and do
away with the most glaring injustices of our
society.
In the Pópol Vuh, the sacred book of the
Mayas, there are some verses laden with sym¬
bolism that tell how the first human beings were
annihilated as retribution because "they did not
think, did not speak with their Creator". Those
men and women, made of wood, had abused their
immediate surroundings and upset the natural bal¬
ance that united them with the cosmos. As a pun
ishment, the gods allowed the earth, the animals
and even household objects to rebel against them
and destroy them.
The revenge exacted by animals and even by
objects on the human beings who dominate
them a feature that exists in one form or another
in almost all cosmogonies is an allegory of the
woes that human beings may bring on themselves
through the misuse of power, especially the
Promethean might of the intellect. A noted leader
of the North American Indians, Chief Seattle, put
it like this in 1855:
"The earth does not belong to man, but man
belongs to the earth. Man has not woven the fabric
of life; he is but a strand of it. Everything he does to
the fabric he will do to himself. What befalls the
earth will befall the children of the earth."
A wealth of difference
We thought we had magic formulae to suit all situa¬
tions. As if all countries were uniform, and as if their
histories, their natural resources, their traditions,
their beliefs, their forms and styles of living were of
no account. As if it were possible to ignore the infi¬
nite diversity of individual lives, of the social, eco¬
nomic and cultural contexts in which people grow
up, of the ideas imparted to them, of their thoughts
and impressions, their states of mind, and so on. We
have forgotten the cultural dimension of personal
and collective development. Instead of believing
that wealth lay in diversity, we imagined that it was
uniformity which, at least in economic terms, ought
to prevail, forgetting that difference is wealth as
long as it unites us.
Knowledge of and respect for difference, full
receptiveness to others. May the diversity of cul¬
tures long continue, of those "hybrid and wandering
cultures", which, as Carlos Fuentes put it, are our
greatest our ultimate source of wealth.
37
