* ni* í.
UNEQUAL PARTNERS
BY NESTOR GARCIA CANCLINI
" I he far-reaching cultural
changes brought about by
communication technologies
are becoming still more
radical through their links
with the globalization of
production and
consumption." Above, a
young consumer from Brunei.
n the second half of the twentieth
century, the industrialization of the
production of material goods, closely
linked to the industrialization of cul¬
ture, gave rise to new concepts of
development. The latest stages in this
process have been the integration of the mass
media into information superhighways and
the integration of national cultural circuits
into globalized systems.
The merger of computer science and
telecommunications, especially direct broad¬
casting by satellite and fibre optic cables, is
enabling the "old" communication media to
be used in new ways. Telephone, cinema,
television and video arc being brought
together in interactive transnational systems
which link up the networks possessed by
these media in the most remote countries.
These information superhighways arc
transforming scientific communication,
office automation, banking and intercompany
services and no doubt also the distribution of
cultural performances. Transnational compa¬
nies programme the circulation of films, car¬
toons and news in many countries of the
South and even in some European countries.
Before the end of this century, U.S. films will
THE UNESCO lOURIER . SEPTEMBER 1996

Vent-titres (1996), a work by
the French artists Martine
Balata and René Jullien.
be broadcast by satellite to halls in hundreds
of cities on every continent without the lim¬
itations imposed by customs tariffs on cinema
and video films. What is more, access to
video games, teleshopping, national and inter¬
national news from television and personal
computers is being widely extended. The arts
arc being incorporated into these mass media
networks in order to expand their audience
and obtain financing.
As a result, the communication industries
are among the most dynamic agents of the
modern economy and constitute one of the
main sources of investment and employment
opportunities. In the United States they rank
second only to the aerospace industry as a
source of export earnings.
The media explosion
The far-reaching cultural changes brought
about by communication technologies are
becoming still more radical through their
links with the internationalization and global¬
ization of production and consumption, pop¬
ulation migrations and tourism. This global¬
izing movement is throwing national cultures
open to news, films, radio, theatre, television
serials and other entertainment forms pro¬
duced outside the country concerned.
Until twenty or thirty years ago, efforts
were made to control the challenge of these
communication flows between societies by
imposing time quotas for the broadcasting of
foreign programmes in each country. These
controls arc no longer feasible today for the
following reasons:
the deterritorialization of artistic production
irMflW?**,
LB1!KPÄI
MMT"
which loosens its ties with any particular
country;
the existence of technological facilities which
can circulate mass media messages
throughout the world;
the increasing cost of film arid record pro¬
duction, which makes it hard to recoup
investment in a single country;
the monopolistic concentration of produc¬
tion and distribution in the hands of pow¬
erful multinational companies;
the transnational expansion of communica¬
tions, which has weakened local traditions
and given birth to a world folklore. Com¬
munities of consumers, especially young
people, are defining their cultural prac¬
tices on the basis of homogenized infor¬
mation and styles which seem acceptable
to different societies, regardless of their
own specific political, religious or national
concepts.
A system with built-in
inequalities
Today, all these factors arc leading to radical
changes which go beyond internationalization
or the opening of the geographical frontiers
of each society to goods and messages from
other cultures. The age of globalization is
being accompanied by an interaction
between disparate economic and cultural
activities brought about by a multi-centred
system in which the speed of world-wide
transmission and strategies for winning over
audiences completely outweigh local historic
traditions. The fact remains, however, that
this global reorganization of cultures does not
eliminate inequalities or asymmetry between
the metropolis and outlying regions.
In Latin America, the economic recession
of the past decade has impoverished local
artistic production and the capacity to play a
competitive part in international integration.
The contraction of public budgets and the
weakness of private enterprise, except for a
few big multinational businesses, confront us
with the paradox that more intensive trade is
being promoted between the receiving coun¬
tries and the metropolises while these coun¬
tries are producing fewer books, fewer films
and fewer records. Integration is being pro¬
moted at the very time when there are few
cultural goods to exchange, and falling wages
inhibit consumption by the majority of the
population.
O^wrier SEPTEMBER 1996

The situation is even more dramatic in the
field of high technology and the information
superhighways. The subordination of the
Latin American countries is being accompa¬
nied by the elimination of customs tariffs on
foreign products as a result of the conclusion
of free trade agreements, while the few subsi¬
dies for local technological development arc
being further eroded.
Greater cultural and scientific dependence
on advanced communication technologies
which require heavy financial investment and
at the same time generate faster innovation,
will render the marginal societies more vul¬
nerable to transnational capital and to cultural
trends generated outside the region. That is
why the multicultural system and its inherent
inequalities are typified today not only by the
coexistence of different historical traditions



but also by the unequal access of different
countries, and of the different sectors of each
society, to advanced means of transnational
communication.
These inequalities have given rise to new
fp/iabet(1992), a mixed-
media work by the Colombian
artist Gustavo Vejarano.
NESTOR GARCIA CANCLINI,
an Argentine anthropologist,
isa professor at the
Autonomous Metropolitan
University, Mexico City.
social injustices. The broad masses are
involved in the global culture to a limited
extent because they only have access to the
first stage of the audiovisual industries, i.e. to
the entertainment and news programmes put
out by radio and television services for which
there is no charge.
Some (minority) groups of the middle and
working classes have been able to gain access
to a second, more up-to-date and sophisti¬
cated tier of the communication media in the
shape of cable television networks providing
environmental and health education, political
information on videos, and so forth. Only
small fringes of the entrepreneurial, political
and academic elite are linked up to the more
active forms of communication, i.e. to the
third tier of the system, which includes the
fax, electronic mail, satellite dishes, and infor¬
mation and game networks ranging from
home videos to international electronic net¬
works of the horizontal kind.
World folklore and
traditional culture
The development of policies to promote
broad access to these second and third com¬
munication tiers is a necessary corollary to the
development of modern democratic forms of
citizenship which have the capacity to inter¬
vene significantly in the processes of global
and regional integration. The multinational
dimension of problems such as environmental
pollution, drug trafficking, and technological
and cultural innovation means that citizens
need to possess information which transcends
the local or national context.
We know that the process of globalization
docs not spell the end of ethnic, regional and
national cultures. The deterritorialization of
the arts is accompanied by effective reterri-
torialization in the form of social movements
which place emphasis on local characteristics,
and use mass media techniques such as
regional radio and television and the creation
of micromarkets for folk music and objects.
It is undeniable, however, that in many
countries, national and ethnic symbols are
ceasing to be the main references of social iden¬
tity and cohesion. The time has come to think
of ways of establishing equitable and creative
ties between the homogeneous transnational-
ization of styles of information and entertain¬
ment and the aspiration of local and national cul¬
tures to survive.
THE UNESCO ^URIER . SEPTEMBER 1996
