THE EDUCATION OF PRISONERS
BY STEPHEN DUGUID
Prison education may seem to be a contradiction in terms. Prisons
are authoritarian, coercive institutions. Education, on the other
hand, is generally seen as liberating, dependent on the free flow of
ideas and, in the case of adults, on opportunities to put into prac¬
tice ideas and skills learned in the classroom.
Despite these apparent contradictions there has grown up over
the past century or more a branch of adult education known as
"prison education". In developing countries the provision of edu¬
cation in prisons is a low national priority. Educational resources
are scarce and teachers are poorly trained.
In the nations of the former "socialist bloc" prison education
has been a formal partner in the reformative mandate given to
prison systems based on the premise that crime must be a devia¬
tion caused by ignorance rather than by social or cultural depri¬
vation. Education in prisons is an important tool in the effort to
have prisoners come to see the "error of their ways".
In the countries of the West the practice varies according to
political choices, available funding and the state of research. In
the past the dominant role for prison education was "schooling"
based on literacy, secondary school and vocational education pro¬
grammes. The rationale for such programmes lay in a complex
series of explanations for crime, largely based on sociological foun¬
dations. More recently the rationale has begun to shift back to
psychological causes for crime, and hence education programmes
are being asked to serve more specific ends such as addressing
addiction, violence, anger and sexual deviation.
Prison educators are constantly called on to justify them¬
selves, and in doing so have reached divergent though sometimes
complementary positions. Many educators focus on the ameliora¬
tive effect of education on the management of the prison. Others
have made a strong case for schooling in prison as a response to
the educational and cultural deprivation of the imprisoned or have
advocated the economic advantages of vocational training. The
most optimistic assert that education should play the leading role
or at least have an important place in the prison's rehabilitative
and reformative agenda.
In the past decade, prison educators around the world have
emerged from their isolated and isolating institutions and discov¬
ered a common vocation amongst divergent theories and praxis.
Teachers, administrators and researchers have taken part in a series
of international meetings in the U.S.A., Canada, the United
Kingdom, Sweden, Estonia and the Netherlands and taken the first
steps towards defining some common standards for education in
prison.
STEPHEN DUGUID,
of Canada, is associate professor of humanities at Simon Fraser University in
British Columbia and a specialist in adult education. He has written many
articles on education in prisons and participated in the work of Unesco's
International Commission on Education for the 21st Century.
14
