FROM IMAGE TO ENVIRONMENT
BY FLORIAN ROTZER
fingertips
m* m
irtual reality is computer
technology enabling a person
to "live" interactively in a
world of computer-generated
images. Wearing a head-
mounted display and a data
glove, this man can "touch"
the table which is
simultaneously being back-
projected onto a giant screen.
n the galaxy of three-dimensional virtual
images into which we have entered,
paintings and the handful of sculptures
still produced using traditional methods
have become a marginal phenomenon. Art pro¬
duced using simulation techniques is moving
towards the conquest of a three-dimensional
world of space and objects which we can enter
and where we can move about freely.
Art is breaking away from the straitjacket
of convention and quitting the museum. Real¬
ity is no longer a matter of appearance but is
becoming increasingly artificial and staged.
The replacement of traditional paintings
and sculptures by ready-made objects is a reac¬
tion to the impact of photography. The intro¬
duction of raw reality into art is a response to
the opportunity which the photographic
image offers of dissociating the representation
of an object from its physical presence. The
microphone and recording technology have
brought the same phenomenon to music,
where a composer like John Cage introduces
into his scores unusual or simple sounds which
are the musical equivalent of ready-mades.
Artists are proposing a new relationship with
reality. Today, faced with the advent of virtual
reality, we find ourselves cherishing the tangible.
We are starting to attach an ethical value to the
reality with which we come into violent contact
at the same time as it eludes us. Now that we
can conjure up all manner of images on our
magic screens and reconstitute all kinds of things
in virtual space, we are rediscovering a taste for
risk in a world where images are analysed to
death. Many people regard the computer as a
machine that disembodies, but in fact the oppo¬
site is the case. The whole body becomes a com¬
mand post that is drawn into cyberspace and
hooked up to a multitude of sensorial and track¬
ing systems.
A gateway
to another world
The traditional warnings against the dangers
of confusing image and reality are no longer
36 THEUNESCO ^>URIER DECEMBER 1996

relevant. We have ceased to believe in the power
of images; they have become too lightweight
and insubstantial. They do not live up to our
expectations. Even when they excite or move us,
we act like an onlooker during a storm who
impassively watches a shipwreck from the shore.
When images began to move, the first audi¬
ence of the Lumière brothers' short film
L'Arrivée d'un train en gare de La Ciotat (1895)
were apparently terrified that the locomotive
drawing into the station would come out of
the screen into the cinema. Today we no longer
jump out of our seats when we see such images,
but many people wish we did. Virtual reality
has created a desire to use simulation techniques
to transcend simulation and achieve the mental
state of the man who became so involved in a
play that he was ready to leap onstage to rescue
the hero. Today we use a joystick or a mouse
to create on our computer screens the creatures
and images of our choice, but the time will come
when monsters and fighter-bombers in elec¬
tronic games will be capable of transporting our
virtual being into their virtual universe.
We no longer want to look through win¬
dows. We want to step through doors into
other worlds and come and go between them.
We want reality, and so we ask for images that
not only act on us but can react to our inter¬
ventions, in some cases unpredictably. Illusion
and utopia are becoming less alluring, while
reality is becoming more attractive, even as an
unsophisticated form of entertainment. Wc
want to get closer to reality and even touch it.
Interactive art
In the words "telephone", "television",
"telecommunication" and "teleconference" the
prefix "tele" not only designates the juxtapo¬
sition in the same virtual space of two distant
events, it also designates the equipment and
technologies that seek to overcome this dis¬
tance and create proximity. Teletechnologies
open doors as well as windows. Soon channel-
hopping will no longer offer usa simple choice
in the quest for thrills, fascinating scenes and
out-of-the-way information; it will give us
access to worlds that will remove us body and
soul from the here and now, as if from a prison.
Reality is not a visual image, nor does it
only involve one or two of our senses, calling
U pposite page, 77ie Legible
City (Karlsruhe version, 1991),
an interactive installation by
Australian artist Jeffrey Shaw
in assocation with Dirk
Groeneveld and Gideon May.
Sitting on a stationary bicycle,
visitors "ride" through a
computer-simulation of
Karlsruhe streets where the
buildings are replaced by giant
letters. These compose a text,
written by Dirk Groeneveld,
that the cyclist deciphers while
riding. The Legible City exists
in two other versions:
Manhattan (1989) and
Amsterdam (1990).
We' earing a special outfit and
a head-set, this man is on a
virtual trip in the middle of a
real street.
on the imagination to do the rest. It involves
all forms of sensations, emotions and actions.
With so-called virtual reality, which offers us
not images but sensory environments enabling
us to explore three-dimensional space, the
transition from contemplation of the pho¬
tographic image to entry into the world of
that image has become technically feasible.
This is what is involved in the creation of
new interactive works of art which would
leave the public with considerable freedom.
Visitors to cyberspace can travel as they wish
in this virtual world, since they arc no longer
perceiving an image transmitted by the single
eye of the camera lens but feeling impressions
comparable to those that we receive in our
usual environment. This multiplicity of sen¬
sory perspectives opens a whole network of
possible interactions that escape linear per¬
spective. One of the attractions of this virtual
world is that those who have access to it can
meet in it other "explorers". Thus we have a
new, theoretically open and extremely mal¬
leable environment. What should we do or
want to do and experience in it?
Artists face an exciting challenge as they
seek to extract dramatic effects from these new
possibilities. The notion of the finished work
has given way to that of performance by those
at the receiving end, who use the work of art
as an instrument whose possibilities they can
exploit.
