Cutting the
Gordian knot
by Ivar Ekeland
Since we can
never base our
decisions on
complete
knowledge, we
have to live with
uncertainty
lYIel Gibson in the title role of
Franco Zeffi relli's film Hamlet
(1991).
IVAR EKELAND,
of France, is honorary president
of trie University of Parls-
Dauphine and director of the
Institut Finance Dauphine, where
he teaches mathematics. His
works published in English include
The Broken Dice, and Other
Mathematical Tales of Chance
(Chicago University Press, 1993)
and Mathematics and the
Unexpected (Chicago University
Press, 1988). His most recent
publication Is Lechaos
(Flammarion, Paris, 1994).
Human existence is fraught with
uncertainty. Who knows what
tomorrow may bring? But this does not pre¬
vent us from taking daily decisions, in our
private and public lives, which hold implica¬
tions for our future, for the future of our fam¬
ilies, our country or even in certain dra¬
matic situations, such as war the future of
humanity as a whole. These decisions, be
they good or bad, are taken on the basis of the
information available at the time.
This raises the question of whether bad
decisions may not be the result of inaccurate or
incomplete information. Would complete
knowledge of a particular situation allow a fully-
informed decision to be taken and its conse¬
quences to be predicted with virtual certainty?
The climatological model
The complexity of both natural systems and
those of human design means that the ideal
scenario a clear-cut situation leading to a
good decision, the effects of which can be
simply deduced is not only unattainable but
inconceivable.
An example of such a complex system is
provided by that increasingly disturbing cli¬
matic conundrum, the greenhouse effect.
Does human activity increase the level of
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and, if so,
what are the consequences for the earth's cli¬
mate? From a purely scientific viewpoint, the
problem consists in studying the long-term
evolution of a complex system (the earth's
atmosphere) which is subject to a variety of
external influences (cosmic and solar radia¬
tion, interactions between the oceans and the
land masses, influence of human activity and
other life-forms, etc.). The difficulty is
twofold: one must first acquire knowledge of
the present state of the system and, once this
has been thoroughly established, one must
then predict its future evolution.
Let us start by examining the apparently
20

"A butterfly flapping
its wings . . . can unleash a
storm. . . "
'In order to predict
next year's weather
at a given spot one
would need a
network of
information from all
over the surface of
the globe.'
© SuperStock. Paris
simple notion of "the atmospheric level of
C02". Does this mean determining the level
of C02 at a particular point in the atmosphere ?
This requires a statistical analysis which reveals
certain major seasonal trends but leaves a sub¬
stantial margin of error, due to the uncertainty
of various meteorological variables. Or does it
rather mean, less arbitrarily, the total mass of
C02 present in the atmosphere at a given
point in time? There is no way of measuring
this directly and, in any case, there is no indi¬
cation that this approach would be any less
uncertain than the previous interpretation.
The only precise definition of this para¬
meter would be "the level of C02 at every
point in the atmosphere at any given
moment". For this definition to be opera¬
tional, it would have to be supplemented by a
mass of data on the direction and strength of
the wind, the temperature and humidity of
the air, and on the oceans. Only then could
we determine, more or less precisely, the
near future of the climatic system.
A definition which requires such a volume
of information is barely feasible in economic
terms. It is therefore right to wonder whether
we should not abandon the attempt to produce
a single figure to denote this persistently elu¬
sive quantity, the "atmospheric level of C02".
Would it not be sufficient to work on the basis
of typical figures, for example, from points at
intervals of 100 km across the earth's surface,
and at 5,000 m intervals of altitude?
The answer naturally depends on pre¬
cisely what we are looking for. In meteo¬
rology, this kind of precision would enable
forecasts to be made from one day to the
next. To forecast the weather two days ahead,
data must be gathered on a finer scale; and the
farther ahead we wish to see, the more sensi¬
tive and extensive the data base must be. The
American meteorologist Edward Lorenz has
remarked that a meteorological disturbance
which is allowed to develop unhindered may
double in magnitude within three days. In the
now famous image, a butterfly flapping its
wings in the Amazon basin can, if atmos¬
pheric conditions are favourable, unleash a
storm on the coast of Brittany a year later.
In other words, in order to predict next
year's weather at a given spot one would need
a network of information on the scale of the
butterfly, stretching all over the surface of the
globe.
21

'Modern societies have become so complex that their situation can
no longer be encapsulated in a handful of figures. '
Let us now leave the domain of meteo¬
rology, with its short-term quantitative pre¬
dictions, and return to climatology, where
these phenomena are analysed qualitatively
over a much longer time-scale. Can we
achieve results using composite data, by con¬
sidering the "atmospheric level of C02" as a
mean annual value adjusted to take account of
random fluctuations? This is possible, but it
will not guarantee a significant improvement
in the degree of certainty of our predictions.
One can, of course, imagine large-scale
assessments of the thermodynamics of the
M an in the World, oil on atmosphere, which would enable definite
canvas by the Russian painter
Pavel Filonov (1883-1941).
conclusions to be drawn. The dynamics of
the earth's atmosphere are subject to great
variation from one year to the next, but a sta¬
tistical analysis over a longer period a cen¬
tury, say would reveal certain trends
However, the relatively short history of
climatology means that such analyses are not
available to us at present. In any case, it could
be that the atmospheric level of C02 in 100 or
200 years time may crucially depend on phe¬
nomena that are too subtle or too obscure to
have yet entered our calculations (for example,
the disappearance of certain animal species).
A stitch in time
The question of the accumulation of large
amounts of data crops up in most human sys¬
tems (economics, politics, the social sphere,
etc.). It was long believed that the state of the
economy, and public opinion, were dependent
on several major variables (including the rate of
inflation, unemployment, taxation and the bal¬
ance of trade) and that the art of government
consisted in maintaining these few indicators
within acceptable limits, or bringing them back
into line if they strayed beyond these limits.
In recent years, however, some industri¬
alized countries have been unable to reduce
their unemployment figures; and a President
of the United States suffered a severe elec¬
toral defeat during a period of economic
growth. It may therefore be wondered
whether we tend to represent problems in an
over-simplistic manner, and whether statis¬
tical data still have any value at all. Perhaps
modern societies have become so complex
that the reality of a given situation can no
longer be encapsulated in a handful of figures,
still less be controlled on such a basis.
In any event, we can be certain of one thing
in human affairs: that nothing is certain. One
might even wonder whether certainty is desir¬
able. To want to know everything about a given
subject is futile, an endless escalation into com¬
plexity. As Shakespeare's Hamlet knew, any
decision involves slicing through a Gordian
knot. Complete information will never be
available, and total certainty is impossible. But
there always comes a moment when one must
decide, when the search for further informa¬
tion is more of a hindrance than a help. Cer¬
tainty will not be forthcoming, either sooner or .
later, and we will never know for sure whether
we have made the right decision: a world in
which a different decision had been taken, a
world in which Chancellor Helmut Kohl, for
example, had not gone ahead with the reunifi¬
cation of Germany, would be so different from
the world we know that any comparison
between the two is meaningless.
One could almost say that the most
important skill in decision-making is knowing
when to decide.
22
