BACKTO THE DRAWING BOARD
BY LOURDES ARIZPE
arcours à la paix ("Route
to peace", 1989-1994) is the
name of a 7,000-m2 public
square (above) created in the
north Paris suburb of Blanc
Mesnil by French architect and
sculptor Françoise Cataláa.
The leaning bronze shaft is
decorated with 150 symbols
from all over the world (detail,
opposite page). The word
"peace" is engraved on three
"doors of peace" (at right of
photo above) in many
languages and in writing
styles from different periods.
LOURDES ARIZPE
is Unesco 's Assistant Director-
General for Culture.
!!ÍB
or the first time in history, the
global market and telecommu¬
nications have brought people
of all the cultures of the world
into permanent contact. While
this is an astonishing historical
achievement, it is bringing both benefits and
liabilities. Better communications between
cultures may bring greater understanding, or
greater friction. Increased trade, conducted
in a just and equitable manner, may provide
more people with access to necessary prod¬
ucts and services; yet it may also wipe out
livelihoods and leave people destitute as
information on the new markets eludes
them. More technology increases our under¬
standing and capacity for managing the envi¬
ronment and our own genetic processes: yet
it may lead to the de-skilling of the cultures
in a "brave new world". The manner in
which these processes evolve will depend on
how people react to such new possibilities.
This is the reason why culture needs to be
made visible as the context in which societies
evolve. Development thinking and policies
must, as a matter of urgency, take up the
issues of co-operation, community, trust,
ethnicity and identity since these make up the
social fabric on which the polity and the
economy are based. In many parts of the
world, exclusive emphasis on competition
and the market are altering these sensitive
equilibrium factors and exacerbating cultural
tensions and feelings of uncertainty.
The way to situate oneself in the world
most readily is by enumerating the traits of
one's culture, which are best defined by
being set in contrast with those of other cul¬
tures. Human beings enjoy a feeling of polit¬
ical and psychological certainty by being
enclosed within symbolically visible cultural
boundaries, although these are contextualized
in historically continuous cultural flows.
Shifting boundaries
Now that these boundaries are shifting,
people are having to rethink their place in a
microglobal world. In the past, national bor¬
ders circumscribed laws, state policies,
economies, politics, education and, as a rule,
THE UNESCO IPURIER
14
SEPTEMBER 1W6

demography, as well as culturally expressive
collective rituals and ceremonies. This highly
centralized, mechanical scheme must now
open up to more flexible participative arrange¬
ments in which the realities of economic inter¬
dependence and cultural identities may be
incorporated.
Complex identities
The great battle today is between a humanist,
rational culture, which proposes respect for
all cultures and religions, and manichean cul¬
tures, which posit the intolerant imposition
of exclusive creeds.
The rational culture seeks political solutions
to today's eruption of entitlements (human,
national, bioethical, gender, ethnic and reli¬
gious) which involves a new co-evolutionary
vision that will lead to new agreements, reor¬
ganizing existing institutions and, in some
cases, building new ones. At the individual
level, it advocates multi-layered arrangements
of identities that will allow a person to recog¬
nize his or her place in the world simultane¬
ously as a planetary inhabitant, a citizen of a
nation-state, a gendered being, an affiliate of a
particular culture or several, according to
ancestry, geography or choice and a holder
of beliefs in a given religion.
The opposing cosmopolitical scheme
entails the enforced imposition on other
people of one's own cultural affiliation, polit¬
ical system or religious creed. Such a vision
may lead to successive killings since each vic¬
tory ensures that revenge will be sought by
the defeated party within a few years.
What is new in today's shifting of cultural
boundaries is that these are interwoven with
the political reorganization of the role of
nation-states on the global stage. Significantly,
new legislation, institutions and participation
mechanisms related to cultural pluralism con¬
stitute by their very nature proposals for new
political schemes to organize public life.
However, while creativity has brought
about a revolution in technology, communi¬
cations and the arts, it has barely touched
institutions and procedures of governance.
The transformation of institutions and the
search for civic ties to allow different groups
of people to live together are more urgent
than ever. They must be based on recognition
of the equal dignity of people and of their cul¬
tures. Experience has taught us that gover¬
nance that denies cultural identities leads to
barren tyranny, and culture without gover¬
nance leads to unmanageable conflict.
THEUNESCof¿URIER SEPTEMBER 1996
