ABRIDGE
TO THE
CREATIVE
PAST
BY LUKE TAYLOR
The religious life of the Aborigines of
Central Australia focuses upon the
activities of the original creator beings,
who instituted the first ceremonies
and produced the first sacred objects and
designs used in them. Today, Aboriginal peo¬
ple say they "follow up" these ancestors in
their own activities and care for the sites which
contain their powerful essence. They hold cer¬
emonies to honour the creative activities of
the original beings and to release a measure of
ancestral power in order to maintain the
world's fertility. The production of art forms
a very important part of these events.
At various stages in the performances, cer¬
emonial leaders paint powerful graphic designs
on the dancers' bodies in red and yellow ochre,
white pipe clay and charcoal. Coloured bird
down or vegetable flu ff may be attached to add
texture or fixed around an enveloping frame¬
work that temporarily transforms the dancer
into a representation of the ancestral being.
More elaborate designs, sometimes extend¬
ing over considerable distances, are made on the
ceremonial ground. They may include sculp¬
tural elements such as mounds or hollows.
Alternatively, decorated wooden poles strung
Mn Aborigine from Elcho
Island, Arnhem Land, In
Australia's far north.
Mboriglnes wearing feathers
stuck to the skin with a paste
made of beeswax and honey.
with sacred objects may be inserted into the
ground at certain points. The designs depict
schematically the features of landscape made
by the ancestral beings, whom the dancers imi¬
tate as they make their way across them.
The designs are destroyed during the cere¬
mony, having served their purpose of pro¬
viding a temporary bridge between the cre¬
ative past and the world of the Aborigines
today. The aesthetic aim is not to construct a
permanent monument but to produce a pow¬
erful effect, thus maintaining knowledge about
the nature of the ancestral world and trans¬
mitting it to the younger generation.
The motifs often consist of concentric cir¬
cles joined by parallel lines or incorporate
other features such as animal tracks, arcs and
straight lines often representing the shelters
or tools used by the Ancestral beings.
The concentric circles are symbolic of
female generative power and the straight line
joining motifs suggest male procreative power.
The conjunction of these elements in a cere¬
monial context is considered by performers
to release procreative energy and thus maintain
the life cycle.
THE UNESCO C3URILR DECEMBER 1996
