A JOURNEY OF SELF-DISCOVERY
BY BUJOR NEDELCOVICI
lllv IlilGIICVlUCll II
has been marked
scientists and ph
I he Ideal City (15th century),
a painting attributed to
Luciano Laurana and
Francesco di Giorgio Martini.
It is now in the Ducal Palace,
Urbino (Italy).
BUJOR NEDELCOVICI
is a Romanian novelist,
essayist and scriptwriter.
of the twentieth century
i Odyssey of exiled artists,
Aninitiatory, rite above all else,
but also a journey into the
labyrinth and a descent into
hell, exile is a source of inspira¬
tion and a revcaler of personal¬
ity. For people who live in exile whether
voluntarily or involuntarily their old life
ends, a new one begins. Whether their exile
is internal, external, political, economic or
cultural, it produces a fundamental spiritual
and moral change in them.
Exile has always existed. From the forced
march of the Hebrews described in the Bible
to Dante's banishment, it has been a regular
feature of Western history and imagination.
But never have exile and exodus been more
systematic and widespread than in the twen¬
tieth century.
In the 1930s, many intellectuals were
forced to flee Nazi Germany and the occu¬
pied countries in order to escape the jack¬
boot. Sigmund Freud, Karl Popper and Elias
Canetti left Vienna for London. Bertolt
Brecht and Thomas Mann took refuge in the
United States. Stefan Zweig went to Brazil,
where he committed suicide. But being an
expatriate (from the Latin expatriare, "to
leave one's native country") is not easy, and
all exiles are foreigners obsessed with retain¬
ing their human dignity.
But it was the Soviet Union which, more
even than Nazi Germany, became the twen¬
tieth century's biggest generator of exile.
Vast numbers of people left that land of ban¬
ishment in search of freedom of conscience,
thought and expression. The indifference
and cynicism of the contemporary world
were finally swept away by the publication
of Alexander Solzhenitsyn's The Gulag
Archipelago. The banished Solzhenitsyn is
one of this century's great men of con¬
science. Recent events in the former
Yugoslavia and in Rwanda (to mention only
two examples) have shown that history
repeats itself, but above all that human
beings continue to exile each other, succes¬
sively taking on the roles of banisher and
banished, torturer and victim.
Voluntary exiles, whether they be intel¬
lectuals, thinkers or writers, adjust to their
condition. They adopt new countries and
sometimes even new languages. People like
René Descartes in Holland, Voltaire, who
took refuge first in England, then near
Geneva, Joseph Conrad, who adopted
English culture and the English language,
Lawrence Durrell in the Middle East and
many other well-known and less well-
known figures alternate between isolation
and adoption according to a sophisticated
the UNESCO Courier 7.
¡OCTOBER 1996

and sometimes elusive process whereby the
distinction between voluntary and involun¬
tary exile is sometimes blurred, even to the
point of vanishing altogether. The odyssey of
people like Pablo Picasso, Marc Chagall,
Wassily Kandinsky, Albert Camus, Samuel
Beckett and Mircea Eliade has marked the
scientific, literary and artistic history of the
twentieth century.
A testing time
"One inhabits not a country but a language,"
the Romanian essayist Emil Cioran said of
writers, who form a case apart. Is not the
writer always somewhere else? That con¬
ception of the homeland could explain why
so few writers Conrad, Ionesco, Cioran
himself have written in a language other
than their own.
Experience has taught me that the most
gruelling and frustrating form of exile is prob¬
ably the exile that exists at home the exile
that precedes the physical act of departure.
After I had inherited, under the iron rule of
communism, the mark of dishonour branded
on my father, a political prisoner, I was not
allowed to occupy any social rank other than
that of a manual worker on building sites. The
need to understand, to explain and also to
imagine made me take refuge in writing,
where I won back my freedom of thought
and expression. In the end, censorship forced
me into physical exile, far from my family, my
friends and my home. I am an expatriate in
the literal sense of the term: I am neither
Romanian, nor French, nor even an exile. I
am a writer, and my only homeland is writing.
If exile is an initiation test, it is also a test of
the truth. It entails shedding one's illusions
and the world of wishful thinking and pre¬
tence, and arriving at a kind of lucidity. It
means learning how to winnow out the wheat
from the chaff by discarding bogus tolerance,
which produces a semblance of inner peace,
in favour of real tolerance, which requires
one to immerse oneself in the universal.
In the end we have all experienced exile at
one time or another in our lives. The main
thing is to understand it and to try to bring out
its metaphysical dimension by surpassing our¬
selves. Involuntary exile has become, in my
case, voluntary exile in search of things past
and spiritual resurrection. To accept is already
to effect a return at least to oneself.

THE UNESCO Q>URIER I «OCTOBER 1996
