post-modern
dance:
the latest
figures
byJochen Schmidt
Five Stone Wind (1988).
Choreography by Merce
Cunningham.
JOCHEN SCHMIDT,
German writer and journalist, is
artistic director of the
International Dance Festival of
North Rhineland-Westphalla. He is
the author of Tanztheater in
Deutschland ("Dance Theatre in
Germany", 1992) and has made a
documentary film on Pina Bausch.
"Post-modern" must be the hardest
term to define in the world of dance.
The notion of "modern dance" was already
unpopular enough, and Martha Graham, for
instance, never accepted it as a description of
her art. But at least we knew what it meant
a form of stage dancing that was created in the
early twentieth century and broke with the
rules of classical ballet.
Very few people have any idea what the
term "post-modern dance", which made its
appearance in American dance literature in
the late 1970s, actually means. To my mind,
the best definition of it was given by the
choreographer Alvin Ailey some years ago at
a press conference. "Post-modern dance?"
he said. "Easy. It means dance after Merce
Cunningham." This seems to denote no
more than a time frontier, but in fact the term
describes the position of not just one but sev¬
eral generations of choreographers in relation
to the American dance genius of the second
half of the century. They have either taken up
the torch handed on by Cunningham or
rebelled against his style and aesthetic.
For America this makes sense but prob¬
ably not for Europe. It is true that Cun
ningham has been extremely influential in
France since the 1960s and has inspired many
young choreographers. But in France and
almost everywhere else in Europe, in the last
fifteen years at least, the influence of the
German choreographer Pina Bausch has
been stronger than Cunningham's.
Many new forms and trends
Of course, Pina Bausch herself is not free
from foreign influences. She was trained in
Essen and at the Julliard School of Music in
New York. However, there is more to post¬
modernism than the "dance theatre" which
she created in the 1970s and which became a
style model all over the world.
The fact is that contemporary dance has
no stylistic and aesthetic unity; it is a highly
complex edifice with many rooms, all fur¬
nished differently. It cannot be limited to
post-modern American dance, which
encompasses the pale neo-classicism of
Karole Armitage as well as the early mini¬
malist exercises of Trisha Brown, or to Euro¬
pean dance theatre, whose variants in Ger¬
many and France, Belgium and Spain differ
widely from one another.
22

Contemporary
dance finds
inspiration all
over the world
There are many other trends in contem¬
porary dance as well as these two major cur¬
rents. A list of them would include Japanese
Butô (see article page 27), and choreogra¬
phers such as Saburo Teshigawara who have
tried to go further than Butô; the first, occa¬
sionally timid, but highly fertile and deter¬
mined excursions of non-Western cultures
into modern dance, e.g. the alchemy with
which Lin Hwai-min in Taiwan has fused the
Chinese tradition and Western dance tech¬
niques; the démythification of Indian dance
by Chandralekha in Madras; the revolu¬
tionary blend of Indian Bharata Natyam
dance and Western music created by
Shobana Jeyasingh in London; African dance
as performed by Irène Tassembedo and her
Ebene group from Burkina Faso; and the
opening of traditional dance forms of Aus¬
tralian Aborigines to contemporary themes
by the Aboriginal and Islander Dance The¬
atre and the Bangara Group in Sydney.
Dancing on turf, earth and water
This variety of contemporary dance, which
is not even remotely covered by the label of
post-modernism, is such that it is hard to
predict how dance will develop. At the same
time it gives grounds for hope that when one
form or another runs out of steam the devel¬
opment of dance will not come to a standstill.
Above, the Russian dancer Mikhail Baryshnikov
in 1977 in Push Comes to Shove, by the American
choreographer Twyla Tharp.
Below, German choreographer Pina Bausch's
The Rite of Spring (1995).
Whatever happens, however, the free¬
doms won by the two dominant figures of
recent decades, Merce Cunningham and
Pina Bausch, are sustainable acquisitions that
will shape the future of dance. In Cun¬
ningham's case they include the abolition of
the one-dimensional perspective and its
replacement by an open, spatial view which
corresponds in a sense to the world-view of
modern physics. Bausch has raised the possi¬
bility of turning every human movement,
however banal or routine (including the
spoken word and singing) into choreography
and of abandoning the classic dance stage in
favour of more natural surfaces such as turf,
earth and even water.
23

Concertante (1994),
by the Dutch choreographer
Hans van Manen.
In future, there will be more and more
dance pieces that will not be designed for the
traditional theatre stage but for theatre in the
round; more and more pieces in which the
dancers speak and sing when movement
alone is not enough to explain their action;
more and more pieces that are not dedicated
to a single dance code (such as the Martha
Graham style or the José Limon technique);
and many others in which mastery of con¬
ventional dance movements will not even be
essential. It does not interest us here whether
aquatic ballets in swimming pools and aerial
ballets in which the dancers climb up and
abseil down walls are an aesthetic fad or rep¬
resent genuine artistic progress. The fact is
that they exist and are likely to become more
widespread in the future. Falling Angels [1383),
by the Czech choreographer
Jiri Kylian.
24

A list of the ways in which modern
Western dance has fused with non-European
dance forms may give the impression that
Western style is increasingly influencing
dance in non-Western cultures via a modern
form of cultural colonialism. That impression
is not totally incorrect, but in dance aesthetic
influence is not a one-way street. Dance styles
from outside Europe are increasingly gaining
ground in the West. African and Asian dance
forms are being transplanted to the West by
migrants from those continents to their new
homes in the West, and today a European or
an American who wants to see authentic
African or Asian dance does not necessarily
have to travel to Africa or fly to Asia. Cities
like New York, Los Angeles, London and
Paris have much to offer in these fields.
More and more Western dancers are
beginning to study non-European dances as
well as or instead of Western techniques, and
their studies are naturally having an impact on
their work. Today, many Western groups
have assimilated Japanese Butô, and it is not
Picture (1984),
by Merce Cunningham (right).
G amia Barn (1990),
by the Swedish choreographer
Mats Ek.
25

Sécheresse et pluie (1995),
by the Vietnamese
choreographer Ea Sola.
necessary to have been born in Madras or
Jaipur to master the subtleties of Bharata
Natyam or Kathak. Influences of this sort can
only enrich dance. The multicultural society
of the kind which is developing in the capitals
and big cities of many Western countries will
also develop its own special dance profile and
its contours will no longer be purely Western,
something from which everyone will benefit.
However, the influence of classical ballet
cannot be disregarded. Since modern dance
and ballet buried the hatchet (in Episodes,
staged jointly by Martha Graham and George
Balanchine in New York in 1959), the two great
Western concepts of dance have moved closer
together. The spectator who sees choreog¬
raphy by the Swede Mats Ek, the Czech Jiri
Kylian, the American William Forsythe, or the
Dutchman Hans van Manen, will often not
La la la Human Steps
Infante (1991),
by the Canadian
choreographer
Edouard Lock.
Nanlakou (1995),
a dance based on Voodoo
rites, by the Haitian
choreographer Kettly Noël.
know whether it is an example of ballet or the
new form of dance. In any case, it does not
really matter into which particular compart¬
ment the critics try to place Jiri Kylian's solo
Double You or Ek's duo-ballet Grasse.
Through their sheer quality such pieces influ¬
ence the neighbouring field of free dance.
One thing is perfectly clear. In dance as in
pictorial art, the tendency to put less and less
substance into the frame has gone. Mini¬
malism has had its day. It was probably neces¬
sary in order to chart the extreme limits of
what could still just be described as dance. The
trend today in Japan and America, Germany
and France is back to more movement all
kinds of movement in all kinds of surround¬
ings. Dancers will have to dance and not stand
still or sit motionless if we are to accept their
performance as dance. '
26
