REFUGEES: THE RISING TIDE
BY RONY BRAUMAN
There have never been so many long-term
refugees as there are today
Mbove, Somali refugees
arrive in Mombasa (Kenya),
1992.
There are over sixteen million
refugees in the world today. The
reality behind this stark figure is
the multitude of human tragedies
being played out in encampments,
sometimes surrounded with barbed wire,
where freedom is the price paid for survival
and security is maintained not by the rule of
law but by enclosure. To be a refugee is to ex¬
change one injustice for another, one form of
suffering for another.
But unless we arc prepared to accept the
refugee's condition as a permanent one, as is
sometimes unfortunately the case, it is
important to understand the origins of these
mass movements and the course they take.
Since 1990, for example, some 10 million
exiles have managed to return home and
pick up the threads of a way of life they had
been forced to abandon. Another important
fact is that half the total number of refugees,
some 8.5 million people, originate from only
four countries: Palestine, Afghanistan,
Rwanda, and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This does not mean that the refugee
problem is confined to the Third World and
that the refugee's plight has never been
known in the countries which are today
industrialized. The Huguenots, the French
Protestants who fled from France after the
5.THE UNESCO ÍOURiER OCTOBER 1996

revocation of the Edict of Nantes, the law



which gave them a measure of religious lib¬
erty, in 1685 were the first group of refugees
to be defined as such. To avoid dragonnades,
the quartering of Louis XIV's soldiers in
their households, forcible conversion, and
exclusion from professional activities,
300,000 Protestants fled the kingdom and
sought refuge in neighbouring Protestant
countries. They were the first exiles for
whom specific responsibility was acknowl¬
edged, in this instance a duty of religious
solidarity.
Horror and
humanitarianism
But the age of refugees that has outstripped
all others has been the twentieth century,
which seems to have been divided between
humane sensitivity and political terror.
Constant growth of concern for human
rights both in the minds of men and
women and in international conventions and
regulations has been accompanied by the
appearance of new forms of oppression,
social control and destruction. Modern
tyrants are probably no worse than those of
the past, but the technical means at their dis¬
posal have enabled them to envisage pro¬
grammes of social surgery that their prede¬
cessors could never have imagined. Horror
.»'hi muhu1'
il Mill»:
ÎIM1U \
,lî|U ,1,1« I»
m
m
i"
i
magnified by technology is a leitmotiv of the
twentieth century, but it has been accompa¬
nied by a concomitant determination to
react by taking humanitarian action. A year
after it was founded in 1920, the League of
Nations established the High Commission
for Refugees under the leadership of
Norway's Fridtjof Nansen, whose first task
was to organize the repatriation of 1 .5 million
refugees and prisoners of war scattered all
over Europe by the turmoil of the First
World War.
In the Second World War, civilians were
wandese mothers looking
for their children. In 1995
UNICEF and the International
Red Cross posted thousands
of children's photographs in
the refugee camps of Goma
(Zaire) in the hope of reuniting
parents separated from their
children during the exodus
from Rwanda the previous
year.
Left, refugees voluntarily
leaving Mexico to return home
to Guatemala.
I he United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), established in 1949,
runs 98 health units and 30
dental and special clinics. One
third of the 2.39 million
refugees registered with
UNRWA live in crowded refugee
camps. Right, a medical visit
in Beqa'a camp.
THE UNESCO ÏOURIER I OCTOBER 1996

in the eye of the storm. At the end of the
conflict there were a recorded 21 million
refugees scattered across Europe. In 1951,
the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
began its activities (see box). According to
the 1951 Geneva Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees, which was drawn up in
parallel with the creation of UNHCR,
refugee status is accorded to any person
who, "owing to well-founded fear of being
persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
nationality or political opinion, is outside the
country of his nationality and is unable, or
owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail him¬
self of the protection of that country. . . .".
One necessary (but not sufficient) condition
of refugee status is the crossing of an interna¬
tional border. This differentiates refugees
from people forced out of their usual place
of residence, who are considered as "dis¬
placed persons" and are without legal status.
Changing status
This definition was hammered out by
Europeans in the political context of the
1950s. Since then its practical application has
broadened over the years in response to
changing conditions. It was a straightforward
matter when a Soviet or Hungarian dissident
sought protection in a democratic country in
the 1960s or 1970s. It was just as straightfor¬
ward when it was a question of saving



THE OFFICE OF THE UNITED NATIONS
HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES
(UNHCR)
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was
established in 1951 with responsibilities for "providing international protection . . .
and . . . seeking permanent solutions for the problems of refugees". Its work is
humanitarian and entirely non-political. Initially, its mandate was limited to people out¬
side their country of origin, but over the years it has increasingly been called on to pro¬
tect or assist returnees in their home countries and particular groups of displaced
people who have not crossed an international border but are in a refugee-like situation
inside their country of origin.
The 1951 UN Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, which is the key to
UNHCR's protection activities, is a legally binding treaty. It contains a general definition of
the term "refugee" that no longer ties it to specific national groups, clearly establishes the
principle of non-refoulement, whereby no person may be returned against his or her will to
a territory where he or she may be exposed to persecution, and sets standards for the
treatment of refugees, including their legal status, employment and welfare. '
UNHCR endeavours:
to encourage governments to ratify international and regional conventions concern¬
ing refugees, returnees and displaced people;
to ensure that refugees are treated in accordance with recognized international
standards and receive an appropriate legal status and the same economic and social
rights as nationals of the country in which they have been given asylum;
* to promote the granting of asylum to refugees, i.e. to ensure that they are admitted
to safety and protected against forcible return to a country where they have reason to
fear persecution or other serious harm;
to ensure that applications for asylum are examined fairly and that asylum-seekers
are protected, while their requests are being examined, against forcible return to a
country where their freedom or lives would be endangered;
* to help refugees to cease being refugees either through voluntary repatriation to
their countries of origin, or through the eventual acquisition of the nationality of their
country of residence;
to help reintegrate refugees returning to their home country and to monitor
amnesties, guarantees or assurances on the basis of which they have returned home;
« to promote the physical security of refugees, asylum-seekers and returnees.
UNHCR's material assistance activities include emergency relief, assisting efforts
to promote voluntary repatriation or resettlement within new national communities,
social welfare, education and legal aid.
Iranians or Argentines from the claws of
their gaolers in the 1970s. Serious complica¬
tions began to appear in the second half of
the 1970s when major upheavals occurred in
several parts of the Third World. Changes of
regime in Southeast Asia and in southern and
eastern Africa, the invasion of Afghanistan
and the rise of violence in Central America
transformed the problem, although percep¬
tions of it and the international instruments
designed to provide a response did not really
change accordingly. The end of the Cold
War saw the easing of a number of conflicts,
enabling millions of exiles to return home.
But other regions erupted into violence.
These political transformations have had
profound consequences on the status of^
THE UNESCO COURIER OCTOBER 1996

refugees. The problem was once solved by
the integration of refugees in their host
countries; today's solution is to provide aid
in camps established along the borders of
warring nations for people who hope even¬
tually to return home. The last few years
have shown that return can be possible and
that exile is not inevitable.
Ethnic cleansing
A Third World phenomenon in the 1980s,
refugee camps have since then reappeared in
Europe for the first time for forty years. In
conflicts of ethnic and political "cleansing"
refugees arc no longer a consequence of vio¬
lence but its very purpose. Here, displace¬
ment is no longer a grim by-product of
human passions but a strategic goal of total
wars waged by armies, not against other
armies, but against civilians.
Whatever the cause of the exodus may
be, the international community's duty its
fundamental commitment must be to pro¬
tect these peoples, first of all by applying the
principle of non-refoulement (see box page
27). People do not choose to uproot them¬
selves from their land voluntarily, for rea¬
sons of opportunism. They flee to escape
oppression, and the international commu¬
nity has a collective duty to shelter and help
those deprived by force of circumstances of
the means to ensure their own survival. The
defence of freedom and pluralism can only
be based on recognition and defence of the
right of asylum. In these uncertain times, the
struggle is certainly a hard one, but it is more
important than ever to wage it.
UNHCR:
FACTS AND FIGURES
UNHCR Public Information Section
Case postale 2500, CH-1211 Geneva 2 Dépôt
Switzerland
Tel: (41 22) 739 85 02
Fax: (41 22) 739 73 15
e-mail: hqpi00@unhcr.ch
UNHCR programmes are financed by voluntary
contributions from governments and governmental
and non-governmental organizations. UNHCR's
budget has increased from some $550 million in
1990 to $1.3 billion in 1995. It also receives a sub¬
sidy from the regular budget of United Nations for
administrative costs.
In 1996 UNHCR employed 5,500 staff mem¬
bers working in 123 countries.
In August 1996, 131 States were Parties to
the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees and/or its 1967 protocol.
Between 1981 and 1991, the number of
refugees more than doubled, rising from 8 to 17 mil¬
lion persons. 26 million refugees and persons of
concern to UNHCR were recorded in 1996.
In 1994, UNHCR confronted the largest and
fastest exodus in its history when more than 2 mil¬
lion Rwandans fled to neighbouring countries
between April and August.
The conflict In the former Yugoslavia has given
rise to more than 3.7 million refugees, displaced
people and others of concern to UNHCR since
1991. During this period, UNHCR spent more than
$1 billion in this region alone.
s persons displaced within
their own national borders,
these Chechen civilians fleeing
the combat zone are of
concern to UNHCR.
Beielow left, voluntary
Cambodian returnees head for
a reception centre set up by
UNHCR.
RONY BRAUMAN
is a French medical doctor.
THE UNESCO lOURIER . OCTOBER 1996
