Racism and
anti-racism by Etienne Balibar
The strangely
ambiguous
relationship
between two
incompatible
ideas
Above left, front page of La
Libre Parole (28 October
1893), an anti-Semltic dally
founded in Paris In 1892.
Above right, a French
explorer at a time when
European colonlalist powers
were engaged In "the scramble
for Africa". (Newspaper
illustration, 9 July 1892).
jf'i' The term "racism" seems to hâve been
' i introduced into the English language in
1938 in a translation of a book by the German
writer Magnus Hirschfeld which had appeared
in German four or five years earlier and
described the "racial theory" that underlay
Hitler's conception of a war between races. The
word thus seems to hâve been coined in Ger¬
many to describe the racism of the Nazi state,
which was targeted primarily against the Jews
but also against other "sub-human" peoples and
groups and was based on the Aryan myth. In
due course it came to acquire its internationally
accepted meaning as a préjudice based on belief
in the congénital inequality of human groups.
Pierre-André Taguieff, a French philoso¬
pher who has made an exhaustive study of the
question, has discovered what he calls two
"totally distinct appearances" of the word
"racism" in France. The first, relatively
episodic use of the word occurred between
1895 and 1897 and was connected with the
founding of the authoritarian ultra-nationalist
organization. Action Française, and of an
extrême right-wing nationalist newspaper, La
Libre Parole. The supporters of this move
ment, which actively propagated anti-semitism
in France and also had close ties with colonial
circles, described themselves as "racists", rep¬
résentatives of a "French race" that was to be
preserved from degeneration. Then, between
1925 and 1935 the terms "racisme" and "raciste"
made a come-back in France but this time were
used in a broader sensé to designate the doc¬
trine of German fascism, and to translate its key
adjective, "vôlkisch".
After the Second World War this second
meaning and the accepted English usage of the
word racism came to overlap. But in France
the référence to nationalism was still of déci¬
sive importance, for attempts to stigmatize
German-style "racism" were entirely orga¬
nized around its différence from French-style
"nationalism". The latter was presented as
"universalist" and was regarded as having a
"cultural" basis that was quite alien to the Ger¬
manie "naturalist" tradition, propped up by
belief in the supposed biological immutability
of "races". An ideology based on xenophobia
and essentialism may thus lie at the roots of
antiracism in France.

An ambivalent doctrine
This reasoning, which I hâve hère simplified to
an extrême degree, has shown up the ambiva¬
lence which may to some extent be character-
istic of both anti-racist and racist thinking. The
ambivalence of racism is manifest in the fact that
it is based both on idealization of oneself
("master race") and on denigration of others as
"degenerate", "sub-human" or "primitive". It
also appears in the relationship of racism to uni¬
versalism. Racism which heightens in a quasi-
mystical fashion the illusion of the absolute
uniqueness and superiority of a nation or group
of nations that believe themselves to hâve been
"chosen" paradoxically coïncides with univer¬
salism when it attempts to set this supremacy
in a context of universal history or natural évo¬
lution of ail humanity.
It should not be surprising, then, that anti¬
racism, which also exists in the context of
nationalism the dominant state ideology of
our era should sometimes manifest a sim-
ilar ambivalence. What is true of the French
condemnation of "German racism" in a cli-
'Races'do not exist, but the word 'race' has been for an entire
âge the pivot ofa vision ofhistory and a confrontation between
différent outlooks on the world.
mate of nationalistic revenge is equally true of
the condemnation of Nazism by the victors
of the Second World War and of the con¬
demnation of colonial racism by certain
national libération movements.
The notion of "race" has such a wide range
of meanings that it can be used in many dif¬
férent contexts. "Races" do not exist, but the
word "race" has been for an entire âge the pivot
of a vision of history and a confrontation
between différent outlooks on the world.
While the meaning of certain words may hâve
shifted as historical circumstances hâve
changed, thèse changes of meaning hâve arisen Cortés Arriving in Vera Cruz
from the same questioning about the relation- '" ^^^^' ""^ "' ^ ®®"®* "'
< . , 1 1 1 1 ] J I 1 murais by Diego Rivera (1930-
snip between biological heredity and cultural 1935) jiiustrating the
specificity that is suggested by the term "race". conquest of the New World
(National Palace, Mexico
City).

HIstorically speaking, there Is not a 


single racism but several
successive ideological configurations, boundup with tbe confllcts
of cultures and violent political practices.
This questioning may seem to hâve disap¬
peared today but in ail likelihood it has only
moved to différent terms.
The origins of
modem racism
The history and critique of "racism" hâve lost
their innocence. Since they are themselves
historically and ideologically determined, they
must face the blinding and retaliatory effects of
the very language they use.
At the time when a standard définition of
racism was taking shape, two important
debates were underway. One centred on the
relationship between "racism" and "anti¬
semitism", the other on the circumstances in
which the specifically modem form of
"racism" emerged. The first debate is far from
over, but the second has given rise to a broad
consensus that modem racism emerged in the
late fifteenth century around the time when
the Americas were "discovered". This was the
starting point of the Europeanization of the
world, and also of the formation of absolute
monarchies (embryonic national states), the
secularization of anti-semitism and the taming
of aristocracies that would develop the ide¬
ology of the "purity of blood".
I am tempted to adopt the methodology
of the current debate about the notion of
"racism". A single racism did not appear in
the West at one moment in history and dis-
appear at another. There are several succes¬
sive ideological configurations, closely bound
up with conflicts between cultures and with
the political practice of violence (particularly
state violence). Each of thèse configurations
expresses the tensions and internai antago-
nisms of a far-reaching attempt to achieve
world domination: the Roman Empire,
Christianity, European expansion, nation¬
alism, the global market and, tomorrow per-
haps, the "new international order".
Each configuration leaves a trace that goes
into the makeup of a new "racism", which is
thus always a "neo-racism". Thus there hâve
been transitions from theological anti-
Judaism to secular anti-semitism, from bio¬
logical racism to cultural racism, and from
colonial violence to post-colonial discrimina¬
tion against people from the "South".
Whether we like it or not, this is probably
due to the fact that schemes for domination
and discrimination (internai exclusion) are
powerful tools for the identification of one¬
self and others, and thus of historical and col¬
lective memory.
The ambivalences and theoretical weak-
nesses of anti-racism obviously do not cast
doubt on the need to combat racism. Just as
the fluctuations of racist doctrine justifying
discrimination and ségrégation cannot con-
ceal the similarities between ail thèse prac¬
tices, so the continuity of anti-racism in every
era is based on a perception of the intolérable
inhumanity of racism and on its patent
incompatibility with freedom.
A cobbler and his slaves. An
Illustration by the French
painter Jean-Baptiste Debret
for his Voyage Pittoresque et
itistorique au Brésil
("Colourful and Historié
Journey to Brazil", 1834-
1839).
ETIENNE BALIBAR,
of France, is professer of moral
philosophy and politics at the
University of Paris X-Nanterre.
Among his works published in
English are Race, Nation and Class
(London, 1991) and Masses,
Classes, Ideas: Studies in Politics
andPft/Vosophy (New York, 1994).
