APOCALYPSE NOW
A self-destroying
Tinguely machine
by Michel Conil Lacoste
Homage to New York, by the Swiss artist Jean Tinguely
(1925-1991), noted for his machine-like kinetic sculptures, was
presented at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, on
17 March 1960.
The event consisted of the self-destruction, in a hellish noise
punctuated by detonations, of an enormous scrap metal con¬
struction into which as usual a number of miscellaneous objects
had been incorporated: bicycle wheels, pram wheels, a coin-
throwing contraption made by Robert Rauschenberg, wireless
sets, shopping trolleys, a piano. The sense of smell was also
involved, asinMétamaric37theyear before: as if to satisfy all the
senses, the commotion was completed by an emission of mal¬
odorous fumes. The stage-by-stage eruption was punctuated by
bangs, crashes, smoke, fiery explosions and mechanical break¬
downs, which took Tinguely himself by surprise, and eventually
the firemen were called in. After half an hour, the whole thing
or what was left of itwas destroyed by remote control. The
museum, the curators and the small group of assistants escaped
unharmed from this auto da fé of metal, whose disorganizer con¬
fessed later thatthere had been moments when he had "pressed on
regardless".
What was the point of this suicidal fury? The "sculptor's"
answerto this question is worth quoting: "Homageto NewYork
was a simulacrum of catastrophe. As I saw it, the apocalypse was
to be a plastic event. I wanted to create the end of civilization in
plastic terms. It was 'an ironicalsuiride', to use Duchamp's expres¬
sion. Everything went up in flames, as at the end of a civilization.
In reality, we are at the beginning of a civilization, at the begin¬
ning of the era of automatization. Butweare not like the Egyptians
who were convinced that the world they had invented would con¬
tinue to exist. We no longer believe in eternity. We are like any
human being who grows old and thinks he is going to die. All the
ancient civilizations believed in finality, but for us finality is move¬
ment. Finality is transformation." (Art Press)
Michel Conil Lacoste, Tinguely, L'énergétique de l'insolence.
© Editions de La Différence, Paris, 1989
THE UNESCO ^URIER DECEMBER t99û 35
