A MATTER
OF
CHOICE
BY AMARTYA SEN
I he tree of life, a work
by the French artist
Niki de Saint Phalle. TI here are two ways of looking at
development in the contempo¬
rary world. One, deeply influ¬
enced by growth economics
and the values that underlie it,
regards development as essen¬
tially a rapid and sustained expansion of gross
national (or domestic) product per head, per¬
haps qualified by some requirement that the
fruits of this expansion reach all sections of
the community. I shall call this "the opulence
view of development." In this approach,
values and culture have no foundational place.
A second, contrasting view sees develop¬
ment as a process that enhances the freedom
of those involved to pursue whatever objec¬
tives they value. In this, which I shall call "the
effective freedom view of development", the
importance of economic opulence is left to
the values of the people involved, and is thus
culturally conditioned.
In line with this view of development, the
expansion of human capability may be
described as the central feature of develop¬
ment. The concept of a person's "capability"
can be traced back to Aristotle, for whom the
life of a person could be seen as a sequence of
things the person does, or states of being he
or she achieves, and which constitute a col¬
lection of "functionings". "Capability" refers
to the alternative combinations of function¬
ings from which a person can choose. Thus,
the notion of capability is essentially one of
freedom the range of options a person has
in deciding what kind of life to lead. Poverty,
in this view, lies not merely in the impover¬
ished state in which a person may actually
live, but also in the lack of real opportunity
"f g\
the Unesco Courier \J SEPTEMbERt'rce

imposed by social constraints as well as per¬
sonal circumstances to choose other types
of living. Even low incomes, meagre posses¬
sions, and other aspects of what are stan¬
dardly seen as economic poverty are relevant
ultimately because of their role in curtailing
capabilities (that is, in severely restricting
people's opportunities to lead valuable and
valued lives).
The application of this broader view of
development thus involves specific
hypotheses about the values people have
reason to cherish. Economists who have
studied this problem have been particularly
attentive to indicators of quality of life such as
longevity, good health, adequate nutrition, basic
education, absence of gender-based inequality,
and basic political and social freedoms.
This approach, which is based on people's
" education is important not
just for the help that it might
give to economic growth, but
because it is an essential part
of cultural development."
Below, Thai schoolchildren
enjoy a break from classwork.
values, differs from the radical a priori judg¬
ment implicit in the "opulence" view of
development. If, given the choice, people
would rather have longer and more disease-
free lives with more autonomy rather than a
higher level of GNP per head, then the
"effective freedom" view of development
can be applied to their case, but not the "opu¬
lence" view of development.
In the opulence view of development, the
focus is uncompromisingly on the growth of
incomes. However, while classical economic
theorists from Adam Smith to John Stuart
Mill did indeed write a great deal on the
growth of real income per head, they saw
income as one of several different means to
important ends, and they discussed exten¬
sively the nature of these ends very dif¬
ferent as they are from income.
11
the unesco Courier.

Smith, Mill and other classical authors
were deeply concerned with the idea that we
value many things other than income and
wealth which relate to real opportunities to
lead the kind of life we would value living.
Their writings reveal great interest in the
foundational importance of our ability to do
the things we value, and have reason to value.
They commented fairly extensively on the
connection between these matters, on the
one hand, and income, wealth, and other eco¬
nomic circumstances, on the other, and they
had much to say on public policies that sup¬
port and promote the more basic ends on
which we may choose to concentrate.
Evaluating
economic growth
In the opulence view of development, the role
of culture is purely instrumental, helping in
particular to promote rapid economic growth.
The question thus arises as to whether eco¬
nomic growth can be valued for its own sake,
thus leading to the treasuring of those things
(including culture) that promote growth? Or
is economic growth itself an instrument, with
less claim to a foundational role than cultural
aspects of human life may have? It is hard to
think that people have good reason to value
goods and services irrespective of what they
do to our freedom to live in a way we would
value. It is also difficult to accept that culture
can have a purely instrumental role. Surely,
what we have reason to value must be itself a
matter of culture, and in this sense we cannot
reduce culture to a subsidiary position as a
mere promoter of economic growth. How
can we make our reasoned valuing completely
valueless?
It is thus important to acknowledge the far-
reaching instrumental functions of culture in
development but also to recognize that culture
cannot be reduced to these functions. Culture
also plays, for example, an intrinsic role in eval¬
uating the process of economic development,
as well as in making room for less immediate
objectives such as sustaining the environment
and preserving the diversity of species.
Some cultural parameters can help, and
others will hinder, the fulfilment of these
objectives, and we have grounds for valuing
those cultural attitudes and features that
foster this fulfilment. But when we turn to
the more basic question, namely, why con¬
centrate on these objectives, culture must I
appear not as a servant of ends, but as the 1
social basis of those ends themselves. We |
cannot begin to understand the so-called |
"cultural dimension of development" f
12
IN ella Sancho, secretary-
general of "Gabriela", a
women's movement in the
Philippines, takes the floor at
a meeting.
without taking note of each of these two roles
of culture.
A foundational role
Since the language of "sustaining" has become
common in the literature of development, it
is not surprising that the phrase "culturally
sustainable development" has made its
appearance. Is this the right direction to take,
in moving away from a purely instrumental
view of culture in development?
There are two major drawbacks in using
language of this kind. First, it ignores the con¬
stitutive role of culture. If culture is only to
do the "sustaining", we still have to ask what
is to be sustained. Focusing on "culturally
sustainable development" is to alienate cul¬
ture from its foundational role in judging


development, and to treat it just as a means of
sustaining "development" no matter how
that is defined. This is, in other words, an
THE UNESCO lOURIER I SEPTEMBER 1996

"Ina view of development
deeply influenced by growth
economics, values and culture
have no foundational place".
Right, children In the mining
centre of Jharia (India).
ornamental debasement of culture to the
status of a glorified instrument in sustaining
"development", defined independently.
The second problem comes from a dif¬
ferent direction. Culture admits of
dynamism, evolution and refinement. Cul¬
ture in every country in the world has
changed over the centuries. The rhetoric of
"sustaining" as opposed to having the
freedom to grow and develop frames the
cultural debate in prematurely conserva¬
tionist terms. There is a dis-analogy with the
environment, here. When it comes to the
natural environment, we don't try to
improve the best that nature gave us; we try
to "conserve" what we have got, and perhaps
return to what we had earlier. But culture is
the fountain of our creativity and progress.
Sustaining is too feeble a role for it to play in
development. Once we shift our attention
from the purely instrumental view of culture
and accept its constructive and creative role,
we have to sec development in terms that
include cultural development as well.
The three roles of culture
Culture comes into development in three
quite distinct though interrelated ways.
Constitutive role: Development in the
broadest sense includes cultural develop¬
ment. Cultural development is a basic and
inseparable component of development in
general. If people are deprived of the oppor¬
tunity to understand and cultivate their cre¬
ativity, then that in itself is a hindrance to
development (not just because it may hurt
economic growth, or some other externally
specified objective). Basic education is thus
important not just for the help that it might
give to economic growth, but because it is an
essential part of cultural development.
Evaluative role: What wc value is, ulti¬
mately, influençable by culture. There is no
externally sanctified importance to economic
growth or any other such objective, and the
things that we intrinsically value reflect the
impact of our culture. Even if the same things
are valued in many different societies (if, for
example, longer and happier lives without ill-
health are sought in many quite different
societies), this does not make them indepen¬
dent of values or cultures, but only indicates
the congruence of valuational reasons in dis¬
tinct societies.
Instrumental role: No matter what
objectives we value, their pursuit is to some
extent influenced by the nature of our cul¬
tures and ethics. While there is more to cul¬
ture than this, we must not ignore the fact that
cultural parameters do inter alia have strong
instrumental roles. This applies not merely to
the promotion of economic growth, but also
to the achievement of other objectives such
as raising the quality of life.
Central to culture is freedom, and in par¬
ticular, the freedom to decide what wc have
reason to value, and what lives wc have
reason to seek. The instrumental, the evalua¬
tive and the constructive roles of culture all
relate, ultimately, to this freedom.
AMARTYA SEN,
of India, is Professor of
Economics and Philosophy and
Lamont University Professor at
Harvard University (U.S.A.).
THE UNESCO f¿URIER . SEPTEMBER 1996
