What canoeb
ROBERT KLITGAARD
of the United States is professor
of economics at the University of
Natal (South Africa). He is the
author of several books Including
Tropical Gangsters (1991) and
Controlling Corruption.
Corruption is in the news again, and
fitfully, almost schizophrenically, we,
the public, respond. On the one hand we are
outraged. We call for firings and purges, for a
new constitution and perhaps a new morality.
On the other hand, we are resigned, and we



passively reflect that nothing really can be done
about corruption. Isn't it everywhere a fact of
life?
In this article I should like to examine three
aspects of the problem. Firstly, what is cor¬
ruption? Secondly, what can a government
that wishes to control corruption actually do?
And thirdly, what if a government doesn't want
to control corruption as much as we, the
public, would like it to do? What can we do as
citizens?
What is corruption?
Corruption can be defined as the misuse of
office for personal gain. Usage varies across
countries and over time, and, at any partic-
From government action to
citizens' initiatives, an
arsenal of weapons to fight
corruption
ular place and time, law and custom may not
coincide. Still, it is remarkable that throughout
history, and around the world today, people
have tended to agree that certain actions are
corrupt .
The real danger is the rise of systematic cor¬
ruption, when the "rules of the game" are dele-
gitimized by the perception that corruption
can sway policies as well as particular contracts,
can reshape legislation, and can make a
mockery of the justice system1. Systematic
corruption generates economic costs by dis¬
torting incentives, political costs by under¬
mining institutions, and social costs by redis¬
tributing wealth and power toward the rich
and privileged. When corruption undermines
property rights, the rule of law, and incentives
to invest, economic and political development
are crippled.
Corruption exists in all countries and, as
recent events have revealed, is a major problem
in many rich nations. But corruption tends to
be more damaging in some developing coun¬
tries because it has a more devastating effect on
property rights, the rule of law and incentives
to invest. Systematic corruption now seems
to threaten political and economic reforms in'
a number of countries in Eastern Europe,
Africa, Latin America and Asia.
What is also news is that the international
community is now discussing corruption
openly, whereas even a decade ago the issue
was virtually taboo2. Why is corruption sur¬
facing now as an international priority? One
idea that has been put forward is that system¬
atic corruption is growing worse. Another
34

done?
by Robert Klitgaard
Italian magistrate Antonio di
Pietro. In February 1992 he
launched "Operation Clean
Hands" (Mani Pulite) against |
high-level economic and «
political corruption in Italy. |
%
'
r~
*\ *>& ÛLIP A'-* ; J ^
3 H^^éí / "Ïr
SC
/ F *
1 iE
^
^À
1 // » <¿4
1
cites the rapid rise of international trade and
international communications, so that people
are exposed to economic temptations as never
before. Yet another points to the political and
economic reforms that have swept the world
and have created new opportunities for cor¬
ruption by rapidly changing the accustomed
rules of the game and, in many cases, because
policy changes are not accompanied by suffi¬
cient development of the institutions and the
public-sector incentives needed to make free
markets and democracy work.
Or are we simply becoming less tolerant
of corruption? One possibility is that we per¬
ceive corruption to be a greater obstacle now
that the Cold War has abated and economic
policies and multiparty polities are roughly
"got right". Another possibility is that we
blame corruption for the fact that neither freer
markets nor democratic reforms have yet lived
up to expectations, in order that we can avoid
admitting that those policies and polities may
not be right everywhere. Or perhaps we have
become more aware of corruption because
political reforms have granted new freedoms
to document it and complain about it.
Whatever the reasons for today's greater
concern over corruption, it is a change
we should welcome. Corruption is a problem
that has for too long been overlooked. What
exactly can be done to attack deeply rooted
corruption?
Virtually all countries have laws that con¬
demn extortion, bribery, speed money, fraud
and embezzlement, kickbacks, nepotism and
other forms of corruption. But dual exchange
rates, for example, are an invitation to illicit
behaviour. So are quantitative restrictions on
imports, the noncompetitive provision of ser¬
vices and regulations, necessary though they
may be in particular cases. It is true that large
public sectors invite more corruption than
small-sized governments. It is also true that
multiparty democracy will in the long run tend
to reduce corruption.


What can governments do?
But whatever the mix of public and private
sectors, and whatever the size of government,
corruption remains a perennial threat. Com¬
bating it requires a deeper level of analysis and
action than calling for a smaller state or for mul¬
tiparty democracy. Fortunately we can learn
from both theory and experience.
Theory teaches us that a rough formula for
corruption holds. Monopoly plus discretion
minus accountability equals corruption.
Monopoly, whether public or private, grants
the power to charge a higher than optimal price
for a service and to provide less of it. Discre¬
tion means that an official has the power to say
yes or no, or how much, without what lawyers
call "bright lines" to limit his power. And a lack
of accountability means that these transactions
take place in the dark.
And so anti-corruption efforts must
attempt to mitigate monopoly, whether public
or private: to privatize a public monopoly and
let a private monopoly ensue will do little. They
must limit discretion and provide clear rules of
the game and bright lines for bureaucratic
behaviour. And above all, anti-corruption
The
international
community is
now discussing
corruption
openly, whereas
even a decade
ago the issue
was virtually
taboo.
35

The logo of the non¬
governmental organization
Transparency International,
founded in 1993.
©All rights reserved,
An anti-corruption
demonstration In Tokyo in
1989 at the time of the
"Recruit" political-financial
scandal.
efforts must provide more accountability.
Information is one enemy of corruption.
Here are some of the political lessons we
can draw from successful campaigns to reduce
corruption.
First,fry big fish. Leading figures involved
in corruption must be publicly named and
punished before a cynical public believes that
an anti-corruption effort is more than words,
more than a campaign against one's political
opponents. It is important, therefore, that the
first big fish must come from within the party
in power.
For example, Hong Kong used to be awash
in corruption. Then, in 1973, an Independent
Commission against Corruption was formed.
It had new teeth and new eyes, but despite its
powers, at first no one believed that the ICAC
would succeed any more than previous efforts.
Credibility came when the ex-police chief of
Hong Kong was extradited from retirement
in England and punished in Hong Kong. The
ICAC also nailed the ex-number two and
scores of other high-ranking police officials.
To a sceptical public and a hardened civil ser¬
vice, frying these big fish sent a credible signal:
"The rules of the game really have changed".
Italy's recent and unprecedented success in
attacking corruption has attracted world-wide
attention. A crucial step was frying a top Mafia
official, many top business executives and sev¬
eral major politicians from the ruling party.
This told citizens that if they came forward
and denounced crime and corruption, they
could make a difference.
Second, begin bureaucratic reforms with
positive steps that help civil servants. In par
ticular, work with bureaucrats to define orga¬
nizational objectives and ways to measure suc¬
cess, and then link part of their compensation
to the achievement of results. It is ludicrous to
ask public servants to fight corruption if they
cannot earn a decent wage through honest
efforts.
Third, after frying a few big fish, get away
from the investigation ofthe past andfocus on
prevention. Here structural changes are
worthy of systematic analysis. Also, a gov¬
ernment may wish to consider the creation of
a special anti-corruption agency whose role is
not just investigating corruption but working
with departments on systematic reforms in
policies and procedures in order to reduce the
vulnerability to corruption.
An anti-corruption strategy
Fourth, have a strategy. This may sound
simple, but in fact most so-called anti-cor¬
ruption campaigns lack just that. Having a
strategy means developing a clear idea of ends
and means in the short, medium and long
terms. It means we must distinguish various
types of corruption and recognize, even if we
do not say so in public, that all types are not
equally harmful. For example, corruption in
the courts or in the police is usually more per¬
nicious than corruption in the customs or in
the driver's licence department. In general
inspectors of all varieties must be cleaner than
service-providers must be.
Having a strategy means that a government
must recognize that it cannot attack all forms
of corruption at once, even if it does not say so
publicly. And a government interested in
fighting corruption needs a success in the first
six months.
Some political leaders seem to believe that
they can excuse the apparent absence of an
anti-corruption strategy by saying that they
were not aware it was going on. This ignorance
is no solace. Corruption is a problem of sys¬
tems of information, incentives and rules. To
combat it, one must think through these sys¬
tems and change them.
Some governments are doing so. I see hope
in the wave of new leaders around the world,
who are putting good governance at the centre
of their agendas. True, sometimes the anti-cor¬
ruption crusaders themselves prove corrupt¬
ible. But a global change in the will to address
corruption is definitely taking place. There is
36

also a remarkable new activism on this for¬
merly taboo subject by international organi¬
zations such as the World Bank and the United
Nations, as well as bilateral donors such as
Britain and France.
An international code
of conduct
But can citizens themselves do anything to
move a recalcitrant government toward
action? The answer is yes. To see how, I believe
we should ask several further questions. Aren't
we the people, the civil society, the private
sector part of the problem? We often criti¬
cize government corruption without recog¬
nizing our own involvement and culpability
and without exploring our own possibilities
for fostering change.
On this score I also find grounds for opti¬
mism. As an example, let me briefly describe
an exciting new initiative: Transparency Inter¬
national, a non-governmental anti-corruption
organization analogous to Amnesty Interna¬
tional that was launched in May 1 993 in Berlin.
Amnesty International, which has chapters
in most countries, investigates allegations of
human rights abuses and publishes case studies
and country reports. Although sometimes
derided by governments, its work has had a
tremendous influence by shedding light on
dark corners of abuse, and has brought
Amnesty International the Nobel Prize for
Peace.
Might a similar idea work with regard to
corruption? Imagine the following scenario:
members of civil society and the private sector
get together, devise and sign a simple code of
conduct in which we promise not to pay bribes,
not to underestimate costs in bidding and later
reinflate them, and so forth. If such alleged
transgressions subsequently occur, we agree
to study the systems behind the allegations
for example, the system of procurement or
contracting or customs clearance. We carry
out confidential surveys of business people
and citizens that identify how the corrupt
system works, then suggest systematic reme¬
dies. We publish the results and push for
change.
This is one of the ideas being pursued by
Transparency International (TI), which is based
on the principle that the private sector must
begin to clean up its own act. By putting inter¬
national credibility behind a code of conduct,
TI will make it easier for private companies to
turn down extortionate requests. By publishing
illuminating reports, even if they have no legal
status, it could increase pressures for reform.
Some forty TI country chapters have been or
are being formed around the world.
I predict that by the turn of the century
many country programmes will be success¬
fully fighting corruption and that we will even¬
tually look back on the 1990s as an era of the
structural adjustment of government, when
the fight against corruption was shaped by sys¬
tematic reform of incentives, accountability
and popular participation.
An anti-corruption
demonstration in Mexico.
1. Two authors have recently and independently
made a distinction between one sort of corruption,
which is analogous to a foul in sports, and another
sort, which is the breakdown of the rules defining
and enforcing fouls, where the sports contest
virtually collapses. The latter is the systematic
phenomenon of corruption that they fear is
undermining development. Luis Moreno Ocampo
calls this "hypercorruption". Herbert W. Werlin's
label is "secondary corruption", and he compares it
to alcoholism. See Luis Moreno Ocampo, En
Defensa Propia: Cómo Salir de la Corrupción
(Buenos Aires: Editorial Sudamericana, 1993); and
Herbert W. Werlin, "Revisiting Corruption: with a
New Definition", International Review of
Administrative Sciences, Vol. 60 (1994): pp. 547-558.
Another valuable source is Jean-François Bayart,
L'Etat en Afrique: La politique du ventre (Paris,
Fayard, 1989).
2. A particularly valuable document is Crime
Prevention and CriminalJustice in the Context of
Development: Realities and Perspectives of
International Co-operation, Practical measures
against corruption, a manual prepared for the Eighth
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, 29 May 1990.
It is ludicrous to
ask public
servants to fight
corruption if they
cannot earn a
decent wage
through honest
efforts.
37
