THE BRAIN DRAIN
BY CARMEN GARCIA GUADILLA
amount of
talent from the
South
CARMEN GARCIA GUADILLA
is a Venezuelan educator.
In the second half of the twentieth cen¬
tury, many countries of the South began
to send students to the industrialized
countries for further education. They
urgently needed supplies of highly
trained personnel to implement a concept of
development based on modernization.
But many of these students decided to
stay on in the developed countries when
they had finished their training. At the same
time, many professionals who did return
home but no longer felt at ease there also
decided to go back to the countries where
they had studied. This migration was
encouraged by developed countries which
offered attractive conditions to keep the ser¬
vices of those they had trained people
whose training had often been paid for by
their home country.
A difficult return
In the 1960s, some Latin American countries
tried to solve this problem by setting up spe¬
cial "return" programmes to encourage their
professionals to come back home. These pro¬
grammes received support from international
bodies such as the International Organization
for Migration, which in 1974 enabled over
1,600 qualified scientists and technicians to
return to Latin America. Another example
was Argentina's scheme for the repatriation of
political refugees, which was supported by the
UN High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR).
In the 1980s and 1990s, "temporary
return" programmes were set up in order to
make the best use of trained personnel occu¬
pying strategic positions in the developed
countries. This gave rise to the United Nations
Development Programme's Transfer of
Knowledge through Expatriate Nationals
(TOKTEN), which encourages technicians
and scientists to work in their own countries
for short periods.
Globalization
and competition
But the brain drain from these countries
may well increase in response to the new
laws of the international market in knowl¬
edge. The rich countries are far better placed
than the developing countries to attract
and/or to keep brainpower.
Recent studies forecast that the most
developed countries (North America, Japan
and Europe) are going to need more and
more highly qualified professionals around
twice as many as their educational systems
will be able to produce, or so it is thought. As
a result there is an urgent need for developing
countries which send students abroad to give
preference to fields where they need compe¬
tent people to give muscle to their own insti¬
tutions, instead of encouraging the training of
people who may not come back because
there are no professional outlets for them.
It is essential to train people who will be
able to train others in their turn, to train
teachers of engineering rather than engineers
and trainers of doctors rather than doctors.
Here, priority must be given to doctoral and
post-doctoral studies. But if all this is to lead
to anything, the countries of the South must
not be content with institutional structures
that simply take back professionals sent
abroad, they must introduce flexible adminis¬
trative procedures to encourage them to
return. If they do not do this, the brain drain
is bound to continue.
The failure of students and trainees to
return home from abroad is a complex sub¬
ject. In many cases, it is independent of the
wishes of those who do not return and of
those in charge of the institutions concerned
in their home countries. It is often the result
of bureaucratic inertia and the incapacity of
the country's economy to respond to the
aspirations of those who have acquired high
qualifications in the developed countries by
offering them suitable opportunities.
THE UNESCO lOURIER . OCTOBER 1 996
