interview Javier Pérez de Cuéllar
\ m
Mr. Javier Pérez de Cuéllar,
former Secretary-General of the
United Nations, headed the
independent World Commission on
Culture and Development which
spent three years (1993-1995)
rethinking the notions of
development and culture and the
relationship between them. Here
he outlines the Commission's
approach to its task and sums up
some of the conclusions it reached.
Interview by Raj Isar.
The World Commission on Culture and
Development was the first group of
distinguished development economists, social
scientists, artists and policy-makers to reflect
together so intensively on the relationships
between culture and development. How does
its work take us forward?
Javier Pérez de Cuéllar: First, it shows how we
can and must broaden the notion of devel¬
opment itself. Development divorced from its
human or cultural context is growth without
a soul. And economic development in its full
flowering is part of a people's culture. In
these years of momentous change, which
THE UNESCO lOURIER .EITEMBERI99Û

offer people such unprecedented opportu¬
nities yet such unequal access to these
opportunities, it is particularly timely, it
seems to me, that this idea he asserted and
promoted internationally.
Because material measurements of "pro¬
gress" are no satisfactory index of human wel¬
fare, the search for other criteria has led, for
example, to the notion of human develop¬
ment, that measures improvements in a broad
array of capabilities, ranging from political,
economic and social freedom to individual
opportunities for being healthy, educated, and
creative and for enjoying self-respect and
human rights. Culture was implied in this
notion but it was not explicitly introduced. We
have shown why it must be introduced and
how it can be. This is an important step for¬
ward in rethinking development.
The second advance, it seems to me, is to
have transformed the way we look at the
pairing of the terms "culture" and "develop¬
ment". Is it simply culture and development?
Or is it culture in development? Culture for
development? Or development for culture?
Once you define culture as we have as
"ways of living together" and once devel¬
opment is seen as a process that enhances
the freedom of people everywhere to pursue
whatever goals they have reason to value,
then culture must be far more than just an
aspect or a means of development.
However important it may be as an instru¬
ment of development (or an obstacle to it),
culture should not be reduced to being a
mere promoter of (or impediment to) eco¬
nomic growth. Rather, it is the end and aim of
development when the latter is seen as the
flourishing of human existence as a whole.
The converse, which is the purely instru¬
mental view, was nicely characterized by one
scholar as the "add culture and stir" school.
I think many people expected the Commis¬
sion to at least inventory all the ingredients
that one might "add and stir" so as to
improve development programmes as cur
rently conceived, if not produre entirely new
recipes of its own!
Did you adopt that approach?
J. P. de C: We took a different tack. Human
beings value goods and services because of
what they contribute to our freedom to live
the way we value. And what we have reason
to value must itself be a matter of culture.
So while it has. far-reaching instrumental
functions in development, this cannot be all
there is to it. There is also the role of cul¬
ture as a desirable end in itself, as giving
meaning to our existence. This dual role
applies not only to the promotion of economic
growth but to other objectives, such as sus¬
taining the environment, enhancing social
cohesion or fostering civil institutions in a
society. Insofar as we have reason to value
these objectives, naturally we would value
the attitudes and behaviours that help us
attain them. But when we turn to the more
basic question why concentrate on these
objectives in the first place? culture has to
enter in a more fundamental way. Not as a
servant of ends, but as the social basis of the
ends themselves.
The third important step forward the
Commission has made, in my opinion, has
been to explore the myriad ways in which
cultural diversity is a strength, not a weak¬
ness; why there can be as many different ver¬
sions of development as there are cultures;
why we must find ways of allowing peoples
from every part of the planet to contribute
to "modernity" in their own terms; and why it
is vitally important to preserve our diverse
heritages in an era so rich in the potential for
...There is also the role of culture as a
desirable end in itself, as giving meaning
to our existence.
THE UNESCO lOURIER 1 SEPTEMBER 1996

interview
even deeper mutual enrichment yet so
fraught with the menace of homogenization.
This is the basic message we sought to put
across in the title Our Creative Diversity
we chose for our report.
Once again, we offer no recipes. To dis¬
cuss culture today is to admit a multiplicity
of readings. Hence instead of tailor-made
solutions, we preferred to raise some of the
hard questions that people face, particularly
in the developing countries. How to deal
with the paradoxes of globalization? How to
find order and meaning in a world disorder
full of uncertainty, incoherence and injus¬
tice? How to claim a space for locally rooted
culture yet take part in shared, planetary
processes? How, in a word, to elaborate their
own models of development?
We take your point that there can be no
recipes. But what are your main messages?
J. P. de C: We decided to explore ten key
areas in which the interactions between cul¬
ture and development appeared particularly
acute or especially pertinent. In each case,
we focused on the challenges of diversity,
and the potential of human creativity.
Intolerance is particularly pernicious when it
is the policy of intolerant governments,
opening the door to discrimination,
segregation and exclusion.
As the globalization of markets, technology
and information sweeps the planet, the fear of
growing homogenization induces accelerating
fragmentation. People are brought closer
together; simultaneously, they are driven
apart. Bridges must be built between them.
What values can provide shared points of ref¬
erence, the minimal moral guidance the world
must heed? Many different sets of values
could enrich such common ground. We for
our part identified five principles: human
rights and responsibilities; democracy; the pro¬
tection of minorities; commitment to peaceful
conflict resolution and fair negotiation and the
promotion of equity.
What was your position on pluralism?
J. P. de C: We could not avoid reaffirming a
commitment to pluralism, as a basic tenet.
Not only as an ideal for relations between
nations but also within nations. How can
each nation create a sense of itself as a civic
community, freed from any connotations of
ethnic exclusivity?
We asked the question haunted by the
ethnic conflicts erupting across the world
even as we deliberated each one the bitter
harvest of diversity mismanaged or cynically
manipulated, with the terrible price innocent
people have had to pay and the consequent
rising tide of human despair and anger.
Surely the lesson of our terrible century is
clear by now: we must learn to rejoice at cul¬
tural differences and attempt to learn from
them.
Governments can hardly prescribe such
attitudes and behaviour as respect and
rejoicing, but they can prohibit attacks on
people from different cultures and their
practices, and they can set the legal stage for
mutual tolerance and accommodation. Intol¬
erance is particularly pernicious when it is
the policy of intolerant governments. Dis¬
crimination, segregation and exclusion based
on cultural traits then deny people their
basic cultural rights. In these cases strong
THE UNESCO lOURIER .SEPTEMBER 1996

No culture can
invalidate
another,
though it may
often be able
to enrich it by
new concepts,
categories and
insights.
international pressures should be used to
denounce such policies and practices, as the
international community was able to do suc¬
cessfully in South Africa.
What is the role of democracy in this
context?
J. P. de C: The only way to achieve pluralism
that delivers equity as well as political sta¬
bility is to make society an inclusive whole,
extending opportunities to all groups. This
requires a democratic framework, consider¬
able decentralization of power and equal
access to institutions of justice. All of these
in turn require real creativity in governance.
The notion of creativity was a second leit¬
motiv for us, as the leaven of diversity. We
urged therefore that the idea of creativity be
more broadly applied to problem-solving in
every field. In the arts and cultural expres¬
sion, it is too often taken for granted in our
world of commodified culture, and its col¬
lective and participatory forms remain under¬
valued. We noted also that scientific and
technological knowledge, creatively adapted
to local circumstances, can be strongly
empowering.
The Commission devoted specific attention
to women and young people . . .
J. P. de C: Development is changing cultural
perceptions of women's and men's life cycles
as well as patterns of gender relations. It is
time to develop agendas which would avoid
the dual pitfalls of ethnocentrism and
Western bias on the one hand, and unprinci¬
pled forms of cultural relativism which deny
women their basic human rights in the name
of "difference", on the other. Hence it is
important, we think, to devise and apply
policies with regard to women's rights as
human rights; reproductive freedom; and to
gender-aware planning and civic and cul¬
tural participation.
How can wc construct a world in which
the defences of peace are built in young
minds? Young people today are better able
than their parents to appreciate the diversity
of values and forms of expression and are
generally more comfortable with technology.
Yet they must be helped to realize that no
culture can ever be thought to invalidate
another though it may often be able to
enrich it by new concepts, categories, and
insights. Our generation has a responsibility
to encourage positive exposure to both diver¬
sity and complexity.
Your recommendations are set forth in an
"International Agenda" that some people
appear to find over-ambitious.
J. P. de C: We designed our "International
Agenda" to be selective and illustrative, not
comprehensive. First and foremost, we wanted
it to deepen the analysis of culture and devel¬
opment. We wanted it to focus energies
around practical initiatives such as the inter¬
national mobilization of Cultural Heritage Vol¬
unteers and an international plan for gender
equality. We hoped it would lead to the emer¬
gence of an international consensus on the
core issues we raised, particularly through
the universal recognition of cultural rights,
and of the need to balance these rights with
responsibilities.
When we call for a reformed United
Nations that really represents "We the peo¬
ples of the United Nations", with a two-
chamber General Assembly, one with govern¬
ment representatives as at present, and the
other representing national civil society orga¬
nizations, we are perhaps even further away
from our goal than the visionaries who first
imagined a European union some seventy
years ago and were considered hopelessly
unrealistic at the time! But we have laboured
not only for our peers, but also for our chil¬
dren and our children's children. On the eve
of a new millennium, as my fellow Commis¬
sioner Celso Furtado has put it, "the chal¬
lenge we face is to conceive a new Utopia
without which the survival of humanity will
not be possible." I
INESCO^URIEFTHE U ESCO SEPTEMBER 1996
