interview
g
Werner Arber
i tion
Swiss microbiologist Werner Arber
shared the 1978 Nobel Prize for
Physiology or Mediane with Daniel
Nathans and Hamilton Smith for their
discovery of enzymes that protect
bacteria against viral infections.
Known as the restriction and
modification system, it has proved to
be extremely useful in molecular
biology and genetic engineering. In
this interview with Serafín García
Ibañez, Werner Arber talks about the
relations between science and
society, especially questions arising
from advances in genetics.
What is biodiversity?
Werner Arber: There are an estimated 10 mil¬
lion animal species in the world. Biodiversity
is widely regarded as referring to diversity of
species. But there is also great genetic
diversity within each species. And ecosys¬
tems that are home to a large number of dif¬
ferent species also contain an equally large
variety from one place to another. All this is
biodiversity.
Not all of these species have been
identified, have they?
W. A.: Far from it. A lot of them are unknown
to us. About four million of them have been
THE UNESCO Q>URIEF OCTOBER 1996

listed, if that; everything depends on geo¬
graphical location, habitat and type of organ¬
ism. A lot of micro-organisms, for example,
which are my speciality, have not been
described because they can't be cultivated
in the laboratory. The only ones we know
well are those that can be studied in vitro.
So, many species are bom and disappear
without our knowing about them?
W. A.: Biodiversity is the result of a long
process of biological evolution that continu¬
ally produces new genetic forms. So it is
clear that in the past living beings have dis¬
appeared, and that more will be born in
future the like of which this planet has
never seen. A new species is the fruit of
numerous mutations that occur in succes¬
sive and distinct stages. Biodiversity as we
know it today is not static; it n: ilect s the
world as it is at a given moment, and its
composition changes constantly.
What is a mutation?
W. A.: It is a change in the sequence of a
DNA molecule. A sequence is the linear
repetition of the four base elements (which
are designated by the letters A, C, G and T)
in this molecule, which contains genetic
information. A mutation occurs when one
letter replaces another, either by cancelling
or by inserting one of these letters at certain
places in the sequence. With the help of
specific enzymes, entire segments of this tiny
piece of DNA can be rearranged.
How can we protect species we don't even
know exist?
W. A.: The best way to protect them is to
keep their living conditions whatever they
may be stable. But that's easier said than
done. How is it possible to keep living con¬
ditions absolutely stable? A host of changes,
not counting those caused by people, can
modify the temperature, the humidity rate
or any other parameter of the environment,
so that living conditions on the planet are
never entirely stable.
When we attack viruseswhich we
automatically assume to be harmfulcan we
be sure that they are not vital for other
ecosystems and even for the preservation of
biodiversity as a whole?
W. A.: People imagine on the basis of their
own experience that micro-organisms are
their enemies because some micro-organisms
cause diseases. It has to be accepted, bow-
ever, that the great majority of these micro¬
organisms are very useful, not only to peo¬
ple but to nature in general. They can, for
example, break down certain toxins very
quickly.
Are we not, therefore, playing with fire by
trying to change and improve certain forms of
life through biotechnologies?
W. A.: Bisks are always involved in this kind
of application, but there are ways of control¬
ling them. We must accept responsibility for
establishing long-term strategies, in several
stages, so that these risks can be assessed
through experimentation.
Can science today create life fro m
inorganic matter?
W. A.: No. Several theories currently seek to
explain bow certain Inorganic molecules are
produced by physico-chemical reactions,
but this is still a far cry from being able to
create a being endowed with the functions
necessary for what is called life, namely
metabolism, reproduction, assimilation and
so forth. But not all scientists agree on this
subject. Some think that in the near future
science will have advanced to the point
where we shall know more about the mech¬
anisms of life and perhaps even be able to
partly construct a living entity in the labo¬
ratory. Others, including myself, think that
life is more complicated, and none of this is
feasible in the near future. I am always fas¬
cinated by the elegance of certain molecu¬
lar mechanisms, and I feel we should think
ourselves very fortunate to be able to
understand nature and watch it at work.
M The progress of research in human and
plant genetics opens up all kinds of
Some of the fears associated with the
applications of genetics arise from the fact that
some scientists overestimate their powers.
oQmirier * OCTOBER 1996

i n t e r v i e '
Werner Arber
speculation. What do you think of people's
hopes and fears in this respect?
W. A.: We should be sceptical about the
claims of certain scientists. In the 1950s and
1960s we heard promises that it would soon
be possible to cure cancer. It's the same story
today with the Aids virus. It was thought
that once the virus was identified, it would
only be a matter of time before the disease
could be treated. But it's not as simple as
that. And as far as the fears are concerned,
as I've said, it is a matter of responsibility, for
wc can assess by means of experimentation
the risks involved in a given application.
There is no general rule; we have to proceed
on a casc-by-case basis. It is also true that
some fears associated with the applications of
genetics arise from the fact that some scien¬
tists overestimate their powers and claim that
anything is possible, whereas in reality things
are much more complicated.
Do research and researchers need a
normative framework?
W. A.: I think it's important to define stan¬
dards that should be respected, and also
that these standards should be revised from
time to time. Some applications may prove
useful and even necessary. Others may be
dangerous. All the factors should be taken
into account.
Biodiversity is no respecter of frontiers. Is
International agreement needed to preserve
it?
W. A.: I think that a certain biodiversity is
necessary for evolution. If too many biologi¬
cal functions were to disappear in a short
period of time, it would take a long time
thousands of years before some of them
reappeared. Knowing that species disappear
partly because of physical and chemical
changes in their environment (in tempera¬
ture or humidity rates, for example) and
that the activities of our civilization have an


Biodiversity is necessary for evolution. If too many
biological functions were to disappear within a
short time, it would take thousands of years
before some of them reappeared.
impact on these changes at the planetary
level, awareness of the problems must be
world-wide. If one state makes a decision
without consulting the others, it doesn't
help anyone. We must act together, we must
co-operate. We cannot bring the economic
machine to a standstill, but we must, for
example, devote the smallest possible area
of land to food production. Above all and
this is the major problem we must reduce
air and water pollution.
Do you think there isa limit to the
numbers of people the planet can feed?
W. A.: There arc two possible answers to this
question, but first of all you have to define
a humanly acceptable quality of life. What
criteria should be adopted? Those of the
industrialized countries or those of coun¬
tries with a traditional economy? In the lat¬
ter case, the figures may vary, but in the
former and it is clear that most human
beings would prefer this way of life there
are already too many of us for the planet's
resources.
M Our world seems increasingly dependent on
technological and scientific data. Should
scientists play a more important role in states'
political and decision-making machinery?
W. A.: Research is a full-lime job that leaves
hardly any time for anything else. As far as
I'm concerned, I think it's a good thing that
politics are the concern of another category
of the population than researchers, but
contacts between the two categories could
be a lot more fruitful than they are at pre¬
sent. Some aspects of scientific research also
have implications that go further than mere
technological applications, forming part of
the broader field of philosophy and its use in
helping us to understand our world. To take
one example, molecular genetics teaches us
that certain genes involved in mutations are
involved on a random rather than a consis¬
tent basis. Nevertheless, these genes are
necessary not only for the short lifespan of
the individual but also for the evolution of
the population as a whole, so that it can
adapt to other environmental conditions that
may possibly develop. This is the kind of
information that it would be instructive to
integrate into our picture of the world. I
THE UNESCO lOlJRIER ' OCTOBER 1996
