com 


m entary Federico Mayor
I igher education
and new technologies
New information and communication technologies, espe¬
cially the Internet, are offering researchers, educators,
artists and administrators all over the world an opportunity
to form the most cultivated, specialized, versatile and active
intellectual community that the world has ever known a
kind of global university.
The emergence of these technologies has revolution¬
ized our ways of thinking and living in recent years and
opened up heady prospects for creating worldwide links
between universities, institutes of higher education and
research, libraries, laboratories and hospitals, disseminat¬
ing knowledge, promoting personalized teaching, educa¬
tion tailored to the needs of individuals and groups, the
exchange of ideas and data and the implementation of col¬
lective projects.
It soon became clear that among the many fields where
the new technologies may be applied especially the high-
capacity networks known as information superhighways
that can carry data, sound and images higher education,
research and the promotion and dissemination of knowl¬
edge are those with the richest potential.
But we should not let our hopes run away with us. In
the wealthy nations privatization and deregulation are pro¬
ducing mixed and sometimes even disastrous results in
human and ethical terms, notwithstanding some undeni¬
able advantages in terms of freedom of initiative and job
creation. In the poorer countries they usually lead to highly
aggressive and dehumanized market competition.
Looking no further than the production, exchange and
dissemination of knowledge, we can see that the technology
explosion is increasing the enormous disparities between
North and South. Within the countries of the North, it is
widening the gap between the insiders (engineers, intellectuals
and the cultured, well-off classes) and the outsiders who do
not have the means to buy access to telecommunications.
The poor countries are under no illusions. They know that
the global village and the electronic village are not the same
thing. Is new information technology really the tool for devel¬
opment it is claimed to be? The cyberspace eldorado may be
THE UNESCO r^)URIEI I DECEMBER 1990

creating as many dangerous illusions as fruitful achieve¬
ments. And what about the cost? Infrastructure, hardware,
software and training costs are already exorbitant for Europe,
as it tries to catch up with the American lead. They are crip¬
pling for the less-well-off countries, and a fortiori for the
developing world, whose aspirations to modernity are already
undermined by the struggle for survival. If we want the
poor countries to have a minimum of new information tech¬
nology, they will have to be helped.
Cyberspace has no frontiers, limits or rules. Theoretically
it belongs to everyone. A supremely efficient vector of com¬
munication and a place where freedom of thought may be
exercised, it welcomes all who use it. But it is only acces¬
sible to those who have the requisite electricity, computers,
telephone hookups and know-how. This paradox recalls
the ambivalence of the word "sharing", which denotes both
conjunction, as in the breaking and distribution of bread,
and division, as in "time-sharing". A whole must be divided
before the parts can be distributed.
Sharing, dialogue, exchange and interactivity are
extremely ambiguous words. Often enough a person is only
interactive with the screen, or at best with data placed at his
or her disposal by the provider or, on the Internet, with a peer
group of researchers and specialists. Where is the relational
interactivity, the give-and-take that encourages social cohe¬
sion and creates human warmth? The university has always
been a place where people of flesh and blood can meet and
live the life of the mind and share each other's company.
Where can students of the global university of electronic
knowledge get together for convivial talk? The new tech¬
nologies have created a new kind of communication that
tends to promote dialogue between person and machine and
threatens to supersede human communication.
The paradox of cyberspace
One consequence of the rise of the audiovisual communi¬
cations media is the passivity of human behaviour in front
of the screen. The citizen of the twenty-first century is a tele¬
viewer rather than a "teleactor", and is usually regarded
as a consumer of images, information, entertainment and
knowledge. Only students who have learned to master
interactive machines and processes since childhood and
know how to extract from the electronic media exactly what
they need for their own growth can resist the powerful fas¬
cination of multimedia. For those who are less familiar with
the technology, the discovery of the medium takes prece¬
dence over the message. Another paradox of the new situ¬
ation is that content is the poor relation in a revolution
based on hardware, technology and processes.
One reason for drawing attention to the dangers associated
with these changes is to improve our capacity to cope with
them. We must welcome and exploit the possibilities opened
up by the new information technology, especially in view of
current trends in higher education: increasing diversification
of the student population and student demand (in terms of
age, expectations and training programmes), financial diffi¬
culties in many cases due to cuts in government expenditure
on higher education and the need to make training courses
more flexible in order to follow market requirements.
We must keep pace with change and, if possible, keep
ahead of it. In order to present a synthesis of the main trends
in higher education and set forth guidelines for its future
policies in this field, UiNESCO recently published a policy
paper entitled Change and Development in Higher Edu¬
cation. It is to be expected that the new information tech¬
nologies will broaden access to higher education in all its
diversity, and that the role of open universities and dis¬
tance-education systems will continue to expand.
Learning without frontiers
Steps must be taken to use the mobility, flexibility, leanness
and speed of the new information technologies to bring about
real sharing of knowledge. Actions speak louder than words:
UiNESCO did not wait until all the promise of these technolo¬
gies was fulfilled before launching its "Learning without
Frontiers" programme. Its Member States decided that in
1996-97 special attention would be paid to the use of tech¬
nology in education. In higher education, the UNITWIN/
UNESCO Chairs Programme is continuing to promote solidar¬
ity and co-operation between universities. An effort is being
made to support university chairs and networks using new
technology for education in general and distance education
in particular. To promote diversification in ways and means
of transmitting knowledge, the number of distance-education
centres and open universities must be increased.
The poor countries must be helped to acquire new tech¬
nologies and equipment, to train their people and enter
existing networks, in short to modernize along with the oth¬
ers. Is a global information society really conceivable in a
world where the overwhelming majority of citizens would be
starved of training and information? In this massive effort of
active solidarity, we must also carefully weigh up the power
factors associated with the new information technology and
make sure that "aid" does not lead toneo-colonialism. If we
are not careful, aid donors will try to provide training tai¬
lored to their own needs, to advise setting up networks
corresponding to demands they have defined for their own
situation, and to back up training with programmes that
they regard as relevant (and/or profitable?) for themselves.
Each country should define its own needs, make its own
requests, set up its own structures and constitute the
regional network it desires to match its own aspirations.
Solidarity, co-operation and aid: nothing is more demand¬
ing than real generosity, which puts recipients first and
seeks to give them the means to choose without influencing
their choice. The information revolution is too rich in edu¬
cational and human potential to he left to market forces or
those who use market forces for their own exclusive profit.
Perhaps the greatest challenge of the twenty-first century
will be to ally progress with fairness. I
the Unesco Courier» December i996 %
