THE ROOTS OF THE BANYAN TREE
BYRENEDEPESTRE
A wanderer
who found
himself at
home in exile
RENEDEPESTRE
is a Haitian-born poet and novelist.
THEUNESCO COURIER «OCTOBER 1996
Does the idea of exile that our civ¬
ilizations share with Antiquity,
the Middle Ages, the Renais¬
sance, and the baroque, classical
and romantic eras, make any
sense in the age of the Internet?
In the past, exiles were people who were
wrenched from their native soil and cut off
from their childhood and mother tongue,
and experienced the heartache of mourning
and nostalgia in a foreign land. Exile was
regarded by the political authorities as a pub¬
lic punishment and civic death. It was a tool
of the penal code which forced individuals
to leave their homeland (or their adopted
home) and forbade them to set foot there
again. Their appetite for life and their
integrity as citizens soured into an endless
season of bitterness and distress as their
uprooting became an incurable disease.
Excluded by historical forces from the land
of their birth, scarred and humiliated by the
loss of their roots, exiles were non-persons
whose lives were totally absorbed in the
desperate quest for paradise lost.
Today we have a broader perception of the
world. The alchemy of exchange and the pro¬
liferation of contacts between civilizations are
accelerating as never before. The witchcraft of
fundamentalist dogmas, the flotsam and jet¬
sam of sects, mental impoverishment the
various forms of barbarity that now flourish
are doomed to fail because of the cross-fertil¬
ization of values and approaches which is
everywhere gaining ground in the relations
between the planet's people, fields of knowl¬
edge and commercial activities.
Such a decisive change, such an enlarge¬
ment of the scale of our experiences, invite
us to take a fresh look at the concept of exile,
together with most of the other traditional
cultural landmarks that we regard as perma¬
nent fixtures. The process of globalization is
bound to phase out the belief that only stay-
at-homes have an identity. As people and
goods move around at dizzying speed and
ideas spread like wildfire from one civiliza¬
tion to another, the situation of the exile
ceases to be cut-and-dried.
Irons in the fire
As for my own story, half a century after
leaving Haïti in 1946, a lifetime's wandering
has led me to find an original answer to the
drama that exile can bring to a writer's life. Far
from Jacmel, my native plot of West Indian
soil, I have learned to stay firmly outside
those closed pockets of ethnicity, those
tensely inward-looking and backward-look¬
ing groups, that exiles of all kinds (and émi¬
grés in general) tend to form in their host
societies. I have always been wary of the
effects of group psychology and the nostalgic
prickliness that hold back migrants' natural
efforts to fit into the values of their adopted
homes. Thanks to my insistence on keeping
two irons in the fire, the sun of home (which
I have lost), and the sun of abroad (which I
have gained), I have managed spontaneously
to be French in Paris, Brazilian in Sào Paulo,
Czech in Prague, Italian in Milan and Cuban
in Havana. These different roots, added to
my Haitian heritage, have produced the
selves, vibrant with all the world's poetry, that
have prepared me to experience with joy and

wisdom the age of multiple identity and cul¬
tural ubiquity that is knocking on our door.
When I arrived in Cuba in March 1959, I
had twelve years of exile in my baggage in
Paris, Prague, Milan and three Latin American
capitals, Santiago de Chile, Buenos Aires and
Sào Paulo. Covered with scars, my head
bursting with the contradictions of the Cold
War, I loathed more than anything the dogma¬
tism, the thought police, the wooden language
and thought, the betrayals, double-think and
compartmentalized morality which were the
redoubtable components of Stalinism and its
terrifying "socialist" realpolitik.
In the early days of my integration into the
Cuban revolution, I felt strongly that Fidelism,
irrigated by Che Guevarism, was capable, in
spite of its youthful vagaries, of putting an end
to the scandals of racism and the other social
defects inherited from colonization. I lived
each day under the illusion that the land of José
Martí, Alejo Carpentier, Ernesto Lecuona,
Nicolás Guillen, Wifredo Lam and Fernando
Ortis would never bring me up against a new
exile. In my heart of hearts, for years on end, in
the midst of the vicissitudes of the new regime,
I thought, and was told again and again by those
around me, that Cuba was my home and that I
was just another Cuban. . . . My Cuban years
were to end in yet another departure.
Adopted homelands
What could I do with so much exile under
my belt, in an elsewhere from Haiti which
occupied in my imagination so many differ¬
ent adopted homelands? Could the absence
of my mother tongue, Haitian creóle, from
my work as a writer and poet, be the sign of
a linguistic exile, the root-metaphor of my
nomadism as a lifelong exile? By exalting my
Haitian identity through the French lan¬
guage and the historic values of the French-
speaking community, was I not betraying
Jacmel, creolity, négritude, the surrealism of
the Haitians, the evenings of a childhood
illuminated by a bewitched reality, by
voodoo legends and spells?
These questions about my identity have
been answered by the life I have lived for
the last ten years as a nomad who has taken
root, as a French citizen in a little town in
provincial France. I know from experience
that identity with a single root is an ethno-
nationalist dogma which is poles apart from
the robust health required by the imagina¬
tion of a writer who is constantly replen¬
ished by drawing on the complementary
resources of his original Haitian home and
the intensely experienced home-life he has
made among the French.
Once when I was in Mauritius I discov¬
ered the banyan, the sacred tree of southeast
Asia whose roots sustain a single trunk from
whose branches aerial roots emanate,
descend into the soil and rise to the surface
as new trunks. My banyan-identity situates
my life and experience as a poet at the oppo¬
site pole to exile.
A banyan tree (Ficus
benghalensis) with
spectacular aerial roots.
THE UNESCO ÏOURIER 5.
OCTOBER 1906
