FACT FILE
The world's major refugee situations
UNHCR is providing protection and assistance to 26.1 million
people around the world, of whom 13.2 million are refugees.
War in former Yugoslavia
Some 3.7 million people who have been dis¬
placed or affected by the war are receiving
humanitarian assistance from the United
Nations, 2.4 million of them in Bosnia and
Herzegovina alone.
Asylum in Europe
Since the early 1980s, around five million
applications for refugee status have been
submitted in Western Europe. UNHCR
tries to ensure that any measures taken to
control this phenomenon are consistent
with the principles of refugee protection.
The Palestinian question
Around 3.2 million people arc registered
with UNRWA, the agency responsible for
Palestinian refugees. Their future remains
one of the most complex issues which must
be addressed in the Middle East peace
process.
West African refugees
The conflicts in Liberia and Sierra Leone
have forced almost a million people into
exile in Guinea and Côte d'Ivoire. Large
numbers are also displaced within their
own countries beyond the reach of interna¬
tional assistance.
Guatemalan repatriation
Some 20,000 Guatemalans have returned to
their homeland over the past 10 years. 9,500
of the 45,000 who remained in Mexico were
repatriated in 1995 with assistance from
UNHCR.
Haitian asylum seekers
UNHCR is assisting with procedures
designed to determine the status of asylum
seekers from Haiti and to monitor the situa¬
tion of those who return.
Reintegration in Mozambique
More than 1.6 million refugees returned to
Mozambique from six neighbouring states
between late 1992 and early 1995. They must
now begin to support themselves and to
reintegrate within their own communities.
Conflicts in the Caucasus
Recent years have witnessed a succession
of population displacements within and
between Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia and
the Russian Federation, involving around
2.5 million people. Many of this number are
unable or unwilling to return to their for¬
mer place of residence.
Reconstruction in Afghanistan
Half of the Afghan refugees have repatriated
since 1992, leaving nearly three million in the
Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan.
Additional reconstruction efforts arc needed
within Afghanistan to enable their return.
Displaced Sri Lankans
More than 54,000 Sri Lankan refugees have
returned from India since 1992, leaving
nearly 90,000 in their country of asylum.
UNHCR provides assistance to the
returnees and to other people who arc
threatened or displaced by the war.
Repatriation to Myanmar
By mid-1995, only 50,000 of the 250,000
people who fled from Myanmar in 1991 and
1992 remained in Bangladesh. The home¬
ward movement, organized by UNHCR
will continue until the end of the year.
Vietnamese boat people
Although the departure of boat people has
effectively come to a halt, just over 40,000
Vietnamese asylum seekers remain in
camps throughout Southeast Asia. Nearly
80,000 have gone back to their own coun¬
try, where their situation is monitored by
UNHCR.
The Horn of Africa: exile and repatriation
UNHCR continues to assist around 1.3
million people from the Horn of Africa and
the Sudan, traditionally one of the most
important refugee-producing regions. The
repatriation to Eritrea from Sudan is under
way, more than 30 years after the first
refugees left that country.
The Rwanda/Burundi emergency
More than a million Rwandese poured into
Zaire between April and July 1994, one of
the largest and fastest refugee movements
ever seen. UNHCR is now providing pro¬
tection and assistance to some 2.2 million
displaced people in Burundi, Rwanda,
Tanzania, Uganda and Zaire.
Source: UNHCR, Geneva
Statistics date from August 1996.
The number of refugees and other persons of concern to UNHCR, 1975-1996
Oí ihc 26.1 million persons assisted by UNI ICR in 1996, 13.2 million arc refugees in lllc strict sense people who
have crossed an international border and been granted asylum in another state. "Other people of concern to the
UNHCR" arc internally displaced people (those who have fled for similar reasons to refugees but have not crossed
into another country), returnees, war-affected populations and other «roups benefiting from UNI ICR protection
and assistance activities. Totals do not include Palestinian refugees assisted bv the UN Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees (UNRWA) in the Near East. ' Source: UNHCR ¡9%.
Refugees resettled by UNHCR in third countries, 1979-1995
The procedure of third country resettlement involves transferring refugees from their country of asylum toan-
other state which has agreed to admit thctn and to grant them long-term residence rights and the opportunity to
become naturalized citizens. Over the past decade, the international community has reached a broad consensus
that third country resettlement is the least preferred solution to a refugee problem, "the solution of last resort".
Source: UNHCR 1996
91
THE UNESCO lOURIER ^ OCTOBER 1906
