The hands-on
approach
by Goéry Delacôte
San Francisco's Exploratorium
is giving a wide public an informal
initiation to science
I Although education in the United States
I has not traditionally been regarded as a
matter for the Federal Government, in recent
years the latter has set about transforming the
education system on a national scale by setting
minimum standards and common objectives
for all schools, thus creating a general frame of
reference.
There are three essential aspects to these
standards and objectives: they lay down what
young Americans should have learned by the
end of a certain number of years of schooling;
they describe relevant and effective methods
to be used for the teaching, in three- or four-
year instalments, of the various subjects; and
they set forth methods of evaluation adapted
to these new criteria. They also list the condi¬
tions to be met for putting this new frame of
reference into effect.
A flexible, open system
These measures bear certain resemblances to
those relating to the establishment of school
curricula in France in the late nineteenth cen¬
tury by Jules Ferry, except for the fact that
they allow local institutions wide freedom of'
choice as to the methods and resources used
to attain the objectives.
In the case of mathematics, the standards,
drawn up with the help of all the parties
involved in the changes chiefly high-school
and college teachers, but also businessmen,
parent-teacher associations and politicians
have already been promulgated. This process,
a thoroughgoing piece of social and political
22

alchemy, was carried out with the co-opera¬
tion of all those competent in the subject, thus
avoiding the mistakes made thirty years ago
when modern maths were introduced. Similar
standards are now being prepared for science
teaching and will soon be brought into force
for all subjects.
This idea of a "wide-mesh" education system
creates favourable conditions for a genuine
debate among the various people and institu¬
tions actively involved in the system. It also
makes it possible to take specific local condi¬
tions into account and to optimize the manage¬
ment of each community's resources. The greater
the scope for initiative, and hence autonomy, at
the local level, the more necessary it becomes to
lay down a general framework that is flexible
enough to let such initiatives be put into effect.
In the next century we shall very likely all
have to come to terms with the definition of
objectives on a national, or even international,
scale and, on the other hand, the need for ini¬
tiatives at the local level.
The educational role of museums
There is, however, a risk that such initiatives
will come to nothing unless schools them¬
selves undergo a transformation at the same
time. The substantial rise in the numbers of
schoolchildren brought about by population
growth will bring the whole education system
to a standstill unless it is reorganized.
The experience of my own institution, the
San Francisco Exploratorium, may be of some
interest in this respect. An experimental
Goéry Delacôte (right),
director of the San Francisco
Exploratorium (USA), bowls a
wheel across a moving
circular platform to show a
visitor a simple solution to a
complex mechanical problem.
Children run their hands over
a meteorite at the
Smithsonian Institution, the
natural history museum in
Washington, D.C. (USA).
The main aim of the San Francisco
Exploratorium is to put across the idea of
continuing education as something quite
natural.
centre, founded in 1969, its purpose is to bring
basic scientific knowledge to a wide audience,
parents and teachers as well as students. It is
open to all comers and provides learning aids,
access to on-line services (Internet, for
example), teachers and guides, all with the aim
of putting users in the frame of mind to go on
asking more questions and allowing constantly
changing new learning techniques and
methods to be tried out.
These techniques, worked out jointly by
the teachers and engineers with the help of the
learners themselves, aim to stimulate debate



on science, its social applications and the ethical
problems it raises, and also on the processes
(metacognition) at work in science.
The Exploratorium is also a meeting-place
for prospective teachers, where they can
acquire a foretaste of their future job. The ini¬
tial training it provides, though by definition
insufficient for a proper vocational qualifica¬
tion, aims mainly to put across the idea of con¬
tinuing education as something quite natural.
In science, this initial training consists chiefly
of familiarizing trainees with the experimental
approach and with how to give lessons, but it
also teaches them how to learn by instilling in
them a capacity to stand back and examine
their own methods objectively.
At a more general level, the educational
role of scientific centres open to the public
museums of science and natural history,
botanical gardens, zoos and so on is being
23

reconsidered in the United States. These cen¬
tres are in the process of changing, from being
mere adjuncts to formal education to
becoming experimental logistical bases for the
transformation of the whole educational
system. Excellent as the universities are as
regards research and academic knowledge,
experience has shown that they are often ill
suited to providing trainee teachers with the
sort of skills an appropriate professional
training requires, whereas the scientific cen¬
tres possess, as compared with the universi¬
ties, a remarkable degree of freedom in terms
of their timetables, programmes and organiza¬
tion and the use they make of their premises
and of available technologies.
A move towards
school autonomy
As well as to the part that scientific centres
could play in education in general, considera¬
tion needs to be given to the future of schools
themselves.

