commentar y
wiving
What will tomorrow's cities be like? Above all, will they be
decent places to live in?
The city is a focus of far-reaching changes in our time.
By the year 2025, an estimated 83 per cent of the popu¬
lation of the industrialized countries and 61 per cent of the
population of the South will be living in urban areas. But
while cities are focal points of progress and social change,
they are also crucibles of crisis and social tensions.
Urbanization is taking place on three levels: in mega-
cities, in medium-sized cities and in inter-urban areas.
Megacities, cities with more than 4 or 5 million inhabi¬
tants, are not specific to the industrialized countries. By
2025 18 of the world's 25 largest cities are likely to be sit¬
uated in the South. As great centres of international com¬
munication and exchange, these "global cities" form part
of an emerging new world map which increasingly ignores
the North-South divide between industrialized and devel¬
oping countries.
Medium-sized cities with a population ranging from
100,000 to 2 or 3 million are autonomous from and sub¬
ordinate to the megacities. They give structure to rural
areas and connect them with the urban world. Develop¬
ments of this kind in Asia and Latin America are the
world's fastest-growing urban areas, facing management
problems comparable to those of large metropolises.
Thirdly, the networks of exchange that link these cities
form a global urban framework within which the labour
force is being redistributed and large-scale population
movements are taking place.
While cities are places of dynamism, innovation and
opportunity, they also harbour poverty, violence, pollution,
unemployment, social exclusion, criminality, insecurity,
drugs and squalor. The problem of urban poverty is today
being discussed in terms (exclusion in France, underclass
in the United States, marginalidad in Latin America) which
reflect three different representations of urban space
inside/outside, high/low and centre/periphery.
Cities for citizens
The city is thus a meeting-point of three crises: a crisis
provoked by cleavages in society linked to social and eco¬
nomic injustice; a crisis affecting the types of social rela¬
tions traditionally associated with the urban habitat; and a
crisis of governance and political representation.
Although no two cities are alike, urban development
must follow one common guideline. The city and the
economy must be made to serve humankind, and not the
reverse, as is the case at present.
THE UNESCO ^lURIER ^J 9 SLITEMBER 1996

The enjoyment of fundamental rights and freedoms pre¬
supposes the exercise of citizenship and participation in
the life of the community. The right to housing, the right to
a roof overhead for oneself and one's family, is a prereq¬
uisite for citizenship. UNESCO therefore has a duty to
remind the international community that the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
requires that "appropriate steps to ensure the realization
of this right" be taken.
Natural resources should be effectively managed in
big cities, but at present these are places where water and
energy are squandered. Cities also swallow up increasing
amounts of land as they continue to expand over arable
areas and green spaces. The expansion of coastal cities
even affects the marine environment. In the last quarter of
a century the population of New York City has risen by 5
per cent, but the area it covers has increased by 61 per
cent. Measures must be taken to ensure that activities to
protect the urban environment become a source of income
and enable the people who live in cities to take charge of
running them.
In many cases the management structures of large cities
are inconsistent with their demographic development.
U.NKSCO supports the introduction of urban governance
structures that clearly delineate the respective areas of
jurisdiction and responsibility of central and local author¬
ities. But it should not be forgotten that democratic and
effective urban governance is based on the participation of
city-dwellers and citizens' organizations in the life of their
community.
An open-ended heritage
Three main challenges face the cities of the twenty-first
century. The first is the introduction of democracy and
the creation of an urban community to which all citizens
belong; the second is the control of urban development
and hence the governance of cities; and the third is the
development and control of urban engineering, especially
during the current transition to a renewed sense of public
interest and to flexible negotiating procedures between
public bodies and private individuals.
Urban development has the potential to promote social
progress, improved access to information, education and
health, and the enrichment of ways of life and cultural
exchanges. But this calls for equality of access to the
city to its physical infrastructure, to education facilities
and employment. UNESCO intends to work towards this end
on two fronts: knowledge generation and action in the
field.
The city is an essential link between the individual and
the state. Just as local democracy and citizenship are the
cornerstones of the city as a moral edifice, social apartheid
is a sign of its degeneracy. Citizenship must be rooted in a
sense of solidarity arising from an urban culture that is
neither a standardized international culture nor a patch¬
work of antagonistic cultures but the outgrowth of a sense
of place and membership of a great urban community.
The city is an open-ended heritage and each city has its
own cultural personality. Modern building materials,
which bring improvements in terms of space-saving, health
and safety, are often at odds with aesthetic and climatic
considerations in the countries where they are used. Sci¬
ence and the arts must be harnessed to serve the city via
an interdisciplinary approach that encourages the emer¬
gence of a new generation of builders. The architecture of
the twenty-first century will have to strike a difficult bal¬
ance between modern energy-saving technology and aes¬
thetic traditions which exist in their own right and which it
would be wrong to ignore.
Training for city-dwellers
This kind of strategic urbanism must be seen in terms of
sustainable urban development. The use of durable mate¬
rials that are consistent with sound management of the
environment must be encouraged. Water, which is indis¬
pensable for hygiene, is being wasted at such a rate that it
is bound to be a major international issue in the coming
century, if it is not one already. Cities are heavy consumers
of energy, and will have to find new renewable and less
polluting energy sources. World energy demand, which is
expected to double in the next thirty years, will have an
incalculable effect on raw material reserves and on the
environment.
As a place where people live and move and have their
being, the city must provide equal access to the modern
communications and information media. In this way
everyone will have an opportunity to participate in the life
of the community and of the world. If tomorrow's city
dwellers are to be well adapted to their urban environ¬
ment, they will have to learn as early as possible to con¬
sider the city as a living environment, to feel self-respect
and respect for others.
UNESCO has developed an approach to these problems
which has three complementary components under¬
standing, action, and information and has created a
number of programmes to implement this threefold
strategy. The Management of Social Transformations
(MOST) Programme, the Man and the Biosphere (MAB)
Programme, the International Hydrological Programme
(IHP), and the International Geological Correlation Pro¬
gramme (IGCP) all aim to increase and disseminate knowl¬
edge. Secondly, a number of training schemes for those
concerned with urban issues are built into the MAB and
MOST programmes. They include schemes supported by
non-governmental organizations in many parts of the world
for restoring historic buildings, rehabilitating urban cen¬
tres, and promoting vernacular architecture and environ¬
mental and population education. Finally, since knowl¬
edge and expertise are only useful if they are shared,
UNESCO has developed a clearing house for information-
exchange and a data bank as part of the MOST pro¬
gramme. UNESCO is also pursuing a communication policy
designed to help town-planners, officials, educators, jour¬
nalists and civic organizations to strengthen solidarity, tol¬
erance, respect for cultural diversity and the culture of
peace in a word, everything that can form a common
bond between men and women everywhere. I
THE UNESCO COURIER *"* «SEPTEMBER 1996
