Isabelle Leymarie talks to
TeI1!b9A LAREDO
Teresa Laredo in concert at Unesco's Paris Headquarters In 1992.
The internationally known Bolivian pianist
and harpsichordist Teresa Laredo studied at
tlie Académie Santa Cecilia in Rome (Italy)
and the Mozarteum in Salzburg (Austria),
and later taught at the Conservatory in
Geneva (Switzerland). She recently carried
out a study on women composers In Bollvia
and made two recordings, one devoted to
Works by the Argentine composer Alberto
Ginastera and by a number of Bolivian
composers, and the other to the early works
of Clara Schumann.
ISABELLE LEYMARIE
is a Franco-American musicologist.
You seem to feel that music is
above ail a state of exaltation,
sometliing almost sacred. . .
Teresa LaredOi Spanish has a term that
describes perfectly how I feel about
music: jûbilo (jubilation). Music is a way
of experiencing higher states of con-
sciousness and communicating them to
others. That is why I love teaching. l've
often hosted musical events and I enjoy
improvising for ail kinds of audiences,
flying in the face of barriers and com-
partmentalization. I like to explore ail
kinds of music and musical tastes. . . .
How did you become so
eclectic?
T. L.: When I was a child I danced the
flamenco with castanets and the zap-
ateado. I also played the xylophone. My
response to music was totally physical. I
also danced my country's Indian dances.
One of my grandmothers came from
Granada. She had an expansive person-
ality and sang. The other was Bolivian
and was more withdrawn. She played
waltzes and light music on the piano.
Later I spent three years in Casablanca
where I became interested in Arab
music and its influence on Spanish
music. In Morocco I played the qanun
for fun, and studied classical harp at
the conservatory. I like oriental music
because, with its quarter tones, it
reveals ail the refinements of the soûl. I
also became interested in Indian music
and hâve taught ragas on the piano.
Since the piano is not a
tempered instrument, teaching
Indian music must be difficult,
especially for rendering slides from
one tone to another.
T. L: Yes, it was a little frustrating.
Later I lived in Sydney (Australia) and
was fascinated by the music of the
Aborigènes their culture, their
musical instruments, especially the
didgeridoo, a wind instrument made
from a bamboo pipe. I found it ail
enchanting. Their music seems to cap¬
ture the sounds of the sea and the wind,
even the movement of ants.
Some American jazz musicians
are very fond of the didgeridoo.
T. L: I haven't got enough wind to play
the Bolivian panpipes, so at home I hook
up them up to a sampler, which synthe-
sizes the sound and intégrâtes it into the
keyboard. l've donc a lot of composing
directly on this device. When I scrape my
47

foot on the floor, for example, I get
sounds that evoke certain cosmic sounds
when they are processed by the sampler.
Would you call this kind of
composition concrète music?
T. L.: Yes, sort of, but combined with
notes. When I use this instrument I take
myself into the next century. I composed
Star Dust while gazing at a drawing done
by my little nièce. You see the earth and
the galaxies and children coming down
towards our planet. They're like voices,
vibrations of innocence that help us to
purify ourselves. They arrive on earth
and join together in celestial harmony. I
am very keen on Andean pantheism, its
cosmic and solar rituals and its célébra¬
tions of the equinoxes.
You are particularly fond of
women 's music. . .
T.L.: What interests me about women is
that they've always made music while
they were cloistered at home, at court
or in convents. Later they played at
family gatherings and gradually began
to study in conservatories. Right now I
am very interested in Amy Beach, an
American contemporary of Olivier Mes-
siaen, and in Seymanovska, a Polish
woman who composed nocturnes that
Chopin admired. In Fribourg not long
ago I asked the audience to identify the
composer of a pièce I had just played.
They ail guessed it was Chopin, but in
fact it was Seymanovska.
How do you manage to
remember so many works from
such varied sources?
T. L: My memory seems to be tailor-
made for that. What's more I hâve a
wide range of expérience. l've accompa-
nied ballets, played chamber music and
concertos and given solo récitals. l've
experienced moments of ecstasy, espe
cially when playing César Franck.
Somewhere in Latin America in a place
where there was no piano, I even mimed
piano-playing to taped music in front of
a rapt audience of children.
Where did you get your
enthusiasm for Clara Schumann?
T. L.: I read her journal and her corre-
spondence with Robert Schumann and
Brahms when I was thirteen years old in
Bolivia. Later I met a woman who had
photographed some documents about
Clara, and she gave me her archives. I
admired Clara. She adored giving con¬
certs; she didn't play her own works but
other people's, and she always deferred
to her husband. So I said to her with my
inner voice, "Now it's your turn. I'm the
person who will make your work
known."
From then on, I decided to draw
attention to minor works composed by
women, those fleeting moments in life
that men sometimes tend to disdain. I
did research and made some amazing
discoveries. It was thanks to Clara that
I finally had the courage to start com¬
posing myself. I think l've interpreted
her music faithfully. It has an aura that
has to come out in every pièce so that
the music is radiant with the artist's
inspiration.
Every note seems to hâve a life
of its own.
71 L: Absolutely. This explains the con¬
nection between music, poetry and the
other forms of art. When I compose,
words and melody often come to me at
the same time. Music has taught me to
see our hidden qualities. The magie
that music gives off comes from our
inner being, from what one might call
the soûl which is something unique to
ail of us and at the same time links us to
others.
