Music,
time, eternity
by Elizabeth Sombart
I I am eleven years old. I am about to walk
I on stage for my first concert. All is
silence here in the wings, far from the hubbub
in the hall as the audience arrives. I am over¬
come by a fear that I've never felt before. I
walk on stage accompanied by the sound of
my footsteps and those of the audience. Sud¬
denly deep within me I feel I must return to
the long silence offstage before I play my first
note. How extraordinary that I need all these
people in front of me to feel the absolute neces¬
sity for silence that is required before music
can be played.
25

The truth dawns on me that noise is some¬
thing that we merely hear. To experience
music, we must listen to it, and to be able to
listen, there must be an inner silence. Without
this silence, there is no music. I must imme¬
diately forget the concert hall, the audience,
the noise, the doors that open and close in the
muffled velvet atmosphere. ... I must hear
only my own silence, the silence that lives deep
in my heart. Breathe deeply. Breathing must
make my fingers move. "Breathe the music
and you will be inspired," our music teacher
says.
The first note bursts from my fingers, my
body, my soul, from the wonderful silence that
fills me and uplifts me. How could I have been
afraid? It is fear that makes us want to make
noise; this evening I realize that noise is the sin
of music. In music, the "frills" are what we
project from our inner noise, from our fear of
silence. My feet are firmly on the ground, my
head is in the clouds and my hands fly over
the keyboard. Every gesture that spells out
music is "sacred". Sounds die out as I play, but
no one notices that they are gone. They die
without dying. They are absorbed in the body
and soul of the listener and go on living there.
The subtle music of inner silence. Music lives in
all of us. The audience and I are now one,
bound by this music that rises from my fin¬
gers like a meadow moved by silence.
A timeless moment
"You can't get to sleep?"
The hand of
Charles Munch conducting
"Who are you? How do you know I can't the Boston Symphony
sleep?" Orchestra.
"I am an old man who lives in the silence
of eternity. Your concert this evening was very
good."
"Did you think so? I don't know whether I
played the music or whether the music played
forme. . . ."
"It played neither for you nor for anyone in
particular. It played, that's all. Music is the
meeting place of the temporal and the time¬
less, the vertical and the horizontal. The
meeting place is your heart, the seat of all the
emotions expressed by music. This is how the
universe advances in harmony with us. It is
our heart, and our heart is the universe. A single
soul, like yours, contains the feelings of all
humanity."
"Eternity is in my heart?"
There is no one in my room except for my
little teddy bear, who has been my night-time
companion since I was born. I must have
dreamed. I close my eyes again and drop off
to sleep.
"Haven't you ever dreamed of music while
you sleep?"
"You again! All I can tell you is that when I
play, I do nothing else and I think of nothing
else. If ever I think, I hit a wrong note. You
know why? Wrong notes arc noise. Noise
comes from fear, the fear that distances us from
the silence of music. And then we fall . . . you
26

"Tell me again, where do the notes I play
goto?"
"You send them back to where they come
from: infinity."
"I'm not sure what you mean by infinity. . . ."
"Every movement, every vibration, every
true word you utter represents sounds that
are in direct contact with the world, with the
wavelengths of your heart. Like you, they have
a past, a present, a future and a natural tendency
to return to infinite silence. People think they
die, but they do not die because time does not
exist. Music is the metaphor of time and time is
the metaphor of the Eternal."
"I don't know what a metaphor is. But I
understand that these three words music,
time, eternal are the same."
"How else would you describe the joy you
spoke of earlier, when sounds mix and swell
like a firework display in your heart, then
scatter into a thousand emotions, fall away and
fade into the silence of the night."
"It is love."
"Yes. Love is to music what silence is to
infinity."
The old man disappears in a rustling of stars.
I close the lid of the piano. The concert is over.
I fall asleep.
ELIZABETH SOMBART
is a French concert pianist who is currently preparing a series of
programmes for a French TV channel on the history of the piano from
Bach to Bartók.
Conslantine Manos © Magnum. Paris
see? When we play well, when music plays
through us, we lose track of time. Musical time
isn't the same thing as ordinary time. Not at
all! In musical time, there is no place for fear
or for thinking. I feel such great joy and peace
when I serve music, in this silence. ... It is a
timeless moment."
"When you began to play this evening, you
did what all musicians should do: you took a
vow of silence. Only then can each sound
become a hymn to life, an explosion of unimag¬
inable force that changes the course of events.
Music was given to men and women so that
they could understand, in the immediacy of
this experience, that the present is the point
where time touches eternity." Ohiyesa or Charles Alexander Eastman (1858-1939), Sioux Indian physician and author.
27
