AFR|CA A tradition of cross-border trade
BY ALIX SERVAIS AFOUDA
ALIX SERVAIS AFOUDA,
of Benin, is an agronomist and
geographer.
I he Lake Chad basin has always
been a hub of long-distance
trade between the Sahara
Desert, the forest regions of the
Gulf of Guinea and the plateau of
Central Africa.
With the creation of nation states in post-
colonial Africa trading activity was concen
trated along interstate borders. Frontier
towns and markets became administrative
centres and the focal points of regional trade.
Merchants settled in these towns but did
not cut off contact with the Hausa, Kanuri,
Fulani, Shewa-Arab and other peoples from
which they came. They belonged to corpo¬
rations that dated back to the days when car¬
avans plied through the region and were gov¬
erned by regulations specific to each ethnic
22 THE UNESCO^HJRIERl NOVEMBER l<>"6


group. They traded mainly in local subsis¬
tence products such as millet, sorghum, rice
and tubers, imported rice, flour and wheat,
cattle, sheep and goats, and products manu¬
factured locally or in other countries.
The transnational nature of their activities
brought the merchants into contact with for¬
eign-exchange dealers, brokers, guides and
transporters as well as officials and other mid¬
dlemen. But the far-reaching ramifications of
their trade, the ambivalent nature of certain
business centres straddling the border between
two states, and the practice of corruption and
smuggling made it possible for merchants to set
up trade circuits that eluded state supervision.
Long-distance
trade
There are two kinds of trading circuit. Locally
grown farm produce is traded within small-
scale networks based on towns and markets
held at regular intervals. This type of trade
may involved people living on cither side of
a state frontier. There are also long-distance
A circuits of transnational trade in locally pro-
bove, a caravan y L
transporting salt in Niger. duced or imported agricultural and manufac-
Delow right, a market in tured goods along routes linking Nigeria,
Cameroon, Niger and Chad.
The volume and nature of trade between
these four countries is determined by three
main factors:
I Complementary needs resulting from eco¬
logical differences. Millet, sorghum, tubers and
cola are imported by Niger and Chad from
Nigeria and Cameroon, for example, in exchange
for cattle, hides, leather, fish and natron.
> The economic situation in each country.
Compared with the other Chad basin coun¬
tries, Nigeria is an economic giant. Next in size
comes Cameroon, followed by Niger and
Chad, two landlocked countries of the Sahel
which have few development resources.
Nigeria's economic might is reflected in the
diversity of its industries, its massive output
Chad.
and the fact that over 95 per cent of its export
revenues comes from oil.
I Political differences. These are mainly asso¬
ciated with agricultural policies, the regulation
of foreign trade and the use of two currencies
in the region (the non-convertible Nigerian
Naira, and the CFA franc, whose convert¬
ibility is guaranteed by the Bank of France).
Irrespective of the enormous losses due
to fraud in the different countries, the intensi¬


fication of regional and cross-border trade in
the Chad basin has by and large encouraged
the growth of agriculture, a parallel exchange
market, transport, crafts and services. In farm¬
ing alone, by allowing certain areas to sell off
their crop surpluses and others to reduce their
subsistence crop deficits, this trade has become
a factor in regional food security. The way in
which food security stocks are regulated via
the different trade circuits shows that the
region's economy has remained strongly inte¬
grated in spite of the way in which national
frontiers are drawn.
The Lake Chad basin is a crossroads of
sub-regional trade that supplies the whole of
Nigeria, Cameroon, Niger and Chad and
other countries such as the Central African
Republic. Its commercial dynamism is such
that a kind of de facto integration is main¬
tained by local populations irrespective of
what states might wish.
THE UNESCO (oURlERB NOVEMBER 1996 CO
