MONTH BY MONTH... MONTH BY MONTH.
The marketplace
past and present
It has become virtually impossible to live in isola¬
tion from the marketplace. Our needs have
become so diversified that they can only be met
by constant recourse to products, services,
finance and information available on the market.
And market transactions have become so inten¬
sive and so far-reaching that they are now planet-
wide. One might say that the pulse of world eco¬
nomic activity today is measured by the state of
the market.
It has not always been so.
For thousands of years the market was only of
marginal importance. On the one hand it brought
into contact separate, self-sufficient communities
which exchanged among themselves goods that
were merely ancillary, inessential to their internal
balance. On the other, the people who engaged in
these transactions attached less importance to eco¬
nomic considerations than they did to the imper¬
atives of religion, custom and lineage that gov¬
erned their lives.
But even within these limits, the market played
an extremely important role as a channel of com¬
munication. It was the only opportunity for closed
communities to open their doors, however
briefly, to the outside world, make contact with
others and catch a glimpse of human diversity. In
the long run, trade promoted the circulation of
ideas, technical innovation and productive work.
In the modern age the status of the market
changed. It ceased to be a mechanism of sec¬
ondary exchange and became instead a mainspring
of social activity, the regulator of production. The
economy hitherto the servant of non-material¬
istic ends which the group considered sacred
became a law unto itself, gradually infiltrating into
all areas of life, harnessing everything within reach
to its purposes and eventually transforming all
established values including cultural, traditional
8
THE UNESCO ^>URIERB NOVEMBER 1906

NT MONTH BY MONTH...
by Bahgat Elnadi
and Adel Rifaat
and moral values into commodities that could be
bought and sold.
Some reacted to this change by treating the
market itself as sacred, regarding it as an impartial
power governed by impersonal laws that would,
via competition, inevitably encourage the best and
penalize the mediocre. However, a closer look
leads to the conclusion that while the market acts
as an economic regulator and rationalizer, it tends
to develop a network of inegalitarian relationships
within which the law of the strongest triumphs
over the spirit of reciprocity.
Freedom and inequality
In fact, the market can be seen as a kind of fron¬
tier area inhabited by two contradictory princi¬
ples freedom and inequality between which
only imperfect compromises can ever be made. A
no-holds-barred free market is in fact a "free-for-
all", a confrontation between strong and weak lead¬
ing ultimately to situations where competition
ceases to exist, thus jeopardizing the very principle
of freedom and resulting in the impoverishment
and exclusion of more and more economic agents.
Beyond a certain threshold, the process breaks the
bonds that hold society together and even, taken to
extremes, makes it impossible for commercial
activity to continue. And so, the argument goes,
there must be a counterweight to market forces;
the law of the market must be contained and regu¬
lated by political bodies which endeavour to main¬
tain a certain balance between unbridled economic



freedom and unchecked inequality.
Several attempts have been made this century
to strike such a balance. For a wide variety of rea¬
sons, most of these attempts have failed.
This explains why in the past few years all kinds
of attempts to liberalize markets and weaken the
ideological basis of political interventionism have
made great strides. The globalization of financial,
technological and information flows, in these con¬
ditions, has created a highly volatile market that
knows no frontiers, is prone to unpredictable
developments and rapidly changing situations. In
this globalized market competition favours big
transnational groups (while not preventing the
emergence of new pockets of prosperity) and no
international body seems able to control economic
behaviour or arbitrate, politically or legally, the
conflicts resulting from it.
The globalization of corruption, siphoning off
drug money and feeding international crime, is one
dramatic symptom of this state of affairs which is
corroding the foundations of democracy and
undermining familiar religious, ethnic and national
landmarks. It should come as no surprise that two
very different trends are developing in response to
this widespread corruption the strengthening of
democratic control mechanisms and recourse to
the dictatorship of closed identities.
The marketplace is thus a crossroads, a meeting
place of some key issues of the late twentieth cen¬
tury. In reporting on this crucial phenomenon we
have tried to shed light not only on the ways in
which it has changed and is changing but also, and
above all, on its contradictory aspects.
THE UNESCO COURIER« NOVEMBER 1996
