January 1972
^
The image and the word by Alberto Moravia
ItaUan writer (1907-1990)
The notion that the book and the printed word are in rapid
décline gained ils widest currency following the spectac¬
ular success of the image and the média of visual commu¬
nication the cinéma, télévision, advertising displays, strip
cartoons, road signs and so on.
But few persons appear to hâve given much thought to
the fact that the image owes its success, in turn, to the
entry into humanity's arena of large masses of humanity,
including the newly literate and the totally illiterate.
The illiterate person undeniably has a distinctive visual
awareness. For him the whole world is a vast System of
visual signs and symbols waiting to be interpreted and trans¬
lated. The origin of writing itself, with its slow progression
from the représentation of an object to a form of sym-
bolism, shows that primitive man used his eyes for tasks
that civilized man later entrusted to his ears.
So in the first place, what we are dealing with is not so
much a décline of the book as a triumph of the image, a tri-
umph due in far smaller measure to those who hâve always
been readers than to those who only yesterday did not know
how to read.
If this is so, as l myself believe, we can expect at any
time to see a steady décline in the influence of the image
and a corresponding résurgence of the book. In other
words, as millions upon miUions of illiterate men and women
learn to read and write, they are likely to abandon the
primitive, direct language of the image in favour of the
more elaborate, more indirect language of the printed
word.
Modem man, moreover, uses the picture in ways that
are basically différent from those of primitive man. In the
primitive world, it marked the first steps in communica¬
tion; today it is only a provisional return to conditions that
are perhaps temporary. The modem world is not so much a
primitive world as one temporarily "primitivized". In other
words, even in the progression from the language of the pic¬
ture to the language of the printed word we can observe
once again the phenomenon of ontogenesis (the development
of the individual) which duplicates the phenomenon of phy-
logenesis (the development of the whole human species).
That this hypothesis is plausible is furthermore borne
out by the huge circulation of paperbacks. Between the
traditional book and the paperback there is not just a dif¬
férence of quality and priée. In reality the two types of
book are profoundly différent in nature.
The traditional book was rooted, indeed still is rooted,
in an organic, stratified cultural context that has lasted for
centuries. The paperback, on the other hand, scatters the
seeds of the culture of ail âges and ail régions wholesale
upon completely virgin soil. In the space of a few years, the
entire population of our planet, only now barely emerging
from iUiteracy, has been inundated, without any prépara¬
tion, with the culture of thirty centuries.
The danger is that this culture will be not assimilated,
but thrown together, condensed and reduced to mère for¬
mulas and synthetic aggregations in a vast grinding opéra¬
tion of destruction. After which the masses would appar-
ently be free to revert to the image, thenceforward the sole
médium of communication.
This, indeed, may be the direction taken by Marxism in
China with its rejection of the past as "Bourgeois". Mao Tse
Tung has said that the vast masses of the Chinese people are
Uke a sheet of blank paper on which one can write whatever
one wishes. What will be written on this paper we still do
not know.
Besides, the image itself has recently appeared to be
reaching its limits. The fact that the spectator takes in the
picture passively, without any effort of interprétation, ulti-
mately results in the picture itself losing its fuU force and
becoming a victim of this passivity. People watching télévi¬
sion or a film at the cinéma simply do not see what is hap¬
pening before their eyes on the screen; or if they do see, they
do not really comprehend. Passivity has atrophied their
powers of concentration, rendering them inattentive to the
point of blindness.
Of course, they "see" the road sign indicating a school, or
the cowboy astride his horse firing his gun, but now what
they "see" is nothing more than a response to the same con-
ditioned reflex devoid of any mental reflection and hence any
communication. Marshall McLuhan admits this when he says
that "the médium is the message."
The décline of the book is by no manner of means, then,
a certainty. Even if we ignore the fundamental fact that the
book springs from nature, that is from the faculty natural to
ail human beings to utter words and shape them into orga¬
nized speech, we should not overlook the fact that the book
is made up of words which are "also" under certain condi¬
tions of poetic creativity, images. Thus there is no substantial
différence between the image suggested by the book and
the image that appears on the screen. In fact there is only one
différence, though an important one: the image on the screen
aUows for no play of imagination; it is what it is.
Nevertheless, we must distinguish between one type of
trading and another type of reading, between one book and
another book. Reading some books is no more than a simple
physical exercise. Such books, written for mass consump-
tion, conventional in content and in style, are not read in the
full sensé of the word but rather are skimmed through by
the reader: when the eye passes from one ready-made phrase
to the next, from one cUché to another, the "reader" may
believe he has been "reading" but in reality he has doue no
more than register the notations of a verbal mechanism that
is as incompréhensible as it is insignificant.
For a book to be properly "read" it must first be really
"written". If it is true that the book is in décline this is due
not to the fact that the broad gênerai public does not read
but to the fact that they read books that bave not been
"written" but merely printed.
A book, then, must be thought out and created or it is not
a book. Indeed, the future of the book is bound up with the
poetry, creativeness, descriptive power and imagery of the
writing. The future of the book wiU be assured if we succeed
in "writing" books ; it will perish if we content ourselves with
merely printing them.
Jl̂
