Hervé Bazin
7 write to warn. 5
The French writer Hervé Bazin, who
died in February at the age of 84, made
his reputation with the virulent
attacks on the institutions of family
and motherhood contained in his
autobiographical novel Vipère au
poing (1948; Viper in the Fist, 1951).
His later novels on social themes and
psychological conflict won him a wide
popular readership and a number of
literary prizes in France and elsewhere.
Among his best-known novels are Chi
j'ose aimer (1956; À Tribe of Women),
Madame Ex (1975; "Madame X") and,
most recently, Le neuvième jour (1994;
"The 9th Day"). Hervé Bazin gave this
interview to the UNESCO Courier
shortly before his death.
Let's talk about your latest book, Le
neuvième jour. . .
Hervé Bazin: God created the world in
six days. On the seventh he rested. On
the eighth he expelled Adam and Eve
from the earthly paradise. We are now
living on the ninth day. We have entered
the ninth era, the time when faustian
man takes the place of the Creator.
Human intelligence gives us access to var¬
ious highly sophisticated forms of cre¬
ation, which also have a strong potential
for destruction. Humanity has the choice
between happiness, which will never be
absolute, and universal suicide.
You write to warn, to keep the
public on its toes	
H.B.: My long experience in journalism
has taught me a utilitarian approach to
writing, an approach I would describe as
committed and designed for direct com¬
munication. I have always been driven by
the problems facing contemporary
society. At the present time it is impor¬
tant to set them down in books because,
given the speed of modern communica¬
tion, there is a constant turnover of news;
however important events are, new ones
happen and push the earlier ones into
limbo. People need permanent landmarks
to help them put things in perspective,
touchstones to help them distinguish
between real threats and those that are
simply passing fads.
Nuclear power is dangerous, for
instance, and we shall have to live with
it until the end of time I mean that we
must make sure the bomb is never used
but I don't think it is a major peril
because it is closely monitored and small
states are not in a position to manufac¬
ture atomic bombs. Biology is dangerous,
however, because it is accessible to any
lab assistant who can tinker with viruses.
In Le neuvième /our you give
fictional treatment to a scientific fact.
H.B.: The subject I deal with in Le neu¬
vièmejour had been in my mind for a long
time. The novel is more effective than the
essay in bringing to a wide public a uni¬
verse which is , alas , very real and not at all
science fiction. In my novel I imagine a
strain of influenza, a "superflu" far worse
than the Spanish flu epidemic of 1918 on
which known vaccines have no effect. To
prevent a catastrophe, an all-purpose pre¬
ventive vaccine has to be found very
quickly. The main character, Monsieur
Alleaume, discovers that it is possible to
make such a vaccine. But of course that
isn't the end of the story. A researcher may
be motivated by a desire to benefit
humanity, but we also have to reckon with
competition between firms in the health
business which to quote from my novel
"would be very unhappy if they were
beaten to the post and had to abandon
their sacred profits to rival companies".
And so my novel is a warning. Be careful!
Man has taken the place of God . He is fre e
to destroy himself and the earth with him,
because he has equipped himself with the
resources to change and invent all kinds of
Biology will only continue to be beneficial if it is closely
monitored, like nuclear power.

Hervé Bazin in 1994.
things. We don't know the precise origin of
Aids, for example, but researchers know
how to create the virus in vitro.
What forms can the 'biological
peril' take?
H.B.: Today other methods of racial selec¬
tion exist than those designed by Hitler.
There may be some Fausts among the
researchers who are working away in the
shadows. The viruses they discover may
become a form of currency, instruments
of pressure and oppression, diabolical
weapons. But the propagation of a virus
can be deliberate or accidental. In 1978
in Birmingham, a researcher named Henry
Bedson was working on the monkey
smallpox virus, which was suspected of
being transmissible to people. The virus
infiltrated from the laboratory through an
air duct with a defective filter to the next
storey of the building, which was inhab¬
ited, and caused the death of two people.
In despair, Bedson committed suicide.
But people like to keep quiet about this
kind of incident.
... Examples of man playing
around with nature?
H.B.: Biologists know that nature uses the
same chemical language for all living crea¬
tures whose genes are interchangeable.
In other words, researchers can cross bar¬
riers. I picked out some funny but
authentic examples from the animal, veg¬
etable and human worlds. Biologists
working on sap have done some astonishing
tilings. There's no need to dye cotton jeans
any more, for example. All you have to do
is splice a gene from a blue flower into
the cotton plant. One third of the vegeta¬
bles and cereals grown today are trans¬
genic they have received additional
genetic material to endow them with new
characteristics. Scientists are licking their
lips over all these possibilities.
One of my friends, a plant research
specialist, is trying to make luminous
tobacco using genes from glow-worms.
What on earth is the use of tobacco that is
luminous at night? None at all, you might
say. Well, think again. It proves the unity
of life: animal and vegetable get on well
together. By replacing one gene with
another, you can make anything you like.
Here's another amazing, crazy and dia¬
bolical example. There is an extremely
useful medicine based on lactoferrin, a
substance produced in very small quanti¬
ties by women who breast-feed their chil¬
dren. The lactoferrin gene has been taken
from a human being and transmitted to a
bull that later inseminated fifty-odd cows
that now produce masses of the stuff.
There are plenty of examples of this
kind ofthing. California is a big producer
of strawberries. Unfortunately, strawber¬
ries are sensitive to frost. A late frost can
ruin the whole crop. But now it's possible
to prevent strawberries from freezing by
introducing into them a gene from plaice,
a fish that is resistant to cold. It's soon
done! Just imagine! The Americans, whose
regulations arc extremely strict, rejected
the idea out of hand. So the growers and
researchers turned to countries where
there is a more relaxed approach.
How does public opinion react?
And the scientists, who have access to
confidential reports? Do they veto this
kind of thing?
H.B.: In Japan, public opinion is imposing

Hervé
Bazin
warn...
a slowdown on this sort of way-out
research. The same thing is happening in
the United States. But the downside can
lead to beneficial discoveries. How won¬
derful it would be if we could discover
genes to combat cystic fibrosis! Biology
will only continue to be beneficial if it is
closely monitored, like nuclear power. The
trouble is that it costs a fortune to make an
atomic bomb, whereas it costs much less to
start a laboratory. Mad scientists do exist.
Firmini was a wise man. He discovered the
disintegration of the atom and took his
secret with him whereas Einstein made it
known to the world. Myxomatosis is a
classic example of this kind of thing. A
researcher who lost his temper when his
vegetable garden was destroyed by rab¬
bits, and infected them with the disease,
which he had discovered in his laboratory.
Unfortunately, there was a hole in his
garden fence and the two rabbits escaped
and propagated the virus.
Many people associate you with a
chaotic rather than a peaceful world,
an impression strengthened by your
rebellious subjects and writings.
H.B.: Rebellion is not totally negative. I
had my say against the family in 1948 in
my novel Vipère au poing, the story of my
battle-axe of a mother. That book brought
me success but it also scandalized many
people. It was in a way my psychoanalyst's
couch and also an act of revenge. With a
start in life like mine, biting comes easy.
Actually, it's quite healthy, and you start
biting into other subjects. Later I became
more self-detached. A story is a story,
there's no need to go on and on. You
change, you live your life, you have new
experiences. And so I left hatred of the
family behind me. I became a novelist
instead of a memoir-writer. Characters
were born in me.
After writing about the cruelty of
family life, I turned to its joys in La mort du
petit cheval (1950; "The Death of a Small
Horse"). I have always been attracted by
the world of outsiders, in this case the men¬
tally ill, especially after the French news¬
paper France-Soir commissioned me to
find out what was happening in the world of
French psychiatry. This helped me to write
about the psychology of the mentally ill
in La tête contre les murs (1949; Head
Against the Wall, 1952) and the psychology
of a pyromaniac in L'huile sur lefeu (1954).
It is widely known that the pyromaniac is
someone who wants to be a great purifier.
The book is based on the true story of a
fireman who started fires so that he could
put them out. With this novel I really
moved away from autobiogaphy. In the
sequestered world of madness I also dis¬
covered an administrative system that was
adept at closing files when families wanted
it to and was not above drugging patients to
destroy the minimal mental faculties they
had left. The mentally ill don't do anything
to help to keep society's wheels turning
and so they must be eliminated.
Eventually, however, I found peace
thanks to the country life I wrote about in
Qui j'ose aimer (1956) and Chapeau bas
(1963). After three marriages, with chil¬
dren and grandchildren, I discovered
loving fatherhood (A u nom dufils, 1961;
Le matrimoine, 1967), in contrast to the
delinquent motherhood I had described
in my first novel. I also wrote about people
who have to fight against the death of
the body, and the mental repercussions of
this , in novels such as Lève-toi et marche
(1952; Constance, 1955), not forgetting
the time, described in Le démon de
minuit (1988), when in the evening of his
days a man sees his approaching death
almost like a spectator.
You are particularly fond of one of
your novels, Les bienheureux de la
désolation (1970), which symbolizes
the break between the peaceful world
of the past and the modern,
destructive world.
H.B.: It's my greatest social novel. It is
based on something that actually hap¬
pened and that intrigued sociologists.
About 250 people lived on the desolate
island of Tristan da Cunha, in the south
Atlantic. A volcanic eruption forced them
to leave and take refuge in England, where
they discovered the joys and sorrows of
civilization. It made me think of the
Indians and Eskimos and other indige¬
nous peoples killed by so-called civiliza¬
tion. In the end, the islanders returned to
their devastated island and recreated it,
using technology to tame hostile nature,
not harming it but not letting it get the
better of them either. This is a lesson from
the awkward squad, whose members range
from the youthful rebels of May 1968 to
eighty-year-old ecologists. These are the
people who link the old world and the new.
This is an example of a civilization
that refused to give up being itself, that
preferred the quest for itself to wan¬
dering and exile. The people of Tristan da
Cunha belong to a community that finds
adventure on its own doorstep, and enjoys
freedom, equality, solidarity and mutual
help without competition or domination.
A community where need keeps out
luxury. There now! I almost feel that I'm
making a politician's speech on the eve
of an election! But we have to admit that
those islanders actually did what we
waste our time talking and writing about
without making any contribution to
human progress, since politicians look no
further than their own navels, and our
civilized and industrialized societies now
have poverty knocking at their door.
How do you write your books?
H.B.: On an old typewriter, an ancient,
Writing is a social art.

noisy Underwood that requires fingers of
steel. I just can't bring myself to use a
word processor. I need the physical effort
ofwriting. Ink gives shape to the informal,
to mental processes. I can sit at my Under¬
wood from seven in the morning until two
o' clock the following morning with only
short breaks for meals. Fictional char¬
acters are very possessive. Some of them
are elusive and try to run off the page,
while others are too demanding. When
you write like that it's like boxing and
sculpture. When all's said and done,
writing is a very physical activity.
It's true that you don't give your
readers a very easy time. You shake
them up, you hector them, you never
let them relax. Bazin is often
synonymous with hardness and
cruelty. Your pen is a scalpel.
H.B.: As I told you, I like good clean bites.
Our age is built on pretence. Everyone
wears masks. Mine is described by some¬
thing Sartre once said. "One writes to
warn". Writers are angry witnesses. They
are watchdogs who bite. But that doesn't
stop me from being a member of several
organizations that work to promote peace
and save the planet. But writing isn't a
gratuitous act. The French writer
Georges Bernanos said, "God didn't put
a pen in my hands for me to have fun".
The aesthetics of writing and research
for its own sake are not my thing. Writing
is a social art. It is socially useful and
looks at subjects via a witness called a
character, who has to tell things in a lively,
effective way. Writing is not a game; it is
engraved in the memory. The world's best¬
sellers are the Bible and the Qur'an.
The poet Rainer Maria Rilke, a man
of great sensibility, said that writing is
like 'rutting'.
H.B.: Yes. It's also a way of breathing and
to a certain degree, a drug. It's impos¬
sible to do without it. "It's divine", we
say pretentiously. And in front of the
blank page, we always feel stage-fright,
panic. You say to yourself, "Is it going to
come? Will the magic happen again?"
Writing is always unpredictable. Like a
page of life you live each day; you have a
vague idea of what is going to follow on
from yesterday's chapter, and then, sud¬
denly, something turns up. And off you go!
Our age is built on pretence. Everyone wears masks.
Mine is described by something Sartre once said:
'One writes to warn.'
When that happens you write for hours
because you have to maintain contact:
there's a prompter somewhere in the
wings. We are not entirely responsible for
what is happening. If, for example, at
the start of a novel you describe one of
your characters in a certain way, you don't
change it later on. You can't do it. Ratio¬
nality has nothing to do with it. It's more
like metaphysics or even spiritualism.
You are president of the Goncourt
Academy, which awards a prestigious
French literary prize every autumn.
How does the selection process work?
H.B.: Edmond Goncourt, who outlived
his brother, welcomed innovative writers
to his literary salon in his so-called Gre¬
nier, two rooms in his house at Auteuil. To
perpetuate this practice he left his for¬
tune to endow a literary academy the
Goncourt Academy. Awarding an annual
prize is quite a job. I have to read about
150 books no manuscripts. This means
that my brain has to be an empty shell
so as to be receptive to every sentence.
When you've read fifty pages, you can
already feel whether a writer has talent or
is a mediocrity. So many people want to
write! It's like a marathon: a thousand
start, only fifty reach the finishing-line.
And you can sense the writers with only
one book in them and those who will cover
several generations; the ones who will be
a nine-days wonder and the ones who even¬
tually will be read in schools; the ones
with stamina and the ones with asthma.
One talks about authors in the same
way as one talks about fine wines. I must
confess that for some years there have
been no fine vintages, no great years. The
Goncourt Prize is not the national lot¬
tery. There is no favouritism, no vote cast
for one of my publishers. But in order to
stay impartial and neutral you really do
need to be deaf and blind to pressure
from the media. To return to the wine
metaphor, it sometimes happens that we
lose our nose for quality. The classic
example of that was when Gallimard
rejected the manuscript of Marcel
Proust's novel! Talent is the most impor¬
tant thing the Goncourt jury is looking
for a traditional quality that needs to be
brought back in many fields. Another
important thing is a kind of spontaneity,
so that the reader sees the pageant of
events just as if he or she were looking at
it out of the window.
What does Hervé Bazin do when he
isn't writing novels?
H.B.: I love astronomy, and so does my
eleven-year-old son Nicolas, my seventh
reincarnation. He stargazes and plays the
violin. Will he become a writer? Looking at
the stars always makes me think of the
creation of the world, and the planets
make me dream about the time of chaos,
when the inchoate universe was still
nothing but a primeval soup of fire, gas
and molten dust, with the inklings of the
soul that would lodge in our cells. And I
like to stay in contact with people and
nature. To stop myself becoming a dry
stick, I draw plans for my house, I potter
about, I cut wood, I do masonry. Physical
effort gives a writer balance. I garden, and
in summer, with my wife, Odile, I tutor
my son. Now that I've rediscovered my
provincial roots in Angers, I cut down my
trips to Paris; I take the train there and
back the same day. I feel the Paris social
and literary worlds are very artificial.
I'm over eighty, but as far as age goes
I decided to stop my clock at forty. Forty
is a nice compromise, a good point from
which to look backwards and forwards.
My mind and body are as alert as those of
a forty-year-old. I must confess that for
me nothingness doesn't exist. My recipe
for living can be summed up in one word.
It is absolute and it goes a long way: "Be!"
Interview by MARTINE LECA
