UNESCO IN ACTION... UNESCO IN ACTION... UNESCO IN ACTION...
The second Unesco philosophy forum
by Géraldine Schimmel
Who are we?
Earlier this year, Unesco's Paris Headquarters was the
scene of a four-day intellectual marathon during
which philosophers, sociologists, biologists,
historians, jurists, writers, political scientists
and artists from all over the world met on the
occasion of Unesco's Second Philosophy
Forum and endeavoured to answer the
question "Who are we?". Here Géraldine
Schimmel presents a round-up ofsome of
the salient issues raised at the Forum
(27-30 March 1996), which was organized by
Ayyam Sureau of Unesco's Philosophy Division
and a panel ofsix thinkers.
To those who might think this theme some¬
what out-of-date I would point out immedi¬
ately that the question is not "Who am I?" or
"What are we?" but "Who are we? "It is a trick
question. Although ¡t does not directly raise
the issue of identity or human nature, it con¬
stantly implies it. It impinges on the notion of
collective identity and therefore of otherness:
who am I to the other, who is the other to me,
and, together, who are we? What is it that
links us all together to the point where it is
possible to talk of human community and,
linked in this way, what future are we heading
for?
This multifaceted question is not specific
to any particular discipline, but every disci¬
pline can contribute part of an answer. It is a
moral and social question, but has political
overtones. A human community wonders
what constitutes its identity. What is meant
by "we"?
A community of communities
In the view of Richard Rorty (United States),
a member of the Forum's Advisory Board, the
expression "we" is meaningless unless it is
part of a realistic and just project that offers
everyone a future. But this future, because it
is increasingly unlikely, weakens our collective
identity. It is pointless to believe in a moral
community if the world is divided by an
unbridgeable gap into two camps, the poor
and the rich. What meaning can the notion of
a moral community have when almost 1.5 bil¬
lion human beings live in a state of total desti¬
tution without their plight arousing any real
world solidarity? Is that solidarity even possi¬
ble? In Rorty's view, regarding others as mem
bers of the same moral community presup¬
poses not only that one is prepared to help
them, but that one has the means to do so.
Here, the word "we" is consigned to the
chilly universe of economic realities. Is this
pessimism totally justified?
Richard Posner (United States) sug¬
gested that a political community is defined
chiefly by feelings of altruism, which tempers
competitiveness between its members and
turns it into virtuous emulation. There can be
no human community without social justice
and equal rights. Human beings have shown
that they are capable of making the transition
from "I" to "we". Many societies are now
more egalitarian and more just than they used
to be. It is surely reasonable to believe that in
time the "we" will progress.
Irrespective of economic considerations,
THE UNESCO Q)URIER 44.
I OCTOBER 1996

UNESCO IN ACTION UNESCO IN ACTION UNESCO IN ACTION...
Daniel C. Dennett (United States) argued that
there is room for a rational exchange between
human beings that can pave the way to
progress towards a global moral community.
Angele Kremer-Marietti (France) accepted that
the idea of a global democracy, a "community
of communities", is Utopian, but believed that
it is a goal we should aim for. In a world where
interdependence is continually becoming
stronger, and where exchangestrade, commu¬
nications, migration flows and epidemicsare
taking on a global dimension, it would be unreal¬
istic to suppose that rich countries can isolate
themselves from poor countries. Although
twentieth-century examples of totalitarianism
may cast doubt on the feasibility of an egalitar¬
ian society, we can at least aim for fairness.
For, as Vitaly Chelichev (Russia) pointed
out, quoting the American philosopher John
Rawls, justice is not about egalitarianism, but
equity. The rich can get richer as long as that
leads to some extent to the poorest getting
richer. Equity would In that case seem to be
above all a rational quest for a less and less
unjust society. If this is accepted, the politi¬
cal "we" can exist in societies which are to
some degree inegalitarian. But there are cer¬
tain definable tolerance thresholds beyond
which economic inequality may jeopardize
political stability.
Perhaps the moral community we are try¬
ing to define is neither a community of trust,
as Rorty suggests, nor a defiant "we", to
paraphrase Annette Baier (New Zealand), but
simply a community of common interests.
The human species has discovered that it is
French geneticist Albert Jacquard (left) and French philosopher Lucien Sève (right).
held together by a new bond, a bond emanat¬
ing from its own fragility. The earth's equilib¬
rium is under threat and the shadow of
Malthusianism still looms, as Nicole Morgan
(Canada) observed. The image of our small
planet being in danger has created a new form
of solidarity between its inhabitants: the sur¬
vival of us all is at stake. This responsibility
brings a fresh intensity to the notion "we".
Federating differences
To use the word "we" is first and foremost to
accept other people's right to exist. In the
words of Albert Jacquard (France), only the
collective gives humankind its dignity. "I" is
above all the link I build up with others. It Is
my membership of a community which has
the power to make the "I" emerge. This argu¬
ment was echoed by Yirmiahu Yovel (Israel), for
whom we are transient creatures who try to
transcend our existence by tearing ourselves
away from meaninglessness, finite beings
who desperately strive to overcome our fini-
tude. Identity provides us with a metaphysi¬
cal anchor. Yovel contrasted static identities
(national, racial, religious), which constrict and
imprison the individual, with dynamic identi¬
ties, which enable human beings to belong to
several groups at the same time. But in any
case, the "I" exists only thanks to the "we".
The role of the Other is thus crucial to the
definition of the Self, especially in cases
where the Other is someone who does not
belong to my group. This difference can gener¬
ate positive competitiveness and become a
source of energy and creativity; but it cannot
be fertile unless there are ethical standards
and political institutions that guarantee
mutual recognition and preclude all forms of
intolerance. The idea of federation, in the
sense of a veritable association of nations,
was regarded as a possible solution both by
Yovel and by Alain Finkielkraut (France), who
cited Kant's project for universal peace, which
holds that international relations will only
emerge from the state of nature through
development of the idea of federation.
To say "we" is to recognize the Other in
his or her dignity as a human being. This
recognition seems to be reflected par excel¬
lence in the universalist discourse of human
GERALDINE SCHIMMEL
(France).
American philosopher Richard Rorty (left)
and Cameroonian philosopher Gaston-Paul Effa (right).
HE UNESCO QlURlER 45
OCTOBER I99Û

Russian epistemologlst Vitaiy Chelishchev.
rights. It has been seen by some as an instru¬
ment of the West's desire for cultural domina¬
tion, particularly during the colonial period.
But it cannot be considered solely as an ideo¬
logical vehicle remote-controlled by the super¬
powers with the aim of erasing the specific
characteristics of different human communi¬
ties. Universalism can be adapted to diversity
of cultures and, as Pilar Echeverría de Ocariz
(Venezuela) argued, it is a guarantee of secu¬
rity for the peoples who support it.
One might ask why universalism should be
regarded as incompatible with cultural identi¬
ties. One reason is the fear that a form of glob¬
alization and a certain cultural hegemony may
iron out differences using the power of the
communications media. Zaki La'idi (France)
stressed that globalization is not an idea, but a
process with no symbolic force which may
prompt nations to protect their endangered
Identity. The universal, on the other hand, does
not neglect differences; it simply forbids a
withdrawal into one's own identity. It is possi¬
ble to be integrated into the world' community
without losing a cultural identity, particularly
since that identity, according to Egon Gal
(Slovakia), does not exist in itself, but is con¬
stantly being reshaped by our acts.
History and identity
Attention was now turned to another compo¬
nent of the meaning of the term "we": we are
solely because we were. To forget that we are
the product of a past and a common history
is tantamount to weakening the foundations
of our collective identity. Jacques Le Goff
(France) insisted on the fact that we consist
of many strata. We have constructed our
selves around events which have become
identity myths, and to forget them is to
deprive our identity of its foundationsthus
eroding the foundations of a common future.
But we must distinguish between what
forms a constituent part of our identity and
what does not. Abdulkarim Sorush (Iran), for
example, seemed to think that one of the main
shortcomings of European Enlightenment phi¬
losophy was that it tried to deny the religious
dimensiona dimension which formed an inte¬
gral part of the Western world's identity.
Because it has tried to eliminate all religious fea¬
tures from its collective organization and sub¬
jected it to purely secular constraints, the West
may have robbed itself of part of its identity
and, what is more, lost the ability to under¬
stand nations with a religious structure, espe¬
cially the Islamic world.
How can a collective identity withstand
the changes of history? If one is, for exam¬
ple, "a former dissident from a former
Eastern-bloc country", as Pedrag Matvejevich
(former Yugoslavia and Croatia) described him¬
self, how should one see the future and pre¬
pare oneself for it? Matvejevich noted that
ideologies based on identity are running out
of steam. Who ought we to be if we are no
longer what we were? Since the immediate
past does not help to construct an identity,
should we, as Matthias Middel (Germany) sug¬
gested, delve into the past and see if a demo¬
cratic ideal from the nineteenth century can
help us to tackle the problems of the future?
Hence the central question: when do we
become aware that the collective "we" exists?
Gianni Vattimo (Italy) answered by quoting
Walter Benjamin: "The essence of a thing
appears in all its truth when it is threatened
with extinction." In the same way, awareness
of identity seems to be shaped by danger and
conflict. Perhaps we resign ourselves to cul¬
tural minimalism through fear of this violent
conflict. This conflict, necessary though it is to
enable the identity to disintegrate and reconsti¬
tute itself, needs nevertheless to be chan¬
nelled and organized. Vattimo took as his exam¬
ple the European Community's process of
constructing an identity, which is taking place
within the framework of a non-violent conflict.
This process is akin to the universalist ideal
which aims not to make all nations identical,
but to allow them to display their differences
on the basis of a universal legal standard.
However, another difficulty has emerged
as the twentieth century comes to a close. As
Marcel Gauchet (France) explained, "being
together" becomes increasingly difficult as
the mystery of "being oneself" melts away. On
the one hand the individual, who has become
the subject of scientific knowledge, seems
easier to understand. The cognitive sciences
have taught us much about the workings of
the mind. On the other hand, there is a crisis
of sociological intelligibility, a crisis of soci¬
eties' capacity to act on themselves, espe¬
cially since the expectations of socialism came
to an end. It has become painfully obvious
that despite our mass of knowledge our soci¬
eties remain impenetrable to us.
So we shall go an asking the question
"Who are we?" for some time to come. One
only hopes that nations will be capable of over¬
coming their differences and of reaching a mini¬
mum degree of agreement about what they
share.
Dorothy Blake of Jamaica (adviser to the Assistant Director-General of WHO, Geneva).
THE UNESCO lOURIER ..I OCTOBER 1996
