DANCING WITH
MASKS
BY MARGARET A. STOTT
In echo mask of the Bella
Coola (Nuxalkmc) Indians of
British Columbia (Canada).
| he ceremonial art of the northwest
coast of North America has long
inspired admiration. In the past, huge
carved and painted totem poles,
masks, head-dresses and rattles as well as carved
or painted chests, boxes and bowls figured
prominently in elaborate feasts and potlatches
(ceremonial occasions on which gifts were dis¬
tributed to affirm social status), and continue
to be important to contemporary northwest
coast communities.
Important aspects of this art are not per¬
manent or tangible, for while some objects
exist for short periods of time and deterio-
KvLwakiutl artist Fah Ambers
puts the finishing touches to a
carefully crafted hamat'sa
mask that will be used in many
potlatches.
rate, others are created and/or destroyed as
part of ceremonial events.
Even during their "lifetimes", these cere¬
monial objects do not necessarily remain
unchanged. Study of the paint on northwest
coast masks has revealed that some of them
have been repainted in dramatically different
designs and colours since their creation. Some¬
times elements such as pieces of copper or
abalone have been added to areas which origi¬
nally were only painted.
Along with this evolution in the appearance,
form and life of objects, there has always been an
emphasis on producing new ones to replace
those which have grown old. Part of every pot-
latch has been the revelation of fine new masks
and other objects commissioned by proud hosts
to be presented for the admiration of their
assembled guests. The concept of the mask or fig¬
ure remains permanent, but it is recreated and re¬
presented in the ceremonial context.
The destruction of masks created for cere¬
monial purposes occurs in another context
amongst the Heiltsuk of Bella Bella, British
Columbia. It is their tradition to burn masks
and other ceremonial objects representing the
crests and privileges of a deceased person. In
1990, following the memorial potlatch held
to honour Hereditary Chief Wigvilba Wakas
(Leslie Humchitt), masks and other objects
created by Nuxalk artist Glenn Tallio (Chief
Wakas's son-in-law) were burned "as a gesture
of love and respect".
Dance and theatre
In 1 967 1 went to the Bella Coola Valley armed
with photographs of masks, head-dresses and
rattles known to have been part of Nuxalk
winter ceremonies. The people were excited to
see the photographs and loved to discuss them.
The conversation usually focused upon who
THE UNESCO (jïUR'EI I DECEMBER I 09Û

i hamat'sa ceremony at a
potlatch given by Chief
T'lakwagila (W. T. Cranmer) at
Alert Bay (Canada) in 1983.
had once owned and used the object in ques¬
tion, and when it had last been publicly dis¬
played in the community.
In some households I was shown masks
or other carvings. I was enthralled with these
objects which were currently held in the com¬
munity. But frequently I detected some puz¬
zlement on the part of my hosts as to why I
was so interested in them. Comments like,
"But you really ought to see it danced. . ."
began to impress me, as I could see that the
Nuxalkmc were not as reverent towards these
ceremonial objects as I was. The most impor¬
tant thing is not merely a carved mask or rat¬
tle, but the role it plays within the integrated
ritual complex in which it is involved.
Each part of a costume contributes to the
creation of a particular personage or character
and that character is unmistakably linked with
a song and a dance. When a man brings out a
carved and painted mask, and shows it proudly,
he says "I dance that". Little is said about the
merits of the mask, while long descriptions of
the dramatic movements of the masked dancer
are readily offered.
In fact, this art, while involving some very
fine tangible elements, is essentially an
ephemeral art of dance and theatre. This was
apparent in seven Kwakwaka'wakw masked
dances performed in March 1996, in the north¬
ern coastal community of Alert Bay. In prepa¬
ration for these dances, as much attention was
paid to instructing the dancer in correct body
movements and hand gestures as was lent to
fitting on his mask and other costume items.
These movements were presented in careful
synchronization with particular drum beats,
song passages and choruses provided by the
accompanying singers. When the Grizzly Bear
danced, the fierce mask worked in concert with
the snarls, song and rhythmic drum beating
that filled the air, and with the lumbering
movements around the dance floor and the
clawing gestures of the dancer.
Living memory
Part of the ephemeral nature of northwest coast
ceremonial art is the vast historical knowledge
and understanding that the creators and the
witnesses of the art traditionally bring to their
experience. Through the oral histories of the
northwest coast peoples, the iconography of
the objects and dramatic content of the art can
be explained. Most figures represented in the
plastic arts and events which are presented in
dance or dramatic form are derived from the
elaborate family histories of those involved.
Through speeches, those witnessing the cere¬
mony are reminded of that history, and hence
they are able to fully appreciate and understand
what they are witnessing.
Once objects are removed from the com¬
munity or are beyond living memory, their
meaning may be lost.
r 17
the Unesco Courier« December i 996
