Logic, cultures
and individuals
by Magoro h
Maruyama
a u
I narmony,
1 a collage on the theme of
| peace by the contemporary
3 Indian artist V. Balu.
I The second half of the twentieth cen-
I tury has been characterized by polit¬
ical, social and cultural movements toward
heterogeneity and fragmentation. After the
Second World War, many new independent
nations won freedom from colonial subjuga¬
tion. In the 1960s ethnic movements
appeared in the U.S.A. More recently there
have been subnational separation movements
in Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and several
other countries.
All these movements sought a national,
ethnic or cultural identity which had been
suppressed or threatened. These reactions
were necessary and good, but they created
their own unexpected trap: they tended to be
separatist; and they tried to standardize and
homogenize individuals within their group.
But newer trends have appeared. Massive
migrations for political or economic reasons
have increased, and professionals and experts
cross national borders for other reasons.
Most major countries now contain a large
percentage of immigrants and resident for¬
eigners. Heterogeneity has become inter¬
woven and interactive within each society.
Furthermore, foreign foods, dress and music
have become accessible to those who do not
travel to foreign countries. The individual's
"ego identity" no longer consists in being one
31

thing, but in a unique pattern of combination
consistent with his or her mind pattern.
Below, Dancing Maenads, a
fresco by the Italian painter
Giulio Romano (1499-1546) in
the Palazzo del Te in Mantua.
Opposite page, Chinese
polychrome terra-cotta
statuettes of dancers (Tang
dynasty, 7th-10th centuries).
Fallacious assumptions
Some assumptions of the social sciences
today are becoming obsolete. Examples of
these fallacious assumptions are:
1) each culture is perfect and it is better
not to change it;
2) all "normal" individuals in a given cul¬
ture are homogeneously acculturated;
3) babies are born with a blank mind, to be
filled with culture;
4) a culture is a mentally healthy environ¬
ment for all its normal members;
5) social change is traumatic to all persons;
6) cross-national migration increases anx¬
iety;
7) contact with many cultures makes the
individual lose his or her identity.
These fallacies stem from the belief that
there is only one true logic.
However, heterogeneity is necessary and
desirable in biological, ecological and social
processes. This applies also to logical types.
Some social scientists who have looked into
the question have found that: there are many
logical types which vary from individual to
individual within each culture or social group;
any logical type found in one culture can be
found in other cultures, i.e., these logical types
exist across cultures; cultural differences con¬
sist in the way in which some type becomes
dominant and influences, transforms, sup¬
presses, utilizes or exploits non-dominant
types; it is possible for babies to be born with
individually different logical types; individuals
whose logical types are non-dominant cope
with the dominant type in various ways:
finding a niche to avoid the dominant main¬
stream; camouflaging their own type; con¬
sciously switching back and forth between
their own type and the dominant type;
32

repressing their own type into the uncon- Even though there can be as many logical
scious and reactivating it under favourable cir- types as there are individuals, the following four
cumstances; repressing it irreversibly; types and their combinations account for about
becoming a rebel or reformer; emigrating. two-thirds of the individuals in most countries.
H-type l-type S-type G-type
homogenist heterogenist heterogenist heterogenist
hierarchical isolationist interactive interactive
classifying randomizing stabilizing change-generating
opposition independence absorption exploration
one truth subjective poly-objective poly-objective
competitive uniquing co-operative cogeneratlve
'The individual's "ego-identity" no longer consists
in being one thing but in a unique pattern of combination
consistent with his or her mind pattern. '
H-type individuals try to standardize
everything, seek universal principles, rank-
order things, put things in neat categories,
look for opposites, place things between two
opposite poles, believe in one truth, compete
with others, and think that one's gain is
someone else's loss, and therefore in order to
win one must make someone else lose.
I-type individuals rebel against homo¬
geneity, look for freedom from interference,
seek self-sufficiency, caprice, uniqueness and
subjectivity, and believe that if many people
work together their efficiency decreases.
Pollution is a result of many people living
together, and if everyone went to the moun¬
tain and grew his or her potatoes, there would
be no problem.
For S-type individuals, things cause one
another in cause-effect loops, that is to say,
the effect comes back to the cause directly or
indirectly through other elements. Individual
differences make co-operation possible,
while sameness breeds competition and war.
Heterogeneous elements interact to maintain
a pattern, and interaction is mutually benefi¬
cial. In binocular vision, the differences
between two images enable the brain to com¬
pute depth. Likewise, different points of view
among many people are useful in computing
invisible dimensions.
G-type individuals are similar to S-type
individuals, except for their belief that inter¬
action generates new patterns.
People in different logical types do not
33

necessarily disagree. They may agree, but
their point of agreement may be based on dif¬
ferent assumptions, and therefore they may
face problems later. For example, several
people may agree that decentralization is
good. H-type persons may agree because the
whole country is seen as homogeneous or
standardized, and nothing is lost by dividing
it. I-type persons may agree because they see
each part of the country as independent, and
it makes sense to decentralize. S-type and G-
type persons may agree because they see het¬
erogeneity, but with the assumption that dif-
"ferent parts would naturally interact for
mutual benefit.
Thus agreement does not necessarily
mean that the same logic is used. One must
be aware of different logical types in order to
avoid later problems. Illusory agreement is
dangerous because later disagreement makes
one think that the other person was insincere
or lying. Consequently it is important to be
aware of the differences in logical types.
Unawareness of differences in logical
types may make people doubt one another's
personal integrity. For H-type persons, per¬
sonal integrity consists in adhering to absolute
principles regardless of situations. I-type per¬
sons stick to their own principles regardless
of what other people say. The way in which
persons of S-type and G-type logics act
depends on the situation. Persons of different
logical types may thus consider one another
to be unethical.



Cultures and logical types
In each culture, a certain logical type
becomes dominant and influences, trans¬
forms, suppresses, utilizes or exploits non-
dominant types. But all logical types exist in
each culture, even though some of them may
be hidden, camouflaged or repressed. For
example, during the period when Germany
and France were dominated by H-type
Gothic architecture or Baroque music, indi¬
viduals with S-type or G-type logics found
their niche and outlet in painting.
When we compare cultures, we do so in
terms of the dominant type. For example, H-
type dominates in Sweden, while a mixture of
MAGOROH MARUYAMA
is an American epistemologist who
is a professor at the School of
International Politics, Economics
and Business of Aoyama Gakuln
University In Tokyo. Among his
published works are Mindscapes
In Management: Use of Individual
Differences in Multicultural
Management (Dartmouth
Publishing Co., 1994).
S-type and I-type is dominant in Denmark.
In Asia, Koreans show strong H-type char¬
acteristics, while Indonesia is strongly of S-
type. In Japan, SH type is dominant, while in
the United States, HI type is dominant. In this
sense, Danes are closer to Indonesians than
to Swedes, and Koreans are closer to Ger¬
mans than to Indonesians. The popular
notion of East/West contrast does not hold.
Each profession has a dominant type
regardless of countries. Accountants tend to
be of H-type, and painters tend to be of I, S
or G-type.
Which logical type is more
scientific?
Newtonian astronomy was of H-type. Nine¬
teenth-century thermodynamics, based on
independent movements of molecules, was
of I-type; early cybernetics in the 1940s was
based on the S-type; the cybernetics of the
1960s on a combination of types G and S.
Archaeological research in Japan has
showed that the Jômon culture, which began
11,000 years ago, had G-type characteristics,
and that the S-type was dominant in the Yayoi
culture which arose 2,300 years ago. The H-
type Yamato culture reached Japan via Korea
1,500 years ago, and this logic eventually
became the official dominant logic of the
ruling class, even though farmers still use S-
type logic and the merchant class which
34

emerged during the seventeenth century
practised G-type logic.
In pre-colonial African cultures, G-type
logics were practised. Oral traditions explic¬
itly stated that heterogeneity made co-opera¬
tion possible while homogeneity bred wars.
Communication
It is extremely difficult, if not impossible, for
persons who think using I, S or G-type logics
to communicate with those who use H-type



logic, because the H-type believes in its "uni¬
versal truth" and tries to reduce everything
into the limited dimensions of its thought
structure. As long as the result of the dimen¬
sion reduction is internally consistent, the H-
type person is convinced that it is the correct
interpretation even though it may miss the
point completely.
The dominance of the H-type logic in
many societies hampers a heterogenistic view
of cultures. This fact has many implications:
«"" many policies of standardization are based
'The suppression or non-utilization of
non-dominant logical types is a waste of
precious human resources. '
on the incorrect assumption that sameness is
necessary for peace and differences are the
cause of conflicts. Policies should be formu¬
lated to encourage heterogeneity and mutually
beneficial interaction between individuals;
'*" the suppression or non-utilization of non-
dominant logical types is a waste of precious
human resources;
'*~ current educational and vocational sys¬
tems are based on H-type logics. Individuals
of other logical types are disadvantaged or
excluded. This is a violation of equal opportu¬
nity in education and in employment;
w it is currently fashionable to compare cul¬
tures as if each culture is homogeneous.
However, non-dominant logical types exist
under the surface. The key to successful mul¬
ticultural management is to discover individ¬
uals of non-dominant types.
« until now, cross-national population
movements were interpreted in terms of
labour demand and supply, or professional
skill matching. However, many people
migrate for the purpose of logical type
matching. We can expect increased migration
for this reason.
¡*~ many people are unaware that their own
logical types are non-dominant and therefore
they are disadvantaged in education and
employment. More importantly, they may
feel uncomfortable, unhappy or frustrated
without being aware of the reason. It is
important for them to become aware of their
own logical types.
The American painter Jackson
Pollock (1912-1956)
demonstrates his "drip
technique"controlled
dribbling and spattering of
paint on canvas.
35
