Corruption
and democracy
by Donatella della Porta
Corruption is a disease that
worsens by feeding on itself
% s .
/ y
, « »
, N .
f M««
Corruption
increases if the
benefits expected
from ¡tare higher
than the risk
involved.
DONATELLA DELLA PORTA
of Italy teaches in the faculty of
political science at the University of
Florence. Among her published
works are Lo scambio occulto. Casi
di corruzione política in Italia (1992;
"The Hidden Market: Cases of
Political Corruption in Italy") and
(as editor) Social Movements and
Violence (1992).
Political corruption has long been con¬
sidered a disease typical of the patho¬
logical but temporary phases that precede the
advent of democracy.
According to this reading of events, it is
particularly likely to develop during the abrupt
transition from a traditional society to a modern
society in which a clear distinction is made
between the public and the private spheres.
It seems to be associated with broadening
participation in political life, in a situation where
there are no structured political parties to act
as intermediaries between citizens and the state;
with massive urbanization and a drift from the
land that brings a mass of disoriented new city-
dwellers into contact with the complex
machinery of a remote bureaucracy; with the
rapid development of modern means of pro¬
duction that subordinate everything to market
forces; and with a process of rapid cultural mod-
ernization that mixes together different and in
some cases conflicting value systems.
In all these cases, corruption seems to be an
"unofficial" measure of structural adjustment
designed to repair a social fabric that has dis¬
integrated as a result of economic and political
pressure; it is a phenomenon that will disappear
as soon as market and democratic forces are
normalized1.
It should not be surprising, therefore, that
political corruption has mainly been studied by
researchers specializing in the Third World and
in transitional countries. In the industrialized
countries, political corruption should only be
a limited, marginal phenomenon. In short, the
spread of corruption ought to be inversely pro¬
portional to the spread of democracy.
In the last few years, these views on the
limited and marginal nature of political cor
ruption in the industrialized countries have
had to be revised. The huge political and finan¬
cial scandal that has implicated dozens of
elected officials and industrialists in Italy seems
to have spread to other European countries
as well as those on the Mediterranean rim.
"Model" democracies such as France and the
United Kingdom have also been rocked by
financial scandals that have tarnished the rep¬
utations of leading political figures.
In other words we must take a fresh look
at the relationship between corruption and
democracy. If the growth of democracy does
not lead to the demise of political corruption,
we must get to grips with those characteris¬
tics of the democratic system that encourage
or authorize it.
Cracks in the system
Two characteristics of modern democracies
seem to me to promote the development of
corruption: the increased number of decisions
taken in the public rather than the private
sector, and administrative decentralization,
which increases the number of decision¬
making centres. The growth of welfare pro¬
grammes, the expansion of the public sector
and the proliferation of laws and regulations
all favour the spread of corruption. Moreover,
local government opens a much broader
potential field to corruption because of the
large number of private contracts that are made
and the likelihood of avoiding scrutiny by the
central government.
But though it may be true that the risks of
corruption grow in proportion to the growth
of state leverage in economic life, it must be
recognized that a whole range of procedures
is available to prevent the discretionary powers
18

r***yv\.VAV
<> V V v' v
^\>,U A A < < \V
> ^ c >
"S V. ^ »
<s.
> >
v>
"The expansion of the public
sector and the proliferation of
laws and regulations favour the
development of corruption."
"It was long thought that
corruption developed during
the abrupt transition from a
traditional society to a modern
society." Below, Watching TV,
a painting by Tsing-Fang Chen
(U.S.A.).
* * i At »
of the administration from being arbitrarily
used. If corruption exists in spite of these pro¬
cedures, it is because obstacles prevent them
from working properly. What are these obsta¬
cles? What are the conditions that encourage
people to act illegally and profit from oppor¬
tunities for corruption?
Like all economic agents, corrupters and
corrupted obey rational motives based on a
desire for gain. Corruption increases if the
expected benefits from it are higher than the
risk involved2. The extent of corruption is linked
to the factors that determine its profitability.
The risks involved mainly consist of dif¬
ferent kinds of sanctions (legal or administra¬
tive, official or unofficial) and the possibility
of their being effectively used, which depends
on the structure of the monitoring mecha
nisms. Where internal administrative proce¬
dures are concerned, one major deterrent is
the existence of effective control mechanisms
in government departments and offices. Mon¬
itoring procedures that apply both to bureau¬
cracy and party financing are effective if the
principle of separate accounting is fully
respected and auditors have access to all the
necessary data.
Investigating magistrates and an adminis¬
trative inspectorate constitute a third kind of
control mechanism, with the impact of pos¬
sible sanctions depending on the investigators'
degree of independence and on the material
and legal means at their disposal. Concurrent
holding of several offices, the overlapping of
politics and the civil service, and the prolifer¬
ation of purely formal checks are factors that
reduce the risk that real sanctions will be taken.
Finally, there is also a purely political check
inherent in the idea of a change-over of power
between political parties, in which case it is in
the interest of opposition parties to denounce
the actions of those in power in order to fur¬
ther their own chances of taking over. The
absence of alternation in government over a
long period may, therefore, eventually lead to
corruption. It is also quite true that a corrupt
political class may well co-operate to share the
spoils between government and opposition
parties.
Spiralling downward
Factors that influence the amount of gain fro m
corruption are determined (for private inter¬
ests) by the importance of administrative deci¬
sions and (for civil servants and elected office¬
holders) by the amount of money offered. For
businesses, the bigger the market for their
products in the public sector, the more they are
at the mercy of civil service decision-makers.
Furthermore, all things being equal, the greater
the diversity of sources available to meet
public-sector demand, the greater will be the
temptation for businessmen to indulge in
bribery to gain access to a market where com¬
petition is so fierce. As for government offi¬
cials, they will be more inclined to accept bribes
if they feel that their salaries or social status are
inferior to their qualifications especially when
rewards in the private sector tend to be higher.
But perhaps the most important question
is why some politicians are so much in need of
money. The first point to be noted is that polit¬
ical expenses are caught in an inflationary spiral.
If Candidate X spends enormous amounts on
his election campaign, Candidate Y must follow
suit if he wants to stand any chance of being
elected. This escalation is particularly strong
19

"In a corrupt regime,
the vote is a kind of
bargaining counter."
Right, a painting by the
Canadian artist
Sandra Dionisi (1994).
when politicians' expenses, especially during
election periods, are not subject to very close
scrutiny.
Political expenses also depend on other con¬
siderations that determine the terms of com¬
petition between and within parties, starting
with the frequency of elections, which in turn
depends on a variety of factors including the
number of elected assemblies, whether or not
there are primaries, and whether the elections
have one or two rounds. The nature of the con¬
test between candidates is also influenced by
the number and size of electoral colleges, the
number of lists presented and whether the elec¬
tion result is decided by majority vote or by
proportional representation.
The role of political parties
The most important parameters that concern
us here relate to parties, which are the main
actors in democratic political life. It should be
noted that the size of political parties has
nothing to do with the extent to which they
may be corrupt. Of course, a small party may
be tempted to use dubious methods to com¬
pensate for its lack of members and funds, but
the major parties maintain a substantial and
costly machine that is not always easy to fund
by legal means.
The decisive criterion is the system used
to legitimize the parties in the eyes of the
public. There is a fundamental distinction
between legitimization by symbolic means,
i.e. by convincing the electorate that the party
is working for the common good, and legit-
Like all economic
agents, the
corrupters and the
corrupted obey
rational motives
based on a desire
for gain.
imization by material means, which associates
membership of a political movement with spe¬
cial access to public funds. The latter approach
involves "buying" votes individually, which
considerably increases the expense of politics.
But an investigation of the causes of cor¬
ruption should not be limited to a one-dimen¬
sional view of the phenomenon. Although it
may be true that corruption is linked to certain
characteristics of the political and administra¬
tive system, it leads to effects that modify the
system. These effects influence a kind of vari¬
able whose importance tends to be down¬
played by economic theorists: the combination
of factors that determine individual choices.
It might be said that corruption, by its very
existence, transforms the system in the sense
that it increases the importance of money in
politics and conversely reduces opportunities
to control the administrative machine. The
development of the role of parties is instruc-
I tive in this regard. In a democracy parties per-
a" form a number of basic tasks: they socialize
political life, select political personnel, inte¬
grate citizens, reconcile specific interests with
the general interest in their programmes, and
help to shape government policy.
Political careerism
Where the selection of political personnel is
concerned, in a properly functioning democ¬
racy elected officials must be able to convince
their fellow-citizens that their programmes
are useful and be able to implement them when
required. The satisfaction they derive from
this is generally more symbolic (fame,
authority, prestige) than material. In a corrupt
regime the situation is different, and parties
will tend to choose individuals who are good
i at making illicit deals which will bring in money
a to fill their coffers.
In this context, a political career is seen as
I a particularly rapid way of climbing the social
I ladder, especially since there is a growing inter-
I action between the political and business
I worlds, giving rise to a proliferation of go-
I betweens who do not fully belong to either
and therefore find it easier to break the rules
of both.
For these people, the rewards of political life
are necessarily material and undisclosed. Their
role is to act as intermediaries, to oil the wheels
of contact and negotiation between those
involved in corruption, using as currency the
supposedly confidential information that is
the common coin of illicit deals3.
Another function of political parties is to
legitimize the system by integrating citizens
into it. In a democracy, parties structure the
20

Clientelism and corruption are based on
"values" which encourage clan relationships and
the deliberate confusion of public welfare
	with private interests	
r
r
"Corruption is more
inclined to secrecy than
transparency, to small
groups of initiates than
the citizens at large."
Below, a painting by the
Canadian artist Sandra
Dionlsl (1994).
electorate and give voters a sense of identity.
The latter is often handed down from one gen¬
eration to the next via programmes that are
presented to the electorate. Parties have to cast
their net wide in order to win majorities; if
they do not do so, groups of citizens repre¬
senting special interests may proliferate.
In a corrupt system, on the contrary, the
structure of the electorate is subject to very
different considerations since there is a shift
away from identification voting towards clien¬
telism, with the vote as a kind of bargaining
counter to be exchanged for favours.
Clientelism and corruption are based on
"values" which encourage clan relationships
and the deliberate confusion of public welfare
with private interests. By encouraging a kind
of purely individual and self-interested elec-
toralism, corruption affects parties' capacities
to act as social mediators. As they cease to rep¬
resent the interests of the body of citizens,
parties lose their ability to mobilize and to gen¬
erate political ideas.
The third function of parties in a democracy
is to influence the development of public
policy. Here too, if the people involved are
corrupt, they are bound to be primarily con¬
cerned with those decisions that are most
"profitable" in terms of bribes. They will tend
to invest more public funds in those sectors of
the economy that are least subject to scrutiny,
creating a kind of vicious circle that weakens
the authority of the public authorities and
thereby their capacity to control.
What is more, by its very nature corruption
looks more kindly on secrecy than trans¬
parency, on small groups of initiates than the
citizens at large. Just as control is primarily
guaranteed by transparency, when decisions
are taken off the record illegal activities are less
likely to be brought to book.
The carrot and the stick
When corruption becomes systematic, par¬
ties take on a new function. They "legitimize"
the system by rewarding those who play the
game and punishing those who don't. Where
there is illegality, there is lack of confidence.
Where the rule of law prevails, the law pro¬
tects the parties to legal contracts against irreg¬
ularities. In a corrupt system this protective
role devolves on other actors: not content with
lowering the moral cost of corruption, polit¬
ical parties make corruption commonplace by
encouraging illegal practices throughout polit¬
ical life. They make sure that public contracts
go to those who agree to play the game and
not to those who refuse to do so.
Sometimes the majority and the opposi¬
tion agree to "depersonalize" illegal practices
by controlling administrative appointments,
so that corruption becomes both anonymous
and almost hereditary as generations of cor¬
rupt officials succeed each other as the years
goby.
Because it scorns the basic principles of



transparency in decision-making and equality
before the law, political corruption robs the
political system of legitimacy, and therefore of
any consensual support in the country. Its
inevitable consequence is that votes (and
silence) must be bought by individual favours
in order to compensate for the lack of a real
democratic consensus.
1. For a more detailed exposition of this view, cf.
Political Order in a Changing Society by Samuel
Huntington, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1968.
2. An analysis worked out by, among others, Susan
Rose Ackerman in Corruption: A study in Political
Economy, New York, Academic Press, 1978.
3. On this subject see the introduction by Alessandro
Pizzorno to Lo ¡cambio occulto, Donatella della Porta,
Bologna, II Mulino, 1992.
21
