As it was... ^-*
THE UNESCO COURIER
February 1958
The divorce between science and 'culture'
by Bertrand Russell
There was a time when scientists looked askance at
attempts to make their work widely intelligible. But,
in the world of the present day, such an attitude is no
longer possible. The discoveries of modern science
have put into the hands of governments unprecedented
powers both for good and for evil. Unless the
statesmen who wield these powers have at least an ele¬
mentary understanding of their nature, it is scarcely
likely that they will use them wisely. And, in democ¬
ratic countries, it is not only statesmen, but the gen¬
eral public, to whom some degree of scientific under¬
standing is necessary.
To insure wide diffusion of such understanding is
by no means easy. Those who can act effectively as
liaison officers between technical scientists and the
public perform a work which is necessary, not only for
human welfare, but even for bare survival of the
human race. I think that a great deal more ought to be
done in this direction in the education of those who
do not intend to become scientific specialists. The
Kalinga Prize is doing a great public service in encour¬
aging those who attempt this difficult task.
In my own country, and to a lesser degree in other
countries of the West, "culture" is viewed mainly, by
an unfortunate impoverishment of the Renaissance
tradition, as something concerned primarily with lit¬
erature, history and art. A man is not considered une¬
ducated if he knows nothing of the contributions of
Galileo, Descartes and their successors. I am convinced
that all higher education should involve a course in the
history of science from the seventeenth century to the
present day and a survey of modern scientific knowl¬
edge in so far as this can be conveyed without techni¬
calities. While such knowledge remains confined to
specialists, it is scarcely possible nowadays for nations
to conduct their affairs with wisdom.
There are two very different ways of estimating any
human achievement: you may estimate it by what you
consider its intrinsic excellence; or you may estimate it
by its causal efficiency in transforming human life and
human institutions. I am not suggesting that one of
these ways of estimating is preferable to the other. I
am only concerned to point out that they give very dif¬
ferent scales of importance. If Homer and Aeschylus
If^z
had not existed, if Dante and Shakespeare had not
written a line, if Bach and Beethoven had been silent,
the daily life of most people in the present day would
have been much what it is. But if Pythagoras and
Galileo and James Watt had not existed, the daily life,
not only of Western Europeans and Americans but of
Indian, Russian and Chinese peasants, would be pro¬
foundly different from what it is. And these profound
changes are still only beginning. They must affect the
future even more than they have already affected the
present.
At present, scientific technique advances like an
army of tanks that have lost their drivers, blindly,
ruthlessly, without goal or purpose. This is largely
because the men who are concerned with human
values and with making life worthy to be lived, are still
living in imagination in the old pre-industrial world,
the world that has been made familiar and comfort¬
able by the literature of Greece and the pre-indus¬
trial achievements of the poets and artists and com¬
posers whose work we rightly admire.
The separation of science from "culture" is a
modern phenomenon. Plato and Aristotle had a pro¬
found respect for what was known of science in their
day. The Renaissance was as much concerned with the
revival of science as with art and literature. Leonardo da
Vinci devoted more of his energies to science than to
painting. The Renaissance artists developed the geo¬
metrical theory of perspective. Throughout the eigh¬
teenth century a very great deal was done to diffuse
understanding of the work of Newton and his contem¬
poraries. But, from the early nineteenth century
onwards, scientific concepts and scientific methods
became increasingly abstruse and the attempt to make
them generally intelligible came more and more to be
regarded as hopeless. The modern theory and practice
of nuclear physicists has made evident with dramatic
suddenness that complete ignorance of the world of sci¬
ence is no longer compatible with survival. M
The above is the text of an address delivered by Bertand Russell,
on receiving the Kalinga Prize for the Popularization of Science,
at UNESCO Headquarters on 28 January 1958.
J
511
50
