
*vv
X
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN L.ESPOSITO
The resurgence of religion is one of the
most powerful forces to have influenced
culture and development in recent times.
When did it start? In what parts of the world
is it prevalent?
John L. Esposito: Iran's Islamic revolution in 1978-
1979 threw light on a reassertion of Islam that had
been going on for more than a decade in some
Islamic countries. Since then Islam has re-
emerged as a major force in political and social
development. Certain movements have engaged
in campaigns of terror in attempts to destabilize or
overthrow governments. Moderate Islamists have
emerged as social and political activists, espousing
the re-islamization of society.
In Latin America, Catholic liberation theology
has informed attempts at social and political
reform. It emerged shortly after the Medellin con¬
ference of Catholic bishops in 1968, which
reflected the spirit of the Second Vatican Council,
and its message was re-emphasized at the 1979
conference of Catholic bishops at Puebla, with its
emphasis on Christianity's "preferential option for
the poor". It has been accompanied by greater
recognition of the role and participation of the laity
in the Church, and a greater emphasis on the rela¬
tionship of the Church to the world, in particular
to issues of justice and equality. In Eastern Europe,
Christian churches played a significant role in the
fall of communism and the emergence of a
democracy movement.
In Sri Lanka, conflict between Sinhalese (Bud¬
dhists) and Tamils (Hindus) has had devastating
consequences during the past decade. India, an
ostensibly secular state, has experienced multiple
communal conflicts, often motivated by the chal¬
lenge of religious nationalism. Clashes between
Muslims and Hindus at Avodhya, where Hindus
seized a mosque claiming it as an ancient Hindu
religious site, and conflict over family law have
17.
THE UNESCO lOURIER 1 SEPTEMBER 1996

heightened tensions between the two communi¬
ties. In the southern Philippines, militant Muslim
factions have agitated for autonomy from the
"Christian dominated" government. In the former
Soviet Union, emergent religious nationalism in
Central Asia is matched by new religio-political
impulses of the Russian Orthodox Church.
All these events remind us of the potential
force of religion in the developing world in partic¬
ular. They reveal the fragility of many nation-states
and the issues of identity and legitimacy that con¬
tribute to the vulnerability of many governments.
What forms do these movements take?
J. L. E.: Revivalist movements are communities
within communities. They view themselves as just
societies established within broader unjust soci¬
eties. They tend to be manifestations of popular
religion, that is, organizations that are born from
populist movements rather than from the official
or institutional church or clergy. These organiza¬
tions create a new religious consciousness and
sense of identity and mission. Religious beliefs and
rituals are reinterpreted to provide direction, as
the faithful combine their quest for happiness in
the next life with a determined effort to create a
better life in the here and now.
What are the causes of religious revivalism
in the developing world?
J. L. E.: The new and better world promised by
modernizing elites and development experts has
not materialized for many. The modern nation-
state with its secularism, consumerism and unfet¬
tered individualism has often produced societies
in which the needs of the majority are subordi¬
nated to those of a minority. Maldistribution of
wealth, corruption, unemployment and housing
shortages have become endemic. Modernization
and urbanization have resulted in overcrowded
cities, social dislocation and culture shock, urban
slums and barrios. of shattered expectations, a
breakdown of the family in the midst of the more
"permissive and foreign" ways of the city.
The development of non-Western countries
was based upon a theory of modernization that
equated development with the progressive west¬
ernization and secularization of society. Religion
tended to be regarded as a major hindrance to
political and social change. Science and technology
were seen as powerful handmaidens in this
process of secular development. However, not
only did modernization remain primarily the pre¬
serve of a small minority elite of society, but most
importantly, the secularization of processes and
institutions did not easily translate into the secu¬
larization of minds and culture.
'Injustice has driven many to their local place of worship where
the scripture is read and experienced as a message to their
hopeless or desperate situation.'
What is the basis of this religious revival?
J. L. E.: Generally speaking, its representatives claim
to offer a more authentic and religiously-based
society. They espouse themes of liberation, social
justice and equality, and project themselves as
champions of the poor and oppressed. Injustice has
driven many to their local mosques or churches
where the scripture is read and experienced as a
message to their hopeless or desperate situation. In
some countries, Islamic movements have provided
an alternative set of social welfare services. Similarly,
Catholic liberation theology has been essentially a
response to the plight of the poor.
So is this a kind of backlash by those who
have lost out from development, who are
turning their backs on the world and rejecting
modern technology and the communications
revolution?
J. L. E.: Most revivalists do not believe that they
are retreating. Many see themselves as reclaiming
the original message and guidance of their
prophets and scriptures, a message obscured with
the passage of time and the assault of modern sec¬
ularism. They fault or incriminate the impact not
only of colonialism but also of despotic govern¬
ments that came later, entrenched elites, and a
clergy that itself came to constitute an unrespon¬
sive religious establishment.
These movements have attracted educated
professionals teachers, engineers, lawyers, scien¬
tists and bureaucrats. Many of their leaders arc
graduates from faculties of medicine, science and
engineering, who have harnessed modern tech¬
nology radio, television, audio and vidéocas¬
settes, computers and fax machines to organize
and mobilize mass support and disseminate their
religious and socio-political message.
Thus technology and communications have
not simply been the purveyors of modern
Western, secular culture, but also of a revitalized
religious message. Villagers no longer live in rela¬
tively isolated worlds solely dependent upon their
local religious leaders. Television, radio and audio-
cassettes now expose them to a diversity of voices
and interpretations of faith and belief. Moderniza¬
tion has provided, perhaps unwittingly, a major
impetus for this global religious resurgence.
JOHN L. ESP0SIT0,
of the United States, is Professor
of Religion and International
Affairs at Georgetown University.
THE UNESCO COURIER * ^F .SEPTEMBER I

What could be done to open up
communication between secular modernists
and religious reformers? Is there any common
ground between them?



J. L. E.: Underestimation of the continued presence
and power of religion, and its role as a source of
identity and solidarity, has led some modernists to
reject the challenge of seeking a civilizational dia¬
logue. For myself, I do not think there is a neces¬
sary incompatibility between religion and modern
change, or democracy. History has revealed many
examples of the flexibility or plasticity of religious
traditions, as well as examples of intransigence. The
transition in the West from divine right monarchies
and feudalism to modern political and economic
institutions took centuries, and so too did the reli¬
gious response to the challenge of modernity.
Wc must realize that the modern transforma¬
tion of politics, society and religion is an open-
ended process, imperfect and incomplete. Just as
the successes of the modern nation-state cannot
be denied, so too its shortcomings must be identi¬
fied and addressed.
The eradication of poverty and illiteracy might
address some of the causes of religious and political
extremism, but it would not fully respond to the
deeper rcligio-cultural issues of identity, authen¬
ticity, culture and values that are of equal impor¬
tance. Addressing the difficult issues of religion
and modernity will require new theoretical and
conceptual perspectives.
How do you see the future?
J. L. E.: Religion and culture will remain a signifi¬
cant force in development. The "either . . . or"
dichotomies and allegiances of the past (secular and
religious, sacred and profane, traditional and
modern) will need to be transcended as govern¬
ments, societies, development experts and reli¬
gious leaders seek to identify areas for mutual
understanding and co-operation.
Aren't you forgetting that certain forms of
religious fundamentalism based on intolerance
and fanaticism pose a serious threat?
History has revealed many examples of the flexibility or plasticity of
religious traditions.'
Vilo
J. L. E.: There can be no doubt that religious
extremism is a serious threat. But the global resur¬
gence of religion and religious movements is a far
broader phenomenon, whose existence chal¬
lenges us to think about the specific forms that
pluralism should take in the societies of the South.
'ow(1990), a waxwork by
the Japanese artist Toshi.
THE UNESCO lOURIER
19
SEPTEMBER 1096
