Inte r v i e w



Gabriel García Márquez
The writer's craft
Is it possible to protect culture?
Gabriel García Márquez: The major ques¬
tion that governments and people inter¬
ested in culture should ask is what kind
of protection the state can offer to cul¬
ture without interfering in it and manipu¬
lating it or, most important of all, without
making it subservient to the government's
political philosophy. The trouble with
culture ministries in Latin America is their
subordination to the vicissitudes of
national politics. A cabinet crisis has
repercussions on cultural activity. Power
struggles within the government result in
the appointment of a culture minister who
has no interest in culture or is opposed to
the previous minister's policies. Conse¬
quently culture depends on a series of
comings and goings that have nothing to
do with culture but everything to do with
politics, and worst of all, with partisan
politics.
Culture should be helped by estab¬
lishing the conditions in which it can
develop freely. But in practice this cre¬
ates big problems. It's impossible to pre¬
dict the workings of creativity or to plan
anything creative. What's more, how can
you do anything about culture without
defining what you mean by culture?
According to UNESCO, culture is what
people add to nature, everything that is
produced specifically by human beings. I
believe that culture is the social use of
human intelligence. Deep down we all
know what the term "culture" means,
but we have a hard time summing it up in
a few words. Culture may be I think it
was France's former Minister of Culture,
Jack Lang, who said this all kinds of
things cooking, a way of being, of
makinglovc, of living, and mixed up in all
this, the arts. Every act has cultural over¬
tones. The danger is that the wider the
concept of culture, the harder it is to
know how to protect it.
Can culture be taught?
6. G. M.: At the moment I'm wondering
how the arts, literature, journalism
(which, to my mind, is a form of litera¬
ture) and the cinema (which is most cer¬
tainly an art) should be taught. Educa¬
tion of this kind must be a one-off, it
must be informal.
At the cinema school in San Antonio
de Los Baños in Cuba I have a workshop
called "How to tell a story", where I sit
a maximum of about a dozen young men
with scenario experience round a table.
We try to see if it is possible to create
stories collectively, to see if the miracle
of creation is possible round a table.
Sometimes we've brought it off. I start
off by asking one of them about the
most recent film he's seen. "Tell me
what it's about," I say. Some of them
know how to tell a story, others don't.
One might answer, "It's the story of a
country girl faced with the contradic¬
tions of modern city life." Then his
neighbour will say, "A country girl is
bored with her family, so one day she
hops onto the first bus that goes by. She
runs off with the driver and meets. ..."
And he starts to tell the girl's story
episode by episode.
The first young man is gifted, but
he'll never know how to tell a story. He
hasn't been born with the gift of story¬
telling. The other fellow, who knows
how to tell a story, still has a long way to
go before becoming a writer; he's got to
acquire the technique and something
that's extremely important basic cul¬
ture. I cannot imagine how anyone could
even think of writing a novel without
having at least a vague idea of the ten
thousand years of literature that have
gone before, if only to know his or her
own standpoint. And then the writer
must settle down to a daily routine of
work because inspiration doesn't fall
from the sky. You have to work at every
word, every day of the week.
Writing is a craft, a difficult craft
that requires a lot of concentration and
discipline, as do painting and com¬
posing. By working at it, someone who
knows how to tell a story will become a
writer; someone else, however hard he
or she works, will never make it. It's the
same with music. If you teach your chil¬
dren a melody, some will be able to
repeat it exactly; others will never learn.
Do you regard yourself as an
intellectual?
G. G. M.:Not entirely. An intellectual, it
seems to me, is someone with more or
less preconceived ideas that he or she is
constantly trying to compare with
'It's impossible to predict the workings of creativity
or to plan anything creative'

A master of modern letters,
immer of the 1982 Nobel Prize
for Literature, the noted
Colombian writer talks to Bahgat
Elnadi, Adel Rifaat and Miguel
Labarca about creativity and his
conception of the writer's craft.
reality. In fact the intellectual tries to
interpret reality through his or her pre¬
conceived ideas. I live off anecdotes, off
the happenings of everyday life. I try to
interpret the world and create art
through experience of everyday life and
the knowledge of the world that I grad¬
ually acquire, without preconceived
ideas of any kind. That's why interviews,
where the questions oblige me to give
abstract answers, are very hard for me.
My starting point has to be a real fact.
That's how I function as a writer. I think
I could prove that every line in my books
has been inspired by a real fact, some¬
thing that I was either told, or that I
experienced or knew about.
In your world, knowledge
encompasses many things. . . .
G. G. M.: That's true. People have said
that my novel One Hundred Years of
Solitude contains incredible things that
could never have happened. But for me
these things correspond to real-life
experiences. Some of my reading has
marked me for life, for example, a
bound volume I once found in a trunk, a
book I had never even heard of. It was
The Thousand and One Nights. I spent
the early years of my life haunted by a
vision of flying carpets and génies pop¬
ping out of lamps. It was wonderful . . .
and for me, completely true.
Moreover, one of the episodes that
excited me most and seemed the most
fantastic was perfectly plausible the
story of the fisherman who asks his
neighbour to lend him some lead for his
net and promises to give her in exchange
the first fish he catches. She lends him
the lead and he keeps his promise. She
cuts open the fish and discovers a dia¬
mond inside. Life is full of natural
things that ordinary mortals fail to see.
The intelligence of poets is to see the
extraordinary in the ordinary.
So this is the question I ask myself.
Why shouldn't the people who believed
in the flying carpets of The Thousand
and One Nights believe that flying was
done in my own village? In my village
there are no carpets but there are mats.
So people fly mats, and do other won¬
drous things, among which we grew up
and lived. I think I made up my mind
not to invent or create a new reality but
to find the reality with which I identi¬
fied and which I knew. That's the kind
of writer I am.
What did you do after One Hundred
Years of Solitude'}
G. G. NI.: I began to mistrust myself. I
have to make an effort not to repeat or
plagiarize myself. I have to go deeper
and deeper into reality, by paying spe¬
cial attention to words. Without real¬
izing it, I have a tendency to repeat
things and put the same adjectives with
the same nouns.

interview



Gabriel
García
Márquez
llie w
craft
People often talk about the influ¬
ence that some authors have had on
others. For myself, I've never tried to
imitate authors I've admired. On the
contrary, I've done all I could not to imi¬
tate them. But in wanting to be personal
there is a danger of falling into the
opposite trap, and the problem is how
to avoid imitating oneself.
In my latest novel, Del amor y otros
demonios ("Of Love and Other
Demons") a story that takes place in
Cartagena de Indias in the eighteenth
century I tried to recreate the culture,
the mentality and the intolerance of the
period, but the hardest thing of all was
to make sure that the novel was different
from its predecessors. The first people
who read it thought it had a kind of
sobriety that wasn't my style. I was
delighted because that's what I'd been
aiming at, to distance it not from myself
but from my other books. It had to be
mine; all books resemble their authors.
In one way or another every book is auto¬
biographical. And every fictional char¬
acter is an alter ego or a collage made
from this or that aspect of the author,
his memories and his knowledge. It seems
to me that a writer's work develops as a
result of digging down inside oneself to
see what is there, for the key to what one
is looking for and the mystery of death.
We know that the mystery of life will
never be deciphered.
Is this preoccupation unique to
Latin American literature?
G. G. M.: It's a fact that Latin America
was born out of a very specific litera
ture, the literature of chivalry. This was
no accident since novels of chivalry were
banned in the Spanish colonies. They
liberated the imagination! Because of
these novels, the chroniclers of the con¬
quest were ready to believe what they
saw. But what they saw went beyond
what they were capable of believing.
This led to the birth of the fantastic
world which later came to be called
"magic realism" and which is a hallmark
of Latin American culture.
When you think of your public now,
do you think in terms of Latin America,
the Spanish-speaking world or the
world at large?
G. G. M.: First of all we have to win over
our own public. If we manage to do that,
it means we have said something valid,
and only then will we interest the rest of
the world. One doesn't acquire a public
by chance. First there has to be an iden¬
tification with reality that interests this
public. Then the identification spreads,
and it interests the entire world.
Above all we must do and continue
to do what we think we should do. Then
things start to happen. When I began
writing, I never imagined I would have
any readers, not to mention large num¬
bers of them. One Hundred Years of
Solitude was my fifth book. It was five
years before my first one was published.
It went from publisher to publisher,
from press to press. It finally came out,
but it was a long time before it began to
sell. You have to do your own work, then
wait and see. To be able to live from
one's writing is a stroke of luck. It can't
be a goal.
For you as a writer, have there been
new departures, moments of doubt,
changes of direction?
G. G. M.: I have made two big leaps in
the dark. The first was to stop smoking
cigarettes. Or perhaps I should say that
cigarettes stopped smoking me. I was
totally hooked and smoked four packs a
day. I never had bronchitis, and the
doctor never ordered me to stop. But
one day I put out a cigarette and never
smoked again. Then, when I sat down to
write, I realized that I had never written
a line without smoking a cigarette.
"Now what?" I wondered. Should I wait
and get used to writing without smoking
or sit down immediately and start to
write? The need to write proved
stronger, and I sat down in front of my
typewriter. But then another problem
cropped up: my hands. They got in the
way now that they had no cigarette to
hold. Fortunately my mind wasn't
affected. It got on with the job as
before.
The second leap in the dark hap¬
pened when I woke up one day and real¬
ized I had only one thing to do, and that
was to write. Before that I either had
to write or work for television, adver¬
tising or the radio. My wife, Mercedes,
once put it like this, "What are you
doing today, working or writing?" We
had separated "work", which had a
financial purpose, from "writing", which
was an unproductive pleasure. Then,
one day I woke up and said to myself,
"From now on I don't have to 'work' any
more. I can write or not write." But I
soon understood the danger this
freedom brought. If I didn't write that
day, perhaps I wouldn't write tomorrow,
or the day after. I kept on writing.
Then I was confronted by another
problem. I had always been a newspa¬
perman, and at that time papers were
put together at night. It was a bohemian
life: finish at the paper at one in the
morning, then write a poem or a short
story until about three, then go out to
play skittles or have a beer. When you
got home at dawn, ladies who were
a difficult craft that requires a lot of concentration
and discipline'

going to mass would cross to the other
side of the street for fear that you were
either drunk or intending to mug or rape
them. Shifting from night to day in
order to write wasn't easy.
With'my newfound freedom, I made
myself keep banker's hours, or rather a
bank clerk's hours, as if I had to turn in
on time every day. Starting at one spe¬
cific time and finishing at another. This
is important. If you get involved and
don't stop in time, the later pages are
written by a tired man. The big problem
for most writers who don't earn enough
to be able to write full time is that they
write in their spare time, in other words
when they are tired. This is literature
produced by tired men. When I get car¬
ried away and continue beyond the time
when I should stop, I end up by writing
tired. You need strict discipline,
starting and stopping at specific times.
My children's school started at 8
a.m. I was the one who took them. Then
I would sit down and write until two
when I brought them back home again.
I felt that in all good conscience I had
earned my day and my lunch. In the
afternoon I'd go to the cinema or see
friends or do various odd jobs. Without
feeling guilty.
I felt guilty between books. When I
finished one book, I wouldn't write for a
while; then I had to learn how to do it
all over again. The arm goes cold;
there's a learning process you have to go
through again before you rediscover the
warmth that comes over you when you
are writing. So I really had to find some¬
thing that would keep me writing
between books. I solved the problem by
writing my memoirs. Since then, I
haven't left my desk for a single day.
When I travel I'm a little less strict, but
I always jot down notes in the morning.
All of which means there is a lot of
truth in the saying that writing is one
per cent inspiration and 99 per cent per¬
spiration.
I also defend inspiration, but not in
the sense given to it by the romantics,
for whom it was a sort of divine illumi¬
nation. When you are working hard on
something, trying to make sense of it,
worrying at it, fanning it into a blaze,
you reach a point where you control it
and identify with it so completely that
you feel that a divine wind is dictating it
to you. That state of inspiration exists,
yes, and when you experience it,
although it may not last very long, it is
the greatest happiness that anyone
could possibly experience. I
'When you are working hard on something,
trying to make sense of it, worrying at it, fanning it into
a blaze, you reach a point where you feel that a divine
wind is dictating it to you'
