commentary Federico Mayor
I he struggle for peace
UNESCO has been in existence for fifty years, and for fifty
years it has been erecting its vast programme for the promo¬
tion of peace through education, science and culture. But
the work of constructing peace is unending; it has to go on in
all places and at all times.
The world has changed considerably in this last half cen¬
tury, and especially in recent years, with the fall of the
Berlin Wall, the end of the East-West standoff, the rise of
conflicts of a new type within nations, the increasingly strong
urge towards the assertion of selfhood, the growing scale of
population movements, the swing towards democracy, the
communications explosion, and so forth. The world we live in
is changing and reshaping itself along lines which are as yet
hard to decipher.
In this world that is struggling to be horn, two certainties
stand out. The first is that the vicious circle of poverty, igno¬
rance, exclusion and violence has become an established fact
and is spreading wider and wider. It is poverty that drives
people from the South to seek a better life in the North and
that drives rural populations to the towns; it is against a
background of ignorance that fear, extremism and intoler¬
ance thrive; and it is exclusion that brings in its train despair
and violence. Secondly, the disparity in the distribution of
the planet's wealth has become intolerably great, with
nations living at widely differing levels of development and
the gulf between rich and poor within nations growing
deeper. These glaring inequalities are a threat to peace
throughout the world.
It is for this reason that UNESCO set up a specific pro¬
gramme on the culture of peace in 1994.
The concept "culture of peace" is not easy to define. The
definition is being worked out one step at a time, forged in the
heat of the work being done and the thought being given to
the question by all who are serving the cause in the field. The
first characteristic to have been identified concerns the rela¬
tionship between peace, development and democracy, a rela¬
tionship that is growing steadily closer and whose synergic
effect is growing steadily stronger. Peace, development and
democracy constitute a three-cornered system of interactions
that has constantly to be created and recreated. The end of
THEUNESCO QlURIER * «OCTOBER I99Ú

an armed conflict, the moment when the warring parties
express a willingness to come to an agreement, is often the
right time for consolidating peace and trying to get it to take
root in people's minds, in institutions and in patterns of behav¬
iour. This explains why UNESCO has a special role to play in
regions where this kind of post-conilict situation obtains.
In the general context of new approaches to security,
UNESCO is for the first time entering into a dialogue with the
military authorities of various countries. I believe that the
armed forces, which occupy a central place within the
nation, rank among UNESCO's natural partners, and as such
have a decisive contribution to make to the task of building
a culture of peace. UNESCO is accordingly involving defence
colleges, centres of strategic studies and military academies
in its activities. This dialogue is proving fruitful for all par¬
ties concerned. It is, furthermore, essential at a time when,
against a background of increasing democratization, all the
constituent parts of society are required to play their part
both in the construction of peace and in devising and imple¬
menting development strategies that demand not only reduc¬
tions in military budgets but a redefinition of the role of the
armed forces.
UNESCO seeks to create a closer relationship with civil soci¬
ety and to organize all its component parts into working for
peace and is particularly concerned to establish a more fruitful
dialogue with parliamentarians. I firmly believe that UNESCO's
exchanges with these key figures of democracy, both at the
international level, through the Interparliamentary Union, and
at the national level, give its work a solid basis and a pragmatic
dimension with which it can no longer afford to dispense.
The national-level programmes for a culture of peace
pursue the following objectives: non-violent conflict manage¬
ment, the establishment of democratic procedures and
respect for basic individual rights; and participation by all in
the process of peace and development. The following are a
few examples.
Unesco peace-building activities
Burundi. One of UNESCO's first responses to the crisis follow¬
ing the events of October 1993 was to organize a symposium in
Burundi on the culture of peace and to set up a UNESCO
Centre for the Culture of Peace, which in 1995, in co-opera¬
tion with national institutions, non-governmental organizations
and other agencies of the United Nations system, ran a series
of seminars on training and education for peace, human rights
and democracy for the benefit of journalists, primary and sec¬
ondary school teachers, activity organizers, educators, provin¬
cial governors, local government officers, leaders of women's
associations and deputies of the national parliament.
Mozambique. UNESCO organized training and awareness-rais¬
ing activities for parliamentarians in 1995, e.g., enabling
twelve members of parliament to go on a study tour in South
Africa and Malawi and exchange views with parliamentarians
in those countries. These measures have helped to create a
climate of confidence.
Rwanda. A nation-wide forum on the culture of peace held
in Kigali in January 1996 with the participation of people
representing the country's various social strata and political
movements, gave an opportunity for discussing key questions
relating to the re-establishment of peace following the geno¬
cide. The forum's recommendations formed the basis of pro¬
jects that have been incorporated into UNKSCO's current
action plan for Rwanda.
Somalia. UNESCO convened a symposium of Somali intellec¬
tuals in Sana'a (Yemen) in April 1995 to map out ways of
promoting the culture of peace in Somalia. A follow-up
meeting was held in Paris in October 1995 to set up a group
with responsibility for drawing up projects to be carried out
with the support of UNESCO, the European Union and the
United Nations Development Programme.
El Salvador. In October 1995, the Salvadorian Legislative
Assembly held a seminar to consider the contribution it
could make to the consolidation of peace and the further¬
ance of national development. Eighty regular members of
the Assembly and more than twenty substitute members
worked together on a document addressed, among others, to
the Head of State, the President of the Supreme Court, gov¬
ernment institutions, the diplomatic corps and the press.
The seminar adopted a proposal for co-operation with
UNESCO to encourage dialogue between different currents of
opinion and make it easier for democratic rules and systems
to function.
Congo. A national forum was held in December 1994, bring¬
ing together all the country's political forces with represen¬
tatives of civil society. This was a fundamental step forward
in the peace process. It enabled an ongoing dialogue between
all the conflicting parties to be set up and resulted in the
adoption of a peace charter.
All UNESCO's activities, all the projects it carries out,
directly or indirectly, the studies it commissions, the meet¬
ings it convenes and the exchanges it organizes in the fields
of education, science, the social sciences, culture or commu¬
nication, serve a single purpose: peace. Whether it is work¬
ing through its Associated Schools to familiarize children
with ethnic, social and cultural diversity, enabling scientists
from different parts of the world to exchange their findings,
facilitating knowledge transfers by establishing professor¬
ships or granting fellowships, or whether it is identifying
ways of managing social change by bringing representatives
of different viewpoints face to face, encouraging the estab¬
lishment of independent media or bringing young artists
from many different backgrounds together, UNESCO has one
overrriding concern, in full accordance with its ethical mis¬
sion, and that is to allow the inhabitants of Planet Earth to
get to know one another better, so that they may have a
truer appreciation one of another and may therefore live
together in greater harmony. I
THE UNESCO ÏOURIER . OCTOBER 1996
