&
<o TALAMANCA- LA AMISTAD
^r- ru«. v VV£*«
Bestriding Costa Rica and Panama,
the Talamanca-La Amistad Cordillera
is a patchwork of natural parks and
reserves covering more than 800,000
hectares. It was registered on
UNESCO's World Heritage List in 1990
FROILAN ESCOBAR GONZALEZ
is a Cuban journalist who has twice won the National
Critics' Award of Cuba, for his books Marti a flor de
labios ("Marti, On the Tip of the Tongue", 1993) and La
vieja que vuela ("The Old Woman with Wings", 1994).
According to an ancient legend of
the Bribri and Cabecar Indians,
the huge platform formed by the
Cordillera de Talamanca, whose peaks
between Costa Rica and Panama rise to
an altitude of almost 4,000 metres
above sea level, was the site where the
god Sibú decided to set up house and
sow the maize seeds that would give
birth to humankind.
According to this legend, the cre¬
ation took place at the source of the
Lari River in Surayum, where Sibú orga¬
nized great festivities, handing out
lavish quantities of cacao to each person
who had helped him. When they were
over, he brought forward young Iriria,
the Earth, so that she could cover the
rock with her fertile bridal train, and
the world began to turn green. Then
Sibú fell asleep after asking the cuyeo
bird to sin" for him that night.
Science, on the other hand, tells us
that this imposing mountain range rose
up some 30 million years ago. The enor¬
mous pressure exerted by tectonic and
volcanic movements caused uplifts
during the Pliocene epoch which even¬
tually filled in the oceanic basin then
separating North America from South
America, and which took on their pre¬
sent shape about 7 million years ago.
So it was that a narrow strip of land
(its width between the Pacific and
Atlantic Oceans is barely more than 150
km) came into existence and formed a
veritable bridge between two biologically
different continents. The abundance and
variety of its endemic species can be put
down to this genetic convergence of flora
and fauna from two distinct regions.
Others factors include the region's
geographical position and its topograph¬
ical and climatic diversity. The proximity
40

a natural bond between tWO Countries by Froilán Escobar González
of the Atlantic and the Pacific tempers
the fierce tropical heat. But variations in
altitude from sea level to the 3,820-
metre-high Mount Chirripo, the
Cordillera's highest point mean that the
climate displays wide temperature dif¬
ferences (from a maximum of 25° C to a
minimum of- 9° C.
A FOREST IN THE CLOUDS
Because of these climatic features and
the richness of its soil, the region offers
a wide palette of different landscapes
and biotopes.
The very humid forest found at trop¬
ical level has a varied, complex and het¬
erogeneous flora, which includes tall
bushy trees covered with epiphytic
plants such as liana, which can grow as
thick as a human torso. Its fauna is
equally varied, and comprises snakes,
deer, felines, vampire and other bats,
capuchin and howler monkeys, tree
frogs, sloths and anteaters. There is also
a huge variety of birds and butterflies
Opposite page, glacier-
sculpted countryside in
Chirripo National Park.
A waterfall in the Hitoy-
Cerere biological reserve,
a nature reserve in the
Talamanca-La Amistad
Cordillera.
whose colours enliven an impenetrable
environment more luxuriant even than the
jungles imagined by Wifredo Lam or
Douanier Rousseau.
A LILLIPUTIAN LANDSCAPE
Above 3,000 metres, the forest gives
way to a damp and inhospitable zone
known as the páramo. The reddish,
dwarfish vegetation, no more than two
metres in height, found on this shrubby
steppe consists mainly of bamboo,
grasses, ferns and myrtle whose
branches have twisted under the effect
of wind, frost, drizzle and the abrupt
temperature changes characteristic of
this subalpine biotope, which is not
found elsewhere in the region.
This is the point where the range of
many plant species of Andean origin
comes to an end. The fauna includes
two species of bird, lizards, one species
of salamander, insects and spiders
which adapt their activity to tempera¬
ture variations during the day and fall
into a state of lethargy at night to slow
down their metabolism. Certain species
of rodent as well as rabbit are also
found in this area. They are hunted by
forest felines such as the jaguar (Pan¬
thera onca), the ocelot (Felis pardalis),
the tiger cat (Felis tigrina) and the
jaguarundi (Felis eyra).
VALLEYS OF
DESOLATE BEAUTY
The Talamanca-La Amistad reserve is the
only site in Central America where the
Quaternary glaciations left an indelible
mark. The visitor venturing up to the
summits of the mountain range can
observe almost intact glacial forma¬
tions deep U-shaped valleys, moraines,
lakes, cirques which testify to the exis¬
tence of great glaciers during the Pleis¬
tocene epoch some 25,000 years ago.
The many valleys fashioned by the
glaciers have a desolate beauty. They
include the Savannah of the Lions,
named after the mountain lions (Felis
concolor) that live there; the Valley of
the Rabbits, a vast expanse of sand sur¬
rounded by rocky peaks and inhabited
by rabbits; the mysterious Valley of the
Ridges, where the soil's high iron eon-
tent causes magnetic disturbances
which disorientate compass needles;
and the Valley of the Moraines and the
Valley of the Lakes, which are dotted
with some 30 crystalline lakes. It is here
that you may catch a glimpse of Baird's
tapir (Tapirus bairdii) as it swims in one
of these often ice-covered lakes, or as it
races along it is a powerful 200-kg
animal two metres long in an attempt
to escape its main enemy, the jaguar,
one of six big cats found in Talamanca,
but now almost extinct.
A BIRD WORSHIPPED
BY THE AZTECS
The sighting of a quetzal, a bird of leg¬
endary beauty, as it takes off, leaving a
golden-green streak in the air, is a par¬
ticularly rare privilege, since the virgin
forest above 1,200 metres where it lives
is steadily being destroyed.
The bird gets its name from the
Aztecs, who called it quetzaltototl and
worshipped it. They used its feathers
to decorate the god Quetzalcoatl, who
was represented as a feathered serpent.
41

"SF^
i
1 1^*i
Two subspecies of the bird are found
in the area between Mexico and Panama,
but only one (Pharomachrus mocinno
costarricensis) inhabits this steep
cordillera. The female lays two eggs in a
nest in the hole of a tree, and takes it in
turns with the male to brood. When quet¬
zals breed, which is twice a year, the male
damages its magnificent plumage by flying
in and out of the nest, and after the young
birds have left the nest it moults and
grows its feathers again.
1. A small, brightly coloured tree frog
belonging to the dendrobate genus. Its
skin secretes a virulent poison.
2. A quetzal, a bird with brilliant plumage
| and (in the male) long tail feathers.
g 3. The giant anteater is nearly
f two metres long.
4. Baird's tapir, a species indigenous to
Central America.
5. The ocelot, an animal long hunted for
its fur.
6. A typical plant of the páramo,
high-altitude grasslands.
7. The vampire bat attacks domestic
animals at night and sucks their blood.
8. The double-crested harpie eagle preys
largely on monkeys and sloths.
9. A puma, cougar or mountain lion, the
largest of the cats found in the Americas.
Another interesting sight is the flight
of hummingbirds, tiny creatures capable
of flying in any direction (including back¬
wards) or remaining in stationary flight as
they gather nectar from flowers. Their
wings beat sixty times a second and their
heart up to 1,440 times a minute. One of
the most picturesque of these birds is the
fire-breasted hummingbird (Panterpe
insignis), which is endemic to the high
areas in this region. It is 11 cm long and
weighs 5.7 g.
Avery different sight is the majestic
flight of the harpy eagle (Harpia
harpyja), which is in danger of
becoming extinct because of the exces¬
sive use of pesticides and uncontrolled
deforestation.
But these are only a few of the 600
bird species that have been identified
in the Talamanca cordillera (as many as
all those found in North America).
SIBÚ'S CHILDBEN
In addition to its natural wonders, the
region contains a great many archaeolog¬
ical remains. Over 200 sites have been dis¬
covered (tombs, stone columns, petro-
glyphs) which cover more than 12,000
years of history, from the preceramic
period to the tribal societies encountered
by Europeans in the sixteenth century.
Study of them will reveal more informa¬
tion about the pre-Columbian cultures of
the region and the links between Meso-
American and South American cultures.
The indigenous peoples of Panama,
the Guaymi and Teribe, like those of
Costa Rica, the Bribri and Cabecar, are
descended from tribes which peopled
the valleys of Central America's mountain
ranges at the time of the Spanish con¬
quest. Despite being in contact with "civ¬
ilization" for almost five centuries, they
have managed to preserve their language,
beliefs and lifestyle. They have a thor¬
ough and detailed knowledge of natural
resources and have succeeded in
exploiting them through farming (maize,
haricot beans, bananas, rice), an activity
which they pursue in conjunction with
hunting and fishing without endangering
the region's ecological balance.
These indigenous communities,
which number about 10,000 people,
currently live in reserves. They not only
suffer from high mortality, mulnutrition
and illiteracy, they are also threatened
by the considerable pressure put on the
ecosystem by the activities of farmers
and ranchers, who are moving closer and
closer to their territories. M
42
