CULTURE IN THE CITY
BY J. MARK SCHUSTER
Shaped
aspirât 'IAC Offl
he arts and culture have long
Ibeen associated with cities. It
was there that people congre¬
gated to exchange ideas and
stimulate one another's cre¬
ativity, that the economic sur¬
plus that could support the arts was centred,
and that an appreciative and critical audience
was available. The symbols of Greek city cul¬
ture were the gymnasium, the sanatorium,
and the theatre, which encouraged cultural
interchange by travel and pilgrimage a fore¬
runner of today's cultural tourism.
Good urban design
Cities are also cultural artifacts in themselves.
Many of them commissioned artists, architects
and designers to embellish them and trans¬
form them into generators of the good life.
This tradition is still very much alive. The
commissioning of large scale public sculpture
has become common in the world's major
cities, some of which have developed exten¬
sive outdoor collections, while others have
used a single large-scale artwork to provide
themselves with a strong image, much as Paris
discovered it had done with the construction
of the Eiffel Tower a century ago. I
Another old idea that has lost none of its |
allure is that of building flagship cultural fácil- |
ities as visible symbols of a city's cultural f
M visitor eyes an exhibit at
the Venice Biennale.
commitment. The Sydney (Australia) Opera
House, the Kennedy Center in Washington,
D. C. (U.S.A.), the Ludwig Museum com¬
plex in Cologne (Germany) and the Guggen¬
heim Museum under construction in Bilbao
(Spain) are familiar examples. The French
government has taken the idea of building
flagship cultural facilities to great lengths,
developing a number of great works in Paris,
including the Pompidou Centre, the Bastille
Opera House, the Grand Louvre project and
the Grande Arche to the west of the city.
Cultural Centres
In the late 1950s and 1960s, cultural centres
were widely seen as a solution to the prob¬
lems of housing the arts and of providing
access to them. They would create a critical
mass of activity and would facilitate cross-dis-
ciplinarity in the arts. In France, André Mal¬
raux had high hopes for his Maisons de la
THE UNESCO (oURIER 32
SEPTEMBER 1996

Rockefeller Center,
New York.
Culture. They would be "... a meeting place
intended to bring cultural wealth of all types,
past and present, and of the highest standards,
to the widest possible public, with no one
excluded."
Yet experience with cultural centres has
been mixed. Many turned into retail outlets
for cultural products produced in pre¬
existing cultural capitals. Many were built on a
scale out of proportion to local demand.
Above all, from an urbanistic point of view,
there was a danger that they isolated cultural
activities on an island. Other solutions to the
geographic distribution of cultural institutions
and activities in the city came to be adopted.
Mixed-use developments
Mixed-use developments in which the arts
combined with other uses have long existed in
many European cities. As the British arts
adviser David Pratley has pointed out: "In
Paris the commercial development of the gar¬
dens of the Palais Royal in the 1780s to create
the shopping centre of Europe presaged the
'culturally inclusive' urban shopping mall of
THE UNESCO Q)URIER I SEPTEMBER 1996

the twentieth century American city. In Eng¬
land theatres and assembly rooms commonly
catered for performance, dances and dinners,
and elaborate pleasure gardens combined
nature and arts in the promenade, music and
dinner. The peculiarly English combination of
being ill and having a good time fueled the
development of entire spa towns in Bath,
Buxton and Cheltenham."
In the United States, mixed-use develop¬
ments were rediscovered both because they
avoid the sterility of segregated uses and in
the hope that they would improve the
chronic financial problems of cultural institu¬
tions by providing internal cross-subsidiza¬
tion of cultural activities. Rockefeller Center
in New York, begun in 1931, was originally
intended to provide a home for the Metro¬
politan Opera and cross-subsidize its opera¬
tion through revenues from the building that
was supposed to be built over it. Though this
never happened, Radio City Music Hall, art
galleries and theatres were built as part of the
Rockefeller Center complex.
Cultural districts include districts based on
artistic resources and programmes, which
might be called "arts districts", and districts
based on historic resources, which might be
called "heritage districts". In the former the
emphasis has been on integrating cultural
development into the overall growth and
development of the city rather than on iso¬
lating it in a cultural centre. In some cases, this
has been done by preserving long-abandoned
cultural facilities and developing the district
around them. Occasionally, entire new cultural
districts, such as the Dallas Arts District
(U.S.A.) or the Antigone district in Montpel¬
lier (France), have been created as the result of
large scale redevelopment plans. Frankfurt
(Germany) pursued this idea with great vigour,
building between the Museums Bank of the
river Main and the Römerberg, twenty-two
museums, eighty galleries, seventeen theatres
and four concert buildings, an unprecedented
concentration of cultural facilities.
Cities of culture
A more recent idea is to expand the bound¬



aries of the cultural district to those of the city
itself. One proposition for halting the urban
M fi rework display at the
Edinburgh Festival (U.K.).
THE UNESCO ^URIER ^P SEPTEMBER 1000

decline of Venice for its year- round residents
is to attract artists to live and work there, cul¬
tural industries to locate there and cultural
institutions to develop around the cultural
infrastructure already in place.
Another spin on the idea is the European
Union's European City of Culture programme.
Originally intended to recognize those Euro¬
pean cities that had already developed an exem¬
plary public cultural life, the programme has
gradually been turned into one that provides an
incentive for bidding cities to improve the
quality of their cultural offerings. Glasgow's
successful bid to become the European city of
Culture in 1990 is widely regarded as a turning
point in that city's urban rcvitalization.
Festivals and celebrations
In addition to such well-established interna¬
tional arts festivals as the Edinburgh Festival
(Scotland), the Avignon Festival (France) and
I he Sydney Opera House
(Australia), designed
by Jörn Utzon.
J. MARK SCHUSTER,
of the United States, is Associate
Professor of Urban Studies and
Planning at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.
the Spoleto Festival (Italy), which have long
sought to move out of the normal performing
venues into the city itself, a new generation of
urban festivals is growing out of local arts com¬
munities to become part of the shared life of
the city. Over twenty years, First Night, the
New Year's Eve celebration in Boston, Massa¬
chusetts, has become a heavily attended cul¬
tural festival with performances by a thousand
artists. The idea has been adopted in over 130
cities in North America, and the International
Alliance of First Night Celebrations is
working to spread the idea of a New Year's
Eve celebration of the arts and culture to cities
around the world.
Festivals need not be solely based on the


performing arts. The Biennales in Bologna
and Venice feature the visual arts, and trade
fairs based on cultural industries bring
another kind of cultural festival to cities, e.g.,
the Cannes Film Festival and the Frankfurt
Book Fair.
THE UNESCO ^URIER 5.
SEPTEMBER 1906
