by Iaroslav Isaievych
hmelnytsky
(1595-1657)
In the first half of the seventeenth cen¬
tury the territory known nowadays as
the Ukraine was embroiled in the rebel¬
lion of the Cossacks, military settlers who organized commu¬
nities in the vast steppe area between the territories controlled
by the Polish government and those controlled by the Crimean
Khanate. The leading figure of this rebellion, Bohdan Khmel-
nytsky, was to leave a profound and enduring mark on the polit¬
ical landscape of this part of Europe.
Ukrainian lands were the core of the medieval Kiev state
known to historians as Kievan Rus', a commercial crossroads
between Western Europe, the East and the Byzantine Empire.
Under pressure from nomadic invasions and internal rivalries,
it split into a dozen or so smaller principalities at the beginning
of the thirteenth century. The largest of these principalities,
Galicia-Volhynia , came under the domination of the kingdom
of Poland after a period of relative independence and resis¬
tance to the Mongol conquests. Some of the others were con¬
trolled by the expanding Grand Duchy of Lithuania, before
being joined to Poland after the Union of Lublin in 1569. Early
in the seventeenth century, increasing oppression of the Ortho¬
dox peasants of the Ukraine by the Catholic Polish nobility led
to social, ethnic and religious tensions that sparked off rebel¬
lions in which the Cossacks played a leading role.
Ardent defenders of their "ancient freedoms" and champions
of the Orthodox faith, the Cossacks organized themselves behind
the Dnepr rapids into the so-called Zaporozhian Sich ("fortifi¬
cation behind the rapids") and chose Bohdan Khmelnytsky, an
officer belonging to the Ukrainian minor nobility, as their hetmán
(commander in chief) . He led a number of Cossack risings .
A good tactician, an excellent politician and an astute diplo¬
mat, Bohdan Khmelnytsky concluded an important alliance
with the Crimean Tatars that enabled him to win decisive vic¬
tories over Poland. He then began peace negotiations. As the
leader of a force that sought only to uphold its autonomous sta¬
tus, he did not at first seek territorial expansion or political dom¬
ination. As time went by, however, the Cossacks' position hard¬
ened, and a series of campaigns were waged to wrest a number
of territories from Polish dominion. A Ukrainian government was
established, led by Khmelnytsky, who proved to be a remark¬
able political leader and administrator.
A Ukrainian state was created as the continuation of Kievan
Rus'. Power was delegated by the central government to local
authorities, and Khmelnytsky introduced to Ukrainian towns
the system of autonomous municipal administration known as
A Cossack leader
whose exploits
are celebrated
in many epic
poems,
Bohdan



Khmelnytsky
was the
architect of
the first
Ukrainian state
the Magdeburg law, from the German city where it was first
established. Self-governing bodies were established in cities,
boroughs and villages, where civilian administrators co-operated
with the military authorities.
Although these were troubled times, Khmelnytsky paid
much attention to cultural development in his country, espe¬
cially by granting financial support and privileges to the monas¬
teries, which at that time were centres of education and print¬
ing. Bulos ofAleppo, who accompanied the Patriarch of Antioch,
Macarius III, through the Ukraine on his way to Moscow,
recorded his amazement when he discovered that, "All the [Cos¬
sacks], including their women and daughters, with very few
exceptions know how to read and are familiar with the Church's
liturgy and hymns. What is more, the priests instruct orphans and
do not let them wander through the streets in ignorance."
Nevertheless, the new state's prospects were not favourable.
The Ukraine was surrounded by powerful countries, and after
a major defeat the Crimean Tatars went over to the Polish side
and Khmelnytsky had to look for new allies. In 1654 he obtained
Muscovite military aid in exchange for recognizing the Tsar's
sovereignty over the Ukraine, but when he realized that Muscovy
intended to curtail Ukrainian rights, he concluded a treaty with
Sweden, which was then at war with Poland and Russia. When
Khmelnytsky died in 1657, he had not succeeded in redressing
the balance of power in the Ukraine's favour. No later hetmán
proved able to achieve this goal. M
THE UNESCO ÇpURIERB DECEMBER 1996
47
