Glasnost and after
Institutionalized corruption
was one reason for the
downfall of the Soviet system
In 1987, the "Dictionary of Foreign
Words" published in the USSR defined
corruption as "Venality and misappropriation
of funds by public figures, politicians and civil
servants in the capitalist world. "
The definition was an absurdly naive piece
of propaganda. It reflected a Manichean divi¬
sion of the world into two camps: incorrupt¬
ible socialists here and corrupt capitalists there.
It was also a typical expression of the very real
Soviet understanding of the demarcation
between the official line and everything else.
At a time when corruption was reaching an
unprecedented level in real life, any public
statement on the phenomenon was held to be
defamatory and punishable. Corruption, which
officially did not even have a name, had
become a typical feature of Soviet society.
By an irony of fate, the general public was
becoming aware of corruption at the very time
when dictionaries sought to obscure the reality.
The revelations of the glasnost (openness of
information) period revealed that, in the 1970s
and 1980s, corruption was rife at the apex of
the pyramid of Soviet power: the Politburo
(or political bureau of the Party).
Regional mafias
The economic mafia was the first group in
society to take seriously the declarations of
Mikhail Gorbachev (elected General Secre¬
tary of the Party in 1985) on perestroïka
(restructuring, renewal). In the same year, it
convened a congress of all its groups in the
Soviet Union to assess possible threats to it
from the Party's new general policy. This anx¬
iety stemmed from the fact that Gorbachev
28
by Leonid Pliushch
KA^Abl* CTDA BKDPOKPATA-
HA nyrrvi hpeppaaa (
had been close to the late Yuri Andropov, who
had headed the KGB (or State Security Com¬
mittee: the Information Services) between
1967 and 1982. In his day, Andropov had
already opposed the "Dniepropetrovsk
[Ukraine] mafia" by making use of compro¬
mising documents.
When he assumed responsibility for the
KGB, Andropov, with the support of Eduard
Shevardnadze, the Georgian Minister of the
Interior, had begun to reveal the monstrous
abuses committed by the Georgian commu¬
nist party and by its first secretary, whose wife
was the local mafia's protector. For its part, the
Georgian KGB took care to ensure that neither
the hidden sponsor nor the thieves were
unmasked.
After dealing with the Caucasus, Andropov
had even begun to clean up central Asia. But his
sudden death in 1984 put an end to his inves¬
tigations, and the "Dniepropetrovsk mafia"
breathed again.
Inquiries were restarted in 1986. This time
they were authorized by Gorbachev, who had
consolidated his power in the party. They led to
the arrest one year later of Churbanov, the
deputy Minister of the Interior of the USSR
and Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev's son-in-
CacA bureaucrat's desk is an
obstacle on our road (1988), a
poster by Vladimir Veshtak.
law.
In Uzbekistan, in addition to the Minister
of the Interior and his inner circle, nearly 98 per
LEONID PLIUSHCH
is a mathematician and essayist
who was held in a psychiatric
hospital as an opponent of the
former Soviet regime and later freed
as a result of international
pressure. He is now a French
citizen and has published a number
of works in French including
Réponse à Alexandre Soljénitsyne
(1991) and Ukraine, A nous
l'Europe (1993).

cent of the regional militia services were
arrested. Almost all the regional and district
party bosses were convicted of theft, fraud
and misappropriation of funds, and of orga¬
nizing and protecting clandestine trafficking.
They got off the hook by claiming that they
were obliged to satisfy the increasing demands
of the Central Committee, the government
and the parliament of the republic.
In fact there was no clear frontier between
the official sphere and the world of crime. The
party bosses and their guests enjoyed the
favours of prostitutes; thieves and murderers
performed special missions for the Party, the
militia and the KGB. In Moscow during the
"years of stagnation" (1 965-1 985), almost one-
third of all prostitutes and black-market cur¬
rency dealers were agents of the militia and
the KGB.
The hub of corruption
Dmingperestroika, the Moscow bureaucracy
tried to confine revelations of widespread pil¬
lage to the southern republics, thus giving the
phenomenon an ethnic slant. The southern
scandals were turned to good advantage by
the empire, which claimed that the nationalist
movements were inspired by local mafias that
wanted to escape supervision by Moscow.
But in the final analysis all affairs on the
outer rim of the USSR led back to the capital,
which effectively protected all the mafias in
the republics and was the true hub of corrup¬
tion. Churbanov's trial not only implicated
Brezhnev's representatives in the republics
but Brezhnev himself, his family and imme¬
diate circle in the spiral of services which the
party elite and the criminals rendered to one
another.
In 1985, Gorbachev gave Boris Yeltsin the
task of cleaning up corruption in Moscow by
putting him in charge of the city's Party Com¬
mittee. Yeltsin took his task to heart. He is said
to have changed the staff of the Committee
three times. Of the thirty-three secretaries of
Moscow's District Committees, only ten
remained in their posts. In the city's Party
Committee alone, nearly 2,000 employees
were arrested for misuse of power.
In late 1988, the Uzbek affair finally reached
the Politburo itself, which persuaded Gor¬
bachev to shelve the matter. The examining
judges were accused of using illegal methods
of investigation, and Yeltsin of totally misun-
There was no
clear frontier
between the
official sphere
and the world
of crime.
What prevents perestroika?
(1988), a poster by Viktor
Krasov.
derstanding his party comrades. This suspen¬
sion of the fight against the mafia provoked
suspicions of Gorbachev himself. By the same
token it gave Yeltsin a popular authority that
helped him to become President of Russia in
1991.
The communist paradox
Following the failed putsch of 1991, the new
government tried to restore the assets of the
"Party-State" to the state itself. Meanwhile,
however, the capital had been salted away in
Western banks. The rest of the assets accu¬
mulated by the nomenklatura (the official
political, administrative and intellectual elite)
was invested through front names in all kinds
of private and "collective" companies.
Here lies the heart of all the paradoxes of the
period of transition, of the "democratization",
"decommunization", "decolonization" and
"privatization" of the USSR: the former appa¬
ratchiks (permanent party members) in many
cases retained control over an essential part of
the apparatus of government, of parliament,
justice and administration of the economy. It
is they who inveigh against "class inequality in
democracy" and claim to pursue an increas¬
ingly unrelenting campaign against organized
crime. However, to understand the logic of
this rise to power, we have to look back to the
very origins of the Soviet state.
The beginnings of cancer
Soviet power was established in an environ¬
ment of general impoverishment typical of
wartime. It was based on forced labour, mili¬
tarized administration of the state and the
economy, and the requisition and distribution
of goods by the state. The party's military
monopoly over life, freedom and work
explains the background to the birth of Soviet
society in its state forms. Thereafter, the Party-
¡ State constantly recreated this environment
I which had become an essential feature of the
° new society.
The substitution of state ownership for all
forms of private property transformed a
stratum of all-powerful functionaries claiming
to act in the name of the "proletariat" into the
collective masters of Nature and of people.
The economic disorder associated with mili¬
tarization, the overwhelming domination of
heavy to the detriment of light industry and
especially of agriculture, the rising deficit and
29

the prevalence of pillage would lead to a back¬
lash' on the individual level of theft and wide¬
spread bribery.
In the early days, the cruelty of the author¬
ities to its own apparatus held the functionaries
in check. They concentrated their efforts
instead on the internal struggle to rise through
the echelons of the bureaucratic hierarchy,
where each post had concomitant privileges.
When Khruschev put an end to the Stalinist
purges of the state apparatus, individuals began
instead to plunder state property, engage in
corruption and seek semi-official extra bene¬
fits (special shops, hospitals, rest homes and
so on). The official wages paid to workers were
so low that they came to rely increasingly on
theft. In a sense, the indulgence with which
they were treated made them the accomplices
of the system.
Generalized
bribery
This gave rise to a whole system of parallel dis¬
tribution of state production. A growing deficit
and the flight of officially manufactured goods
into hidden channels of distribution turned
corruption into a dual system of mutual ser¬
vices. It was both vertical (in the apparatus of
bureaucracy) and horizontal (in the produc¬
tion apparatus) through exchanges of stolen
products or services rendered by one pro¬
ducer to another.
"MONiicui i * . ' « i Cotiiqiorc Com
«#npfl
These exchanges resulted in an entire illegal
production system which had already begun
to supply the black market in the days of
Khruschev. Under Brezhnev, the official
economy could no longer function without
the parallel economy. No factory or kolkhoz
director could avoid paying bribes to the com¬
panies with which he did business and on
which he was dependent. Only a few isolated
individuals refrained from diverting apart of
the public service to their own advantage.
Such eccentrics did not keep their jobs for
long because their abnormal conduct threat¬
ened the general collusion. (Most prisoners
of conscience and dissidents began their polit¬
ical protest by behaving in this way).
The system of bribes and services rendered
became an original substitute for the money
economy. An underground private economy
developed and has been partially legalized in
the current transition period to enable func¬
tionaries to retain their power to prohibit,
authorize and manipulate. Officials exercise
their arbitrary will in a twilight zone between
legality and illegality, so that it is prejudicial only
to the conduct of legal business. The vast sums
which astute businessmen now invest in new
spheres or in Western banks slip between two
powers and two laws. In that environment,
privatization does not help to create a market
economy but merely hastens the pillaging of
the national economy.
Contradictory trends
At the same time, society has admittedly been
democratized to some extent. The rights
movement has unmasked the lies of the com¬
munist system, developed the conscience of
the intelligentsia and stimulated a demand in
civil society for democratic freedoms.
Perestroika therefore seems to have been
the expression of two contradictory demands,
simultaneously reflecting the hopes of civil
society for greater democracy and the appetite
of the communist elite for the legalization of its
privileges. The outcome of these opposing
social trends will determine the nature of the
economy and the institutional forms of the
future development of the countries of the
former Soviet empire. In the absence of a self-
regulating market economy, they will continue
to waver between a form of mafia-based state
capitalism and the restructuring of an oppres¬
sive communist-fascist empire.
State ownership
transformed a
stratum of all-
powerful
functionaries
claiming to act in
the name of the
"proletariat" into
the collective
masters of Nature
and of people.
Left, Glasnost (1988), a
poster by Gennadi Belozerov
featuring the front page of
Pravda("Trutir),the daily
newspaper of the Communist
Party of the former Soviet
Union. Written on the pencil is
the word "glasnost".
30
