An inner experience
by Jacques Castermane
Mysterious experiences that lead to inner
silence and a sense of life's unity
Silence is usually defined as the absence
of noise. However, it is also an inner
experience, and one that affects each of us on
different levels. The happy, fulfilled person
finds comfort in silence. The old fisherman
sitting for hours on end gazing at the sea and
the farmer who looks out over his land both
know this soothing silence, the fruit of a life of
toil. And wc are all familiar with the emotion
that wells up during the silence, however brief,
that honours the dead. This silence has a special
quality, questioning those who observe it about
the meaning of existence. Anyone who has
entered a temple in Kyoto or a cathedral in
Europe has been struck by it, a silence which
stops the visitor short as soon as the threshold
is crossed. It is disturbing, and even sometimes
threatening, because the visitor feels it to be a
door opening onto mystery.
But the silence of the inner life is even more
profound. When people experience this
32

Above, on the coast near St.
Malo (France).
Right, Hindu ascetic or sadhu
in Nepal.
silence, they know the unity of life. Such an
experience can be the starting point of spiri¬
tual development.
All experience is ephemeral. But with prac¬
tice, experience of profound silence can
become a permanent condition. It is the state of
being of someone who has achieved maturity,
a mental disposition whereby a person dis¬
cerns, through the conflicts and clashes of
everyday life, an essential unity. Those who
display this unity in their daily lives have pro¬
gressed from adulthood to maturity.
The art of silence opens the doorway fro m
transient to lasting experience.
The promise of beauty
Various moments in life provide the condi¬
tions for such an experience contemplation
of nature or art, for example, or the love that
joins two persons. Wherever the promise of
beauty takes you, there is an opportunity to
experience inner silence.
What is beauty? If we agree with Kant,
beauty is a quality that is innate to an object.
But while it concerns the object, we must
admit that it also concerns the subject. When I
listen to a piece of music, what makes me say
"it's beautiful" is not only the work as it is inter¬
preted, but also and above all the way in which
I am affected by the interpretation. Is this a
matter of taste? It is judgment based on taste,
says Kant. At all events, the word "beautiful"
denotes a quality experienced by a person and
agreeable to that person. Sometimes, when
you listen to a sonata or a symphony that you
have heard a hundred times, the quality that
affects you on this specific occasion is such



that the word "beautiful" is no longer adequate
to express your feelings. This is an experience
in which one's feelings cannot be described by
words.
It is a strange moment during which one
can sometimes even feel alien to the object. It
may happen that there is no more object, no
33

more symphony, no more orchestra, no more
conductor! In this unexpected experience
there is no longer an object that is distinct fro m
a subject. There is no longer a distinction
between subject and object. At this point you
are gripped by silence.
This silence, this absence of all materiality, is
the inexpressible presence of what lies beyond
the subject-object differentiation, beyond
duality.
What can be said of this silence? This is how
it was once described to me by someone who
had experienced what she called "a curious
moment".
"I was strolling on the sea-shore, watching
the sun go down. I stopped. It was beautiful.
No, suddenly, it had nothing to do with what is
called beautiful. It was peculiar. It was as if I
were immersed in a totally different reality.
Everything within me became astonishingly
calm, and I felt a very great inner force . . .
freedom. I knew nothing, and yet I knew
everything. I no longer belonged to myself,
and at the same time I was in a sense more
myself than I had ever been. A wave of silence
suffused me. I shivered. A shiver of joy and at
the same time a shiver of fear. It was as if I had
rediscovered something known while con¬
fronted with the unknown. Then I heard
someone say, 'It's magnificent, isn't it?' I lis¬
tened, and then it was all over."
At the moment when consciousness,
which makes the distinction between subject
and object, reasserts its ascendancy, "it's all
over." Immediately, the experience fades away
into memory. Few people try to understand
what has really happened during such a
"curious" moment.
These are experiences in which what is called
silence reveals a reality that transcends ordinary
reality. What is discovered is transcendence.
The word "transcendence" has several



meanings. It can denote a reality that is beyond
the space-time horizon, infinitely beyond
human beings and the condition in which they
live. It can also denote an experience that opens
The Phaung Daw U
pagoda on Lake Inlee
(Myanmar).
34

human consciousness to another dimension
of the self. In this case transcendence is imma¬
nent in the individual.
It may seem highly subjective to say that
what is experienced in a state of silence touches
on a reality that surpasses ordinary reality. But
that is the case!
The person as subject is the seat of subjec¬
tive experiences. What interests us when we
talk about inner silence is the person as sub¬
ject. The person as subject cannot be defined
using the objective criteria that enable us to
study the person-object. The person as sub¬
ject is someone who feels, experiences, and
suffers, who knows joy and sadness, well-being
and hardship, confidence and mistrust.
Clearly this subjective side must be rele¬
gated to the background in a science labora¬
tory, where objective measurement is all that
matters. Human feelings may lead to error by
subverting the objectivity demanded by sci¬
entific research.
But when we are concerned with the
person as subject, it is objective criteria that
may lead to error. To say dismissively that
"what you felt is purely subjective!" is to
reduce the human being to an object, a thing!
What I feel when I walk in the forest or
Vaulting in Exeter Cathedral
(United Kingdom,
13th-14th centuries).
35

slowly make my way to the top of a mountain
is, fortunately, a subjective experience. Lis¬
tening to Mozart or Debussy is also a subjec¬
tive experience. And when tenderness unites
two persons who love each other and when
they become one, this too is a subjective expe¬
rience in which they rediscover the great
silence that rises from the depths of being.
When we go to concerts and museums or
into the world of nature, is it not to enjoy and
repeat the experience of this transcendent "I"?
When we tenderly draw near to the person
we love, is it not to re-live the experience of
immanent transcendence, that of the person
as subject?
The art of silence
But it is not the sunset, nor the piece of music,
nor the loved one that is the cause of the fulfil¬



ment, the inner order and the unity we feel.
These are merely the circumstances that reveal
our innate potentialities. While this experience
lasts, we fleetingly perceive what we are in the
depths oí our being.
This is why it is important to ask oneself
the question, "How can I become what I have
experienced, how can I make the transition
from a short-lived experience to a permanent
state of being?"
The answer is by practising silence, the art
of silence.
Etymologically, the Latin word for art, ars,
means "way of being". It is even "a way of
stretching towards an order dictated by the
gods". In a sense, artists arc always concerned
by transcendence. In the same way, human
beings growing to maturity must take them¬
selves in hand, just as a craftsman takes a piece
of unfinished work in his hands. Self-perfec¬
tion is the goal. Permanent inner silence is the
fruit of this accomplishment.
A scene from
Fuoco centrale (1995), a play
staged by the Teatro Valdoca
Company in Italy.

Western spirituality tends to be so con¬
cerned with the creation of something external
that a longing for inner creation, for the great
peace of the soul, is considered a waste of time
or even an attempt to escape from the real
world.
In the West a person who regularly prac¬
tises an art generally seeks to acquire knowl¬
edge that culminates in a performance. The art
of silence, on the other hand, is directed
towards knowing how to be, achieving the
capacity to feel and to remain calm, peaceful
and serene in the circumstances we face in our
daily lives.
36

What is the "material" that must be worked
on and shaped by the artisan's hand? It is his
or her own body.
But is it really possible that a physical exer¬
cise can lead humankind to the "greatest
good"? Let us not forget that the body con¬
sists of three factors. It is substance, matter. It is
also form. The substance assumes feminine or
masculine form, youthful or elderly form. But
these two factors are characteristic of a corpse
as well as a living body. They do not define a
living person. Living consists of doing, of
action, of all the actions through which people
are present in the world.
The practice of silence relates to this last
factor. The art of silence consists in raising
actions that are normally unconscious to the
level of conscious experience. The most com¬
monplace act can then become the object of a
specific exercise: sitting down, walking,
breathing. All the arts, from singing to making
pottery, dancing and even archery or fencing,
provide those who practise them regularly
with the opportunity to become themselves.
They provide an opportunity to achieve matu¬
rity, they open the person to immanent tran¬
scendence, which is manifested "silently" in
every aspect of their lives.
JACQUES CASTERMANE,
of Belgium, is director of the
Dürckheim Centre (France). He is the
author of Les leçons de K. G.
Dürckheim: premiers pas sur le
chemin initiatique ("The Lessons of
K. G. Dürckheim: First Steps on the
Initiatory Path", 1988).
37
