MONTH BY MONTH... MONTH BY MONTH...
The darkness and light
Is the state of exile, which was for so long the
exception, now becoming the rule?
To be expelled from a community in the far-
off times when communities regulated every
detail of their members' lives was tantamount to
receiving a death sentence. Not only did exiles
face the future alone, bereft of the protection of
the group, they also forfeited all contact with their
ancestors and with their gods, as well as the possi¬
bility of setting up hearth and home. An individ¬
ual banished from a community was a lost soul.
For communities themselves, exile was a col¬
lective disaster when, after being defeated in an
unequal struggle, their survivors were reduced to
slavery. The victors severed the tics of continuity
that bound the defeated peoples to their past,
keeping them alive for callous exploitation as
beasts of burden with no identity as human beings.
It is true that there were more tolerable forms
of exile. Exceptional people princes, doctors,
engineers or artists who were constrained to
leave their homeland, usually for political rea¬
sons, might sometimes live comfortable lives and
even enjoy privileges and positions of influence
in prosperous states. But they never ceased to be
foreigners. An essential part of them remained
anchored in a homeland that became mytholo-
gized by time, nostalgia and regret.
With the colonial conquests of the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries, the notion ' of exile
changed. The great voyages of discovery,
advances in navigational instruments and tech¬
niques, and the growth of a permanent network
of exchange across the oceans paved the way for
a global market. In the course of time, large num¬
bers of people emigrated in search of regions
more politically clement or more economically
promising. For these migrants uprooting was not
THE UNESCO lOURIER" OCTOBER 1096

0NTH BY MONTH... MONTH BY MONTH ... MONTH BY MONTH
Of eXl le by Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat
a punishment or a calamity. It might be an adven- prospering elsewhere. If the winners of global-
ture, at one with the spirit of change that was the ization feel at home wherever they arc, the losers
hallmark of the new era. They were embarking feel excluded both from a homeland where they
on another life, but one whose hazardous nature would have preferred to stay or to which they
they freely accepted. They saw the country of dream of returning one day, and from the coun-
their birth as a distant, stable landmark in a shift- tries to which they have emigrated, where they
ing world, a haven of certainty amidst the vicissi- are generally looked down upon and do not "fit
tudes of life. in". For the happy few, exile is freely chosen and
Until the second half of this century, however, creative; for the vast majority it is enforced and
exiles everywhere belonged to a very small minor- alienating.
ity. Demographic stability was the rule; population This gap is even more intolerable because
movements were the exception. Today things have while it is widening the world looks on through
changed. The international market, which for- the universal eye of television. It is a potential
merly encompassed national markets whilst time-bomb. The frustrations it causes and the ten-
respecting their frontiers, is now in the process of sions and violence it provokes arc bound to get
abolishing those frontiers. The major economic, worse if nothing is done to counterbalance the
financial, technological and information flows chaotic, inegalitarian tendencies of the market,
criss-cross the planet. For the time being, however, the privileged
A demarcation line now runs through all inhabitants of the planet are more inclined to
countries, dividing those who participate in the defend their vested interests than to share the
age of globalization from those who cannot adjust fruits of their prosperity. They cordon off their
to it and seek imaginary escape-routes from it by territory with illusory barricades and in so doing
withdrawing into hermetic nationalist, denomi- respond to the outsiders knocking on their door
national or tribal worlds of their own. Not that all with some of the most retrograde arguments of
those affected by the high tide of economic glob- the fundamentalist canon.
alization are privileged. Far from it. A minority They forget that their own power is indisso-
holding the levers of economic power and the ciablc from the globalizing process that manufac-
cultural values that open the doors to success arc turcs these outsiders. Above all, they forget that
obtaining unprecedented power, freedom and the revolutionary ideas of liberty, equality, law,
outlets for expression. Meanwhile, hundreds of justice and solidarity have played just as powerful
millions of men and women are gradually being a role in the drive to world unification as market
driven from the rural areas, regions and countries forces. It is these ideas which sustain human crc-
where they were born as a result of economic ativity, advances in science and productivity, and
impoverishment, political terror or war and the security of intellectual and material exchange,
involuntarily thrust into nearby or distant centres They have long been the prerogative of a small
of growth. group of nations. They can no longer remain so.
Their tragedy is that, although they have no In today's open world, if their benefits do not go
future in their own land, they have little chance of to all, they will be lost for everyone.
the Unesco Courier U «October iooc
