Easy come, easy go . . .
by Rochel Andriambelomiadana
Politics dominated by cronyism and easy
money is the road to ruin
Above, pro fits fro m
drug-trafficking seized
by the authorities.
ROCHEL
ANDRIAMBELOMIADANA
of Madagascar is the author of an
essay entitled Libéralisme et
développement à Madagascar
("Liberalism and Development in
Madagascar", published by
Editions Foi et Justice,
Madagascar).
Corruption in industrialized countries
tends to be concentrated in the higher
echelons of power; in the developing world it
seems to extend to virtually every level of eco¬
nomic and social life. It may be limited in
extent as when it is simply a matter of unclog-
ging the wheels of administration but when
a court verdict is reached as a result of bribery
rather than objective judicial decision, or when
a surgeon only operates when prompted by a
wad of banknotes, it can be a matter of life and
death. Corruption can even damage the eco¬
nomic life of entire countries.
When this is the case, corruption is far more
than an occasional bribe offered to influence a
public decision. It is an institutionalized system
in which networks of cronies seek to enrich
themselves by winning and keeping control
of strategic political or commercial positions
from which they can exercise illegal pressure.
This system, which has international ramifi¬
cations, is expanding. Action against it must be
based on an understanding of the factors that
encourage it to spread and an analysis of the
effects of corruption on development.
Three key factors will be examined in this
article: money, its link with politics, and
poverty.
Oiling the wheels
In a commercial transaction, a sum of money
is paid for something (a commodity or a ser¬
vice) which is itself the fruit of labour. Social
success based on money is thus the visible fruit
of effort. This social philosophy stimulated the
rise of the industrialized countries.
Today, however, money is increasingly dis¬
sociated from labour. With the sudden rise in
the prices of coffee, cocoa, oil and other raw
materials in the early 1970s, huge quantities of
25

At a civic education centre at
Xai-Xai, in Mozambique, an
instructor gives a one-man
show to dramatize the
importance of voting in
elections.
Since there is no
watertight partition
between public
money and money
used to fight
elections, politics
is funded, without
public consent, by
creaming off the
national wealth.
money flooded the international financial mar¬
kets and threw the economies of the industri¬
alized countries off balance. To regain a cer¬
tain stability, these countries were forced to
export at all costs. Corrupting leaders of coun¬
tries of the South appeared the most effective
way of doing this.
Later, narcodollars replaced petrodollars,
and today highly sophisticated techniques are
used to launder the profits from drug trafficking
via international financial circuits and networks
involving bankers, stockbrokers, business-
people, lawyers and politicians. Corruption and
clientelism are the bedrock of the system.
Í
Abismal-3 (1985), a
drawing by
Colombian artist
Jonier Marin.
A
\4
As a result, money inevitably seeps into
politics, perverting public administration and
governance. Since there is no watertight par¬
tition between public money and money used
to fight elections, politics is funded, without
public consent, by creaming off the national
wealth. Thus, political organizations are funded
by illegal means and to stay in power depend
on political forces whose support is earned by
handouts from the state coffers. Slowly but
I surely, this use of money leads to a system of
I government based on corruption.
I Squandering national
9 resources
Poverty in developing countries is a breeding
ground for corruption. A small minority of
people get rich quick by illegal means from
non-productive activities while the majority of
the population wallows in poverty. Govern¬
ment officials are among the first victims: infla¬
tion erodes their purchasing power while their
employer (the state) is unable to increase their
wages. This largely explains why the hard core
of corruption is found in government.
Other contributory factors to the spread
of corruption are over-regulation and state
interventionism in social and economic life.
While it is undeniable that widespread cor¬
ruption paralyzes development, it may have
some positive effects, albeit limited. Corrup¬
tion brings about a redistribution of untaxed
income, which absorbs some of the social
costs of the notorious "structural adjustments".
Furthermore, the transfer of income from the
less poor to the very poor does promote social
justice of a kind. But this circulation of money
is merely a transfer of wealth, not a means of
wealth-creation. Nor is it very realistic to argue
that the informal economy, boosted by cor¬
ruption that counteracts an over-regulated
market, stimulates commercial activity. In
reality, because of its weak productivity, the
informal sector brings little added value.
The truth is that the more corruption gains
ground, the harder it becomes to manage the
economy. When the logic of production loses
out to the logic of speculation, there can be no
effective economic policy. Disequilibrium in
26

public finance, for example, is the result of a
disparity between rising expenditure and stag¬
nating tax receipts due to the size of the
informal sector, fraud and tax evasion, not to
mention the corruption of the tax authorities.
Corruption also goes hand in hand with a
squandering of national resources at the very
time when the latter should be exploited sus-
tainably It diverts these resources so that their
contribution to the country's economic
growth is insignificant. The problem becomes
critical when the state, the main economic
actor, is taken hostage by networks of preda¬
tors. Furthermore, redirecting income from
this system towards the consumption of
imported goods puts pressure on the foreign
exchange market, to the detriment of the local
When it is embedded in the power system,
the parallel economy seeks purely and simply to control
the distribution of a country's wealth. t
A branch of the Central
Bank of the States of
West Africa In Bamako
(Mali).
currency. The country's economic develop¬
ment suffers as a result of these interdepen¬
dent factors.
Undermining democracy
Systematic corruption and clientelism under¬
mine the workings of democracy by per¬
verting the exercise of power and the expres¬
sion of the will of the people. Power origi¬
nating from the people is hijacked to satisfy
the personal interests of those who possess it.
It cannot be said too often that democracy
becomes the worst of regimes when it lacks
what may be its sine qua non, virtue. Without
virtue, said Montesquieu, "the Republic is an
empty shell and its strength becomes merely
the power of a few citizens and the licence of
all". Without virtue, professional ethics disap¬
pear, the state loses its authority, and institutions
decline and become flimsy. The exercise of
power becomes the art of governing on the
basis of deception.
When it is embedded in a country's power
system, the parallel economy seeks purely and
simply to control the distribution of a country's
wealth. It keeps the remorseless wheel of
poverty turning: poverty undermines civic
virtue; lack of civic virtue weakens democ¬
racy; a weakened democracy discourages
development; without development, eco¬
nomic life collapses; economic decline further
increases poverty.
This vicious circle can be broken by the
will of the people, if the people realize the
extent of the problem. The barriers between
civil society and political society could then
« be broken down, paving the way for the
i country's responsible governance, the pre-
| condition of effective support from the inter-
I national community.
27
