
r
^
fi> Isabelle Leymarie talks to
V
With his rich tonal range, "Chico" (Arturo)
O'Farrill is the most famous composer-
arranger of Cuban and Latin jazz. He began
working with the leading Havana bands in
the 1940s and later worked in New York with
the Afro-Cubans ("The Afro-Cuban Suite",
recorded with Charlie Parker, Flip Phillips and
Buddy Rich), Dizzy Gillespie ("Manteca
Suite"), Benny Goodman ("Undercurrent
Blues"), Stan Kenton ("Cuban Episode"),
Glenn Miller, Count Basie, Clark Terry, David
Bowie and Gato Barbieri. He has also
composed film music and classical works,
including "Three Cuban Dances" and
"Symphony No. 1".
He was born in Havana to a Cuban
mother and an Irish father and spent a few
years in an American military academy ("my
father thought it would keep me out of
trouble") where he played trumpet in the
school band and took his first steps In jazz.
Back in Cuba, he studied law for a year, but
music won the day. In 1943 he joined
Armando Romeu's Orquesta Bellamar and at
the same time led an experimental band with
a friend of his, guitarist Isidro Pérez.
In 1947 he moved to New York where he
composed scores for a host of musicians, and
in the early 1950s toured the United States
with his own band. He then spent two years in
Havana and went to Mexico in 195S where he
composed "Aztec Suite" and married the
Mexican singer Guadalupe Valero. By 1965
he was back in New York.
Recently he formed a big band with which
he has recorded Pure Emotion, one of his
most accomplished records, and composed a
piece for trumpeter Wynton Marsalis, which
was premiered on 30 November 1995 at New
York's Lincoln Center.


CHICO O'FARRILL,
one of the great figures of Latin Jazz
ISABELLE LEYMARIE
is a Franco-American musicologist.
How did you get started in music?
Even when I was a child I was fascinated
by Cuban rhythms, although mine wasn't a
very musical family. At military school I fell
in love with the recordings of Tommy Dorsey,
Artie Shaw and Glenn Miller. But it was
when I began to study Bunny Berigan's
trumpet solos and transcribe arrangements
that I found my real calling, writing music,
not playing because I had decided that I
couldn't do both at the same time.
But back in Havana, I still played with
René Touzet, then with the Armando
Romeu Jr. Bellamar band, the best Cuban
jazz band at that time. We played the clubs
until 1915, and I was lucky, thanks to the
encouragement of more experienced musi¬
cians, to be able to do more and more com¬
posing. I also studied harmony and orches¬
tration with Felix Guerrero.
Was a lot of jazz being played in
Cuba at that time?
Yes, probably because of the American
tourists. Clubs would usually hire two
bands, a big band with dancers, singers and
comics that accompanied the revues, and a
"b"-band that played Cuban music. The
brass sections were smaller than in the
United States, and bands used stock
arrangements that they bought ready-made.
The musicians' phrasing wasn't good. There
wasn't much exchange with American
jazzmen, and jazz records were scarce.
A few of us got together and formed a
small band and gave free rein to experimen¬
tation. When bebop took off in the United
States, I was immediately struck by Charlie
Parker and Dizzy Gillespie. I spent hours
studying their phrasing and trying to find
harmonies on the piano. Cuban music
seemed simplistic in comparison.
Were you able to turn your knowledge
of bebop to good use in a big Cuban
band?
Yes. The Montmartre Club asked Isidro
Pérez to form a band. We got together a
fabulous big band, the Isidro Pérez
Orchestra, with the best of Cuba's musi¬
cians. We did all our own arrangements just
the way we wanted. But our modern ideas
were often too much for the audience, who
had a hard time dancing to the music. A
year later, the Montmartre closed its doors,
and I was out on the street.
So I made up my mind to try New York,
where I carried on studying harmony with
Bernard Wagenaar, Stephan Wolpe and Hal
Overton. Then, after a hard spell financially,
Benny Goodman took me on as an arranger.
Does Latin jazz call for any special
know-how?
first have to know the jazz rhythms
and Caribbean rhythms a guaguancó is
different from a guajira or a bolero and
avoid discordance. Cuban music tends to
phrase farther behind the beat than jazz.
But it's a question of ear and experience
and instinct, of course. I remember when we
recorded the "Afro-Cuban Jazz Suite" with
the Machito band in 1948, the producer,
Norman Granz, hired the trumpeter, Harry
Edison. But Edison was an honest guy and
realized in rehearsals that he wasn't used to
that kind of phrasing. He decided to bow
out, so Granz called Charlie Parker, who,
extraordinary musician that he was, got the
idea right away.
É What do you think of Latin jazz today?
There's a lot of new talent. When I made
Pure Emotion, my son Arturo Jr. , who is a
pianist, recruited the musicians. They were
all incredibly talented! The media encourage
cultural mixing and the spread of Latin-Amer¬
ican rhythms, but I'm not expert enough to
get involved with kinds of music I don't know.
My roots are still in Cuban music. There, and
in jazz, I know what sounds good.
You hadn't made a record for years.
Why did you make Pure Emotion?
I've spent a lot of time writing music for
the market, which gives me a decent living,
but a producer talked me into making this
record. Pure Emotion, the title piece, is a
slow ballad that's got hardly anything Latin
in it. Variations on a Well-known Theme is
based on the theme of Cucaracha and has a
very advanced arrangement with complex
harmonies and a number of transformations.
I wrote it in Mexico in 1965 and I've played
it in Los Angeles and elsewhere. I put Get
me to the Church on Time a Broadway
standard to a mambo beat. There's a lot of
variety on the record.
Has Latin jazz got a future?
-Yes. It's music that's constantly regener¬
ated by new input. If Latin jazz died out, it
would mean that American jazz was also
dying, and the Western world would be in
trouble!
47
