tradition and renewa
INDIA
the dancer's dilemma
by Romain Maitra
Can the sacred
language ofIndian
choreography be
adapted to the
modern world?
Far right, Kumari Alarmel
Valli, an exponent of Bharata
Natyam, a form of classical
dance drama from southern
India (1995).
Right, Indian dancer
Shantala Shlvalingappa in a
figure from kuchipudi, a form
of Bharata Natyam performed
in Andhra Pradesh (1995).
^
36

I Indian classical dance reveals a world
that is normally beyond the reach of
our senses. Every aspect of it has a sacred
dimension, reflecting its origins as a sacred
temple ritual designed to propitiate the gods.
The two chief Hindu gods, Shiva and
Krishna, are closely associated with dance,
which is described in an ancient treatise,
Bharata's Natya Shastra, as an offering to God,
a cleansing of the soul, a path to salvation and
an expression of God within oneself.
The overwhelming impact of a perfor¬
mance of Indian classical dance today is made
by its sculptural quality, its symmetrical
beauty and its stylized grace. Following intri¬
cate rhythms the dancer makes sinuous con¬
vulsions which culminate in timeless poses
when he or she seems solidified, a statue with
the unresisting density of honey poured
upon honey.
Sensuous and spiritual
The ethos of Indian dance is both sensuous
and spiritual. The dynamism of the human
form becomes a vehicle in which the dancer
embodies imperishable spirit and noble sen¬
timent. In the Natya Shastra, Bharata writes:
"Having made the invocation, the dancing
must begin. The song should be sustained in
the throat; the mood (bhava) must be
shown by the glances and the time {tala) be
marked by the feet. Wherever the hand
moves, there the glances follow. Where the
glances go, the mind follows. Where the
mind goes, the mood follows. Where the
mood goes, there lies the flavour {rasa)." It is
said that the ideal spectator relishes this rasa,
or rather that the rasa is reflected in the
spectator. To witness classical dance-forms
such as Bharata Natyam, Odissi or Kathak is
to face a mirror in which one's spiritual self is
reflected.
In classical dance a distinction is made
between pure dance sequences {nritta) and
mimetic and interpretative gestures {nritya).
The dancer uses his or her entire body for
abhinaya or dramatic interpretation, but
chiefly the face and the hands, with two
modes of interpretation lokadharmi (real¬
istic) and natyadharmi (stylized). It is
through the latter mode that imaginative sug¬
gestions are made, much to the aesthetic
delight of the rasika (connoisseur).
The legendary Bharata Natyam dancer
Balasaraswati believed that dignified restraint
was the hallmark of abhinaya. In her own
words, "Even in the best of laughter, there is
a restraint on the mouth movement, even at
the height of wonder, there is a limit for
opening the eyes, even in the white heat of
amorous sport, the danseuse has no use for
movements of the torso but gestures only
through the face and hands. This decency,
decorum and dignity impart to Bahrata
Natyam its divine character."
Fixed in time
Unlike other Indian art forms such as
painting, sculpture and theatre, the dominant
dance culture of urban and modern India has
not entered into dialogue with changing
times. For centuries Indian dancers have
been evoking Krishna's divine pranks and
the moods of archetypal nayikas (heroines).
Why does Indian dance not reflect the issues
of contemporary life?
37

Left, a sketch made by French |
artist Robert Renard during a i
performance of the sacred 1
Indian dance form known as ï
Odlssi at the 1995 Avignon 1
Festival (France). g
© Robert Renard, Cheval-Blanc

Left, Mahâkâl (Invoking time),
a modern Indian dance based
on Hindu tradition.
Choreography by
Chandralekha(1995).
Opposite page below, a
Bharata Natyam-style dance in
honour of Shiva, performed in
a Tamil Nadu temple.
Below, dancers Vampati Ravi
Shankar and Shantala
Shlvalingappa flank their
teacher, Vampati Chinna
Satyam, during a performance
of kuchipudi dance.
In view of the freedom that modern
choreography demands, its natural place is in
the Western dance idiom, a salient feature of
which is the organization of horizontal space.
It could be said that Indian classical dance is
organized along vertical lines. The dense
vocabulary of its movements is not the stuff
for free-flowing exploration of space. Rather
it aspires to move in time, from rhythmic
time to timeless frozen postures.
However, if the dominant dance culture
in modern India is to find creative vitality and
freshness, perhaps it should redefine some
of its values and articulate a conviction for
creative freedom. A new synthesis should be
created.
And yet quite a few independent Indian
dancers and choreographers have forged
links between their traditional roots and their
experiences and feelings of contemporary
life. Some have searched for new repertoires
and texts; others have sought inspiration
from the myriad forms of folk dances in
India or have made a fusion of Indian and
Western dance genres.
One hopes, then, that the timeless theatre
of the Indian spirit will increasingly be dotted
with niches of individual creative statements
of dance, without tipping Saraswati or
Ganesh from their pedestals. Like its dancers
who bend and angle their physiques so
gracefully, let Indian dance culture be more
flexible today.
ROMAIN MAITRA
is an Indian journalist and critic
specializing in dance and the
visual arts.
39
