B © C U E m T s
Race and racial préjudice
Article 1
1. AU human beings belong to a single
species and are descended from a
common stock. They are born equal in
dignity and rights and ail form an intégral
part of humanity.
2. Ail individuals and groups hâve the
right to be différent, to consider them¬
selves as différent and to be regarded as
such. However, the diversity of life
styles and the right to be différent may
not, in any circumstances, serve as a pre¬
text for racial préjudice; they may not
justify either in law or in fact any dis-
criminatory practice whatsoever, nor
provide a ground for the policy of
apartheid, which is the extrême form of
racism	
4. Ail peoples of the world possess equal
faculties for attaining the highest level in
intellectual, technical, social, économie,
cultural and political development.
5. The différences between the achieve-
ments of the différent peoples are
entirely attributable to geographical, his¬
torical, political, économie, social and
cultural factors. Such différences can in
no case serve as a pretext for any rank-
ordered classification of nations or
peoples.
Article 2
1. Any theory which involves the claim
that racial or ethnie groups are inher-
ently superior or inferior, thus implying
that some would be entitled to dominate
or eliminate others, presumed to be
inferior, or which bases value judge-
ments on racial differentiation, has no
scientific foundation and is contrary to
the moral and ethical principles of
humanity.
2. Racism includes racist idéologies,
prejudiced attitudes, discriminatory
behaviour, structural arrangements and
institutionalized practices resulting in
racial inequality as well as the fallacious
notion that discriminatory relations
between groups are morally and scien-
tifically justifiable; it is reflected in dis¬
criminatory provisions in législation or
régulations and discriminatory practices
as well as in anti-social beliefs and acts; it
hinders the development of its victims,
perverts those who practice it, divides
nations internally, impedes international
co-operation and gives rise to political
tensions between peoples; it is contrary
to the fundamental principles of interna¬
tional law and, consequently, seriously
disturbs international peace and security.
3. Racial préjudice, historically linked
with inequalities in power, reinforced by
économie and social différences
between individuals and groups, and still
seeking today to justify such inequalities,
is totally without justification.
Article 4
1. Any restriction on the complète self-
fulfilment of human beings and free
communication between them which is
based on racial or ethnie considérations
is contrary to the principle of equality in
dignity and rights; it cannot be admitted.
2. One of the most serious violations of
this principle is represented by
apartheid, which, like génocide, is a
crime against humanity, and gravely dis¬
turbs international peace and security.
3. Other policies and practices of racial
ségrégation and discrimination consti-
tute crimes against the conscience and
dignity of mankind and may lead to
political tensions and gravely endanger
international peace and security.
Extract from the Déclaration on race and racial
préjudice adopted by the General Conférence
of Unesco on 27 November 1978
