A puzzling transition
Russian public opinion has mixed feelings
about economic reform
BY YURI LEVADA
Michael Lynch © Stock Illustration Source, Pans
YURI LEVADA
is a Russian economist and
sociologist.
fter the collapse of the planned
economy in the Soviet Union,
reforms carried out in a diffi-
L cult economic environment
got a mixed reception from the
population. Many feared economic disaster
and a massive explosion of popular discon¬
tent. Surveys have shown that anxiety about
the future among the population peaked at
the beginning of 1992.
At the same time many were deluded into
believing that privatization of the economy
could be easily achieved and could enable the
country to develop rapidly. Most inhabitants
of the Soviet Union had no idea how market
mechanisms and financial structures actually
worked, how to exercise the right to prop¬
erty, how to accumulate capital or how to
save. Moreover, the political situation and the
balance of power within the regime made it
impossible to carry out reforms as planned.
Changes were made too slowly and chaoti¬
cally, so that they hurt the majority of the
population. It took several years before the
early enthusiasms and disappointments
sparked by the market economy gave way to
a more clear-sighted appraisal and a determi¬
nation to adjust to new conditions.
Over the last few years public opinion has
been divided as to the need to pursue eco¬
nomic reforms leading to a market economy.
As the table on page 28 shows, almost half the
population has no opinion as to whether or not
the reforms should be pursued. The chief sup¬
porters of the reforms are the youngest and
most educated strata of society living in the
cities. These are people to whom the years of
reform have given greater opportunities to use
their own initiative, and who have remained
extremely confident about future changes.
The most resolute opponents of continued
reforms are the over- fifty-fives, retired peo¬
ple and villagers, in other words those who
have lost more than they have gained from the
transition to a market economy.
The wealthiest, and especially the new self-
styled "businessmen" and "managers", natu¬
rally welcome the market economy. Of those
in the highest income bracket, 48 per cent are
in favour of continued reforms and 17 per cent
against, while a mere 20 per cent of those in
low-income groups are in favour and 35 per
cent are against. However, the great majority
of those who have received a university or
specialized education want to see reforms
continue, even though many of them have
experienced a fall in their standard of living
since the beginning of the reforms because of
26
THE UNESCO lOURIER« NOVEMBER 190<j

the crisis in higher education, science and
industrial research. Despite that, they remain
hopeful that the reforms will succeed.
How fair is privatization?
To judge from data provided by a series of
public opinion polls carried out in 1995, 42
per cent of the population regard an eco¬
nomic system based on state planning and
distribution as "fairer", while 37 per cent are
in favour of a system based on private prop¬
erty and market forces. The rest are don't-
knows. (Some 9,600 people were polled.) The
opinion of elderly people tips the balance in
favour of a planned system.
Today 26 per cent of Russians believe that
most of their fellow citizens have already
adjusted to the changes that have taken place,
29 per cent think they will be able to adjust
in the near future, and 32 per cent consider
that they will never be able to do so. The
remaining 13 per cent gave no definite
answer. It is above all the younger, better
educated and most active people who are
prepared to adjust to the new conditions.
Those who find it hardest to adjust to the
changes are people who have difficulty in
altering their customary way of life. They con
sist mainly of people living in Russian villages
and small towns, who account for almost two-
thirds of the population. The modernization of
the farming sector entails massive investment
that no one is in a position to make at present.
So reforms aimed at steering that sector
towards a market economy have run into con¬
siderable difficulty and have led to incompre¬
hension and even opposition on the part of
much of the rural population. This is why pri¬
vate land ownership, to which democrats and
reformers are seeking to give legal status, has
the support of city-dwellers but is opposed by
most of the rural population.
Most of the population currently regard
privatization of companies, banks and other
activities as quite normal. Prejudice against
wealthy landowners is far less widespread
than it was a few years ago. Most people nev¬
ertheless feel that the biggest companies and
the energy monopoly should remain in the
hands of the state. The greatest resentment is
directed at the right of foreigners to own land
and large companies. Many still fear that for¬
eign capitalists want to appropriate the coun¬
try's wealth.
It is true that the Russian people's relation¬
ship with the market economy goes further
Ftreet vendors in Moscow.
5 f^URIITHE UNESCO lO IERB NOVEMBER 1096
27

f- * i
than the subjective opinions and attitudes ^^^^nE!EE!E93IïIEQSBïE3]H^^^^B ^^ ' ^ \ ^
revealed by many public opinion polls. All >(|^(U!UiuUUlïJiyUèiilaIâ!i!M!aUl^^^^M v%_
, , .1 u . March 92 March 93 April 94 March 95 March 96
those who are experiencing this on-going but	
very real transition towards a new economic For continuing
. . ii- AC A reforms 47 42 32 27 31 V
situation are constantly having to denne and
appraise their position. Let us look at some of
. . r r , . ... Against continuing
the main features ot this complex situation. reforms 27 20 28 30 26 mz.
	W
Coping with transition Dont know 26 38 40 43 44
In Russia, about one-third of the working L
population are currently employed by the
private sector, and one-sixth by state-owned most serious problems are considered to be
joint-stock companies. But even the 50 per phenomena resulting from the "transition to
cent of the working population employed by the market economy", such as price rises (68
public bodies and enterprises already live per cent); cr¡mc (59 pcr cent)5 unemploy-
largely in a market economy environment mcnt (55 per ccnt) antj falling production (55
and have to take account of its rules. per cent). Some 60 per cent of the population
The market economy has almost every- feel that the quality of life is not now as high
where put an end to the shortage of con- as it was five years ago.
sumer goods that was the inevitable charac- The borders of present-day Russia have
teristic of the planned distribution system. opened up to the circulation of people, goods,
The lack of staple commodities came top of information and (to a much lesser degree) cap-
the list of problems that most worried the ital. The situation may be full of contradictions,
population at the beginning of the 1990s, but it marks an important stage in the transition
whereas today only a small percentage of of the Russian economy and society towards
people (7 per cent of 2,400 interviewees in a market economy. Most Russians are in
May 1996) mention such shortages, which favour of these new opportunities, and 10 per
now come near the bottom of the list of what cent of them take advantage of their freedom
are regarded as acute problems. Today, the to go on business trips or holidays outside the
borders of the former Soviet Union. At the
same time, public opinion closely follows the
constant debate in the mass media about the
negative aspects of contact with the outside
world, such as the flight of capital, the increas¬
ing importance of consumer goods, the inter¬
nationalization of organized crime, and civil
service corruption.
Most voters who took part in this year's
presidential elections and supported the win¬
ning candidate, Boris Yeltsin, came out in
favour of retaining the achievements of the
reforms and against a return to the past.
Almost 80 per cent of those who voted for
Yeltsin believe that the majority of the popu¬
lation has already adjusted, or will adjust in the
very near future, to the reforms, and only 13
per cent think that this will not happen.
Conversely, only 35 per cent of those who
voted for the unsuccessful communist candi¬
date think that people will adjust to the
changes, while 49 per cent of them believe it to
be impossible. For the time being, then, reac¬
tions to the reforms remain very clear-cut
across the spectrum of society as a whole.
Ihe GUM shopping arcade in Moscow.
. «
ESA
r
In Kagoshima,
southwestern Japan,
employees of a
ceramics factory
perform gymnastics at
the weekly staff
meeting.
28 THE UNESCO COURIER! NOVEMBER 199a
