drama :s
hidden
depths
by Eugenio Barba
In African and Latin American cultures
dance is the vehicle that brings human
beings close to the gods. While the gods do
not necessarily dance themselves, dance is
the elusive area, on the border of the physical
and the spiritual worlds, in which their force
is expressed.
Theatre belongs to the same order. The
French actor and director Jacques Copeau,
who was, with Konstanin Stanislavsky, one of
the leading innovators of twentieth-century
drama, believed that dance is the essence of
drama. Surprising though it may seem, there
are many reasons to think that this is so.
In the art of corporeal expression, the dis¬
tinction made between dance and theatre is a
Kudolf Nureyev in Arlequin,
magicien par amour (1984).
The choreography, by Ivo
Cramer, was inspired by
commedia dell arte.
product of certain fairly recent European
conventions. It did not exist in ancient Greek
and Roman theatre, in medieval or Eliza¬
bethan theatre, or in commedia dell'arte. Nor
does it exist in the classic forms of Asian the¬
atre. It is ignored by actors in their practice of
stagecraft. Actors all dance, although their
dance is sometimes concealed from the audi¬
ence by their acting.
Nor is dance "naturally" dependent on
music. The author of an anonymous Italian
pamphlet against carnivals that appeared four
centuries ago (Discorso contro il carnevale,
1607) condemned dance out of hand. To illus¬
trate what he regarded as the diabolical nature
of dance, he suggests that one should look at a
roomful of men and women dancing and
then suddenly pretend that one can no longer
hear the music. Observe the artificial move¬
ments, he says. Note the contortions the
people make as they touch each another, take
each other by the hand, lean towards each
other, search for each other and lose each
other. Do they look like civilized men and
16

Although they are
sometimes
artificially
compartmented,
acting and dance
springfrom the
same inner
intensity
IVI embers of the Beijing
Opera perform the dance of the
courtesans at the court of the
Tang dynasty.
women? No, they are grotesque, jerky,
affected or obscene. One might think they
are mad. Unbeknownst to themselves, they
are in the hands of the devil. . . .
Let us take this idea of switching off the
music a little further. I think it is an excellent
exercise for directors and actors. What hap¬
pens? If dance only gives rise to forced, exag¬
gerated movements, it is not the kind of
dance that springs naturally from the body
but an attempt to apply a veneer of music to
the body. When dance bubbles up from the
body, it contains its own music. It does not
matter whether the music is silent or whether
it really provides delectation for the ear.
The living body
A performer trained in a classical Asian tradi¬
tion who dances without music loses none of
his or her inwardness and ability to captivate
the spectator. Add music, singing, the poetry
of words and the fantasy of a story-line and
the display becomes richer and more com¬
plete, a feast in which the spectator tastes only
a little of each dish. But even in the midst of
this, profusion, the performance retains its
force and vitality by virtue of its inner naked¬
ness.
This observation can be applied to any
dancers, whatever their origin or training,
who can find within themselves the music
most appropriate to their physical action
the music of the body. This is not formal
dance; but the dance of the body that has
come to life. The word life is not used gratu¬
itously; it means presence, purely and simply.
It is neither expression nor communication,
but it makes both possible; it is inherent in
each. It is what I call in my research on the
anthropology of theatre, the "pre-expres-
sive" level.
And so even if there is a dividing line
between theatre and dance today, it is not her¬
metic. On the contrary, there are many points
of contact between the two. Theatre and dance
form one vast territory, which can be explored
both from the viewpoint of the geographer
interested in neighbourhoods, crossroads and
17

EUGENIO BARBA,
of Denmark, is director of the
International School of Theatre
Anthropology (ISTA) which he
founded in 1979. He is also
director of the Odin Teatret, a
research institute on acting, which
is based at Hostebro (Denmark).
Notable among his published
works are The Paper Canoe
(Routledge, 1994) and (with Nicola
Savarese) The Secret Art of the
Performerfreprint; Routledge,
1995).
panoramas and from that of the geologist who
wants to explore the underground layers
common to regions which are superficially
divided and differentiated.
It is the geologist's approach that interests
me.
In all actors I look for the hidden dance
that gives intensity to their presence. I try to
discover the undulations of rhythm, of pow¬
erful action harboured in the depths of their
bodies, even if they barely make any move¬
ment, if they are seemingly motionless and
their behaviour is apparently quite "normal".
When actors conceal the violence and
energy that infuse life into their stage pres¬
ence, even if they do not dance overtly
something dances within them. Without this
hidden dance, their acting is not authentic.
For an actor, acting is not a matter of pre¬
tence. Acting is only real when it involves the
whole body, when the slightest movement is
rooted in the torso, not in a part of the body
such as the hands, the eyes or the mouth, and
springs from the unity of body and mind.
This integrity, this unity of the living organism
is what I call "dance".
When the hidden dance ceases to be latent
and expresses itself freely in space, then
rhythm, drums and music are required to
create a dialogue.
Shakespeare,
Verdi and candomblé
I should like to give an example from my
own experience. Recently I worked for
some time with a modern Brazilian dancer
and choreographer who is also closely con¬
nected with the dances and ceremonies of the
Afro-Brazilian candomblé cult. We decided
that we would bring our two cultures into
contact but not attempt to blend them. I
come from the villages of southern Italy,
where on festive occasions brass bands play
tunes or overtures from operas by Verdi,
Puccini, Donizetti or Bellini.
We staged a one-man show which juxta¬
posed the theme of Verdi's Otello, based on
Shakespeare's play, with the stories and figures
18

Above, the Rio de Janeiro
carnival.
Above right, dancers of the
Odin Teatret (Denmark) take
part in an exchange with the
Yanomami Indians of Brazil
(1976).
Right, Sanjukta Panigrahi
(India) and Augusto Omolú
(Brazil) in Theatrum Mundi,
directed by Eugenio Barba
(1994).
of the Orisha, the gods of candomblé, who are
summoned by drums. The orchestra played
Verdi and the drums were beaten. The story
of the Moor of Venice alternated with the
invasion of the higher forces which take pos¬
session of him.
To some extent I wanted to go back to one
of the traditional interpretations of Othello:
the man resplendent as night who bears
within himself both the forces of the forest
and those of the elegant city built on water,
and who derives his charm and destructive
power from their imbrication. Of course I
also wanted the audience to understand that
there is no unbridgeable gap between the cul¬
ture that produces Othello and that which
produces the terreiro, the candomblé ritual
in which drums summon the gods.
But on an even more personal level I was
trying to show what I see whenever I observe
an actor or an actress who can reach down to
the sources of life when on stage. It doesn't
really matter whether they are acting in a
comedy or a tragedy as soon as attention
moves towards their bodies I can feel the
beating of life.
All I have to do is release myself from the
grip of words and plot, facial mimicry and hand
gestures, and concentrate on watching what the
actor or actress is doing with his or her body. I
see nothing but the dance concealed beneath
the veneer of theatricality. The dragon of life
surfaces from the depths, expresses itself in
ways that are by turns barely perceptible and
violently explosive. It is then that I know that
drama, with or without music, is dance.
Let us remember what happened on stage
in Shakespeare's time. At the end of the
grimmest play, after reducing to ashes the
audience's illusions about the great ones of
this world and revealing the bestiality that
lurks beneath the noble words of knights,
after showing how love can be a bitter
struggle, Shakespeare's actors would sud¬
denly abandon their fictional characters and
begin to dance to the lively rhythm of a gigue.
At that moment, perhaps the scales would fall
from the eyes of at least one member of the
audience who would realize that the actors
had, in spite of all appearances to the contrary,
been dancing all through the play.
19
