A geneticist
explains why the
concept of race is
notvalidfor
human
populations
An unscientific notion
by Albert Jacquard
' jjsf- Racism is based on two assertions
?i 1 ''.. which are presented as facts. First, that
the human species is made up of very distinct
groups with différent biological characteris-
tics in other words, "races"; and second,
that thèse "races" can be ranked in hiérar¬
chies according to a scale of "values".
Thèse two propositions were laid down as
incontrovertible truths in a book that ail
French schoolchildren were given to read
during the first half of this century. Le Tour de
la France par Deux Enfants (A Tour of France
by Two Children). When the two children
visit Marseilles, they are surprised by the
diversity of people of every colour they
encounter there. This provides the author
with an opportunity to teach them about the
four human races white, red, yellow and
black and to make the following observation:
"The white race is the most perfect."
The author is careful to illustrate each race
with a very decent-looking individual. He
admits that each race is "perfect", but cannot
help establishing a hierarchy of perfection,
which is to the benefit of the white race.
The rôle of the scientist is to cast a rig-
orous, dispassionate eye on thèse two asser¬
tions and détermine the degree to which they
are fantasy or fact.
Defining race
Human beings display a variety which is at once
disturbing and marvellous. The task of science
is to try to make sensé of this chaotic situation
by proposing a classification. The most cele-
brated classification is that of the Swedish natu¬
ralist Linnaeus. He conceived of a tree whose
successive ramifications would mark the dis¬
tinction between two "kingdoms" (animal and
vegetable), then between several "classes"
within each kingdom (such as mammals in the
animal kingdom). Each class contained several
"orders" (carnivores, for example), each order
several "gênera" (such as the genus Canis), and
each genus several "species".
The dividing Unes between this séries of
catégories are often blurred and arbitrary,
except in the case of species, where an objec¬
tive criterion interfecundity makes it pos¬
sible to détermine whether two living créa¬
tures belong to the same species or not. In
other words, individuals are deemed to
belong to a single species if they are capable
of reproducing and obtaining fertile offspring.
Usually, however, a species comprises
such a large number of members that it is
tempting, and scientifically logical, to pursue
the classification process by defining rela¬
tively homogeneous groups within a given
species. Criteria need to be defined before
the dividing fines between thèse groups,
which are generally described as "races" or
"breeds" can be drawn.
It was not really until the eighteenth century
that scientists tried to introduce some sort of
order into the varions ideas that were being
peddled on the subject. They first needed to
specify the characteristics to be taken into
account when comparing individuals.
The characteristics concerned were natu-

%-5)#
rally visible ones, such as size, colour and shape.
Throughout the nineteenth century anthropol-
ogists squabbled over the number of races con¬
tained within the human species. The four tra¬
ditional races, which were based on skin colour,
were clearly inadéquate when it came to taking
into account the degree of variety involved.
Should humankind be divided up into ten, 100
or 1,000 races? The controversy might hâve
gone on raging for ever if the parameters of the
whole question had not been changed by the
sudden appearance of a new discipline: genetics.
From 1900 on, the rediscovery of con¬
cepts devised by the Austrian monk Gregor
Mendel (1822-1884) made scientists realize
that appearances, or "phenotypes", were the
manifestation of factors concealed in the
nuclei of cells: gènes. The combination of
gènes in any individual constitutes his or her
"génotype". Thus, parents pass on to their
children not a visible characteristic but half
the genetic inheritance that governs their
phenotype. They do not transmit what they
are, but half the mass of information that
allowed them to become what they are.
This meant that scientists had to go back
to square one. They realized that the only
comparison that makes it possible to appre-
hend the stable reality of a given population
is one that focuses on what it passes on with
each génération, in other words its genetic
inheritance, and not on appearances, which
are no more than a manifestation of it.
A faise genetic traii
The first thing scientists did was try to track
down "marker" gènes whose présence
would indicate that an individual belonged to
a given race. If ail members of a given popu¬
lation possessed a certain gène that was not
found elsewhere, things would be straight-
forward. But no such gènes hâve been found.
Most gènes are présent in virtually ail human
The human "races" depicted
in illustrations from H. von
Schubert's Histoire Naturelle
du Règne >1n/ma/("Natural
History of the Animal
Kingdom"), published in
Germany in 1886.
Chromosomes (below), where
the gènes are located, are the
carriers of heredity.
populations. Some of them, probably as a
resuit of récent mutations, are found only in
certain populations, but even then they are
rare and do not qualify as marker gènes.
What distinguishes groups, then, is not the
présence or absence of a gène, but the fre-
quency of its occurrence. The B-gene of the
blood System accounts for 25 per cent of the
genetic inheritance of people who live in the
Indian sub-continent, but that proportion
decreases the fartherwest one goes: itis 15-20
per cent in Russia, 10-15 per cent in Central
Europe, 5 per cent in France and Britain, and
0 per cent in the Basque Country.
Any définition of race can therefore resuit
only from a logical process that allows for
such différences in frequency. The starting
point is a table which indicates, for ail popula¬
tions, the frequency of the greatest possible
number of gènes. Information now available
to us means that this line of reasoning can be
pursued with the help of a large mass of
observations. As part of this approach, popu¬
lations are regarded as belonging to one and
the same "race" when most of their gènes
occur with similar frequency.
If the problem is to be approached with
scientific rigour, a définition of genetic dis¬
tance between différent populations is
required. Once ail such distances between ail
populations hâve been calculated, it seems
logical enough to assume that populations

Breeders hâve not
"improved" the
equlne race, they
hâve improved the
racing abifities of
certain stock, at
the cost ofa
spectacular décline
In their biological
potential.
Meetings on the Phone, a
drawing by a young Chinese
artist Inspired by a Unesco
exhibition heid In Beijing
(1984).
Figure A
Figure B
ALBERT JACQUARD,
a noted French geneticist, is a
former head of the Genetics
Department at France's National
Institute of Démographie Studies
(INED)in Paris. His works
published in English include In
Praise of Différence: Genetics &
Human Affairs (1984) and
Genetics of Human Populations
(1978).
with a small distance between them belong to
the same race, and those with a great distance
between them belong to différent races.
If thèse populations are represented as
dots whose distance on paper is proportional
to their genetic distance, the resuit in the case
of dogs is shown in figure A (this page) where
each cluster of dots may be regarded as a
breed. On the other hand, if ail human popu¬
lations are represented, the resuit is not a
séries of very distinct clusters, but an indis¬
tinct haze of dots which cannot be put in
groups without an arbitrary élément coming
into play (figure B). It is true that populations
X and Y are genetically doser to each other
than they are to population Z, but it is impos¬
sible to know where to draw the dividing line.
There is only one conclusion to be drawn:
the concept of race is not valid for human
populations. There are obvions différences
between, for example, Lapps and Pygmies,
but the transition from the former to the
latter can be established via intermediate
populations without any abrupt leaps.
The reason why the concept is not valid is
well known. If a genetic inheritance is to
acquire a certain originality, if it is to distinguish
itself significantly from that of neighbouring
groups, it has to remain in complète isolation
for a very long period, or for roughly as many
générations as there are individuals of repro¬
ductive âge. That kind of isolation can exist in
the case of animais, but is barely conceivable for
a species as nomadic and as keenly curions as
ours. Because we are capable of crossing
mountain ranges and océans, we hâve homog-
enized our genetic inheritances.
That observation can be illustrated by the
following figures: the proportion of the total
genetic diversity of the human species that can
be put down to différences between the four
traditional "races" is only 7-8 per cent. In the
case of différences between nations within
thèse races, it is also only 7-8 per cent, while the
remaining 85 per cent is due to différences
between groups belonging to the same nation.
In other words, the essential différences are not
between groups, but contained within them.
The concept of race consequently has so little
content that the word becomes meaningless
and should be eradicated from our vocabulary.
From classification to liierarciiy
However arbitrary it may be, some sort of
classification is necessary. But, in Western
culture at least, a classification is often auto-
matically assumed to be the basis of a hier¬
archy: if two objects are not identical, they are
regarded as not being "equal", in which case
one is superior to the other. This automatic
assumption originates in primary school,
where we are taught that when two numbers
are différent one is bigger than the other.
What is true for numbers does not apply
when several sets of measurements are used.
In this case, the opposite of "equal" is not
"superior" but "différent". There can be a
hierarchical rank only when objects are
described by a single number. Thus one stone
will be heavier, or denser, or more voluminous
than another. It can be "superior" only if ail the
measurements are synthesized into one.
This is what some psychologists do when
they want to compare people's intellectual
potential. Some individuals can reason more
quickly, others hâve a more extensive

memory, and others again ask more relevant
questions: they hâve différent mental pro¬
files. But the question "Who is the most intel¬
ligent" can only be answered if intelligence is
gauged by a single measurement. Hence the
success of the notorious "intelligence quo¬
tient" or IQ. In fact it measures nothing def-
inite, but enables people to talk as though a
hierarchy of intelligence existed.
Différent human groups hâve varying
potentials in every field. Whether innately or
thanks to their culture, Pygmies are better
equipped to solve the problems posed by
living in an equatorial rain forest than Lapps,
who know better how to cope with Arctic
cold. The two populations are différent; nei¬
ther is superior to the other.
Unfortunately, our minds hâve been
impregnated with a belief in that kind of hier¬
archy, which is reflected in turns of phrase
that are so familiar to us that we take their
meaning for granted. Thus we accept the idea
that breeders hâve "improved" the equlne
race, whereas in fact ail they hâve donc is
improve the racing abilities of certain stock, at
the cost of a spectacular décline in their bio¬
logical potential. Such "thoroughbreds" are in
fact defective animais whose only achieve-
ment one of little interest is their ability to
run fast over short distances.
The phrase I used about the "white race"
being "the most perfect" is not even a fallacy:
it is meaningless. But it is much harder to
combat such assertions, which are meaning¬
less, than it is to combat inaccuracies.
That is why the fight against racism may
well go on for ever. It matters not that the
geneticist can prove that the notion of race is
without foundation or that the logician can
demonstrate the absurdity of global hiérarchies.
The racist's attitude will not change one iota
because when it comes down to it that attitude
has nothing to do with biological reality or logic.
An expression of contempt
What racism expresses is essentially con¬
tempt contempt for other people that is
motivated not by their characteristics as such
but by the fact that they belong to a group.
Hence remarks such as "Ail . . . are . . .". What
prompts such contempt is a lack of self-confi¬
dence, and its end-product is self-destruction.
What are human beings if not animais
whose peculiar characteristic is to be able to
construct themselves with the help of
others? My "I" has emerged from the "yous"
that hâve been addressed to me. "I" is made
up of a web of links I weave with others.
But the weaving of those links cannot take
place unless efforts are made and fears quelled.
Other people are a source of both riches and
risks. We hâve to confront them, that is to say
tackle them head on and set intelligence against
intelligence. The exchange will be fruitful only
if a modicum of confidence exists both self-
confidence and confidence in others.
Racists are people who hâve no self-confi¬
dence. To disguise their fear, they puff them¬
selves up and daim to be superior. Their con¬
tempt for others only serves to mask the panic
their own inner emptiness inspires in them.
It is easy to prove that the notion of race in
the case of human beings is virtually impossible
to define, or that the concept of hierarchy
cannot be used in a global way. But the most
useful contribution science can make to the
fight against racism lies elsewhere in a greater
awareness of what a human being is: a won-
derful thing which each individual builds with
the help of others.
The head ofa fruit fiy
{Drosophila melanogaster),
an Insect widely used In
genetic experlments.
