COMMENTARY BY FEDERICO MAYOR
1996:
INTERNATIONAL YEAR FOR
-3 THE ERADICATION OF POVERTY
For there to be peace, there must be
knowledge and acknowledgment of
others. Peace means lasting respect for
differences; peace means never threatening
tjiat most important possession of all: life itself.
At the" dawn of the third millennium, I call
on each and every one of us to make a public
announcement in the schools, in the worlds of
sport and the arts, in the media and within
government administrations: human life must
no longer be threatened. The act of killing has
no justification and above all no religious vin¬
dication religions are founded on love and
generosity nor can there be any cultural,
nationalistic or ideological justification. If we
really wish to leave a peaceful world to our
children, we must with the greatest firmness
forbid all threats to human life.
values can humanity enjoy peace, peace lived
every day which means happiness.
Dialogue and tolerance are not to be
equated merely with docility and acceptance
of the opinions of others. On the contrary,
dialogue and tolerance mean choosing a new
way of life, a new way of reaching agree¬
ment with no bloodshed, no loss of life, no
violence, none of war's perversity. Dialogue
and tolerance mean pursuing with both deter¬
mination and compassion the non-violent set¬
tlement of conflicts.
Dialogue and tolerance
This is the one essential condition whereby a
culture of war of force, constraint, oppres¬
sion, inequality can be transformed into a
culture of peace. A culture of peace requires:
dialogue, tolerance and awareness of the infi¬
nite diversity of humanity. The ethical values
embodied in UNESCO's Constitution: justice,
freedom, particularly freedom of speech, "the
free flow of ideas by word and image"
equality, solidarity "the intellectual and moral
solidarity of mankind" only through these
Peace and development
There can be no lasting peace without sustain¬
able development, without endogenous devel¬
opment, through the uprooting of frustration,
poverty and exclusion. Only by conferring on
each person the possibility of deciding for him
or herself and thus being in charge of his or
her own destiny can we hope to reduce pop¬
ulation growth, reduce migration, improve the
quality of life in rural settings, understand and
help those who govern to understand that
peace and the environment are the concerns of
each and every one of us.
Sustainable development has one essential
key word: sharing. We should share all
resources starting with knowledge. At both
international and domestic levels, land, finance,
knowledge and know-how are the preserve of
38

a very small minority. This inequality consti- site of a child's experience in the outside
tutes a threat to world stability and security, world. Principles and values, the links
Such inequality is incompatible with the need between all differences and all cultures, can
for a lasting democracy democracy being the only be learned through example. How can
third side to the interactive, interdependent tri- peaceful behaviour be learned if schoolbooks
angle: peace, development, democracy. tell only of war and violence? How can we
=-:	;	} ;	 move from the concept of might being right
Education for democracy t0 that of right being might without «dis.
Only education can ensure a true democracy, arming" history and showing the tremendous
one where all citizens participate: "I partici- contributions of philosophers, scientists,
pate, therefore I exist"! I am "counted" in sur- inventors and artists?
veys, polls and elections. But I must also The United Nations and therefore all
"count". If I am not taken into account, nations has designated 1996 the Year for the
democracy is only a name, a façade, an autoc- Eradication of Poverty. We are primarily
racy or a disguised plutocracy. Lasting democ- thinking, of course, of the least-developed
racy is the only political system where human countries. But we must not forget the poor, the
rights are respected. To this end, decisive steps far too numerous excluded people in the most-
must be taken to strengthen the legal and judi- developed countries. The misery of the shanty-
cial system and provide the rule of law with towns, the street children, the exploitation of
the rigour and speed it needs. Human young people all are reasons for our collec-
resources must be increased for the fight tive shame. But those of us who are well off and
against violence and for making public think of marginalization as being beyond
freedom a synonym for security. The United society and therefore beyond our concern,
Nations system and particularly its peace- should open our eyes and take notice. The
building and conflict-prevention capacities whole of society, including the armed forces
must be strengthened in order to confront who will become peace-builders must work
transnational problems whether economic, together for our common future. Whether we
political or cultural (drug and arms trafficking, are aware of it or not, the world is one world,
money laundering, terrorism, etc.). Parliamentarians, elected representatives of the
people, must ensure that budget priorities fit in>L*. ? '	&v.r.^.Uv 	
UlSarmin8 History wjtj1 ^ terms 0¡ a morai world contract. Such
Peace, development and democracy can be a contract must be long-term and take account
achieved through education, but only if educa- of future generations with the vision that "we,
tion is for everyone, by everyone and with the peoples" must have in order for our chil-
everyone. This is neither a question of donations dren to be spared "the scourge of war",
nor of selling a prototype; education is an I invite all states, parliaments, mayors, local
everyday, personal achievement. Through edu- governments, teachers, journalists, intellec-
cation, society as a whole civil, military and tuals, sports associations and youth groups to
religious can be taught to eradicate violence, to work together so that 1996 may give fresh
prevent potential conflict and to build peace. impetus to the historic transition from a cul-
Teachers cannot instil in schools the oppo- ture of war to a culture of peace.
39
