A hidden enemy
by Marc Germanangue-Debare
A news vendor in Santiago
(Chile).
MARC GERMANANGUE-DEBARE
of France is a researcher at the
Institute of International and
Strategic Relations (IRIS) and
teaches at the European Business
School (EAP) in Paris. Among his
published works are: Les milliards
de l'ombre, l'Economie souterraine
(1992; "The Hidden Billions: the
Underground Economy") and
Europes, Mutations économiques
(new edition 1993; "Economic
Change in Europe").
22
In over-regulated societies the
underground economy can act
as a safety-valve. In bloated
form it jeopardizes economic
development and undermines
political liberties.
| What is the connection between a
' Frenchman who does odd jobs about
the house on Sundays, a Cairo shoeshiner, a
drug trafficker, a Brazilian subsistence farmer
and a voluntary Red Cross worker? Appar¬
ently nothing except that they are all active in
areas that form part of the underground
economy.
The term is used to describe "every kind of
economic activity which is pursued on the
fringes of penal, social and fiscal legislation, or
which is mostly not recorded in the national
income accounts."1 This definition itself com¬
prises two types of underground economy:
the hidden economy and the barter economy.
The hidden economy refers to illegal profit-
making activities of many and varied kinds,
which include drug trafficking, smuggling,
procuring, corruption, tax fraud and forgery.
In each case the activity is kept hidden (since
it is illegal) and makes money or saves it when
tax fraud or evasion is involved for the person
who carries it out.
The barter economy is very different fro m
the hidden economy in that it involves purely
legal activities, whose only common denom-

inator is that it they do not appear in official
economic statistics (since they do not entail
any exchange of money). Here again the
examples are varied, ranging from voluntary
work for an association (a sports club or polit¬
ical party, for example) or for a non-govern¬
mental organization (such as a humanitarian
aid agency) to activities in the home (do-it-
yourself, gardening, housework) and subsis¬
tence farming.
Despite the difficulties involved in mea¬
suring the invisible, experts have tried to quan- ,
tify the underground economy phenom¬
enon in France, notably, where the National
Institute of Economic and Statistical Informa¬
tion (INSEE) ventured a figure of 4.3 per cent
of gross domestic product (GDP) for the
hidden economy alone (with 3 per cent
accounted for by tax fraud and evasion). Esti¬
mates for Third World and East European
countries are even more difficult to arrive at.
It so happens that these are the countries
where the underground economy plays a par¬
ticularly important role.
In the countries of Central and Eastern
Europe, whose economies are in the process
of going over to capitalism, and in the countries
of the South, where there is a marked phe¬
nomenon of economic dualization, the under¬
ground economy often plays a more decisive
role than in the rich countries.
Hidden billions
The underground economy existed in the coun¬
tries of Central and Eastern Europe before the
fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989. It even had unof¬
ficial links with the planned economy because,
in its way, it provided "answers to the short¬
comings and rigidity of the planned economy,
and particularly to shortages, standardization,
poor product quality and problems of getting
supplies to cities."2 A veritable black market
grew up in this way. Certain highly prized but
virtually unobtainable consumer goods such
as vodka, meat and petrol were produced
secretly and exchanged under the counter. It was
not unusual, either, for employees to engage
in "double work", in other words to do work
on the side at their official workplace. The
creaming off for private purposes of part of the
output of certain state enterprises in other
words theft also forms part of the under¬
ground economy. This parallel economy in fact
marked a resurgence of the "market" which
planning was striving to stamp out.
In developing
countries, the
underground
economy is
usually the
predominant
production
method.
A parallel market In Moscow
(Russia).
But whereas the planned economy disap¬
peared in these countries with the collapse of
their communist regimes, the parallel economy
did not go the same way. On the contrary, it
thrived on the ruins of the former system. The
transition to a market economy cannot be car¬
ried out overnight, and people in the former
Eastern-bloc countries will long continue to
rely on the black market to obtain, for example,
Western products which can now be freely
imported there.
The dominant production
i method
ñ Another aspect of the underground economy
J can be observed in the developing countries,
I where it is usually the predominant production
I method, though there are of course variations
| depending on geographical area and degree of
development. But two principal forms can be
defined: one of them, a "primitive" form, is
mainly restricted to subsistence farming, while
the other form, an "urban" one, encompasses
various commercial activities such as craft indus¬
tries, trade and very small-scale services such as
street vending (drinks, fruit, cigarettes),
shoeshining and "guided tours" for Western
tourists.
In the 1970s, some national and interna¬
tional organizations such as the World Bank
regarded such activities as survival activities
that would necessarily die out as countries
developed and modernized.
A completely different view has prevailed
since the end of the 1980s. "The informal
economy has acquired many virtues within
the past few years: it generates jobs and income,
can stand in for the state when it fails in its duty,
and is an area where solidarity can thrive."3 It
23

has even been argued by some, including Her¬
nando de Soto, an adviser to Peruvian Presi¬
dent Alberto Fujimori, that an informal
economy is vital to the development process.
It would seem that 39 per cent of the wealth
produced by Peru derives from undeclared
activities. According to de Soto, the informal
economy has been growing because official
regulations are too numerous and too rigid;
they cause unnecessary delays for individuals
and families whose needs are urgent. Take the
example of housing. A small farmer wishing
to settle in Lima will be obliged, if he abides
by the laws of the official economy, to wait
seven years and spend over $2,000 before
being allocated land on which to build his
house. The other solution open to him, which
falls into the category of the informal economy,
is to join the thousands who live in the Peru¬
vian capital's shanty-towns (it costs nothing,
and setting up house there takes only a few
hours). In de Soto's view, the regulations are in
urgent need of simplification.
The other side of the coin
It should however be stressed that the informal
solution adopted in the case just described
automatically brings in its train insecurity and
a lack of public amenities, sanitation and run¬
ning water. The young street vendors to be
found in the great capitals of the South lead an
equally precarious existence. One of the traps
of the informal economy is that those engaged
in it cannot rely on regular remuneration, often
In the 1970s activities linked to the parallel
economy were regarded as survival activities that
would die out as countries developed and
modernized. A completely different view has
prevailed since the end of the 1980s.
experience difficult working conditions and
hardly benefit at all from schooling or literacy
campaigns.
The growth of the underground economy
also goes hand in hand with a degree of laisser-
faire by governments. The adoption of such
policies can be dangerous in countries where
democracy is either non-existent or still shaky.
The risk is that increasing power will fall into
the hands of mafias, in other words, groups
likely to challenge both the authority of the
state and the basic rights of its citizens.
To sum up, although the underground
economy, in the poorest countries, has cre¬
ated a certain number of jobs, and even sus¬
tained a certain sense of solidarity and family
unity, its growth on too extensive a scale pre¬
sents very real dangers for both the economy
and the political system of such countries.
1. Pierre Pestiau, L'économie souterraine, Hachette,
Paris, 1989.
2 Marc Debare, Les milliards de l'ombre: l'économie
souterraine, Hatier, Paris, 1992.
3 Bruno Lautier, L'économie informelle, La
Découverte, Paris, 1994.
Imitations of an expensive
brand, these watches were
destroyed after being seized by
the authorities.
24
