THEAGEOFTHE
MIGRANT ARTIST
BY MICHAEL HAERDTER
ur globalizing world seems to be
marked by rapidly increasing chaos,
I a profound crisis of the ideas of
order, coherence and limitation that
long prevailed and whose legend we
arc still addicted to. Linear systems
in the sciences are slowly giving way to what has been
labelled "chaos theory". A clear and calculable image
of the world is fading, and the ideas of national
integrity and coherence are increasingly revealed as
an illusion.
The traditional concept of separate cultures
based on ethnic homogeneity and national singularity
has become untenable, whether we like it or not.
Cultures today are in general characterized by
hybridization. Our lives are defined by more than
one culture of which our personalities are crossing
points. We have hyphenated identities, and our cen¬
tury might be seen as a "hyphenated" period whose
dramatic turning points and murderous climaxes
reveal the death-throes of one world and the birth-
pangs of another.
The ivory tower in which solitary artists strove
for transcendental purity has been abandoned. Post¬
modern artists have left their lonely studios and
returned to the marketplaces of the world. Instead of
creating timeless works of museum art, they com¬
municate ideas and emotions, often by provocative
concepts or irritating objects and installations. The
formalist master perfecting his style over a lifetime is
a model which has been replaced by that of the artist
capable of formally mastering an existential message
or situation at any moment of his or her life. Art
today is largely interventionist and temporary. It can
happen anywhere. The studio of the postmodern
artist is the world.
Migrating artists are among the many transcul-
tural messengers of a world whose keywords are
nomadism and globalism. The postmodern inven¬
tion and worldwide spreading of residential arts cen¬
tres are one response to the needs of artists and intel¬
lectuals to experience the world and its many envi¬
ronments and cultures, to be temporarily part of
creative communities and to exchange ideas and
knowhow. The networking of centres across
national and cultural barriers is part of the post¬
modern game, as is the crossing of borders between
arts and technologies that many of these centres are
able to provide.
MICHAEL HAERDTER,
of Germany, is director of the Kunstlerhaus Bethanien, an institute for
the promotion of contemporary art.
»
W >
THE UNESCO lOURIER
16.
SEPTEMBER 1996

