APPEAL BY THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF UNESCO
FOR THE CONTINUATION OF THE PEACE PROCESS
IN THE MIDDLE EAST
Peace is proclaimed in treaties but made in the hearts and minds of peoples. The
premise on which UNESCO is founded remains as true as when it was affirmed fifty
years ago following "the great and terrible war . . . made possible by the denial
of the democratic principles of the dignity, equality and mutual respect of men,
and by the propagation in their place, through ignorance and prejudice, of the
doctrine of the inequality of men and races."
The Israeli and Palestinian peoples, sustained by the political vision and
courage of their leaders, are engaged in an historic process of reconciliation
aimed at bringing to an end long years of bloodshed and injustice and laying the
foundations for the construction of a culture of peace within their societies,
their territories and their region.
At this time when their commitment to peace is being so cruelly tested, I
appeal to the Israeli and Palestinian peoples not to be deflected from their course
by the terrorist's blind savagery. Let the actions of the extremists be seen for
what they areimpotence in the face of the peace process, an attack on peace
itself that is a challenge not only for the Israeli and Palestinian peoples but for
all the countries concerned.
Such outrages must not be allowed to prompt a return to the vicious circle
of retaliatory violence. The firmest measures must be taken to stamp out ter¬
rorism which is why I strongly support current initiatives to co-ordinate action
against terrorism in the region. We must show that our vision of peace with jus¬
tice is stronger and more enduring than any sectarian doctrine of hatred and
exclusion. Let peace be our common combat and shared victory.
I invite all those men and women who share the conviction expressed in this
Appeal to manifest their steadfast commitment to the peace process in the Middle
East by writing to me at UNESCO.
Federico Mayor
13 March 1996
Unesco
7, Place de Fontenoy
75352 Paris 07 SP France
Fax (33 1) 47 34 85 57
Internet: http://www.unesco.org
