Interview
Ismail Serageldin
talks to Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat
'A philosophy ofdevelopment '
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), generally known as
the World Bank, was established in 1945 as a result of decisions taken at the United
Nations Monetary and Financial Conference held at Bretton Woods (U.S.A.). It is a
specialized agency of the United Nations. In the last 50 years it has developed many
pioneering concepts and a philosophy of international aid. Here Ismail Serageldin, Vice
President of the Bank responsible for its Department of Environmentally Sustainable
Development, outlines for Courier readers the broad range of its activities.
What exactly does the World
Bank do?
Ismail Serageldin: Its primary role is
to finance development projects car¬
ried out by its member countries,
especially the poorer ones. These
projects are selected solely on the
basis of economic criteria. When a
borrower country exceeds a certain
per capita income threshold, it
becomes a donor country. A lot of
countries have gone through this
process, including some European
countries.
Has the Bank's philosophy
changed over the years?
I. S.: Yes. In contrast to what a lot of
people seem to think, the Bank is
changing constantly. Rack in 1944,
its primary goals were development
aid and the fight against poverty, but
they were harnessed to an immediate
objective, that of post-war recon¬
struction in Europe. The Bank's first
loan was made to France in 1947.
But the Marshall Plan, not the
Bank, was the main financial tool in
European reconstruction, and so the
Bank was able to take an interest in the
so-called "developing countries" early
on. Although its resources were rather
limited at the time, it brought off nothing
less than a financial miracle.
In order to promote the private
sector in these countries, without any
guarantees from the governments
concerned, it created the Interna¬
tional Finance Corporation (IFC) in
1956.
Then, when the first African
countries achieved independence,
Our approach to development is based on three
inseparable aspects of the concept of sustainability:
economic, social and environmental.

some very poor countries needed
loans at preferential rates but did not
meet the Bank's solvency criteria.
The International Development Asso¬
ciation (IDA) was founded in 1960 to
meet this need. This was the Bank's
first major step in the war on poverty.
Loans made by IDA can be interest-
free for up to forty years with a ten-
year grace period, whereas the World
Bank usually makes fifteen- to
twenty-year loans with only a three-
to five-year grace period and an
interest rate 0.5 per cent higher than
that at which the Bank itself borrows.
In 1988 the Multilateral Invest¬
ment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) was
established to encourage the flow of
private sector credit to the poor
countries by providing investors with
guarantees against political and non¬
commercial risks in these countries.
When former United States
Secretary of Defence Robert
McNamara became President of
the Bank in 1968, was his arrival
welcomed?
I. S.: It certainly was! He brought new
blood into the Bank. He was a very
dynamic man with a strong grasp of
essentials. At that time a big debate
was going on as to whether or not the
World Bank should be engaged in
operations targeted at the poor ini¬
tially it had been concerned exclu
sively with countries' economic growth.
Redistribution of income (investment in
human resources) was regarded as a
political matter, within the sphere of
state sovereignty. This was the begin¬
ning of a process of reasoning which
in 1991 culminated in the Bank's
demonstration that growth and redis¬
tribution were complementary.
In 1973 Robert McNamara said in
a speech in Nairobi that the Bank was
committing itself to the war on poverty
and targeting the lower 40 per cent of
the income distribution, in other words
those who were so poor that their con¬
dition was below any definition of
human dignity. From then on eco¬
nomic growth and poverty reduction
were the Bank's objectives. The idea
of integrated rural development was
launched, and the following year the
Bank began to attack the problem of
urban poverty. In 1975 it turned its
attention to health and population.
Did the 1973 Yom Kippur war
and the ensuing oil crisis have an
effect on the Bank's policy?
I. S.: The enormous financial flow that
accompanied the oil crisis triggered a
rush to this new source of wealth by
the commercial banks. The developing
countries took out loans from these
banks that their governments guaran¬
teed without hesitation. The World
Bank was against these so-called "sov¬
ereign" loans, which meant that the
lending bank was not interested in what
the borrower state did with the loan.
The World Bank lends on govern¬
mental guarantees, but it is also obliged
to make sure of the soundness of what

Interview



Ismail
Serageldin
is being planned. All the Bank's loans
are linked to specific projects. If a road
is being built, for example, the Bank
pays as the work proceeds.
By the end of the 1970s many of
the countries that had taken out "sov¬
ereign" loans from the commercial
banks were hit by a collapse in the
prices of the raw materials they
exported. They were in deep trouble,
short of currency and funds. (It is
worth recalling here that the big
problem of international debt involved
commercial banks, not the World
Bank). These countries then appealed
to the World Bank for help, asking for
loans but without any specific pro¬
jects in view, since their economic and
financial situation made it impossible
for them to continue work on projects
that were already underway, never
mind embarking on new ones.
And this was contrary to the
World Bank's principles. . .
I. S.: Precisely. To help member
states out of the deadlock, we had to
understand why their financial insti¬
tutions had got themselves into such
a mess. That's when structural
adjustment programmes came in. The
liquidity loans that went with these
programmes were regarded as excep¬
tions to the Bank's rule; they were
made to enable countries to achieve a
more balanced position. At the time
the Bank thought this phase would
last only a short time.
But in 1983 the Bank realized that
for many countries, mainly in Africa,
structural adjustment was going to be
a very long job. A study carried out at
the request of African finance minis¬
ters made a clear diagnosis: African
governments bad run their economies
badly, exchange rates were intoler¬
able, and state-related structures
were too heavily subsidized.
So the Bank insisted on the need
for a moral agreement between credi¬
tors/lenders and African countries
which were ready to put their house
in order. Among other measures, the
Special Fund for Africa was created to
increase the IDA's lending capacity to
the twenty-two most indebted nations.
This was a turning point in the
international community's methods
because for the first time the guar¬
antee of a sovereign state was no
longer enough. The borrower
country had to put its economy in
order. Lenders and creditors
expected the World Bank to evaluate
the efforts made in this regard by bor¬
rower countries. This position was
officially adopted when the Special
Fund for Africa, administered by the
Bank, was created in February 1985.
What role did the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) play in the
debt crisis?
I. S.: A country has to be a member of
the IMF before it can become a
member of the World Bank. And once
a year each member state has to
review its financial and monetary man¬
agement with the Fund, which then
submits a report. In fact the World
Bank and the International Monetary
Fund are complementary institutions.
The latter looks after short-term bal¬
ance exchange rates, money stock
and credit and the former is con¬
cerned with long-term production and
investment structures.
Tru
As the debt crisis grew, the com¬
mercial banks and other creditors
accepted to reschedule provided the
IMF was willing to monitor the eco¬
nomic and monetary situation on a
quarterly basis. The Paris Club (cred¬
itor governments) and the London
Club (commercial creditors) were
founded at that time. The IMF played a
very important role in matters relating
to debt rescheduling and macro-eco¬
nomic stability, and the Bank in matters
relating to structural adjustment for
the long-term growth of the economy.
In 1987 the Bank launched a social
programme to accompany structural
adjustment measures and commissioned
a long-term study on the conditions
under which Africa could emerge from
the crisis. One of the conclusions of the
report1 , which was issued in 1989, was
that there could be no solution to
Africa's debt problem without effective
governance.
How can this dilemma between
politics and economics be
resolved?
I. S.: The Bank's rules are quite clear
on this. It is expressly forbidden for
any member of the World Bank to
intervene in the political affairs of a
member state. And a regime's political
hue cannot be used as a criterion in
deciding whether or not to make a
loan. By introducing the idea of "good
governance", the Bank sparked off a
debate every bit as lively as that about
redistribution of income fifteen years
before.
But it all depends on what you
mean by politics. The minutiae of pol¬
itics don't concern us. The political
structures of the countries we deal
with are not our business. On the other
hand there are certain aspects of gov¬
ernance that we regard as essential for
economic growth: openness, for
rue development involves improving the status
of women and empowering them to play an active par
in society.
i t

All the Bank's loans are linked to specific
projects. If a road is being built, the Bank pays
as the work proceeds.
example. When a country has no clear
idea of the size of its external debt
because several different ministers
have had the right to authorize state
expenditure, doubts arise about its
governance. This is no longer, strictly
speaking, a question of internal politics.
The second aspect is account¬
ability, in particular justification of
the use of funds. Suppose a
country's power company makes mas¬
sive losses and to make up for them
turns to the public treasury, whose
money comes from taxes on farm
products. It cannot be denied that
this is of concern to the Bank. Good
governance cannot mean creaming off
funds that should be used for invest¬
ment to make up for deficits incurred
by badly managed uncompetitive
public-sector enterprises.
Thirdly, institutional pluralism is
necessary to create an atmosphere
that encourages better economic man¬
agement. For that a country needs
chambers of commerce, employers'
federations and trade unions.
It is also indispensable that
investors and other economic players
should be kept informed of what the
state is doing in the field of tax and
income tax law. A survey of 121 pro¬
jects carried out by the Bank shows
that the ones that worked best were
those in which the different economic
players took part.
But more than anything else, the
rule of law is absolutely essential.
There can be no useful investment or
serious investors without an invest¬
ment code that clearly defines obliga¬
tions, taxes, interest rates, rights, and
so on. Investors also need to count on
a reliable legal system. If there isn't
one, they won't run the risk of
investing in the country.
All these criteria of good manage
ment should help to create an encour¬
aging general environment for eco¬
nomic activity.
As part of the same line of
thinking, the Bank supports the
idea of sustainable development. . .
I. S.: Our present approach is based
on three indissociable aspects of the
notion of sustainability: economic,
social and environmental.
Sustainable development means
giving future generations as much cap¬
ital as we have had ourselves and the
same opportunities to transform it into
goods and services. These opportuni¬
ties can easily be quantified. Our idea
of what is meant by capital must be
extended to include not only economic
and financial capital, but also natural
and human capital, in other words
health, education and nutrition, and
the social capital represented by
investment in the structures that
enable society to function. This is a
new approach to the wealth of nations.
All social structures are based on
the individual and the bonds existing
between individuals. This gives rise
to a paradox. We have to be free to
act as individuals, but this freedom is
meaningless if the individual is not in
contact with others. Human beings
must act socially and express their
freedom but they must bave a great
degree of autonomy as well. This co¬
operation between individuals gener¬
ates well-being and wealth.
All World Bank studies on the
role of women show that women play
a role of major importance in eco¬
nomic development. True develop¬
ment involves improving the status of
women and empowering them to play
an active part in society. Education
and access to credit are essential
components of this empowerment.
Economics, politics, culture and
the environment are central to
development. What about the spiri¬
tual aspect?
I. S.: A few years ago some of my col¬
leagues and I wrote a book about
this, called Friday Morning Reflec¬
tions at the World Bank: Essays in
Values and Development. We set up
a small discussion group almost
twenty years ago, and we meet every
Friday morning to talk about the spir¬
itual values of development. Our
members include Christians, Mus¬
lims, Buddhists, atheists, and Jews.
The book has four chapters, written
by a Muslim, a Hindu, a Christian
and an agnostic.
What kind of thing do you talk
about?
I. S.: Contrary to what you might
think, it's not a dialogue between reli¬
gions, since some of our members are
non-believers. We talk about the spir¬
itual values of development. We
choose a topic such as "at what levels
should we attack poverty?" or "What
is the role of charity in development
projects?". Everyone puts forward a
personal point of view depending on
who they are, intellectually and spiri¬
tually speaking, without representing
a particular religion. The chapter I
wrote is quite clear on this point. It is
called "The Justly Balanced Society:
One Muslim's View"2. Speaking for
myself, the values I consider to be
Islamic require us to defend the inter¬
ests of the poorest and the marginal¬
ized members of society. But of course
wherever we come from and whatever
our affiliations and religious convic¬
tions, we share a certain number of
universal spiritual values that wc try
to apply in our daily lives. I
1 "Long-term Perspective Study of Sub-
Saharan Africa", 4 vols. , World Hank,
1989.
2 In David Dcckmann et al., Friday
Morning Reflections at the World Bank:
Essays in Values and Development,
Washington DC, Seven Locks Press, 1991.
