Men of few words
interview with Christophe Wondji
The word of an African chief is the sacred fruit of a
long and silent apprenticeship
A village chief
in Botswana.
Africa attaches great importance to oral
tradition. Is there such a thing as an 'African
silence'?
Christophe Wondji: There are several kinds of
silence. The silence of the night and the silence of
the forest contrast, for example, with the sound of
tom-toms during festivities and merrymaking, and
with the eloquence of the griots musicians and
folk-historians. There are also the profound silences
that punctuate the utterances of wise men, such as
those of Ogotommel, the old Dogon sage ques¬
tioned by the French ethnologist Marcel Griaule.
Speech is an act. It comes from the depths of
one's being. It is a form of commitment. That is
why the head of a family or a village speaks only
at the appropriate time and place. Words spoken by
a chief can be divisive. They can wound and even
kill. A chief is therefore very careful about deciding
when he should speak. There is an Akan proverb
which says that the spoken word is worth its
weight in gold. In other words, it is comparable to
11 \\\y
the signs engraved on the little bronze statuettes
that were once used in parts of West Africa as
weights for weighing gold dust. The only way of
access to this word is by going through successive
stages of silence, which "weigh down the tongue".
Who can receive the words of an elder?
C. W.: A father chooses the quietest of his sons,
the one least prone to lose his temper, the one
said to be "like a grave", in that he takes in words
but does not utter any. His attitude shows he is
keen to learn: he remains in the company of
"elders", but keeps silent in their presence, thus
showing that he knows his place.
One day the father takes the son he has chosen
to one side and says to him: "My son, I want to
give you some fragments of the Great Word the
word that concerns the origins of our family. You
shall reveal nothing, I am sure: your belly is deep."
A person whose belly is not deep who
immediately repeats what he has been told is
left out, because "everything comes out of him
easily". If he is incapable of keeping his mouth
shut when he is young, how will he be able to
keep an important secret later on in life? It's easy
to spot a man "with a light mouth". Just tell him
something of no importance and make him swear
to keep it to himself. If he boasts about it to the
first person he meets and during the heat of the
day gossip circulates fast beneath the straw
roofs the blabbermouth is disgraced forever.
How is the word passed on?
C. W.: By keeping one's mouth shut and one's
ears open. The young man lets the elder speak.
The master expresses himself slowly, in a rather
low voice. His speech is punctuated by long
silences, so that his words can penetrate the
younger man and become part of him.
10

The griot (village musician
and historian) of a Guiñean
village with his grandson.
Does the disciple make any comment while
he is receiving his instruction?
C. W.: He never interrupts the elder with untimely
remarks. For many a long year he simply listens.
And as a result of his patient listening, his spirit is
elevated and gradually approaches the truth
embodied by the master.
It is only when he feels he has understood a
little that he starts asking questions, but he is in
no hurry to do so. Until he has made the elder's
words his own, he will be unable to use his knowl¬
edge properly. That moment will not come until
he in turn is in charge of a family, a group of
hunters or a whole village.
For some time now, educators have been
striving to introduce new methods of "expression
and communication" in Ivory Coast schools
following a Western fashion. The emphasis is on
dialogue. "Put your point of view across," very
young pupils are told. "Formulate your doubts
11

and your criticisms." It is easy to see why the pupils
fi nd it hard to adjust to a practice so totally alien to
their tradition of respecting a master and a corpus
of knowledge.
Can the silent listening of a disciple be
compared to that of a hunter lying in wait?
C. W.: In a sense, yes. In Akan, silence is defined
by the following expression: "Nothing can be
heard from the deep forest." The young hunter
holds his breath and remains motionless as he
learns how to recognize animals by certain sounds
they make the growl of the leopard, its muffl e d
tread, the flapping of an elephant's ears, the rustle
of grass under an antelope's hooves. There is an
attitude that corresponds to each animal, but also
an appropriate way of shooting it. When faced
with a leopard, a solitary and combative animal
that is quick to scent danger, the hunter has to
adopt a completely different strategy from the
one he will use with an antelope, which is timid
and guileless. The arrow has to hit the leopard
first time, in the head or the heart, otherwise it is



bound to get you.
In the same way, the head of a family or a vil¬
lage, or indeed an Ashanti king, has to resolve
conflicts with a good deal of tact, and without
being unfair to either party. Like the hunter lying
in wait, he seems to be keeping out of it. His "cane
carrier"1 conducts the debate in his place. The
chief's words concern each person and are
Elephants in Chobe Natural
Park (Botswana).
i
addressed to all. They therefore need to be
selected, or "sifted", by the cane carrier. They
are full of unspoken thoughts, which are
extremely important, and which the elders know
how to decipher.
The chief, then, listens patiently without inter¬
fering. Used as he is to staying in the background,
in an attitude of attentive observation, he has learnt
how to fathom the human soul. He can see
through masks and contradictions. When he
intervenes it is to bring matters to a close using
only a few words. He is expected to take the right
decision courageously. He, too, has to "aim accu¬
rately", in other words recognize the trouble¬
maker but not exclude him: "He who is wrong
must not sleep outside."
You're talking about words spoken in
public. What about those spoken in private?
12

Fulani leaders returning from
a ceremony (Nigeria).
CHRISTOPHE WONDJI
is head of the General and
Regional Histories section of
Unesco's Division of International
Cultural Co-operation. His
published works include La côte
ouest-africaine du Sénégal à la
Côte (¡Ivoire, Géographie,
sociétés, histoire, 1500-1800
("The West African Coast from
Senegal to Côte d'Ivoire:
Geography, Societies, History,
1500-1800", Paris, 1985).
C. W.: A chief does not speak to all and sundry, at
any time or in any place, except via his cane car¬
rier. If a "well-intentioned" person comes to see
him and makes indiscreet remarks about one of
his collaborators, he will simply say "I heard, thank
you", turn away and refuse to receive the person
again. How can someone who divulges a secret
be trusted? What's more, the informer surely casts
doubt, by his very act, on the chief's discrimination.
It is as if he were saying to him: "You don't know
how to choose your associates." The chief knows
full well that a slanderous remark actually seeks to
destabilize his power.
The chief's authority resides above all in his
ability to keep calm and control himself, a faculty
which he has developed since his youth, and
which enables him to maintain a certain distance
from himself and curb his temper.
One day, the inhabitants of a Bété village who
felt they had been aggressed by the chief's men
came to insult them. When the chief appeared,
they redoubled their insults, because the chief
embodies the whole village. The chief first listened
to their vociferations without uttering a word, then
decreed: "You are within your rights" and invited
the malcontents to join him over a jug of bangui
(palm wine). They all fell into an awkward silence,
then ended up admitting: "We went too far."
The chief is responsible for war and for peace.
He has to find words that soothe, not words that
incite, for when he dies he will have to leave his
children a vigorous, united and prosperous society.
And for that he will have to answer to his ancestors.
Interview by MYRIAM SMADJA
1. The chief's spokesman, who also carries the chief's wooden
cane, the symbol of his power. Editor
13
