an impulsefrom ,
within
Dance
renews the
bonds that
unite us to
the world
by Dominique Dupuy
The American dancer and
choreographer Merce
Cunningham during a
rehearsal of Event (1976).
Modern people have a paradoxical rela¬
tionship with space. They may have
reached to the stars, explored the ocean
depths and fathomed the unfathomable, but
they have also cut themselves off from their
environment and the forces around them.
They abandon the earth and risk becoming
rootless, "extra-terrestrial" creatures. Long
gone are the days when, as peasants, they had
Opposite page
above, Rudolf Nureyev
(foreground) in a
1972 revival of
Stravinsky's ballet
Apollon Musagetes,
created by George
Balanchine in 1928
for the Ballet Russe.
Opposite page,
Merce Cunningham's
Enfer (1992).
physical contact with the land. Today, high on
their tractors, they have become human
machines. Long gone are the days when, as
navigators, they were at one with wind and
water. Today, as they wing peacefully, com¬
fortably and hygenically from continent to
continent, they have lost touch with the
dream of Icarus.
They have hardly any active contact with
10

the elements, with matter, or even with
gravity. In their daily lives they do less and
less of the things that once linked them to the
world. Once upon a time they were used to
walking; they strode up hill and down dale.
Today, in lifts, escalators, cars and trains,
movement is levelled. Many once-familiar
physical actions beating, hammering,
pounding, grinding and wood-turning are
now done by machines.
Various kinds of recreation compensate
for this loss. Some, such as funfairs with
swings, Ferris wheels and roller-coasters, are
not new. More recent forms of diversion
include sporting activities such as jogging,
skiing, water-skiing, surfing, windsurfing and
hang-gliding, virtually all of which are marred
by the spirit of competition.
A ritual act
Today people tolerate their bodies, reluc¬
tantly accept their weight and maltreat their
vertebrae (although some civilizations still
teach the art of sitting). They may become
© C. Masson/M. Enguerand. Paris
A. Paccianl/C, Masson/M. Enguerand. Paris
restless as they passively consume sounds
and images, but they avoid real movement.
What about dancers? Once upon a time,
like peasants and sailors, they were in tune
with earth and sky, with seasonal activities, the
lunar month, the weather, and the rhythms of
life. But as traditional farm work disappears,
this kind of dancing is also dying out, and so
too is dancing as a form of festivity.
Since the beginning of the century, how¬
ever, new dance forms have appeared that
seek to revive the time-honoured relation¬
ships between people, their bodies and the
natural world. Today, as part of the globaliza¬
tion process, dance more than any other form
of expression is an area of exchange and under¬
standing where East, West, North and South
are meeting, not without incident, perhaps,
but with growing enthusiasm. Why is this so?
Dance testifies that people belong to the
universe and its profundities: gravity, silence
and sanctity. Even when performed outside
sacred precincts, it is full of ritual meaning.
Performance is a rite whose preparation,
rehearsal and production is a communion.
Ritual is inherent in an activity that estab¬
lishes a special relationship between dancer
and teacher, during a time of awakening and
initiation. Dance is a rite in which the body is
11

A dancer from Bali, where
dance plays an important role
in cultural life.
DOMINIQUE DUPUY,
a French dancer and
choreographer, is in charge of
dance at the Institute of Musical
and Choreographic Education of
the Cité de la Musique, in Paris.
listened to and cared for, calling to mind the
ancient idea of the body as a temple.
A dancing body establishes a relationship
with the universe and becomes a point of
contact with energies, forces and flows. In its
extreme affirmation of verticality it points the
way to ecstasy.
Dancers do not take leave of their senses.
On the contrary, they use their senses with
great subtlety not only the so-called objec¬
tive senses of sight and hearing but also the
subjective senses, especially touch, by which
they make contact with the physical world.
Dancers are physically normal people
who stand apart from the passivity of
everyday life and the tension of sporting
achievement. They occupy the middle
ground between the interior and the exte¬
rior; they commune. They compete neither
with themselves nor with others. Dancing
together in a group is only possible if there is
harmony. Dancers discover space in a state
of rapture that is not far from the rapture of
the soul.
The element of dance is empty space; its
instrument is the human body. There is no
need for words, colours, earth, stone or
wood. Dance lives in the present tense. Its
life is one of loss and renewal. It vanishes and
reappears. The dancer, the only begetter of
the dance, is mortal. The body ages and one
day will rot. Dance has no Stradivariuses, and
there are no museums of ancient dance
instruments. Constantly reinventing them¬
selves, intoxicated with perfection, dancers
throw themselves headlong into their art.
Art in the present tense
The repository of the dance tradition is mainly
the body and the spoken word. Knowledge is
transmitted by one-to-one contact between
master and pupil. The camera and written
notation are useful tools, but they can never
replace the moment of transmission, the
unique instant of sublime pleasure when the
core of a movement is communicated like a
secret to a child or an adult. The dance master
is something of a shaman.
The essence of dance is rarity, quality
rather than quantity, being rather than having.
The way to perfection lies through
learning by repetition, a long apprenticeship
whereby a movement is rarefied from ordi¬
nariness into dance. Dancers do what anyone
can do, but the way in which they do it makes
their dance different and unique.
They are transformed by their efforts.
They embody in concentrated form all the
movements of the plant and animal kingdoms.
They are trees whose roots move; they are
fish and birds. Tall moving trees, tall earth-
bound birds, they progress through space
horizontally and vertically, like great moving
crosses.
But the inner movement of dance is silent.
Except in the rare cases where body sounds
are heard hammering feet, clapping hands,
snapping fingers it is a movement that
emerges from silence and the void. Breathing
provides its inner resonance.
The embodiment of harmony between
earth and heaven, the physical and the meta¬
physical, high and low, dark and light, the
expressible and the inexpressible, dancers are
enraptured and enrapture those who watch
them. What they create is as dazzling and tran¬
sient as a flash of lightning. The dancer has and
is a sacred fire. H
12
