e language
ofbody andsoul
People dance to celebrate big occasions and
express thepleasure ofbeing together
Above, a festival of aboriginal
dance in Laura, Queensland
(Australia).
WERNER LAMBERSY
is a Belgian writer. Among his many
published works are Anvers
("Antwerp", Editions les
éperonniers, Brussels, 1994) and
Volti Subito (Editions Le Dé Bleu,
1994).
People dance to celebrate existence at
I festive moments which are cut off
from ordinary time and bring them into con¬
tact with a timeless world. This experience is
common to all those peoples who, whenever
they want to mark a sad or happy event, do so
by marching (a slow dance), taking part in
processions (at different rhythms) or making
merry.
Even today, a dance is always the high
point of a town or village fête. Weddings,
communions and baptisms end in dancing.
Philanthropic organizations organize charity
balls, and dancing is a feature of informal get-
by Werner Lambersy
togethers at conferences, at teenagers' parties,
and at match-making sessions held for young
people in search of a partner.
The pulse
of society
For the community concerned, the impor¬
tant thing is to get together and see who has
turned up, who hasn't, and who hasn't been
invited to show itself to other communi¬
ties and to itself. Festive occasions, with
their displays of finery and wealth, their
social ostentation and their revelry help to
establish and endorse a pecking order within
13

The Chilean town of Tirana
honours the Virgin Mary
during a six-day festival held
in July.
© Joe Viesti/Ask Images. Paris
Joie tie Wvrein Dakar
(Senegal).
the group. At these times, dance dramatizes
the often diffuse power relationships on
which the group is based, even if it does not
put its members on equal terms.
When it dances, society functions like a
body. Like the individual body, the social
body has its needs that must be recognized
and satisfied in good time. Dance restores its
fluidity, encourages its members to circulate,
and reveals its physical condition, its vitality
and resilience. The dancers who take part in
the Shrove Tuesday carnival held each year at
Binche in Belgium, dress up in their heavy
feather costumes at four o'clock in the
morning and have to dance to a punishing
tambourine beat for three days. Here we are
not far from voodoo trances or ritual Indian
dances experiences in which dance com¬
municates with the invisible and flirts with
the unsayable.
Grape-pickers and harvesters would
never dream of taking leave of each other
without holding a dance to celebrate harvest
home, thank the gods, commune with the
elements and promise to meet again. Outside
the family, social or ethnic context, dancing to
celebrate national holidays is an avenue to the
universal.
Dance is not so much an aspiration to
defeat the laws of gravity as a desire to be at
one with the harmony of the spheres. Singly,
in couples or in groups, dancers always
express more than is strictly required by the
occasion that brings them together. They
tread beyond the bounds of real time and
space. Pan is not dead; he has become a punk
or a rapper.
Where there's dance
there's hope
There was dancing in front of the ruins of the
Berlin wall just as there was dancing at Wood¬
stock to protest against the Viet Nam War. The
Middle Ages had a dance of the dead. Anything
can be an occasion for dance, even horror. But
where there's dance there's hope. There is no
such thing as a dance of despair. This is why
humanity's immediate reaction to events is to
dance. It may be a dangerous thing to do. It
14

Right, a couple dance the
tango in the San Telmo
district of Buenos Aires
(Argentina).
For centuries the people of
Helston in Cornwall (England)
have celebrated the arrival of
springtime by dancing the
Furry Dance. Below, the
dancers make their way
through the streets.
may be playing with fire. But in communicating
with one another it is the alpha and the omega.
Dance, rather than the written and spoken
word, is the language of the soul. To dance is



to take the pulse of the world and become
attuned to its rhythm. Dance means listening
to others, acknowledging the existence of
common ground.
All human society is based on this principle.
Dance is a leitmotif of private and family life, of
religious and social life. It is a crossroads of
meeting and exchange between the irrational
and the rational. Whenever men and women
get together and dance, they save from extinc¬
tion and standardization the untamed side of
human nature that is indispensable to our sur¬
vival. To dance is to refuse the paralysis of con¬
formity and to rediscover the essence of
democracy: diversity, potentiality, and freedom
of movement.
15
