What is
development?
Is it a soulless process of economic growth
dedicated exclusively to the creation of wealth
and regarding everything, including culture, as a
commodity? Or is it part of a broader endeavour
to construct a society whose members are both
participants and beneficiaries and whose goals are
not limited to economics but shaped by the
values to which these people subscribe?
These questions, which have long been
asked, were recently re-examined in depth
during a three-year enquiry (1993-1995) carried
out by a distinguished World Commission on
Culture and Development chaired by Mr. Javier
Pérez de Cuéllar. The Commission's overall
findings have recently been published by
UNESCO in the form of an excellent report
entitled Our Creative Diversity.
This issue of the UNESCO Courier is natu¬
rally more limited in scope than the Report. It is
an attempt, via contributions from some of
those who helped the World Commission in its
deliberations, to present this complex issue to a
wide public in simple terms. The conjunction of
two such disparate terms as development and
culture is in itself enough to give rise to misun¬
derstandings, false problems and false solutions,
and therefore invites caution.
THE UNESCO ^>u , . SEPTEMBER 1096

The dominant economic system is being endow economic activity with nobler purposes
called to account. Its driving principle rampant than the profit motive, help to liberate people
worldwide competition for profit in an open from need and ignorance, stimulate their crc-
market deploys a logic that is based on greed, ative impulses, and establish new forms of soli-
inequality and pollution and in effect condemns darity between individuals, between peoples,
the majority of the world's people to a grim fate, and between humankind and nature.
Today this system is being contested at various The goal of culture regarded in this way is not
levels, ranging from root and branch opposition to detach and isolate a given region or corn-
to piecemeal criticism of its specific effects. Cul- munity from the rest of the world, but to enable
turc often seems to be the spearhead of this it to play a part in the system of global exchange
challenge. But what, one might ask, is the true while enjoying full respect for its dignity, its
role and nature of culture ? originality and its essential interests.
Some, in the North, simply regard culture as Culture in this sense is not at odds with eco-
an instrument as one factor among others in nomics; it provides economics with a human
the search for profit or as a corrective to certain face. It is the very core of a society's way of life,
excesses of the system of production. Others, defining the purposes and standards which
in the South, use culture as an emblem of iden- show it at its best.
tity which can be brandished against Western But if culture is to play this role effectively,
ways of life. In so doing, they do not attack the it must not be venerated as a sacrosanct
dominant system's fundamental flaws, its immutable tradition but regarded as a malleable
propensity to create socio-economic inequali- process capable of adapting to new situations
ties and environmental damage, but the political while retaining a certain essential continuity. It
and legal institutions that are its concomitants in must be able to sacrifice superstitions, habits and
democracies (individual freedoms, human rights inclinations that have become oppressive, and
and political pluralism). Here, support for cul- in the interests of self-renewal and free expres-
tural specificity masks the defence of conserva- sion to borrow from other societies criteria of
tive interests in patriarchal and despotic societies efficiency that have proved their worth,
or the total rejection of Western society in the But surely there is nothing new in this. Are not
name of a programme which is to a greater or today's living cultures those which refused to
lesser extent fundamentalist. become fossilized and, instead of trying to make
Yet another way of looking at culture (in the time stand still, took root in time, drew fertility
broadest sense) is to regard it as a source of self- from it and thus remained eternally youthful?
renewal and a lever of change as the bearer of
moral, aesthetic and spiritual values that can BAHGAT ELNADI AND ADEL RIFAAT
THC UNESCO (oURIER «SEPTEMBER 1006
