Looking at life with the eyes of a child
by Henri Matisse
French painter (1869-1954)
nlf
Creation is the artist's true function; where there is no cre¬
ation there is no art. But it would be a mistake to ascribe this
creative power to an inborn talent. In art, the genuine creator
is not just a gifted being, but a man who has succeeded in
arranging, for their appointed end, a complex of activities, of
which the work of art is the outcome.
Thus, for the artist creation begins with vision. To see is
itself a creative operation, requiring an effort. Everything that
we see in our daily life is more or less distorted by acquired
habits, and this is perhaps more evident in an age like ours
when the cinema posters and magazines present us every
day with a flood of ready-made images which are to the eye
what prejudices are to the mind.
The effort needed to see things without distortion takes
something very like courage: and this courage is essential
to the artist, who has to look at everything as though he
saw it for the first time: he has to look at life as he did when
he was a child and, if he loses that faculty, he cannot express
himself in an original, that is, a personal way.
To take an example. Nothing, I think, is more difficult for
a true painter than to paint a rose, because before he can do
so, he has first to forget all the roses that were ever painted.
I have often asked visitors who came to see me at Vence
whether they had noticed the thistles by the side of the
road. Nobody had seen them; they would all have recog¬
nized the leaf of an acanthus on a Corinthian capital, but the
memory of the capital prevented them from seeing the thistle
in nature. The first step towards creation is to see every¬
thing as it really is, and that demands a constant effort. To
create is to express what we have within ourselves. Every
genuine creative effort comes from within. We have also to
nourish our feeling, and we can do so only with materials
derived from the world about us. This is the process whereby
the artist incorporates and gradually assimilates the external
world within himself, until the object of his drawing has
become like a part of his being, until he has it within him and
can project it on to the canvas as his own creation.
When I paint a portrait, I come back again and again to my
sketch and every time it is a new portrait that I am painting:
not one that I am improving, but a quite different one that I
am beginning over again; and every time I extract from the
same person a different being.
In order to make my study more complete, I have often
had recourse to photographs of the same person at different
ages; the final portrait may show that person younger or
under a different aspect from that which he or she presents
at the time of sitting, and the reason is that that is the
aspect which seemed to me the truest, the one which
revealed most of the sitter's real personality.
Thus a work of art is the climax of a long work of prepa¬
ration. The artist takes from his surroundings everything
that can nourish his internal vision, either directly, when
the object he is drawing is to appear in his composition, or by
analogy. In this way he puts himself into a position where he
can create. He enriches himself internally with all the forms
he has mastered and which he will one day set to a new
rhythm.
It is in the expression of this rhythm that the artist's work
becomes really creative. To achieve it, he will have to sift
rather than accumulate details, selecting for example, from all
possible combinations, the line that expresses most and gives
life to the drawing: he will have to seek the equivalent terms by
which the facts of nature are transposed into art.
In my "Still Life with Magnolia", I painted a green marble
table red: in another place I had to use black to suggest
the reflection of the sun on the sea; all these transpositions
were not in the least matters of chance or whim, but were the
result of a series of investigations, following which these
colours seemed to me to be necessary, because of their rela¬
tion to the rest of the composition, in order to give the
impression I wanted. Colours and lines are forces, and the
secret of creation lies in the play and balance of those forces.
In the chapel at Vence, which is the outcome of earlier
researches of mine, I have tried to achieve that balance of
forces; the blues, greens and yellows of the windows compose
a light within the chapel which is not strictly any of the
colours used, but is the living product of their mutual
blending; this light made up of colours is intended to play
upon the white and black-stencilled surface of the wall
facing the windows, on which the lines are purposely set
wide apart. The contrast allows me to give the light its max¬
imum vitalizing value, to make it the essential element,
colouring, warming and animating the whole structure, to
which it is desired to give an impression of boundless space
despite its small dimensions. Throughout the chapel, every
line and every detail contributes to that impression.
That is the sense, so it seems to me, in which art may be
said to imitate nature, namely, by the life that the creative
worker infuses into the work of art. The work will then
appear as fertile and as possessed of the same power to
thrill, the same resplendent beauty as wc find in works of
nature.
Great love is needed to achieve this effect, a love capable
of inspiring and sustaining that patient striving towards
truth, that glowing warmth and that analytic profundity
that accompany the birth of any work of art. But is not love
the origin of all creation?
(Text recorded by Régine Pernoud)
50
