SWIMMING AGAINST THE TIDE
BY EZ10 MANZINI A quest for duration in societies whose only
permanent feature is change
Design is inseparable from its age.
I But its role may also be to break
away from the spirit of the age and
herald a new era.
Two hundred years ago, the seemingly sta¬
tic pre-industrial world began to stir. Slowly
at first, and then with growing speed, it
embarked on an unstoppable quest for nov¬
elty. Right from the start, industrial design
was one of the main driving forces behind this
process of acceleration, for reasons that were
both ethical (the new versus the old in the
name of progress) and mercantile (the new
replacing the old in the name of commerce).
Design was both a product and a component
of its time. How do things stand today?
It is often said that acceleration and tran¬
sience are the defining features of our age. But
today we wonder where all this speed is tak¬
ing us. Perhaps design should swim against
the tide and contribute to this questioning.
Perhaps it should promote profundity and
duration in what seems to be an increasingly
superficial and constantly changing world. In
other words, perhaps design should emphasize
the "solid side" of a changing world.
Language pollution
Freed from its inertia, matter lends itself to
unlimited transformation. The physical world
no longer seems to be a solid vehicle for per¬
manent meanings, but a constantly changing
fluid. At the same time, progress in informa¬
tion technology and communications opens
up a new dimension of human experience that
is liberated not only from matter, but from
the constraints of space and time. Even the
certainties of memory are called into question
by the greater possibilities of "fiction", of
juggling with information and images to cre
ate a potentially infinite variety of "virtually
real" pasts, presents and futures.
These developments are both fascinating
and disturbing. We cannot yet fully gauge their
human and social implications. The only thing
we can really be sure of is that the changes
underway are of far-reaching importance. New
cultural instruments must be created to con- Andy Warhol-Robot
(1994), by Korean artist
Nam June Paik.
THE UNESCO ^JURIER DECEMBER 1996

.«-<_
kbove, The "Ara" halogen
lamp designed in 1988 by
Philippe Starck (France) and
produced by Flos.
lop, Ecriture de feu ("Writing
with fire", 1996) by the French
sculptor Yann. Oil burners
float on the surface of Lac de
Nariay, a lake in France's Jura
department.
front a phenomenon whose consequences will
be mainly negative unless it is kept under con¬
trol. We can already see this today. What ought
to be communication, and therefore exchange,
has led to a new form of isolation, and what
ought to be information has become no more
than background noise. We discover that
words and images are products that are "con¬
sumed" and produce rubbish that eventually
pollutes our language.
But matter that seemed to have dissolved in
the ever-changing flow of information reap¬
pears elsewhere in our experience. The rubbish
accumulated by our societies is matter that
has again become dense and inert, trapped in its
own heaviness and duration. It is used matter,
stripped of its original meaning, that invades
our space and our time as tangible evidence of
the irreducible physicality of our environ¬
ment. We discover that the fluid world of
information and "fiction" needs powerful
stage machinery in order to function, that all
this machinery consumes and is consumed,
and that it all forms a huge entropie system
which uses resources and creates waste.
Nobody today would deny this obvious
fact. We talk anxiously about "the environ¬
ment problem", and ask ourselves questions
about how to promote "sustainability", in
other words about how to put an end to the
war that the human race has more or less
unwittingly declared on its environment. We
cast around for solutions. Some turn to an
idealized past that will never return; others
look just as naively to an increasingly tech¬
nological and dematerialized future. As we
have just seen, in the current economic and
cultural context, dematerialization is more
than offset by the increase in consumer goods.
The solution to the problem the creation of
a more harmonious relationship between
humans and their environment is not and
cannot be purely technical.
And so we move between two contrasting
worlds: a virtual world without substance or
history, and an environment in which cum¬
bersome and durable rubbish is accumulating.
Living matter
Of course it is very tempting to turn away
from the problems of the environment and
take refuge in the virtual world. But to do so
is to forget that between the immaterial world
of information and the world of "dead mat¬
ter", or rubbish, there is a world of bodies,
things and images which change in ways and at
a pace determined by our innermost nature as
human beings biological beings who live in an
ecosystem, and cultural beings who constantly
try to make sense of things. And this world of
THE UNESCO QïURIERB DECEMBER 1996

matter which is "living" in both a biological
and a semiotic sense is a world which needs
permanence as well as change, repetition as well
as novelty, and solidity as well as fluidity.
The world of living matter consists of
change and permanence. It could be thought of
as a fluid with a solid component. Today we
should fix our attention on the solid compo¬
nent. It is being eroded by change, but it
remains the basis of our search for meaning
and by its very nature it curbs consumption
and reduces waste (both physical and semi-
otic). It is here that we shall find the answer to
the basic questions concerning our cultural
future (the construction of meaning) and our
existential future (the preservation of living
conditions).
Permanence in change
In the past, the idea of solidity was based on
the permanence of things, on a duration of
forms and relationships which seemed intrin¬
sic to them (the inertia of matter and social
conventions). Today that solid world, which
was the basis of our models for interpreting
reality, has ceased to exist.
i creation by Belgian
fashion-designer Fred Sathal.
Otars in stripes. Hervé
Léger's ready-to-wear
collection, presented in Paris
in October 1996.
It has been superseded by a fluid world, in
which the permanence we so much need can no
longer be taken for granted but must be
acquired by a deliberate act of the will. "Solid¬
ity", when it exists, is the result of a project.
Some may feel that there is not much point
in seeking solidity in a world fascinated by
promises of immateriality. For myself I prefer
to think that the best way to make sense of
things is to rediscover and revalue their core of
solidity. In doing this we should reject nos¬
talgia and naivety, and remember that the solid
world of the past can now be no more than a
memory. The kind of solidity (of products,
relationships, ideas) that we can seek today is
that of forms stabilized in a context of per¬
petual change.
Since this solidity is no longer an intrinsic
quality of things, it must be the result of a
deliberate endeavour to define what must
endure so that everything else can change with¬
out losing meaning and without destroying
the planet. If it takes that course, design will
belong to its time, and the meaning it acquires
will help to shape the future.
8
THE UNESCO IpURIER DECEMBER 1996
