COMMENTARY BY FEDERICO MAYOR
A NEW OUTLOOK FOR
HUMANITY
The construction of peace must begin at
the moment when life begins. More than
ever before, we must struggle to ensure
that the inalienable principle of the right to rights
applies to all citizens; more than ever before, soci¬
eties must reject violence and corruption; more
than ever before, all social forces civil, military
and religious must combine their efforts, skills
and imagination in the search for new solutions to
new problems which can only be solved by spiri¬
tual force. More than ever before, we must turn
our backs on inertia and routine, and become the
architects of our own destiny.
We must make constant efforts to identify and
address the economic, social, ideological and polit¬
ical causes of all forms of discrimination, humilia¬
tion and deep-rooted inequality that can give rise
to rivalry and confrontation.
If there is to be a fresh flowering of life on earth
it will need to grow out of a firm alliance between
culture and nature, in which knowledge and pop¬
ular wisdom must play their part alongside the
great advances of science and technology.
We are now approaching the end of the twen¬
tieth century, one of the most violent in the history
of humanity. Between two Balkan wars we have
witnessed two worldwide conflagrations and
dozens of regional and local conflicts. It has been a
century tragically marked by violence. At the same
time, the good seed that lies dormant in humankind
has sprouted into hope for the future, based on an
awareness of our common destiny as a planetary
society and the realization that we are all citizens of
the world, with the rights and duties this entails.
Educating by example
At the dawn of a new century and a new millen¬
nium let us assume the responsibilities of this new
citizenship which does not conflict with our citi¬
zenship of birth, but enriches and complements it.
One of the dilemmas we must overcome is the
apparent contradiction between the universal and
the local, the global and the national. We must
respect, safeguard and nurture diversity. The elim¬
ination of differences is dangerous not only in cul¬
tural terms, because it leads to standardization and
uniformization; worse still it contributes to the
creation of an indifferent, undifferentiated world.
We can only aspire to universality if we have a
strong awareness of our local roots. And the more
generous we are in universal terms and the more
respectful of others the stronger our national iden¬
tity will become. As the Spanish poet Antonio
40

Machado put it: "A good description of your own
village will make you universal". And an old adage
reminds us that "In the beginning was our region;
the world was given to us as a bonus".
High walls which once seemed impregnable
have been brought down by the irresistible force
of the human longing for freedom, dignity and the
affirmation of identity. But new walls have been
built by the uneven distribution of wealth between
and within nations, and by disparities arising from
the production and use of knowledge and from
ethnic and religious differences.
To combat racism, xenophobia and discrimina¬
tion, we must teach by example. Children will not
take their cue from what we say to them, but from
what we do. Youth, sport, music, unselfish com¬
petition, learning to win and lose all these activi¬
ties, together with "history without war" must
now become the core of a new kind of teaching
and nothing teaches more than love for the
world's children and young people.
Ethical principles
If we are to construct a culture of peace, we must
be inspired by ethical principles, not market forces
or opinion polls, since what really matters in the
final analysis is not the free market but free people.
Ethics signifies coherence between what we preach
and what we do, between what we say and our real
motivations. And, to quote Bolivian stateman José
Luis Tejada, we must not remain silent "when we
could have spoken and should have spoken, and
loudly at that". "I should have cried out when I saw
that the dawn was under threat, but I felt sadness
and fear." Our concern with economic deficits
must not allow us to forget that spiritual deficits are
at the root of the problems that beset us.
The twenty-first century can be the century of
"justice and dignity" proclaimed in UNESCO's
Constitution. It will be a century of peace or it will
be nothing; it will be a century of lasting develop¬
ment or it will be nothing; it will be a century of
imagination and creativity or it will be nothing; it
will be a golden age of solidarity and love or it will
be nothing; it will be a century of reconciliation
and the rehabilitation of the excluded or it will be
nothing. If the twenty-first century is to be equal
to our dreams and hopes and Utopia is to be made
possible, we must be bold and dare to change.
The twenty-first century will come into its own
if we are capable of demolishing the barriers within
us that deny access to a new form of civilization. It
will come into its own if we can surmount new
obstacles such as those preventing the full, just and
egalitarian development of women; those that
hamper the legitimate aspirations of young people
to play a full part in society; and those that discrim¬
inate against ethnic minorities and condemn them
to wretched and hopeless lives. The Indian scholar
and statesman Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan warned
us of this at the very first session of UNESCO's Gen¬
eral Conference, when he said: "UNESCO stands not
merely for a new set of adjustments but for a new
way of life, a new outlook, a new philosophy which
will inspire humanity. . . . What is essential today is
not so much the rehabilitation of schools and
libraries, or shops and factories, as the rehabilitation
of man. We must recreate man if we are to recreate
a new world community.
41
