>*r ' * iL';.
THE PROSPECTS
FOR TEACHERS
BY BILL RATTEREE
The training of what may well be more than 50 million teachers
worldwide by the year 2000 and payment for their services-
representing from 50 to 80 per cent of current public educa¬
tional expenditure in almost all countriesconstitute an enor¬
mous investment.
For this investment to be fully realized, the training, recruit¬
ment and career prospects of teachers must be interlocked in
such a way as to favour a dynamic and creative schooling envi¬
ronment. Recruitment criteria will need to favour aptitude and
motivation to teach, not just the acquisition of credentials.
Career structures will need to provide instructional rather than
administrative paths for highly skilled teachers. There must be
equality of opportunity and treatment between men and
women.
As far as salaries and other material benefits are con¬
cerned, the evidence suggests that with a few exceptions in
high-income countries, teachers' salaries have not maintained
comparability with professions requiring similar qualifications.
The consequences include: a decline in the quality of individ¬
uals recruited into teaching, the loss of qualified and experi¬
enced teachers who are attracted to other jobs, and general
lack of interest in sustaining creative performance. The impact
is most dramatic in low-income countries subject to economic
and fiscal restrictions, where multiple job-holding, teacher
absenteeism and recourse to private teaching schemes are
becoming the rule.
It is thus indispensable to ensure salaries comparable to
rates of equivalent professionals and to formulate strategies
to establish material incentives broad enough to motivate all
teachers. The alternative is that schooling in many countries
will inexorably decline, as basic skills are not taught or taught
poorly, student dropout levels among low-income families will
increase and the education system will fail to carry out its basic
mission.
BILL RATTEREE,
of the United
States, is a member
of the secretariat of
the International
Labour Organisation
(ILO) in Geneva.
A practical
science lesson in
a Wandsworth
school, south
London (United
Kingdom).
26
