Distance education in the
high-tech era
Menahe 111 YaarI, President of the Open University of Israel,
talks to Jasmina Sopova
How does distance education fit
into current educational practice?
Menahem Yaari: Several kinds of institu¬
tions in the world practise it, notably a large
number of traditional universities that are
gradually opening departments of this kind.
They are, you might say, "mixed" institu¬
tions. There are also institutions like the
National Technological University (NTU)
in the United States that operate uniquely
as distance education entities but by using
the traditional course material of other
leading universities. They act as an agent, as
it were. There are also about twenty uni¬
versities like ours that develop their own
course material and broadcast it via satellite,
thereby using the most up-to-date com¬
munication technology.
What is special about the Israeli
version?
The control room of the Open
University of Israel's satellite
studio.
M. Y.: We have based our system exten¬
sively on the one developed in Britain
twenty-five years ago. But we've taken it
even further. The British Open University
is mostly concerned with the social sci¬
ences, while Israel's covers a broader
range of subjects, particularly the sciences.
Its teaching is much more diversified.
For each subject there are at present
about 400 we set our own course mate¬
rial and ask the most qualified experts
Israel has to offer to develop the course.
This ensures a very high standard. We can
boast of the fact that our courses are used
as working documents by a large number
of students and professors in other Israeli
universities.
From its inception the University used
the most modern educational tools avail-
Established in 1974, the Open University of Israel
is one of the world's few nationwide distance edu¬
cation universities. It has a study centre in
Jerusalem and almost 90 more scattered
throughout the country. In addition to an impres¬
sive programme of Jewish and Middle Eastern
studies, the university offers nearly 400 courses (in
Hebrew) in such diversified fields as the social sci¬
ences, the life and natural sciences, mathematics,
computer science, music, humanities and art.
able video, cable television and com¬
puters but we took a revolutionary step
in 1994 when we introduced multimedia
and interactive studies by satellite.
How does a course by satellite
work?
M. Y.: Unlike other courses, courses by
satellite take place live. The professor is in a
studio at our broadcasting centre in Tel
Aviv. A satellite dish connects him to some
sixty receiving centres scattered
throughout the country. The studios in the
Tel Aviv centre are equipped with a video
camera, facilities making it possible to pre¬
sent transparencies and slides directly on
the video, a colour scanner, a personal com¬
puter for graphic presentation of informa¬
tion and a console enabling the teacher to
communicate directly with the students.
The teacher also has at his disposal all the
relevant information about his students:
27

how many there are, their names and their
academic background. The classrooms are
equipped with a large screen, personal
computers and telephones so that students
can dialogue with their teacher.
All this must demand high-level
organization. . .
M. Y.: Yes. As well as the experts we ask to
develop our courses, the Open University
of Israel employs its own faculty (teaching
assistants, lecturers and professors), like any
other university. But instead of giving
courses, the professors provide course
follow-up by supervising their content.
They also have to make sure that assess¬
ments, final examinations and teaching
materials are up to an acceptable standard.
We are also on the cutting edge of self-
evaluation. We are perfectly aware of each
course's contents and each student's
results. All these data enable us to assess
the quality of our teaching. We have direct
access to courses, and if something goes
wrong, we know about it at once and can
rectify it from one day to the next.
Does this kind of organization
make the system complicated and
costly?
M. Y.: Just the opposite. The experts who
develop our courses work for other insti¬
tutions. We pay only fees, which consid¬
erably reduces our overheads without
diminishing the quality of our teaching.
The Open University of Israel now
pays for itself. For the first fifteen years of
P
Conquering time
and space
One message that Unesco is trying to get
across is that education does not neces¬
sarily mean going to school. Continuing
education and distance education are the
two key concepts for broadening the scope
of traditional education.
Continuing education means giving
those who have "outgrown" school-going
age a chance to improve their skills or to
retrain according to their needs or job-
market demands. It also encourages the
social reintegration of marginalized young
people, like those, for example, who have
been demobilized after a war. Unesco has
established a training programme of this
kind in local languages for young Haitians,
its existence it was sponsored by the
Rothschild Foundation, which was its ini¬
tiator. But for the past few years enrol¬
ment and the sale of our own books (some
450,000 per year) provide for 75 per cent
of our budget, with the rest coming from
the state. By way of comparison, govern¬
ment financial support for other institu¬
tions is about 75 per cent. It's true, how¬
ever, that they are more heavily engaged
in research than we are.
Moreover, we don't need a campus.
The Open University's satellite programme
broadcasting studio.
% 1
Palestinians, Rwandans and Mozambicans,
and several scientific, technical and profes¬
sional training projects for women in sub-
Saharan Africa are also on the drawing
board.
Distance should be no obstacle to educa¬
tion. China, India and Brazil, which rank
among the world's nine most populated and
least literate countries, are planning to over¬
come the problems of distance by using satel¬
lites to televise educational programmes.
Studies have shown that although this kind
of teaching is initially very costly, it may be
more economical in the long run than tradi¬
tional schooling. Unesco is doing all it can to
promote effective partnership between gov¬
ernments, non-governmental organizations
and business so that these countries can ben¬
efit from quality programmes and broad¬
casting technology.
Our study centres are mostly located in
the country's primary or secondary
schools, which we are able to use when
they are not occupied at specific times of
the day. In this way distance education
becomes one of the least costly educa¬
tional systems that exist.
What are the other advantages of
distance education?
M. Y.: Apart from the fact that it enables
working people or students living far from
university towns to continue their studies
near home, it offers the possibility of
teaching beyond the borders of any given
country. In this regard distance education
can become a basic tool for building peace,
especially in the Middle East where bor¬
ders have begun to open up. But opening
borders isn't enough. For people to cross
them, education is essential. And when I
talk about crossing borders I'm not refer¬
ring only to the physical sense; I mean
exchanging ideas and establishing a real dia¬
logue. It is clear by now that with the
advance in technology that enables us to
reach the remotest villages distance edu¬
cation is the best way to establish this dia¬
logue. It is even likely that this form of
teaching will gradually replace the more
traditional form, which is for the moment
at least still dominant just about every¬
where in the world.
28
