COMMENTARY BY FEDERICO MAY OR
THE RIGHTS OF
FUTURE GENERATIONS
The extent to which future générations will
be able to enjoy their rights will dépend on
the moral and intellectual choices made by
présent générations on whether we do our duty
to our children and our children's children.
Time to act
For the fîrst time in the history of humanity,
awareness of the global impact of our actions
starting with the effects our population numbers
hâve on the environment compels us to do ail
we can to avoid causing irréparable environmental
damage and preventing future générations from
exercising ail or some of their rights. Because of
this risk we must act before it is too late and cor¬
rect trends which might otherwise lead to incalcu¬
lable problems. We must observe, anticipate, and
prevent. Prévention is not just an option. It is an
unavoidable obligation, an ethical imperative. We
must act in good time. We must look ahead and try
to see the shape of our common destiny. We must
never lapse into fatalism. UNESCO's Constitution
has entrusted us with a unique task: to be the con¬
science of humanity. This task includes considéra¬
tion for those who will follow in our footsteps,
those who hâve yet to be born.
The survivors of wars think with great intensity
of those who will come after them, because they
want to spare future générations the horrors they
hâve known themselves. Death, which they hâve
seen at close quarters, has at least given them an
opportunity to discover the full meaning of life. Not
life lived selfîshly and in isolation, but community
life in ail its aspects, including that of continuity.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the opening
words of the Charter of the United Nations
should refer to the fate of succeeding générations.
What is surprising, however, is that there has been
no subséquent attempt to look more deeply into
the idea of "future générations", especially from
the standpoint of the rights they should enjoy. It
is true that the World Héritage Convention
adopted by Unesco's General Conférence in 1972
was inspired by a détermination to safeguard the
héritage so that it could be passed on intact to
future générations those very words appear in
its text. Twenty years later, the Earth Summit
adopted the Rio Déclaration, which strengthens
and reaffîrms the idea of solidarity between the
générations.
Solidarity between the générations
But we must go further. We must recognize and
guarantee the 


rights of future générations. Probably
the most striking example of a possible threat to
those rights is that of pollution and its attendant haz-
ards, especially in relation to choices concerning
nuclear energy an issue which is rarely as simple
and cut-and-dried as it is presented to the gênerai
public. The political, économie or financial interests
that favour particular solutions must never be
allowed to overshadow the interests of future gén¬
érations. In cases where the foreseeable consé¬
quences of investment will extend far beyond the
présent, it is worth considering whether an impact
study should not be made of the conséquences of
the various options on offer over a fifty-year
period, the span of two générations.

In fact there is little doubt that several of the



rights of future générations are affected: the right
to life and to the conservation of the human
génome, the right to development and to indi¬
vidual and collective fulfilment, and the right to an
ecologically balanced environment. Thèse are
indeed human rights, that is, universal and univer-
sally recognized values which are a legitimate cause
of concern for the international community as a
whole. This is a far cry from rights regarded
merely as legally protected vested interests.
The duties of the présent
The fact remains that the rights of future généra¬
tions belong to a new type in comparison with the
rights enshrined in the Universal Déclaration of
Human Rights of 1948. First of ail because, by déf¬
inition, those entitled to them do not yet exist
although since Roman times the law has admitted
cases in which the rights of persons yet unborn are
acknowledged. We must now extend that possi-
bility, without, however, ending up with a précise
légal status for the unborn child or embryo, issues
which are now under discussion in many countries.
In reality, thèse new-style rights are only rights
because today's générations hâve obligations
whose counterparts are the rights of future génér¬
ations. In other words there is a dialectical rela¬
tionship between rights and duties which should
make us aware of the inhérent unity of the human
race, in space and over time.
Which rights of future générations should be
recognized? It has often been correctly pointed
out that ail the rights set forth in the thirty articles
of the Universal Déclaration can be condensed
into a single one: the right to live in dignity, which
is indeed the sum of civil, political, économie,
social and cultural rights. The same synthesis could
probably be applied to the rights of future généra¬
tions, with the added dimension of the continuity
of human life, i.e., guaranteeing the right to live in
dignity on an earth that is habitable. This brings us
back to the préoccupation with the environment
which will probably, with hindsight, be seen as the
major qualitative change that has occurred in the
twentieth century.
However, it is préférable, if only for educa-
tional and légal reasons, to consider the rights of
future générations on an individual basis. First of
ail, the exemption of persons belonging to future
générations from ail individual responsibility for
the crimes of earlier générations should be
regarded as a human right. I hâve long believed, to
put it bluntly, that history kills and that accordingly
we are in duty bound to "disarm history", since it
is axiomatic that future générations cannot con¬
tinue to shoulder the burden of the crimes, actual
or alleged, of their forebears. Make no mistake:
this has nothing to do with the moral responsibility
which each person, each community and each
nation must assume in complète freedom, but
concerns légal responsibility, with its attendant
criminal and civil conséquences.
The right to live in peace
The second right which is of great importance at
the présent time is that which has been formuated
as "right to peace and right not to be a victim of
war". In this context I think particularly of the pio-
neering work carried out by the recently founded
Tricontinental Institute for Parliamentary Democ¬
racy and Human Rights and by Captain Cousteau
and his associâtes. We know that war does not stop
when the guns fail silent but continues long after,
to the détriment of those who were not respon¬
sible for it. The acknowledgment of this new right
for future générations is part of the culture of
peace for which UNESCO is working.
If it is true, as the French philosopher Henri
Bergson once said, that "the idea of the future is
more fertile than the future itself", we must start to
work on this idea, extract ail we can from it, and
ensure that it flourishes. The rights of future gén¬
érations are the duties of today's générations. Their
lives tomorrow dépend on the concern we show
for them today.
