THE SECOND HALF CENTURY
A continuing struggle for access to the airwaves
Uuring the Hungarian
uprising in 1956, crowds
gathered to air their demands
outside the Radio Budapest
building, its façade pitted with
gunfire (above). R
adio has an image problem. It lacks
the maturity of the newspaper
industry and the modernity of tele¬
vision. Unlike the newspaper, radio
has to be understood immediately and unlike
TV it lacks an appeal to young people attracted
more to visual images in an increasingly multi¬
media world. And yet it continues to hold the
largest audiences of all media and it has been
party to the most dramatic political develop¬
ments during the past half century.
National radio stations have had an enor¬
mous impact on the political lives of their cit¬
izens. Was it not Moscow Radio which broad¬
cast Khruschev's message to Kennedy in which
he anounced the dismantling of Russian rocket
bases in Cuba? Egyptian radio broadcast Pres¬
ident Nasser's announcement of the national¬
ization of the Suez Canal, Hungarian radio
reported the crushing of the Hungarian revo
lution, Czech radio reported the demise of
the "Prague Spring".
Nothing, however, allows radio to give
greater value than times of crisis or war. The
Gulf War was dubbed the first war to be con¬
ducted in the media. It has always been
assumed that the media in this context meant
TV. According to research, however, the first
source of knowledge that war had broken out
in the Arab States was "word of mouth" for
the majority of people in Egypt, the United
Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia. Radio sur¬
passed TV in all three of these countries as a
source of further information.
But when a normally credible station such
as the BBC is based in a country which gets
involved in a crisis such as the Gulf War it too
can be mistrusted. "If an uneducated person
hears the news on the BBC, he'll believe it even
if it's wrong . . . they can start rumours	" And
22
THE UNESCO Ç)URI ER FEBRUARY 1997

(1945-1995)
BY GARETH PRICE
- L
m
Mfo < P
President Nasser of
Egypt used the radio to
proclaim the
nationalization of the
Suez Canal in 1956. After
the broadcast he was
acclaimed by the crowds.
A.big crowd
turned out for
the opening of
Malopolska Fun,
Poland's first
free foreign
radio station, in
Cracow (1990).
zech radio gave up-to-the-
minute reports of events
during the "Prague Spring" of
1968. Above, a lorry carrying
young patriots passes a
detachment of Soviet tanks
parked on the pavement.
so we are back with accusations of propaganda,
with the eternal philosophical debate concern¬
ing the existence of objectivity. Perhaps it is


easier for the pragmatic journalist to aim for the
slightly different goal of credibility.
Jamming the airwaves
It is the fear of an audience believing a radio sta¬
tion which leads to jamming of the airwaves, a
phenomenon that came to its height during the
cold war of a communist era that only eased off
in 1985 with the accession to power of Presi¬
dent Gorbachev. Jamming by the Soviet Union
in the early 1980s was calculated to cost $800
million per year because the jammer has to trans¬
mit a blocking noise as strong as the incoming
signal and even then some signal does get
through. It was always difficult to cut off the lis¬
tener determined to receive the broadcasts.
The world of transfrontier radio since the fall
> C°uiTHE UNESCO lOURIER« fEBRUARY 1997
23

I he antenna of a radio
station in support of Kanak
independence in New
Caledonia (1985).
of communism is more complex. After the acci¬
dent at the Chernobyl nuclear power station in
the Soviet Union in August 1986, Radio Liberty
carried out an audience research investigation in
order to establish how listeners had discovered
the facts about the crisis. More respondents
quoted Western radio stations as their prime
source than those watching Russian TV. A
majority of the sample who had first heard of it
on TV switched to Western radio for added
knowledge. In some post-communist coun¬
tries, the broadcasters now have less resources
with which to compete with the Western media
W the Unesco Courier« FEBRUARY |t!97
in reporting a major crisis. Even during the
Bosnian conflict, the Bulgarian media were heav¬
ily reliant on reports from the West because
they could not afford to send correspondents
to the war arena next door to them.
The transistor revolution
Transfrontier broadcasting is a costly business
but it has many participants. In Francophone
Africa, for example, Radio France Internationale
(RFI) and the commercial Afrique Number
One broadcasting from Gabon may dominate

the airwaves but they face stiff competition
from the Soviet Union, China, South Africa,
Germany, the U.S.A. and the U.K. In recent
years, rebroadcasting of international radio ser¬
vices on national networks as well as on cable
systems has increased considerably.
In this age of satellites it is now difficult to
imagine the problems of radio transmission in
earlier days, particularly the problem of world¬
wide reception. Short-wave transmissions faced
obstacles galore limited range, the sun, ionos¬
pheric storms, the seasons. Today's obstacle is
congestion of the airwaves.
From the listener's point of view, how¬
ever, the invention of the transistor in the
1950s was particularly important in revolu¬
tionizing radio. Until then the majority of
sets were in Europe and North America. The
transistor opened up listening in sub-Saharan
Africa, in China and in India from an esti¬
mated 2.5 million sets to 90 million sets in the
space of twenty years after 1956.
In the last twenty years alone radio set
ownership has doubled again around the
world and even today the potential for growth
is incredible. There arc over twice as many radio
sets in existence as there are TV monitors.
The rise of local
broadcasting
The interesting fact about even transfrontier
broadcasting is that in any one country lis¬
tening to broadcasts from international oper¬
ators always peaks when the national or ver¬
nacular languages are used. And this is why
local broadcasting has now come into its own.
One has only to consider the number of
languages used in some countries to realize that
TV cannot compete with radio in servicing
multi-ethnic and multi-linguistic audiences. In
some emerging democracies, strenuous efforts
are made to embrace the linguistic maze. In
Namibia, for example, the constitutional prob¬
lem of language was solved by adopting only
one language English. But NBC, the national
broadcaster, caters for the real linguistic needs
of Namibian listeners with seven services in all
including the major indigenous languages and
Afrikaans. In neighbouring South Africa, eleven
languages are given equal status in the consti¬
tution. Radio copes with all eleven, while TV
struggles to embrace but a few.
It is difficult for TV to reflect national cul-
M Zambian villager listens to
a radio hooked up to added
battery power.
tural mosaics. Radio is better able to embrace
the national cultures, in music as well as in the
spoken word. The demand for music, whether
classical, folk or pop, gives an option to peo¬
ple's lives which can only be satisfied on radio.
A sense of place
All the same, there are limitations to the num¬
ber of languages which radio can cope with. It
is unrealistic to even consider the possibility
of all of Papua New Guinea's tens of dozens of
languages getting airtime in the short run. There
are also worries that tribal differences in Africa
or ethnic divisions in the former Yugoslavia
have led to the development of radio of the
worst possible kind. It is for governments to
promote the media in a regulated way within
the context of a democratic society.
There are legitimate needs within each state
THE UNESCO ^iURIER FEBRUARY I 25

which do not necessarily conform to the state
boundaries. This is where national radio's role
in several countries has been challenged by the
strengthening of local commercial radio pro¬
viding services in local languages and a greater
depth of national and local identity. This is
an important concept best dubbed "a sense of
place" and it is the very antithesis of trans¬
frontier broadcasting. In 1996, the retiring
chairman of the European Broadcasting
Union's Programme committee, Geraint Stan¬
leyjones, delivered an important lecture which
embraced the essence of the argument:
"Broadcasters have a special role in main¬
taining a culture and cherishing identity," he
said, "for it is not just, indeed it may not even
be principally about information. It is as much
about culture music, art, education, language
and so forth. At its best it reflects back to a
community the richness which that commu¬
nity contains. There is no other medium which
can do it; and at the end of the twentieth cen¬
tury if public service broadcasters don't do it
other broadcasters will swamp the airwaves
with other messages. I would now argue that
credibility in broadcasting, requiring as it does
identity between the broadcaster and his or her
audience, also now requires much more atten¬
tion to be paid to cultural differences than to
national mass. In a Europe with fewer national
boundaries people will be freer to develop and
deploy their local identities as part of the
broader whole. And broadcasting needs to
reflect and celebrate and foster that. It can only
be public service broadcasters who will do it."
But public broadcasting has to be carefully
defined because it is not always to be found in
the state or national broadcaster, certainly as far
as independent journalism is concerned. One
of the basic problems facing journalistic inde¬
pendence in most countries of the world dur¬
ing the past half century is the repressive atti¬
tude of the governments of new states, often
termed emerging democracies, towards their
own national or local media.
Threats to independent
reporting
When the "winds of change" released dozens
of countries in Africa and Asia, the South
Pacific and the Caribbean from the bonds of
colonialism in the 1950s and 1960s, few
emerged successfully either as true democracies
or with anything other than large state radio
stations tied to a government information
policy. The majority of countries even today
have retained these large state broadcasters who
have a valuable role to play in the "nation-
building" process albeit at the expense of inde¬
pendent journalism. They have contributed
to the struggle for better health and hygiene in
development and educational programming. In
M woman mechanic is
interviewed for Buenos
Tiempos Mujer(E\ Salvador), a
community radio programme
produced by and for women
and designed to help the
country's needy women. The
programme was launched by
Unesco with support from the
Salvadorian government and
funding from Germany.
26
THE UNESCO lOURIER« FEBRUARY 1997

that sense they have had an important role as
a public broadcaster but one deprived of inde¬
pendence in reporting on government itself.
The irony of that situation is that it has
been left to the emerging private radio stations
to test the waters of actual reporting in its truest
sense. Similarly, the major feature of the 1990s
in the post-communist world has been the dif¬
ficulty of persuading governments which claim
to be democratic that independent media are
the prerequisite for good government and
underpin a truly democratic nation. Such a sea-
change requires media which stop being mes¬
sengers for politicians and start servicing the
audiences who elect those politicians. In other
words, journalists should report on govern¬
ment performance between elections.
It is a difficult enough task to get this mes¬
sage across in all the countries of Central and
Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) in their difficult
transformation from communism to free mar¬
ket economies. It is even more difficult in coun¬
tries such as Bosnia and Serbia where hate is
ingrained on all sides. In the emerging democ¬
racies the hope for independent journalism lies
not with the state "public" broadcasters but
with the small private and commercial operators
who dare to take a different approach. It is they
who build credibility and therefore audiences.
Unfortunately there are all too few coun¬
tries even today which allow for freedom of
speech. While journalists in the more sophis¬
ticated democracies tend to indulge in varying
degrees of self-censorship, those in emerging
democracies have little pretence to subtlety
when interviewing their favourites. But there
are those even worse off, such as the journal¬
ist in one country I shall not name who, when
asked by a Western journalist in 1992 whether
he submitted questions in advance for a min¬
isterial interview, answered "No, the Minister
gives me the questions. And if I change the
script I could be shot". In fairness to journal¬
ists paid by governments, they cannot be
expected to report on their paymasters.
The clash between ideology and idealism
will continue for years to come, complicated by
the increased pressures on public broadcasting
on the one hand and commercial survival or
profit on the other. The good news is that the
choice of radio channels available to audiences

