ultural landscapes
BY DAVID LOWENTHAL D
A new category of World Heritage sites shaped by
a blend ofhuman and naturalforces
Rice terraces in the highlands
of the Philippines are the
product of 2,000 years of
harmony between people and
their environment. This
cultural landscape was
included on the World Heritage
List in 1995.
Landscapes are all around us, and it is a
daunting task to set workable yard¬
sticks for gauging and protecting them.
The task is all the more difficult
because each culture views landscapes through
different lenses. A coherent idea of cultural
landscapes has nonetheless emerged under
UNESCO's guidance. Global evaluative criteria,
consistent yet flexibly workable, specify three
distinct cultural landscape types:
> clearly defined and intentionally created
sites (e.g., gardens like those of Aranjuez in
*¿M- ^ v
X x
Spain, Versailles in France, and Olmsted and
Vaux's Central Park in New York);
> organically evolved locales (e.g., the enditched
Somerset Levels and the stone-walled York¬
shire Dales in England, the river-fronting arable
strips of the Côte-de-Beaupré in the St.
Lawrence Valley of Quebec, Canada, and agri¬
cultural palimpsests like the rice terraces of
Luzon in the northern Philippines);
> associative sites (e.g., sacred and commem¬
orative places like Uluru in Australia, Ton-
gariro in New Zealand, and Ghana's sacred
groves).
Many sites embody more than one such
type, depending on the perceiver. To most vis¬
itors the Grand Canyon of Arizona is a won¬
der of nature, whereas many Native Ameri¬
cans view it as a sacred site.
As well as possessing a complex and con-
18 E UNESCO ^)URIER1 SEPTEMBER 1997

tinuing mix of nature and culture, landscapes
differ from other World Heritage sites in sev¬
eral ways. They are by their very nature exten¬
sive, occupying more terrain than sites devoted
purely to the built heritage. While some cul¬
tural landscapes are selected for their spectac¬
ular uniqueness, many are even more treasured
as representative, embodying qualities that
typify human impress over sizeable regions,
even over subcontinental areas. Whereas built
heritage sites are generally chosen as master¬
pieces and repositories of high art, landscapes
tend to have a broader, more universal appeal.
MA vast mosaic
These traits make it hard to decide which land¬
scape sites to select for inscription. Landscape
boundaries are difficult to circumscribe, land¬
scape features multiform and fluid, ever evolv-
Russell Falls, in Tasmania's
Mt. Field National Park. The
Park is located in the
Tasmanian Wilderness
(Australia), a cultural and
natural site included on the
World Heritage List in 1982
and 1989.
ing, and subject to periodic change. Every land¬
scape is unique. But it is their representativeness,
rather than their uniqueness, that makes most
landscapes globally important. Yet to select for
global recognition even a sample of the world's
representative landscapes, let alone to demar¬
cate, describe, and protect them, would be
impracticable if not impossible. Landscapes
already listed or in process of being so are, in
truth, tokens of a much larger assemblage of
sites that deserve attention and care.
difficult choice
Today cultural landscapes are widely cherished.
But their widespread appeal raises another
problem of selection. Can we envisage how
the inscription of a relatively small number
of landscapes "of universal value" will affect all
the rest? Unhappily, the listing of a few,
whether chosen as uniquely spectacular or as
ideally representative, now sometimes signals
to governments and entrepreneurs that they
are at liberty to do as they wish with any land¬
scape not on the list, and hence deemed to be
of lesser aesthetic, historical, and social import.
Yet the most modest locales embody pro¬
found meaning for folk indigenous to or
otherwise familiar with them. And routes
I linking particular places the pilgrim tracks
ö
I of medieval Christians; the desert pathways,
| invisible to others, of Australian Aborigines;
| the trails of such explorers as Lewis and Clark
in the American West likewise enshrine essen¬
tial memories.
In short, in cherishing some landscapes we
must endeavour to treat them not as the only
locales worth conserving, but as tokens rep¬
resentative of much of the rich diversity of
the entire globe. A sense of connection with all
these peopled and storied places enriches and
humanizes life the world over.
Universal appeal
Heritage today is increasingly seen not merely
as the property of individual states but as the
rightful legacy of all humankind. Of no aspects
of heritage is this more true than of its land¬
scapes. Not only are landscapes no respecters of
political boundaries; their inherent worth
applies alike to natives and to those who love
them and often visit them from afar.
Indeed, the world's most famed landscapes
have achieved their fame largely through the
r
THE UNESCO lOURIER SEPTEMBER 1997

devoted study, delineation, and stewardship of
foreign artists and savants.
Indeed, experience suggests that the uni¬
versal appeal of landscapes particularly com¬
mends them to global care. Insofar as they are
in large measure the creations of nature, how¬
ever much altered and improved by human
occupation, they are less vulnerable to nation¬
alist exclusivity than are purely cultural sites
and relics. It is often the case that landscapes
perceived as of universal value have been pro¬
tected by concerns voiced internationally. For
example, designation by UNESCO enabled the
Australian government to rescue the south¬
western Tasmanian temperate rainforest, along
with its archaeological traces, from destruc¬
tive development.
Just as all the peoples of the world depend
for their physical survival on the shared man¬
agement of the global environment, so does
their spiritual well-being require responsible
stewardship of global landscapes. Such land¬
scapes enrich those who admire them from afar,
those who may indeed never visit but only
envisage them, no less than those for whom
they are local or national homelands.
Ancient and modern.
The glass and steel pyramid
(1988) by architect I. M. Pei in
the main courtyard of the
Louvre Museum, Paris.
These huge stone slabs
silhouetted against the
horizon at Stonehenge in
Wiltshire (United Kingdom)
were erected in neolithic times
(3rd-2nd millennium B.C.) and
form one of the world's most
impressive megalithic
monuments. Stonehenge,
Avebury and related sites were
added to the World Heritage
List in 1986.
