A NEW WEAPON IN THE WAR ON POVERTY
BY JOSE GARSON To be fully effective, microfinance must slot
into a broad strategy for cultural, educational
and social development
V¡liage women in Burkina
Faso learn the basics of
accountancy.
It all began with a simple question. What
operational definition can governments
or co-operation agencies use for poverty,
I independently of the sufferings of the
needy? In other words, what should anti-
poverty programmes try to do and how
should their success be measured?
After some hesitation, economists came up
with a practical definition that incorporated
scales ofpoverty and measured progress in alle
viating it. A person who has a much lower
income than that of the rest of the population
and who is deprived of any real access to basic
services (health, lodging and education) is
regarded as living in poverty. In a given popu¬
lation, the poor are those whose incomes are
lowest and who therefore consume least. They
are those who have the worst quality of life,
since they are excluded from the public services
which the state provides for its citizens. Poverty
alleviation, in this context, means focusing on
a precise target those sections of the popula¬
tion with a much lower income than the rest
via these two parameters. A poverty alleviation
programme achieves its goal if it produces a
sustainable increase in the income of the poor¬
est segments of the population.
Self-help projects
Of course formulating an operational defini¬
tion does not mean that we have the financial
muscle to get rid of poverty. Developing coun¬
try governments and co-operation agencies
do not possess sufficient resources to grant
subsidies that would sustainably increase the
income of each person defined as poor. Any
large-scale increase in the income of needy peo¬
ple must come from elsewhere.
Very early on, some developing countries
mainly in Asia realized that this "elsewhere"
could be the poor themselves, on condition
that they were associated with poverty allevi¬
ation policies. After all, they reasoned, many
needy people have sufficient initiative and
energy to devise small projects or activities
that, once underway, could increase their
income. By providing successive increases in
income, such projects could gradually lift these
people out of poverty without direct and mas¬
sive state intervention.
Before this could happen, obstacles to the
creation of small projects had to be identified,
and the poor who so wished had to be pro-
THE UNESCO INJURIER« |ANUARY 1997

vidcd with the wherewithal to get round them.
One of the chief obstacles was credit, which
banks do not usually channel to small-scale
projects, especially those undertaken by the
poor, who are by definition not very credit¬
worthy. By granting credit selectively to the
enterprising poor, governments and co-oper¬
ation agencies hoped to initiate a sequence of
events that would lead to the creation of
income-generating economic activities, thereby
kbove, a training centre in
Ghana where women learn
craft skills and receive loans to
help them start up small
businesses.
" I he main challenge for
microfinance will soon be
cultural, educational and
social." Below, an outdoor
lesson in Nepal.
alleviating poverty. Here was the first link
between credit and poverty.
From credit to savings
But generating additional income by granting
credit to the working poor only alleviates
poverty among a small part of the population.
What about the rest, the overwhelming major¬
ity? Credit is of no use to this majority, but sav¬
ings certainly are.
To understand this, it is necessary to analyse
what actually happens in the poorest and most
isolated parts of developing countries. In these
regions all monetary transactions are made in
cash. Since there are no banks, people have to
keep all their possessions with them. A trans¬
action can only be completed if each party to
it has a wad of notes, with the concomitant
risk of loss and theft. At best, someone who
wants to "invest" his savings can do so by
purchasing an animal. In these circumstances it
is difficult for the very poor to accumulate
sufficient resources to escape from poverty.
The absence of institutions that make it pos¬
sible to transform cash into a deposit and then
into savings is a hidden but genuine reason
why poverty is so intractable and persistent.
THE UNESCO (^OURICR JANUARY 1997

Mt a centre in Daghestan, a
Chechen refugee woman
The poor cannot save effectively and trans- makes duvets t0 seM on the
actions between them involve countless diff i- market,
culties because there arc no on-the-spot financial
intermediaries to provide the basic financial ser¬
vices that would permit the emergence of eco¬
nomic activities to lift their region from poverty.
In addition to credit, then, microfinance
the process which encourages the development
of financial intermediation at the local level
is one of the most powerful weapons in the
M cotton spinner in Laos.
struggle against poverty and economic isola¬
tion. Banks, specialized non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) or a combination of
the two are the architects of this development.
The next steps
In the traditional method of doing business or
saving, a poor person needs common sense
but docs not need to know how to read or
write. On the other hand, in a relationship
with a financial intermediary and in the
world that the financial intermediary gradually
creates around itself people must become lit¬
erate; they must participate culturally in the
world of reading and writing. Traditional busi¬
nessmen carrying their money in their pock¬
ets transact business which is their own affair
and no one else's. When they open a bank
account, however, they must understand that
the money they deposit is also going to serve
others the people to whom the bank issues
credit. They must understand that this money
is both theirs and other people's. They must
recognize and accept a fact of life of which
they were ignorant.
This explains why the arrival of microfi¬
nance is profoundly disturbing for some soci-
TME UNESCO QiURIERB |ANUARY 1997

eties. The mechanisms of traditional relation¬
ships with self, others and the community
are shaken. The very structure of language can
become an obstacle, as in some southern
African languages where the same verb desig¬
nates the act of borrowing and lending. Co¬
operation agencies must therefore be cautious
and avoid prejudice. A credit scheme in which
40 per cent of borrowers do not repay their
loans is not necessarily a bad scheme in itself.
If four borrowers out of ten have not kept
their end of the bargain, it is because repay¬
ment of a loan within a given time frame is
behaviour that is not innate but is acquired
culturally in societies where borrowing is
widely practised. A good scheme must take
these factors into account in its initial analy¬
sis of the local population's needs.
The challenge
Microfinance's main challenge will soon cease
to be financial and become cultural, educa¬
tional and social. Bilateral and multilateral co¬
operation agencies working with the World
Bank and the leading microfinance networks
have met to examine all the financial questions
that microfinance can raise. In two or three
years' time, the different methods of imple¬
menting microfinancc systems will all have
been tested.
The next step will be to build on the far-
reaching revolution begun by the Asian pio¬
neers, Grameen and Bank Rakyat Indonesia
(BRI), continued by others such as BancoSol
in Latin America and taken further by African
initiatives such as the Kenya Rural Enterprise
Programme (K-Rep).
Microfinance opens doors by creating sol¬
idarity groups, by insisting on the need for
personal repayment disciplines and by think¬
ing of individual activities in social terms. If it
is to develop, action must be taken to pro¬
mote literacy, education, craft learning and
health care among the populations it is aimed
at and via the social structures it has set up.
Only this cultural, educational and social
development will keep microfinance in sight of
its original purpose and ensure that it remains
a weapon in the war on poverty.
fishermen's huts on the
banks of the Mekong River.
K^^l^^
THE UNESCO Q>URIER> JANUAR'
