outh gap BYLÁSZLÓRAJKI
The South and the North face different
problems and defend different interests
when protecting and presenting sites
included on the World Heritage List.
In the North, a variety of organizations
hope that the state will protect listed sites
against the encroachments of tourism. The
countries of the South, on the other hand,
hope that inscription on the List will make
their sites better known, attract more visitors
and generate more tourist revenue.
Other problems arise in East European
countries where economies dominated for
decades by the state are in the throes of transi¬
tion to the market economy. These countries are
creating models of privatization without his¬
torical precedent. In this context, some orga¬
nizations of civil society are doing all they can
to obtain stronger state guarantees for the pro¬
tection of cultural and natural treasures, while
others are calling on the state to relax its influ¬
ence and control. Lack of funds is complicating
matters further. In this situation, sale to foreign



buyers sometimes seems to be unavoidable.
The practice of selling off certain national
properties seems to be gaining ground every¬
where, raising the question that in the long
term it may weaken the fabric of national life.
These properties must be given legal protec¬
tion. But here too, the answers given differ
under different systems of governance. In the
North attempts are made to draw up legal reg¬
ulations that are both detailed and global in
Yellowstone National Park
(U.S.A.), established in 1872,
is located in a vast natural
forest in Wyoming. It attracts
large crowds of visitors who
come to admire its geysers,
hot springs and wildlife,
especially the bison (above).
This natural site was added to
the World Heritage List in
1980.
Below, the statue of King
Stephen I, founder of the
kingdom of Hungary, in the
precincts of the 13th-century
castle of Buda. The
Fishermen's bastion can be
seen in background. Budapest,
the banks of the Danube and
the Buda castle quarter were
added to the World Heritage
List in 1987.
scope, whereas in the South the trend is to
guarantee certain basic rights. These two atti¬
tudes are difficult to reconcile. Let us take the
example of two national parks.
Yellowstone Park (United States) attracts
so many tourists that in 1 995 the World Her¬
itage Committee put the Park on the list of
World Heritage in Danger. But is radically
reducing the number of visitors the best solu¬
tion? It would mean that only a minority of
privileged people would have access to this
natural treasure. What about the rest? Would
they have to make do with photos, films, the
Internet, virtual reality?
How can we accept discrimination between
a minority with the opportunity to enjoy
direct experience of sites of universal value and
the overwhelming majority which would be
excluded from this experience?
The Virunga animal reserve, on the border
between Rwanda and the former Zaïre, is a
national park which has been invaded by starv¬
ing refugees from the Rwandan tragedy. Guards
protecting the wild animals against poachers
have wondered whether they should use their
weapons against starving people to protect ani¬
mals belonging to endangered species or whether
they should help the refugees to capture them.
The author has no easy answer. But he
would like to believe that the collective wis¬
dom of international organizations, based on
freedom and solidarity, will make it possible
to find solutions.
32 > G>u RIERB SEPTEMBER 1997
