d«i,,.t Federico Mayor
THE HUMAN RIGHT
TO PEACE
"The purpose of the Organization is to contribute to peace and security by promoting collaboration among
the nations through education, science and culture in orderto further universal respect for justice, forthe
rule of law and for the human rights and fundamental freedoms which are affirmed for the peoples of the
world, without distinction of race, sex, language or religion, by the Charter of the United Nations."
( C(» IN ST I T 1 T I O l\ O ! II INK SC O, A K T I C I. K I)
Lasting peace is a prerequisite for the exercise of all human
rights and duties. It is not the peace of silence, of men and
women who hy choice or constraint remain silent. It is the
peace of freedom and therefore of just laws of happiness,
equality, and solidarity, in which all citizens count, live together
and share.
Peace, development and democracy form an interactive tri¬
angle. They are mutually reinforcing. Without democracy,
there is no sustainahle development: disparities hecome unsus-
tainahle and lead to imposition and domination.
In 1995, the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations and
UlSESCO and the United Nations Year for Tolerance, we stressed
that it was only through a daily effort to know others better and
respect them that we would he able to tackle at source the
problems of marginalization, indifference, resentment and
hatred. This is the only way to break the vicious circle that
leads from insults to confrontation and the use of force.
We must identify the roots of global problems and strive,
with imagination and determination, to cheek conflicts in their
early stages. Better still prevent them. Prevention is the victory
that gives the measure of our distinctively human faculties.
We must know in order to foresee. Foresee in order to prevent.
We must act in a timely, decisive and courageous manner, know¬
ing that prevention engages the attention only when it fails.
Peace, health and normality do not make the news. We shall
have to try to give greater prominence to these intangibles,
these unheralded triumphs.
A universal renunciation of violence requires the commit¬
ment of the whole of society. These are not matters of govern¬
ment but matters of State; not only matters for the authorities,
but for society in its entirety (including civilian, military, and
religious bodies). The mobilization which is urgently needed to
effect the transition within two or three years from a culture
of war to a culture of peace demands co-operation from every¬
one. In order to change, the world needs everyone. A new
approach to security is required at world, regional and national
levels. The armed forces must be the guarantors of democra¬
tic stability and the protection of the citizen, because we can¬
not move from systems of complete security and no freedom to
systems of complete freedom and no security. Ministries of war
and defence must gradually be turned into ministries of peace.
Dccision-makingprocedures and measures to deal with emer¬
gencies must be specially designed to ensure speed, co-ordina¬
tion and effectiveness. We arc prepared for improbable wars
involving thelarge-scale deployment ofinordinalely costly equip¬
ment, but we are not equipped to detect and mitigate the nat¬
ural or man-provoked disasters that occur repeatedly. We an; vul¬
nerable to the inclemency of the weather, to the vicissitudes of
nature. The protection of the citizen must be seen as one of the
major tasks of society as a whole if we really wish to consoli¬
date a framework for genuinely democratic living. Investing in
emergency help and relief measures and above allin preven¬
tion and the long term (for example, in continent-wide water dis¬
tribution and storage networks) is to be prepared for peace, to
be prepared to live in peace. Currently, we are prepared for
possible war, but find ourselves surprised and defenceless in our
daily lives in the face of mishaps of all kinds.
The United Nations system must likewise equip itself with
the necessary response capacity to prevent the recurrence of
atrocities and instances of genocide such as those which today
afflict our collective conscience Cambodia, Bosnia and Herze¬
govina, Liberia, Somalia and Rwanda...
There is today a general desire for peace, and we must applaud
the clear thinkingand strength of mind displayed by all the war-
ring parlies in the accords that have been reached in El Salvador,
Namibia, Mozambique, Angola, South Africa, Guatemala and the
Philippines. These agreements (ill us with hope hut also sad¬
ness, when we think of the lives sacrificed on the long road to
the cease-fire, and of the open wounds, so difficult to heal. Thus,
as we revive the concept of the "construction of peace in the

minds of men", we now call on all adversaries who still put their
trust in weapons to lay down their arms and seek reconciliation.
Condemnation will not suffice. It is time for action. It is
not enough to feel outrage when we learn of the number of
children exploited sexually or at work, of refugees or of those
suffering from hunger. We must react, each of us to the best
of our abilities. It is not just a matter of looking at what the gov¬
ernment is doing. We must part with something of "our own".
We must give, give of ourselves. We must stop imposing mod¬
els of development, models for living. The right to peace, to live
in peace, implies jettisoning the belief that some are virtuous
and correct while others are wrong, and that some are always
giving while others are always in need.
It is clear that we cannot simultaneously pay the price of war
and the price of peace. Guaranteeing lifelong education for
all would enable us to: control population growth, improve the
quality of life, increase civic participation, reduce migratory
flows, level out differences in income, assert cultural identity
and prevent the destruction of the environment through sub¬
stantial changes in energy use patterns and urban transport; pro¬
mote endogenous development and the transfer of knowledge;
foster the swift and effective operation of justice, with appro¬
priate machinery for international co-operation; provide the
United Nations system with appropriate facilities to tackle
transnational problems in time. None of this can be achieved in
a context of war. What is needed, then, is to reduce the invest¬
ment in arms and destruction in order to increase investment in
the construction of peace.
Education by example
The distillation of traditions, thoughts, languages, forms of
expression, memories, things forgotten, wishes, dreams, exper¬
iments, rejections, culture finds its supreme expression in our
everyday behaviour. Infinite cultural diversity is our great
resource, which is underpinned this is our strength by uni¬
versal cultural values that must be passed on from the cradle to
the grave. Family members especially mothers teachers, the
media, everyone must help to spread the ethical principles, the
universal guidelines that are so necessary today for haves and
have-nots alike: the latter because they have a right to the basic
minimum standards that human dignity demands; the more for¬
tunate because material goods fail to deliver the expected plea¬
sure. Where there is no longing, possession brings no enjoyment.
In education, tools are useful. But nothing can replace the
friendly words of a teacher, or the caresses and smiles of parents.
The only real education is education by example . . . and love.
Learning without frontiers whether geographical, or fron¬
tiers of age or language can help to change the world, by
eliminating or reducing the many barriers that today impede
universal access to knowledge and education. Education must
help to strengthen, reclaim and develop the culture and iden¬
tity of peoples.
Globalization carries with it a danger of uniformity and
increases the temptation to turn inwards and take refuge in all
kinds of convictions religious, ideological, cultural, or nation
alistic. Confronted with this threat, we must "emphasize the
forms of learning and critical thinking that enable individuals to
understand changing environments, create new knowledge and
shape their own destinies". Indigenous peoples must be placed
on an equal footing with other cultures, participating fully in the
drafting and application of laws. Peace means diversity, a blend¬
ing of "hybrid, wandering cultures" as Carlos Fuentes put it;
it means multi-ethnic and multilingual societies. Peace is not
an abstract idea but one rooted firmly in cultural, political,
social and economic contexts.
Eliminating violence
Above all, this profound transformation from oppression and con¬
finement to openness and generosity, this change based on the
daily use hy all of us of the verb "to share" which is the key to
a new future cannot be achieved without our young people,
and certainly not behind their backs. We must tell them they
who represent our hope, who are calling for our help and who seek
in us and in external authorities the answers to their uncertainties
and preoccupations that it is in themselves that they must dis¬
cover the answers, that the motivations and glimpses of light that
they are seeking can be found within themselves. Although at
times it may be difficult, given both their consternation and our
own, to present the situation to them in those terms, our position
as lifelong teachers and learners obliges us to say to young people,
as Cavafy put it in a poem: "Ithaca gave you the journey. . . . She
has nothing left to give you now". Each according to his own plan.
Each according to his own way of thinking. Free from self-serving
outside interference, especially when it robs the young of their own
"core", the intellect, talent and resourcefulness which are the most
precious individual and collective treasure of humankind. Sects
and the escape provided by drug addiction are the clearest symp¬
toms of this pathological state of mind that is our great problem
today. Indeed, education means activating this immense potential
and using it to its fullest so that each may become the master and
architect of his or her own destiny. We cannot give to youth what
we no longer possess in youthful vitality but instead we can offer
what we have learned through experience, the fruit of our failures
and successes, of the burdens, joys, pain, and perplexity and the
renewed inspiration of each new moment.
Let youth hold high the banner of peace and justice! So con¬
vinced am 1 of the relevance of this goal to the proper fulfilment
ofour mission that I have proposed to the General Conference that
it designate "UNESCO and youth" as a central topic for discussion
at its next session. That will be an appropriate moment since the
General Conference will be considering for adoption the "Decla¬
ration on the Safeguarding of Future Generations".
At all the United Nations conferences, regardless of the sub¬
ject under consideration (environment, popidation, social devel¬
opment, human rights and democracy, women, housing), there
has been a consensus that education is the key to the urgently
needed change in the direction pursued by today's world, which
is increasing disparities in the possession of material goods and
knowledge, instead of reducing them. To invest in education is not
only to respect a fundamental right but also to build peace and

progress for the world's peoples. Education for all, by all, through¬
out life: this is the great challenge. One which allows of no delay.
Each child is the most important heritage to be preserved. U\KSC()
may at times give the impression that it is only interested in pre¬
serving stone monuments or natural landscapes. That is not true.
Those efforts are the most visible. And the heritage thus safe¬
guarded the least vulnerable. But we must protect our entire
heritage: the spiritual, the intangible, the genetic heritage
and, especially, ethics. These are the basic, universal values that
our Constitution sets forth with inspired clarity. If we sincerely
believe that each child is our child, then we must radically change
the parameters of the "globalization" currently underway. And
the human being must become the beneficiary and main actor of
all our policies and strategies.
A system collapsed in 1989 because, concentrating on equal¬
ity, it forgot liberty. The present system focused on liberty, will
know the same fate if it forgets equality and solidarity. The
din made as the "Iron Curtain" collapsed drowned out the
tremor that ran through the foundations of the "winning" side
in the Cold War. We must, then, for the sake of both principle
and self-interest, redouble in every field the fight against exclu¬
sion and marginalization. We must all feel involved. We must all
work to ease the great transition from the logic of force to the
force of reason; from oppression to dialogue; from isolation to
interaction and peaceful coexistence. But first we must live, and
give meaning to life. Eliminating violence: that is our resohe.
Preventing violence and compulsion by going, as 1 said before,
to the very sources of resentment, extremism, dogmatism and
fatalism. Poverty, ignorance, discrimination and exclusion an;
forms of violence which can cause although they can never jus¬
tify aggression, the use of force and fratricidal conflict.
Swords into ploughshares
A peace consciousness in the interests of living together, of sci¬
ence and its applications does not appear overnight, nor can
it he imposed by decree. First comes disillusionment with
materialism and enslavement to the market, and then a return
to freedom of thought and action, sincerity, austerity, the
indomitable force of the mind, the key to peace and to war, as
affirmed by the founders of UlNKSCO.
Science is always positive, but the same cannot always be
said of its applications. Advances in technology and knowledge
can be used to enrich or to impoverish the lives of human
beings; they can help to develop their identity and enhance
their capacities or, on the contrary, they can be used to under¬
mine the personality and coarsen human talent. Only conscience,
which is responsibility and thus ethical and moral can make
good use of the artefacts of reason. Conscience must work in tan¬
dem with reason. To the ethics of responsibility we must add
an ethics of conviction and will. The former springs from knowl¬
edge, and the latter from passion, compassion and wisdom.
We are now approaching the end of a century of amazing sci¬
entific and technological progress: we can diagnose and treat
many diseases which cause suffering and death; we communi¬
cate with extraordinary clarity and speed; we have at our dis
posal instant, limitless information. However, antibiotics and
telecommunications do not compensate for the bloody con¬
flicts which have cut down millions of lives in their prime and
inflicted indescribable suffering on so many innocent people. All
the obscenities of war, brought home to us nowadays by audio¬
visual equipment, do not seem able to halt the advance of the
huge war machine set up and maintained over many centuries.
Present generations have the almost impossible, biblical task
of "beating their swords into ploughshares" and making the
transition from an instinct for war developed since time
immemorial to a feeling for peace. To achieve this would be
the best and most noble act that the "global village" could
accomplish, and the best legacy to our descendants. With what
satisfaction and relief should we be able to look into the eyes
of our children! It would be also the best way to celebrate the
fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Bights, in 1998.
Other "rights" have been added since 1918. These should
all be taken into account, and to them should he added the right
which underlies them all: the right to peace the right to live
in peace! The right to our own "personal sovereignty", to respect
for life and dignity.
Constructing the defences
of peace
Human rights! At the dawn of the new millennium, our ideal
must be to put them into practice, to add to them, to live and
breathe them, to relive them, to revive them with every new day!
No one nation, institution or person should feel entitled to lay
sole claim to human rights, still less to determine others' cre¬
dentials in this regard. Human rights can neither be owned nor
given, but must be won and deserved afresh with every passing
day. Nor should they be regarded as an abstraction, but rather
as practical guidelines for action which should be part of the
lives of all men and women and enshrined in the laws of every
country. Let us translate the Declaration into all languages;
let it be studied in every classroom and every home, all over the
world! Today's ideal may thus become the happy reality of
tomorrow! Learning to know, to do, to be and to live together!
I appeal to all families, educators, religious figures, parlia¬
mentarians, politicians, artists, intellectuals, scientists, craft-
workers and journalists, to all humanitarian, sporting and cultural
organizations and to the media to spread a message of toler¬
ance, non-violence, peace and justice. Our aim must be to foster
understanding, generosity and solidarity, so that with our minds
more focused on the future than on the past, we may be able to
look ahead together and build, however difficult the conditions
or inhospitable the setting, a future of ¡peace, which is a fun¬
damental right and prerequisite. Thus, "We, the people" will
have fulfilled the promise we made in 1915, our eyes still seared
by the most abominable images of the terrible conflict that had
just ended "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war", "to construct the defences of peace in the minds" of all the
peoples of the Earth.
