Cyberspace a planetary network
of people and ideas
BYJ.C.NYÍRI
Mbove, a computer-generated
¡mage illustrating the
information superhighway, the
communication network
capable of channelling an
ultra high-speed global flow of
text, sounds and images.
Ideas travelled in the same way, and with
the same speed, as people until the 1840s,
when magnetic telegraphy was introduced.
By 1860 there were 51,500 km of telegraph
lines in the United States alone. A permanent
transatlantic telegraph line was installed in
1866, and by 1872 most of the major cities of
the globe were linked.
With the advent of telegraphy, the trans¬
mission of information became practically
instantaneous, but it also acquired a peculiarly
fragmented character. If information is to
count as knowledge, it has to relate to a con
text. For face-to-face communication such a
context is provided by the situation in which
it is embedded. With a written text, especially
with a printed book, the context for each par¬
ticular passage is given by the wider textual
environment, indeed by the entire book, or
often even by the library in which the book is
found. The mere physical characteristics of a
book, and of stacks of books in a library, cre¬
ate a context of temporality convey a sense of
the past. Modern historical consciousness
emerged from the printed text.
Lacking a wider written context, and

employing characteristically short sentences,
telegraphic style comes close to the style of spo¬
ken language. However, telegraphic messages are
not embedded in concrete speech situations.
With the telephone, the experience of a living
conversation is partly restored. Facial expres¬
sions, gestures and the impressions of physical
surroundings are not transmitted; but tone,
mood and pace certainly are. Questions can be
asked, a dialogue maintained. Knowledge gained
from a telephone conversation might be about
events far away, yet it is up to date, and can be
rather complete; but of course it lacks the log¬
ical coherence of written communication.
^Electronic broadcasting
In the 1920s radio broadcasting rapidly became
the dominant mode of news dissemination
and propaganda. This was a decisive transition
towards a new era of non-written communi¬
cation, a transition not without effect upon
twentieth-century philosophy, in particular
upon Heidegger's and Wittgenstein's views on I oung women listen to the
radio in a sanatorium near
Moscow, around 1930.
the nature of linguistic meaning and the cog¬
nitive role of the community.
Radio broadcasting might enhance a sense
of global connectedness; but it also fosters
randomness and evanescence, lessening the lis¬
teners' ability to form an ordered picture fro m
out of what they have heard. Similarly with
television, where even the apparently all-
encompassing diversity of information pro¬
vided by satellite broadcasting, information
both verbal and visual, from local gossip to
international news, results in a motley of views
and messages entirely disconnected.
Television, of course, relies fundamentally
on images. Now it is possible to conceive of a
logic of images as complementing verbal logic,
and indeed it is to be expected that the former
is going to play an increasingly important role
in interactive multimedia communication, the
great promise of computer networking. How¬
ever, it is fair to say that in television broad¬
casting, as we know it today, the employment
of images often subverts rather than ampli¬
fies rational thinking.
I The networked computer
Just a few years ago it would have still been
possible to make an analysis of the cognitive and
social effects of the spread of the personal com¬
puter without specifically referring to the role
of computer networking. Today such an analy¬
sis would seem unnatural. Computers are, char¬
acteristically, enmeshed in networks. As such
they are not just number-crunchers and word
processors, but also, perhaps even primarily,
nodes of communication. The networked com¬
puter is a tremendously powerful instrument
for bringing together scattered information
data, texts, images, increasingly also sound
from all over the world, and indeed for build¬
ing up out of that information new edifices of
knowledge. The computer enables one to study
reference material in a breadth hitherto incon¬
ceivable, and in a depth not practicable in the
conventional printed medium.
However, both the isolated computer and
the networked one possess features which
appear to amplify, rather than alleviate, the dif¬
ficulties of finding one's way around labyrinths
of information. The knowledge stored in com¬
puters is physically never present, except for
the tiny segments momentarily on the screen.
When reading or browsing through a book,
when walking along the shelves of a library, or
even when flipping catalogue cards, one gains a
sense of orientation the electronic medium docs
not provide. For your knowledge to be coher¬
ent, you somehow have to know what you
know, have a survey, an overview, a memorized

pattern of your knowledge. We have memory
images of certain important passages, recall the
pattern of text on a printed page, or the location
of a volume in a library. When texts are read or
scanned on the screen, such an overview will
hardly emerge.
MFrom e-mail to WWW
The basic form of networking is e-mail the
exchange of written messages via telephone
lines (and/or broad-width cables) and pow¬
erful intermediate computers (called servers),
between any two individual computer areas.
Travelling through a net of interconnected
networks, e-mail messages normally take just
a few seconds to reach their destinations, and
within minutes a reply might arrive. As a con¬
sequence e-mail messages are frequently quite
similar to exchanges in spoken languages: rich
in emotions, poor in grammar and typically
without the logical discipline of reflective writ¬
ing. E-mail messages might be sent to more
than one person, even to lists containing hun¬
dreds or thousands of addresses. In any case
they are easily forwarded to third parties.
E-mail messages are regularly seen by eyes
they were not intended for. They are, so to
i period engraving showing
a telegraph room in Paris in
1889.
"M Journey through Digital
Space", an exhibition held at
the abbey of Montmajour, near
Aries (France).
speak, overheard, just as written messages
often were in the age of reading aloud, the
kind of reading characteristic of manuscript
cultures. Another feature of manuscript cul¬
tures brought back by e-mail and by all
forms of working with electronic docu¬
ments is intcrtcxtuality: the free re-use and
mixing of passages, taken from any text, in
the process of producing a new one.

E-mail gives rise to innumerable discus¬
sion lists, news groups and computer bulletin
boards, which have been described as the con¬
temporary equivalent of the ancient forum.
And while the overwhelming part of com¬
munication in the electronic market-place is
entirely fleeting and uninformed, the con¬
certed actions discussion groups frequently
initiate do have an immense democratic poten¬
tial, and the exchanges they pursue can indeed
provide information of high quality.
Such quality is of course more or less main¬
tained in the networked exchanges of the sci¬
entific community. There is today a growing
number of electronic scholarly journals; indeed
in some fields traditional periodicals have
already become obsolete. Even more signifi¬
cant are, as Stevan Harnad pointed out in Psy¬
chological Science in 1990, the changes per¬
taining to the so-called pre-publication
phase the phase of scientific inquiry "in
which ideas and findings are discussed infor¬
mally with colleagues, presented more for¬
mally in seminars, conferences and symposia,
and distributed still more widely in the form
of pre-prints. It has now become possible",
Harnad emphasized, "to do all this in a
remarkable new way that is not only incom¬
parably more thorough and systematic in its
distribution, potentially global in scale and
almost instantaneous in speed, but . . . unprece-
dentedly interactive." Scholarly skywriting is
the telling name Harnad gives to interactive
scientific inquiry in the medium of e-mail.
MTbe World Wide Web
The world of e-mail documents is unstable and
chaotic, difficult to navigate and impossible to
survey. By contrast, the World Wide Web
(WWW), today's ultimate computer network
achievement, is relatively stable and transparent.
The emergence of the Web amounts to a revo¬
lution in its own right. So-called Web pages
are self-published multimedia documents, each
having an address, and each connected throu gh
so-called hypertext links specifically conspic¬
uous words or symbols to a number of other
Web pages. Web pages form a m ore or less fixed
constellation of documents easy to scan and
study. We may know our way around in the
World Wide Web.
Multimedia documents may also convey
knowledge that mere texts cannot. The logic of í
images, as noted above, might come to fruit- I
fully complement the logic of texts. In the age î
of manual copying, and even in the age of the j
printing press, illustrations could only play a 1
subordinate role; and pictures as vehicles of I
thinking played almost no role at all. This is |
^ THE UNESCO |Q>URIER JUNE 1097
now changing with the possibility of manip¬
ulating images on the screen. Let us add that
knowledge is not just a matter of thinking; it
is also a matter of practices and skills. And
illustrations can show how things arc done. It
might be very difficult to give a verbal descrip¬
tion of, say, how a particular instrument is
handled, whereas a picture or a set of illustra¬
tions will easily explain it. Knowledge accessi¬
ble on the Web is not just global; it also tends
to be truly operational.
¡The virtual library
\s hildren in a computer class
(U.S.A.).
Quite a few of the great public and research
libraries of the world plan, or have already
begun, to digitize their materials first the
catalogues, and subsequently the holdings
themselves. Once digitized, these materials
(assuming that copyright problems and other
related issues have been solved) will be (and
many of them already are) accessible on the
net, thereby forming the joint stock of a huge
library that has no physical existence a virtual
library. This stock is, of course, continuously
enriched by scientific publications now issued
as electronic documents.
The advantages of the virtual library arc
obvious. Users of the net, whether living in
poor or rich regions of the world, may in prin¬
ciple have unlimited access to any library item.
Once they reach the documents they seek, they
can copy them electronically or make print¬
outs; and they can work with them in many
subtle ways, such as electronically searching
through them, and constructing concordances
and indexes. At the same time the original hard
copy items can be safely stored in buildings
that will gradually become book museums
rather than remain traditional libraries.

I he library of St. Catherine's
monastery, built in the 6th
century at the foot of Mt. Sinai
(Egypt), houses some 3,500
manuscripts, the world's
second largest collection after
that in the Vatican Library.
However, there are disadvantages too. Even
if multimedia technologies are fully employed,
bringing about a stronger illusion of physical
presence (e.g., pages of old books appearing
not just as a uniform text, but, if required,
as facsimile) electronic documents are poor at
creating a sense of place and time. That the ten¬
sions between the virtual and the physical are
not, in principle, impossible to resolve, is
shown by the programme of the new Biblio¬
thèque Nationale dc France. The BNF, which
is to be fully operational by 1998, is meant
to be both a giant physical library and a dig¬
ital on-line library. It is meant, as two of its
spiritual architects put it, to "consummate
the marriage of the universe of Gutenberg
with that of McLuhan. ... It will be open,
democratic, innovative, but all of those things
within a perspective ensuring the greatest
respect for the past." The BNF will no doubt
be a lighthouse in the torrents of the coming
global virtual library.
I Virtual universities
In an environment increasingly dominated by
multimedia computer networks, conventional
secondary and tertiary education is becoming
obsolete. Young people growing up with com¬
puters, introduced to the marvels of the net at
an early age, will experience traditional school
settings as simply unnatural. They become
used to finding their information not by ask¬
ing their elders or by going to a library, but by
surfing the Web.
On the tertiary level, lifelong learning is
expected, in the form of broad interdiscipli¬
nary education in the first place, and periods
of specialized training in new directions ever
after while being employed, or between jobs.
Tertiary education based on the net seems to
be the obvious solution. The virtual univer¬
sity is an institution of higher education with¬
out walls with no definite physical location,
no classrooms, no conventional library.
Although a minimum of face-to-face encoun¬
ters among registered students and their teach¬
ers and examiners seems to be inevitable, and
indeed called for, the learning process most of
the time takes the form of computer net¬
working.
The virtual university can be conceived of
as the twenty-first-century variety of distance
education. It needs to be stressed, however,
that the virtual university eliminates, rather
than bridges distance. The virtual university
preserves, or recreates, the personal community
of teacher and students, the audible and visi¬
ble character of lectures, the live interaction
of seminars. It is heir to the traditional uni¬
versity. But it is different both from the tra¬
ditional university and from distance educa¬
tion in the sense that, utilizing the possibilities
of interactive multimedia, it radically goes
beyond the inspirations of the printed book
of the fixed linear text. The creation of a virtual
university is a task of philosophical dimen¬
sions. It amounts to overcoming text-centred
modern European thought.
The working language of the Great Euro¬
pean universities of the Middle Ages was Latin.
From the sixteenth century on Latin was grad¬
ually complemented by the new literary
"national" languages emerging in close con¬
nection with the spread of printed books.
These new languages in turn became instru¬
mental in the creation of modern nation
states in building up centralized bureaucra¬
cies and national job markets. The university
henceforth served as the apex of a national edu¬
cation pyramid. It appears that in the case of
small nations the practical importance of
national universities is diminishing.
With the rise of a global economy and the
resulting need of a global education, the pres¬
sures to uphold a nation-wide cultural homo¬
geneity are weakening. A new interest is emerg¬
ing in local community life, local culture and
local dialect, an interest adequately reflected
by the popularity of local regional radio and
television broadcasts. Local activities are gain¬
ing a new significance by the fact that they can
be directly connected, through the net, to
activities on a global scale, without interven¬
tion or interference from national institu¬
tions. Computer networking is global, but it
is eminently suited also for the local and the
particular. Global knowledge and local cul¬
tures might happily coexist and exert mutually
creative influences.
