interview
vv
Mano Luzi
Mario Luzi is an essayist, playwright and translator, but above all he is one of the greatest living
Italian poets. His works have been translated into some thirty languages. Among those which
have appeared in English are For the baptism ofour fragments (Guernica, Montreal, 1992) and
After manyyears: selected poems (Dedalus Press, Dublin, 1990). Here, Mario Luzi talks to Mauro
Rosi about his life and work and the role of poetry today.
You wrote your first poem at the age of nine.
What do you remember about that time in your life?
Mario Luzi: I was an ordinary child, and I took
part wholeheartedly in the life of the community,
even if I sometimes had interests that were not
shared hy all my chums. One day, when I was
playing in the open air with the others, I felt the
need to leave them and go home, so I could write
that celebrated first poem to which you refer,
and which I have since lost. That was how I expe¬
rienced an almost physical need a need to trans¬
fer the living element of the grass and the park
where I was playing on to paper, into writing. I
can still remember the theme of that first piece
of poetic creation. At the timo 1 was very
impressed hy Dante's Divine Comedy, which of
course I hadn't read, but which I knew about
through a series of illustrated booklets (strip
cartoons didn't yet exist). I was intrigued by the
character of Dante and his journey that mys¬
terious adventure to forbidden places, where he
judged and was judged and wondered whether
he had really deserved his fate.
And after that initial experience?
M. L.: I remember a poem I wrote about a volcano
when I was about twelve. I must have heard
about an eruption in Italy or somewhere, and
my youthful imagination had been fired by that
wondrous element which blazed forth from its
hiding-place in the earth.
And then. ..?
M. L.: I wasn't very interested in the poems we
were given to read. My teachers gave pride of
place to moralistic poetry, chosen for didactic
purposes, like Giusti's not of course his ironi¬
cal poems, but his "devout" and less brilliant
work. I was far more drawn to the poetry of
D'Annunzio and Paseoli, which was modern for
its time. I couldn't really understand it but I
was interested in the way it broke away from
the set models we were given at school. It was
only later, when I was at high school, that I felt
a real need to express myself in words. I wrote a
great deal, mainly letters, almost all of which I
have lost. I then gradually decided that I was
going to devote my life to writing.
You later became a university specialist in
French poetry. How did your interest in that and in
European poetry in general begin?
M. L.: That was much later. First I became inter¬
ested in philosophy and spent a long time study¬
ing it, almost to the point where it began to com¬
pete with poetry. I was around eighteen or twenty
years old. Yet when I approached philosophy as
a spécifie discipline, I got the feeling it was all
rather how shall I put it? a will-o'-the-wisp. I
was probably more interested in the myth of phi¬
losophy than in philosophy itself: 1 loved the wis¬
dom of the Pre-Socraties, Plato and other philoso¬
phers of Antiquity. In other words, I preferred
philosophy that established a relationship with
truth and the human element to philosophy which
saw itself as a process of self-correction. I5y that
I mean the kind of finicky philosophy that
restricts itself to what Leopardi ironically called
"ramme/ir/i" "darning"' or "mending". At that
time, Italian philosophy was above all orientated
towards the latest manifestations of idealism, and
that didn't suit me at all.
THE UNESCO lOURIERB APRIE 1997

Poetry is an especially important way of
approaching truth.
M;I ario Luzi
in December 1996
Do you think that in a different cultural context
you might have ended up as a philosopher rather
than a poet?
M. L.: I don't know. Put I would certainly have
been more responsive to philosophy. I think that
in this respect my career is similar to Leopardi's.
Although he was best known as a poet, he con¬
sidered himself a philosopher hut didn't like
the philosophy of his time.
It was only late in life that I rediscovered
philosophy, when I was asked by a magazine to
take part in a discussion with Gianni Vattimo
and Massimo Gacciari, philosophers who belong
to what is known as the "weak thought" {il pen-
siero debole) school. This school, which was
inspired by Martin Heidegger and Hans Georg
Gadamer, regards language as the "house of
being" and believes it plays an essential role in the
process of the formation and recognition of truth.
It recognizes the emotional roots of experience
and therefore its own emotional and poetic
sources. It holds that poetry, as a radical cre¬
ation in and through language, is an especially
important way of approaching truth.
i fM\\ â
Ik 1 1 t 1 i \
r ^m f 1 »
v
r
This relationship with philosophy, especially with
Heideggerian philosophy, is at one with the religious
urge, with religious faith, which is a constant
feature of your poetry.
M. L.: Heidegger's philosophy does indeed attach
great importance to the sacred. It constantly
asks questions of theology and of poetry too,
notably Hilke's and Hölderlin's. . . .
A hallmark of your generation was its belief in
the ideal of the committed intellectual. For some,
that involved a very direct form of commitment, and
sometimes even activism in political parties. What
was your experience ofthat eventful period, and
what do you think of it with hindsight?
L. M.: By way of an answer, I will refer you to a
poem I wrote some thirty-four years ago, l*resso il
Besenzio. In it I describe a kind of meeting with
the "committed", to whom I reply, poetically, by
defining my own position. I tell them that although
we are moving in the same direction my itinerary
is less direct and longer than theirs; that I also
have to heed values which transcend current
events and are in a sense timeless; that my watch
is regulated by more complicated mechanisms,
which means that my time is not the same as
theirs. You mentioned earlier the faith that dri¬
ves my creation. I would simply add that the rela¬
tionship and confrontation between time and the
timeless is a constant element of my poetry.
Having said that, I approve of political com¬
mitment when it is ethically inspired and deeply
motivated, not purely polemical. I've never liked
the barricades, but even though I have not
committed myself to any political movement
I've always been very aware of the sufferings of
people victimized by injustice and mindful of
the relationship between power and freedom.
The universality of poetry is nowadays taken for
granted. But when one looks closely at the question
of translation, it seems clear that the language
barrier can sometimes be an insuperable obstacle to
the wide circulation of a piece of writing. What's
your position on this?
M. L.: The language barrier complicates matters
and is certainly a limitation. I realize that any
THE UNESCO lOURIERB APRIL 1997

k translation is debatable, that the legitimacy of
the choices made can always be questioned, and
that translation is always to some extent inade¬
quate or unfaithful. But no one, I'm glad to say,
has ever been able to prevent translation from
going on. And, anyway, surely the whole point of
poetry is that it transcends its original context,
overcomes the language barrier, and carries its
message beyond the source from which it sprang.
Without that potential, poetry cannot exist. It is
also true that people have always needed to wel¬
come poetry, to receive it as a gift, to be recep¬
tive to it. Despite the imperfections arising from
the way it is given concrete expression, there is
something vital and irrevocable in poetry: words
that are uttered in it are uttered forever and
can never be annulled. This holds true even if
they sometimes reach their audience in an "adul¬
terated" form.
When all's said and done, translation is about
human communication in the broadest sense. It
is in the nature of human beings to recognize
and be recognized, to seek and to be sought. In
Translation is about human
communication in the broadest sense.
other words, translation is an intrinsic part of
the human mind. In the biblical episode of Pen¬
tecost, the Word is heard and understood by
all though no one quite understands how. For
me, that is the "first translation".
Yourwerebornin Florence, you were educated
there, you have always lived there, and even if your
duties have taken you elsewhere, you have always
returned there. Didn'tyou everfeelthe need to cast
off your moorings and get away from your origins?
M. L.: No. My origins have not been an obstacle to
my poetry, because Florence has always been,
apart from one or two moments of eclipse, a pole
of universal attraction. Florence's culture is noth¬
ing if not universal. Far from being local or
parochial, it is open to all that is human, and
has been at least since the thirteenth century.
In the 1930s Florence was a hotbed of poetic
creativity. Literary historians refer to "Florentine
hermeticism" as an extremelyfruitful movement.
M. L.: The poets to whom the "hermetic" label
was attached were not all Florentines, but it is
true that at that time Eugenio Móntale, Carlo
Emilio Gadda, Alfonso Gatto, Tommaso Lan-
dolfi, Elio Vittorini and others all congregated in
Florence. The literary tradition of Dante's city
was not the only reason why they were there.
During the Fascist period Florence was an
"oasis", a place "apart" in Italian life. Because
of its marginal relationship with the country's
main political and economic centres, it enjoyed
a degree of cultural freedom that encouraged
the emergence of innovative movements. This
was an important factor which, on top of the
prestige of its centuries-old literary and artistic
tradition, enabled Florence to continue to play
a leading role despite the political situation in
Italy. Moreover, our movement was underpinned
by no specific doctrine or aesthetics. The poetic
renaissance of the 1930s was driven solely by
the need to lend poetic language a new, more
profound and more human credibility. Her¬
meticism inspired two or three generations of
poets. Even such already mature and established
poets as Móntale and Ungaretti underwent a cer¬
tain renewal thanks to the interest and support
of younger poets.
What were your sources of inspiration and points
of reference in international poetry at that time?
M. L.: We wanted to pursue the discourse of the
Symbolists while at the same time adapting it to
our environment and our motivations. Our inspi¬
ration was Mallarmé, and also Rimbaud. Our
movement brought about an important change in
Italian literary language, which opened up to
other traditions, especially those of other Euro¬
pean countries, thanks to great translators like
Giovanni Russo, Renato Poggioli and, for Span¬
ish, Carlo Bo. As for myself, I am sure that living
and working in that environment left a lasting
mark on the way I express myself.
In their desire to avoid retreating into a self-
contained environment, intellectuals today,
particularly those in the developing countries, are in
danger of being waylaid by shallow
cosmopolitanism, commercial culture and a
superficial lingua francaall of them examples of
the decay triggered by globalization. What do you
feel about this?
M. L.: I think it's a very real problem, and I share
the concern of intellectuals who have looked into
the question, such as the Egyptian Nobel Prize
winner, Naguib Mahfouz. Today's universalist
trend, encouraged hy historical events, brings
> rjoiTHE UNESCO lOURIER APRIL 19^7

with it a risk of homogcnization and consequently
a loss of roots and identities. Certain writers,
notably those belonging to dominant cultures
that grew out of colonial civilizations, are perhaps
less sensitive to this problem. Others however
and I'm thinking of certain forms of literary
expression in the Caribbean have come up with
original and remarkably brilliant solutions
through very powerful writing which has
remained faithful to its roots while at the same
time being virtually "global". But the dilemma
of having to choose between regionalism and cos¬
mopolitanism remains a very real problem in every
country, including Italy.
Ever since Hegel, intellectuals have periodically
predicted the demise of art. While it is true that
poetry has blithely ignored such predictions, the fact
remains that it now leads a shadowy and marginal
existence.
M. L.: That's true. The myth of poetry has come
to an end. Poetry was more vigorous and more
important in the past than it is now. Take the
Renaissance court, the medieval city, Dante,
Petrarch. Poets had no power, but they could
celebrate power and help define its form. And
take, on the other hand, the antithetical power
of poetry: I'm thinking here of Baudelaire and
the key moment in the rift between power and
poetry. It was by opposing those in power that
poetry, in a way, demonstrated its force and its
virtues.
After alliance, and then opposition, came
divorce. And divorce led to indifference, the
great enemy of poetry. So it was that poetry and
sometimes even great poetry began to flourish
in a marginal way. Poetry accepted that mar-
ginality.
Some poets experienced marginality not as an
ordeal but almost as a privilege.
M. L.: Yes, as a sense ofbelonging, an essential fea¬
ture of their identity. But while the myth of the
poet has completely disappeared today, the
poet's discourse is perhaps more alive than ever.
In times as muddled and chaotic as ours, all soci¬
ety's players are called to account. We're all in
the same boat. The poet is no longer someone
special, but he is listened to like the rest of us.
Of course, you can dodge him or give him a wide
berth, but if you cross his path, and he is a true
poet, you cannot turn a deaf car to him. Per¬
haps his symbolic role is outmoded, but he is
still there, and he is more necessary than ever. We
Perhaps thepoeù symbolic role is
outmoded^ but he is still there, more
necessary than ever.
all feel the lack of something essential. And when
something is lacking we go looking for it in a
place where we have a chance of finding it. Well,
poetry is one of those places where the overall
quest for meaning manifests itself.
Is there a poem which you would have liked to
write but have never written?
M. L.: I believe that all poems exclude. Any poem,
even the greatest and most perfect, leaves some¬
thing unsaid. That is inherent in the symbolic
power of poetic language and in its force. It is a
limitation I perhaps feel more keenly than oth¬
ers. It is greater than I would have liked. It's
true I sometimes think I could have expressed
more directly something I have said. Whereas
we think we mean one thing and set out to
develo]) an idea, that idea may suddenly seem to
us to be an external object. We sometimes get the
feeling it has escaped us, even if that is not
strictly speaking true. In fact, this idea is part of
us. Without realizing it, we carry it within us
and we work on it, and at the same time its pres¬
ence influences our behaviour and everything we
say or do. By externalizingit, we transform it, and
there is sometimes a lingering regret that we
have not expressed it straightforwardly.
Perhaps, on the other hand, the spirit of our
age deserved a greater degree of dramatization.
One of my plays, Rosales, is about terrorism.
Terrorism and . . . eroticism, because, oddly
enough, the two were closely connected at one
time. One of themain characters is a kind of Don
Juan, who gets caught up in a terrorist operation
against his will. When I had finished the play, I
realized there was more to be said on the subject,
especially about the lurking, stifled yearning for
liberation and salvation which drives us all, and
which sometimes manifests itself in violence.
I could have said more about this highly elu¬
sive dimension which some people find in tra¬
ditional religion, while others deny its existence
that "something" which perhaps exists, but
which we do not know how to look for. I believe
that, while we assert that there is nothing, some¬
thing exists, but we cannot manage to give it a
name. I
THE UNESCO Q)URI ERB APRIL 1997
