ALL POWER
TO THE
MICROPHONE!
BY ARMEN OGANESSIAN
For almost
70 years,
radio was a
formidable
T| hroughout its history Russia has felt
a need to link up its vast spaces, and
in the early years of the twentieth
century radio took over from the rail¬
ways as the instrument of this grand design.
At the third Pan-Russian Electrotechnical
Conference, in February 1 904, engineer Alek¬
sandr Popov gave the first demonstration of
radio transmission of the human voice. He
had already invented a lightning detector, and
in 1896 developed a radiotelegraph system
which transmitted Morse code. It was first
used by the Russian navy, which later owned
Russia's first large radio stations.
But Russian industry lagged behind
Popov's genius. Russia's first radio factory in
St. Petersburg was established by the Marconi
36 r
W THE UNESCO I^OURIERB FEBRUARY 1997
enin during a recording
session in the Kremlin (1919)
company, and the country's first radio com¬
pany was founded some time later, in 1910,
under the auspices of the naval authorities.
A propaganda tool
Lenin and his followers immediately grasped
the possibilities of this new medium of com¬
munication, and in their hands radio became a
powerful weapon in the exercise of political
power.
On the eve of the October 1917 coup d'état
the Bolsheviks issued orders to armed patrols
via radio. They asked the railwaymcn to stop
troop trains bringing battalions loyal to the
provisional government from reaching St.
Petersburg (renamed Petrograd). The rebel
sailors seized the naval radio station and the

next day Lenin wrote his "Address to the cit¬



izens of Russia" on the delegation of power to
the Armed Revolutionary Committee.
After the transfer of the Soviet government
to Moscow, the radio station at Khodinsk
became "the megaphone of the Russian revolu¬
tion". It broadcast government decrees, mes¬
sages for foreign states and peoples, and news
from the Russian telegraph agency. At a time
when millions of Russians, for the most part
illiterate, had to be reached and persuaded, radio
had the edge on the written word. It was, in
Lenin's words, "a daily that knew neither paper
nor distance".
Significantly, Lenin ordered the best Russ¬
ian engineers to be released from the jails of the
Cheka, the Bolshevik secret police, and sent to
work in the radio technology laboratory at
Nizhni-Novgorod. In 1920, the laboratory
produced a radiotelephone with a loudspeaker,
and some time later, a short-wave transmitter
whose signals could be received in Britain,
France and Iraq. By the end of the decade
Moscow was broadcasting to other countries,
first in German then in the other main Euro¬
pean languages.
At the same time, the content of Russian
programmes became more diversified and music
was given air time between speeches and propa¬
ganda programmes. In 1 924 private citizens were
authorized by decree to buy a receiver for per-
Ladio reaches distant parts
of the Soviet Union (1929).
laf uring the Second World
War, people in a Russian city
street listen to Yuri Levitan,
Radio Moscow's chief
announcer.
sonal use, and daily newspapers began publish¬
ing programme schedules. Scientific and sport¬
ing news, poems and stories went out over the
airwaves. Then came the first live broadcasts fro m
stadiums; the first radio correspondents and
children's programmes appeared.
A popular hit
According to Russian historian M. Miriukov,
radio was regarded by the people as a "real mir¬
acle". The Communist Party press was espe¬
cially interested in the audience's reactions and
its opinion of programmes.
In 1928 A. Chorin, an engineer who had
also been freed on Lenin's orders, patented a
recording and sound-reproduction machine
developed under his responsibility. His device
provided Russian radio journalism with a pro¬
totype of the tape-recorder. Later advances in
recording techniques in the 1 930s were decisive
for radio broadcasting during wartime.
In the mid-1930s two Moscow radio sta¬
tions broadcast images as well as sound twice
a week, thus paving the way for the coming of
television. In 1935, hermetically sealed as the
"iron curtain" then was, Moscow stations
broadcast a concert given in the United States,
while in response ninety American stations
broadcast a concert performed in Moscow.
On the eve of the Second World War there
were more than a million radio receivers and
nearly 5 million relays in the Soviet Union.
The broadcasting network covered nearly the
whole country.
At noon on 22 June 1941 Moscow radio
announced that the Soviet Union was at war
37
THE UNESCO COURIER« FEBRUARY 1997

1
!
I he Moscow radio tower built
in 1922.
ï with Hitler's Germany. Although German
troops advanced deep into the country, radio
stations continued to transmit, and the voice
of Moscow could be heard throughout occu¬
pied Europe, including Germany.
The triumph of radio
The leaders of the Third Reich, especially Josef
Goebbels, the Minister for Propaganda and
Information, wanted to silence the transmit¬
ter. The Soviet Radio Committee was among
the strategic targets of the Luftwaffe bombers,
and Radio Moscow's chief announcer, I. Lev-
itan, was on the hit-list of people to be exe¬
cuted if Moscow fell. Later Levitan talked
about his work during this grim period:
"Preparation was hard going. Your words had
to show no sign of panic or despair, and you
couldn't allow your voice to shake. The voice
of the radio was heard all over the country, at
the front and abroad. Resistance fighters and
partisans listened in. Radio brought hope,
helped people forget wounds and fatigue, and
called for victory over the enemy."
With the army, radio was the war's great
victor. With the coming of peace, its triumph
as the most successful medium of mass com¬
munication seemed incontestable. In the
immediate post-war years, Soviet radio began
broadcasting on three networks for several
hours a day. Some time later the appearance of
a receiver capable of receiving three programmes
set the seal on this success. Radio was listened
to everywhere. At the time it was so popular
and people were so convinced of its indis-
pensability that they could not imagine that
it would one day be supplanted by television,
then in its infancy.
This complacency, especially among people
working in radio, was probably partly to
blame for radio's decline in popularity once
television began to catch on. But radio did
not give up the ground it had won in the 1 920s
without a fight. When one of the networks
interrupted a concert to transmit the radio
signals from the first earth satellite, Sputnik,
as it drew closer to Moscow, tens of millions
of listeners were glued to their radio sets.
The thaw
Shows devoted to pure entertainment, apart
from opera and concerts, were unknown on
pre-war and wartime Soviet radio. It was dur¬
ing the years of political thaw under Nikita S.
Khrushchev that entertainment programmes
first appeared mornings and evenings. The peo¬
ple in charge of these programmes were famous
nationwide.
The defining radio event of the 1960s was
the creation of a round-the-clock station,
Mayak ("The Lighthouse"), which broadcast
only music and news. It currently reaches 221
million listeners throughout the Common¬
wealth of Independent States. Under Leonid
Brezhnev a number of directives were issued to
strengthen artistic, political and social news
programmes. New stations were created, and
the network grew and diversified.
Mikhail Gorbachev's rise to power brought
changes to radio although the main contours of
the broadcasting scene remained essentially the
same. During his period of office the first steps
to dismantle the state broadcasting monopoly
were taken.
THE UNESCO lOURIERB FEBRUARY [997
