Easter Island's last secret
BY LUIS M1Z0N
The only Polynesian island where traces of
an indigenous script have been discovered
Top, a sanctuary of giant
statues or moai near the shore
of Easter Island. Some moai
wear a kind of headpiece of red
volcanic tuff.
The azure waves which break on the
shores of Easter Island have come all the
way from the far edge of the Pacific Ocean a
thought which makes the place seem even more
isolated than it looks. In the night sky, the
bright stars of the southern hemisphere seem
to be far-off sister isles exchanging winked
messages with the huge stone statues that dot
the island like a tribe of dozing giants.
Easter Island has many faces obscure,
extraordinary and mysterious. There's the
island you see, as described by explorers, and
then the hidden one, of caves and tunnels and
the secret lore its inhabitants share. There's the
island whose history is lost in the mists of
time and the island depicted by scientists,
artists and travellers. All these dimensions
overlap, interlace and whisper to the others,
like so many primal echoes. Works of art and
tourist trinkets apart, Easter Island is a place
the West has invented to fantasize about.
From the air, it looks like a boomerang
hurled from another planet slap into the mid¬
dle of the ocean. A 1 1 8 sq. km triangle of rock
with its high point to the northeast, facing
towards the islets of Polynesia, and its flat
part in the southwest, looking towards the

far distant coast of Chile. At each corner of
the triangle is a volcano. In the left-hand cor¬
ner is the almost-perfect cone of Rano Kau. In
the right-hand one, Rano Rarako, on whose
slopes are the biggest group of giant stone
statues (moai). In the northern corner is Rano
Aroi, next to Mount Terevaka. Nearly all the
islanders live in the village of Hanga Roa, near
Rano Kau.
The nearest inhabited land is 3,500 km
away.
W,;'V.,
A mysterious script
Easter Island is the only Polynesian island
where ancient writing has been found. Its
meaning is an impenetrable secret.
Even though it was confined to such a small
geographical area and used by the tiny handful
of people who lived there, the writing shows
evidence of a sophisticated civilization. Who
were these people? When did they get there and
where did they come from? Did they bring
their civilization and writing with them? What
feelings, thoughts and values did these incom¬
prehensible markings once convey?
Landing on this remote spot in the middle
of the Pacific vastness can only have been a
mistake or the result of a mishap or piece of
good fortune. The discovery of the island in
1722 by Europeans, in the person of the
Dutch Admiral Jacob Roggeveen, was a bad
Detail of a rongo-rongo or
"talking wood" tablet from
Easter Island.
A rock painting depicting the
Bird-Man, the focus of an
Easter Island cult.
omen. The island's population then was 4,000;
it had been reduced to 1,800 by 1863, 600 by
1 870, a mere 200 five years after that, and only
a few more in 1911. The nineteenth century
was ruthless with non-European cultures.
Easter Island's only resource was its manpower
and a few patches of farmland. But its poverty
hardly protected it against colonial rapacity.
In 1862, a fleet of pirate slavers from Peru
came looking for workers for the guano indus¬
try and made off with more than 1 ,000 of the
islanders, including their king, Kaimokau, his
son Maurata and the elders who could read
the writing on the stone tablets known as
rongo-rongo.
The French consul in Lima eventually man¬
aged to get a hundred-odd of the deported
islanders repatriated, but by then they were
infected with smallpox and on their return they
contaminated the rest of the population. The
secret of the Easter Island script probably died
with the victims of this catastrophic epidemic.
The earliest research on the inscriptions was
done between 1 864 and 1886, when an attempt
was made to categorize the markings or compare
them with other undeciphered scripts from
ancient India, for example. There were three
stages in these attempts at decipherment, each
linked with a figure symbolizing a period of the
island's history and a specific tablet.
The bishop of Tahiti's tablet
Easter Island had about 1,000 inhabitants when
the French merchant ship Tampico, captained by
Jean-Baptiste Dutrou-Bornier and carrying the
missionary Father Gaspar Zumbohm, anchored

In the 19th century Westerners
demolished the last moa/still
standing upright. Right,
sailors from the French frigate
F/oresurrounded by angry
¡slanders in 1872.
offshore in 1866. Two years later, Dutrou-
Bornier settled on the island, marrying, or rather
kidnapping, Koreto Kuapurunga, who claimed
to be queen of the island, and joining forces
with an Anglo-Tahitian called John Brander.
That same year, 1 868, Fr Zumbohm decided
to return to Valparaiso. Since he would pass
through Tahiti, the Easter Islanders asked him
to take a gift to its bishop, MgrTepanoJaussen,
as a mark of respect. When the offering, a huge
ball of plaited hair 1 00 metres long, was unrav¬
elled in front of the bishop, a wooden tablet
bearing strange markings was found inside.
An elderly islander in the missionary party,
Urupano Hinapote, explained that it was a
rongo-rongo, one of the revered tablets which
recorded the island's most ancient traditions
but which nobody could decipher since the
elders who knew the secrets of the script had
died. The bishop wrote to the missionary who
had stayed behind on the island, Fr Hyp-
polyte Roussel, and asked him to send him as
many of the tablets as he could find. Roussel
sent him six, noting that the markings on
them probably meant nothing, that the
islanders did not know what they meant and
that those who said they did were liars.
But the bishop was convinced the discov¬
ery was important and he eventually found, on
a Tahitian plantation, an interpreter called
Metoro Tau Aure. As soon as he gave him one
of these tablets covered with geometric,
26
anthropomorphic and zoomorphic signs, he
began a religious chant, apparently reading the
signs from bottom to top and left to right,
and turning the tablet upside down at the end
of each line to read the next one. This is a vari¬
ant of a form of writing known as "boustro-
phedon" (literally "turning like oxen in
ploughing") and is similar to certain ancient
Greek inscriptions where alternate lines are
written in opposite directions. Unfortunately,
the bishop's interpreter chanted the same thing
whichever tablet he was given to "read."
Captain Dutrou-Bornier's stick
When Ignacio Gana, captain of a Chilean
corvette, the O'Higgins, landed at Easter
Island in 1870, Dutrou-Bornier gave him a
chieftain's stick covered with markings which
experts consider the finest example of rongo-
rongo in existence.
Gana gave the stick, along with two tablets
with markings on them, to a scholar at the
Santiago Natural History Museum, Rodulfo
Philippi, explaining that the Easter Islanders
had such reverence for the markings that they
were obviously sacred to them.
Philippi at once sent plaster casts of the
tablets to various experts around the world,
notably an English scholar, Pack Harrison,
who was mystified by what he took to be a
kind of cartoon strip. Not one of the experts

Giant heads carved out of soft
volcanic tuff may represent
important figures in the
history of Easter Island.
consulted could find the key to the mysteri¬
ous markings.



Thomson 's attempts at
translation
William Thomson was the purser on the Amer¬
ican ship Mohican which stopped at Easter
Island in 1886. Three years later, the U.S.
National Museum published his history of the
island, the most detailed written until then.
Before reaching the island, the Mohican
had stopped in Tahiti, where Thomson pho¬
tographed the tablets in the bishop's posses¬
sion. Once on Easter Island, he searched for an
islander who could translate the inscriptions.
He came across an old man, Ure Vaeike, who
was very reluctant to help him but was even¬
tually persuaded by money. The old man
seemed to regard translating the markings as
something dangerous for his soul.
As soon as he saw the photos of the tablets
he began to chant quickly. But, just as with
Metoro Tau Aure, he did not seem to be read¬
ing the text. He too recited the same things
whichever one he was shown.
In the end, he confessed to Thomson that
nobody on the island could read the mark
ings but that they were definitely important,
like a book written in a foreign language one
did not understand. According to Thomson,
Ure Vaeike's "poetic translation" of the mark¬
ings was as follows:
"My daughter's canoe which has never been
beaten by enemy tribes. My daughter's canoe
has not been destroyed by the plot of Honiti.
It's always victorious in all battles. Nothing
could force my daughter to drink the poison
from the obsidian cup. How can I console
myself when powerful seas separate us? Oh
my daughter! My daughter! The great liquid
path stretches to the horizon. My daughter, oh
my daughter. I shall swim through deep waters
to find you, my daughter, oh my daughter!"
Experts now think some of the Easter
Island markings are perhaps words, though
they may not be full sentences or at all gram¬
matical. They may just be notes to help the
passing-down of oral traditions, especially
genealogical records.
Maybe these mysterious inscriptions have
the same message for us as the island itself.
Perhaps they simply invite us to ponder on the
fragility of all human endeavour. For the
moment they remain poems dedicated to
silence.
