FACT FILE LAND, SEA AND PEOPLE
UNESCO'S ISLAND AGENDA
In 1990 Unesco created a unit to act as a focal point
within its Secretariat for those of its small Member
Statesmainly islands in the developing worldthat
do not have permanent delegations at Unesco Head¬
quarters. The unit's task is to ensure that these small
states participate fully in Unesco activities and that
Unesco is responsive to their needs.
The states (of which there are 28, plus 3 Asso¬
ciate Members) have been selected according to the fol¬
lowing criteria, which were flexibly applied: a surface
area less than 10,000 km2; a population of less than 1
million, and a per capita gross national product (GNP)
of about $2,000. The countries belong to the following
regions: Africa (Cape Verde, Comoros, Lesotho, Sao
Tome and Principe, Seychelles and Swaziland);
Asia/Pacific (Cook Islands, Fiji, Kiribati, Maldives, Mar¬
shall Islands, Nauru, Niue, Samoa, Solomon Islands,
Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu); Caribbean (Antigua and Bar¬
buda, Bahamas, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts
and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines,
Suriname), plus the three Associate Members (Aruba,
the British Vi rgin Islands and the Netherlands Antilles).
They face particularly acute environmental and
development problems because of their ecologically
fragile and vulnerable natural heritage, small size, geo¬
graphical isolation, geological formation, scarcity of
natural resources, and the natural hazards to which
they are exposed (earthquakes, volcanic eruptions,
tsunamis, cyclones, typhoons, floods, landslides and
droughts). These problems are worsened by soil ero¬
sion, groundwater contamination, deforestation in
upland areas, over-use of herbicides and the pollution
of rivers and coastal waters.
Places of cultural and biological blending, these
small countries have nurtured societies that are in
many cases multiracial and multilingual and gifted
with a remarkable capacity for adaptation. They are
an original source of inspiration for the exploration of
new paradigms and partnerships on local, regional
and worldwide levels.
AMINA OSMAN

For further information:
Unit for Relations with Small Member States
Bureau for External Relations
Unesco, 7, Place de Fontenoy
75352 Paris 07 SP France
Tel: (33) (0)1 45 68 18 61
Fax: (33) (0)1 45 68 55 39
E-mail: a.kramp@unesco.org
