AY IT WITH FLOWERS
BY YANNIS E. IOANNOU
The first-time visitor to Cyprus is
likely to be struck by the way in
which the natural world with all its
contrasts, wisdom and perfection is
recreated inside the islanders' houses. The
microcosm of the Cypriot house tradi¬
tional or modern, in the mountains, low¬
lands or towns is engaged in a constant dia¬
logue with the macrocosm of nature: with
what the Greek poet Odysseus Elytis has
called "the universe, the infinitely small, the
unfathomable".
The language of this dialogue is a miscel¬
laneous and multicoloured assortment of
pots of flowers, arranged in rows or placed at
random around the entrance door, along walls
and windows, on makeshift shelves or old
tables, suspended from trees or outer walls,
as if to welcome the thirsty traveller. The pots
of flowers strike a friendly note which might
otherwise be excluded from homes and gar¬
dens by utilitarian and often thoughtless
human intervention, to say nothing of the
intensely arid climate of a land where summer
lasts nearly six months.
I A tradition ofsymbolism
A geranium in a huge container stands har¬
moniously among daffodils, and all around
flowers growing in a conglomeration of pots
of all shapes and sizes create a vast coloured
landscape. To enter a house ungraccd by pots
of flowers is to experience a foretaste of death.
But let's take a closer look at these clusters
of pots. All kinds of receptacles, irrespective
of colour, size or material, are pressed into
service and used for planting cuttings. Buck¬
ets, metal or plastic drums, tin cans or mar¬
garine containers, milk and yoghurt pots all
form part of this astonishing miscellany.
They are not arranged according to any set
order but moved around depending on the
space available. There is no preordained aes¬
thetic pattern, as one might tend to think.
This is a world of its own, loaded over¬
loaded even with affection, love and respect.
It continually breaks the rules that govern
the decorative approach and stylization of
Western gardens. This is not mere decoration,
but a world in a state of flux, in the throes of
constant creation and recreation, ordained
by standards of raw beauty based on an orig¬
inal law which obeys no human model and in
my opinion achieves perfection. "Nature
" Ihe pots of flowers are there
as if to welcome the thirsty
traveller". Below, an outdoor
café in Athna, eastern Cyprus.

In Cyprus no
home is
complete
without a
'garden9 of
pottedplants
itself", Elytis tells us, "is neither good nor
bad, beautiful nor ugly. It simply is."[ It exists
in simplicity, humility and disorder, in a
beauty that is both elusive and familiar.
Symbolism, often dating back to Antiqu¬
ity, is associated with this strange world
whose "inhabitants" arc closely linked to tra¬
ditional life in Cyprus. The lily is associated
with purity. Certain cacti ward off the evil
eye. A vine inside the house would climb,
and sometimes still docs, up the walls of the
living room, twining round and clinging to
beautiful traditional plates hung as orna¬
ments but its two ends must never meet
because that would bring bad luck. This is
why in the past nobody was called Manolis
(the plant's common name).
The therapeutic uses and virtues of some
plants are also important. The mushy juice of
the aloe was once used as an ointment for
treating wounds and burns. Basil and gera¬
niums arc placed near doors or windows
eraniums are placed near
doors or windows where their
powerful smell wards off
mosquitoes."
where their powerful smell wards off mos¬
quitoes and of course basil leaves whet the
appetite of the Cypriots, who sprinkle them
over salads. Sprigs of mint arc systematically
put in the folds, made for this very purpose,
of the traditional halloumi cheese. Lavender
leaves in a cupboard keep the moths at bay.
The heady aroma of Spanish jasmine leaves
and marjoram is inseparable from crystal¬
lized fruit, especially in the island's rural areas.
Walnuts arc regarded as a gastronomic lux¬
ury. They used to be served when the object
of a visit was an engagement.
I A woman's perfume
Love is associated, perhaps even identified,
with certain plants which have a distinctive
odour and colour, such as jasmine flowers
hand-plaited with thread to make a necklace
which women used to wear for want of more
sophisticated perfumes or hide discreetly in
their blouses (especially on Sundays and

holidays). In traditional society, before the
days of the sexual revolution, a woman who
was desired was inaccessible. Only her per¬
fume that wonderful blend of the flower's
smell with that of her body could be flcet-
ingly captured. Desire could be fulfilled only
in song, dance and amorous daydreams, as is
suggested by this couplet from a traditional
Cypriot song:
Jasmine at your door, oh my jasmine
I came to prune it
and your mother thought
I had come to carry you away.
The women tend the flower pots and are
perfectly familiar with the qualities and needs
of each plant. To keep jasmine perfectly fresh,
they plant it in metal or terracotta pots or,
better still, in wooden containers.
Water is a serious problem in Cyprus.
Planting flowers in pots rather than in a gar¬
den saves a great deal of water, especially in the
arid plains, since just the right amount of
water can be sprinkled over a flower pot.
There is no water shortage in the mountains,
but water is hard to transport, and access to
houses is almost always difficult. What is
more, plots of land suitable for cultivation
are so small that, to save space, pots are
30
M flower market in Llmassol
in southern Cyprus.
pressed close together there are houses
whose balconies overflow with flowers. The
sparse soil available is used to grow vegetables
for subsistence but also for the joy of gar¬
dening and swapping one's produce with that
of one's neighbour.
IDivineprotection
My wife was the first person I questioned
about the origins of the custom of growing
plants in pots. "Can't you see," she said, "that
these arc poor people's plants? To begin with,
they have no money to buy pots and they
never buy plants. Friends and neighbours
swap cuttings. . . . The pots don't count. It's
the plants that matter and the whole nexus of
affection that grows around them. . . ."
I was struck by her words. I had been liv¬
ing with these pots for as long as I could
remember without paying any attention to
this practice whose ceremonial, functional
and symbolic connotations can only be
explained by wisdom born of long tradition.
When women plant flowers (planting trees
is a man's job), arrange and rearrange flower
pots to make sure that each plant is in its
right place in the sun or shade, caress the
plants, feci the joy of watching them bios-

som, and tenderly water them, they are act¬
ing within a long tradition of hospitality
under divine protection. It would be a viola¬
tion of this tradition if strangers had to
knock at the door of a house without pot
plants they are an umbilical cord between
the domestic microcosm and the natural
macrocosm.
Pot plants perform the same function in
the monasteries that dot the hills and moun¬
tains of Cyprus, whose inner courtyards arc
oases of human warmth and fresh air. They
restore to passing guests the peace and seren¬
ity they lost on their journey. The visitor's
first contact with the spiritual and artistic
world of the Byzantine monastery is made
through this miniature universe that seems to
be in a state of rapture. Worship of God
blends with the worship of nature, while the
echo of the psalms intoned by the deep voices
of the monks or in the sensuous tones of
the nuns, accompanied by the song of the
cicadas outside, infuses the senses and the
spirit.
These pots brimming with scent and
colour are imbued with sanctity. They cele¬
brate the inexhaustible totality of man and
the world, the joys and beauty of the earth
and the monastic austerity which leads to



union with God. These intimate gardens
where everything is within reach provide the
mass of flowers which on Good Friday night
accompany Christ to His tomb in a volup¬
tuous blend of classical sensuality and Byzan¬
tine spirituality.
The geometrical order and perfection of
Western gardens are a far cry from this sim¬
ple beauty whose every feature prolongs the
stirrings of the soul. Here the law of analogies
between people and their landscape seems to
function to perfection. As Elytis says, "a line
a painter draws is not limited to itself alone,
but has an 'analogy' in the world of spiri¬
tual values. Seeing the mountains shaped this
way or that way must have an effect on the
human spirit, must have its analogy."2
1. Interview with Odysseus Elytis by Ivar Ivask in
Books Abroad, vol. 49, Norman, Oklahoma, autumn
1975.
2. Ibid " Ihe natural world is
recreated inside the islanders'
houses."
