NuestraSeñora de La Paz (Our Lady
of Peace) was founded by the
Spaniards on 20 October 1548 in
the valley of the torrential river
Chuqueyapu. Located in the area where the high
plateaux of the Andes (the Altiplano) give way
to the slopes leading down to the Amazonian
side of the cordillera, it became an important
station on the route connecting the Potosi sil¬
ver mines to Cuzco and the Pacific coast.
At first La Paz consisted of two settle¬
ments, one for the "Indians" on the right bank
of the Chuqueyapu, near what is today Plaza
Alonzo de Mendoza; the other for the
Spaniards and their descendants, on the left
bank around Plaza Murillo. Although the
indigenous-mestizo and Spanish-creole pop¬
ulations lived in close proximity, in practice
they were divided by all kinds of physical and
symbolic barriers. The torrents and ravines ¡
that scar the hill-slopes around the historic |
town separated the different neighbourhoods, |
and after an uprising of the Aymara Indians of I
the Altiplano in 1780 a wall was even built to I
protect the white population. In« lk
r r r L. a Paz from the air.
M A social Babel
La Paz is the only city in Spanish-speaking
America that still has two names. In addition
to its official name it is known to the Aymara
Indians of the Altiplano as Chuquigo or
Chukiwayu Marka. In spite of the changes
wrought by the centuries, the shifting of the
neighbourhoods occupied by the different
populations, and ethnic intermixture, La Paz
still consists to a large extent of an Indian city
and a white city.
28 r
W THE UNESCO V__OURIER MARCH 1993
3i!»>tl- i "
&ê
'f *
-» ^ \,
This polarity is etched into its majestic
site, dominated by Mount Illimani, whose
peak towers over 6,400 metres high. The
world's highest capital, and the different social
strata that live in it, extends in tiers between the
altitudes of 4,200 and 3,200 metres. On the
heights, slopes and edges of the Altiplano live
Aymara Indians who have migrated from the
countryside. The middle classes live in the
heart of the city, at around 3,600 metres, near
the administrative and commercial centre (La
Paz became the seat of the Bolivian govern-

-*~"~
ment in 1900). Below 3,500 metres are resi¬
dential districts where an affluent and largely
white population lives in expensive houses
surrounded by gardens whose upkeep is
favoured by a more temperate climate.
The 1,000 metres between the "top" and
"bottom" layers, between the Indian settle¬
ments of El Alto and the elegant districts of
Calacoto, la Florida and Achumani, contain a
welter of climatic, ethnic, economic and social
contrasts.
M Interdependence
The whites were long haunted by the fear that
they would be encircled by the indigenous
people, as they were by Tupaq Katari in 1781.
However, the conquest (or reconquest) of the
city by the Indians has taken other, more
peaceful and irreversible forms. Between the
sixteenth century and the beginning of the
twentieth, whites and mestizos made constant
inroads on the territory of the indigenous
population. Deprived of their land and no
longer able to farm or raise animals, the Indi¬
ans began to specialize in crafts and trade and
came to constitute a partly urbanized group
known as cholos, "town Indians" or mesti¬
zos (see box page 31).
After the revolution of 1952, agrarian
reform, universal suffrage, education for all
and other measures were introduced, trans¬
forming Bolivia's social and economic struc¬
tures and encouraging a far-reaching process
of national integration. An internal market
grew, the rural world turned increasingly
towards towns and cities like La Paz,
Cochabamba and Santa Cruz, and new poles of
development emerged in the eastern lowlands.
Attracted by better-paid jobs with higher
status to leave their small plots of infertile land,
Indian immigrants and Aymara peasants set¬
tled in the hills around La Paz and on the
plateau, where the gigantic settlement of El
Alto grew up. The city's population, 321,000 in
1950, had almost quadrupled by 1992, with
nearly one third living in El Alto, where infra¬
structure and services are often dismally lacking.
Today, the two cities arc closely interde¬
pendent. The "white" and mestizo city cannot
exist without the labour of immigrants who
work in the lower echelons of the urban econ¬
omy (in the clothing, transport and con¬
struction industries, in small businesses, and
as domestic servants) but have rarely cut them¬
selves off from their home villages.
I The birth of the "Indian"
When the Spaniards arrived in this part of the
Andes it was inhabited by a number of
Aymara groups such as the Pacajes, the Lupacas
and the Collas. These traditional ethnic and
territorial units were dismantled by the colo¬
nizers and the generic term "Indian" was used
to designate all indigenous people. This view
of the Indians as a uniform mass still prevails
today, even though each region and rural com¬
munity has a specific identity that can be rec¬
ognized by its styles of clothing and music,
and by the spoken dialect. The term "Indian"
is rejected by most of the indigenous peoples,
who regard it as an insult and associate it with
exploitation and discrimination, but at the
M passer-by is dwarfed
by a wall painting in El Alto,
the Indian district.
THE UNESCO i3)URIERB MARCH I 29

same time it is accepted by Indian rights move¬
ments which in the last twenty years or so
have been trying to end discrimination against
all the Indians.
Whatever the rights and wrongs of this
debate, it is indisputable that the immigrants
brought cultural models that have given La
Paz its special flavour. La Paz differs from
other Latin American capitals, which are sur¬
rounded by poverty belts, in that its needy
districts display many features of the rural
communities from which their inhabitants
have come. For economic and cultural reasons,
newcomers first build adobe (sun-dried brick)
houses with corrugated iron roofs like those
in the villages they have left behind, consist¬
ing of a kitchen and a huge common living
room for all the family. Later they add new
rooms built of industrially manufactured
bricks which are often left ungarnished by
plaster or whitewash, partly because of the
30 r
W THE UNESCO L^OURIERB MARCH 1997
ancers shaking rattles
celebrate the Christian feast
of the Assumption.
cost but also because new migrants regard these
bricks as a status symbol.
External signs and codes physical appear¬
ance, clothing, food and language are
imposed, maintained and even sought-after.
They reveal the extreme ethnic diversity of
these Indian groups, and also highlight the
contrast between them and the economic and
political elites who favour a "Western" lifestyle.
La Paz has always been shaped by a two-
track process of integration and discrimination.
Although the existence of racism is denied it
can be seen in the day-to-day relations between .
people from different social strata. Immigrants
of peasant origin do the dirtiest jobs, earn the
lowest wages, are excluded from the social secu¬
rity system and have only limited access to
schooling and health care.
I Festive union
The different classes of society mingle during
the fiestas that punctuate the year. In the pre¬
dominantly indigenous neighbourhoods, as in
the villages, patron saints are the object of
colourful celebrations organized and financed
by volunteers who want to show their devo¬
tion and also acquire prestige corresponding to
the money they spend on food and drink for
the participants, dancers' costumes, bands,
and so on.
In recent decades, several events of Andean
and rural origin have spread to other sections
n street scene
in the city centre.

of the population. The alasitas fiesta dedicated
to Ekeko, an ancient divinity of plenty, is
now celebrated throughout the city each year
on 24 January. On that day, at midday, every¬
body in the city stampedes to buy miniature
models of houses, cars, banknotes and other
good luck charms.
The fiesta of Señor del Gran Poder, which
takes place inJune, was once celebrated only by
the people who live in the parish of that name.
In the last twenty-odd years it has been an occa¬
sion when dozens of costumed groups dance to
rhythms from mestizo, indigenous and chola
cultures as they parade through the city's main
avenues. Recently, people from classes which
would once have looked down on such events
as vulgar and "Indian" have joined in.
Another common practice is to organize a
ch'alla good-luck ceremony at house-warm¬
ing parties, political meetings and all kinds of
other occasions. During the ceremony Andean
divinities (Pacha Mama or achachilas, the
sacred mountains) are invoked and presented
with offerings bought in the "Street of
Witches". Sometimes indigenous shamans are
called on to use their expertise as negotiators
with the Aymara divinities.
ruit sellers in an Indian
market.
HALF-WAY HOUSE
In La Paz the term cholo describes people who are socially and
ethnically in a halfway house. Forthose who regard themselves
as "whites", a choloU the son of an Indian who no longer dresses
in a traditional way like his father and has received a more
highly rated education. For others, a cholo is the mestizo son of
a marriage between a white and an Indian, or else the son of a
cholo. To be considered as such, two conditions must be met. A
cholo must have migrated to the city and have a job whose sta¬
tus is sufficiently high for him no longer to be defined as an
"Indian". For exa mple, a mason or a plumber who has migrated
from the countryside will be treated as an Indian, but an incomer
whohasajob with higher status (e.g. as a driver or butcher), will
be regarded as a cholo.
In white people's minds, the intermediate status occu¬
pied by the cholos in La Paz society seems bound up with a set
of qualities and defects (rebelliousness, submission, neurosis).
A passport from cholo status to that of a "señor" is possession
of a certain amount of wealth and an educationpreferably
gained abroad. For many "whites", however, those who have
"made it" in this way, i.e. become "señores", remain half-rio-
fos. "He acts like a cholo," is an insulting way of saving that a
person has no manners and reprehensible habits.
In La Paz, there are no very marked differences in men's
dress, which is mainly determined by economic factors, but
women's dress s quite a different matter. In everyday language,
a distinction is made between "a dressed-up woman ", who
wears Western-style clothes, and a chola who wears the pollera
(a capacious dress with a pleat in the middle) .
Cholas who control the sale of food in the markets are a
feared and respected group. They react with firmness and pride
when the term chola is applied to them pejoratively by those who
do not belong to their social and cultural world. L. P.
Events of this kind show how practices
and beliefs that not so long ago were generally
inaccessible or despised are spreading and that
the different classes and cultures of La Paz are
intermingling. It is still too early to say
whether these borrowings merely indicate that
the "haves" are taking over the cultural forms
of a tamed and neutralized class of "have-
nots", or whether they mark the start of a
process that will eventually lead to genuine
recognition of these cultures.
r *"
- - --MiJa Li» '
Left, a house in the Calacoto
residential district.
Par left, a shanty town on the
heights of La Paz.
THE UNESCO I^URIERB MARCH 1997 31
