BY BADAOUI ROUHBAN
Throughout history, the violent side of
nature has manifested itself in
destructive phenomena such as floods,
volcanic eruptions, severe storms, wildfires,
earthquakes and tidal waves. Disasters and
risks are a part of our life, and they will con¬
tinue to threaten, kill and destroy. "Zero
risk" is out of reach in the contemporary
world. The basic problem is how to prevent
hazards from causing increasingly large-scale
disasters. The answer is that the disastrous
effects of natural phenomena will only be
eliminated, reduced or stabilized when peo¬
ple decide to make cities, settlements, infra¬
structures and houses safer.
I A culture ofprevention
For people are the agents of disaster. "It's
not the bullet that kills, it's the hole". Earth¬
quakes and windstorms do not kill; the col-

A call¡or a 'culture oj prevention 'to counteract
increasingly destructive natural disasters
lapse of houses and buildings from shak¬
ing is the main cause of death. Natural haz¬
ards themselves arc not on the increase; nor
are they likely to be in the future. It is the
frequency of natural disasters that is
expected to grow, as well as their complex¬
ity, scope, gravity and destructive capacity.
There will be an increase in multiple or syn-
ergistic-type disasters causing society-wide
impacts. In a time of globalization, large-
scale damage caused by an earthquake in a
world financial centre such as Tokyo or Cal¬
ifornia is bound to have an effect even on the
economies of faraway countries.
Natural disasters are not always entirely
"natural". On the one hand, natural forces
are at work on a planet whose environment is
being altered day after day by humankind:
floods arc made more severe by deforestation,
global warming more preoccupying by the
unchecked emission of greenhouse gases. On
the other, natural disasters will increasingly
generate or magnify concurrent technological
disasters. Floods can devastate chemical com¬
plexes, earthquakes can affect critical plants.
The good news is that disaster reduction
is both possible and feasible. While we cannot
prevent an earthquake ora windstorm from
occurring, or a volcano from erupting, we
can use the scientific knowledge and technical
know-how that we already have in order to
increase the earthquake- and wind-resistance
of houses and bridges, and to issue and dis¬
seminate early warnings of volcanic eruptions
and organize proper community response to
such warnings. The extent to which society
puts this knowledge to effective use depends
upon its social, cultural, political, economic,
and even religious specificities.
I Informing thepublu
Disaster prevention and preparedness start
with improving our understanding of risks
by assessing the distribution in time and space
and the intensity of the natural phenomena
When Colombia's Nevado del
Ruiz volcano suddenly erupted
on 13 November 1985, It
struck the towns of Armero
and Chinchina and claimed
nearly 25,000 lives. Above,
victims flee the disaster.
The eruption of Vesuvius
In 1794 (anonymous
19th-century painting).

involved and the exposure of people and struc-
tures to them. On the basis of this assess¬
ment, protective measures may be taken such
as land-use restrictions, adequate construc¬
tion measures and wise environmental man¬
agement. Detection and warning systems may
be installed, and contingency and emergency
plans be set up. One permanent measure of
paramount importance is the education and
information of the public.
A number of cases show that loss of life,
injuries and physical damage can all be sig¬
nificantly reduced by the application of bet¬
ter warning and disaster prevention mea¬
sures. Because of inadequate use of, and
response to, warning, more than 300,000
people died in Bangladesh due to a cyclone
in November 1970. In May 1985, better pre¬
diction and proper response to warning of
a cyclone of the same intensity kept the
death toll below 10,000. Similarly, appro¬
priate warning and evacuation saved the
30,000-strong local community during the
1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the
Philippines. The population of the city of
Armero in Colombia had been less fortunate
in 1985 when a comparable eruption of
Nevado del Ruiz volcano caused 25,000
deaths within minutes.
Disaster prevention measures cost much
less than relief and reconstruction expendi¬
ture following a disaster, yet many deci¬
sion-makers tend to focus on relief and to
treat disaster situations in an ad hoc way
when they are presented with them. Today
most typical strategies are crisis-oriented.
Furthermore, information about natural

