commentary Federico Mayor
the leritage,
memory of the future
The fundamental dilemma facing all the world's coun¬
tries, to varying degrees, is that of the need to safeguard
the past while continuing to build the future, the need
to balance the demands of development and culture.
The international scope of the problems the details of
which have been brought to our attention in recent
decades through the rapid growth of communications
technology gives added impetus to the prevention
and education efforts tirelessly deployed by UNESCO,
in co-operation with all its Member States. UNESCO's
Constitution defines one of the Organization's principal
tasks as being to "maintain, increase and diffuse knowl¬
edge by assuring the conservation and protection of the
world's inheritance of books, works of art and monu¬
ments of history and science".
In the words of the Spanish scholar and writer Miguel
de Unamuno, "Memory is the basis of the individual
personality as tradition is the basis of the collective per¬
sonality of a people. We live in memory and through
memory, and our spiritual life is, in the last resort, noth¬
ing more than the effort of remembrance to persevere,
to become hope, the effort of our past to become future".
Today our world needs to adopt a broader definition
of the word heritage. As well as the physical heritage,

the heritage of ideas, the scientific heritage and the ture. This is our goal and it is this that I wish to empha-
genetic heritage which UNESCO has also begun to pre- size so that, in our day-to-day work, even when we
serve as the heritage of all humanity are part of the are addressing the most specific issues, we never lose
ancient heritage that we must safeguard. But I should sight of this paramount concern. Because where there
also like to stress the importance of the ethical her- is conflict, where there is violence, where there is war,
itage, the enormous relevance of a few central val- there is only destruction. There is no safeguarding,
ues, the universal principles which contain the infinite there are no human rights, no democracy, no rights to
diversity of our sources of inspiration and can transfonn education, justice or housing. Without peace there is
it into the unity that constitutes our strength and our nothing. Peace is the precondition, and that is why it
hope for the future. was so clearly proclaimed by the founders of the United
The task of preserving and enhancing the heritage Nations and of UNESCO in the preamble to their respec-
of our ancestors extends far beyond the simple preser- tive charters. The overriding aim they set forth is to pre-
vation of magnificent landscapes and sublime monu- vent "the scourge of war", to stop people killing one
ments. For the first time in the history of humanity, another.
our awareness of the repercussions of our actions on I believe that the most important monument we
the planet at large obliges us to ensure that they do not have to [»reserve is human life. Human beings alone are
have irreversible consequences on this heritage. This endowed with the creative spirit. This is their distinc-
criterion of irreversibility, of risk reaching a point of no tive faculty, setting them aside from all other living
return, creates a moral obligation for decision-makers organisms. This is the wonder of human life. And in
to take steps now before it is too late to rectify trends wishing to preserve human life, our first concern must
that might otherwise lead to irreversible change. be with children, children all over the world, whatever
their nationality, for children have no nationality, they
are the children of us all. They are the most important
We must be vigilant, we must look ahead, anticipate the and the most fragile heritage we have to preserve .
future and take the necessary preventive measures. Our constant endeavour, then, must be to preserve
Today these measures are no longer optional; they con- human life. How is this to be achieved? How is violence
stitute an ethical imperative. We must look ahead so as to be averted? In seeking answers to these questions we
to shape our common destiny, and we must never sue- must draw upon our memory of the future so that we
cumb to fatalism. can, in the world of tomorrow, safeguard the most
It cannot be said too often that everything we do important human right, the right to life,
depends on consolidating the foundations of peace. It Let us never forget that safeguarding the past is
is UNESCO's mission, in particular, to build peace in important insofar as it contributes to a new design for
people's minds through education, science and cul- the future. I
THE UNESCO COURIER SEPTEMBER I 997 '
The miracle of life
