FROM SHORT WAVE TO SATELLITE
Do satellite and digital radio
spell the end of short-wave radio?
For almost seventy years, short-wave
transmission has been the most effi¬
cient method of delivering pro¬
grammes across long distances. Today,
however, the development of new technologies
such as satellite transmission, digital audio
broadcasting and interactive two-way cable is
forcing many international broadcasters to
reconsider the choice of short wave as their
principal medium for the future.
The phenomenon known as "short-wave
radio" is actually the result of a combination
of transmission technology and the electro¬
magnetic properties of the earth's atmosphere.
Just as the waves of the ocean are caused by
the vibration of water molecules, radio waves
result from the vibration of electromagnetic
particles. The rate at which they vibrate is much
faster than that of ocean waves several thou¬
sand times per second, or even several hun¬
dred thousand times per second.
The number of vibrations (or cycles) per
second is the frequency of the wave. The cycle
per second is named the hertz (abbreviated
Hz) after the German physicist Heinrich
Hertz. The higher the frequency of a radio
wave, the shorter its wavelength the distance
between two consecutive cycles. Radio waves
of different lengths are used for different pur¬
poses, because they have distinct physical
28 THE UNESCO lOURIER FEBRUARY 1997

BY RAY GALLON AND DIANE SELIGSOHN
Left, a Mongolian nomad
camp in the Gobi Desert
around 1930.
Beelow, Somalis listening to
the BBC World Service learn
that Mogadishu has fallen
(1991).
properties. Radio stations are allocated fre¬
quencies according to a system ratified by a
series of international conventions. They are
often identified by their number on the dial,
which corresponds to a frequency in kilohcrtz
(kHz) or megahertz (MHz).
Hopping round
the earth
Short-wave transmissions are in the frequency
range of 3 to 30 MHz. They are used for inter¬
national broadcasting because their physical
and electromagnetic characteristics (wavelength,
energy level, etc.) allow them to be reflected
by the ionosphere, a layer of electrically
charged particles in the upper atmosphere.
Unlike domestic broadcast transmissions,
which are beamed at the horizon and cover a
broad but local area, international short-wave
broadcasts are pointed at the sky. When a radio
wave emitted from a transmitting antenna hits
the ionosphere, it "bounces" back towards
the earth. This is called a "hop", and carries
the signal a distance between 2,000 and 4,000
kilometres.
The wave is then reflected back towards the
ionosphere by the earth's surface, making
another "hop" as it again returns to earth.
After several "hops" the signal can reach the
other side of the globe. The more powerful
the transmitter, the farther the signal can travel.
But the ionosphere also causes problems
for long-distance broadcasts. The generation of
radio waves in the ionosphere is strongly
affected by the time of day, the season and
sunspot activity. Small but rapid changes in
the ionosphere's altitude and makeup alter its
reflecting abilities, affecting the quality of
reception.
Static also interferes with short-wave recep¬
tion. It can be caused by electrical charges such
as those produced by ignition systems in auto¬
mobile and aircraft engines. But lightning is the
most common culprit. Radio frequency inter¬
ference produced by these atmospheric dis¬
charges can travel thousands of kilometres.
Since there is almost always a thunderstorm
somewhere within a few thousand kilometres
of any radio, static is a constant disturbance.
This is why short-wave broadcasters often
send the same programme simultaneously on
several frequencies, and periodically change
these frequencies. But as a consequence, the
THE UNESCO ^ÎURIERl FEBRUARY 1997

spectrum of frequencies is often overloaded,
increasing the likelihood of interference and
restricting the introduction of new services.
Technological innovations and improved
co-operation among countries are now mak¬
ing it possible for international broadcasters to
provide alternative solutions to ensure recep¬
tion and improve sound quality. For exam¬
ple, they now often transmit programmes by
satellite to local FM stations, which retransmit
them as part of their domestic schedule.
Rebroadcasting is fast replacing short wave in
some parts of the world, especially in Russia
and Eastern Europe.
In areas where co-operation agreements are
not yet possible, the same technology is used
to relay signals to short-wave transmitters in
the target region. The closer the transmitter, the
fewer "hops" necessary to reach an audience,
resulting in greater listening comfort.
Satellite direct
broadcasting
Short wave has been called the "first genera¬
tion of international radio". The second gen¬
eration, according to Simson Najovits, deputy
editor-in-chief of Radio France Internationale's
foreign language services, is the system of pro¬
gramme placement and leasing of domestic
FM transmitters. "What is strange," he says, "is
that the second generation is not likely to last
for many years. What's likely to overtake it
is the third generation called mobile radio."
Mobile radio, also known as Satellite Digital
Audio Broadcasting (Satellite DAB), means
digitally encoded signals, similar to the digi¬
tal sound on a compact disc, sent directly fro m
satellites to radio receivers in homes, cars, or on
the street. This, in the opinion of Najovits,
will relaunch the idea of international radio.
"It will suddenly make international radio
from several countries available everywhere in
the world with a simple mobile receiver," he
says, "which if mass-produced would be sold
for perhaps $1.00. A whole new horizon will be
opened, both in information and entertain¬
ment. It will mean almost a new medium."
The technology exists already, and prototype
receivers have been built.
The proliferation of Satellite DAB is
dependent on a typical chicken-egg scenario:
receivers will only be manufactured if there
are broadcasts to receive, and broadcasters will
only use the technology if the potential audi¬
ence has receivers. Market studies indicate that
most radio listeners are unlikely to spend $100
on a new radio just to receive international
broadcasters. The market will be driven by the
conversion to DAB by domestic broadcasters,
initially in developed countries where the
W THE UNESCO ^lURIER FEBRUARY 1997
means to invest in expensive new equipment
are more available. The dilemma for the large
international broadcasters is that the majority
of their audience is in the developing world.
The North-South gulf
"We're finding that there's an increasing split,"
says Jonathan Marks, Director of Programmes
at Radio Netherlands and organizer of a recent
conference on the future of international
broadcasting. "In some parts of the world
technology is leaping along very quickly, but
if you look at the statistics, there's an enor¬
mous gulf between North and South." There
is a large existing base of short-wave receivers
particularly in Africa and in the former Soviet
republics, where short wave has also been used
for domestic broadcasts across large stretches
of territory.
"A lot of people in Third World countries
depend on short wave," explains Victor
Goonetillike, a teacher and writer who mon¬
itors international broadcasts from his home
in Sri Lanka. "They listen to it for informa¬
tion, not for stereo music quality." He empha¬
sizes that $100 can represent an entire month's
income for a family in a poor country: "The
technology will be able to reach the audience,

but whether the audience can reach out for it
is another matter."



"People are still listening to short wave,"
confirms Andres Sennitt, editor of the World
Radio and Television Handbook. "The broad¬
casters on the other hand have limited budgets.
They want to invest in new technologies
because that's obviously what's going to be
important in the future. And in order to do
that they're having to cut back on some of
their short-wave broadcasts. So they're hav¬
ing to make difficult choices whether to
invest for the future and risk losing some lis¬
teners in the short term that they might regain
later on, or whether to stay longer with short
wave, and risk being squeezed out of the dig¬
ital medium. There are only going to be so
many satellites and if the big broadcasters have
already taken up the space, there won't be any¬
thing left for the ones that come along later.
"The real irony," as Dr. Kim Andrew Elliott,
producer and presenter of "Communications
World" on the Voice of America, and the
VOA's former director of research, points
out, "is that we already have DAB TV as a
reality, but DAB radio is a distant dream."
One possible compromise which would
permit the continued use of short-wave trans¬
mission for the short to medium term, and at
M satellite dish brings
telecommunications to
Bhutan.
the same time improve the quality of recep¬
tion, is to relocate short-wave transmitters
which currently deliver their energy (via the
"hops" described above) to distant places, but
not to neighbouring countries. For small to
medium external services such as Radio Prague
International, the most effective way to oper¬
ate is regionally, targeting neighbours with
similar interests and cultures to their own.
Relocating transmitters
The current short-wave system was set up at
a time when international co-operation was
difficult or impossible to achieve in this area,
and stations. had to use powerful transmit¬
ters in their home countries, not necessarily the
best locations for reaching their target audi¬
ences abroad.
Now that there is a greater spirit of co¬
operation among international broadcasters,
says Oldrich Cip, co-ordinator of frequen¬
cies and adviser to the management of Radio
Prague International, "We should start co¬
operative projects which would relieve the
enormous pressure on the space of the short¬
wave spectrum. We could introduce integrated
projects such as streams of multinational
broadcasts on special channels. They would
be broadcast from strategically located posi¬
tions on the outskirts of Europe, let's say
from Russia towards western Europe or fro m
the Iberian peninsula towards eastern Europe.
This would deliver 100 per cent reliable sig¬
nals into these target areas. The homeland-
based transmitters could be switched off and
the spectrum would be cleared and improved."
In western Europe, Cip says, "you would
hear a stream of programmes, perhaps includ¬
ing Radio Prague and other stations from
Central Europe at very good strength, whereas
if you listened to those programmes from the
transmitters within central Europe you would
probably hear very little or nothing, especially
during the winter evenings because of physi¬
cal conditions."
If the lure of new technologies is irresistible
for international broadcasters, short wave still
has a powerful hold on listeners, even in rich
countries. Oldrich Cip believes that short
waves are here to stay for at least two more
decades, and probably for much longer. "Short
wave as a natural resource will always remain
within the spectrum of radio frequencies. Even
if we change to digital, we still have some space
which has to be utilized somehow. I am con¬
vinced that the condition of short waves can
be reversed so that they can be very effective
and relatively reliable. Of course, some of the
vagaries of the ionosphere never change. But
this is also one of the fascinations of short¬
wave reception."
THE UNESCO COURIER FEBRUARY 1997 %
