Words have no legs, £
yet they walk'
YOUSSOUF TATA CISSÉ
talks to Jasmina Sopova
Africa's continent-wide lines ofcommunication
based on respect for the spoken word
In traditional African societies
knowledge was transmitted orally. Did
this restrict the spread of ideas?
Youssouf Tata Cissé: Not at all. In Africa
ideas travelled with people. Human migra¬
tions, initiatory journeys, conquests and trade
routes made pathways along which ideas criss¬
crossed the continent.
Since ancient times Africans have moved
about and carried with them knowledge, tech¬
nology, beliefs, traditions and languages. What
other explanation can there be for the fact that
one finds the same ideograms tattood on the
bodies of Moroccan women and depicted in
the statuary of the Bambara and Malinke peo¬
ples of west Africa? How can you explain the
existence of the same place names, the same
divinities, the same rites and the same musical
instruments in the Nile Valley and in west
Africa? Comparative studies on the affinities
between pharaonic Egyptian and certain
African languages by the noted Senegalese
writer and Egyptologist Cheikh Anta Diop,
and his research on the migrations of peoples,
based on purely linguistic data, say a lot about
this flow of ideas in Africa.
The Nile Valley is often mentioned in the
oral traditions of the Soninke and Malinke,
who regard it as the original homeland of their
ancestors. Intrigued by this, I carried out
research into place names and ethnic names
and found nearly 400 names in Egypt, Sudan
and Ethiopia that also existed in west Africa.
Here are a few examples: EI Kantara in Egypt,
and Kantara, a Soninke clan name and fore¬
name; Segala, the name of an island in the Red
Sea and of several villages in Mali and Côte
d'Ivoire; Dakar in Ethiopia and Dakar, the
capital of Senegal. Moreover the oldest divini¬
ties of Pharaonic Egypt Bes, the oryx, the
vulture, the ibis, the falcon and the sphinx
are still celebrated in Mali where they have
their masks and statuettes.
The absence of writing was no obstacle to
the spread of knowledge. The cult of the spo¬
ken word in Africa meant that speech was an
important channel for the communication of
knowledge and ideas. That is why Mali's Bam¬
bara people say, "words have no legs, yet they
walk." Nothing can stop them.

What role have initiatory journeys
played in the spread of ideas?
Y. T. C: Initiation is much more than a hand¬
ful of "exotic" rites. It is a general education
that begins at six years of age and ends at
around thirty-three. Traditionally, it was car¬
ried out by six societies to which initiates
belonged one after the other, depending on
their age and the knowledge they had acquired.
They learned everything: history, the origins
of peoples, languages, mathematics, technol¬
ogy, morality and the secrets of nature and
the universe. During this process of learning
about life, young initiates were supposed to
travel, and they went to foreign lands with
their teachers, musicians, dancers and crafts¬
men. They lodged with local people and dis¬
covered new ways of life, new crafts and new
languages. In turn, they put on shows in which
griot in Casamance
(Senegal).
they demonstrated their own knowledge.
Enrichment was mutual. Only when they had
learned three languages did they return home.
This indicates the importance attached to
knowledge and respect for others. Nowadays
these initiatory journeys occur during the dry
season, but in the past they lasted seven years.
What influence was exercised by the
griots (story-tellers and masters of
ceremonies) and the donikeba
(teachers)?
Y. T. C: Doni in Bambara means "knowledge",
and the donikeba are "makers of knowledge".
We also have doma, or "knowers", and soma,
or "priests". These masters have an extraordi¬
nary memory, and are the guardians and prop¬
agators of tradition. In the past their social
status was so high that they enjoyed diplo¬
matic immunity in wartime.
Masters of the spoken word that they were,
griots acted as negotiators and ambassadors in
times of conflict, as did smiths, wood-cutters
and hunters, who were reputed for their man¬
ual dexterity and their knowledge. As musi¬
cians, poets, genealogists and historians, they
also played a considerable role in the spread of
ideas. Through a visualization technique
enabling them to put a face to every name, these
"troubadours" knew by heart the complete
genealogy of the family to which they were
attached, as well as the great deeds performed by
its ancestors. Some knew, and still know, the
history of a whole ethnic group or of an entire
kingdom. The history of Mali has been
recorded in verse and set to music. For a month
every year the griots of Kela, for example, recite
it all through the nights of Thursday to Friday,
Saturday to Sunday and Sunday to Monday,
100 hours in all.
Griots are also great travellers. They have to
visit various masters for periods of training
during which they increase their knowledge
while also spreading it.
To give you some idea of the distances they
can cover, let me cite a relatively recent exam¬
ple. In 1946, at the end of the Second World
War, griots left Bamako and went on foot via
Niamey to Agadez in Niger in other words
a distance of 4,000 kilometres to sing the
praises of the RDA (the Rassemblement
Démocratique Africain, a west African polit¬
ical movement), the triumph of General de
Gaulle, the abolition of forced labour, and
the forty-four-hour working week	 In this

way political ideas spread through songs sung
by illiterate griots.
You also mentioned that ideas spread
as a result of conquest.
Y. T. C: Yes, because when warriors set out
to conquer new territory, they were accom¬
panied by religious leaders, masters of initia¬
tion, griots and smiths. All the corporations
of craftsmen the main repositories of tradi¬
tion were among their retinue. They took
with them their raiment, ornaments and jew¬
elry. They exchanged their knowledge with
that of the peoples whose land they occupied.
New civilizations were born as the result of
these encounters.
In peacetime ideas circulated as a result of
the formal relations between different cultural
and religious communities. Take the case of
Mansa Musa I, whç ruled the Mali empire
between 1307 and 1337. It is said that when he
made the pilgrimage to Mecca his escort con¬
sisted of 60,000 porters, 10,000 subjects and
500 servants. His wealth and generosity dur¬
ing his stay in Cairo were noted not only by the
Egyptians but also by Italians, Portuguese and
North Africans. In this way new doors were
opened for trade and cultural exchanges.
How did Islam reach Mali and what
contribution has it made?
Y. T. C: Mali is among the foremost Islamic
countries of west Africa. According to Soninke
oral tradition Islam was introduced around
666 by the envoys of Ocba Ben Nafi, a leading
figure in the expansion of Islam in Egypt and
North Africa. After laying the foundations
of the al-Qayrawan mosque in Tunisia, he is
said to have sent a delegation to the capital of
Wagadu (present-day Ghana) to ask Kaya
Maghan, the emperor, to convert to Islam.
The emperor rejected the proposal, but
allowed his subjects, especially those doing
business with Turkey (trade in diamonds,
eunuchs and slaves) to embrace the new reli¬
gion. The first converts were the Soninke.
The Qur'an was immediately translated,
with a commentary, first into Soninke then
into the country's other languages, so that
people could learn to recite the Qur'an by
heart and absorb Islamic dogma without
knowing Arabic. This is still done today. In
uring a ceremony in the
forest near Abidjan (Côte
d'Ivoire) a message is sent by
drum to announce the arrival
of masked dancers.

other words, Islam has been integrated into
traditional societies without destroying tra¬
ditional cultures and languages.
Traditional art was also incorporated into
embryonic Islamic architecture. Architects
adapted old patterns of worship to the new
religion and built mosques in a unique style
known as "Sudanese", using banco compacted
earth reinforced with an exposed timber frame¬
work. One of the oldest mosques is in
Tombouctou. It was designed by an architect
named Ishaq el-Tuwedjin, whom Mansa Musa
had met in Cairo during his pilgrimage to Mecca.
The mosque at Djenné is by far the most beau¬
tiful. Built in 1907 and patterned on the early
religious buildings of the Ghana empire, it too
is typical of the Sudanese style widespread in
eastern Senegal, Ghana and Nigeria all the
countries visited by the Sudanese builders.
The egg-shaped dome added to the top of
minarets is another example of Sudanese syn¬
cretism. Bambara cosmogony holds that the
first thing the Supreme Being created was a
wondrous egg, Fan, consisting of nine com¬
partments into which He inserted the nine
basic states of existence. And so the egg-shaped
dome is a symbol of the traditional religion
grafted onto a Muslim place of worship.
The pattern marked on the ground in hop¬
scotch, a game played by children the world
over, is also divided into nine sections. I think
that the role of games in the transfer of ideas
should not be neglected, not only in Africa but
worldwide. And games mean music and song.
To get back to architecture, I would add that
during the colonial period a fusion took place
between the traditional style and the European
style, leading to what has been called "colonial
architecture". It is mainly found in administra¬
tive buildings, markets and post offices in Mali,
Mauritania, Burkina Faso and Niger.
Did colonization open new routes for
the movement of ideas in Africa?
Y. T. C: Colonization brought a break in con¬
tinuity. All aspects of traditional society were
disrupted. The setting up of French schools
and the use of French as the official language
disturbed the system of traditional teaching.
Only the Qur'anic schools continued to func¬
tion. All the traditional structures were shat¬
tered. Religious leaders became suspect. Reli¬
gious rites and objects were labelled as satanic.
The established channels for transmitting
knowledge and ideas were blocked. The use of
Toung Senufo adults return
to their village after their
Initiation Into the rules of life
in society (Côte d'Ivoire). Their
outfit is a sign of their new
status.
so-called "talking" or "messenger" drums was
strictly forbidden.
Why?
Y. T. C: Because the colonizers realized that
the beating of drums signalled that an upris¬
ing was afoot. The language of the drums
announced the arrival of the colonial army A
message could travel 500 kilometres in a single
night. In 1916, for example, during the Bobo
uprising in Mali, the drums carried the message
as far as Burkina. They said, "Warrior, take up
your quiver, don't forget your bow; even
struck down by the enemy, we must fight."
Who could understand these messages?
Y. T. C: Everyone. All initiates understand
the language of the drums. Youth societies,
initiatory societies, the griots they all have
their drums and other musical instruments.
Obviously there are secret codes that only the
initiates know. They arc the equivalent of mil¬
itary secrets in modern societies.
In 1 965, when I arrived in a Senufo village in
Mali, a rapid musical portrait was made of me,
so that the drums and balafons could announce
my arrival. Apparently they described my phys¬
ical and moral character. It was an impressive
performance.
