LISTENING
ISABELLE LEYMARIE TALKS TO
DAVID SANCHEZ
Puerto Rico has a strong musical tradition dating back to the
early colonial period. At the beginning of this century, the
island had such a talented pool of instrumentalists that Afro-
American band leader and jazz pioneer James Reese Europe
recruited musicians for his wind section among them, in San
Juan, the capital.
Until the late 1960s Puerto Rican music was relatively
unknown outside the island, but since then a new generation of
musicians has emerged. Theyoung saxophonist David Sanchez,
one of the most expressive of present-day jazz composers and
performers, is a star in this constellation which also includes
drummer Giovanni Hidalgo and bass-player John Benitez, with
whom he has often played.
Isabelle Leymarie: Black influence is
very strong in popular Puerto Rican
musicboth traditional music and dance
music like salsa. This comes out very
clearly in your playing and your
compositions. Bomba Blues on your last
record, Sketches ofDreams, blended the
blues with bomba, an Ashanti- and Bantu-
inspired genre created in Puerto Rico.
David Sanchez: In Puerto Rico, 90 per
cent of the music has black roots. I'm
thinking of bomba, of course, but also
the more hybrid plena, which is played
with tambourines and appeared after
the First World War, and danza, which
is orchestrated for European instru¬
ments. Danza comes from old courtly
dances like the minuet, and when it
arrived in the Caribbean in the eigh¬
teenth century, it picked up African
syncopation. These black roots are per-
48 THE. UNESCO ÇjURIERB JANUARY 1997

vasive. Although we have our own
indigenous rhythms, which are our
hallmark, we've also left our mark on
Cuban music. Unfortunately, black
music in Puerto Rico is often over¬
shadowed by black American music
and is still far less widely played than
it deserves.
I. L.: Were you brought up in a musical
family?
D. S.: I grew up in Guaynabo, near San
Juan, in an atmosphere steeped in music.
At home I heard local performers such
as the drummer Rafael Cotijo, the singer
Ismael Rivera and El Gran Combo, a
famous band, all forerunners of Puerto
Rican salsa. My father used to listen to
the Mexican singer Toña la Negra and
Cuban musicians such as the Orquesta
Aragón and the singer Vicentico Valdés.
My sister, who was studying literature,
introduced me to Brazilian and Haitian
records and nueva trova, politically com¬
mitted Latin American songs of the late
1960s. I started playing on my brother's
drum set and the conga. I had a partic¬
ular liking for Cuban drummers such
as Mongo Santamaria, Patato Valdés,
Los Papines and El Niño, and jazzier
groups such as Irakere. I especially
remember Misa Negra, a composition
by their piano player, Chucho Valdés.
I. L.: How did you move from "Latino"
music to jazz?
D. S.: Again it was my sister who taught
me to appreciate jazz with records like
Miles Davis's Basic Miles and Billie
Holiday's Lady in Satin. When I was
twelve I moved onto the tenor saxo¬
phone. I studied classical technique
and then went on to the Escuela Libre
de Música in San Juan, where some of
our best musicians have studied. Then
I analysed the styles of the great jazz
saxophonists: Pen Webster, John
Coltrane, Dexter Gordon and Sonny
Rollins, whom 1 particularly admire.
I. L: Although you're known as a jazz
musician, you've never lost your affection
for Latin rhythms.
D. S.: Yes, I like playing what is known
today as "Latin jazz". It's a hybrid style
that came from the United States in the
late 1940s with musicians like Dizzy
Gillespie, Charlie Parker, Mario Bauza
and Chano Pozo, who realized that jazz
and Afro-Latino music flowed from the
same sources and that they could get
along very nicely. Some critics occa¬
sionally ask the question whether jazz
will last. I'm convinced that the future
of jazz is in Latin jazz. At a time when
jazz often returns to a certain kind of
classicism, Latin jazz has created new
forms of expression. Its popularity
keeps growing, and we Latin Ameri¬
can jazzmen are in top form.
I. L.: There seem to be two musical
trends in Latin America and the Caribbean
right now: a return to roots and fusion
between different musical genres.
D. S.: The whole of Latin America, and
Puerto Rico in particular, is multicul¬
tural, and has been from the start of its
history. This is where we get our inspi¬
ration. This is what shapes our per¬
sonality. If more people understood
the enrichment that comes from cohab¬
itation with other ethnic groups, there
wouldn't be so many conflicts!
rTHE UNLSCO (^OURIERB JANUARY 1997 ~

L I T E N N
I.L.: The Cuban flautist Alberto
Socarras used to describe how, when he
moved to Harlem in 1929, American
musicians couldn't believe that someone
with a Spanish accent could play their
music as well as they did. Is it still hard for
a Puerto Rican instrumentalist to be fully
accepted in the American jazz world?
D. S.: Sometimes there are tensions , but
the joy of making music usually wins
out over racial, language or cultural
differences. As in any art form, what
counts first and foremost is an open
heart.
I. L.: How do you compose your music?
D. S.: The first thing I usually dois set
the beat and the melody. Forme, these
are the two most important factors.
Rather than structure, I create themes
and melodies that bring about the form.
In my last recording, Street Scenes, I
wanted to reproduce the different kinds
of atmosphere in big cities like Paris
and New York. Street life and everyday
scenes were my sources of inspiration.
Except for Four in One by Thclonious
Monk, all my compositions were sug¬
gested to me by my band. Sometimes
it's the way my musicians play that gives
me ideas, and after a performance I
sometimes sit down and transcribe into
music what I've felt. I
