hazards and disaster reduction techniques
is not well disseminated, and planners, pro¬
ject managers and communities do not inte¬
grate hazard management into development
planning. Resources spent on relief and
recovery continue to account for 96 per cent
of all resources spent on disaster-related
activities annually, leaving a pitiful 4 per cent
for disaster prevention. It is high time to
make a shift in emphasis from post-disaster
reaction to pre-disaster action.
8
a Decade for
In 1984 you became the first person to call
for an international decade to reduce loss of
life and property from natural hazards.
Yes. One of the highest callings of scientists
and engineers is to improve the lives of people
everywhere. Natural hazards do not recognize
international boundaries, nor does any one
nation have all the knowledge or material
resources needed to cope with them. Only
through international co-operation will signif¬
icant progress be made, especially in developing
countries with limited resources and few pro¬
fessional workers.
What are the successes of the Decade so
far? What happens when it's over?
The Decade has raised the priority of disaster
mitigation in many countries, particularly in
the developing world. Government disaster
o ffices have been established and risk assessments
have been carried out in many countries. Train¬
ing programmes were implemented and inter¬
national teams organized to assess the dangers
of particular disasters. Many countries have pre¬
pared national plans for the first time and shared
them with the international community.
More could have been done, particularly to
help developing nations, which suffer most fro m
natural disasters. Unfortunately we have not been
able to raise enough funds to realize the Decade's

hternational action
Interview with ri\AI\IK r Ktbb,
President Emeritus of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences
and 'father' of the International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction (1990-2000)
full potential. Nevertheless, we are grateful to the
countries whose financial support enabled us to
achieve some results. Hopefully the momentum
inspired by the Decade will not be lost.
Do you think natural hazards are a world
issue which deserves, amid other proliferating
environmental and societal issues, priority
attention?
Mitigation of natural disasters in the form of
environmental protection, preservation of biodi¬
versity, prevention of disease, education and the
dissemination of knowledge, and equitable eco¬
nomic growth must be priorities on the agenda of
a civilized and humane global society of the twenty-
first century. Science can contribute to all of these.
What are the primary decisions that the
government of a hazard-prone country should
take?
Almost every country is prone to one or more
natural hazards. Within the governmental structure
there should be a body responsible for disaster
mitigation and relief. Among its tasks would be
assessment of risks from natural hazards, disaster
relief planning, land use and construction regula¬
tions appropriate for indigenous hazards, public
education, warning systems, evacuation planning,
training and drill and arrangements for interna¬
tional co-operation. I emphasize that many devel
oping countries will need help in establishing such
programmes.
Can the public participate in disaster
reduction?
Some governments have educated their citi¬
zenry in public safety measures. Unfortunately
many countries have yet to achieve this degree of
preparation.
What is the link between dealing with natural
disasters and potential human-made disasters?
All of these disasters result in human suffering
and should be tackled by the international com¬
munity. Perhaps we could dedicate the new century
to reducing all aspects of human suffering. How¬
ever, these potential disasters differ, have various
causes and solutions, and affect nations differ¬
ently. It will be hard to get universal agreement
on how to address such complex global problems.
It may be worthwhile to treat these several cate¬
gories of disasters separately in the short term.
Dealing with disasters requires co-operation
between many disciplines and between the
public and private sectors. How can this best be
achieved?
First by establishing an organizational structure
Once a structure is in place, a strategic plan or road
map will have to define the roles to be played by
professionals in diverse disciplines and by public
and private sectors. All are currently involved one
way or another but not in a truly collaborative
enterprise. They meet and share information
more on disaster relief than pre-disaster planning
and mitigation.
Electronic communication, universally acces¬
sible data archives, software for learning from
experience and building "virtual teams", spin-offs
of bureaucracy-free entities are some of the mech¬
anisms used to spur collaboration and increase
efficiency in attacking complex problems.
Left, building a barrier to hold
back mud-flows caused by
volcanic eruption in
Galunggung (Indonesia).
Right, earthquake drill at a
Los Angeles school (U.S.A.).
