n idea whose time has come
BY PIERRE NORA
How France
became aware
ofits heritage
Tn the last twenty years or so, the concept
_ of "heritage" has expanded or rather
A exploded to the point where it has
-become transformed'. Thus, while older
dictionaries define it primarily as that which is
passed on, e.g. from parents to children, a more
recent definition refers also to "the evidence of
the past . . . considered collectively as the inher¬
itance of present-day society"2.
In France, this idea grew up around that of
the " historic monument", itself a notion inher¬
ited from the French Revolution3. It acquired
official status in the early 1830s and was then
given a legal definition by a system of listing and
preservation that was voted into law in 1913.
Historic monuments, the Roman aqueduct
known as the Pont du Gard, for instance, or
Chartres cathedral, were seen as irrefutable evi¬
dence of an ever-present past, acknowledged as
such by the nation and therefore designated as
representative of the national identity.
This state-run, centralized system of "list¬
ing" monuments, which in fact amounted to
a takeover by the public authorities, survived
with various ups and downs until the mid-
1970s 4. Then the deluge began, with the emer¬
gence of an ethnological and rural heritage. A
significant event in this connection was the
opening, in 1967, of the Museum of Popular
Arts and Traditions in Paris. Since then, the
ground covered by the concept of the heritage
has constantly expanded in three major direc¬
tions: to include the contemporary, in response
to the interest in industrial archaeology and
the nineteenth century in general, an aware¬
ness of which was stimulated by the demoli¬
tion of Les Halles, the covered food markets
built by Victor Baltard in Paris in the middle
14

The château of Chenonceaux,
an outstanding example of
16th-century French
architecture, was built
between 1515 and 1522 on the
right bank of the River Cher.
years of that century; to take in the daily life
of bygone times, the evidence of a world of
dances, songs, cookery and crafts that was
swept away forever by the winds of change in
the years between the late 1940s and the mid-
1970s (corresponding to what French econo¬
mist Jean Fourastié has called the "Thirty Glo¬
rious Years of Growth"); and to embrace the
non-artistic and non-historic the natural her¬
itage, the heritage of science and technology
and that of traditions and folklore.
M A silent transition
This snowballing of the concept has entailed
enormous psychological and financial invest¬
ment in the economy and in tourism. It has
been accompanied by a silent but decisive tran¬
sition from "national history" to "national
memory", i.e. from a historical to a social aware¬
ness of the nation. In concrete terms, this shift
reflects a kind of emancipation, or perhaps it
would be better to say an "internal decolo¬
nization", of such sub-groups within society
as manual workers, provincials (Corsicans or
Bretons, for example), women or Jews who,
because they are becoming more and more
fully integrated into the nation as a whole,
have a heightened awareness of their past and
regard every item of evidence of that past as an
indispensable pointer to their identity5.
This change is well illustrated by the recent
emergence and proliferation of what in France
are known as "museums of society" a pipe
museum and a clog museum, for instance
which aim to preserve the memory of a par¬
ticular industry or local product6. The her¬
itage is no longer simply the representation



of an idea held by society as a whole. It increas¬
ingly tends to be linked to the identity of a
given sector within society, asocial group that
demands to be recognized and registered as
"national" and that has ceased to perceive itself
in cultural terms alone.
This exponential growth in the area covered
by the concept of the heritage clearly reflects a
thoroughgoing democratization process and a
constant proliferation of the forms in which it
finds expression. Crucial as it is, this change lends
itself to a linear explanation as the logical cul¬
mination of one of those long-term movements
that art historians have taught us to decipher7.
This movement could be seen as a stage-
by-stage process, with first the establishment
of a religious heritage (the Church's relics and
treasures), followed by an aristocratic one
(stately homes, weapons, textiles) and next
the heritage of monarchs and scholars, itself
scholarly in character, with its libraries, its
manuscripts and its histories of religious
orders. Then came the decisive stage, from the
confiscation of Church property at the time of
the Revolution to the establishment, under
the July Monarchy^, of major institutions
concerned with the heritage. It was at this stage
that the concept of heritage really came into
being, i.e. that of property not in use for its
original purpose but acquiring a totally dif¬
ferent kind of use by virtue of its antiquity,
and it was also at this stage that the nation
would provide the frame of reference for the
"togetherness" of the community. This stage
was continued into, or rather brought to ful¬
filment in, its successor, when the idea of the
"national" still prevailed but was regulated
and given a civic, republican character. This in
turn led to, and achieved fruition in, interna¬
tional organizations such as the League of
Nations and UNESCO, which have done so
The baroque façade of the
cathedral of Our Lady of Las
Mercedes in Antigua
(Guatemala). The city, which is
noted for its superb
monuments, was founded in
the 16th century and was
placed on the World Heritage
List as a cultural site in 1979.

much to disseminate the global concept of
heritage. Thus we have come to the democra¬
tic, community-based, psychologically sig¬
nificant heritage as we know it today.
\An aura ofsanctity
May we then conclude that awareness of the
heritage has progressed uninterruptedly? In
point of fact, as we well know, quite different
factors are involved in the present runaway
expansion of the heritage. It is taking us over
a threshold and into a new set of circumstances.
We have moved on from a heritage simply
handed down to us to a symbolic heritage
linked with the notion of identity, from a
visible and material heritage to an invisible and
non-material heritage, and from a state-
controlled heritage to a social, ethnic and com¬
munity-based heritage. To borrow the lan¬
guage of relativity theory, we have moved fro m
a "special" heritage system to a "general" one,
in other words from the age of heritage as his¬
tory to that of heritage as memory9.
In this process, the nature and status of
the heritage have changed. The heritage now
belongs to the same constellation of ideas as
memory, identity and culture, and in demo¬
cratic societies has become the secular equiva¬
lent of sanctity.
All countries, whether democratic or not,
are feeling this increasingly powerful concern
for their cultural property, the only differ¬
ences being in rates of progress, in degrees of
Period houses, furniture,
gardens and workshops bring
the colonial period back to life
at Williamsburg, Virginia
(U.S.A.).
urgency and in the vocabulary employed. The
example of France is valid because it makes the
evolution of the concept particularly easy to
follow for two major reasons.
The first of these reasons derives from the
close relationship established by the Enlight¬
enment between the ideas of the nation and of
civilization, the nation's existence being justi¬
fied by the fact that it is the vehicle of progress
and the instrument of civilization. At the water¬
shed of the French Revolution, the preservation
of the monuments of the ancien régime and of
the achievements of civilization were thus pro¬
moted with equal vigour. The French politi¬
cian and historian François Guizot may rightly
be seen as a key figure in this respect: in his His¬
tory ofCivilization in Europe, he saw the intel¬
lectual merit of the Restauration^ as residing in
"the reawakening of appreciation of France's '
ancient monuments".
The second of these reasons derives from
the long history of state power in France and
its centralizing, Jacobin tradition, which, via
a forceful national conservation policy, has
made the recent transition to cultural and com¬
munity-based conservation all the more strik¬
ing. A kind of "French model" may thus be
discerned within the overall evolution of the
heritage concept11. This is not so surprising,
since in the French language the very word for
"heritage" patrimoine contains within
itself, for better or worse, the word patrie
"homeland".
m

1 . For an account of the development of the concept, see: Andre
Desvallées, "Emergence et cheminements du mot patrimoine"
("Emergence and evolution of the word 'heritage'"), mPatri-
moine, Musées et Territoire, No 208, 1995, 3, pp. 6-30.
2. Collins Dictionary of the English Language, third edition,
1991.
3. Cf. Dominque Poulot, Musée, Nation, Patrimoine ("Muse¬
ums, the nation and the heritage"), Paris, Gallimard publish¬
ers, 1996.
4. For a description of the system and its collapse, see Jean-
Michel Leniaud, L'Utopie française, essai sur le patrimoine,
Paris, Editions Mengès, 1992.
5. Cf. Pierre Nora, "L'ère de la commémoration" ("The age of
commemoration"), general conclusion to Lieux de mémoire
("Places of memory"), Paris, Gallimard, 1993, and Quarto, 1997.
6. Cf. Musées et sociétés ("Museums and societies"), Proceed¬
ings of the Mulhouse-Ungersheim seminar, June 1991. Paris,
Ministry of Culture, 1 993; especially Isaac Chiva, "L'ethnolo¬
gie de la France et les musées" ("The ethnology of France and
museums"), and Krzysztof Pomian, "Les musées de société, de
la nostalgie à l'anticipation" ("Museums of society, from look¬
ing backwards to looking forwards").
7. Cf. André Chastel, article "Patrimoine" ("Heritage"), Ency¬
clopedia Universalis, supplement, Paris, 1980, Vol. 1, pp. 41-49;
'La notion de patrimoine' ("The concept of heritage"), in col¬
laboration withJean-Pierre Babelon, Revue de l'art, No 49, 1 980,
reproduced in book form, Paris, Liana Levi, 1994; "La notion de
patrimoine", in: Les Lieux de mémoire, ed. Pierre Nora, Vol. II,
La Nation, book 2, Paris, Gallimard, 1986, pp. 405-450.
8. Name given to the reign (1830-1848) of Louis-Philippe,
who came to power after the "July Revolution" of 1 830.
9. Cf. Science et conscience du Patrimoine ("Science and aware¬
ness of the heritage"), Proceedings of the Entretiens du Pat¬
rimoine (Heritage colloquium), 1 994, chaired by Pierre Nora,
Paris, Fayard publishers, 1997.
10. Name given to the period (1814-1830) when the monarchy
was restored after the abdication of Napoleon.
11. Cf. Dominique Poulot, "Le patrimoine universel: modèle
français" ("The universal heritage: the French model") in
Revue d'histoire moderne et contemporaine, No 39, January-
March 1992, pp. 29-55.
The Museum of Tools and
Craftsmanship in Troyes
(France). The municipal
Prague (Czech
library in
Republic).
