L I S T E N I ETHIOPIA'S
BY ISABELLE LEYMARIE B Z ÏX] B Y \ íTlÍ nStfelS
Are all three of you genuine azmaris!
Ejigayehu Shihahaw: No, the only uzmuri
is Weres Egeziaber. He only perforins tra¬
ditional music, whereas Fantahun She-
wakochew Mekonnen and I sing and play
other kinds as well. A real azinuri has to
play the masenqo, an instrument Weres
Egeziaber specializes in.
It is said that the meaning of the word
azmari has changed. Whereas it once meant
"praise-singers " it has supposedly come to
mean "those who criticize", or even "those
who denigrate".
E. S.: A few centuries ago the azmaris per¬
formed religious functions at the courts of
sovereigns. They celebrated liturgies and
officiated at certain ceremonies. Their
repertoire only gradually became more sec¬
ular. They began as praise-singers, then
they sang love poetry and eventually began
to invent humorous or satirical verse in
which they poked fun at their own pro¬
tectors.
In some regions, the griots, who are also
praise-singers and heirs to a long tradition,
are not allowed to criticize or abuse anyone
directly, although sometimes they allow
themselves to make a fewveiled allusions.
E. S.: In Ethiopia we are absolutely free to
do this. The azmaris in particular and tra¬
ditional singers in general excel in the art of
improvisation. They have a particular lik¬
ing for humour, alliteration, puns and
satire. No one really takes exception to
their mockery. Love songs are still hy far
the most popular part of their repertoire,
however.
Ethnological studies of Ethiopia say that
the azmaris are despised by the rest of society.
E. S.: That is true of musicians in general,
48 r
THE UNESCO f^URIERB MAY 1997
MjBBTpg-'
The azmaris are minstrels who belong to Ethiopia's Christian majority, the Amhara. Their
repertoire, whose origins are lost in the mists of time, consists largely of light poetry, much
of it extemporized. They use traditionalinstruments such as the krar, a lyre with similarities
to those used in ancient Egypt, the masenqo (a single-string spike fiddle) and double-
skinned drums. Women performers wear long white dresses with scarlet bands, and the men,
white shirts and trousers and a kind of cloak with a wide golden-brown sash. Three exponents
of this Amharic tradition, singer Ejigayehu Shibabaw (at centre of photo) and her
accompanists, (on her right in photo) Fantahun Shewakochew Mekonnen (krar, percussion
and vocals) and (on her left) Weres G. Egeziaber (masenqo and vocals), recently gave a series
of recitals in Paris. During their visit, they talked to Isabelle Leymarie.
not just the. azmaris. My father, for exam¬
ple, is a businessman, and is very hostile to
the fact that I am a singer. I had to run
away from home to follow my vocation.
Yet you give concerts outside Ethiopia and
you are just about to make yourfirst
recording. Isn't this success a point in your
favour?
E. S.: Not at all. He believes that it is
shameful to perform in public Even if 1
became a big star, be wouldn't change his
mind.
\\ eres Egeziaber: I must be an exception
because my family was overjoyed that I
became a musician. My parents are farmers,
and when I was eighteen I learned to play
the masenqo in my village from small
groups of itinerant musicians.
Ejigayehu Shibabaw, you are not from a
family of musicians, how did you learn the
traditional repertoire?
E. S.: By car. Hut that is very easy, because
in Ethiopia, even in Addis Ababa, every¬
one knows the old songs. Tradition is still
very much ali\ c. I didn't need recordings or
any special training. I speak two Ethiopian

languages: Amliaric, my mother tongue,
and Ago, which is a v cry rby thmic language.
And if I have to sing songs in other lan¬
guages, I learn them phonetically. Fan¬
tahun Sliewakochew Mekonnen studied
music for four years in a school where they
taught both classical Western music
and Ethiopian music. He often does
arrangements.
How did you form your trio?
E. S.: We met at a puppet show at the
Addis Ababa National Theatre, a big
employer of singers, dancers and musicians.
How do you improvise?
E. S.: We usually improvise words to a given
melody. Even during a concert I sometimes
invent new couplets when I feel inspired.
Do the musicians improvise too?
F. S. K.: Yes, but according to certain rules.
Ethiopian music Amliaric music in par¬
ticular is based on pentatonic scales.
There are a lot of them and each one
expresses a specific mood. We mainly use
four. Improvisation is traditionally done
inside this modal framework. Our instru¬
ments, especially the masenqo, are
adapted to this form of music. I also play
the trumpet and the piano. As well as the
traditional repertoire, I play pop music,
Ethiopian pop, using brass and keyboards
but with words sung in Amliaric. We also
listen to foreign music, but our inspiration
is mostly local, although we are not locked
in to the old modes. Sometimes we mix sev¬
eral modes or African modes and Western
scales.
Ejigayehu Shibabaw, do you sing more
modern music?
E. S.: Yes, I'm currently preparing to make
my first record, also using brass and key¬
board instruments. It will include a blend
of reggae and West African and Ethiopian
beats. I'm calling it Tsahay, "sun" in
Amliaric. Our country is rich in rhythms
often unknown outside Ethiopia so I
doubt I'll ever be short of inspiration. I

