ON THE CREST OF
THE WAVES
Ln antenna fixed to a mast,
near Antibes in southern
France (1901). I ith hindsight, the coming of
wireless seems to have been
inevitable, like that of most
great modern inventions. It
was announced almost simultaneously in two
places in Russia by Aleksandr Popov, and
in Italy by Guglielmo Marconi.
Initially, as its name indicates, wireless was
a system of long-distance communication with¬
out wires. Transmitted in real time, the radio
signal defies distance, geographical barriers and
geopolitical frontiers. Ubiquitous and instan¬
taneous, radio was the first technological man¬
ifestation of a virtual reality whose mysteries are
still being explored today. It took a generation
before its cultural significance was fully per¬
ceived. At first transmitting the language of
telegraphy, it was soon being used in the mer¬
chant navy, in aviation and above all in the
armed forces, where it had many applications.
Broadcasting only became an important
medium of mass communication in the indus¬
trialized countries in the late 1920s; the trend
was reinforced in the following decade. The
expansion of radio was steamrollered by two
very powerful forces that are still at work.
One was industrial development; the other
was political and commercial propaganda.
From crystal set
to satellite
The development of radio as a medium of
mass communication was shaped to a large
extent by the arrival on the market of succes¬
sive generations of receivers.
The valve receiver, which replaced the pio¬
neering crystal set, was a heavy piece of walnut
or rosewood drawing-room furniture. What
did it matter if amplitude modulation (AM)
coverage (on medium wave, long wave and short
wave) was still somewhat hit and miss? Radio
was entering the home at the speed of sound.
12 > G3"1THE UNESCO IpURIERB FEBRUARY 1997

In the United States, big companies like
RCA broadcast musicals featuring the stars
of Broadway. While the cinema was still silent
radio hummed to the rhythms of jazz and
ragtime. In Europe, where post and telecom¬
munications ministries monopolized the air¬
waves, programmes tended to be more for¬
mal concerts from the Royal Albert Hall,
classics from the Comédie-Française, and deco¬
rous tea dances.
But on both sides of the Atlantic a new
social ritual came in as people gathered to lis¬
ten to the wireless. In the 1950s the TV set
would become the focal point of a similar
kind of convivial relationship.
Reaching
a world audience
The transistor radio came on the scene in the
early 1 960s, when the TV set was gradually tak¬
ing the place of the radio in the home. Along
with the record player, it soon became a cult
object of the consumer society. Cheap enough
to be a mass-produced instrument of personal
entertainment, it was a symbol of teenage eman¬
cipation in the rich countries. From the North
Sea pirate stations to the studio that appears
in the film American Graffiti, a whole genera¬
tion celebrated its values, its counter-culture
and its music (rock) on the air.
The cheapness of transistor sets also made
radio the mass medium best suited to the poor
countries, above all in regions where distances
and infrastructural weakness meant that com¬
munication had to take place over the airwaves.
At the same time, radio became mobile.
This was the age of the car radio. Soon, fre¬
quency modulation (FM) was encouraging
programme proliferation, neighbourhood
radio stations and audience segmentation. The
extent of the latter, especially in the United
States, seems to have gone so far that it is hard
to know what people really do listen to.
Will the time come when radio no longer
federates distant audiences and different socio-
cultural backgrounds? Will digital broadcast¬
ing turn it into an elite medium, for exam¬
ple? Some European manufacturers seem to
be opting for systems such as digital audio
broadcasting (DAB), which offer high defin¬
ition sound and multimedia services, but
require far more expensive receivers. Perhaps
consumers will make different choices.
Broadcasting policies have followed the
main trends of twentieth-century history so
satellite broadcasting
transmits news all over the
world. In left foreground, two
dish antennae in Bahrain.
closely that they are almost mirrors of our
time. The turning point came during the
period of reconstruction after the Second
World War, when governments realized that
audiovisual communication was a key instru¬
ment in public life, a sensitive area that ought
to be controlled in the public interest.
From monopolies
to pluralism
After first national, then international, allo¬
cation of frequencies came the development
of state radio systems. Once the age of total¬
itarian illusions was over propaganda radio
stations became champions of sovereignty and
in some cases supporters of national libera¬
tion movements.
Public audiovisual networks put out pro¬
grammes containing a mix of light entertain¬
ment, news and educational broadcasting
the main strands in the fabric of contemporary
THE UNESCO lOURIERB FEBRUARY 1997
13

culture. They were organized in different ways
in different countries: kept under relatively
close supervision by the executive in countries
such as France, Spain and Portugal; shared
between political parties (Italy); air time
divided between voluntary service and reli¬
gious groups (The Netherlands); separate ser¬
vices for different language communities
(Switzerland and Belgium).
This kind of regulatory set-up came to
omen disc jockeys ata
pirate FM radio station in
Leeds (United Kingdom, 1993).
M French family listens in
(1926).
prevail on almost all the continents, except
North America. Over two centuries ago the
United States wrote into its constitution an
amendment which prevents congress from leg¬
islating to establish a religion or abridge free¬
dom of speech or the press. To appreciate the
astonishingly progressive nature of such a pro¬
vision, it is hardly necessary to recall that royal
or imperial censorship existed in most Euro¬
pean states at that time and that censors vio¬
lated the secrecy of private correspondence as
well as keeping tabs on printed matter.
The fourth
estate
Audiovisual regulatory frameworks in Europe
are not totally consonant with an American-
style liberal approach. Their foundations were
laid pragmatically. The Board of Governors
of the BBC, the body responsible for guar¬
anteeing the independence of public broad¬
casting in the United Kingdom, may have
served as a model, but it was the development
of FM radio, and later of commercial television
in Italy that really set things moving. Politi¬
cal authorities soon came to realize that
monopolies were rapidly becoming obsoles¬
cent and that anarchy threatened. Most coun-
14 THE UNESCO QjURIERB FEBRUARY 1997

tries set up systems designed to separate the
audiovisual media from the state.
The criteria varied from country to coun¬
try. The United Kingdom put licences up for
auction; the French went in for pluralism; the
countries of Africa and Asia created institu¬
tions designed to guarantee the implementa¬
tion of a multi-party system and protect
national cultural identities. Democratic change
was thus transposed into the field of the
audiovisual industry.
Digital radio
People often talk of the golden age of radio, as
if this hundred-year-old medium were out of
date. The fact is, however, that in the South as
well as in the North radio, like the written
word, has remained an incomparably vital
medium, which others can complement with¬
out ever being able to replace.
It is true that satellites are bringing to tele¬
vision some of the qualities of radio such as
instantaneous transmission and planetary cov¬
erage. But no TV news channel, however pow¬
erful it may be, will be able to cover news in each
¡ Bolivian youth listens
to a radio bought in town with
his earnings. world region, in each country, in real time, as
radio does. Satellite music channels can never



keep their finger on the pulse of rapidly chang¬
ing tastes. Young people find the music they
want on the FM band of radio. It will be a long
time before television becomes interactive and
hands over the microphone to the public except
in specially staged circumstances.
But radio is also adapting to the age of
satellites and digital communication. On the
Internet, some information services are already
o ffering a combination of written and audio
material. Radio France Internationale, for
example, can now be picked up all over the
world on a multimedia personal computer.
Soon, individual receivers with low-cost dish
antennae will make it possible to receive in
digital form, anywhere in the world, the main
international radio networks relayed by geo¬
stationary satellites; the same signal will be
able to transmit complementary data to screens
with liquid crystals.
And so, in the age of multimedia and on¬
line communication, there is still plenty of
room for radio.
THE UNESCO ^>URHERB FEBRUARY 1997
15
