interview
Interviewed byJastnina Sopova, two leading writers from formerYugoslavia, a Bosnian Croatand a Serb,
testify in the light of their experience of the war that tore their country apart. Looking beyond eastern Europe,
they draw some general conclusions from what they have learned, about the role of the writer and the
psychology of nationalist conflicts.
Predrag Matvejevic
Predrag Matvejevic was born in Mostar (Bosnia and Herzegovina). His father was a Russian from
Odessa, his mother a Bosnian Croatian. He taught atthe University of Zagreb before settling in Rome
where he teaches Slavonic literature atthe University of Sapienza. A staunch champion of human rights
who defended many persecuted east European intellectuals under the communist system, he now spends
much of his time trying to healthe wounds of thefratricidalwarthat tore his country apart. The works
of this brilliant essayist have been translated into ten orso languages. His The Mediterraneana Cul¬
tural Landscape will be published laterthis year by the California University Press.
"Between asylum and exile" is the
formula you use to define your situation as
an intellectual "who came in from the East".
Predrag Matvejevic: I am not really an exile.
No one exiled me from Croatia and the
former Yugoslavia. I left Croatia because
I realized that I could express myself
more openly and freely elsewhere. But
when I had left, I saw that this was a
trap. This is what I meant when I talked
about being between "asylum and exile".
Asylum neutralizes your message and
exile distances it from its goal.
But intellectuals from the East are
not the only people in this situation. So
too are intellectuals in the Western world.
The relatively comfortable position they
enjoy in their own countries is a kind of
"born" asylum. At the same time they
are exiles because they cannot take part
in decision-making and have no say in
social projects. They are exiles in their
own homeland.
"Between treason and outrage" is
another phrase you often use.
P. M.: Yes. Every word I utter against the
atmosphere I live in, or against the
national group to which I belong, is
regarded as treasonable. Any criticism I
make of others is regarded as a calumny
and an outrage. This position "between
treason and outrage" exists in many cul
tures and destroys critical thought. You
are caught in a vice which prevents you
from expressing yourself freely.
The main reason foryourvoluntary exile
is to enjoy freedom of expression. Do those
who stayed behind have to keep their
mouths shut?
P. M.: I would say that they stand
"between silence and obedience". Silence
about mistakes that are made here too
I'm not only talking about former
Yugoslavia silence because you're
afraid to talk, because the media are
controlled, etc. Obedience, because by
obeying the authorities you keep your
privileges.
So are silence and obedience both forms
of self-betrayal?
P. M.: Not necessarily. Silence can mean a
lot of things. There are eloquent silences.
The silence of Boris Pasternak and Anna
Akhmatova under Stalinism meant "We
reject Zhdanovist social realism, wc
reject terror in the arts and letters." But
there is also a silence which is a sign of
conformity, of acceptance of an existing
state of affairs. I think this is the position
of the nationalist intelligentsia. Its silence
about what happened in Vukovar and
Sarajevo means: "Let's keep quiet. We
are not guilty."
CONTINUED ON PAGE 6
THE UNESCO ^U^RB MARCH I

Between asylum and exile
Vidosav Stevanovic
Vidosav Stevanovic, a leading contemporary Serb writer, lived for thirty years in Belgrade, before going
into exile in 1991. Since 1995 he has been living quietly in a house outside the town of Kragujevac,
where he was born. Although his voice is not heard in his own country, he is well known internationally.
His works have been published in some twenty languages.
In 1995, after your period of self-
imposed exile, you returned to your home
country. But you still travel a lot	
Vidosav Stevanovic: I travel from time to
time. I often go to Paris. Soon I shall be
visiting Prague and the United States,
on the occasion of a film which is being
made based on The Island of the
Balkans, the second book of my trilogy
The Snow and the Dogs. The director is
a Croatian in exile. We are on the same
wavelength in our attitudes to our respec¬
tive countries. The Czech Republic is
ihc only country that has been willing to
give a nationality to this film. And so a
Croatian and a Serb are making a Czech
film for the European market, probably
in English. . . .
Isn't there a risk that this collaboration
will cause you problems? Predrag Matvejevic
describes a situation "between treason and
outrage".
V. S.: I agree with this idea. It is true to
our experience. The only way of avoid¬
ing the traps that are set for you is to
write what you feel and what you think,
whatever the cost, now or in the future,
when it may well be even higher. At least
you will have acted according to your
conscience; you won't have been sullied
by the evil that rages in the Balkans.
Is keeping silent a form of self-
preservation from this evil? Some writers
have chosen silence in the current situation.
V. S.: Most of my country's writers today
live in silence. An eloquent silence, some
people say. I don't agree with them.
There are moments in history when peo¬
ple should come out of their corner and
fight for specific values, in this case the
values of humanism (however old-fash¬
ioned that may seem), the values of a civ¬
ilization that does not know how to defend
itself. I'm talking about European civi¬
lization. We must fight for these ideals,
just as we must fight against those intel¬
lectuals who have engineered war pro¬
grammes and war propaganda, and
fomented hatred. Let's not be too indul¬
gent towards those who keep quiet. Can
we accept that a country's literature
should be reduced to a handful of people
who speak out in the midst of a general
silence?
When a war ends, people are affected
by collective amnesia. "There was no war,
we didn't take part in it; there were no
crimes, it's got nothing to do with us."
They remember nothing. Those of us who
speak out belong to the awkward squad,
because we remember what has hap¬
pened. "Undesirable" though we may
be, we shall continue to bear witness.
A people cannot get over its funda¬
mental problems without making an in-
depth analysis of itself, just as some
patients cannot be cured without being
psychoanalysed. Nationalism is a sick¬
ness. A people must settle accounts wilh
itself, face up to its phantasms and its
myths that are the source of everything
that has happened. Until it has come to
terms with its own conscience not other
people's the lull will he short-lived. The
phantasms will sink to the bottom and
CONTINUED ON PAGE 7
i (JulTHE UNESCO lOURIERB MARCH 1997

interview
Predrag Matvejevic
I refused to adopt that position. That
is one of the reasons why I left.
This attitude is comparable to one that
appears in your recent books"between
refusal and praise".
P. M.: Yes. Some people don't only obey,
they sing the praises of the authorities.
Others don't take refuge in silence but
openly express their hostility to the
authorities. The gap between these two
positions is growing wider. Very few peo¬
ple stay in their country and express their
revolt.
Your latest book, The "Ex" World,
Confessions, contains some hard thinking
about the war in former Yugoslavia. You
write: "In this war there are neither victors
norvanquished. Everywhere there are
victims. . . ."
P. M.: And I go on to add: "There is no
just partition of Bosnia; the only act of
justice would be not to partition it." The
first victim is Bosnia itself. I have always
been on the side of the victims. At the
time of the aggression against Croatia
and against Vukovar, I was on the side
of the Croatian victims. But when Croa¬
tian soldiers destroyed the bridge at
Mostar which had survived all kinds of
barbaric acts since it was built in 1566,
and then the part of Mostar where the
Muslim majority lived, my sympathy
again went to the victims.
You also write: "Losing is part of our
destiny. But it is rare to lose a country. It
has happened to me." Is mourning an
appropriate word to use here?
P. M.: I think that former Yugoslavia's pol¬
icy of non-alignment in a deeply divided
world had merits that deserved a better
fate. Even if this people wanted to split
up, I would have preferred them to do so
without war. Perhaps I am alone in this,
but I like Yugoslavia as a whole. Wherever
I go in Yugoslavia I feel at home. At the
same time I don't think I usurp the iden¬
tity of its different constituent peoples
in any way. You might call this, wrongly,
"unitarist Yugoslavism" or talk of
" Yugonostalgia", but it's nostalgia for the
peace and well-being of all these peoples.
I am without prejudice. I just feel very
suspicious of those who are guilty, even if
they are guilty to different degrees.
What do you think of the emergence of
national cultures from Yugoslav culture?
P. M.: We all fight for the right to a
national culture. That is an undeniable
right. But some areas of a national cul¬
ture often turn into nationalist ideology,
as happened under fascism. The fascist
regimes included cultured people who
helped to shape their ideologies. We saw
this in Italy, Germany and Spain. We also
saw it in Stalinist Bussia. It is necessary
to be more critical and vigilant where
national culture is concerned. This is a
danger we're not always aware of.
In your recent books you sound the
alarm against another danger: considering
each characteristic of a people as an
intrinsic value.
P. M.: Yes, this mistake is often made.
Particularity is not necessarily a value.
Cannibalism is a particularity. Does that
make it a value? If you don't make a dis¬
tinction between these two notions, then
you can slip from particularity to par¬
ticularism.
Your book The Mediterraneana Cultural
Landscape, first published before the war,
was a reflection on the Mediterranean which
was not confined to current events. In The
"Ex" World, Confessions, however, which
appeared in 1996, you return to the same
theme but treat it quite differently. Is this
change of perspective a result of the war?
P. M.: Yes, the war sharpened some of my
attitudes. The earlier book ignored cur¬
rent events and said nothing about the
hard realities of the Mediterranean today,
whereas the chapter devoted to this in
my latest book is an indictment in which
I emphasize the complete difference
between the Mediterranean and the usual
image of it. This "land of myths" has suf¬
fered from the mythologies it has given
rise to. Decisions about its fate are taken
elsewhere.
What does it mean to be an "ex"?
P. M.: You are not born an "ex"; it is some¬
thing you become. From one day to the
next you discover that you are an ex-
Yugoslav or you declare that you are an ex-
communist. For some this is a happy expe¬
rience, for others a traumatic one. It is a
situation that is regrettable to varying
degrees (one does not miss the ex-Soviet
Union in the same way as one misses ex-
Bosnia and Herzegovina). In individual
experience, the word "ex" does not have
the same meaning. At the end of the last
century, Nietzsche said that he wanted to
be "untopical", i.e. "ex" in relation to the
present, but he had the future in mind.
The untopicality of certain "exes" today
looks towards a past that is over.
There seem to be a lot of "exes" in
Europe as the century draws to a close.
What has happened to the myth of
progress?
P. M.: The idea of progress and other
Utopian ideas were seriously compromised
by Stalinism and by what happened in the
former Soviet Union. The idea of emanci¬
pation has been pushed into the shadows,
whereas it should he held before us as a
guideline, without reference to any kind
of ideology. The absence of this idea, at
the end of the century, is tantamount to an
absence of humanism. It is here, outside
ideological paradigms, that I am trying
to find my way.
THE UNESCO lOURIERB MARCH 1997

Between asylum and exile
Vidosav Stevanovic
float back to the surface when the next
shock occurs; then we shall see a modern
version of last century's war in the
Balkans.
This recurring war is the leitmotiv of
your book recently published in French as
Prélude à la guerre (Prelude to War). In the
first edition, published in Serbian ten years
ago under the title Testament, you wrote:
"Today or tomorrow we shall lose freedom.
All that my ancestors have accumulated will
be taken away from us. Everything will be
destroyed, devastated, looted; people will
be torn to pieces, women raped, churches
desecrated. Nothing will be left . . . ." Those
were prophetic words.
V. S.: Critics have drawn attention to the
"prophetic" element in this book, but you
don't have to lie a genius to foresee war!
Wars usually break out for the same rea¬
sons, happen in the same way and are fol¬
lowed by the same amnesia. It's not hard
to be a prophet when you prophesy evil.
I don't want to be either a prophet or
a people's guide. That is not the writer's
job. At most he can be the voice of con¬
science, the voice of art, the voice of an
individual.
When I wrote that book, I was trying
to get down to the roots of the history
of Serbia and its people and trace how
myths had originated and been trans¬
formed into evil, into collapse. "Look
where your myths are leading you", I
wanted to tell people. Take them for
what they are: stories and nothing more.
Don't let them turn into monstrosities. I
tried to warn them. I failed.
In the same book, you also write: "Evil
is not in the world but in man; he alone
invented it and he alone uses it."
V. S.: Evil is just as much part of human
nature as good. Before launching out into
a crusade against other people's evil, one
should campaign within oneself. Though
evil is inherent in human nature, it is not
a dominant component of our world. The
proof is that the world continues to exist,
whereas the ultimate aim of all evil is to
destroy it.
Can the writer exorcise this evil, this
destructive instinct?
V. S.: The writer says: don't let yourself be
carried away by myths of death. He
writes a poem about death which is a
poem about life, about the beauty of liv¬
ing. The writer writes an endless poem
about an ephemeral world.
Is "Prelude to War" not also a quest for
this endless poem? "Is there some story
that will be never-ending . . . always ready
to admit me into it and to rescue me from
time, in which it would be impossible to
know which sentence, page or chapter will
come next?" you write, calling to mind
Jorge Luis Borges's Book ofSand.
V. S.: I am not a Borgesian, but perhaps
you are right. All the same, don't forget
that the hero of my novel asks this ques¬
tion but does not give an answer. Doesn't
a writer write the same story in many
books, in an attempt to save himself from
time, from the ephemeral?
Yourimaginary world seems close to
that of Julio Cortázar.
V. S.: Throughout my writing life I have
used a literary form that I called, before
Gabriel García Márquez, "fantastic real¬
ism". It consists of lifting from reality
images that can be transformed into fan¬
tasy and the surreal. Perhaps this
explains why you see a parallel between
my work and that of Latin American
authors. I am a great admirer of Latin
American literature. In the last thirty
years, it has brought something really
new to what we call world literature.
Do you believe in the existence of a
world literature?
V. S.: Yes, in the sense of a literature that
embodies receptiveness between cul¬
tures. On the other hand, I am very scep¬
tical about the idea of "national litera¬
ture", which is based ultimately on a
certain isolation. If you add to that the
various kinds of political climate that
prevail in our part of the world, for exam
ple political exclusivity, largely inca¬
pable leaders, intellectuals ready to lord
it on their own dunghill you get some¬
thing that is simply not viable: a closed
culture.
The political fragmentation of
Yugoslavia has led to the disintegration of
its culture. What are the consequences of
this?
V. S.: I feel no nostalgia for what was
called Yugoslavia. If it broke up it's
because disintegration was inevitable.
But I deeply regret that we have lost
what was called the Yugoslav cultural
area. None of the now-proclaimed
"national" literatures from that area
would be what it is without years of con¬
stant interpénétration with the others. I
have learned a lot from Croatian, Slovene
and Macedonian writers who belonged,
in my opinion, to one and the same cul¬
ture. That culture drew great profit from
its very diversity. It is very important to
have the opportunity to choose. If you
lock yourself up in your little enclosure,
you cease to have any choice. I think that
before establishing relations between the
new Balkan states, something that will
not depend on writers, it is vitally impor¬
tant that artists should continue to col¬
laborate, to learn from each other and
even why not? to quarrel if their quar¬
rels are creative.
The main ideological thesis of all
nationalism in the Balkans is that a com¬
mon life is impossible. That is what led to
war, to the creation of nation-states, to
ethnic cleansing, to crime. But each war
shows those people that their thesis is
crazy and without foundation. Each war
shows that in the Balkans, an area which
has, often wrongly, attracted many nega¬
tive connotations, a common life is not only
possible but absolutely indispensable.
This is why I think that culture or cul¬
tures should be the precursors of reuni¬
fication, not in some state or other, but
intellectually. There are enough links
between us to give rise to a single culture
and enough differences for that culture to
be strong. And that is the best thing the
Balkans can offer to the world.
> C°uTHE UNESCO ÍOURIERB MARCH 1997
