LATIN AMERICA: ACCIÓN SPEAKS
Alain Pinoges/CIRIC. Paris © Alain Pinoges/ClRIC, Paris
The story of
BancoSol, the
first private
vUll iiCívIdl
bank for micro
WoIforkmen trim wood in a
Bolivian sawmill whose owner
took out six loans from
BancoSol in a year in order to
buy machines and hire more
hands.
ÄCCION International is a U.S.-
based private non-profit organiza-
i tion that currently provides tech-
*nical assistance to a network of
institutions in thirteen countries in Latin
America and six cities in the United States. Its
network of eighteen independent organiza¬
tions in Latin America has lent over $1 bil¬
lion to microenterprises in the last five years,
in loans averaging less than $500.
Three of the most advanced institutions
in the ACCIÓN network started their pro¬
grammes as non-profit organizations and have,
in the last five years, converted into regulated
28
financial institutions that are part of the finan¬
cial system in their countries but specialize in
serving the microenterprise sector. One of the
most successful of these institutions is Ban¬
coSol in Bolivia.
Solidarity groups
Banco Solidario, S.A., or Bancosol, grew out
of a non-profit joint venture created in 1986
by prominent members of the Bolivian busi¬
ness community and ACCIÓN International.
The latter brought with them leadership and
seed capital, while the former provided tech¬
nology and methodology. PRODEM, as the
programme was named, provided credit and
training to broaden employment opportuni¬
ties for the very poor self-employed, encour¬
age investment in microbusinesses, and increase
the income generated by this sector. PRODEM
used the group lending technique of "solidar¬
ity groups" and began making small working
capital loans.
In its first five years of operation, PRO¬
DEM financed loans to over 13,300 microen¬
trepreneurs, 77 per cent of whom were
women, disbursing over $27 million in loans
averaging $273. The default rate remained close
to zero during this time. In five years, PRO¬
DEM was unable to recover only about $2,000
of the $27 million it lent.
Many factors contributed to PRODEM's
success. The most important were the orga¬
nization's commitment to total quality,
including 100 per cent repayment; investment
in training employees; and a powerful man¬
agement information system. By the end of
1991, PRODEM had a portfolio of $4 million
THE UNESCO 0>u RIERB JANUARY 1997

LOUDER THAN WORDS BY MARIA OTERO
Local branches of BancoSol
in La Paz (Bolivia). Centre, the
information desk of the Garita
district branch. In background
is a poster which says, "I've
got to make a repayment every
Monday." Left, customers
inside the El Alto district
branch. Far left, the entrance
to the branch.
© Alain Pinoges/CIRIC, Paris
and realized that despite its success, it was only
reaching a small percentage of the market that
needed its services. .
The enormous demand, coupled with
PRODEM's desire to provide savings services
to its borrowers and to access capital markets
for funds, moved PRODEM's leadership
towards the transformation of this non-profit
institution into a fully chartered private com¬
mercial bank specializing in microfinancc
the first in the world.
The transition required two years' work
which began in 1989. The process included
raising the equity capital required by Bolivian
Be> elow, a fruit and vegetable
vendor In the El Alto district of
La Paz. She took out eight
loans from BancoSol over a 4-
year period. The last loan was
50 times bigger than the first.
law before it would charter a bank; designing
the bank's financial structure, as well as its
projection for profitability; training staff;
and meeting the requirements of the Bolivian
Superintendency of Banks.
BancoSol opened its doors in 1992. PRO¬
DEM transferred to BancoSol its $4 million
portfolio in exchange for shares, making PRO¬
DEM the largest shareholder of this newly
formed bank. Other shareholders included
ACCIÓN, Calmeadow from Canada, which
had been very instrumental in the formation
of the bank, Fundes from Switzerland and
ICC, the Inter-American Development Bank's
private arm.
Small is profitable
After four years of operation, BancoSol is
currently serving nearly 70,000 clients through
twenty-nine offices. This clientele constitutes
about 40 per cent of all the banking clients in
the Bolivian banking system. It is interesting
that while BancoSol's loan loss remains very
low and in 1994 it registered the highest return
on assets in the Bolivian banking system, its
clients very low income people of indige¬
nous background, mostly women requiring
very small loans are not considered bank¬
able clients by other banks. Currently, Ban¬
coSol lends approximately $80 million a year,
in short-term loans averaging below $600. Ban¬
coSol's outstanding portfolio is some $35 mil¬
lion, about one fourth of which is funded
through savings deposits. Its plans are to con¬
tinue expanding its coverage in Bolivia, to
increase its mobilization of savings, and to
maintain itself as a profitable bank that ser¬
vices a population that has never had access to
financial services.
BancoSol's success is helping reshape
Bolivia's financial system. In 1994 the Super¬
intendency of Banks created a new type of
regulated financial institution to enable other
financially strong non-profit organizations
to become regulated and thereby expand the
availability of financial services to this sector.
Institutions in other countries are also learn¬
ing from the experience of BancoSol and adapt¬
ing it to their own settings. K-Rep in Kenya,
Acción Comunitaria del Peru, and Genesis in
Guatemala, for example, are following Ban¬
coSol's lead and in the next two years plan to
become regulated financial institutions spe¬
cialized in microfinancc. H
THE UNESCO COURIER« JANUARY 1997 29
