a name.''
ta
BYLUISMIZON
Early European explorers to Chile's south coast
symbolically annexed the places they discovered
by giving them European names
Mbove, a glacier flows down
to Beagle Channel on the
coast of Tierra del Fuego.
The Yahgan were a people living in Tierra
del Fuego ("land of fire")who used to
ply up and down the coast in their
small boats and build themselves
makeshift shelters on islands or on the banks
of inlets. The last of them, a woman who was
born in 1887 and died in 1983, wrote, "I am the
last survivor of the Wollaston islanders. There
used to be five Yahgan tribes, each from a dif¬
ferent place but all speaking the same language.
Before I could walk, I had been as far as Cape
Horn, strapped to my mother's back. Every¬
body called me Rosa, because that was how I
was christened by the English missionaries,
but my real name is Lakutia the kipa. Lakutia
is the name of a bird and kipa means woman.

ÍH
V - ..*>. 	
All Yahgans arc named after the place where
they were born, and my mother gave birth to
me near Lakutia Bay. That's how it is done
among our people: we are given the name of
the place that welcomes us to the world."
It is several centuries, however, in Chile
and elsewhere in Latin America, since geo¬
graphical names told the simple tale of people
living in symbiosis with their environment.
Instead they speak of the clash of two peo¬
ples and two cultures fighting over the same
territory. Indigenous names and European
names of coastal features and mountains are
associated with different memories. Today
these names intermingle in a landscape into
which the indigenous population wanted to
melt while the Europeans simply wanted to
take possession of it.
I Leaving their mark
For the explorer who comes from afar, the
land is like a new-born baby, as yet nameless.
The names bestowed on places by the Euro¬
pean navigators and explorers who began
arriving on the southern coast of Chile in
the sixteenth century have political or reli¬
gious connotations, or else express a sense of
beauty or were even inspired by passionate
love. Only seldom did the newcomers keep
the indigenous name.
The annexation of the Araucan lands, fol¬
lowed by their exploration by naturalists and
their colonization, gave rise to a new series
of terms and appellations. The vast territory
inhabited by the Indians who provided
Alonso de Ercilla, in the sixteenth century,
with the inspiration for his epic of the con¬
quest, La Araucana, lay roughly between the
Pacific, the Andes and two rivers, the Bio-
Bio (or Malleco) to the north and the Token
(or Callc-Calle) to the south. These lands
were gradually integrated into the territory of
Chile in the nineteenth century, the process
being completed by 1883. There are still many
Araucans today, but the indigenous popu¬
lations of the clusters of islands that stretch
from the Isla de Chiloé to Cape Horn have
become almost entirely extinct.
Between Cape Horn and the main island
of Tierra del Fuego, the place-names arc some¬
times English (the Wollaston, Picton,
Lennox, Button, Gordon King and Scott
Islands), sometimes French (the Hermite and
Bertrand Islands and the Pasteur Peninsula),
or Spanish (Caleta Hernández, Santa Rosa or
Mejillones), with a few Yahgan Indian names
thrown in, such as Bahia Tckenika, Canasaca
or Wulaia. Thus, one name may be concealed
behind another. Onashaga was the Yahgan
name of the Beagle Channel and Yakashaka
was that of the Murray Channel, at the
mouth of the Strait of Magellan.
As for Valparaiso, the leading port on the
Pacific side of the continent before the con¬
struction of the Panama Canal, its Spanish
name means "Vale of Paradise". This was the
he village of Castro on
Chiloe Island (Chile).

* place where, in the great days of sail, mariners
who had passed the Strait of Magellan or
rounded the Horn making for the Pacific
coast of South America dreamed of drop¬
ping anchor.
I orres del Paine, in Chilean
Patagonia.
Acts ofpossession
History sometimes seems to have hesitated
over thé choice of a name, even to the point of
rejecting the one proposed by the discoverer.
Magellan, for instance, having entered the strait
that was to bear his name on the first day of
November, decided to call it All Saints' Strait,
but it subsequently became known by other
names Straits of Patagonia, Victoria and the
Moluccas, or again Dragon's Tail Strait but in
common parlance it remained the "Strait of
Magellan".
A similar process is associated with the
naming of Cape Horn. Although the first per¬
son to have mentioned it seems to have been Sir
Francis Drake, who entered the Strait of Mag¬
ellan on 20 August 1578, the first sailors to
round the Cape, on 29 January 1616, thus con¬
necting the two great oceans, were the Dutch¬
men Jacques Le Maire and Willem C. Schouten.
r" THE UNESCO IpURIERB MAY t>)9;
\s ape Horn, at the southern
extremity of Chile.
They named it Cape Hoorn after the village
where Schouten was born. Spanish captains
later wanted to rename it San Ildefonso, but
Spanish sailors were content to change
"Hoorn" to "Hornos" (Spanish for "ovens"),
perhaps in the hope of lending a little imagi¬
nary warmth to cliffs that are forbidding and
icy, despite forming part of the "Land of Fire".
The naming of a place is both an individ-

ual and a collective act. To name is to possess.
Every newcomer thus leaves the imprint of
his language and the signs of his passage.
Alonso de Ercilla, one of the discoverers of
Chiloé, an island with an Indian name,
expressed very well the keen powers of obser¬
vation and the underlying sense of pride of
the discoverer who leaves his mark upon a
place. In Part Three, Canto XXVI of La Arau¬
cana, he dwells at length on the exploration of
Chiloé and some of the neighbouring islands,
inhabited by Indians. The Indians, he tells us,
"were filled with amazement and wonder at
the sight of these strangers [white-skinned,
fair, hairy and bearded] with a different lan¬
guage and different clothing".
Before returning, Ercilla left behind a tan¬
gible memento of his visit. "I walked for half
a mile. Then, wishing to leave a visible, writ¬
ten sign of my having been there, in the bark
of the greatest tree that I saw I engraved with
the point of my knife these words, 'Don
Alonso de Ercilla came here, before any other.
He was the first to cross the channel, in a small
boat, with only ten men, this last day of Feb¬
ruary in the year 1558, at two o'clock of the
afternoon, as he was making his way back to
join his companions'."
I An echo ofpast voyages
Other names bear witness cither to the ordeals
undergone by their discoverers Cape Deso¬
lation, Land of Desolation, Deceitful Island,
Island of Anger, Hunger Harbour, Vain Bay,
Gulf of Torments or to their hopes: Eden
Harbour, Future Harbour, Cape Welcome,
Land of Springs.
An echo of the adventures they went
through, of the dangers they encountered and
their miraculous escapes, may sometimes be
heard, and then the names sound like votive
offerings. Hernando Alonso, pilot of the flag¬
ship of a famous Spanish expedition led by
Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa, tells how, run¬
ning into a terrible storm in the Strait of Mag¬
ellan, ". . . as wc commended our souls to the
Holy Spirit, the Comforter, and to the Blessed
Mother of God, there came suddenly, by their
mercy, a little light and gentle wind which res¬
cued us from that peril, and soon thereafter we
rounded the headland of the island of Santa
Inés, which we named the Cape of the Holy
Spirit in recognition of the grace it had
accorded us."
In fact the Cape of the Holy Spirit already
Isla Robinson Crusoe (Nearer
Land Island) in the Juan
Fernández Islands, some
600 km west of Valparaiso
(Chile).
had a name, by which it is known to this day:
Cabo de Pilares (Cape of the Pillars), because
of its supposed similarity to the ruins of a
Greek or Roman theatre or to the megaliths of
Stonehcnge. The other names given to it never
caught on, as if what had most appealed to
the imagination of seamen was the strange
shape of the rocks eroded by the violence of
the elements.
Other places are even today still unnamed.
The southern coast of Chile, down to its very
tip, is formed of one enormous, shattered
mountain range of which all that remains to be
seen are thousands of mountain-tops, in other
words, thousands of islands. Between Cape
Horn and Chiloé, more than 3,000 islands,
channels, promontories and rocks are still
waiting to be named.
