An art in search of its roots
BY ROMAIN MAITRA
Rasilla, below, is a devotional and ritual theatre form which originated
in northern India.
I Indian folk theatre is a composite art
with a composite set of skills practised
by artists who stage a total performance
through the creation of verbal, spatial and
visual patterns. Folk theatre forms such as
fatra from Bengal, Tamasha from Maharash¬
tra, Nautanki from Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan
and Punjab, Bhavai from Gujarat, Yaksha-
gana from Karnataka and Therukuttu from
Tamil Nadu feature a wide range of make-up,
song, dance, mime, improvised repartee, slap¬
stick or stylized acting, and even acrobatics.
These folk theatres give a glimpse of styles
of speech, music, dance, dress, behaviour,
humour, legend, proverb and wit in their
respective regions. The actors, who are often
very talented performers, speak directly to the

Forms of folk drama rooted in the villages
could give new impetus to modern Indian theatre
Below and opposite page
above, an episode from the
Mahabharata, the great Indian
epic, directed by Raton
Thiyam.
audience audience participation is the hall¬
mark of Indian folk theatre and often
improvise. They are apt to mix up several
moods and disciplines, from time to time
bursting into song and dancing with gusto
when the chorus sings their dialogue. The
result is a form of drama which springs from
an exhilarating freedom of expression and pro¬
vides the villagers with a complete emotional
experience in an environment in which ideas
can be effortlessly communicated.
Folk forms have their own stage conven¬
tions and production styles. The scenography
is nonrealistic and the stage is usually a bare
space manipulated by the actors through the
use of stylized and symbolic make-up and by
codified gait, choreographic acting, and sym¬
bolic hand gestures. Change of location is
denoted by movement and by word of mouth
rather than by change of set and decor.
Folk theatre has inherited many of the clas
sical conventions of Sanskrit theatre. The clas¬
sical Sutradhar or narrator is used in several
vernacular theatres, and the classical Vidushak
or buffoon appears under different names in
different regions as Konangi, Komali, or
Joothan Mian. Other stock characters are
found in different regions.
While ageless in pattern these performances
are refreshingly novel in their appeal. Cosmic
or symbolic battles between the forces of good
and evil, mythological stories and legendary
romantic tales are sprinkled with commen¬
tary on current social or political conditions.
One reason for the survival of folk plays, in
fact, has been their capacity to gradually adapt
old themes to changing ways of life and sati¬
rize the latest local happenings. The exaggera¬
tion, malapropism and ready wit in the fol¬
lowing piece of dialogue from Naqal (from
Punjab), taken from Balwant Gargi's Folk
Theatre of India (1966), is typical.

Inspector: How did you know that a thief
had burgled?
Wife: Pearly one, I heard the haystack bark¬
ing and saw it running toward the dog.
Inspector: What did you do then?
Wife: Great Sire, I jumped out of my bed.
Immediately I rolled my skirt and put on the
bed around my waist.
Inspector: Then what happened?
Wife: May God bless you with a dozen
children! Then I saw the courtyard rushing
past the thief.
Cobbler (peeping from behind): Sir, she is
trembling with fear. If you permit m-m-m . . .
if you per-
Inspector: Bark!
Cobbler. May the plume of your turban. . . .
Inspector: Be brief ! Tell me what have you
lost?
Cobbler: Sir, I have lost nine yards of my
cow, and the black-hoofed turban is. . . .
With the disintegration of the traditional
culture and the growing impact of industrial
society, however, folk theatre is gradually los¬
ing its artistic character and vitality. Powerfu 1
forces of globalization, accompanied by aggres¬
sive images and values of the West, are com
pounding the ill effects of 200 years of colo¬
nization which had already shaken traditional
Indian cultures loose from their moorings.
Urban influences have a weapon of matchless
power the TV and cinema whose shadow
is falling over village drama.
And yet at the same time, many Indian direc¬
tors realize that theatre forms borrowed from
the West are inadequate to project the social aspi¬
rations, ways of life, cultural patterns and pro b-
lems of the people of India as a whole. Since,
like theatre artists all over the world, they are
interested in establishing a closer relationship
between the theatre and the people, there is every
reason why they should make greater use of the
living tradition of indigenous theatre.
It is unfortunate that there has not been
more mutual exchange and collaboration
between the urban and rural traditions in
Indian theatre. Some leading theatre groups
in Calcutta, Bombay and Delhi are involved in
experiments of this kind, but they are rela¬
tively few. Ultimately, the outcome of their
work will depend on the resilience of the the¬
atre form itself to withstand and coexist with
the powerful invasion of commercial cinema
and television sitcoms and serials.
A scene from Therukuttu, folk
theatre from Tamil Nadu in
southern India.
