REFLECTIONS
Funding
a new home
for Egypt's
ancient
treasures
bySamirGharib
Cairo Museum possesses what is regarded
as the world's richest collection of Egypt¬
ian antiquities, comprising some 176,000 items.
Only 40,000 of them are on display, however.
The rest are stacked in the museum's basement
areas.
The museum has never been enlarged since it
was built at the beginning of the century. Some
renovation and modernization work has been car¬
ried out, particularly on the electrical installa¬
tions and the surveillance and alarm systems,
and a new room for the royal mummies is now
open to the public, after being closed for many
years for reasons connected with Islamic law.
The main achievement in recent years has prob¬
ably been the recording of over 135,000 items on
CD-ROM but these are merely drops in the
ocean.
On average, a new archaeological site, is dis¬
covered every month in Egypt. As there are no
regional museums, the rooms and corridors of An exhibition hall of the Cairo
the Cairo Museum are bursting at the seams with Museum. In centre, a statue of
. r , . -ii Ramses II.
more and more artelacts, and it is impossible to
observe scientific standards of display. The base¬
ment areas are so crammed that it is almost
impossible to get into them. Valuable objects
are piling up and mouldering down there, doomed
to slow degeneration. Security problems and
management difficulties further aggravate the
situation, while the museum's location on Al
Tahrir Square, one of the world's most congested
thoroughfares, means that it is threatened by
pollution and by vibration from the underground
railway that passes beneath it.
The only solution would be to build a spa-
© Grandadam/Hoa Qui Pans
cioiis new museum, in compliance with modern
scientific standards, on a protected site. This
would make Egypt the world centre for the study
of Egyptian civilizations, would greatly increase
tourist revenue, contribute to the development
of research and enable management of all the
country's museums and sites to be centralized.
For archaeology, it would contribute to the devel¬
opment of reliable conservation methods, edu¬
cation and the media would also benefit and, last
but not least, it would help in the creation of
new jobs and the training of specialists.
In 1992, a plot of land of lllfeddans (about

REFLECTIONS
68 hectares) near Giza and the Saqqara site was
allotted to the new museum by presidential
decree, but in its five-year budget adopted at
the same time the government set aside only 75
million Egyptian pounds (about $20 million) for
the project, a sum incommensurate with the
total construction cost, then estimated at $700
million.
The Italian government made available two
billion lire to finance a feasibility study. An Italo-
Egyptian commission of experts was set up and
began work in January 1993. Its conclusions were
public three years later: the building of the
new museum should proceed in tandem with the
restructuring of the present museum; the col¬
lections should be divided between the two
The upraised arms on this
statue adorning the tomb of
the Pharoah Awlbr'hor
symbolize the ruler's ka, the
energy principle that inhabits
gods and humans.
museums, and the new one should also house a
large specialized library, restoration laborato¬
ries, a data bank, an information agency, rooms
for young visitors, separate rooms for permanent
and temporary exhibitions, an auditorium, a pub¬
lications bureau, photographic laboratories, and
so forth.
No decision has as yet been taken about the
distribution of the collections. Various propos¬
als are being studied, the main aim being to avoid
duplication.
But the real problem is a financial one. The
Egyptian government is not in a position to make
available the two billion pounds needed to carry
out the project, and the present scale of its foreign
debt is such that it cannot contract any new loans.
On the other hand the governments of the rich
countries, all of which have their own problems,
are unable to help with the project's financing.
There is no doubt, however, that the project
is economically viable. The museum has every
chance of becoming a major attraction for the
world's Egyptologists and providing a windfall
for national and international tourism. It will very
likely double the number of tourists visiting
Egypt, which now stands at one and a half million
a year. Successfully managed, it should thus be
able to draw three million visitors, representing
a revenue of $30 million from admission fees
alone, not counting other sources of income,
which should double this sum again. The
museum could therefore cover its construction
costs in less than a dozen years.
Egyptian banks alone could put together the
capital needed for the building of the museum
and then entrust its management to an interna¬
tional company. The Egyptian government could
take the initiative in setting up a company in
which it would itself be a small stakeholder and
put shares on sale on the Egyptian and interna¬
tional markets. Such a solution, which is in line
with the government's present privatization pol¬
icy, would furthermore enable it to control the
movement of objects of artistic worth: neither
private enterprises nor individuals would be able
to take any such object out of the country with¬
out the agreement of the authorities. The Egypt¬
ian law-enforcement agency responsible for the
protection of the heritage would obviously be
in charge of security for the new museum, as it
is for the present one.
If the public sector docs not have the
resources to finance the project, let the private
sector step in! I
