WHERE CREDIT IS DUE...
BY ROBERT PECK CHRISTEN
M<I embers of a
craftswomen's savings and
credit group meet in Sumatra
(Indonesia).
ave you ever tried to sell half a goat
without killing it because you only
needed ten dollars? The question
may seem absurd but it sums up a
dilemma that faces many poor people in the
developing world. Saving and lending are part
of their everyday lives, as they are for the rich.
However, economists would say, they have
fewer options than the rich for managing their
liquidity through financial instruments and
they save in inferior stores of value such as
goats and construction materials.
For the privilege of having more money up
front (loans), you pay. This is because the lender
cannot be totally certain that you will be able
to fully repay the amount advanced against
your future cash flow and probably has other
opportunities in which to invest the money
advanced to you. The borrower's greatest con¬
cern is not what interest rate I am going to
charge him or how profitable the venture will
be that he undertakes with my resources, but
rather, when and how much will he have to
repay. Avery profitable business opportunity
or a great personal need may have motivated
him to borrow a certain amount in the first
place. Maybe the quality of my credit service
made him choose me over my competitor. But
ultimately, his decision to enter into a credit
agreement with me has much more to do with
whether I can offer him repayment terms that
coincide with his projected cash flow so he can
meet his payments safely.
Going the whole hog
To use a common example from microlending.
Many village banking programmes lend tiny
amounts of money to very poor women so
that they can initiate an economic activity such
as fattening a hog. Most of these lending
methodologies require repayment on a weekly
or monthly instalment basis since this tech¬
nique seems to reduce the levels of default
among borrowers. In fact, repayment levels
among women who fatten hogs they buy on
credit is very high.
But where do they get the money to repay
the loan? Clearly it can't come from the hog.
It must come from some other income source.
In fact, we often see careful microentrepre¬
neurs setting the amount of their instalment
loan payment to the value of sources of income
they receive on a steady basis such as rent fro m
property they own or salaries someone in the
household receives, irrespective of the cash
flow they expect to receive from the invest¬
ment activity carried out with the loan.
When does a microloan generate economic
"development", if it essentially fulfils a cash
flow management function?
It can do so in a number of ways. When the
up-front nature of a credit relationship allows
microentrepreneurs and small farmers to take
advantage of a specific economic opportunity,
they can increase their incomes. When, through
access to credit, borrowers reduce their costs by
purchasing in larger volumes, take advantage of
sales of discounted merchandise, and replace an
THE UNESCO COURIER« JANUARY 1997

*
i ,
f*
VV-W
+,* >>
Trié
r
informal moneylender, they can generate an
immediate increase in income. Microentrepre¬
neurs may also use a loan to increase their sales
by financing their clients to allow them to
pay in instalments for the goods they have
purchased. Credit may allow borrowers to
increase their productive or commercial capac¬
ity through the purchase of major assets more
rapidly than would be possible through the
simple reinvesting of the proceeds of their
businesses. Credit may allow them to under¬
take activities which they would otherwise
not have the resources to finance.
An enormous number of microentrepreneurs,
Mbove, a baby sleeps in a
hammock strung above a bed
of apples in the Xinjiang
region of western China. Many
microenterprises are home-
based family businesses.
I his Togolese hairdresser
joined a small enterprise
development loan programme
in order to take part in its
savings scheme.
small farmers and fishermen, and others who
earn their living independently could benefit
from the efficient provision of microcredit ser¬
vices on the part of specialized financial insti¬
tutions. They cannot take advantage of eco¬
nomic opportunities that they sec out there,
because they do not have access to rapid and
appropriate sources of finance at reasonable rates
of interest. This fact has led many to enthusi¬
astically endorse the idea that "credit creates
economic opportunity, hence development".
A dangerous illusion
This simplistic belief lies at the heart of the
failure of many microcredit schemes to achieve
high repayment rates. The sponsors and
administrators of these failed programmes
forget that it is economic opportunity that
creates greater income potential and, eventually,
prosperity. Only when credit allows individ¬
uals to take advantage of economic opportu¬
nity can it contribute to prosperity.
No amount of credit to small farmers who
produce traditional staple crops has allowed
them to leave poverty behind, as long as farm
gate prices remain depressed to favour urban
consumers, rural marketing and physical infra¬
structure remain undeveloped, and rural tech¬
nology remains inappropriately simple. Rather,
rural credit programmes to traditional farmers
with strict repayment enforcement could very
easily wind up removing peasants from their
THE UNESCO Q>URIERB JANUARY 1997

land once their indebtedness reached unaccept¬
able levels.
Successful microcnterprise credit initiatives
over the past twenty-five years have focused
their loans on target groups who, through
credit, could gain access to real economic
opportunity. Concretely, most concentrated
their lending in non-farm enterprises that had
been in existence for at least one year prior to
the loan, and that demonstrated a clear repay¬
ment capacity.
These programmes have funded individu¬
als and the cash flow of their ongoing business
activities. By considerably shortening average
loan terms, they opened the opportunity to
re-lend to the same clients greater amounts if
their business had prospered with the original
loan. If, on the other hand, as frequently hap¬
pens, the projected increase in sales failed to
materialize, the loan repayment was not nec¬
essarily jeopardized since it was based on the
cash flow stream of the original level of busi¬
ness activity.
Encouraging results
An intuitive grasp of the essentially fungible
nature of loan funds led the organizers of these
programmes to the conclusion that it was
fruitless to spend great effort tracking the end
use of funds, once disbursed. Instead, they
saw the merit of developing a long-term rela¬
tionship with clients and found that by get¬
ting to know them over a scries of financial
transactions the credit risk would be consid¬
erably reduced. They developed community or
peer group based lending technologies that
generated information about potential par¬
ticipants' willingness to repay and generated
incentives to do so.
These approaches produced results. Better
programmes were routinely able to produce and
sustain repayment levels above 98 per cent. Since
the loans went to low-income individuals who,
through credit, gained access to real economic
opportunity, it was possible to charge suffi¬
ciently high rates of interest to fully cover oper¬
ating costs. When programmes recover 98 per
cent of their loans and more than cover their
operating costs, they can grow exponentially
and serve ever greater markets. Furthermore, the
history of economic development has clearly
shown that a well functioning financial system
will make a big contribution to overall local
prosperity as confidence in financial systems
increases the pool of local savings and the avail¬
ability of resources for investment.
) r
W THE UNESCO (^pURIERB JANUARY 1997
