COMMENTARY Federico Mayor
The responsibility of
scientists
Knowledge is always good: it is its applications that can
be harmful or even evil. A hammer can he used improp¬
erly as an instrument of aggression; so at another level
can atomic energy. But we must he careful not to allow
only the negative aspects of science to he emphasized.
These are usually described in exaggeratedly dark
colours, while the good aspects are not news.
The scientific and technological community has a
duty to remind people of the enormous benefits sci¬
ence has brought. Some years ago, the Green Revolu¬
tion, which has transformed the future prospects of
millions of people in Asia, came under criticism from
environmentalists because it had tended to favour
richer farmers, who could afford the pesticides and
fertilizers on which the new varieties of wheat and rice
depended. The critics behaved as if this discredited
the entire enterprise, whereas their criticisms were far
outweighed by its highly positive aspects.
There are plenty of other examples. Does anybody
think about poliomyelitis any more? Or of the way we
have been able to reduce pain and even eliminate it with
the help of analgesics or modern anaesthetics? Or of the
transport and telecommunications systems that enable
us to be citizens and witnesses of the whole world,

even though they compel us to assume the responsi¬
bilities this entails?
We cannot shirk our moral responsibilities. We must
admit that there have been a considerable number of
silent scientists in the twentieth century. The possession
of knowledge carries with it a moral obligation. What
would we think of a meteorologist who did not warn us
that a storm was coming? Or of clinical analysts who
failed to alert us to the urgent nature of their findings?
Scientists have to transcend the walls of their labora¬
tories, their departments, their faculties, and their
industries. To say that the scientific life is simply a mat¬
ter of "publishing or perishing" is both disparaging and
wrong. A scientist who chooses to remain silent, par¬
ticularly when irreversible consequences may follow,
is behaving both unprofessionally and immorally.
Genetics and ethics
In no field of science are the issues more complex than
in genetics, nor is there any other area of science in
which the discriminatory use of the information would
be more scandalous. The whole subject of bioethics, far
from being a luxury, should be the preserve of the
entire human community, since the advances made by
the few are a battle won for the whole human race.



Bioethics came into being, rightly, at the moment
when techniques of genetic manipulation first emerged
in the 1970s, and questions began to be asked about the
influence of molecular biology on the future of human¬
ity. Far from simply being concerned with an investi¬
gation of the relations between science and society, it is
concerned with the relation between man and nature
in its biological diversity. The development of bioethics
illustrates, I believe, a proper and appropriate response
by scientists and philosophers to the social questions
raised by science.
These are many. Genetic diagnosis and screening
make it possible to give reassurance to members of fam¬
ilies with a history of genetically transmitted illnesses.
However, should these tests be conducted only after the
disease appears? Should genetic testing be restricted to
hereditary, incurable, fatal or incapacitating diseases?
How can the confidentiality of information he guaran¬
teed overtime, especially when they could be of enor¬
mous interest to employers and insurance companies?
For the time being, the scientific community has
agreed that there should he no use of gene therapy on
the germ cells those that would transmit the changes
to the next generation and that the cloning of human
beings should be banned. But is this agreement based
on ethical principles, or does it merely reflect current
fears of the possible associated risks?
Moral dilemmas
Behind the first series of questions looms the spectre of
eugenic selection, with its attendant host of violations of
human rights and individual freedom.
The temptation for couples to use the results of
screening in selecting their potential offspring is under¬
standable, but it is difficult to draw the line between the
legitimate desire not to pass on serious genetic diseases
and the illusory quest for the "perfect child". At another
level, it is not impossible to envisage entire societies
being tempted to practise eugenic selection on entire
populations that it might consider genetically vulnera¬
ble or as presenting "risks".
Each society must work out for itself a route through
this moral maze, but there is also a role for the inter¬
national community. National rules may vary from coun¬
try to country, which could encourage a form of "genetic
tourism", in which people would be tempted to take
advantage of laxer regulations abroad. The first stirrings
of this have been seen in the use of techniques of in vitro
fertilization which allow women past menopause to
become pregnant. In Italy there are no rules or con¬
ventions prohibiting the use of this technique for women
in their late fifties or even sixties, so that women from
the United Kingdom have travelled there to take advan¬
tage of a treatment they would be denied at home
because of their age.
Without acting as judge and jury in such cases, it is
nevertheless clear that some international standards
are desirable. Similar arguments apply to the even
more vexed question of the patenting of the human
genome, where so far different countries have adopted
different approaches. For these very reasons, UNESCO
has created a World Committee on Bioethics*; perhaps
it would he wise to extend its scope to include every
impact of science on human life.
See the September 1991 issue of the UNESCO Courier, "A
code for living." Ed.
