LISTENING
American trombonist and composer
Steve Turre combines respect for tradition
with openness to all types of music.
How did you first get interested in jazz?
Steve Tune: Coming from a musically gifted
family especially my mother, who is a
pianist and flamenco dancer I always knew
I'd be a musician. It's my vocation in life.
At home we listened to all kinds of music
jazz, boogie-woogie, classical, Latino, blues,
gospel, rock, whatever. In my parents' day
they met at a Count Basic dance you
danced to jazz. But it's become less rhyth¬
mical now, which explains why it's lost some
of its public. Latino music on the other hand
has a great beat and has a considerable fol¬
lowing today. I love a good beat. Everything
in nature is rhythmical. Music without a
beat lacks vitality.
When I was about nine or ten, I began
playing the trombone in the school band.
Two or three years later I joined a band
where my older brother plaj ed the sax. In
1972 I went on a European tour with Kay
Charles (my younger brother, Pete, is now
his drummer). The following year I took
part in a jam-session at the Keystone Cor¬
ner in San Francisco, and Art Blakey asked
me to ¡day with his band.
You are sometimes called a Chkano musician.
Are you happy with that label?
S. T.: Absolutely not. The word "Chirano"
mainly applies to Los Angeles where it
means people of Mexican descent who usu¬
ally belong to the underprivileged social
classes. Whereas I grew up in the Bay Area
near San Francisco (northern California).
I have Mexican roots, but I am American,
and like any American, I'm a blend of var¬
ious nationalities. I don't want to be
restricted by my roots or get locked into
clichés for the rest of my life. I want to be
myself with my individuality intact.
Some Latin American jazz musicians often
complain that the critics respect them more
when they play "pure" jazz rather than Latin
Jazz, music which is, however, just as interesting
and hard to play. Have you run into any such
prejudices in your career?
S. T.: Yes. The problem often comes from
record companies or promoters. Some
labels, for example, make a distinction
between white jazz and black jazz. If you



Isabelle Leymarie talks to
Steve Turre
have a Latin American background and you
nin a band, they tend to consider ) ou exclu¬
sively as a player of Latin jazz. And even
though I love Latin rhythms, I'm a jazz
musician, and I stand by my jazz records.
I don't like having labels stuck on me. I'm
interested in all sorts of music.
Besides your work as a trombonist, for the
past few years you've become especially well
known for playing conches and seashells, from
which you coax haunting sounds. Your seashell
solos with Dizzy Gillespie's United Nations
Orchestra were one of the highlights of his
concerts. How did you discover these unorthodox
instruments?
S. T.: Kahsaan Koland Kirk had a seashell
he let me play. I loved to blow into it.
Conches and seashells were the predeces¬
sors of brass instruments, but it was only in
1978 while on tour in Mexico with the
Woody Shaw sextet that I had my eyes
opened to seashells. I'd never been to Mex¬
ico. Wc were going to perforin in several
towns, and my mother gave me the phone
number of some of her relatives. I invited
them to the concert, and that evening,
Woody decided to play a piece in which
we used seashells. The audience loved it,
and after the concert my family asked me
if I knew that the Aztecs used to blow into
seashells. I didn't in fact. Next I went to
Mexico City's Anthropological Museum and
saw some wonderful seashells, and then to
Teotiliuacán, where I found bas-reliefs
showing men blowing into seashells or
conches. Up till then I didn't feel confi¬
dent enough to use them. But after that I
felt something click inside and began play
ing without worrying about what people
might think.
Aztec priests used sacred conches. In the
Caribbean the Maroonsescaped slavesand
Haitian countryfolk also used conches to
communicate. Conches are both a sacred symbol
and a symbol of freedom. Do you do anything to
the conches and seashells before playing them?
S. T.i Yes. I taught myself by trial and error.
I file and trim them. I've got them in all
sizes and compose according to the ones
I've got at hand. Small seashells produce
high notes; big ones produce lower notes.
For the past five or six years I've also been
collecting animal horns, which are still used
in certain forms of traditional African
music. Fitted with a special mouthpiece,
they produce interesting sounds and
rhythms. I've created something new with
my seashells, but I use them for the dif¬
ferent tonal colours they give. They fill out
my instrumental palette. The "Shell
Choir", my set of seashells, are part of my
musical luggage just like other experi¬
ments. But I'm a trombonist most of all.
The trombone is my main instrument, and
I can change timbre and colours by using all
sorts of mutes.
Do you get as much pleasure from composing
as you do from playing?
5. T.: If j ou lead a band, it's to play your
own music. I've already played the whole
traditional repertoire of jazz for the trom¬
bone, and I want to do something differ¬
ent. At school I studied harmonics and
basic musical theory, but I mostly learned
to compose from the great arrangers and by
watching how music is made. I had the
opportunity to compose the score for a
ühn, Anna Oz, directed by a young French
filmmaker, Eric Rochant. You can hear my
seashells in it with a few additions. I'd like
to do more films, but I prefer playing. I've
found a way of expressing myself and a
style I feel comfortable with, and I get
enormous satisfaction from it. I
