From the clay
tablet to the
computer, a
wealth of tools
for memorizing
ideas and
transmitting
them through
time and space
The test of time
BY LOUISE MERZEAU
30
An idea must stand the test of time
before it can be transmitted through
space. In other words, it must be
proof against oblivion, falsity and fal¬
sification, and at the same time remain alive,
fertile and receptive to change. An idea can
only do this if it is fixed, first of all in the
memory, then in a material substance. This
paradox is more apparent than real: fixity is a
precondition and guarantee of the movement
of thought. But if memory is the prime vec¬
tor for the transmission of ideas, it is only
when ideas are externalized by inscription in a
medium or "carrier" that their lives are pro¬
longed beyond the limits of a single human
life. As a result of this process messages are
detached from the human body which they
outlive by being themselves "embodied" in a
device that memorizes and diffuses them.
I Traces and imprints
From the flintstone to the computer, the tools
that have been used to process these media are
THE UNESCO I^OURILR |UNE 1007

kbove, a cluster of optical
fibres, hair-thin strands of
glass or plastic carrying
information as pulses of light,
play a key role in modern
telecommunications.
Left, hieroglyphics carved in
stone at Aswan (Egypt).
witnesses to this future-oriented process: each
technical aid is a step towards the victory of the
mind over the ephemerality of human life, a
first step towards someone else a person who
may be located in another place or another time.
The materials on which the inscription is
made are also repositories of this active mem¬
ory, places where the processing operations
leave their signature. Everything made by
human hand is a palimpsest. When the copy¬
ist monk of medieval Europe scratched out
what had been written on a sheet of parch¬
ment so that he could use it again, he left as
many traces as he erased. The original text either
became an illegible mess or disappeared entirely,
and then another text was written on the same
surface. Across the ages these scratchings-out
tell the story of a technique of writing (com¬
plete with calligraphy, desk, pen, pen-knife,
and ruler), a method of production and an
economic system (parchment was made from
animal skins which had to be limed, cleaned,
dried, chalked and then scraped, costing more



than the hours of work in the scriptory), and
of a method of dissemination which was itself
based on a certain form of knowledge (a sin¬
gle, inexhaustible and sacred message con¬
stantly referred to by writers and readers
belonging to a small circle of clerks).
Intangible though it may seem, a computer
file is not exempt from this trace-making
process without which it is impossible for an
idea to endure and travel. It is true that the
electronic text can be modified at will and that
by losing its definitive character it also loses the
variants and rough drafts that show the suc¬
cessive stages of its composition. But the com¬
puter memory contains far more information
than that which appears on the screen. With
each operation writing, copying, saving or
erasing the program records the instruction,
the code and the tag in a scries of figures com¬
prising 0 and 1 . While these digits may be inde¬
cipherable as such, they are nevertheless infal¬
lible witnesses to the intellectual operations
involved in producing a piece of writing or
an image or doing a calculation. By returning
to these instructions the program can recon¬
stitute, transmit and modify these data on
another machine at a later time.
{Travelling light
The evolution of techniques of inscription,
storage and recording shows how the quest
for greater precision has gone hand in hand
with a quest for greater mobility. The pur¬
pose of recording a message is not only to
make it unchangeable but also to make sure
I he Russian writer Fyodor
Dostoyevsky's desk and the
pen with which he wrote many
pages of The Brothers
Karamazov and The Diary of a
Writer.

that it can move freely in space and time, when
its medium can be easily handled, transported



or duplicated. From the clay or metal tablet of
the Sumerian era to the wax-smeared wooden
polyptych of ancient Rome, from the several-
metrc-long volumen to the bound leaves of
the codex (2nd-4th centuries), from the paper¬
back to the diskette and the electronic diary,
the written word has been packaged in increas¬
ingly handy as well as more reliable forms.
A thirteenth-century European student who
sought access to a piece ofwriting recommended
to him by his tutors was obliged to borrow an
exemplar or master copy from a stationer and
make a copy of it. His twentieth-century coun¬
terpart borrows a printed book from the library
and makes a photocopy, or downloads a digital
version of it from the network. In both cases, the
ideas circulate after being recorded in a medium,
but in the latter case the risk of the wording
being altered in the course of transmission is
much smaller than in the former. What applies
to texts applies even more strongly to the dif¬
fusion of images. One need only think of the
difficulties of copying a geographical map or an
assembly diagram, to realize how far inscrip¬
tion techniques engraving, printing or digiti¬
zation affect the propagation of knowledge.
Just as processes have become more reli¬
able, carriers have become more streamlined,
miniaturized and technically complex. Speed
and mobility go hand in hand with capacity to
record and store information. Today, thanks
to progress in electronics, information can
travel in real time and data circulate in billions
along optic fibres.
\ Package tours
Ideas travel best in groups. Sciences, arts and reli¬
gions are primarily collections, which assemble
the physical or mental universe into a corpus
where it can be reorganized so as to improve its
capacity for transmission. A message is more
certain to last if it belongs to a structured whole.
The origin of museums before they set
themselves the goal of safeguarding the her¬
itage lay in this need to concentrate scien¬
tific knowledge in a single centre of exchange
and research. The Mouscion of Alexandria,
300 years before the Christian era, was a,trca-
sure-house and laboratory, a community of
objects and thinkers from which knowledge
and beliefs flowed outwards to the entire Hel¬
lenistic world. In the treasuries of ancient tem¬
ples, medieval churches and princes, the same
foundational activity collection opened a
door to the future for works of the mind.
Something more than accumulation is
involved here: objects arc brought together
for processing, management and organization.
Inventories and indexes, follow-up and cata¬
loguing, as well as comparative study and rank¬
ing revitalize items in a collection by inte¬
grating them into generating systems.
During the French Revolution, it was the
concentration of biens nationaux, the "national
property" confiscated from the nobility and
the Church, that gave rise to the notion of
- 4M
/
I
ÊLwm^ 2ÈÊtw~'
M village meeting in southern
Bangalore, capital of the
Indian state of Karnataka.

heritage. Faced with the need to protect images,
objects and buildings from sans-culotte van¬
dalism, the state began to compile invento¬
ries and descriptions of them and classify them
as historic monuments in a ranking that would
set an order of priority for their conservation
and restoration. Thus concentrated in an insti¬
tution i.e. a policy, places and agents ideas
expressed in stone, gouache or pottery gave
rise to a new idea: that of common property,
which belongs to all citizens and to no-one
in particular, and gives substance to awareness
of the national heritage.
In the sciences too, memory records and
produces knowledge by organizing proposi¬
tions. Grids, tables, projections, textbooks, dic¬
tionaries and encyclopaedias connect and sys¬
tematize data so that increasingly complex and



dynamic knowledge can be extracted from it. It
is through this kind of networking that each
person gains access to the memory of others.
n Illustration symbolizing
the power of a CD-ROM
(Compact Disc Read-Only
Memory) to store large
quantities of book text (up to
250,000 A4 pages).
As well as having a large
storage capacity, CD-ROM
enables text, ¡mage and sound
to be accessed from any part
of the disc.
MDon 't forget the guide
Once beliefs and knowledge have been con¬
centrated into territories, we still have to find
our way around them. This is where human or
technological guides come in. Access to a polit¬
ical, philosophical, scientific or religious her¬
itage docs not necessarily imply familiarity
with it.
The memory has always needed a helping
hand from signposts, which have ranged from
the use of "common places" (loci communes)
by Roman rhetoricians to the hypertext of
today. Taking in a set of images, using a tree-
diagram to find our way into a system of
thought, or hopping from one screen to the
next while surfing on the net always implies a
topology of information, complete with
road-signs, roundabouts, highways and
byways. The layout of annotations and foot¬
notes, the numbering of chapters and pages,
and the icons of CD-ROMs enable us to find
our way within the world of ideas and there¬
fore provide a basis for their transmission.
In addition to these signposts arc mediators
organized in institutions, groups, clubs,
schools and corporations. At once structured,
localized and receptive to their environment,
these mediators connect thought to the social
interactions that give it meaning. Their medi¬
ation fits the transmission of ideas into a strat¬
egy, a balance of power or a role-playing situ¬
ation. For shared space-time, a framework of
tensions and negotiations, is the basis of the
collective memory. Consensus designed to
buttress the social body's belief in its own
perpetuation never comes about automati¬
cally; its construction calls for constant stew¬
ardship of the collective experience.
These guides for the collective memory are
vested with the power to winnow out those
values that should be preserved from those
that should be forgotten. The controversy
often sparked off by the granting of amnesties
(the first of which dates from 403 B.C.) or by
the definition of imprescriptible crimes high¬
lights the ethical issues involved in the politics
of memory. From the viewpoint of history
and the formation of cultures, the choice of
what should be recorded and what should be
erased is never a matter of indifference.
The inclination of modern societies to
exploit to the nth degree everything they pro¬
duce poses a real question. While new tech¬
nologies bring within reach the Utopian dream
of a total grasp of events, phenomena and mes¬
sages, we must always keep in mind that remem
bering is indissociable from forgetting
