Cuba's gold
BY EDUARDO MANET
Once upon a time
there was a
beautiful island . . .
Engraving above shows
Havana, capital of Cuba, as it
was in 1851, a time when
Cuba's sugar industry was
expanding and its population
was growing.
I I like to imagine the first encounter
between the Spaniards and the Indians
of Cuba. The Spaniards disembark as con¬
quistadors with drums and trumpets. Hel-
meted and booted, they carry halberds and
muskets, and wield sabres and swords. The
Cuban Indians savour earthly delights. They
lie naked or almost in their hammocks and
smoke the rolled-up tobacco leaves they are
so fond of.
A monk who sailed with Christopher
Columbus remarked on the splendour of
Cuba's plant and animal life and its magnificent
sunsets. In the glowing sky a festival of colours
would modulate from blue to pink, then to
orange, green and purple before melting into
a deeper, denser blue just before nightfall.
But the Spaniards had other priorities than
contemplating the beauty of sunsets. Discov¬
ering, conquering and colonizing the New
World cost the Spanish crown dear. Colum¬
bus, who had left Europe to search for the
fastest and most economical silk and spice
route, was eventually relieved of his command.
An army of battle-hardened soldiers and war¬
like adventurers began hunting throughout
the region for gold, fighting among them¬
selves to the death and terrorizing, corrupting
and enslaving the indigenous population.
The feverish search for El Dorado ("the
land of gold"), a mythical land honeycombed
with gold mines, fuelled legend and inspired
perilous expeditions. Looking for gold, find¬
ing gold and sending galleons-full of it back to
Spain grew into an obsession.
The Indian population of Cuba, the "pearl
of the West Indies", was mobilized to strip
the island of its gold, but the conquistadors
were cruelly disappointed; they did not find
a single nugget. Exhausted by forced labour
and decimated by disease brought by the
Europeans, the island's inhabitants were
almost completely wiped out.
The triumph ofsugar
The colonists soon found consolation else¬
where. The island abounded in other forms
of wealth. The sybaritic society of the Old
World discovered that sugar of rare quality
could be grown in Cuba. What could be more
delicious after a copious meal than a sweet
dessert, a cup of beautiful, anthracite-black

coffee along with a glass of Cuban rum and
one of the cigars that would become world
famous as Havanas?
This was the Cuban "gold" found by the
first colonists. Not precious metal but tobacco,
rum, coffee and especially sugar. And because the
sugar cane on the island proved to be of such
exceptional quality, there was no point in tak¬
ing the trouble to develop other, less reliable
crops. Growing sugar as a single crop was offi¬
cially encouraged. Fields of sugar cane would
soon stretch as far as the eye could see, and
monoculture would turn into monomania.
With the rise of Cuban patriotism in the
nineteenth century, voices were raised against
the risk that a single crop might eventually
strangle the country's economy. But even after
the Cuban people had achieved a hard-won
independence, the cultivation of sugar cane as
a single crop continued its triumphant march.
A good many of the hectares of sugar-cane
fields that had belonged to the Spanish or the
Creoles were transferred to Cuban business¬
men and American companies. The produc¬
tion rhythm imposed its law on the island's
economy. When the price of sugar rose, the
Cubans profited; when it went down, the cane-
cutters and the needy fell into dire poverty.
All Cuban patriots wanted to do some¬
thing about this. In the schools it was taught
that the country's future lay in crop diversi¬
fication, in an economic blend that would
strike a balance between the different sources
of wealth tobacco, coffee, minerals and fruit.
It is hardly surprising then that after the
revolution of 1 958 the new leaders launched a
massive programme of industrialization and
diversification of the Cuban economy. Farm¬
ing went from strength to strength as Cuba
began a new chapter in its history that was
designed to put an end to the dominance of
sugar cane, a symbol of the past.
Golden sands
But realism soon led the country's leaders to
change their minds. Cuban sugar became a
force on the world market and brought in
foreign currency. At the same time, Cuba
broke off relations with the United States,
and came to rely on sugar as a basis for trade
with the Soviet Union and the Eastern bloc
countries. Tobacco, rum, coffee, fruit, zinc
and nickel mines and fish were part of the
island's resources, but sugar cane, as always,
dominated the economy. It was as much a part
Harvesting sugar cane in
Vinales (Cuba).
A contemporary engraving of a
Cuban sugar plantation in the
late 17th century.
of Cuban reality as the island's beaches and
palm trees, its Havanas, its torrential rains, its
music and its climate.
Today the situation has changed consider¬
ably. Since the seismic shocks that transformed
the world political scene in the 1980s with the
implosion of the Soviet Union and the fall of
the Berlin wall, sugar has become one of the
most unstable products on the international

market. The well fed and health-conscious West
has banished it from the table. Sugar substi¬
tutes and other sweeteners have taken over. The
following comparison says it all: in 1914 Lidia
Quatania, star of Cabiria, an Italian film that
became an international hit, was the embodi¬
ment of female pulchritude. She and her volup¬
tuous curves made the perfect advertising image
for the sugar Cuba then sold in massive quan¬
tities. In 1997 one need only look at the fash¬
ion shows on Western television and the fili¬
form silhouettes of the top models today's
dream creatures to understand the uncertain-
tics of the sugar market.
But to return to Christopher Columbus.
The first tourist to set foot on Cuban soil,
he exclaimed that the island was "the most
beautiful land in the world". The library in
Seville which houses the archives of the colo¬
nization of the Americas contains thousands
of pages on the early days of colonization that
corroborate this description and constitute a
collection of tourist brochures before their
time.
Cuba has kept its beautiful beaches and
palm trees intact. Why not profit from this
bounty? All that had to be done was to set up
a tourist development strategy, a hotel infra¬
structure and to adapt to today's joint-venture
system. Tourism is the most hybrid of indus¬
tries. Tourists from all over the world Ger¬
mans, Mexicans, Spanish, Swiss, Belgians,
French, Italians and many other nationali¬
ties now relax on Cuba's soft sands.
Let me conclude by describing an imagi¬
nary scene. A Cuban beach. A beautiful glow¬
ing sunset. A hammock is stretched between
two coconut trees. Lounging in it is an Indian
chief smoking tobacco leaves. Two beautiful
Indian women are fanning him with palm
leaves. Diego Velazquez, a Spanish conquista¬
dor, surrounded by cuirassed soldiers armed
to the teeth, impatiently addresses the reclin¬
ing chief. "We want gold!" he demands in a
strong castilian accent.
"Gold?" queries the Chief gently, "but. . ."
His hand sweeps nonchalantly, politely and
elegantly towards the beach, the sea, the sky
and the sun. "Gold, señor? You have it before
you. This is our gold."
A floor show in a Havana
nightclub.
