ast and present: a creative dialogue
BY JACQUES RIGAUD I
A relationship
which has its
ups and downs
as well as some
surprising
moments of
harmony
The problem of reconciling the safe¬
guarding of cultural sites of historic
interest with the creation of a new, vital
architecture is one that is peculiar to our
own times. For centuries, indeed for thousands
of years, buildings of various kinds were erected
in a medley of styles without any thought
being given to respect for the past. While the
attraction of some sites lies in their homo¬
geneity and harmony, the Place des Vosges in
Paris, for instance, the Piazza del Campidoglio
in Rome or the Campo in Siena, the charm of
many cities such as Prague, Venice, Naples or
Rome resides precisely in the way that a wide
variety of buildings stand there side by side.
The fact that such contrasts fail to shock
us may perhaps he due to our awareness that,
behind the appearance of dissimilarity, there is
an underlying unity to the architectural her¬
itage. We arc conscious that, between the Doric
column and the buildings of Andrea Palladio or
Christopher Wren, between the Roman basil¬
ica, Istanbul's Hagia Sophia and Romanesque
art, and between the Pantheon, St Peter's in
Rome and St Paul's Cathedral in London, there
are just as many ties of kinship and continuity
as there are breaks in tradition. However much
they may differ or even clash, the successive
styles somehow fit in with one another and
get along together. It is worth remembering

**
S-iR
SK>
'3- -.-.
Itr*
M O ,j
<r r
7:
*îh1>
that until the nineteenth century respect for
the heritage was unknown in Europe. Our fore¬
bears had no hesitation on religious, political or
aesthetic grounds in building a cathedral in the
middle of the mosque of Córdoba or knock¬
ing down the Louvre of Charles V to create
the Cour carrée, which they did with a kind of
"innocence" quite devoid of scruples about the
heritage.
The interior of the Byzantine
church of Hagia Sophia in
Istanbul (Turkey). This
immense domed church dating
from the 6th century was
transformed into a mosque in
the 15th century. The historic
areas of Istanbul were
included on the World Heritage
List as a cultural site in 1985.
Attitudes have changed. We have gradually
come to appreciate the irreplaceable value of
what we have inherited from the past, a real¬
ization that has become global in scale with
the "world heritage" concept that UNESCO
has succeeded in putting across. There is, how¬
ever, another reason for this shift in outlook.
Since the end of the last century, art in all its
forms has undergone a number of radical

changes which aesthetic factors alone cannot
fully explain. Industrial, urban civilization
has profoundly altered the design and struc¬
ture of towns as well as construction tech¬
niques and materials.
¡Changing attitudes
Aerial view of the Great Mosque of Córdoba in Spain (8th-10th centuries), an outstanding
monument of Western Islam. In the 13th century, when Córdoba was recaptured from the Muslims
by Ferdinand III of Castile ("the Saint"), the mosque was converted into a cathedral. The historic
centre of Córdoba was included as a cultural site on the World Heritage List in 1984 and 1994.
The results have been twofold: on the one
hand, the wholesale destruction of monu¬
ments and sites at the very time when a con¬
sciousness of the heritage at first concerned
only with preserving major buildings of sym¬
bolic significance was emerging; and on the
other, the untimely onslaught of materials
and forms that clashed with those of the
past steel, concrete and glass giving birth to
a radically different kind of architecture, con¬
trasting utterly with the buildings that have
come down to us from former times.
It is for this reason that several opposing
attitudes are represented in the modern
approach to this issue. One consists in regard¬
ing certain sites, monuments or groups of
buildings as sacrosanct and not tolerating any
visible assertion of modernity. This is the case
with the château of Versailles and with some
cities that were destroyed by war, such as War¬
saw, Nuremberg or Rouen, and have been
rebuilt as faithful copies of their old selves.
Another attitude is to advocate a type of con¬
struction that is in keeping with, or even a
High-rise buildings in San Francisco (U.S.A.).

pastiche of, that which already exists. A third,
conversely, is openly in favour of a dialogue
between past and present buildings. There is,
unfortunately, a fourth attitude, which I have
no hesitation in calling indifferent or igno¬
rant and which is the one that has done the
greatest harm to certain grand urban vistas, as
in the case of Brussels, London and Paris.
I Contrasting styles
The deliberate confrontation of ancient and
modern can come in various forms. The new
building can be discreetly fitted in: the audi¬
ence chamber created for Paul VI in the Vati¬
can by Pier Luigi Nervi is uncompromisingly
modern in form but crouches in the shadow
of St Peter's without having the slightest detri¬
mental effect on that august site. By contrast,
while the Pompidou Centre makes an assertive
statement in the heart of old Paris, its pro¬
portions are in keeping with those of the
buildings massed around it, and the piazza in
front of it provides a smooth transition
between it and its surroundings at the same
time as being a successful urban space. Another,
less controversial, example in France is Norman
Foster's Carré d'art in Nîmes. It faces the
Roman temple known as the Maison carrée,
but far fom overwhelming it, seems to con¬
verse with it across two thousand years. In
Germany, the Ludwig-Wallraf museums at
the foot of Cologne cathedral do not flaunt
themselves in any such face-to-face encounter,
but give the impression that they were
designed with this juxtaposition in mind.
The case of the Pei pyramid in the fore¬
court of the Louvre is a more subtle one. Clas¬
sical in form, it might appear, though func¬
tional, to be incongruous in such a setting,
but in fact its metal and glass construction,
all reflections and transparencies, lends a bold
and at the same time unassuming new touch to
the classical façades of the palace. The same
architect was successful in harmoniously inte¬
grating a new wing into the National Gallery
in Washington. On another level, certain sen¬
sitively-sited major civil engineering projects
such as the Golden Gate Bridge in San Fran¬
cisco or the Pont de Normandie in the Seine
estuary manage to blend in admirably, thanks
to the elegance and refinement of their forms.
In the past, the juxtaposition of styles may
have been a happy coincidence. In our own
times a construction in a contrasting style
runs the serious risk of affronting the eye and
striking a discordant note unless, that is, the
juxtaposition is carefully thought out and
modern architects, for all their boldness, show
themselves willing to accept with a kind of
humility the constraints imposed by the pres¬
ence of such prestigious and awe-inspiring
neighbours. If they do this, there is every
chance that posterity will be grateful to them
for enriching the heritage of the centuries.
Façades giving on to Market
Square in the historic centre of
Warsaw (Poland), which was
meticulously reconstituted
after destruction by Nazi
occupation troops during the
Second World War. This
cultural site was
included on the World Heritage
List in 1980.
