interview Aimé Césai re
Aimé Césaire, who was bom in Martinique in 1913, is one of this century's major
writers. In his poetry, plays and political activities he has waged a lifelong strug¬
gled restore dignity to colonized peoples. Firstandforemosta poet, here he
talks to Annick Thebia Melsan about his faith in the power of words.
The usual way of trying to place you is by reference to
various things such as time and place, writing, poetry
and its different categories, political action and so on,
but how would you place yourself?
Aimé Césaire: That's a terribly difficult ques¬
tion to answer but, well, I'm a man, a man from
Martinique, a coloured man, a black, someone
from a particular country, from a particular geo¬
graphical background, someone willi a history
who has fought for a specific; canst;. It's not \cry
original but, broadly speaking, my answer would
be that history will say who I am.
You are from the north of Martinique. . . .
A.C.: I've always had the feeling that I was on a
quest to reconquer something, my name, my coun¬
try or myself.
That is why my approach has in essence always
been poetic.
Hecause it seems to me that in a way that's
what poetry is.
The reconqucst of the self by the self.
And what is your preferred instrument for that
purpose?
A. C: I think words are the essential instrument!
Fora painter it would be painting! Fora poet
it is words!
I think it was Heidegger who said that words
are the abode of being. There are many such quo¬
tations. I believe it w as lîené Char, in his surreal¬
ist days, who said that words know much more
about us than we know about them.
I too believe that words have a revealing as
well as a creative function.
Revealing, creative . . . exploratory, perhaps?
A.C.: Exploratory is \ery well put! It's the plum¬
met drojiped in the water, the homing dev ice that
brings ihe self back up to the surface.
You have often said that the black person's first
words, after the long years of silence, are bound to be
revolutionary words. Does that mean that poetry is
"revolutionary" as well?
A.C.: Yes, it is revolutionary because it is the
world turned upside down, ploughed up, trans¬
muted.
When the review Tropiques came out in Mar¬
tinique under the occupation in 1911, in the mid¬
dle of ihe world war, like a plunge into tin; con¬
tradictory wellsprings of tin; West Indian soul, a
stark glimpse into the depths of colonial alien¬
ation, it was truly a cultural revolution.
And when ihe Vichy censor banned Tropiques
in 1911 with the comment that it was revolution¬
ary, he showed himself to be a very good critic. It's
true! It was a cultural revolution.
We were carrying out a kind of Coperniean
revolution. There was good reason to be surpised!
And the Martiniquais were themselves surprised
as they slood revealed to themselves. It was a
strange encounter!
It modified quilo a number of values.
Which ones?
A.C.: We are by definition complicated beings.
That is the general rule for any society but one
that is particularly applicable, in the case of soci¬
eties where complex layers of sediment have
been laid down as a result of the inequalities of
colonial life. Not everything was negative, far
from it. The hybridization of which we are the
outcome has achievements and positive values
to its credit wherein the West and Europe, also
had their share. There was, as I say, a positive
side, the effects of which were only belatedly felt
by the non-Europeans but which are undeniable
and in which we are simultaneously agents and
partners and, I should add, sometimes the ben¬
eficiaries as well. The Abbé Grégoire1, Victor
Sclioelclier- and all those who spoke out and
> QuiTriEUNEsco Courier« may 1907

Identity means having roots, but it is also
a transition, a transition to the universal,
Mimé Césaire
in April 1994.
still speak out, who campaigned for human rights
without distinction of race and against discrim¬
ination, these were my guides in life. They stand
forever as representatives of the West's great
outpouring of magnanimity and solidarity, an
essential contribution to the advancement of the
ideas of practical universality and human val¬
ues, ideas without which the world of today
would not be able to see its way forward. 1 am for¬
ever a brother to them, at one with them in their
combat and in their hopes.
You made an important speech in Geneva in 1978, at
the event called "Geneva and the Black World", in
which you said: "The effective power of poetry, with its
two faces, one looking nostalgically backward, the
other looking prophetically forward, with the
redeeming feature of its ability to redeem the self, is
the power of intensifying life". Was your Cahier d'un
retour au pays natal, published in 1939, just such a
primary utterance?
A.C.: Yes, that is how I see it: a new starting-point,
a real start there are many false; starts in life.
I5ut I think that was, for me, the real start.
Disinterring memories, all that was buried,
bringing it back, presenting it so that it bursts
forth fully formed upon the world 1 think this
sends an important signal. To express, not sup¬
press, the force of one's reaction, to wield rein-
vigorated words as a miraculous weapon against
the silenced world, freeing it from gags that are
often imposed from within.
How does one set about "ungagging" the world?
A.C.: I simply believe in the redeeming power of
words.
Is that enough to deal with the human condition and
the way it repeatedly slides out of control?
A.C. : l'robably not, not without lov e and human¬
ism.
I really do believe in human beings. I find-
something of myself in all cultures, in that extra¬
ordinary effort that all people, everywhere, have
madeand for what purpose?
Quite simply to make life livable!
It is no easy matter to put up with life and
face up to death.
And this is what is so moving.
We are all taking part in the same great adven¬
ture.
That is what is meant by cultures, cultures
that come together at some meeting-point.
You invented the term "négritude", which has been
the mortar holding together a historic movement. Does
not the assertion of négritude carry with it the risk of
separating you from others, from "non-blacks"?
A.C.: We. have never regarded our specificity as the
opposite or antithesis of universality. It seemed to
us or at least to me to be very important to go
on searching for our identity but at the same time
to reject narrow nationalism, to reject racism, even
reverse; racism.
Our concern has always been a humanist con¬
cern and we wanted it to have roots.
We wanted to have roots and at the same time
to communicate.
I think it was in a passage in Hegel emphasiz¬
ing the master-slave dialectic that we found this
idea about specificity. He points out that the par¬
ticular and the universal are not to be seen as
opposites, that the universal is not the negation of
the particular but is reached by a deeper explo¬
ration of the particular.
The West told us that in order to be universal
we had to start by denying that we were black. I,
on the contrary, said to myself that the more we
were black, the more universal we would be.
It was a totally different approach. It was not
a choice between alternatives, but an effort at rec¬
onciliation.
Not a cold reconciliation, hut reconciliation in
the heat of the fin;, an alchemical reconciliation if
vou like.
1. Henri Grégoire (1750-1831), French ecclesiastic and
politician, a leader of the movement in the Convention for
the abolition of slavery. Ed.
2. French politician (1804-1893), campaigner for the abo¬
lition of slavery in the colonies, Deputy for Guadeloupe
and Martinique. Ed.
THE UNESCO COURIER! MAY 1997

Aimé Césaire
The identity in question was an identity rec¬
onciled w ith the universal. Eor me there can never
be any imprisonment within an identity.
Identity means having roots, but it is also a
transition, a transition to the universal .
Fire, one of the main life forces?
A.C.: Yes, as vou say, fire.
There is an obvious fiery quality in my poetry,
but why? I belong to this island. . . . Why this
obsession in my poetry? It is not something that I
deliberately seek. I am aware everyone is
aware that the volcano is out there. It is earth
and it is fire.
Eire is not destructive. The volcano is not
destructive except in an indirect way. It is a cos¬
mic anger, in other words, a creative anger, yes,
creative!
We are far removed from that romantic idyll
beneath the calm sea. These are angry, exasper¬
ated lands, lands that spit and spew, that vomit
forth life.
That is what we must live up to. We must
draw upon the creativity of this plot of land! We
must keep it going and not sink into a slumber of
I bent the French language
to my purposes.
acceptance and resignation. It is a kind of sum¬
mons to us from history and from nature.
How, then, do you explain the fact that your
"primary utterance" was expressed in the language of
the colonial power, of colonialism?
A.C.: I have no problem with that.
It was not something I wanted, but it happens
that the language I used was the language I had
learned at school. That didn't bother me in the
slightest, it didn't in any way come between me
and my existential rebellion and the outpouring of
my innermost being. I bent the French language
to my purposes.
Nature and history have placed us at the cross¬
roads of two worlds, of two cultures if not more.
There is the African culture, which I see as being
below the surface; and precisely because it is
below the surface, overlooked, treated with con¬
tempt, it needed to be expressed, to be brought
out alive into the light.
But the other culture was the obvious one,
the one we were conscious of from books and from
school, and which was also ours, an integral part
of our individual and collective destiny.
And so I have tried to reconcile those two
worlds, because that was what had to be done. On
the other hand, I feel just as relaxed about claim¬
ing kinship with the African griot and the African
epic as about claiming kinship with Rimbaud and
Lautréamont and through them with Sophocles
and Aeschylus!
But what does the African griot think when he sees
the tragic events unfolding in Rwanda or Zaire and the
pall of hopelessness hanging over Africa, the Africa of
which you dreamed so often while you campaigned for
decolonization?
A.C.: I have never harboured any illusions about
the risks of history, be it in Africa, in Martinique,
in the Americas or anywhere else. History is always
dangerous, the world of history is a risky world; hut
it is up to us at any given moment to establish and
readjust the hierarchy of dangers.
I saw that very clearly as early as 1966, at a
time when great hopes had been aroused hy the
accession of many countries to independence.
Indeed, I spoke out about this at the opening sem¬
inar of the World Festival of Black and African
Arts in Dakar in April 1966, before an assembly of
African dignitaries who were new to their jobs and,
it must he admitted, unclear in their minds about
the world and the power relationships in it, about
themselves and about their irreversible responsi¬
bility.
I have the words of my speech of 6 April 1966
here in front of me. This is what I said:
"Africa is under threat, threatened hy the
impact of industrial civilization, threatened by
the internal dynamism of Europe and America.
You may ask why we should talk of threats when
there is no European presence in Africa , when colo¬
nialism has disappeared and Africa has become
independent.
"Unfortunately, Africa will not get off so
lightly. The disappearance of colonialism does not
mean that the danger of African culture disinte¬
grating has also disappeared. The danger exists
and everything contributes to it, whether the Euro¬
peans are there or not: economic development,
modernization, political development, higher
school attendance rates, education, urbanization,
the integration of Africa into the world network of
relationships, and so on and so forth. In short, just
at the moment when Africa is truly being born into
the world, it is in greater danger than ever of dying
unto itself. That does not mean it should not he
horn into the world. It does mean that in opening
itself up to the world it should keep its eyes wide
open to the dangers and that, in any event, the
shield of a merely political independence, politi¬
cal independence unaccompanied and unsupple-
mented by cultural independence, would in the
long run prove to he the most unreliable of shields
and the most untrustworthy of safeguards."
On top of that there has been political irre¬
sponsibility, and the whole gamut of cynicism has
been run through! Fortunately, however, there
have also been shining examples of the greatness of
Africa, such as Nelson Mandela. Africa is experi¬
encing the human adventure, and I am prepared to
wager that the vital force of eternal Africa will
once more inspire the song of the griot.
What about the Marxist Utopia to which you
subscribed in 1946 and which you condemned before the
Budapest crisis in your Letter to Maurice Thorez, in
THE UNESCO COURIER! MAY 1997

which you set out your reasons for breaking with the
Communist Party?
A.C.: It is true that, like so many of my contempo¬
raries, I believed in what turned out to he a false
Utopia. I am not at all ashamed about this. In the
postwar context it expressed a heartfelt enthusi¬
asm, a spiritual yearning.
But it was very soon followed hy disappointment,
a feeling of being manipulated, a conviction that one
was being lied to and, as I said at the time, an unbear¬
able awareness of "the collapse of an ideal and the
poignant illustration of the failure of a whole gen¬
eration". I felt an irresistible need not to keep silent
and, regardless of the prevailing conformism, to
break away at whatever risk to myself from the then
all-powerful framework of the Marxist apparatus. It
was part of my ontological choice as a human being
aware of the non-negotiable responsibility that goes
with a consciously accepted identity.
In Discours sur le colonialisme (1950), you said that
"nobody can colonize with impunity, there is no
innocent colonization. There will be a heavy price to pay
for reducing humanity to a monologue".
A.C.: Yes, I am deeply convinced that universal
civilization has a great deal to lose by reducing
whole civilizations to silence.
I think it would greatly impoverish human civ¬
ilization if the voices of African, Indian and other
Asian cultures were to fall silent. If the global¬
ization we are now being offered were to reduce
the dialogue of cultures to a monologue, it would
create a civilization doomed to languish and
decline. I believe in the importance of exchange,
and exchange can only take place on the basis of
mutual respect.
Is it still relevant, in 1997, to think in terms of
combat?
A.C.: We are always, all of us, warriors. The war
takes different forms at different times, but there arc
always things to rebel against. One. is always in rebel¬
lion against something, things that are unacceptable,
things I will never accept. That is the inevitable way
of the world, probably for everyone. There are things
with which I cannot come to terms. I cannot accept
that a people be stilled or that Africa be obliter¬
ated, I cannot resign myself to such things.
I desire passionately that peoples should
exist as peoples, that they should prosper and
make their contribution to universal civilization,
because the world of colonization and its modern
manifestations is a world that crushes, a world of
awful silence.
At the age of eighty-four, Aimé Césaire, well over half
a century after Retour au pays natal, are you still faithful
to your belief in the urgent relevance of poetry?
A.C.: Of course I am. I no longer have the same ele¬
mental energy, or the same strength, but I stand hy
it, I have not reneged on it.
Is poetry still effective today? Will it always be?
A.C.: At any rate, it is for me the fundamental mode
The voice ofpoetry is the only
one that can still be life-giving
and provide a basis on which
to build and reconstruct.
of expression, and the world's salvation depends on
its ability to heed that voice. It is obvious that the
voice of poetry has been less and less heeded during
the century we have lived through, but it will come
to be realized more and more that it is the only voice
that can still be life-giving and that can provide a
basis on which to build and reconstruct.
Wouldn't you say that underlying the poetic
dimension of your work there is always a purpose, an
ethical aim?
A.C.: Yes indeed, there is an ethical aim underly¬
ing everything. From the time of the Cahier d'un
retour au pays natal onwards, a concern for
humankind emerges, a searching for the self but
also a searching for fellowship and universality, a
searching for human dignity, which I believe to he
the bases of ethics.
And yet this century has not been one where ethics
has triumphed, has it?
A.C.: Certainly not, but one must speak out, whether
one is heeded or not; we hold certain things to be
fundamental, things that we cling to. Even if it means
swimming against the tide, they must he upheld.
What we seek is reconciliation, to be in league
w itb the cosmos, in league with history, to be in keep¬
ing with ourselves.
In other words, poetry is for me a searching after
truth and sincerity, sincerity outside of the world,
outside of alien times. We seek it deep within our-
selv es, often despite ourselves, despite what we seem
to be, within our innermost selves.
Poetry wells up from the depths, with explosive
force.
The volcano again.
No doubt I have reached the moment of crossing
the great divide but I face it iniperturbably in the
knowledge of having put forward what I see as essen¬
tial, in the knowledge, if you like, of having called out
ahead of me and proclaimed the future aloud.
That is what I believe I have done; somewhat
disoriented though I am to find the seasons going
backwards, as it were, that is how it is and that is
what I believe to be my vocation.
No resentments, none at all, no ill feelings but
the inescapable solitude of the human condition.
That is the most important thing. I
THE UNESCO (^>URI ER MAY 1997
