interview Viviane Forrester
e are witnessing a transformation
of society and civilization
French writer Viviane Forrester is a novelist,
literary critic and the author of an award-
winning biography of Van Gogh. Her most
recent book is L'Horreur Economique (1996),
an examination of the tyranny of economics in
the modern world which has become a best¬
seller in France. Forcefully written and well
documented, it paints the picture of a society
in which jobs are disappearing, depriving very
large numbers of people of the opportunity to
earn a living, and denounces the way in which
this situation is being exploited. The book is
currently being translated in some twenty
countries. Here Viviane Forrester talks to Edgar
Reichmann.
You are a novelist and you have a special
interest in English literature, notably the
Bloomsbury group. How did you come to write a
book about economics?
Viviane Forrester: I have never compartmental¬
ized creative activity. All thinking, to my mind,
is political, even when it does not claim to be. I
think that each of us, whatever our walk of life,
should feel concerned about the present state of
the world, which is entirely governed by eco¬
nomics. Isn't this situation inextricably tied up
with politics, in the highest sense of the term? If
Shakespeare were to come back to life today, I
think he would he fascinated by the tragic inter¬
play of powerful economic forces which are
stealthily transforming the lives and destinies of
the citizens or rather the populations of all
countries.
You pillory the optimistic belief that the
current crisiswith its corollary of long-term
unemploymentis temporary. Do you think that
this crisis reflects a major shift?
V.F.: I think it docs. To my mind we are witness¬
ing a profound change, a transformation of soci¬
ety and civilization, and we are finding it very
hard to accept. How can we say good-bye to a
society that was based on stable jobs that pro¬
vided a safety net and the basics of a decent exis¬
tence? Job security is on the way out. In my book
I concentrate on the ways in which this situa¬
tion is being exploited. For the first time in his¬
tory, the vast majority of human beings arc no
longer indispensable to the small number of those
who run the world economy. The economy is
increasingly wrapped up in pure speculation.
The working masses and their cost are becoming
superfluous. In other words, there is something
worst; than actually being exploited and that is
no longer to he even worth exploiting!
It is true that this state of affairs is not being
concealed, but there is a tendency to avoid talking
r i
THE UNESCO ^^pURIER |UNEI997 ~

What we are seeing today is economic
globalization and the globalization of
poverty.
about it clearly. In democratic societies, at any
rate, you don't tell people that they are regarded
as superfluous. Under totalitarianism there might
be an even worse danger than joblessness and
poverty. Once salaried work has disappeared, why
should a totalitarian regime not simply eliminate
those forces that have become useless?
What can be done to avoid this terrible
conclusion?
V.F.: In democratic countries there is an urgent
need for vigilance. It is often claimed that the
industrial age, when a regular wage provided the
means of subsistence, can somehow be patched
up. But those days are over. Wage-earning is dis¬
appearing and the panoply of temporary doles
and allowances designed to replace it is shrinking,
something that is nothing less than criminal. The
managers of the economic machine exploit this
situation. Full employment is a thing of the past,
but we still use criteria that were current in the
nineteenth century, or twenty or thirty years ago,
when it still existed. Among other things, this
encourages many unemployed people to feel
ashamed of themselves. This shame has always
been absurd but it is even more so today.
It goes hand in hand with the fear felt by the
privileged who still have a paid job and are afraid
of losing it. I maintain that this shame and this
fear ought to be ([noted on the stock exchange,
because they are major inputs in profit. Once
upon a time people pilloried the alienation
caused by work. Today falling labour costs con¬
tribute to the profits of big companies, whose
favourite management tool is sacking workers;
when they do this, their stock market value soars.
But isn't it possible that the accumulation of
banking and financial wealth, and the widespread
long-term unemployment you talk about may
lead to a so-called leisure society? This was
supposed to happen in the now-defunct Marxist
utopiaeveryone would be rewarded according to
their needs and not only for the work which
brought them a living.
V.F.: We lived for decades with the utopia you
allude to. What we are seeing today is economic
V.F.: Today we hear a lot about "wealth creation".
In the past it was simply known as profit. Today
people talk about this wealth as if it will auto¬
matically go straight to the community and create
jobs, yet at the same time we see highly prof¬
itable businesses cutting down heavily on their
workforce. When people talk about society's
"movers and shakers", they aren't talking about
the hulk of their country's population but about
business leaders who relocate at the drop of a
hat. Politicians make jobs their priority, but the
Stock Exchange is delighted whenever a big indus¬
trial complex fires workers and gets worried when¬
ever there's the slightest improvement in the
unemployment figures. I wanted to draw people's
attention to this paradox. A company's stock mar¬
ket quotation depends largely on labour costs,
and profit is generated in the last analysis by
reducing the numbers of those who have a job.
What impact is this economic tyranny having
on culture, teaching, education and young
people?
V.F.: The present situation raises a vital question
for the future of the people of our planet, above
all for young people and their future. Today the
great thing is to he "profitable", not "useful".
This raises a very serious question. Should peo¬
ple be profitable in order to "deserve" the right
to live? The commonsense answer is that it is a
good thing to he useful to society. But we are
preventing people from being useful, we are
squandering the energies of young people by
regarding profitability as the be-all and end-all.
Most countries have lost their sense of priorities.
There is a greater and greater need for teachers
and medical staff, but governments are increas¬
ingly aggressive towards them. These are the
professions where posts are abolished and fund¬
ing is cut. Yet they are indispensable to the wel¬
fare and future of humanity. This confusion
between "usefulness" and "profitability" is dis¬
astrous for the future of the planet.
Young people live in a society which still
regards salaried employment as the only accept¬
able, honest and lawful way of life, but most of
them are deprived of the opportunity to achieve
this. In deprived inner city areas this is a major
problem. At the same time I often meet young
people with armfuls of degrees who are out of
work. What inexcusable waste! For generations
study was young people's initiation into social life.
I admire young people today because they go on
with their studies fully aware that they are run¬
ning the risk of rejection by society.
Twenty-odd years ago, during a writers' forum
in Austria, there was great amusement when one
of the speakers asked the audience (who came
from many countries) whether they had ever
heard of a French poet named Mallarmé. A later
speaker was indignant about our laughter. He
mentioned a number of brand names, none of
which we had ever heard of. They were makes of
rifles and machine guns. He was from a country
of the South, then plunged in civil war, where 90
per cent of the people knew the names of these
weapons but no one would ever have heard of
Mallarmé. I heard myself saying that if the users
of these machine guns, African peasant farmers,
the young people of Latin America and most of
the unqualified workers of Europe have never
heard of Mallarmé, it's not all their fault: they
don't have the opportunity. Some have machine
guns; others have the time to read Mallarmé!
That's another crime! The works of writers such
Should people be profitable in order to
"deserve" the right to live?
as Mallarmé, Senghor, Omar Khayam, Kafka,
Proust or Virginia Woolf should not he the priv¬
ilege of an elite. They break down the walls that
imprison us. Understanding the work of these
creative artists makes us freer, less blind and
less deaf. Their work helps to broaden our hori¬
zons, sharpen our thinking and open our minds,
the only way to a critical, clear-thinking outlook
and to effective action. Then someone at the
meeting stood up and shouted: "Mallarmé is a
machine gun!"
Your analysis deals primarily with the
situation in the industrialized countries. What
about the developing world?
V.F.: This is something about which the West
ought to feel heartily ashamed! It behaved rapa¬
ciously in the countries it colonized, and today it
closes its frontiers to their people who come
looking for menial jobs in order to survive, under
the pretext that they would make the unem¬
ployment figures worse. Even if there was an iota
of truth in this allegation in fact there is none
this kind of immigration can never be as preda¬
tory as the former colonial powers were, and
sometimes still are, in continents ravaged by

Young people are being robbed of the chance
ofsalaried employment.
famine, pandemics and civil war. Those who try,
in some countries of the North, to convince pub¬
lic opinion that immigration causes unemploy¬
ment, divert attention from the truth. In the
North it is the relocation of certain industries and
the flight of capital that are increasingly causing
and perpetuating unemployment.
Only twenty or thirty years ago, there was
still reason to hope that the relative prosperity
of the North would spread all over the world.
Today we are seeing the globalization of poverty.
Businesses based in the North that set up in the
so-called "developing" countries, do not create
jobs for the people of those countries hut gen¬
erally make them work without any kind of social
security protection, in medieval conditions. The
reason is that the workforce underpaid women
and children, as well as prisoners costs less than
automation would cost in the country of origin.
This is colonization in another, equally heinous,
form.
In spite of your pessimism, do you see any
solutions on the horizon different from those that
led to totalitarianism?
V.F.: I am not pessimistic, far from it. The pes¬
simists are those who say there is no alternative
to the present situation, that we have no choice.
My book is an attempt to describe what is going
on. It's true that the situation is dramatic. All the
same I am, like many other people, the citizen of
a country whose democratic regime makes it pos¬
sible to reflect and freely resist the growing pres¬
sure that the economic factor is exerting on our
lives. By endlessly going on about the dictatorial
system that prevailed until recently in part of
Europe and elsewhere, some people want us to
think that the terrible failure of the U.S.S.R.
justifies the economic horrors facing us. This is
a kind of blackmail.
I would like there to be checks and balances,
alternative thinking, conflicts of ideas and inter¬
ests. Not violent conflict, of course, hut we
should wake up and stop being petrified, pris¬
oners of hackneyed thinking. Already in coun¬
tries where my book is being translated espe¬
cially in the United States, Brazil, Mexico,
Lithuania, Poland and in others such as the
Republic of Korea it is causing something of a
stir even before publication. Articles are appear¬
ing, people are asking me questions, friends of
mine who read French are asking for copies.
I am neither against the globalization of
exchanges, nor the emergence of new technolo¬
gies. Such an attitude would be absurd. But I am
against their being taken over by a tiny minority
of economic power centres, often in private
hands, whereas entire populations are excluded
from social progress. I am against the globaliza¬
tion of rejection and poverty and for the global¬
ization of well-being. I
