language ofits own
BY MANGA BEKOMBOPRISO
The body is itself
a medium of
expression in
African societies
based on the oral
tradition
Africans regard the body (nyólo,
nyama) as a "full" object because
of the organs and substances it
J envelops and of which it is the
overall expression. The idea of the "body-
in-itself", externalized and observed from
the outside, appears in certain linguistic
expressions: a person who watches his or
her body in action sees it tremble {nyólo e
ma sówá mbá: body trembles in me), forces
it to sustain an effort {swè nyólo: force
body), sacrifices it through suicide {bwd
nyólo: kill body), preserves it from danger
{sunga nyólo: save body). To communicate
with his or her body, a person puts it to the
test {senga nyólo: feel body) and gets it to
relax {bôbisè nyólo, relax, loosen body).
Despite the importance of its media¬
tion function, this externalized body is a
precarious secondary organism which is
consigned to oblivion when it ceases to
be driven by the forces around it. It is not
the body that thinks but the I (Na); nor
does it dream, that is the function of the
r 25THE UNESCO COURIER» APRIL 1997

Self {Mbâ), for which the body is merely
a physical envelope. In African societies
where the oral tradition predominates, the
body is a product of the spoken word, and
as such it is itself a medium of expression.
This is particularly evident in African
sculpture, which largely consists of depic¬
tions of the body, sometimes wearing a
mask, sometimes without. These sculp¬
tures always have a meaning. Whereas the
body is never represented in order to
serve as a cult object or to demonstrate a
particular aesthetic, in African masks and
statuary it expresses an idea, a desire, a des¬
tiny. It reveals a phenomenon, designates
a thing, issues an instruction or a taboo.
As a cultural construct, the body is seen
in terms of its constituent parts, which are
*,
clearly differentiated from each other. Each
part has a place and a function whose impor¬
tance varies depending on the context in
which it is perceived and the value attached
to the objects with which it is associated.
I Good and bad blood
The body's symbolism is organized round
its external parts, which occupy space, and
its internal parts the hard, soft or fluid
substances whose continual interaction
generates life-giving energy. In some parts
of Africa, quality of blood reflects the
body's amount of efficient energy. In order
to maximize this energy the blood is
"washed" by absorbing medicines, and if
it has been rashly tainted some of it is
extracted from the body. Blood brings
26
M fertility statuette from
northern Cameroon.
G DagliOrli, Pans
THE UNESCO ^ÎURIIERB APRIL 1997

good or bad luck depending on whether it
is "good" or "bad". It is the "breath of life",
the "life force", which may be attacked,
topped up and strengthened by the med¬
icine man, his opponent, the soothsayer
and the healer. Blood also has a unifying
quality that comes into play when oath-
takers exchange a little of their blood and
absorb it under the watchful supervision
of ancestors who are keepers of the law. In
this instance, blood-sharing is more
important than verbal promises, for
although promises are binding, the
exchange of blood guarantees that they
will be kept. At weddings, joint con¬
sumption of the blood of a sacrificed ani¬
mal sets the seal on lasting solidarity
between bride and bridegroom.
Head andfoot
During a chief's consecration ritual in
southern Cameroon a woman over child-
bearing age squirts purifying water on the
chief's feet at regular intervals, while mak¬
ing a recitation in which the words sángó
(father, master), nginya (strength) and
bolódí (power and fullness) are many
times repeated. This is because feet are in
almost constant contact with the earth of
the village, which is as "pure" as the water
and the plants that grow from it, as well as
being the home of the omniscient ances¬
tors who want everything in society to be
as it should be. Feet symbolize putting
down roots, the time-honoured presence
of ancestors and the power that springs
from the action of a chief.
As the location of the intellect, the head
is regarded as a microcosm, as a body-and-
soul reproduction of the person and the
"tool" that connects him or her to the cos
mos. Because of this, the head is used in
separation rituals. When members of the
lineage leave the village to make their for¬
tune far away, they are like a baby being
weaned from its mother's breast. Both
migrants and babies are bathed and their
skulls are ritually anointed.
M double-faced helmet mask
from western Cameroon. It Is
designed to regulate the social
order.
> CpuTHE UNESCO lOURIERB APRIL 1997
27
