THREE MICROCREDIT
36
age-earning is the most wide¬
spread form of employment in
the industrialized countries.
However, in a context of eco¬
nomic crisis and high unemployment, the pro¬
portion of self-employed workers has risen
steadily since the early 1980s. Microcredit is one
tool of development for this sector.
The Association for the Right to Eco¬
nomic Initiative (ADIE) was set up in France
in 1990, and was supported from its incep¬
tion by a number of private foundations, the
French state and the European Union. To date
THE UNESCO QîURIERB JANUARY 1997

In rural Albania, left, there is
an expanding network of
village credit funds managed
by locally elected committees.



SCHEMES IN EUROPE
BY MARIA NÓWAK
ADIE has funded more than 2,500 micro-
enterprises started by the unemployed and
people receiving the minimum social wage
(RMD). It has branches in fourteen French
regions and works in tandem with authorized
savings and loan banks such as Credit Mutuel
and Crédit Municipal.
Nearly 40 per cent of ADIE's customers
have not completed a vocational training
l.The RMI ("revenu minimum d'insertion")
is an allowance paid by the French state to people over
25 who have no other source of income.
Author's note
course, and about 10 per cent can barely read
or write. But in life's hard school they have
acquired entrepreneurial capacities and energy
that no formal schooling could have taught
them. Some of them pursue occupations tra¬
ditionally associated with poverty such as
street vending and scrap-metal dealing; oth¬
ers are astutely exploiting the possibilities of
modern technology, e.g. by teleworking pro¬
viding secretarial services from home.
What most differentiates them from their
counterparts in the countries of the South,
however, are the administrative complexities
and the social charges they have to cope with.
Social security coverage for the most vulnera¬
ble groups tends to discourage potential entre¬
preneurs from starting new businesses.
But helping unemployed people create
their own jobs on a permanent basis costs the
THE UNESCO Q>URIERB |ANUARYI997 37

state three times less than supporting them
for a year while they are out of work. In France
microcredit is used as a tool to help people on
the fringe of society to help themselves.
The dismantling of Albania's co-operatives
and state farms that began in 1992 has put
farmers in charge of individual holdings aver¬
aging 1.4 hectares but with no farm imple¬
ments or input.
As part of the Rural Poverty Alleviation
Project financed by the World Bank and Aide
International, village credit funds have been
set up to inject resources into rural areas and
rebuild village community life destroyed
under communist rule.
Managed by farmer-elected committees,
these village funds grant loans and collect
repayment instalments with support from
the Albanian Rural Development Fund. To
date they have granted 8,000 loans, the average
amount of which has gradually risen from
$200 to $400 with a 99.5 per cent repayment
rate.
This network so far covers only some 5
per cent of Albanian villages but is expanding
rapidly. A law was passed in April 1996 allow¬
ing credit funds to collect savings as well. The
success of microcredit in rural areas has led the
government to extend the programme to the
towns, where loans average $2,000 and are
granted on an individual basis.
As well as providing finance, microcredit
enables formerly communist countries to
decentralize decision-making by privatizing
the grassroots economy, promoting the emer¬
gence of new entrepreneurs and facilitating the
transition to a market economy.
A project in Tuzla
The Republic of Bosnia and Herccgovina is
facing the combined difficulties arising from
a transition economy and a war-torn econ¬
omy. Unemployment among people of work¬
ing age is running at 64 per cent, and nearly 80
per cent of the population lives on humani¬
tarian aid.
To case the passage from humanitarian aid
to economic activity the World Bank has
launched a pilot project in Tuzla to support
local initiatives. With support from the non¬
governmental organizations that endeavoured
to help the civilian population during the war,
the project is focused on displaced persons,
demobilized soldiers, small farmers and the
unemployed.
Loans range from $300 to $600 depending
on the projects and the borrowers' capacities.
In refugee centres the loans give single women
with children a chance to rent plots of land
to plant potatoes, buy a cow or goat, knit or
embroider. In the villages, they usually fund
crafts and businesses that supplement income
from farming, which is inadequate. In cities,
where the market is larger, they enable people
to start or relaunch microenterprises by job
creation. Microcredit is helping a country
emerging from war to turn to the future.
BEelowleft, a craftsman
from Bordeaux (France) makes
imitation antique armour for
theatre companies. He set up
his own business after
receiving a loan from the
French Association for the
Right to Economic Enterprise
(ADIE).
B elow, a refugee who lost
all her possessions during
the war in the former
Yugoslavia. After receiving a
loan from a World Bank pilot
project to support local
initiative, she bought goats
and now sells their milk to
support her family.
V THE UNESCO COURIER |ANUARY 1997
