Letters from Asia
l)v Denis Sinor
To communicate by means of
the written word, two con¬
ditions have to be fulfilled:
the sender and the recipient of the
communication must be familiar
with the same language and the same
script. In early and medieval Inner
Asia circumstances did not favour
the simultaneous existence of both
conditions.
In the past, there were far more
languages than there arc today. This is
a worldwide phenomenon, the rea¬
son for which lies in a steady increase
in populations which brings closer to
one another peoples once separated
by great distances. In the process, the
languages of the smaller peoples tend
to disappear; their speakers are
absorbed by a majority population
using another tongue. There is rea¬
son to believe that in Eurasia alone in
historical times hundreds of lan¬
guages disappeared, many of them
without leaving any written trace.
Others have survived in documents
now extremely difficult to decipher.
At the beginning of this century in
the relatively small area of what is
today the Chinese province of Xin¬
jiang, texts written in seventeen dif¬
ferent languages were discovered.
Most of these ceased to be used many
centuries ago.
Yet in the past, though less than
today, people of differing languages
had to communicate, and the only
way to do this was, for some of
them at least, to have command of
more than one language. While it
has always been possible for indi¬
viduals to acquire several languages
through learning, in earlier epochs
multilingualism was usually a by¬
product of a child's family circum¬
stances. In Inner Asia and elsewhere
such individuals often came to serve
as interpreters or translators.
The function of interpreters is
aural and oral: what they hear in one
language, they transpose into
another. The function of transla¬
tors is similar, but they use visual
and manual means. They read a text
in one language and write it down in
another. The need to communicate
by vision as opposed to audi¬
tion requires the simultaneous
command of more than one lan¬
guage and, in many cases, more than
one script. It was on competence in
such skills that cross-cultural com¬
munications depended.
WRITING FOR A MULTILINGUAL
READERSHIP
Few people were literate in the
period and in the lands with which
wc are concerned, hence correspon¬
dence between them must have been
sporadic and, as might be expected,
very few specimens of writing have
survived.
It often happened that several
scripts were used within one lin¬
guistic community. Old Turkic,
Uighur texts have survived in a num¬
ber of scripts and it is by no means
certain that even literate speakers
within that same group could read all
of them. Further complications arose
when people using different lan¬
guages and different scripts wished
to communicate with each other.
It may happen that one sender
wishes to communicate with a
number of recipients. Before the
invention of printing, texts destined
for a wider public were often
engraved in stelae or on mountain¬
sides, to be seen and read by all. In
Inner Asia such inscriptions were
very often multilingual. The inscrip¬
tion of Karabalgasun in present-day
Mongolia provides a good example.
Made in the middle of the eighth
century A.D. to glorify the deeds
of an Uighur ruler, it uses three
scripts and three languages. The
Uighur text (an Old-Turkic dialect)
was engraved in an original runiform
script; the Sogdian version used the
THE UNESCO y^OURIERB |ULY AUGUST 1907
91

E FLECTI O
Letter from the Mongol Khan
Giiyiikto King Bêla IV of Hungary
"I, the Khan, envoy of the Heavenly King who gave me power over
the world to exalt those who submit themselves and to subdue
the adversaries, I wonder at you, king of Hungary, that, when I had
already sent three times ambassadors to you; why did you not
send back to me any of them. Nor did you send me your
ambassadors or letters. I know that you are a rich and powerful
king, that you have many soldiers under your command and that
you rule alone a big kingdom. Therefore it may be difficult to
submit yourself to me. However, it would be better for you to
submit yourself spontaneously to me. I understand moreover that
you keep under your protection the Cumans, my servants. I thus
enjoin you not to keep them with you, and for their sake have me
as an enemy; because it is easier for them to escape than for you.
For they, without homes and on continuous move may perhaps
evade, but you, who live in houses and have forts and cities, how
shall you escape from my hands?"
Sogdian script developed from Ara¬
maic; and Chinese characters were
used for the Chinese version. Texts
written in six languages (Sanskrit,
Tibetan, Mongol, Chinese, Uighur
and Tangut) and six scripts were used
in the Buddhist inscription of 1345
at the Chii-yung gate near Beijing.
There arc good reasons why
most of the still extant letters of
Inner Asian origin were written by
rulers to rulers. Though illiterate
themselves, they had at their dis¬
posal scribes who could write on
their behalf, and their writings had
a fair chance of being preserved in
the archives of the recipient.
The first problem that must have
beset the recipient of any diplomatic
letter must have been caused by the
script in which it had been written.
Thus the credentials presented to the
Emperor Justin II by the Turkish
ambassador Maniakh, who reached
Byzantium in 568, were said to have
been written in the "Scythian script"
(a general Greek term used to desig¬
nate peoples of the steppe). Unfor¬
tunately, we have no further infor¬
mation on this script.
On occasion there must have
been difficulties in finding a trans¬
lator. Such was the case in 1 267 when
Pope Clement IV could find no one
to translate the Mongol letter sent
to him by the il-khan Abagha, the
Mongol ruler of Iran. It appears
from the Pope's letter to Abagha
that previous correspondence had
been conducted in Latin, a reference
which would suggest that Euro¬
peans, perhaps missionaries, were
active in the il-khan's chancery.
THETORTUOUSWAYSOF
TRANSLATION
In the first half of the thirteenth
century the Mongol empire
expanded well into eastern Europe
and it became necessary for those
concerned to establish some rela¬
tions with each other, to exchange
some letters. The finest pieces of
medieval diplomatic correspondence
emanating from Inner Asia are the
letters scntby the Mongol rulers
to the Pope and to various western
princes.
The earliest known example of
such a correspondence is embedded in
a Latin report written by a Domini¬
can Friar called Julian in which he
described the information he had
gathered in eastern Europe about the
Mongols. The letter, addressed to
King Bêla IV of Hungary, had been
written by a Mongol ruler, proba¬
bly the Great Khan Güyük, some
time before Julian's return to Hun¬
gary in December 1237.
Only the Latin translation of
the letter has survived. According
to Julian: "The letter was written
in pagan characters but in the Tartar
[i.e. Mongol] tongue, so that the
king [of Hungary] found many
who could decipher it but none
who could understand it. But we, as
we crossed pagan Cumania, found
someone who interpreted it for us."
Of course the Hungarians them¬
selves used the Latin script, but they
had recently offered asylum to the
Cumans who spoke a Turkic lan-
The Gobi Desert
(Mongolia).
92
THE UNESCO IpURIEHB |ULY AUGUST 1097

Six languages
(Sanskrit, Tibetan,
Mongolian, Chinese,
Uighur and Tangut)
were used in this
Buddhist inscription
carved in 1345 at the
Chii yunggate near
Beijing.
guagc, and it has been surmised that
among them were people who rec¬
ognized the script: probably that of
the Turkic-speaking Uighurs. But
being able to read a script is in itself
not enough to understand its con¬
tent; for this purpose an individual
who was literate as well as knowing
Mongolian had to be found. The let¬
ter (see box on opposite page) reads
something like an ultimatum.
The laborious process of mul¬
tiple translations is well illustrated
in observations by the Franciscan
Friar John of Piano Carpini, who
was sent as an emissary to the Mon¬
gols by Pope Innocent IV in 1245.
When the Great Khan Güyük was
about to send a letter to the Pope,
Piano Carpini was asked whether
there were any people in the Pope's
entourage who could read Russian,
Persian or Mongol. The Friar sug¬
gested that the best plan would be
for the Mongols to write in Mon
gol and to have the text translated,
there and then, word for word, into
Latin. The accuracy of this Latin
translation was then carefully
checked and the letter was taken to
Rome, where, in the course of time,
it was lost. Fortunately, a copy of
the text is incorporated in the
chronicle of Carpini's contempo¬
rary, the monk Salimbcnc. The
notaries and scribes working in the
Great Khan's court thought it wise,
for variety's sake, to prepare a Per¬
sian translation of the Mongol text.
It was discovered in 1920 in the
papal archives, and provides us with
a splendid example of the multilin¬
gual nature of the Mongol chancery.
The letter has a preamble, writ¬
ten in Uighur, clearly the adminis¬
trative language if not of the Mon¬
gol court, at least of the Uighur
scribes who manned it. This pre¬
amble was probably the standard
formula with which letters by the
Great Khans began. It reads: "By
the strength of Eternal Heaven,
powerful ruler of the great coun¬
try and of the sea: our command¬
ment." The preamble is followed
by a red seal written in Mongol (in
Uighur script) with a similarly
worded injunction.
Guy iik's letter was meant as an
answer to one written by Pope
Innocent IV and transmitted by
Carpini himself. It constitutes an
ultimatum to the Pope and other
princes of the West who arc
enjoined to appear in person in the
Mongol court, to pay homage to
the Great Khan and to listen to his
orders. Were they to disobey these
orders, the Great Khan would view
them as enemies. Güyük also cate¬
gorically rejects the Pope's repri¬
mands for Mongol atrocities com¬
mitted in Hungary and elsewhere.
Such acts, writes the Khan, were
committed in retaliation against
rTHE UNESCO lOURIER |ULV AUGUST 1007 *

REFLECTIONS
A nomad
encampment.
Miniature by the
15th-century Tu rco-
Mongolian artist
Siyah Kalem.
these people for their arrogance and
because they had murdered Mon¬
gol ambassadors. He explains and
defends his past actions with the
following reasoning. "From where
the sun rises to where it goes down,
all the lands belong to us. Were it
not for the will of God, how could
that have happened?"
In stark contrast with the tone
and content of this letter is that writ¬
ten in Mongol and sent in 1305 by
the Mongol il-khan of Persia Olj eitü
to Philip IV the Fair, king of France.
By that time old feuds were forgot¬
ten, and the hope of an alliance
against the Egyptian Mameluks
seemed desirable to both parties. The
letter had two aims: to inform the
king of France that the fratricidal
struggle between the descendants of
Chinggis khan had been satisfacto¬
rily settled and that the il-khan was
ready to follow the friendly poli¬
cies towards France initiated by his
ancestors.
The likelihood of anyone's
being able to read a Mongol letter in
the French court was dim indeed,
and Oljeitü acted wisely by choos¬
ing as one of the bearers of his mes¬
sage a man who probably spoke
Mongol as well as French. This was
the Italian Thomas Ugi of Siena and
it may be assumed that it was he
who, on the back of the letter,
penned an Italian paraphrase of its
content. (See box this page.)
Letter from Oljeitii, Mongol il-Khan of Persia,
to Philip the Fair of France
"Our words. The ruler Oljeitii.
"To the ruler of France.
"How could it have escaped your attention that since ancient times the kings of France
had friendly relations with our good great-grandfather, our good grandfather, our good
father and our good elder brother? Although far away, you considered them near by and you
sent them messages whether or not favourable, and you exchanged ambassadors and gifts
of good will. At present when, by the grace of Heaven, I have occupied the great throne of
the il-khans, I would not act contrary to the precepts and rules established by my good
ancestors, norwould I depart from what had been agreed between you and them.
Considering it sacred, I would not abandon what had been agreed upon. More than ever, it
is myintention to be finked with you in friendship and to exchange ambassadors with you.
"As a result of calumnious utterances made by evil people we, elder and younger
brothers, allowed our mutual affection to wane. But now, all of us, descendants of
Chinggis khan, who for forty-five years had remonstrated against each other, have now '
reached an agreement. From the country of the Chinese where the sun rises, to the other
end of the world, our nations are linked by postal stations. We agreed that we would act
jointly against our enemies.
"We thought: how could we abandon the good relations that had existed between
our good forebears and you? So we sent to you ourtwo ambassadors, Mamalagh and
Thomas.
"It has come to our knowledge that you, kings of the West, also live in peace.
Verily, what is better than concord? As for those who would be hostile to either us or you,
with the help of Heaven, we would act jointly against them.
"We wrote this letter in the year 704 of the Snake (=1305 A.D.) in the first month
of the summer, at the city of Aliwan."
LONG-DISTANCE MAIL
Among the very few private letters
that have been preserved, pride of
place is taken by the so-called
"Ancient Letters" written in Sog-
dian, an east Iranian language no
longer in use. These writings were
discovered in 1907 by the explorer
Sir Aurel Stein in a ruined watch-
tower located between Lou-Ian and
Tun-huang on the trade route from
the West to China. These letters,
commercial writings penned by
Sogdian merchants to their princi¬
pals, were probably lost or aban¬
doned while being carried from cast
to west. Their exact date cannot be
established but it seems certain that
they were written not later than the
early fourth century A.D.
One of them is particularly inter¬
esting, and because of its historical
references and its moving, one might
say, tragic content, it stands alone in
the corpus of medieval Inner Asian
letters. Written by a certain Nanai-
vandak, a Sogdian merchant living at
the eastern end of the great trade
route, it was addressed to his princi¬
pal in Samarkand, some 3,200 kilo¬
metres away.
"Sir," writes Nanai-vandak, "if I
wrote you all the details of how
China fared, it would be a story of
debts and woe	 And, Sir, the last
emperor [of China] so they say
fled from Saragh [his capital city]
because of the famine. And his for¬
tified residence and fortified town
were set on fire. The residence burnt
down and the town was destroyed.
So Saragh is no more!"
