interview Manuel Elkin Patarroyo
In 1986 Colombian physician and
biochemist Manuel Patarroyo made a
synthetic vaccine, SPf66, which has since
shown considerable efficacy in the
struggle against malaria, one of the
world's most widespread diseases. In this
interview with Flor Romero he looks back
to the day when he vowed to follow in the
footsteps of Louis Pasteur.
'Science with consdence'
How did you first become interested in science?
Manuel Patarroyo: I think my scientific curios¬
ity was whetted for the first time when I was five
years old, on the day when my aunt Alicia turned
up in Ataco, the village where I was born, with
two little dog-shaped magnets. It was then that
I heard the word magnetism for the first time. I
insisted on being told what it meant. Ever since
then I have always needed to understand. When¬
ever I went fishing and came back with a catch,
it wasn't to cook the fish but to open them up and
see what was inside.
When I was eight years old, I read a biogra¬
phy of Louis Pasteur in a book my father gave
me. From that day on, Pasteur became my hero,
my model. I decided that I too would make vac¬
cines to serve humanity. I have devoted my life to
fulfilling this childhood dream.
I don't know how much credence should be
given to what the ancient Greeks called/atum, the
destiny that shapes a person's life and leaves lit¬
tle room for freedom. But the fact is that even as
a child I already knew what I wanted to do. I have
never been tempted to leave my chosen path.
But how did you manage to develop a chemical
vaccine against malaria in a country without a
scientific tradition and without the necessary
infrastructure for such an important discovery?
M.P.: The story of this vaccine, SPf66 (Synthetic
Plasmodiumfalciparum, 66th tested formula)
began in 1978 after we had mastered the method¬
ology developed by Bruce Merrifield, who won
the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1984. The first
step in our research was to isolate Plasmodium
falciparum, the deadly parasite that causes
malaria, from cultures of infected blood. Then
we had to isolate the proteins of which it is com¬
posed. After vaccinating Amazonian monkeys with
these molecules, we exposed them to the parasite.
We succeeded in defining four molecules that
were immunologically useful. We established
their molecular structure and then synthesized
them and endeavoured to find the combination
that protected the infected monkeys. The 66th
combination was the successful one. This was how
SPÍ66, the first entirely synthetic antiparasite
vaccine, was discovered in January 1986.
And yet I would be incapable of explaining in
detail why the product works. No one knows
parasites' pathogenic mechanisms.
Was this why the scientific community reacted
oddly to your discovery?
M.P.: We were blamed for having discovered this
vaccine empirically, in a situation involving mul¬
tiple combinations oîfalciparum molecules.
We first of all tried the vaccine in the owl
monkey, Aotus trivirgatus, which is one of the
few animal hosts of the human malaria parasite
and is plentiful in Colombian Amazonia. The
results, published in the scientific journal
Nature, met with considerable scepticism from
the scientific community, and so did the first
human trials in 1987.
I understand this scepticism, not only because
48

of the synthetic nature of the vaccine but also
because my country has no scientific tradition.
But no one can deny that in Colombia we have dis¬
covered a vaccine which is revolutionary on two
counts as the first antiparasite vaccine and as
the first totally synthetic vaccine. And while for
the moment it is only partially effective, SPf66
can prevent around a million deaths each year.
Can a higher standard of protection be
achieved?
M.P.: Since 1986, we and other research teams
have discovered other molecules on the surface
of the parasite. In order to maximize the vac¬
cine's efficacy, we have tried to find out more
about these parts of the parasite which enable
it to adhere to the cells and invade them. We
are continuing to work along these lines so that,
hopefully, the vaccine can one day be adminis¬
tered orally.
At present the vaccine's efficacy in Latin
America varies between 38.9 per cent and 60.2
per cent, depending on patients' age. The vaccine
seems to be much more effective on children
under five. The side-effects (which do not affect
more than 5.6 per cent of patients) are limited
and require no medication. It is an absolutely safe
vaccine without any of the problems associated
with biological vaccines.
Under the auspices of the World Health
Organization (WHO), the vaccine has been tested
in the most malarious areas of the planet, the
United Republic of Tanzania, and Gambia. In
late 1994, the prestigious medical journal The
Lancet published the results of vaccinations in
the United Republic of Tanzania, after a two-
year trial between 1992 and 1994 whose objec¬
tive was to determine the efficacy of the vac¬
cine on children aged from one to five in an area
of intense malaria transmission. The results
showed that the protective efficacy of SP1'66
was 31 per cent.
The epidemiological situation in Tanzania
provided a particularly stiff test for SPÍ66
because people living in this part of the world are
a hundred times more exposed than those living
in Colombia to the bites of the mosquito that
harbours fulciparu m. In these conditions, as
Nicholas White of the Oxford Tropical Medi¬
cine Research Programme pointed out, the pro¬
tection obtained with our vaccine is a positive
and important result.
But we must be realistic. This vaccine will
make it possible to reduce the incidence of
malaria, but will not eradicate it completely. We
must continue to control the disease, diagnose it
and use medicine and insecticides. Only a prag¬
matic and multifactorial approach to the problem
will make it possible, if not to eradicate this
scourge, at least to reduce the number of victims.
How do we stand with regard to malaria today?
M.P.: Malaria currently kills more people than
any other disease. It occurs in hot, humid trop¬
ical regions, i.e. where the vast majority of peo¬
ple in the developing world live. It affects 40
per cent of the world's population and causes
between 2 and 3 million deaths each year, far
more than Aids, for example.
But malaria is not equally virulent every¬
where. Some ethnic groups are more resistant
to infection than others. Susceptibility to malaria
is related to blood group. In Africa, for example,
the epidemic is particularly intense and can
worsen during the rainy season. It is the world's
malaria hot spot. One and a half million children
under five die of malaria in Africa each year.
You have developed a top-level scientific
laboratory in Colombia . . .
M.P.: Yes, and I am extremely proud of the team
I work with. Most of its dynamic young
researchers (average age thirty) are Colombian
chemists, physicists, bacteriologists, molecular
biologists and medical doctors.
In the grounds of Bogota's San Juan de Dios
hospital, where I worked, there was a derelict
building constructed at the beginning of the cen¬
tury by a Colombian architect who had studied
in France. Incredible though it may seem, in a
kind of delayed-action response to my childhood
dream, this building was an almost identical
reproduction, albeit in ruins, of the Pasteur
Institute in Paris. I was able to lake it over and
use it as the premises of the Bogotá National
Institute of Immunology, where thousands of
doses of SPf66 are made today.
What was the most difficult time in your life as a
researcher?
IV1.P.: The most anxious moment of my life was
when I administered the vaccine to thirteen vol¬
unteer soldiers. Experiments had already been
carried out on monkeys, but their kidneys and
brains are not identical to those of human beings.
For nine months I woke up at three o'clock in the
morning feeling sick with anxiety. I said to myself
that if their kidneys were damaged a transplant
was always possible. But if their livers were dam¬
aged these young men would be exposed to incur¬
able hepatitis. The thought that these thirteen
boys might die was a nightmare.
When the time came to introduce the para¬
site into their veins, for eleven days I was unable
to sleep. I visited the hospital at all hours of the
day and night to see how they were.
One day, in Cartagena, I went to the beach and
threw myself into the water. I was so panic-stricken
that I wanted to drown myself. Fortunately every¬
thing turned out all right. The results of the tests
turned out positive.

As a child you saw the ravages of tuberculosis
at close quarters. Have you ever thought of trying
to find a synthetic TB vaccine?
M.P.: There are currently 27 million cases of
tuberculosis in the world, and two and a half
million people die of the disease each year.
Tuberculosis is my wife and malaria my mistress.
I can say that I have spent as much time with the
one as with the other.
After a long spell of secret work at the San
Juan de Dios Institute of Immunology, we suc¬
ceeded in identifying the molecules exclusive, to
the tuberculosis bacillus and synthesized them
chemically. I hope it will be possible for this
vaccine, which we will call COLTU VAC (Colom¬
bian Tuberculosis Vaccine), to be used on a mas¬
sive scale by the year 2000.
You have given the patent of the malaria vaccine
to humanity via the World Health organization.
M.P.: I received very tempting offers from a num¬
ber of American, European and Asian laborato¬
ries. But the vaccine should be made available to
governments so that they can organize massive
vaccination campaigns . It should not be sold and
I do not want to earn money from it. That is why
I offered it to WHO for nothing, because in my
opinion WHO is the most suitable organization to
distribute it in the countries where it is needed.
Didn't you think of using proceeds from your
discovery to develop your Institute and improve its
research facilities?
M. P.: Giving is giving, not a form of exchange. To
ask for something in return would tarnish the
gesture. But Pasteur said that though the results
of science are universal, the scientist has a coun¬
try and his merits belong to that country. That is
why I wanted the vaccine to bear the name of
Colombia. I also want the main production plant
to be in Bogotá and the price of the vaccine to be
very low so that it will be accessible to the needy.
So far the price has been calculated as thirty
U.S. cents for the three "adult" doses and half
as much for a child's dose.
It's your way of fulfilling your cherished dream
of becoming a benefactor of humanity . . .
M.P.: One should fight to fulfil one's childhood
dreams. The world we live in has lost the capac¬
ity to dream. We should teach children to dream
and encourage them to work for the good of their
fellows. Aptitudes are fostered in the home dur¬
ing childhood, not in universities.
You have often talked of demystifying science.
What do you mean by this?
M. P.: One of the problems of science is that it
tends to lock itself up in an ivory tower and invent
a coded language that only initiates can under¬
stand. That is a mistake. The scientist is a product
of society and must act in and for society. Knowl¬
edge must help to free and elevate the human
being. If it does not, we are condemned to suicide.
We must vaccinate the world against selfish¬
ness and pessimism. Solidarity, goodness and gen¬
erosity must not be empty words. Researchers
have a moral responsibility to work for the wel¬
fare of all humanity. "Science with conscience"
should be their watchword. M
