íve la différence!
BY CLAUDE FABRIZIO
The creative diversity
ofpeople and cultures
is at the heart of the world
heritage idea
Wooden ceremonial mask
(19th century) of the Bella
Coola Indians of British
Columbia.
Modern societies' strange knack of eras¬
ing their own traces makes the preser¬
vation of the world heritage a duty
owed to memory. At a time when
remembrance of things past is becoming an
industry, an instrument of power, the profu¬
sion of images and information flowing in from
all over the world makes our selection of them
ever more arbitrary. This, paradoxically, helps to
confuse our standards of judgment and weaken
appreciation of our cultural diversity.
And yet it would seem that societies have
never felt greater curiosity about each others'
ways of life and, especially in the wealthy
countries, about great monuments, places rich
in historical associations, the arts, and those
crafts, traditions and customs of distant peo¬
ples that are a heaven-sent boon for the tourist
industry.
In Western societies, it is true, the serious
exploration of other cultures, at first the pre¬
serve of certain categories such as ethnologists,
historians, archaeologists and a well-heeled
elite of travellers, has long been a fact of life.
10 r
THE UNESCO ^^pURIER SEPTEMBER 1097
More recently, we have witnessed the emer¬
gence of cultural tourism which relies for
its existence on one part of the world parad¬
ing its individuality for the delectation of the
other part.
I The birth ofa notion
This is nothing new for Europe. China, India
and Persia never quite disappeared from the
mental landscape of a cultured few, but it was
not until the beginning of the nineteenth cen¬
tury that Ancient Egypt burst upon the
European cultural consciousness, while the
Arab world only gained admittance thanks to
the British obsession with the passage to India
and to that concept invented by Romantic
writers and painters, "the Orient" (which,
incidentally, began at Greece). As for the
Amerindian heritage, it only gained recogni¬
tion in this century, when indigenous peo¬
ples began to lay claim to a political existence.
African and Oceanian cultures constitute a
paradox in the sense that the West has failed to *
Pollution and decay threaten
the outstanding architectural
and artistic heritage of Venice.
Opposite page, the campanile
of St. Mark (San Marco) seen
from the San Salvador canal.
Venice and its lagoon were
included on the World Heritage
List in 1987.

> GuiTHE UNESCO lOURIER« SEPTEMBER 1997
11

put the art and culture of those regions in a
historical perspective, although they have had
for a century a strong hold on the Western
imagination.
It was not until the United Nations was set
up and many new countries achieved inde¬
pendence that UNESCO's work led to the emer¬
gence of the notion of a world cultural heritage
as a manifestation of the equal dignity of all
cultures and to acceptance of the idea that the
international community as a whole had a
duty to preserve that heritage.
The first thing that had to be done was to
draw up a list of that heritage, to display to
humanity at large evidence of the splendour of
all its component parts. The next step was to
explain the background situation, making it
clear that there were all sorts of dangers fro m
which it was essential to safeguard the world
heritage not only age and neglect but also
war and the destructive fury of those who
deny other cultures, past or present, the right
to exist. Other, no less serious, threats that at
present hang over the heritage include indus¬
trial pollution and the feeding frenzy of prop-
12
The al-Azhar mosque in Cairo
(1831). Oil on canvas by the
19th-century French painter
and traveller Adrien Dauzats.
In Santo Domingo Xenacoj
(Guatemala), colourfully clad
figures take part in a
spectacular annual procession
held on 26 July to honour
St. Christopher the Apostle.
erty developers that is eating away at the
world's major tourist sites.
I The non-material heritage
As deeper thought has been given to the
world's different cultures, it has come to be
realized that not all of them found material
expression in major works, and that a whole
area of humanity's cultural heritage is invisible
because it resides in the human mind. For this
reason, some cultures such as those of the
nomadic peoples of North America or the
steppes of Eurasia who for the most part pro¬
duced only small artifacts, long went
unrecorded. It should also be said that, pace
Malraux, the production of everyday articles,
clothing, domestic utensils and so on is not a
matter of reproduction, not involving the
kind of creativity that goes into the art pro¬
duced for the court or for religious celebra¬
tions, but embodies a universe of signs that do
not need to be ostentatious in order to carry
meaning.
Nor can the cultural heritage of any given
society be reduced to its material forms. This
question first arose in relation to societies
whose lore and skills, as well as the memory of
their ancestors, were concentrated in the oral
tradition. It thus came to be understood that
the patrimony of any culture is not only an
inheritance from the past but also preserves,
through changing circumstances, some of its
most lasting models and points of reference.
The concept of a non-material heritage thus
merges into that of culture as "the whole com¬
plex of spiritual, material, intellectual and emo¬
tional features that characterize a society or
social group" and which "includes not only
the arts and letters but also ways of life, the

fundamental rights of the human being, value
systems, traditions and beliefs".
The force ofchange
To this definition, which came out of the Mex¬
ico City World Conference on Cultural Poli¬
cies (1982), should be added that which, in
each culture, explains its dynamism, the force
of change within it, and the importance of
the influences it undergoes and the intercul¬
tural exchanges in which it participates, not
forgetting the changes that all cultures are expe¬
riencing today as a result of the worldwide
spread of a global model of development!.
Whereas daily life in "modern" societies is
supposed to be governed solely by the tastes
and wishes of individuals (it being considered
inappropriate for the authorities or the wider
community to interfere in such matters), pri¬
vate life in traditional societies is strongly
influenced by the community's rules. It may
be true that few purely traditional societies
still exist, but of those that do, many are still
far removed from the models of social and
cultural behaviour that the elites of the coun-
Many heritage sites today
face problems associated
with mass tourism.
Above, a tomb hewn from the
rock at Petra (Jordan), which
was placed on the World
Heritage List in 1985.
Right, visitors buy small
flasks of coloured sand
collected on the site.
tries of the North regard as self-evident. Any
high-handed attempt to change these societies'
values could not only fail in its avowed aims
but, more seriously, could sap their energy
and take away their freedom to choose their
own paths to fulfilment.
It has to be acknowledged that human beings
are the most important monuments of the cul¬
tures to which they belong, and the relevant
conclusion should be drawn. The real common
heritage of humanity is its creative diversity.
1 See The cultural dimension of development.
Towards a practical approach, UNESCO, Paris, 1995.
