ducat
Tomorrow's world will l)e shaped by our children's vision
of it. What kind of vision will it he, and how can educa¬
tion help to shape it? These questions raise two sets of
issues. One has to do with the contribution that educa¬
tion must make to society; the other relates to the expan¬



sion and reform of the education system itself so that it can
meet the hopes and expectations that society has vested
in it.
While the challenges to education are universal, the
responses to them must come from the heart of the cul¬
tures of each region. Education must reflect all that is best
and most distinctive within ourselves and our societies.
Only thus will it help to unite people everywhere around
shared values in defence of their common interests.
Everywhere and from every standpoint, education is
crucial to peace. For peace, as we all know, is more than
the absence of conflict. Peace is a culture based upon tol¬
erance and respect for others; it is a spirit of active soli¬
darity amongindividuals, built upon expectations of jus¬
tice and tranquillity. Sustaining and promoting these
values must be one of the foremost duties of education.
Our schools must be revered places of learning and their
most valuable lessons are those that teach the wisdom of
peace and the folly of war.
The promotion of democracy and human rights is an
essential part of the peace-building process. So too is
THE UNESCO G?URJERB JANUARY 1097

the promotion of the rights of women. If we really believe With this in mind, UNESCO and its partners in the
in human rights, how can discrimination against women United Nations system are actively engaged in promoting
be tolerated? In practical terms, the cost to development worldwide improvements qualitative and quantitative
of neglecting the unique talents of women is enormous. in the pro vision of basic education. Particular stress is
Morally, it seems to ine inadmissible that, at the dawn of placed on providing quality education for girls and
the twenty-first century, limitations should be placed on women. Another of our preoccupations is to improve the
women's fundamental freedoms. The problem of women's status and qualifications of teachers. Teachers are the
rights clearly transcends education, but it is one with front-line workers in the struggle to achieve a literate
which education systems, especially in the countries of world. Their job is a challenging and difficult one; their
the South, should be closely concerned. salaries and conditions of service are often poor. Yet the
A growing body of research highlights the importance vast majority of teachers are sclflessly doing all they can
of the education of women and girls in accelerating devel- to educate the citizens of tomorrow. They know how
opment. To educate a mother is not only to educate a vitally important their task is. We must remember this and
family, but also to replace a potential inheritance of illit- ()iTcr teachers the appreciation, honour and respect due
eracy with a tradition of education that will be passed from to them.
generation to generation. The education of women also In a worl(1 in which progress is increasingly dependent
has a very powerful impact upon fertility rates. on l,,e products of the mind, education is increasingly rec¬
ognized as the force of the future. This has in turn rein¬
forced the importance of international co-operation, which
A NEW ETHIC OF SHARING AND CARING , PTT T . . TT ,
is the vocation of UNESCO. I will not review UNESCO s
I must also stress the importance of the population ques- many activities in this field, but I would mention two
tion, which is of concern to us all. It is essential that we programmes especially designed to encourage the rapid
moderate population growth, but this can only be done transfer of knowledge and technology to developing
if women have the power of choice, the capacity to shape countries. The first of these is UNITWIN, which links uni-
their own destiny. It is not through the imposition of exter- versities in developing countries with those in industri-
nal models that the solution to the problem will be found. alized nations. The second is the UNESCO Chairs pro-
Education giving people the means to decide for them- gramme, which places high-level specialists at the disposal
selves once more provides the key. An increase in edu- of universities in developing countries,
cation is directly correlated with a decrease in fertility. As Our duty as educators is to use education to focus the
well as reducing demographic growth, we must provide energy and idealism of young people on building a soci-
properly for all those already on board spaceship earth ety of peace, progress and prosperity. We must strengthen
and those destined to join itincluding street children, the function of peace-building in all cultures. We must
those exposed to hunger, disease and neglect. We must infuse into the minds of young people everywhere a new
be ready to invest in education what we have in the past ethic of sharing and caring. We must prepare the ground
been prepared to invest in war. We must be ready to pay for a new civilization in which the word and not the sword
the price of peace. will prevail.
41
THE UNESCO COURIER JANUARY 1997 ~
