LISTENING ISABELLE LEYMARIE TALKS TO
RIDOBAYONNE
Versatile instrumentalist, band-leader and singer, Rido Bayonne is a musicaljack of all trades who blends Bantu, Cubanjazz, soul and funky
beats into a unique personal style that bursts with vitality. Born in the Congo, near Pointe-Noire, he became his country's most popular
drummer before moving to Paris, where he played with a number of international stars. Since 1985 he has performed in clubs and festivals
at the head of his big band, with which he recently made a recording. Gueule de Black.
M You play several instrumentsbass,
piano, guitar, the drums, African drums and
the marimba. Do you identify with any
4,
particular one?
Rido Bayonne: No, they all give me some¬
thing. I have a different relationship with
each one. Hut it was through playing the
bass that I became well known.
Your music has a strong beat. When you
compose, do you start with the beat, the
harmony, the melody or the structure?
R. B.: The heat. Because rhythm is life's
motor. Heartbeats, breathing and all
sounds are rhythm, even the silence that
goes with them. In this sense you can say
that everybody makes music without
realizing it. Hut don't forget that in
Africa the drum is the basic instrument.
In any ease, my music, is always chang¬
ing, and I nev er play my pieces the same
way twice.
Where do you get yourinspiration from?
R. B.: From many sources, but the most
important thing is that I have to feel emo¬
tionally involved. If I'm not, I can't com¬
pose. I am very receptive to what goes on
around me ... a conversation, a crying
child or even sounds like the clinking of
forks in a restaurant. Forks striking plates
can create rhythm and melody. When you
love music, you hear it everywhere!
Your music is also the result of various
traditions.
R. B.: Hesides my African cultural back¬
ground, I've learned from European liar-
48 r
** THE UNESCO COURIERS ATRIL 1997
monies and American music, especially
James Hrown, who has had a big influ¬
ence on me. Hut I was born in a cotton
field and I first heard the musicians of my
village during festivities and the impor¬
tant ritual ceremonies that marked birth,
initiation, marriage and death. We spoke
French at home, and I had a Western-
style education. Cultural intermixing is a
tremendous thing. My father had me lis¬
ten to Franco, a Congolese musician who
played a very important part in popular
African music, and also to Miles Davis,
Duke Ellington, European and American
popular music and Cuban music. Several
Congolese of my great-grandfather's gen¬
eration were sold into slavery in Cuba,
and my family has always been particu¬
larly fond of Cuban music.
Did you always want to be a musician?
R. B.: Always, despite my father's strong
opposition, lie didn't think music was a
real job. My late mother told me that I
was already beating time when I was still
in her belly. I am self-taught. As a child
I made my own bongos and guitars with
the spokes of bicycle wheels. I had no
idea how to tune a guitar, but that never
stopped me from playing. When I was
eighteen I started composing and har¬
monizing songs. Five years later I earned
a bit of money by playing in the Hantu
National band in Brazzaville a well
known band that had an excellent saxo¬
phone section. Then I played in
Cameroon with Mann Dibango*. In the
1960s, to keep my father happy, I stud
ied law for five years. When I finally gave
that up to devote myself full-time to
music, my father declared war on me,
although since then I have often helped
my family get by. My brothers, who
stayed in the Congo, are having a hard
time, even those who are doctors and
lawyers, because of the economic situa¬
tion. Eventually my father came to feel
happy about my success and even became
proud of me.
What kinds of bands have you played
with in France?
R. B.: At first I played in dance-halls in
Lyons, then Paris. There weren't many
blacks in France in the 1960s, and peo¬
ple often came to "see" the band because
there was a black in it. In fact up till
then I didn't even know I was black; I
was so caught up in my music that I never
realized!
What are you doing at the moment?
R. B.: I'm studying classical harmony at a
conservatory. I'm the oldest in the class.
I've got to be humble, because every day
I see that it is not musicians who are
great, but music. It transcends us. I'm
always amazed to see that everything in
music that I thought was innate can be
taught and learned. Recently I had fun
taking sixteen bars of Mozart's Requiem
and re-harmonizing them, changing the
melody and re-orchestrating them for
brass, voice, keyboard, piano and drums.
You can tell it's Mozart, but it is actually
a re-creation. Classical musicians are

afraid to innovate and certainly can't
improvise; whereas jazz and pop musi¬
cians are a lot freer and more open from
that point of view. As far as I'm concerned
only Mozart is qualified to play Mozart.
But for the past 200 years people have
made themselves play and replay his
works note for note as if they were pre¬
served in amber. Every musician has a
streak of madness. And to get inside your¬
self and find this streak of madness and
your own voice, you've got to be pos¬
sessed. I like Mozart's madness. He took
his obsessions to their very limit.
Your record Gueule de Black was
recorded at a concert in Bayonne.
R. B.: Yes, in 1995 an old dream of mine
came true. I'd long wanted to see the
city of Bayonne, and it was a revelation to
me. My family name, Bayonne, originated
with a Basque sailor who settled in the
Congo long ago and had children he
named after his home town. So I've got
Basque ancestors. Bayonne is a great
town with old buildings that have been
very well ¡»reserved. I gave an open-air
concert at a town celebration, and every¬
one there welcomed me with open arms.
It was incredible. That same year I
turned fifty. It was an opportunity to
bring together dozens of French-speak¬
ing musicians from all sorts of back¬
grounds. I am a happy man. Music still
gives me all I could ever hope for. M
* See the interview wilh Mann Dilnuigo
in I In; Umcsi.o ('«liner ("A world of iiuisir",
March 1991) Editor.
