Despite the sweeping changes that have occurred since the Soviet era,
Russian theatre is still a crucible of collective enthusiasm
A common home
BY ANATOLY SMELIANSKY
Ten Days That Shook the
World, directed by Yuri
Lyubimov at the Taganka
Theatre in Moscow (1965).
The play is based on John
Reed's eyewitness account of
the 1917 Revolution.
Just a hundred years ago, a famous
encounter took place in a well-known
Moscow restaurant, the Slav Bazaar, between
the actor and director Konstantin Stanislavsky
and the playwright and critic Vladimir
Nemirovich-Danchenko.
They talked non-stop for eighteen hours
and ended up agreeing to create a new company.
Little more than a year later, the Moscow Art
Theatre (MKhT) was born. It was to be a driving
force of twentieth-century Russian theatre.
The Art Theatre gave rise to numerous
other theatres and spawned many directors
and actors. It also nurtured some well-known
aesthetic critics and dissenters who developed
their own approaches to theatre. The names
of Vsevolod Meyerhold, Evgeny Vakhtan-
gov, Mikhail Chekhov, Alexander Tairov and,
in the European theatre, Bertolt Brecht, Peter
Brook and Jerzy Grotowski are associated
with the acceptance or aggressive rejection of
the ideas of the Theatre's founders at the begin¬
ning of the century.
In the 1930s, Stanislavsky's ideas were glo¬
rified by the Soviet state and many of his oppo¬
nents were liquidated. In reality, however, his
o fficial adoption was accompanied by the nega¬
tion of all that he stood for. In the early 1930s,
Stalin renamed the Art Theatre the "Theatre of
Academic Art" (MKhAT), which was the sig¬
nal for all the country's theatres to model them¬
selves on the Soviet-style MKhAT.

The leaders of the Revolution had realized
immediately that the theatre could be used as
a spiritual substitute for the Church they had
dismantled. It would not be good for the holy
places to remain empty. So for decades, until
the fall of the Soviet Union, this model of a
theatre-cum-church existed in one form or
another. If it was sacrilege, it was also remark¬
ably effective.
In Soviet Russia, the theatre replaced a par¬
liament which had become just a rubber stamp,
and a Church which had been half suffocated.
Several generations of directors, actors and
spectators had developed a kind of condi¬
tioned reflex. You didn't go to the theatre just
for entertainment but for communion.
The elite's notion of communion (sobor-
nost), which was very popular with the Russ¬
ian symbolists at the beginning of the century,
now found an unexpected place in society. The
theatre became perhaps the only focal point of
Russian sobornost, a spontaneous living con¬
tact between people. Directors and actors made
themselves servants of the cult of the theatre.
Audience expectations rose, to the point where
it was felt that life could be transformed by a
moralizing production.
When the Soviet Union began to fall apart,
the country had about 600 state-subsidized
theatres with between twenty-five and 160
* -
Students of the Theatre
Institute and young actors of
Maly Theatre, St. Petersburg,
in Claustrophobia, a play
written by them and directed
by Lev Dodin (1994).
Konstantin Stanislavsky
(right) and Vladimir
Nemirovich-Danchenko
in 1923. In 1898 they founded
the Moscow Art Theatre.
actors and actresses each. In the towns, the
theatre usually stood near the offices of the
regional party committee or the party-con¬
trolled House of Culture. The authorities
stressed, even geographically, the importance
of the theatre as a vital tool in leading the
"flock".
But while the vast majority of theatres
faithfully carried out their mission for the
party, some managed to express dissent. Oleg
Efremov, Georgi Tovstonogov, Yuri Lyubi-
mov and Anatoly Efros were not content just
to reflect the standard trends of Russian the¬
atre. They also worked through troupes which
were like families, designed not to break up
after a few weeks but to stay together for years
of joint creativity. This was the indelible fea¬
ture of what was, and still is, understood in
Russia as "theatre".
To be in the theatre in Russia is to share a



common home and to devote your whole life
to a joint endeavour. It's a long-term artistic
association which demands a special set of
structural, aesthetic and, especially, moral cir¬
cumstances.
The crisis
The coming of freedom put our biggest the¬
atre "temples" to the test. The deaths of Efros
and Tovstonogov plunged the Art Theatre
and the Taganka Theatre, the two biggest the¬
atres under communism, into crisis. After a
long internal conflict which spilled over into
the newspapers, the Kremlin decided in May
1987 to split up the Art Theatre. Efremov
remained as head of one half of the MKhAT
s while actress Tatiana Dronina took charge of
a the other. The split quickly turned ideologi-
| cal, with the first MKhAT naming itself the

Chekhov and the second continuing to be
called the Gorky.
While Efremov tried yet again to revive a
"troupe of friends" and to get back to the
founding tenets of the MKhT, the tempestu¬
ous amazon Dronina, who had no production
or management experience, gathered so-called
"patriotic forces" around her. At the Gorky
MKhAT, it was even decided to celebrate Stalin.
At the end of a production by Sergei Kurgin-
ian based on Mikhail Bulgakov's play Batum,
the white-uniformed generalissimo looks pen¬
sively into the distance and the crowd rises as
one on hearing the sound of the abolished
Soviet national anthem and its words: "Stalin
taught us to be true to the people. He has
inspired our work and achievements."
From temple
to entertainment hall
The two MKhATs, both of them in Tvcr-
skaya Street, arc a good illustration of the pre¬
sent state of Russian theatre. A similar thing
happened at the Taganka Theatre. When Lyu-
bimov returned there, he was greeted as a hero
and the audience chanted "stay! stay!" Some
people wept. The spring of 1988 was still a
heady time in Moscow. He stayed, dug up
plays which had been banned and put on oth-
Scene from the first act of
Konstantin Stanislavsky and
Vladimir Nemirovich-
Danchenko's 1902 Moscow Art
Theatre production of Maxim
Gorky's The Lower Depths.
ers, including Nikolai Erdman's The Suicide,
Pasternak's Dr Zhivago and Dostoyevsky's
The Adolescent.
But the collapse of the Berlin Wall didn't
bring success. Lyubimov no longer had anyone
to fight against. He had returned to a different
country, something he didn't immediately
grasp. When he did, it was too late. His main
opponent was a member of his troupe, one
of his pupils, Nikolai Gubenko. The dispute
at the Taganka took the form of a battle over
property, but as at the Art Theatre, it was
tinged with ideology. Gubenko was close to
the communists, led by Zyuganov, and as his
fellow actors said wryly, he had gone "from
the Taganka to the Zyuganka".
In this situation, the days of the Soviet
theatre came to be regarded with nostalgia.
Though squeezed dry by censorship and iso¬
lated by an "iron curtain" from theatre devel¬
opments in the outside world, the best pro¬
ductions of that era were an expression of the
society's spiritual life. One might say, recalling
Stanislavsky, that it was a theatre with "too
much to do".
In the new, relatively free atmosphere, the
Russian theatre lost its special importance.
The "super-theatre" became just theatre. Such
downgrading affected every aspect of intellec¬
tual life. The print run of "heavy-weight"

newspapers and magazines fell tenfold, some¬
times a hundred-fold. Playwrights, directors
and authors who had thought of themselves
as good shepherds of the people were now
confused. Their books were no longer pub¬
lished and their plays became only one of
many leisure activities.
It was something quite new for Russian
theatre people to be just another part of the
modern entertainment industry. Artistic free¬
dom was no longer felt to be something spe¬
cial and healthy. People very quickly adjusted
to the new scene, just as they do to the air
they breathe.
The system of state subsidies for theatres no
longer covered half their budgets. In an effort
to survive, Moscow theatres opened casinos
and night-clubs on their premises. Many of
the old "theatre show enterprises," as the Soviet
authorities officially dubbed theatres, became
criminal show enterprises. With a high degree of
symbolism, signs saying "Money changed here"
were posted outside the capital's biggest the¬
atres. Just as the whole country was changing its
blood, so were the theatres. That said, it was
hard to see what was being exchanged for what
and, as it were, at what exchange rate. The loss
of social status and of the saintly feeling that
you were at the top of the tree, which were
embedded in the genes of Russian artists of
every kind, was one of the most important
results of the change.
Atth adse crossro
The new class invented its own structures and
took to what was called "tusovka", a slang word
of the new Russia which is difficult to translate.
The word evokes big extravaganzas, endless
Alexander Ostrovsky's Wolves
and Sheep, directed by Piotr
Fomenko(1997).
birthday celebrations, the razzmatazz of pub¬
licity, banquets, exchanges of honours, orgies of
words and other such pleasures which Russia
had forgotten while frozen under communism.
In the new Moscow, political, religious
and "artistic" tusovkas intermingled. The same
people went from event to event, variety artists
hobnobbed with the high clergy and satirists
with KGB bosses. The president sent his best
wishes to the biggest tusovkas, thus marking
the transition of the post-Soviet artistic elite
to a new lifestyle.
The Russian theatre embraced the new
trend, of which it was simultaneously recorder
and victim. "Perestroika" plays were built
around turning everything upside down. The
tired old heroes and institutions leaders of
the Revolution, party secretaries and collec¬
tive farm virtuosos were exposed and jeered
at. The popular actors who once played Lenin
now depicted the moving figure of the mur¬
dered Tsar Nicolas II.
Then came new characters: "international
girls," evil KGB agents, the heroes of the dis¬
sident movement. The puritan language of the
old era disappeared from stage and screen as
easily as the taboo of sexuality. A naked body
and a daring speech became a kind of symbol
of the freedom we had gained. "A stinking
mixture of blood and excrement," was how
elderly critics described the new art forms.
As Russia entered the market economy,
the theatre began to depict the emergence of a
new kind of human being, the transforma¬
tion of Soviet Man into the "nouveau riche"
or "new Russian." It was often hard to make
out any difference between the subject of the
artistic study and the resources used to carry
it out. Socialist realism and "capitalist realism"
turned out to be twins.
Renewal
There are no reliable statistics, but most the¬
atres in the capital are clearly full again, after a
crisis period in the early 1 990s. The country is
coming out of a critical phase and the healthy
theatre attendances of the past two years are
striking evidence of the change. The advent of
the free market has of course produced the
kind of openly commercial operations famil¬
iar in Europe and the United States.
More interesting are the persistence and
survival in Russia of what could be called, not
so much home-made theatre as cult theatre.
In a basement on Povarskaya Street, not far
from where Stanislavsky and Meyerhold set up

The Lamentations of Jeremiah,
a work inspired by the Old
Testament book of the same
title, was set to music by
Vladimir Martinov and
directed by Anatoly Vassiliev
(1997).
a studio at the beginning of the century, is
Anatoly Vassiliev's School of Dramatic Art.
This is a modern experimental theatre labora¬
tory not especially noted for its annual "pro¬
ductivity" level, but its existence is crucial to
theatre in Moscow. Vassiliev's most recent
work, The Lamentations ofJeremiah, was
closer to a religious and liturgical event than to
traditional theatre.
Vassiliev is not alone. In St. Petersburg, Lev
Dodin is also trying to preserve a Stanislavsky-
style repertory theatre capable of withstand¬
ing the context of rampant capitalism. Among
the popular new theatres are the Piotr
Fomenko Workshop and Sergei Jenovach's
theatre. Also popular are the shows put on
by Kama Ginkas, usually at the small Young
Moscow Theatregoer's Stage (TIouZ). This is
serious new work, highly representative of
the creativity of the new Russian theatre.
In June 1997, an international conference
was held at the Art Theatre on the Slav Bazaar,
the meeting that laid the foundations of twen¬
tieth-century Russian theatre. It was attended
by all of Russia's leading stage directors and
many of their European and American col¬
leagues, who reflected on the theatre achieve¬
ments of the past century and the prospects
for the next.
I think it was Dodin who came up with the
best summary. For him, the Art Theatre of
Chekhov and Stanislavsky's time was a model
for "home-made" theatre, family theatre built
on two distinct foundations great idealism
(which made the theatre into a kind of cult),
and the kind of clearsighted economic calcu¬
lation that is inevitable in a market economy.
The twentieth century rubbished these
two foundations. Idealism degenerated into
Stalinism or fascism. Economic rationality
and honesty degenerated into cynical wheeling
and dealing. The laws of the marketplace have
infiltrated the remotest corners of the theatre
business and robbed our theatre of some of its
meaning.
We are back with the same problems which
were being argued about at the beginning of
the century. To start the new one, Russia needs
another Slav Bazaar. But is it only the Russian
theatre which needs something like that?
