VILLAGES
I he 20-watt transmitter was hit
by lightning and broke down in
May," begins the Project Man¬
ager's report for 1994. "It has
been replaced. The local technicians were
advised to install a lightning arrester to fore¬
stall repetition of the accident."
The people of Banga, a small town in the
province of Aklan, in the Philippines, are quite
capable of taking preventive measures of this
kind. After all, it was they who set up their
small community radio station on the campus
of the Agricultural College and mounted its
antenna on top of a concrete structure on a
small hill nearby. The station, one of five sim¬
ilar set-ups in the less developed areas of the
Philippines, was established several years ago as
part of Tambuli, a community radio project in
which Unesco, the Danish International
Development Agency (DANIDA) and the
Philippines are collaborating. (Tambuli is the
traditional way of calling villagers to an impor¬
tant meeting.)
In this kind of project, the initiative comes
from the communities. The local folk build
the radio station, and after group discussions,
they set the guidelines for the broadcasters.
They organize the radio team, drawing on all
sectors of the village. There is no lack of vol¬
unteers. At Banga, Lyn Villasis, a beautician
turned broadcaster, reads fairy tales to children
over Radio Manduyong, modulating her voice
to evoke the characters in each story. A health
programme is hosted by a midwife. On Radio
Tambuli in Laurel, a little town in Batangas
province, Nerrie Bihis gives talks on develop¬
ment topics, town cleanliness and good man¬
ners, while a local police officer hosts a weekly
awareness programme on law and order.
Village problems
get an airing
Two Christmases ago the Banga community
went carolling to raise funds for the purchase
of a karaoke sing-along system for their radio
station. In Baranggay Bugtong Bato, where
Radio Ibajay did the organizing, Vicente
Pagayonan played indigenous songs on a flute

Radio brings empoweri ural commun
FIND THEIR VOICE
BYWIJAYANANDAJAYAWEERA
AND LOUIE TABING
made from a PVC plumbing pipe! Whatever
the music, people sing to cultivate a sense of
belonging and identify with their commu¬
nity in the context of a larger national culture.
In Banga, karaoke is more than just a sing-
along machine. Karaoke time is time for their
baranggayan sa himpapawid (village on the
air). Live interviews, and discussions with local
officials are broadcast between spontaneous
musical performances, problems are raised and
solutions are sought in what amount to village
meetings aired over the local radio station.
Olutunga is a small island near the south¬
ern tip of the Philippine archipelago, which
comprises some 7,000 islands. Toto Val
Samonte, manager of Olutanga Island Radio
(DXOI), wants it to become "the best island
in the world", an ambition that reflects the
confidence of his fellow townsfolk in the
power of radio to make Olutunga a better
place in which to live.
Community radio stations regularly hold
forums often linked to karaoke sessions on
gambling, irrigation, relief during floods and
typhoons, fishing rights and education. One
programme which revealed that cement used in
road construction had not complied with con¬
tract specifications alarmed the contractor and
persuaded the local authorities to investigate.
Local initiative
In Banga, local radio mobilized community
efforts to build a footbridge. Another station
successfully campaigned to clean up a big poul¬
try farm to reduce airpollution. Some families
" If you city folks have car
stereo, we have car-abao
(water buffalo) stereo!" say
Filipino villagers reached by
community radio, above.
Above left, a "village on the
air" programme being
recorded at Ibajay, in the heart
of the Philippine archipelago.
and neighbourhood groups have started small
pig farms, fish traps and prawn production.
In Laurel, Batangas teenagers used the radio to
collect donations for the construction of their
basketball court. Often people tune in to com¬
munity radio to find out whether the local
bus has arrived! On islands like Batanes, which
only has three flights a week to the mainland,
it is very important to know the arrival and
departure times of local flights.
Community radio stations have made a
lot of difference to these "sleepy towns", usu¬
ally found at the bottom of the development
list. They have encouraged people to analyse
their problems and come up with their own
solutions, with contributions from the local
political and administrative authorities. Live
discussions on the air ensure a continuing dia¬
logue on issues of concern to the community
and perform a watchdog function by making
sure solutions stick. More civic organizations
are being formed, and new income-generating
activities are being started by families and
neighbourhood groups. There is a more con¬
structive dialogue with local officials.
"Were it not for Radio Tambuli, the Ban-
gans would still be sleeping," said one munic¬
ipal officer. "Tambuli has made the big people
listen to the voice of the small people." Added
Porfirio Bullo, Banga's station manager:
"Before we used to just listen to radio; now we
are the ones who are listened to."
THE UNESCO f^JURl ER» FEBRUARY 1997
35
