newyork
BY JEROME CHARYN
N
ew York is a city that breathes
fairness and barks against
inequality. It's this that has
made it the marvel of the twen¬
tieth century, not its skyscrapers or its bil¬
lionaires. New York's skyscrapers have lost
their lyrical line, and no billionaire has ever
really made a dent in the city's chaotic heart.
New York is the only city on the planet where
the lower depths fought against the rich, estab¬
lished order and won.
These lower depths arrived in the form of
the Irish, who tossed the Protestant majority
out of city government and became the boss of
Manhattan right after the Civil War, around
1 865. The Irish were never bankers or brokers,
and they rarely built mansions on Fifth Avenue
or anywhere else, but they were firemen and
cops and schoolteachers, mechanics, gangsters,
and politicians, who practised their own rude
Hn ocean liner arriving in
New York harbour circa 1925.
;:'r
' Il
I...
ill»
mi!
Mil
;¡i;i
¡ ' ii
i
, i
il !!
i ;,
i i i
M 'I
democracy, stealing from the city and also edu¬
cating and feeding the poor. And when the first
immigrants from Eastern Europe arrived in
the 1 870s, the Irish enlisted them in their own
anarchic political machine. The greenhorns voted
for Irish mayors and aldermen before they
could even spell their own names.
Wave after wave of immigrants soon fol¬
lowed the same example Italians, Ukraini¬
ans, Greeks, Polish, Russian, and Romanian-
Jews, Magyars, Albanians, Slovaks, Serbs, who
helped create their own turbulent tribal orches¬
tra until the National Origins Act of 1 924 cut
off the flow of "mongrels" from Eastern
Europe. But not even the anti-immigrant hys¬
teria of the United States Congress could really
change the complexion of the vitality of immi¬



grant New York. The "mongrels" had learnt
THE UNESCO QíURlíRM MARCH 1997

I he southern tip of
Manhattan.
English, could interpret all the complex signs
and signals of the metropolis, could gather
capital for their own enterprises, could buy
their own seats on the New York Stock
Exchange. Even more important, they helped
school their own and other people's children
without rancour or a sense of exclusion.
New York in the 1930s, in the midst of
the Great Depression, was still the most
democratic place on earth. It encouraged the
very idea of rebellion, the sacredness of indi¬
vidual rights, the belief that any government
which did not serve these rights should and
could be driven out of office. Even Holly¬
wood understood this ethos and capitalized
on it. In film after film The Bowery (1934),


Dead End (1937), Angels with Dirty Faces
(1938), Cityfor Conquest (1940)New York
ers are depicted as an unruly lot, women, chil¬
dren, and old men who provide their own
liberty and law. This ethos even reached as far
as Rick's Cafe (Casablanca, 1943), where Rick
Blaine (Humphrey Bogart) warns a German
major (Conrad Veidt) that if the Nazis ever got
near Rick's old neighbourhood of Hell's
Kitchen, they had better run for their lives.
But there are no Rick Blaines today. Is the
City becoming a kind of behemoth as it
approaches a new century? Its public schools are
dying. It cannot seem to educate its young,
teach them the most basic skills, or convince
them that the city is there for them. New
York's crisis of faith has become the crisis of
every large American city. The poor have lost
their place. They cannot negotiate for them¬
selves in this labyrinth. Since 1965, three million
THE UNESCO Q>IIRI ERB MARCH 1097

t immigrants have arrived in New York, most
of them non-white: Jamaicans, Dominicans,
Mexicans, Koreans, Pakistanis, Indians, Chi¬
nese, who have formed their own tribes and
entered into the fabric of New York, but it's
not the same democratic family. Blacks and
whites are further apart than they ever were, in
spite of "integration." Young black males have
become an endangered species in New York.
They cannot survive the system's shabby pub¬
lic housing and shitty public schools.
No one, not even the most passionate New
Yorker, seems capable of dealing with that
heartless dividing line between whites and
blacks. Poor blacks (and Latinos) have fallen
lop, immigrants take the oath of allegiance during a
naturalization ceremony in New York City.
Mbove, a meeting of "Guardian Angels", volunteers who
patrol the New York subway.
Left, street scene in New York City's Chinatown.
outside America's vocabulary. They arc, as nov¬
elist Ralph Ellison described over forty years
ago, invisible women and men. It doesn't really
matter that some blacks have escaped the
ghetto to have fabulous careers as rap singers,
generals, actors and actresses, comedians, box¬
ers, basketball and baseball players. The others
have been left woefully behind. And the
despair, paranoia, and depression get worse
and worse. The overwhelming majority of all
prisoners in New York State come from the
poorest black and Latino neighbourhoods in
New York City. These neighbourhoods, like
Harlem and Brownsville and the South Bronx,
arc the ghastliest sort of ghettos, where crime
THE UNESCO lOURIERl MARCH 1997

begets crime, where the walls of every block are
filled with painted elegies to fallen black and
Latino warriors. This is the fastest-growing
art coming out of the ghettos. And the young
artists who are painting these testimonials are
sought out everywhere. It's ironic and sad that
their only real capital is death.
The South Bronx has become the worst of
the little laboratories of crime. The police are
quite proud that they have been able to use
the same federal statutes that trapped Mafia
chieftains like John Gotti to go after the black
and Latino gangs of the South Bronx and toss
them into jail. The exploits of these crusading
cops were written up in The New Yorker's
Above, New York's Indian community celebrates Indian
Independence day (15 August) on Fifth Avenue.
Kight, a city playground.
Qelow, a Chinatown grocery store.
"Talk of the Town" column, which praised
Walter Arscnault, chief of the Homicide Inves-
tigationUnit, "a small team of detectives and
prosecutors which specializes in large gang
busts and has not lost a single case in its ten-
year history." Arscnault, whose uniform is a
pair of blue jeans and a white oxford shirt, is
like a wizard who can rattle off the nicknames
of every defendant in a particular case
"Chicken, Foodhead, Pacqualito, Popcorn,
Dominican David." But is the South Bronx or
Ç Brownsville in better shape without "Pop-
Is corn" and "Dominican David"? I doubt it.
| As soon as one gang is pulled off the street,
| another gang forms. It's all part of the same
> Q>uTHE UNESCO ÍOURIERB MARCH 1997

^ implacable beast, that Hydra's head of depra¬
vation that keeps fattening itself on other peo¬
ple. The police can only solve problems in a
community by being part of that commu¬
nity, by living in it, by sharing its despair,
bathing in its stink. But the cops never live in
the communities they patrol and rarely have a
stake in them. They are often part of the cor¬
ruption that helps destroy a community, in
spite of Walter Arsenault's heroics.
The South Bronx always had its gangs, even
sixty years ago, when the gangs were mostly
white, and the cops who dealt with them often
came out of the very same gangs. Then and
* now, the poor had to have their colours, their
territories, their little flags, declaring that they
were outlaws in a world that was largely indif¬
ferent to them and their designs. To some
degree, it was an educative process, a means
whereby a gang could talk to itself and other
gangs, find a common language. I'm not dis¬
missing the plunder and mayhem of any gang,
past or present. But most often, the gangs fed
off their own entrails and still do. Their com¬
mon language still unites them; it's the only
schooling many of them will ever have either
the old Fordham Baldies or today's La Com¬
pañía, Wild Cowboys, and Jheri Curls.
The police had better learn to understand
the dynamics of the gangs and their will to
survive, or they themselves and the city of
New York will not survive the gangs, which
are already taking over and "educating" the
jailhouses they are in.
New York itself has become an enormous
jailhouse, where the rich have their isolated
"free" zones, and the poor are tucked away in
ghettos that are growing larger every day. Cap¬
tured gangs will not make the problems disap¬
pear, only the deepest compassion and a com¬
mitment to overcome white and black paranoia
can possibly change things. New York is like
any other nation involved in internecine war¬
fare, and that warfare has to be stopped. It.will
not come with crime statistics which claim that
homicide is going up or down. Statistics always
lie. They're the baldest, crudest propaganda.
Crime will go down when New Yorkers feel
themselves to be a family again. It might start
to happen right now, as young artists, white
and black, invade bombed-out areas in search of
cheaper rent. But will they involve themselves
with the poor? Or will they recreate "fashion¬
able" neighbourhoods that will only drive up
the rent and oblige the poor to plunge into yet
another ghetto? No one really knows.
But I'm always the optimist. Like any
Depression baby (I was born in 1937), I still
believe in fairness. And no magical policeman
in blue jeans will ever take that away.
flight, film stars parade
through crowded Bombay
streets in a fund-raising
campaign for hurricane
victims.
Ounbathing during
lunch break in the business
district.
W THE UNESCO ÍOURIERB MARCH 1997
