commentary Federico Mayor
cience
and society (2)
During the Cold War years, the value of science and
technology tended to be construed in terms of its mili¬
tary and economic applications. While this enabled research in
many specialities to enjoy a golden age of generous funding in
some countries, it tended to widen the gap between the rich and
the poor nations. The ending of this chapter of history has
brought an opportunity to base civilization on peace, not on war.
The question is whether we are as ready to pay the price of
peace as we were to 2>ay the price of war.
The close co-operation between science and government
that is needed can flourish only in free societies, so it is encour¬
aging to observe the growth of democracy in recent years in
all parts of the world. The twentieth century has so far shown
us both the apogee and the demise of the totalitarian state. It
was Erich Fromm who described totalitarianism as "the escape
from freedom". Totalitarianism promised in exchange for the
surrender of personal freedom a guaranteed utopia that
would justify the sufferings of the present. In the march
towards this Utopia, science and technology were given a van¬
guard role.
For a while, and so long as technology remained predictable,
centrally planned economies demonstrated a brutal ability to
ape the successes achieved elsewhere, and even exceed them.
Many Western intellectuals who visited the Soviet Union in the
1930s compared the purposive activity there with the apathy
of the democracies and made no secret of their preference. In
a world dominated by coal and steel, the command economy did
achieve some successes, at the cost of great human misery.
But when the focus of development shifted to industries based
on new knowledge in electronics, biology and biotechnology,
the price of suppressing free thought and action had to be
paid. The centrally planned economies, for all their claims to
be "scientific", lost the battle because they used science as an
instrument, obscuring its true nature. The lesson is that nobody,
38
however powerful or well informed, can know for certain which
scientific ideas will shape the world of tomorrow. Only by allow¬
ing scientists the freedom of action logo where their curiosity
leads can we be sure that science will flourish and our economies
will flourish with it.
Beyond the market
The problems faced by societies in transition from oppression
cannot be solved simply by appeals to the free market, effec¬
tive as it has so often proved to be. The free market the so-
called Invisible Hand is no guarantee of meeting long-term
needs or of ensuring the best use of human resources. The
question is whether we possess adequate knowledge to devise
sound methods of moving from centrally planned economies to
a freer but nonetheless humane market. A longer-term view,
based on investing now to prevent future catastrophes, is
required, both for practical and ethical reasons. This is in my
view most important, for those who have been suffering under
the shadow of oppression or extreme poverty will be very dis¬
appointed if we offer them only the rules of the free market.
The success of science is based upon shared knowledge.
Only by open publication of results and the mutual testing of
ideas can we be sure that we are moving along the right lines.
The extent to which knowledge is shared, both within nations
and between nations, will determine our ultimate success. And
yet the community at large, all too often including its leaders, '
remains years behind in its understanding of the directions in
which science is moving.
Scientific illiteracy is one of the key issues we face. Elected
leaders have neither the time nor the resources to grasp biolog¬
ical or environmental complexity, although they may be required
to make decisions that will determine the educational, scien¬
tific and ecological priorities for years to come. Voters are unable
to make rational decisions on issues that require basic scien-
THE UNESCO ^>URI1ER« ARR1L 1997

tifie knowledge, because all too often they have never been pro¬
vided with that knowledge. An unprepared community cannot
truly govern itself or plan for its children's future.



We live in a society that depends on science and technology
without really understanding it. When basic scientific knowl¬
edge was tested in one survey, it was found that less than a
third of Britons and 43 per cent of Americans knew that elec¬
trons are smaller than atoms. Almost a third of the British
respondents, and a quarter of the American ones, believed that
antibiotics kill viruses as well as bacteria. I am not seeking
here to be critical of any particular nation: there is no reason
to suppose that these results would be any different if the
surveys had been conducted elsewhere.
Achieving scientific literacy
Nor is there anything new about antipathy to and ignorance of
science and technology. We tend to think of the nineteenth cen¬
tury as a period of confident expansion, ruled by engineers. But
even then a strong undercurrent of opposition thrived. It is easy
to laugh at the Duke of Wellington, who opposed the develop¬
ment of railways because, he said, "they would enable the lower
orders to go uselessly wandering about the country". But he
wasn't alone. The French novelist Gustave Haubert listed the
four greatest misdeeds of modern civilization as "railways, fac¬
tories, chemists and mathematicians". Yet he happily used the
railway as a convenient way of meeting his friend Louise Colet,
who lived in Paris, while he lived near Bouen.
Many of us harbour the same double standard: we enjoy
the benefits of technology while remaining largely ignorant of
its inner workings. We have a society where, in Martin Wciner's
words, there is outward acceptance of modernity without inner
conviction. Few people know, or very much care, what goes on
under the bonnets of their cars, or at the other end of the
high-tension cables that supply their houses with electricity.
To them it is all a bit of a conjuring trick.
It is clearly impossible to provide every person with a pro¬
found understanding of all the important and controversial
areas of science and technology; impossible because even sci¬
entists themselves do not possess it. A cell biologist does not
understand particle physics; a metallurgist is unlikely to have
more than a limited grasp of genetics; and hardly anybody
understands the wonderful world of high mathematics. What
singles out scientists and engineers is not their knowledge of
fields other than their own, but the conviction that they could
understand these other subjects if they wanted to, a confi¬
dence that is not generally shared by non-scientists.
This is the confidence we must try to spread more widely. The
evidence is that when scientific ideas address people's concerns
and interests, they show an impressive ability to locate infor¬
mation and translate it into forms they find useful. An interest¬
ing example of this is the annual Aids conferences, ten of which
have now been held since the disease first challenged the scien¬
tific community to find an answer in the mid-1980s. While osten¬
sibly gatherings to discuss research in progress, the conferences
also involve many people who are HIV-positive, or who care for
Aids sufferers. These people are not scientists, but because of
the immediacy of the issues for them, they rapidly become
familiar with all the latest research in the fields of virology and
immunology, two of the most difficult of scientific disciplines.
Aids activists make life very difficult for scientists, with their
sometimes unreasonable demands for faster progress. But they
also make the whole field more stimulating, and help to ensure
that research is focused on the real problems.
This gap between what scientists know and what the public
understands is one of the greatest threats to clear-sighted science
and public policy. In 1931 Albert Einstein said, "Concern for man
himself and his fate must always form the chief interest for all
technical endeavour . . . in order that the creations of our minds
shall be a blessing and not a curse to mankind. Never forget th is
is the midst of your diagrams and equations."
On the scientific side we in the laboratories and classrooms
must share in the blame for the lack of diffusion of our findings
and concerns through the communities in which we live. On the
other side of it, however, the political leadership local, national
and international must also bear the responsibility of leaving sci¬
ence in a ghetto of narrow specialities, despite its central impor¬
tance in the world around us. The responsibility for scientific illit¬
eracy is shared and the solution to a continued state of chronic
ignorance or misplaced sensationalism must be found at the
meeting point between scientists and community leaders.
Three 'musts'
There are no easy answers, but it is clear that scientific liter¬
acy must try to provide at least three things.
First, a whole picture of the. different issues. Only a holis¬
tic approach can help us evaluate the different options open to
us. One example is that of energy sources: the costs and risks
of a power station are evaluated by most economists as if coal
were a renewable resource, picked from the tree like an orange.
Coal, however, is not renewable. Here are two more examjdes.
Can we seriously address the problems of developi ng countries
without taking into account the terms of an equitable inter¬
national trade? Can we try to improve the education of rural
women without providing the villages with wells and drills for
obtaining a pure water supply?
Secondly, it also means a far-sighted vision, bearingin mind
that in all the most important questions the most fragile and
ephemeral factor biologically, at least is the decision-maker.
Mortality is part of human existence, but we must learn to
think ahead for the intergenerational human rights of our chil¬
dren and their children.
Thirdly, we need a historical and global perspective, in
order not to forget that there is a past which has forged our own
behaviour and which, when consciously understood, can be
used to changed our ways of being. Nothing is determined by
some mechanical "logic" of history: everything depends on
what we do in the here and now. This is the legacy we can give
to our descendants.
THE UNESCO lOURIERB APRIL 1997
39
