The World Heritage
Convention,
25 years on
by Bernd von Droste
On 16 November 1997 we celebrate the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption by UNESCO's General Con¬
ference of the Convention concerning the Protection of the
World Cultural and Natural Heritage. Today the Conven¬
tion has been ratified by 149 States Parties, which makes it
the most universal international legal instrument in the field
of heritage conservation. The anniversary is an opportu¬
nity to reflect on, and critically review, its implementation.
The Convention is uniquely founded on the premise that
certain natural and cultural sites are of "outstanding uni¬
versal value" and form part of the common heritage of
humankind. The conservation of this common heritage is
of concern not just for individual nations, but for all human¬
ity. Another unique feature of the Convention is the fact that
it seeks to protect both cultural and natural heritage. In view
of the many linkages between people and their environment,
this holistic approach is both logical and revolutionary.
The Convention is also remarkable in that it has helped
to establish systematic international co-operation in the realm
of conservation. Every year the 21-member intergovern¬
mental World Heritage Committee approves funding for
emergency conservation assistance to World Heritage sites
under threat, to support co-operative conservation activities
at World Heritage sites around the world, for conservation
training, and for preparatory work on nominations of cultural
and natural sites for inclusion on the World Heritage List.
So far, 506 sites of outstanding universal value have been
included on the List. Of these sites, 380 are cultural, 107 are
natural, and 19 are mixed cultural and natural sites. They are
located in 107 States Parties. Despite efforts to ensure a more
balanced and representative World Heritage List, it is still
heavily weighted towards the monumental and religious
architecture of Western Europe. In future years more sites
from the Arab States, from the Pacific and from Africa
should be added to the List.
Part of this heritage is now threatened and consider¬
able ingenuity and resourcefulness are required to ensure its
continued survival. The challenges are ever increasing. The
World Heritage Committee has included on the List of
World Heritage in Danger 22 sites under extreme threat
and in need of special conservation actions. There is also
growing concern about the state of conservation of four
sites in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of the
archaeological site of Butrinti in Albania.
Military and civil conflicts, the growth of mass tourism
and uncontrolled and ill-advised development are among
the factors that make it difficult to protect the extraordi¬
nary natural and cultural sites that constitute our World
Heritage. In this the twenty-fifth year of the World Heritage
Convention let us recall the splendour of this common her¬
itage and participate, individually and collectively, in pro¬
tecting it for the centuries to come.
