MARSEILLES
BY EMILE TEMIME
It is the destiny of Marseilles to be a cross¬
roads, a place of transit and a refuge. Mer¬
chants, travellers, migrants and merchan¬
dise meet in this city whose hinterland
spreads out along rivers and roads, this mythic
place that opens its arms to the Mediterranean
world. Once a colonial port, it has lived pri¬
marily from the passage of people and goods
whose diversity has shaped its long and event¬
ful history.
In the nineteenth century, a revival of com¬
mercial and industrial activity attracted busi¬
nessmen from northern Europe to Marseilles,
in accordance with a process that already existed
before the French Revolution, when the city
enjoyed privileges that made it a meeting point
between traders particularly Germanic
traders and ships that brought silk and spices
from the East or were engaged in the lucrative
West Indian traffic. This economic revival also
attracted Piedmontese, migrants from the
French Alps, and Ligurian sailors who found
temporary work in Marseilles and in due
course settled down there.
Later, after 1870, the Mediterranean was
the theatre of the great westward migration
THE UNESCO IpURIERB MARCH 1997
23

Ihe Old Port in the late
nineteenth century.
of Italians, Greeks, Armenians and Levantines
towards the American Eldorado. For many
of these migrants, Marseilles was merely a
stopover, albeit a lengthy one in some cases. Its
population remained predominantly Euro¬
pean, but it was a cosmopolitan city, and after
the completion of the Suez Canal it became
more receptive than ever to all kinds of outside
trends and influences.
The following decades saw the arrival of
newcomers who gradually gave shape to the
Marseilles mosaic as we know it today. The
great influx of Armenians in the 1920s was
triggered by the violence and revolutions that
shook eastern Europe and the Middle East.
The use of "colonial" labour, starting early in
the twentieth century, brought to the Old
Port workers from the Far East, the shores
of the Indian Ocean (Somalis and Malagasy),
black Africa and, above all, from North Africa.
Marseilles industrialists were the first in France
to use Algerian workers. This flow of North
African workers was slowed neither by colo¬
nial wars nor by decolonization, after which
large numbers of "repatriated" French made
their way to Marseilles.
As a result of colonialism Algerians,
Tunisians and Moroccans came to constitute
the majority of "foreigners". In the 1970s
Comorians joined the Senegalese and Malians
who had long been settled in the city. There
have been sporadic inflows of Vietnamese,
Laotians and Cambodians. The decline in ocean
shipping and passenger traffic since 1 960 does
not seem to have had any immediate impact on
the city's multi-faceted identity.
m the Unesco Courier B march 1997
But an idyllic portrait of Marseilles would
be inappropriate. Terms like diversity, toler¬
ance, and acceptance of others should be han¬
dled with care. There is a longstanding mis¬
trust of newcomers. Divisions have always
existed, and sometimes minority groups have
been treated as outsiders.
Living together
Two centuries ago, many Catalonian fisher¬
men left Marseilles as a result of legal pro¬
ceedings. Anti-Italian demonstrations at the
end of the nineteenth century provoked a tem¬
porary exodus of Italians. More recently, vio¬
lence in 1 973 against Algerians spread fear and
caused some departu res. But all these episodes
were short-lived and did not jeopardize an
accepted and on-going cohabitation.
Coexistence is not always synonymous
with community. Crossroads arc not neces¬
sarily places where people really meet. One rea¬
son for this, in the case of Marseilles, is that
many people do not stay long in what is above
all a place of transit. All that many newcom¬
ers have known of Marseilles is life in fur¬
nished accommodation or transit camps, their
presence hardly noticed by the city's perma¬
nent population. I am thinking of the colonial
workers housed for years in the Lyautey and
Vict Nam camps of south Marseilles, of Jews
from North Africa and the survivors of the
concentration camps and ghettos of central
Europe after the Second World War, many of
whom lived in the "Grand Arenas".
MiI arket scene in
the Old Port, today a pleasure
boat marina.

But even people who settle permanently in
the city do not always become part of the com¬
munity. Barriers remain. Ethnicity persists not
only because of rejection but because of the
bonds created by a common origin and a com¬
mon language and because of a basic need for
security and communication. The people of
Marseilles long dubbed "Belle-de-Mai" and
"Saint-Henri" in the northern part of town,
and "Menpenti" and "La Capelette" in the east,
as "Italian neighbourhoods". Later, Armeni¬
ans settled on the edge of the city at "Beau¬
mont" and "Saint-Antoine". They did not con¬
stitute the entire population of these areas, but
there were quite a few of them, and their sense
of solidarity was strong enough to identify
them with the neighbourhoods they lived in.
Such identification may last longer than the
demographic situation really warrants.
Divisions sometimes even persist when the
reasons for them have disappeared. In the inter-
| war years, for instance, Italians and Corsicans
| lived side by side in the "Panier" neighbour-
| hood, in the old town overlooking the sea.
1 They understood each other; their cultural
rado Beach.
>
E UNESCO ^JURIER MARCH 1 25

backgrounds were fairly similar; and they lived
in more less the same conditions. Many of
them did the same kind of work. Yet a closer
look reveals that for twenty years there were
Corsican streets and Neapolitan streets, Cor-
sican cafés and Italian cafés.
The many places of worship, often in the
same neighbourhood, demonstrate a de facto
tolerance and mutual acceptance that are actively
encouraged by the authorities. Their number is
synonymous with coexistence but not neces¬
sarily with dialogue. The longstanding diversity
of Christian churches is now matched by that
ofJewish and Muslim places of worship, with
their distinctive congregations and rites.
So it is not in the city's nature to erase cul¬
tural differences, and the steady turnover of its
population probably helps to maintain and
even strengthen traditions that might even¬
tually have disappeared with the appearance
of new allegiances.
Multiple allegiances
These allegiances, which transcend national
and religious boundaries, are largely based on
the jobs people do. This is true for all levels of
society.
Trade is the mainstay of the city's wealth
and has from very early times encouraged peo¬
ple of different origins and beliefs to com¬
bine their efforts and work together. The very
small French Protestant middle-class com¬
munity has played a role quite dispropor¬
tionate to its size. Some surprising alliances
have been made. In the nineteenth century, for
example, the Altaras, a devout Jewish family,
combined with a militant Catholic family, the
Caunes, to found an arms company.
At about the same time, Greek merchants
Belottom, Spanish immigrants
on the Canebière, the famous
Marseilles boulevard that leads
into the city from the Old Port.
Belelow, an American sailor
joins in a carnival organized by
Marseillais of West Indian
origin.
achieved notable status among the leading cit¬
izens of Marseilles, although at the outset
they did not take French nationality. Tech¬
nicians and engineers from Britain, Germany
and Switzerland also provided their expertise
and made a contribution to the city's mod¬
ernization.
More recently, fortunes of another kind
have been built on new networks and busi¬
nesses arising from North African initiatives.
In Belsunce, the business district of central
Marseilles, the fabric of commerce has been
woven, unravelled and woven again by Arme¬
nians, and Jews and Muslims from North
Africa. Competition is no obstacle to a
sense of community transcending national
and religious boundaries, although it may
give rise to mistrust and occasional misun¬
derstandings.
- M IE £
ilk- r 3 til!
For the most part immigrants have pro¬
vided the pool of unskilled labour needed to
run the port and the factories. This poorly
paid and exploited workforce included men
and women from all over the world. At first
Italians provided the bulk of the port work¬
ers, then Algerians, their ranks swelled until
the 1960s by Spanish, Greeks and Armenians,
in short all those who were forced to do'
unpleasant jobs in order to survive. Here, com¬
petition led to confrontation, but in the long
run awareness of common interests brought
these workers closer together and helped them
overcome longstanding grievances. The real
gaps are social, not national.
In the twentieth century, the middle classes
have concentrated in the southern districts,
continuing a process that began much earlier.
26
THE UNESCO (OURIERB MARCH 1997

The north-south polarity grew more marked
in the 1960s and 1970s when working-class
housing was built, mainly in the northern
neighbourhoods, for a population that was
growing in a context of full employment, a sit¬
uation that has changed since then.
Social integration
This cleavage naturally exists in daily life, start¬
ing at school. The school still does the "inte¬
grationist" job described by the long-standing
residents of working-class neighbourhoods
who look back to the time when children of
all backgrounds rubbed shoulders in the class-
An anti-racist demonstration
in a Marseilles street.
Marseilles worker gives a
colleague a friendly hand.
room, speaking a common, sometimes
invented language, a variant of French full
of foreign sounds and local jargon. But it is
true that social discrimination is growing
more marked and that schools are sometimes
closed because there are not enough pupils.
Working-class housing abandoned by its
more affluent residents is demolished.
But there are other places where the dif¬
ferent segments of the population come
together. They meet at places of recreation,
first and foremost at the soccer stadium,
where many of them probably identify most
strongly with the city. Gathering places less
well-known to non-residents of Marseilles
are the recently rehabilitated "beaches" along
the fringes of the southern neighbourhoods
and cultural centres (such as the "Maison de
l'Etranger") where different cultures can
express themselves. The "Fiesta des docks",
held in abandoned warehouses on the water¬
front, is another recent success in this field.
It attracted thousands of mostly young peo¬
ple from the city's new frontiers.
These new frontiers stretch to the Etang
de Berre and Aix-en-Provence. However, the
odds are that the city will only truly solve its
problems of unemployment, economic effi¬
ciency and harmonious coexistence by play¬
ing its traditional role as a bridge between
Europe and the Mediterranean. The big dan¬
ger would be for Marseilles to turn inwards
to its hinterland and break the bond between
the two shores of the Mediterranean.
THE UNESCO f3)LJR,ER" MARCH 1997
27
