In an age of spreading computer technology and cultural Intermingling,
the world's many forms of theatre have reached a crucial stage
Theatre for tomorrow BY RICHARD SCHECHNER
The Dragons' Trilogy,
directed by the Canadian
Robert Lepage, a leading
exponent of the "forward-
looking avant-garde".
"Where is the theatre going?" The ques¬
tion is often asked, but perhaps it
would be more accurate to ask it in the plural
rather than the singular, for it is clear that there
are many different kinds of theatre and that
they are not moving in lock-step.
There is the theatre of artists, modeled on
Western-style plays made mostly of words,
written by playwrights and acted for the most
part in a naturalistic style.
There is the theatre of highly codified ges¬
tures, costumes and make-up, combining the
spoken word with sung dialogue and songs,
such as Japanese Kabuki.
There is theatre that could also be called
dance or opera because of its total integration
of movement, gesture, song and narrative
such as Chinese jingju or Indian Kathakali.
There is the theatre of ritual performances
addressing, honouring or entertaining the
gods as practised in many cultures around
the world.
There is the theatre of popular festivity
and ritual where people build and wear masks
and full-body costumes, such as Yoruban
gelede, Hopi kachina, or Trinidadian carnival.
There is the theatre of religious narrative which
takes many days to enact, such as Indian
Ramlila, Yaqui Waebma, or the Passion play
performed once every ten years at Oberam-
mergau in Germany.
There is so-called "mainstream" theatre
Broadway, the West End and Boulevard Theatre
There is also avant-garde or experimental
theatre.
The life and death
ofthe avant-garde
Once upon a time avant-garde or experimen¬
tal theatre was "in advance of" what was fol¬
lowing. But it has been at least twenty-five
years since that was so. Avant-garde theatre is
no longer in advance of anything, and most of
the persons working in it do not risk failure
in order to explore new boundaries of per¬
formance knowledge or practice. In fact, there
are strong arguments for saying that all today's
theatre is "official", paid for by governments,
foundations, or other mainstream funds or
desiring to be paid for by them. Of course,
many works are still labeled "avant-garde",
but the term does not refer to a single style or
tendency, but to several.
The current avant-garde consists of what¬
ever or whoever critics, audiences and artists
identify as belonging to the avant-garde. Calling

A Chorus Line, directed and
choreographed by Michael
Bennett with music by Marvin
Hamlisch. It was first
produced on Broadway in
1975.
a theatre artist "avant-garde" is sometimes more
a way of praising the artist than describing the
work.
V* The historical avant-garde. This is the
line of development which began with natu¬
ralism in Europe in the 1880s and extended
through many successive waves of experi¬
mentation: symbolism, futurism, Dada, sur¬
realism, Happenings, environmental theatre,
performance art, and so on. Each of these
claimed hegemony over all its predecessors;
each was destined to be absorbed into the
mainstream in one way or another. Works that
were hissed off the stage by one generation
were honoured by the next.
This historical avant-garde ended in the
1970s. No more waves of newness came crash¬
ing onto the shore. With the emergence of
postmodernism, recycling came to the fore.
The end of the historical avant-garde probably
coincided with a certain perception of the final¬
ity of scientific knowledge, as new develop¬
ments in science came to be technical innova¬
tions and "improvements" rather than shifts
in fundamental paradigms. A definite mode
of stability reminiscent of the European Mid¬
dle Ages came to be felt. Perhaps if newness is
to become important again it will originate
outside the Euro-American cultural sphere.
But since the end of the Cold War and the
advent of "globalization", is anywhere really
outside the Euro-American cultural sphere?
^ The forward-looking avant-garde enacts
an amazing and sometimes apocalyptic future.
It celebrates the newest technology and is cur¬
rently dominated by interactive telecommu¬
nications and CD-ROMS, the Internet, virtual
realities, and multimedia.
f' The tradition-seeking avant-garde, on
the other hand, eschews high tech and looks
instead towards "ancient knowledge," "ritu¬
als," and "traditional performances" especially
in non-Western cultures. Here the ideas and
researches of the Polish director and teacher
of acting Jerzy Grotowski are dominant. Gro-
towski has said that his goal is "To re-evoke a
very ancient form of art where ritual and artis¬
tic creation were seamless. Where poetry was
song, song was incantation, movement was
dance. One might say but it is only a
metaphor that we are trying to go back and
discover what was before the Tower of Babel.
First to discover differences, and then to dis¬
cover what was before the differences	 We
can hope to discover a very old form of art, art
as a way of knowledge."

v' The intercultural avant-garde has two
aspects. One is positive, seeking and synthe¬
sizing "universals" and connections between
cultures. The other is ironic and probing, seek¬
ing out disjunctures and miscommunications
"at the borders." The work of the Danish direc¬
tor Eugenio Barba and his International School
of Theatre Anthropology (ISTA) is an example
of the first aspect (see the Unesco Courier,
January 1996); the practice and theories of the
performance artist Guillermo Gomez-Pena are
an example of the second.
At ISTA and in his writings, Barba
attempts to show how "pre-expressive" posi¬
tions, movements and gestures arc at the root
of all effective artistic performing. For Barba,
these are most clearly seen in Asian dance-the¬
atres such as Kathakali and Odissi in India,
buto in Japan, jingju, and kunchu in China.
Gomez-Pena emphasizes the contradictions
of living and working in more than one cul¬
ture simultaneously. While Barba wants to
find connections, Gomez-Pena and others like
him explore the ways in which cultures collide
and fail to communicate, with their attendant
fractures, difficulties, ideological contradic¬
tions and crumbling national myths. Barba
tends to work with traditional performers;
Gomez-Pena with both traditional and post¬
modern artists.
The principal goal of the historical avant-
garde was to expose, ridicule, and destabilize
official art and official culture. The principal
goals of the other four kinds of avant-garde arc
too various to summarize, but revolution and
rebellion are not today very important themes.
Nor is there an attempt to present "the shock
of the new". The newest work in today's
avant-garde is highly technological and these
technologies are immensely popular and wide¬
spread, global even. They arc innovative but
not shocking; they tend to integrate rather
than divide; and they cost a lot of money,
especially during the development stage, and so
there has to be a deep alliance with the social
forces that have money.
What next?
Once it was felt that theatre would disappear
in the face of various other forms of dramatic
entertainment and arts, especially movies and
video. But the emergence of computer tech¬
nology is more likely to lead to a collapse of |
the differences between the various media arts. ^
The use of the information chip instead of I
strips of celluloid or magnetic tape will mean s_
an increasingly easy-to-use flow back and forth S
of images and actions from computer to film 5
to video and also between the so-called live
and the so-called mediated.
I use the term "so-called" because interac¬
tivity will allow for the immediate interven¬
tion of "viewers" or "audiences" who will
become "users" or co-creators. And although
fixed-text media movies and television will
be ubiquitous, interactive exchanges on the
personal as well as the artistic level will increase
exponentially.
The emergence of chip technology and per¬
formance does not sound the death knell of
"live theatre". It means only that the various
avant-gardes will bifurcate even more. If today
there are five avant-gardes, in twenty-five years
there may be ten or more.
Collectively, there will be a lot of live per¬
formance, but each genre will have relatively
few scattered clients, brought together first by
means of the Internet and secondly by local
and regional "festivals" or other occasions that
gather into one spot for a limited time all those
interested in a certain kind of performance.
Rehearsing an Afro-Brazilian
dance in Salvador (Brazil).

Culture will no longer be defined as local¬
ized in place, but as localized in taste and prac¬
tice. People will be able to belong to a "drama
culture" or a "performance art culture" wher¬
ever they happen to live.
This new definition of "local" will have an
effect on traditional performance genres. At
present, such forms as Kathakali or No,
gelede, samba or wayang kulit have been tied
to a particular place, particular social practices,
and particular practitioners. But increasingly,
at least some of these forms are opening to
practitioners who might not be "born to
them," and arc frequently domiciled outside
their place of origin or primary practice.
Global tourism
and traditional arts
Global tourism exerts an extremely strong pres¬
sure. Governments and corporations often
indistinguishable from each other are replac
ing traditional patrons. Already many tradi¬
tional arts have been commercialized, global¬
ized and "smoothed out" to satisfy the tastes
of tourists and "art lovers". Only those societies
rich enough to establish categories comparable
to Japan's "living national treasures" will be
able to preserve their traditional arts as such.
And even when they are preserved in this way,
the traditional arts tend to exist in venues that
are, like museums or game parks, strictly fenced
off from the impact of ongoing life. Many tra¬
ditional arts will cease to exist. No effective
remedy has been found to stop this cultural
extinction, which is in any case not entirely
bad. Times and circumstances change; not every¬
thing that was can be preserved indefinitely.
Sometimes the urge to preserve is a mask hid¬
ing fear of change.
Nor ought we to underestimate people's
inventiveness and creativity, especially the
power of popular culture. As advanced
economics preserve some traditional arts in
their traditional forms, and other less pro¬
tected arts vanish, a new category of continu¬
ous creation of tradition through fusion and
hybridity is emerging. Throughout Latin
America, for example, performances fusing
African, European, and Native American reli¬
gions are thriving. Other parts of the world are
experiencing a similar surge of creativity.
Over the past several centuries immigra¬
tion and displacement have created the great¬
est movement among the world's peoples ever
experienced. From assailed or displaced frag¬
ments of cultural practices, new vigorous per¬
formances have arisen. And soon enough, for¬
merly "artificial" or "synthetic" practices are
transformed into new wholes. We live in a
period where older traditional arts exist side by
side with new traditional arts, the fruit of
both consciously "invented traditions" and
less thought-out but very robust hybrids.
'Ordinary theatre'the string
quartet of the next century
And what about "ordinary theatre" (in Euro-
American terms), the enactment of dramas
written by playwrights and performed by
actors? Of course, this kind of theatre is not
"universal" and "omnipresent". It is a specific
cultural occurrence and as such it could go
extinct. But I don't think it will. I believe that
this kind of theatre will become the string
quartet of the twenty-first century. By that I
mean that it will have a small devoted audi¬
ence, but it will not be important in the way
it was, say, at the end of the nineteenth century

when a new drama by Ibsen could shake up an
entire continent. The important debates about
public culture will be conducted outside the¬
atres on TV, over the Internet, in new ritu¬
als convened and enacted electronically, or via
mass movements assembled in the streets.
Liveperformance
But this is not the whole story. The Utopian
electronic global village may turn out to be as
non-existent as all previous utopias. The media
and the Internet are increasingly omnipresent
but they do not satisfy certain basic needs
that are met by live performance. In fact, live
theatre will flourish to some degree because
of the rapid development of media and instant
information transmission. Note that I say
"information" and perhaps ought to say
"data" and do not use the more complex
term "communication". The media provide
more information than communication, while
live performance often offers more commu¬
nication than information.
Live performance can be sub-divided into
non-theatre and theatre performances. The
former include performance in everyday life,
religious services, sports, and popular enter¬
tainments such as rock-music concerts and
theme parks. There are three kinds of live the¬
atre: Broadway, boulevard, and other large-
scale commercial enterprises; not-for-profit,
subsidized mainstream theatres such as the
Stadtheaters in Germany or the regional the¬
atres in the U.S.A.; experimental theatre and
performance art.
Commercial theatre is self-supporting
because it effectively exploits crossovers
between media and live performance. Shows
and stars exist both live and on tape, CDs,
and film. In this sense, the pop entertainment
industry is the most advanced performance
genre economically and technically.
The Stadtheater system is the way in which
the middle class tells itself that it is "cultured"
and "responsible". Its repertory is based on
"classics" but includes some new works and
the safer experimental artists who "graduate"
to official status.
Experimental theatre and performance art,
which I regard as the "contemporary avant-
garde", are harder to pin down. Some perfor¬
mance artists become fairly big stars and occa¬
sionally a movie star also continues to work in
The Polish director Jerzy
Grotowski has described his
goal as an attempt to
"discover a very old form of
art, artas a way of
knowledge". Below, a scene
from Grotowski's production
of Akropolis, based on a 1904
play by Stanislaw Wyspianski.

k^^5 -^
1 ÍF\ J
î
"WW i y. ->
* h* M0V/ 1, , , , , $ , ,
t1/ ' ^^ ^k v
experimental theatre. But basically, experi¬
mental theatre and performance art take place
in small venues for tiny audiences.
Yet they perform a very important func¬
tion. Live performance of this type contin¬
ues to be "dangerous". By dangerous I do not
mean that the performers wound themselves
onstage but that they work in front of audi¬
ences while making and recovering from mis¬
takes and unforeseen circumstances. Live per¬
formance is also able to explore risky or taboo
subjects, unlike large-scale media such as film
and video which involve so much money that
often the financial backers do not want to take
chances. Finally, live performances before/with
small audiences allow for the experience of
close contact physically, emotionally and con¬
ceptually between actors and spectators. This
experience of shared presence is irreplaceable.
Will there be money for this kind of the¬
atre? Surely not enough. At one time, exper¬
imental performance got no public or official
support at all. Maybe under those circum
stances the avant-garde was most alive, dan¬
gerous, and important, since it owed its exis¬
tence to no one except the artists and the
immediate audiences gave freedom to those
involved. Of course, censorship and worse has
always been and will continue to be a threat.
But the underground seems to find a way.
There is a real need for an unofficial or anti-
official theatre. Official theatre no matter
how beautiful is always just that, "official".
And in houses of worship live theatre's clos¬
est sibling laughter is scarce, especially laugh¬
ter of the sarcastic, ironic, parodie, and blas¬
phemous kinds. Nor do church, synagogue,
mosque or temple encourage bleak tragedy or
atheistic scepticism. Official or corporate the¬
atres, newspapers and media, as well as state
sponsored religions, all require continuous
challenge and critique. Corrective tones of
unbelief, mockery, parody, horror and delight
are found in experimental theatre and perfor¬
mance art. I hope the next century will see
plenty of this kind of theatre.
The god of evil in a 1980
Beijing Opera production of
The Monkey King Wreaks
Havoc in Heaven.
