4/
Rumour, gossip and seditious songs fed the underground media
thatflourished in the reign ofLouis XV
Best-sellers and gossip-mongers
in 18th-century France
BY ROBERT DARNTON
Mbove, Parisian newshawks
at their usual meeting point, a
tree In the gardens of the
Palais-Royal, around 1750. By
gathering news and spreading
it orally, they were Important
links in the information chain
of 18th-century France.
T't would be a mistake to think that the
England of Samuel Johnson, the France
I of Diderot and the Germany of Goethe
"formed part of a media-free civilization.
Their world buzzed with a communication
network every bit as dense as ours. It was
merely different so different that most of
its media have been forgotten. Take the case
of eighteenth-century Paris. Who today can
even recognize the names of the genres and
modes of its communication system: mau
vais propos (saucy gossip), bruit public (pub¬
lic rumour), on-dit (rumour), pasquinade
(scurrilous pamphlet), canard (tall story),
feuille volante (scandal sheet), factum (squib),
libelle (lampoon) and chronique scandaleuse
(muck-raking history) ?
There were so many modes of communi¬
cation, and they intersected and overlapped
so intensively, that one can hardly picture their
operation. Let me give as an example an anec¬
dote which might be likened to a modern
14


"news flash". It was incorporated in a best-
selling biography of Mme. Du Barry, the mis¬
tress of Louis XV:
"There is a report, carefully spread about
by some courtiers, which proves that Mme
du Barry has not lost any favour or familiar¬
ity with the king, as some had suspected. His
Majesty likes to brew his own coffee and, by
means of this innocent amusement, to get
some relief from the heavy burdens of gov¬
ernment. A few days ago, the coffee pot began
to boil over while His Majesty was distracted
by something else. 'Hey, France!' called out
the beautiful favourite, 'Look out! Your cof¬
fee's going to pot!' We are told that 'France' is
the familiar expression utilized by this lady in
the intimacy of the petits appartements. The
details should never circulate outside of them,
but they escape, nonetheless, thanks to the
malignity of the courtiers."
The anecdote is trivial in itself, but it illus¬
trates the way a news item moved through
various media, reaching an ever-wider public.
In this case, it went through four phases: it
began as a mauvais propos, or insider gossip
at court. Then it took the form of a bruitpub¬
lic, or general rumour, in Paris. Next it was
consigned to writing in a manuscript news
sheet, or gazette à la main. And finally it fig¬
ured as an episode in a libelle, that is, a printed
book which belonged to a genre of scandalous


and highly illegal political literature.
M Forbidden best-sellers
In my own research, I have tried to identify the
forbidden books that were most in demand
during the twenty years before the French
Revolution. By studying orders of book¬
sellers and other sources, I have come up with
a retrospective best-seller list, the top fifteen of
the 720 works that composed the highly pop¬
ular corpus of literature which circulated
beyond the reach of the censors and the police.
The list contains some well-known works by
famous writers like Voltaire, the Abbé Raynal
and the Baron d'Holbach. But five of the top
fifteen best-sellers were libelles Wkc Anecdotes
sur Mme la comtesse Du Barry, quoted above,
or chroniques scandaleuses, a variety of muck¬
raking contemporary history. Although they
reached readers in every corner of the king¬
dom, all five have been completely forgotten,
like their authors, who have disappeared fro m
the history of literature.
How can we assess the impact of these
books on public opinion?
Thanks to advances in the new discipline
known as the history of the book, we have a
Exchanging information at
the Café de la Régence in
Paris, around 1750. Many
Intellectuals frequented this
café on the Place du Palais-
Royal. Contemporary drawing
by an unknown artist.
pretty good idea of how the printed word
became a force in European history; but we
know very little about oral modes of com¬
munication. They could have been more
important than the print media in societies
with a high rate of illiteracy, but their effec¬
tiveness is difficult to gauge because the spo¬
ken word generally vanished into the air.
In the case of eighteenth-century Paris, how¬
ever, oral communication about public affairs
was followed carefully by the police, who
posted spies in cafes, taverns, public gardens
and all the nerve centres for the spread of infor¬
mation. Spy reports cannot be taken literally, of
course, but they reveal a great deal about the
general tone and the modes of transmission in
oral communication. By way of illustration, I
will discuss two modes: gossip and songs.
IA hotbed ofgossip
Gossip provided the most important source
of news for Parisians under the Old Regime,
because newspapers did not exist. True, there
were many periodicals, and some of them con¬
tained articles about court ceremonies and for¬
eign affairs. But papers with news in them,
news as we know it information about
power struggles and personalities in the pub¬
lic sphere did not appear until the press was
freed of censorship in 1789.
If you wanted to know what was happen¬
ing in the corridors of power before 1 789, you
used your feet and your ears. You went to cer¬
tain cafés, certain benches in the Luxembourg
Gardens, a certain terrace in the Tuileries Gar¬
dens or the Tree of Cracow; and you listened to
the nouvellistes de bouche or newsmongers
who gathered at those centres of gossip. The
Tree of Cracow was an actual tree in the garden

of the Palais-Royal, which served as a meeting
place for those who wanted to know who was
winning in the War of the Polish Succession
from 1733 to 1735. During the next decades, it
became such an important institution that
ambassadors sent their servants to pick up news
items or to plant them, for gossip became
public opinion and public opinion became a
force to be reckoned with under Louis XV.
The regime acknowledged this new form of
power by placing spies wherever bruitspublics
(public rumour) or mauvais propos (bad talk)
were likely to break out. I have found spy
reports on conversations in forty cafés around
1730. Some are even written in dialogue:
"At the Café de Foy someone said that the
king had taken a mistress, that she was named
Gontaut, and that she was a beautiful woman,
the niece of the Duc dc Noailles and the
Comtesse de Toulouse. Others said, 'If so, then
there could be some big changes.' And another
replied, 'True, a rumour is spreading, but I find
it hard to believe, since the Cardinal dc Fleury
is in charge. I don't think the king has any incli¬
nation in that direction, because he has always
been kept away from women.' 'Nevertheless,'
someone else said, 'it wouldn't be the greatest
M late-18th-century
illustrated edition of
Malbrough s'en va-t-en-guerre,
a French song that was highly
popular at that time.
MORT ET COI\ VOI UE
L'INVINCIBLE MAÁBROí/K
L'a jaitir í
I*.*. trt-.Jium
î. ^l|)|im r , r »ÇV rr Wb...'» «T IfQ. lliMB^Q f^WT In Arm* ÍW* I V«*J .Hftl »T
. .- fax . »:-«-v, fc .- . ,-.-. >*vrr- .1 Í.-" »" . VI «*J p.l*M IJW *
nk*. il%»i«. i.. kMj>^.- ïêqtmm ' i . *fr*r7t m A tu^i , ir.1 ri r.' -Mi
M I Il - ^r ^~
evil if he had a mistress.' 'Well, messieurs,'
another added, 'it may not be a passing fancy,
and a first love could raise some danger on the
sexual side and could cause more harm than
good. It would be far more desirable if he liked
hunting better than that kind of thing.' "
As always, the royal sex life provided
plenty of material for gossip, but the reports
indicate that the talk tended to be friendly. In
1729, when the queen was about to give birth,
the cafés rang with jubilation:
"Truly, everyone is delighted, because they
all hope greatly to have a dauphin. . . . One of
them said, 'Parbleu, messieurs, if God graces
us with a dauphin, you will see Paris and the
whole river aflame [with fireworks in celebra¬
tion].' Everyone is praying for that." '
Twenty years later, the tone had changed
completely:
"In the shop of the wigmaker Gaujoux,
this individual [Jules Alexis Bernard] read
aloud ... an attack on the king in which it was
said that His Majesty let himself be governed by
ignorant and incompetent ministers and had
made a shameful, dishonourable peace [the
Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, 1748], which gave
up all the fortresses that had been captured ... ;
that the king, by his affair with the three sisters,
scandalized his people and would bring down
all sorts of misfortune on himself if he did
not change his ways; that His Majesty scorned
the queen and was an adulterer; that he had
not confessed for Easter communion and
would bring down the curse of God upon
the kingdom and that France would be over¬
whelmed with disasters	 He promised Sieur
Duzemard that he would show him the book
entitled The Three Sisters."
I Seditious songs
During the twenty years that separate those
reports, a great deal had happened to damage
the Parisians' fondness for their king, and a great
deal more would happen between 1750 and 1789.
In his manuscript memoirs, the head of the Paris
police, Jcan-Charles-Pierre Lenoir, wrote that
he had to pay the crowd to shout "Vive la reine!"
when Marie-Antoinette, Louis XVI's queen,
rode through the streets in the 1780s, but his
efforts produced "only some scattered applause,
which everyone knew to be bought". It seems
clear that public opinion had shifted and that the
shift had involved an interpénétration of writ¬
ten and oral modes of communication.
Parisians did not merely talk; they also
sang. Songs were mnemonic devices and pow¬
erful vehicles for spreading messages, like com¬
mercial jingles today. People commonly com-

posed verse about current events and set it to
popular tunes, such as "The Bear Went Over
the Mountain" (" Malbrough s'en va-t-en
guerre" in French). The greatest songster of
the century, Charles Simon Favart, learned to
put words to tunes while rhythmically knead¬
ing dough in his father's bakery. Many oth¬
ers Collé, Gallet, Panard, Vadé, Taconnct,
Fromaget, Fagan also came from the artisan
classes. Their songs penetrated workshops and
taverns throughout the city, and street singers
accompanied by hurdy-gurdies relayed them
from corner to corner. Paris was suffused with
songs, many of them political. As the saying
went, government in France was "an absolute
monarchy tempered by songs".
When a hit song attacked the king and his
ministers, it was a serious affair. In 1749 the
police received an order to capture the author
of a song about the fall of the first Maurcpas
ministry. They had only one clue: it began
with the words, "People once so proud, now
so servile. . . ." But that was enough for them
to set their spies to work in taverns and cafés;
and before long one of their agents heard the
verse declaimed by a medical student named
François Bonis.
He was hustled off to the Bastille and asked
where he had got the verse. He had copied it,
he said, from a sheet of paper that was passed
to him by a priest in the hospital. The priest
was arrested and said he had got it from
another priest, who in turn was arrested and
attributed it to a law student, who said it was
dictated to him in class by a professor, who
claimed he had heard it from a wit in a café . . .
and so on, until the police had filled the Bastille
with fourteen suspects.
group of "incredibles"
meet in a Paris café. During
the early days of the Directory
(1795-1799) the incredibles
were fashionable young
royalists noted for their
mannered elegance. Engraving
made in 1797.
They never found the original author. In
fact there may have been no distinct author
at all, because it was a case of collective cre¬
ativity: people changed phrases and added
verses as songs made the rounds. And while the
police tried to follow the song to its origin,
they discovered that its path crossed those of
six other songs, each more seditious than the
last and each with its own chain of transmis¬
sion. Their words were memorized, declaimed,
read and sung. They circulated on scraps of
paper hidden in pockets and sleeves, and they
were printed in several chroniques scandaleuses,
which spread them to the farthest corners of
the kingdom.
Two lessons stand out from the cases I have
mentioned.
First, it makes no sense to separate elite
"print culture" from oral "popular culture",
because messages spread through different
modes of communication, which intersected
and overlapped among all segments of the
population. The media were mixed; they
reached a mixed audience, and so the history of
books should be studied as one ingredient in
the general history of communication.
Second, best-sellers, gossip and songs may
not provide an accurate version of events, but
they show how events appeared in the domi¬
nant media of the time. In the case of eigh¬
teenth-century France, I would go so far as
to claim they constituted a coherent account
of contemporary history, the only one, in
fact, that was available to eighteenth-century
Frenchmen, because publications about the
recent past and current events were not allowed
to circulate in the legal book trade. Illegally
circulated publications, in the form oí libelles
and chroniques scandaleuses, reduced the story
of public affairs during the reign of Louis XV
to a kind of folklore organized around two
master themes: despotism and decadence.
We know now that the folklore version of
the Old Regime was wrong. Mme Du Barry
had indeed spent some time as a prostitute
before her promotion to the royal bed, as the
libelles claimed, but Louis XV was no despot.
And when the Bastille was stormed on 14 July
1789, it contained only seven prisoners, most
of them incarcerated for immoral behaviour at
the request of their families. But the French
saw the Bastille as the embodiment of despo¬
tism. They experienced the events of the 1780s
as variations on the themes that permeated
their gossip, songs and books. They perceived
the collapse of the Old Regime from the per¬
spective of a political folklore that had been
spread far and wide by the dominant media of
their time.
