In the Dominican Republic, vivid
colour schemes enliven everyday life
with a host ofpolitical and sporting
allusions
Colourful
For the people of the Dominican Repub¬
lic creating colourful surroundings is
almost second nature
The dominant colours they use arc the
primary colours: blue, red and yellow, with
a few others thrown in green, sky blue,
purple and pink. Black is excluded from their
palette and white is used to separate other
colours or to create a neutral area. These
colours arc used to beautify dwellings and
their surroundings. If the doors arc blue,
for example, the main structure will be red,
green or yellow. The aim is to create a colour
scheme for a whole neighbourhood or vil¬
lage, not for each individual house. Variety
is the keynote. Doors and windows may be
the same colour, separated by white from
the dominant colour of the house. Few
houses arc painted in more than three
colours one at least of the four main tones
is always missing but no house sports only
one. The whole effect shows an intuitive
knowledge of the art of using colour.
I A symbolic attachment
The predominance of blue is a way of bring¬
ing the sea into everyday life. There is a para¬
dox here, for the Dominicans turn their
backs on the sea, which they regard as the
origin of all their misfortunes, of both nat¬
ural and human origin. They fear and shun
it. The only thing they like about it is its
colour. On other Caribbean islands gardens
are decorated with conches, sea-shells and
starfish, but not here. Dominicans believe
that conches bring bad luck. And blue is
always accompanied by white, like foam on
the crest of a wave. "In its desire to become
sky, the sea makes clouds of foam," Domini-

anguage
BY GUILLERMO PIÑA-CONTRERAS
M palissade on the shore at
Samana, on the northern
coast.
can writer Ruben Suro has written of this
bond between the two colours.
The main structural element of the tra¬
ditional Dominican rural dwelling is the
trunk of a palm, the island's symbolic tree.
It is a more developed form of the Taino
Indian hut and the African cabin of the early
colonial days. The roof is usually made of
leaves from the royal palm and fibre from
another local variety, the cane palm.
The dialogue with the environment is
not limited to dwellings; it also extends to
artistic tastes and religious beliefs, the latter
of which blend aesthetics with superstition.
Many gardens contain an altar surmounted
by a picture of the Virgin Mary of Altagra-
cia (the country's patron saint) at the end
of a path of white stones. The niche housing
the image of the Virgin is usually painted
white, setting off the blue and red of her
robes. Houses where there is no altar arc pro¬
tected by crosses placed at the edges of court-

yard or garden. These crosses are also painted
white, for white is the colour of faith. (In the
mountainous north, tresses of garlic are hung
on the door to keep the devil out.) Roads,
parks and other public places are decorated in
a similar manner. It is not uncommon to sec
roadside shrines at places where accidents
have occurred, and altars in public squares.
These practices are illegal, but they are toler¬
ated by the authorities and arc part and par¬
cel of the Dominican Republic's magical-
religious landscape.
People have also modified the appearance
of the urban landscape. Trees, especially palm
trees, and electricity poles are often painted
in a single colour to head height. For some¬
one who knows nothing about Dominican
political life, a row of palm trees or electric
power poles painted in alternating reds,
" few houses are painted in
more than three colours, but
no house sports only one."
" U ominicans want to create
a colour scheme for a whole
neighbourhood or village.
Variety Is the keynote."
blues, greens, whites, purples and yellows
is simply an eye-catching sight, a way of
enhancing the environment. In fact, each
colour represents an ideology. The colour
of the party that won the presidential elec¬
tion recurs at regular intervals, and so does
that of the party that won the local elec¬
tions. This way of marking out political turf
goes back to the early days of independence,
when colours were used to designate the
main parties in order to overcome the obsta¬
cle of illiteracy: red for the conservatives,
and blue like the sea for the liberals.
Politics and sport
Today the custom of painting pillars and
posts has become widespread, but it still has
political and sometimes sporting overtones.
Some people even paint the front door of
their house the colour of the party they sup¬
port. Colours can express sporting rivalry
as well as ideological conflict, since each of the

titte
life. The back wall behind the dance floor is
usually covered with an evocative painting
of a sugar cane plantation or a seascape. The
style is usually naive and the country's
dominant colours blue, red, green and
yellow are used. Even the colours of the
chairs are significant. Their variety is enough
to satisfy all tastes and tendencies, reflecting
the colours of the country's political and
sporting teams.
The visual landscape is backed up by a
landscape of sound. Music blares from every
corner. In bars, in houses, at every level of
society, the traditional beat of the merengue
explodes. On the breakwater, a long prom¬
enade on the edge of the Caribbean, the noise
soon becomes intolerable for anyone who
has failed to understand that deafening music
is a component of Dominican life. It's as if
the people were trying to struggle against
their environment, to drown out the hiss¬
ing of the waves, the moaning of the sea
winds and the shouts and din of the street.
Music is as aggressive as the colours that mark
the landscape. The climate and the habit of
living in the open air sharpens the senses,
especially sight and hearing. The elements
here arc part of human nature. The Domini¬
cans' dialogue with their surroundings is
also a dialogue with themselves.
big Dominican baseball teams has its own
colour: red, blue, green and yellow. Politics
and sport are ever-present in daily life.
Poverty also plays a role in this unending
dialogue with the environment. In the slums
poverty has given rise to a specific architec¬
tural style. Lacking the funds to buy con¬
struction materials, slum-dwellers use tin
cans, crates and all kinds of trash with great
imagination to cover the walls of their homes
in the shanty towns that sprawl around the
edges of the big cities, along river banks and
near the sea shore. To create an effect of uni-
formity, some people use cans of a single
brand as walls for their dwellings, or paint
them with distinctive naive murals. The vari¬
ety of colours used to decorate large aban¬
doned public buildings reveals the number
of families living there. Each family uses
colour to mark off its living area.
Bars where people gather to drink and
dance are one focal point of community
" Ihe traditional Dominican
dwelling reveals an intuitive
knowledge of the art of using
colour. For example, if
the doors are blue, the main
structure will be red,
green or yellow. "
