Federico Mayor
"The moro experience I gather, the more I realize that
Man himself is the cause of his happiness as well as his
misery," said Mahatma Gandhi. We should take inspi¬
ration from the words of this great Indian sage and
politician if we wish to estahlish a globally sustainable
energy system.
Such a system is an important facet of the changes
we must make in order to reduce current asymmetries
in the sharing of resources. These asymmetries, which
are morally unacceptable, generate frustration and
violence and threaten world peace and security at the
dawn of a new millennium.



It is estimated that 2.4 billion people today have no
regular access to electricity. The lack of a reliable means
of heating and lighting the homes , clinics and schools of
some 40 per cent of the world's population living
mainly in rural or remote areas of the developing world
acts as a significant brake on the development process.
In such areas, people more often than not women and
children are obliged to make long journeys to find
drinking water and fuelwood.
Renewable energy electrification would help meet
the basic needs of isolated populations in terms of heat,
light, the pumping and purification of freshwater, edu¬
cational opportunities, basic communications, medical
care, income-generating rural activities and improved
agricultural methods and techniques in short, all
those facilities we think of as necessary for a healthy,
developing community.
40
THE UNESCO lOURIER» FEBRUARY 1997

Leaders of the world's nations who met at the United education, training and public understanding in the
Nations Conference on Environment and Development field of renewable energy as a strategic priority,
in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992 recognized the risk of
rapid climate change caused by gas emissions (some Tfog Solar Summit
of them with clear greenhouse impact) and prepared a
Convention designed to stabilize the earth's climate.
The Conference laid stress on the development of envi¬
ronmentally sound energy systems, particularly new
and renewable sources of energy, to the benefit of
industrialized and developing countries alike.
Industrialized countries can profit from the incor¬
poration of renewable energies into their national
energy programmes. Denmark, for example, today pro¬
duces 3.5 per cent of its electricity from wind, at a
cost that is competitive with traditional fossil fuels.
Renewable energy sources
The World Solar Summit marked the start of a ten-
year plan of almost unprecedented international and
national action and co-operation. The World Solar Pro¬
gramme 1996-2005, which comprises some 300 renew¬
able energy projects, is a major international initiative
with which UlNKSCO is pleased to be associated. Its exe¬
cution requires the commitment of national authori¬
ties, the relevant organizations of the United Nations
system, multilateral and regional development banks,
intergovernmental and non-governmental organiza¬
tions, academic and research institutions, and the pri¬
vate sector.
We now know that integration at the sub-regional



The widespread use of renewable energy sources as or regional levels will never happen if it is only based
part of a global energy system requires increased on economic interest. It is clear that money divides if it
knowledge of the various technologies and their adap- is the only ingredient of alliances. Integration is
tation to different contexts and fields of application. The achieved with common values, with the democratic
importance of further research, education and training ideals of justice, freedom, equality and solidarity
of engineers and technicians cannot be over-empha- enshrined in UiNKSCO's Constitution. There can be no
sized. The availability of unrestricted information and sustainable peace without development; there can be
its communication to decision-makers and the public at no sustainable development without a social context
large will serve to influence opinion and the all-impor- governed by democratic principles; there can be no
tant energy consumption patterns of the population. sustainable development without a human face.
Only if we enhance the quality of life in rural areas We have too often forgotten the human face. We
shall we achieve our target of reaching those who are have forgotten that science and technology are there
excluded from the benefits of progress. Only then will to mitigate human suffering. A system based on equal-
population growth rates and the consequent emigration ity collapsed in 1989 because it had forgotten free¬
flows decrease. The three main interdependent dorn. A system based on freedom can also fail if it for-
dimensions of this initiative are therefore social, edu- gets equality. And neither system takes into account
cational and environmental. Here the media have a fraternity. We must tirelessly build peace in the minds
major role to play. <>f men through our everyday conduct, which is the
Public awareness and participation are the keys to supreme expression of our culture. Let us exercise
success, as in so many other fields. The regional con- our responsibilities and make the indispensable and
sulfations that preceded the World Solar Summit held urgent transformations that human dignity demands. In
in Harare (Zimbabwe) in September 1996 identified a word, let us create a culture of peace.
41
THE UNESCO lOURIER FEBRUARY 1997
