H E R I T A 6 E
The treasure o ERRO RICO
by Pascale Absi
Indigenous miners who work the ore-rich mountain of Potosí
(Bolivia) believe it to be the incarnation of Pachamama, an Andean
god. The city has featured on the World Heritage List since 1987.
Paraguay
Argentina
The Royal Mint (Casa Real de Moneda), below, was completely
rebuilt between 1759 and 1773 by Salvador Villa and Luis Cabello.
It is one of the finest examples of Potosi's colonial architecture.
The history of the Bolivian
city of Potosí began in
1545 when the Spanish began
mining silver deposits in a moun¬
tain which became known as the
Cerro Rico. Within a few years a
rich settlement studded with opu¬
lent baroque churches, theatres
and the mansions of the colonial
bourgeoisie had grown up at the
foot of this 4,000-metre-high
peak, and soon Potosí had a bigger
population than that of London,
Paris or Amsterdam. Fabulous
fiestas were organized by the
wealthy mine-owners. It is said
that a silver bridge stretching
from Potosí to Madrid could have
been built with the ore extracted
from the mountain by the Indians
during the colonial period.
But first and foremost Potosí
was a mining camp whose fortunes
were closely linked to its veins of
ore and to the vicissitudes of inter¬
national markets. After a period
of great wealth, decline set in, and
in the mid-1980s plummeting
prices brought an end to the tin
cycle that had begun at the turn
of the century. The state-run
mines closed, and Potosí was
plunged deep in crisis.
Today it is the capital of the
poorest department in the Bolivian
Andes. Of its 120,000 or so inhab¬
itants, more than 7,000 miners
men, women and children orga¬
nized in co-operatives still work
night and day deep within the
mountain. Mining methods have
barely changed since colonial
times, and because of the com¬
bined effect of accidents, silico¬
sis, poor diet and lack of medical
care, the average life expectancy of
workers is no more than fifty.
GIVETHAT YOU MAY RECEIVE
One August day in 1996 more than
a hundred women from Potosi's
mining co-operatives decided to
occupy the summit of Cerro Rico
to protest against their working
conditions and the policy of priva¬
tizing ore deposits for the benefit

The mining city of
Potosí. In
background, the
baroque cathedral
designed by Manuel
de Sanahuja. It was
not completed until
1838.
of multinational companies. Their
action also had a cultural aim: to
protect the Cerro Rico from the
intrusion of the modern technolo¬
gies used by the big companies
that would threaten its geologi¬
cal stability. One side of the sum¬
mit had already caved in, partly
destroying the mountain's char¬
acteristic conical shape.
The city's entire population
rallied behind the mining women,
whose struggle is far more than a
mere defence of Potosí as a his¬
toric symbol. For everyone, miners
and farmers alike, the Cerro Rico
is the incarnation of Pachamama,
an Andean divinity associated with
the earth's fertility.
The mine workers, who belong
to the region's indigenous,
Queehua-speaking communities,
still have plots of land in the places
from which they came. They often
return to the countryside to do
farm work, attend festivals, or
assume some kind of political
office. Townsfolk and miners they
may be, but they are not cut off
from the rural world. The mining
culture has been built around a
conception of the world rooted in
rural life: you must give in order
to receive; people are not the rulers
of the world, but must negotiate
continually with the forces of
nature in order to gain access to
its wealth. The Potosí miners
believe that the Spirit of the moun¬
tain is the real owner of the mineral
deposits that people are allowed to
mine (but only in exchange for
offerings).
THE GODS OFTHE MOUNTAIN
The present equilibrium between
the workers and their mountain is
the culmination of a long process
of taming the vital forces of the
Cerro, which was intact in 1545
when the Spanish discovered the
existence of fabulous deposits of
silver within it. The Cerro Rico is a
sacred mountain on whose summit
stands a ¡dace ofworship. The min¬
ers say that it has exacted a toll of
human lives in exchange for being
exploited. The earliest sacrifice
was made by the Indians who came
to Potosí to do compulsory service
for the Spanish crown and died in
their thousands in the bowels of
the mountain. It is their blood, so it
is said, that gives the mountain its
singular red colour. Nowadays,
sated at long last, the Cerro Rico
lets people five in exchange for more
modest offerings.
The Europeans appropriated
the souls of the indigenous popu¬
lation as well as the riches of
South America. The Spanish soon
replaced the divinity of the moun¬
tain by the Madonna de la Cande¬
laria (Our Lady of Candlemas).
They built chapels along the
mountain roads, and placed a
cross on the summit. Pagan ele¬
ments that could not be assimi¬
lated by the Catholic missionaries
(ancestor worship, for example)
were considered to be devil-wor¬
ship and condemned.
Today the miners divide their
loyalties between two divinities,
Pachamama and Tío. Pachamama
is associated with the mountain and
is personified at the entrance to
each mine by an effigy of the Vir¬
gin Mary, whose protection the min¬
ers solicit. She is also the wife of
Tío, the god of mine shafts and the
lord ofmining and mineral deposits. I

Represented by mud stat¬
uettes placed here and there
along the mine galleries, Tío has
inherited horns, hooves, forked
tail and the nickname diablo from
the European image of the devil.
Yet the moral idea of the devil
and the Manichean division into
good and evil propounded by the
Catholic Church have never been
totally integrated into Andean con¬
cepts of the vital forces of Nature.
The devil of the mine punishes
workers who fail to make offer¬
ings to him not because he is evil
but because he is hungry. He is
held responsible for most of the
mortal accidents due to roof-falls
or suffocation on these occasions
he is said to have eaten his vic¬
tims. Propitiatory rites therefore
consist largely of feeding the mine
divinities in order to solicit their
wealth and win protection from
their gargantuan appetites. Every
Friday miners gather around one
of Tío 's statuettes, pour a spot of
alcohol at his feet, lay a few coca
leaves on his outstretched hands
and place a lighted cigarette
between his lips. During the dry
season, the miners improve his
rations by sacrificing llamas.
Tío is a strangely anthropo¬
morphic figure, sitting amongst
the men as if he were one of their
number and being included in
A miner examines a
shard of ore he has
just hacked from the
shaft wall.
their conversations. He is a work¬
mate, almost a friend. He can even
be heard of an evening in the
silence of the abandoned mine,
emptying a wheelbarrow or hack¬
ing away at the rock. Some miners
tell how, when they arrive at their
posts in the morning, they find
their work already partly done.
Sometimes dressed as a miner,
with helmet, lamp and cloven
hooves, jewels, blond hair and out-
sized sex, Tío has been known to
appear to a miner working alone in
the galleries and guide him to a
particularly rich seam or suggest
they make some kind of pact. In
return for greater wealth, he will
ask the miner for exceptional
offerings, such as his soul or a
human sacrifice.
A WORKMATE AND A GOD
The capture of a miner's soul
through a pact with Tío is only the
extreme manifestation of the influ¬
ence of diabolical forces on human
beings. According to Potosí min¬
ers , going down the mine turns you
into something of a devil yourself.
When they first start work, the
men of the Cerro fall victim to an
initiatory disease corresponding to
the temporary seizure of their soul
by Tío. This event, regarded as a
baptism, marks their entrance into
the circle of devils, an essential
qualification for work underground
and a guarantee of the quality of
their output.
There is a tenuous dividing line
between the devil who becomes a
miner and the miner who becomes
a devil. In the mine their roles are
interchangeable; the man becomes
Pachamama's lover. Mining is
described as a fertile sexual rela¬
tionship: the miners talk about lift¬
ing the skirts and using their crow¬
bar to deflower the woman-
mountain whom they fertilize with
their offerings and deliver each
day of her minerals.
The same energy circulates
between the miners and the spirits
H
of the mountain. They say in the
Cerro that men give life to the mine
with their breath, just as the mine
gives life to men. Just as mines cave
in when they are no longer
exploited, miners fall ill and die
when they no longer go to work.
One August morning in 1996
the women members of the co¬
operatives came to defend this
fragile balance which is threat¬
ened by large-scale mining of the
Cerro Rico. In the evening of the
fourth day of their occupation, as
they were preparing to pour a liba¬
tion to Pachamama from a bottle
of spirits they had brought with
them to fight the bitter cold, one
of them told me, "You know, all
these machines will spell the end of
the Cerro. It might even collapse,
and that would make Pachamama
very angry. ..." H

The Cerro Rico.
In Potosí it is said
that the mountain
owes its reddish
colour to the blood of
the thousands of
miners who have
perished working
deep within it.
THE SPANISH KING'S SILVER
The great days of Potosí were in the early 17th century when it
was the biggest mining and industrial complex in South Amer¬
ica. Twenty-two successive lagunas or reservoirs equipped with
locks fed water to an artificial watercourse {La Rivera) which
powered 140 ingenios or mills where the silver ore was ground,
mixed with mercury and melted into bars in fireclay kilns known
as huayras or guayras before being stamped with the official
mark of the Spanish Royal Mint. This was known as the patio
mining technique.
Potosí had a population of 160,000 at that time. Each year
some 13,000 Indians, bound under the mita system of forced
labour, came to the city with their families, about 60,000 peo¬
ple in all. Drawn from all over the high Andean plateau, these
peoples of diverse ethnic origins played a big hand in shaping
the city as it is today. The indigenous people's district is still
divided into 17 parishes, an echo of the 17 Andean provinces sub¬
jected to the mita.
Even today, five of the 22 reservoirs still provide about 80,000
people with water. The entire chain of production has been pre¬
served intactmines to dams, aqueducts, refineries and kilns.
Many other traces of Potosi's past glory and prosperity have
also survived. There are some 22 parish or monastic churches,
some dating from the 16th century, numerous mansions in the
Spanish town centre. Above all, there is the Royal Mint, which was
rebuilt between 1759 and 1773. About 2,000 colonial buildings
have been identified, the oldest being the Casa Vicaria (1615). The
blend of baroque and local (Mestizo) architectural styles that
began to appear in the second half of the 17th century can be seen
in the churches of La Compañía (1700-1707), Santa Teresa
(1685), San Lorenzo (1728-1744) and San Martin.
In 1630 a fracture In an embankment wall caused a lot of
damage In the indigenous district. Rebuilding work went on
into the 18th century. Mining activity continued until Bolivian
independence in 1825, after which its decline, which had already
begunproduction methods had remained unchanged for a
century and a halfbecame steeper.
