manuscripts on the move
BY GERALD MESSADIE
Manuscripts
travelled
adventurously
along the
information
highways of the
medieval world
The reproduction of the written word
began long before printing with mov¬
able type was invented in the middle
of the tenth century by the Chinese Pi
Sheng. By the end of the third millennium of
the pre-Christian era religious and political
documents were being copied on clay tablets
in the Near and Middle East. These copies were
made for the ruling castes, and it is unlikely
that they circulated beyond the borders of
the kingdoms where they were produced, for
they were of interest to few people. Later,
copies were also made of famous literary works
such as the ancient Mesopotamian epic of Gil-
gamesh, king of the city of Uruk. The story
of Gilgamcsh, who was deified and mythified
after his death in 2650 B.C., is both a found¬
ing myth and the celebration of a hero. The
cult of the hero was probably the reason why
poems such as the Iliad and the Mahabharata
were also copied several centuries later.
MProduction, collection
andpreservation
Fourteen sets of fragments of the Gilgamesh
Epic have been found between present-day
Turkey and Iraq. While language barriers do
not seem to have been real obstacles to the cir¬
culation of manuscripts, no proof has sur¬
vived to suggest that manuscripts crossed cul-
10 r
'* the unesco Courier iune 1997
I ravellers arriving in Beijing.
Miniature from a French
version (c. 1410) of The Travels
of Marco Polo.
tural frontiers. For instance, although Greek
was spoken throughout the Mediterranean
basin by the fourth century A.D., not a sin¬
gle fragment of the Iliad has been found either
in Palestine, Carthage or in major centres on
the Silk Route. The transport of a long piece
of writing recorded on clay tablets must have
been a laborious affair (the complete 3,000-
line version of the Gilgamesh epic would have
weighed several dozen kg). Even so, the spread
of papyrus and parchment, which consider¬
ably lightened this burden (a long poem could
have been recorded on a few volumina or
scrolls), only seems to have had a slight impact
on the communication of ideas and cultural
transfer.
Early in the first millennium of the Chris¬
tian era, literacy rates were still minimal in
most of the world. Written texts were
intended to be read in public, and this was
not to everyone's taste. In the second century,
for example, the Latin poet Juvenal com¬
plained that he had had to listen to readings of
many an indigestible tragedy.
Manuscripts were highly prized by certain
princes, who wished to accumulate as much
learning a magical commodity as possible
but were not very interested in transmitting it.
In the fourth century B.C. in Alexandria cus¬
toms officials seized all the books they found
on ships and had copies of them made for

restitution to their owners. The originals were
placed in the city's two great libraries, among
the most fabulous of the ancient world, whose
users were physicians looking for exotic reme¬
dies, navigators seeking maritime informa¬
tion, and minor poets on the lookout for
pieces of obscure knowledge or material to
plagiarize.
The first conclusion to be drawn is that



the spread of culture via manuscripts was neg¬
ligible until very late in Antiquity.
IApproval, condemnation
and destruction
Cultural barriers became slightly more per¬
meable with the coming of commercial pub¬
lishing in the strict sense, which was first prac¬
tised in Rome around the first century B.C.
Authors gave copyists the original version of
a piece of work so that several copies could be
made and offered to prospective buyers. These
copies on parchment were relatively costly,
and the copyist paid the author royalties based
on the number of copies sold or on his esti¬
mate of the value of the work. The pages of
parchment were covered with writing on both
sides and then sewn together to form what is
now called a codex, a book that was easy to
carry.
Copies of works by Aristotle began to be
found in Baghdad (where a Greek colony
prospered) and those of Tacitus in Britain.
But it would be an exaggeration to think that
this form of publishing had inaugurated the
free flow of ideas. The excesses of Imperial
Rome gave rise to many pamphlets that were
not to the liking of the emperors, and copy¬
ists who reproduced impertinent documents
did so at their own risk. The censor's hand
became particularly heavy after the reign of
Constantine the Great.
In the fifth century almost all the works of
the third-century philosopher Porphyry,
whose writings were likely "to rouse God's
anger", were destroyed. The works of the first-
century historians Seneca the Rhetorician,
Scrvilius Nonianus, Cluvius Rufus, Fabius
Rusticus, Aufidius Bassus and nearly all those
of Vclleius Paterculus, have also alarmingly
disappeared. There are excellent reasons to
believe that a large number of copies of the
work of Heraclitus, one of the greatest
thinkers of ancient Greece and perhaps of all
time, were in circulation until the second or
third centuries. All that has survived of them,
less than five pages of large print, has come
down to us indirectly in the form of quota¬
tions from authors in possession of complete
copies of a work that was probably also
destroyed.
Under the Christian Roman Empire,
Uetail of an Egyptian
papyrus manuscript from the
reign of Psamtlkl
(c. 663-609 B.C.).
monks soon became the only people licenced
to copy pieces of writing. They took advantage
of the situation and, following their superiors'
injunctions, obeyed their religious convic¬
tions. A monk named Xiphilin wrote, and of
course abridged, the only version that has
come down to us of Dio Cassius's history of
Rome, and Flavius Josephus's The Antiquities
of the Jews was "reworked" with the inter¬
polation of a passage on Jesus.
The second conclusion is that the more
ideas a work contained the smaller the likeli¬
hood that it would circulate untouched.
Manipulation, distortion
and invention
An additional peril to those of distortion and
censorship was that of manipulation by "well
intcntioned" copyists and the absurd mix-
ups due to the authors themselves. In the
reports despatched by Megasthenes, the Greek
ambassador to the court of Candragupta Mau-
rya in the fourth century B.C., it is impossi¬
ble to distinguish what is really Hindu from
what merely reflects the author's determination
to "Hellcnizc" his observations, as when he
purports to identify Dionysus and Hercules
among the Hindu gods.
»«e.

Very few authors, even including the great¬
est writers of Antiquity, escaped the indig¬
nity of forgery. In those days people did not
know how to distinguish the authentic from
the false on the basis of style, writing or the
material used. Even today we do not know
for sure which texts were authentically and
entirely written by Plato, although some such
as the Second Alcibiades, the Theages and the
Axiochos are unanimously recognized to be
fakes. The First Alcibiades itself, with the sur¬
prising interruption by Zarathustra, is "dubi¬
ous". It is now accepted that Aristotle never
wrote the book on the Wise Men that was
long attributed to him.
The Italian historian Arnaldo Momigliano
believed that most Greek and Latin texts pur¬
porting to be translations of oriental originals
dealing with such figures as Zarathustra, Thoth
and Ilystaspe are pu re fabrications. Despite their
immense talents, the Greeks were not gifted
linguists. They garbled Persian and made a hash
of Hebrew, and all Egyptologists know that the
Greek texts purporting to be reproductions
of originals of the cult of Isis are embellish¬
ments that bear little relationship to the orig¬
inal. Plotinus asked Porphyry to unmask the
forger who had produced an Apocalypse of
Zarathustra, and as early as the third century
B.C., clever swindlers tried to sell "Aristotle's
real library" to Ptolemy III Eurcgetcs.
It was just as true in the past as it is today
that the most far-fetched stories the ones
that appealed to the simple stood the best
chance of survival. Herodotus (circa 480-425
B.C.) was taken in by the confabulations of
i doctor examines a urine
sample, following precepts
laid down by the great Persian
physician, alchemist and
philosopher Rhazès (9th-10th
century). Detail from a French
14th-century manuscript.
I he great library at
Alexandria (Egypt). The most
famous library of Antiquity, it
may have contained as many
as 700,000 volumes. Late
19th-century Hungarian
engraving.
Aristcas of Proconnesus (circa 550 B.C.) who
"described" the griffins, bird-men and giant
ants that were to be found in Asia. Giving cre¬
dence to the writings of the man Cicero had
dubbed "the father of history", Alexander the
Great believed that the Nile was a tributary
of the Indus. Seventeen centuries later Marco
Polo gave a description of China in his Book
of Travels that was invented from start to fin¬
ish and contained no mention of the existence
of paper, tea, the Great Wall, printing, bank¬
notes, ice-cream, none of which were known
in the West. Yet this far-fetched account
enjoyed a huge success. Of the versions pro¬
duced at the time 143 have survived, and there
must have been hundreds more!
The ideas and information that travelled
with manuscripts were clearly often at second
or even third hand. Accounts of the Far or Mid¬
dle East that reached the Greeks were often
confabulations, and so were many of the man¬
uscripts they wrote about them. More recently,
manuscripts about the New World especially
Spanish and Portuguese were also largely unre¬
liable, and the continent they described was
presented to Europeans as a land of fantasy.
The third conclusion to be drawn is that
false ideas circulate far more easily than true
ones.
Translation, utilization,
rediscovery
The Western tradition which holds that "the
Arabs" saved the Greek cultural heritage
should not be accepted without qualification,
true though it is that Arabs translated almost
all Aristotle and Plato, and Neo-Platonists
like Plotinus, Ptolemy and Euclid. It does
mean, however, that manuscripts of these texts
already existed. Furthermore, the term "Arab"
is very loosely used in this context since the
translators concerned included Turks, Per¬
sians, Mesopotamians from Baghdad, Jews
and converted Christians. Nor do the transla¬
tions seem always to have been masterpieces of
precision; some of the "free" interpretations
they contain are bewildering. The ideas they
conveyed to readers could often be quite dif¬
ferent from those in the original texts.
The greatest paradox is that manuscripts
circulated when the Islamic empires were at the
height of their power and in a totally different
way from that which is generally accepted. It
was through Latin and Hebrew translations of
Averroës's commentaries on Aristotle that
many Western Christian thinkers, including
Roger Bacon and Duns Scotus, first came to
know about Aristotle's ideas. Avcrroism nour¬
ished Christian philosophy and theology until
Thomas Aquinas launched his great diatribe
against the Parisian Avcrroists in 1274.

The most famous manuscripts in the mod¬
ern world are the Dead Sea Scrolls. One of
their special features is that they never reached
their destination. Discovered by chance in the
twentieth century, some twenty-two centuries
after they were written, they raise a question
which is seldom mentioned but is nevertheless
central to the transmission of ideas via manu¬
scripts: who were they intended for? Were
these monks from Qumrân on the shore of
the Dead Sea, known as "Esscncs", who inde-
fatigably covered parchment rolls with copies
(often considerably modified) of whole books
of the Old Testament, working for them¬
selves, or were their copies meant for other
communities? And if so, which ones? What
originals did they use? It is very likely that
other manuscripts of the same type are await¬
ing discovery like the fragments discovered
in 1884 in Jerusalem which were rejected as
fakes through the obstinacy of a French
palaeographer and now seem to have been lost
forever.
Incidentally, one might also wonder what
happened to the hand-written scrolls that
Buddhist monks carried for centuries along
the Silk Route. There were hundreds of these
monks, and each one travelled with about fif¬
teen scrolls as his sole luggage. This adds up to
a large number of lost scrolls	
A fourth conclusion may be drawn,
namely that manuscripts circulated more eas¬
ily between cultures that were politically close
and were preserved with greater security in
those circumstances.
The men of letters of the young Islamic
empire were interested in the Greek and Latin
learning which had fostered the Byzantine
empire they were in the process of devouring,
and educated Christians were interested in the
learning of the Muslims who were threatening
them. And if we still have Latin rather than
Greek writings about the Celts, we should
probably be grateful to imperial administra¬
tors who were sufficiently interested in the
description of foreign peoples to have their
manuscripts copied in large numbers, thereby
increasing their chances of survival.
An appendix may be added to the fourth
conclusion: manuscripts have a far better
chance of surviving if they serve political and
ideological ends.
Quintactas
M Printing, diffusion
andprohibition
Printing seems to have decisively changed the
situation for manuscripts. By producing hun¬
dreds of copies of a text, the printing press
made it more likely that at least a few would
survive. In principle this was true except that
censorship of manuscripts intensified for an
4.TX ilni>iiio
couenet
tont) au
rúisq:
2&08qi
frnftnri
effe cfcfi
62
tú in co
i btblu
fuitCvti
pttrcgi
pcrttoe
nebant
ri Ubî(
rû nlcjfc I
n intent ¡
tú id c |
edftue!
diöfcö {
etíjmí I
fedcenJ
¿¡in hum mm.inimhitTn s
BlI urning books. Engraving
from Hartmann Schedel's
"Universal Chronicle", also
known as the Nuremberg
Chronicle (1493).
obvious reason, to stop them reaching the
printer. Having to destroy all the printed
copies and making possession of any surviv¬
ing copies a crime made the task of the thought
police much more complicated.
One of the most striking examples of this
kind of censorship is to be seen in the tribu¬
lations of a manuscript written in the seven¬
teenth century, which was copied by hand and
circulated throughout Europe until 1690
before being published anonymously in 1719,
probably in Holland. This printed edition
was seized and destroyed. Only three copies
have survived and are today conserved at the
universities of Leyden, Góttingen and Cornell
respectively. A replica was published in 1994 in
Italy by Einaudi, 275 years later. This work
by an unknown author, the Treatise of the
Three Impostors, or the Mind ofMr. Spinoza,
boldly claimed that the three monotheistic
religions were of human, not divine, inspira¬
tion. Many other manuscripts, old and new,
arc still sleeping in secret archives and inacces¬
sible libraries.
I will end this article with a fifth conclu¬
sion, namely that the most threatened manu¬
scripts are those that arc richest in ideas. I
