An institution on trial
BY EDMUNDO OLIVEIRA 2L¿^¿^Ú^^
Prison causes more ethical, social, psychological
and economic problems than it solves. What can be done to improve
the penal system?
In the late twentieth century, an age of
supposedly scientific penology,
humanity has far to go before it reaches that
perfect state where it can do away with prisons.
Modern society still finds it necessary to
respond to crime with punishment.
The retributive character of penal measures
stems directly from the nature of the appara¬
tus used to fight crime. In spite of advances
in criminology in discovering the causes of
crime, there still remains a probability that
crimes and misdemeanours will be commit¬
ted, and the threat of sanctions as a deterrent
is thus indispensable.
But if punishment is a necessity, it must
not infringe certain inalienable human rights.
Above all, penalties must be proportional to
the wrong that has been caused and to the
o ffender's degree of culpability. The principle
in physics that every action gives rise to an
equal and opposite reaction might be applied
here. But perhaps the idea of the just penalty
is a Utopian dream. Although a perfect solu¬
tion is unattainable, a reasonable solution must
be sought, which means proceeding, as in
mathematics, by successive approximations,
setting the offence and its consequences against
the sacrifice imposed on the perpetrator by
the punishment inflicted. What, for instance,
is the point of inflicting a penalty involving
loss of civil rights on someone who has already
brought his own name into disrepute?
Regrettably, prison continues to generate
more ethical, social, psychological and eco¬
nomic problems than it solves. In practice, the
rehabilitation desired by many systems of
criminal law around the world ends in disil¬
lusionment, despair and revolt against a soci¬
ety that closes its doors to ex-convicts. The
judicial system is still seeking ways to carry out
Visiting day at Gatesville
women's prison, Texas
(U.S.A.).

The cell's naked light bulb.
Photo taken by Michael Inns
penal sanctions that provide adequate «hile he was an inmate at
Wandsworth prison in London
responses to the need for the psychological (see page 35).
rehabilitation of offenders and their reinte¬
gration into society.
There is an urgent need to find alternatives
to custodial sentences, so that offenders with
the exception of those who posea definite and
continuing threat can be re-educated for pro¬
ductive lives in society. Every penologist knows
that most criminals retain some vestiges of
morality, feel rejected and scorned, seek for¬
giveness from their families and the community
for the offence they have committed and fre¬
quently acknowledge the validity of their pun¬
ishment. They often turn themselves in, and
remorse even leads some of them to take their
own lives.
If the judicial system itself regards sentences
as punitive measures, how can inmates faced
with the soul-destroying experience of prison
life hope that they can ever again be useful mem¬
bers of society? It is indispensable to improve
and modernize penal and judicial systems so
that sentences and their application can restore
the inmate's dignity and prepare him or her
for a constructive role in society. Imprison¬
ment should be a last resort, for individuals
who pose a clear threat to the community.
The problems facing prison systems cannot
be solved in isolation, but must be consid¬
ered in relation to social justice and to the law-
enforcement and judicial systems and inte¬
grated into society as a whole. This requires the
active participation of all sectors of society,

which must set aside their prejudices and shed
their indifference.
Dealing with the problems of the prison
system calls for an innovative approach to
incarceration and the adoption of alternative
measures that, while punishing the offence,
are likely to re-educate the offender for respon¬
sible citizenship.
Should prison
be abolished?
A recent penal reform movement has put forward the
idea of abolishing prison, but although its underlying
logic can be defended in theory, there seems no obvious
way of putting the idea into effect in institutional terms,
given the current state of society.
Abolitionists emphasize the penal system's selective
nature and its limited operational capacity (prisons are
filled with poor people). They argue that incarceration
as a form of punishment has already been abolished for
those they call "underground criminals"lawbreakers
who escape imprisonment because of their prestige,
privilege or influence.
But blame for the impunity of "underground crimi¬
nals" should be laid at the doorstep of the judicial rather
than the penal system. What should be done is not abol¬
ish prisons or imprison all and sundry, but improve the effi¬
ciency of the criminal law. It would also be a good idea if,
once a sentence is handed down, it could subsequently
be adapted to take account of the offender's develop¬
ment during the rehabilitation process. H E. 0.

