A Buddhist remedy BY HAYAO KAWAI
The unifying approach of Buddhist thought
encourages a fruitful relationship between doctor
and patient
I A major psychological problem of our
I times is what I call "loss of relatedness".
It takes many forms and seems to me to some
degree intertwined with the progress of mod¬
ern science and technology.
Here are two examples taken from my
experience as a psychotherapist.
The father of a boy who obstinately
refused to go to school over a long period
once said to me: "Today human beings can go
to the moon and back when somebody merely
"The dichotomy between body presses a button. Why can't you find the right
and mind posited by Western , .
H.-..-1.*,h« button to press to make my son go to
thought seems to be r j
responsible for an increase in
psychosomatic illnesses."
school?" In other words, he wanted to oper¬
ate his son like a machine. Sensing this lack of
"relatedness", the son resisted his father, con¬
sciously or unconsciously.
Another modern trend is the increase in
psychosomatic diseases. Modern medicine,
based on the premise of a dichotomy between
mind and body, has made great progress in
many fields, especially the conquest of dis-'
ease. But at the same time, this dichotomy
seems to be responsible for an increase in psy¬
chosomatic illnesses; it is almost as if nature
were taking revenge.
I suspect that the rapid progress of mod¬
ern science has something to do with this. To
see whether this is so let us examine the main
principles of scientific methodology.
The basic premise of scientific methodol¬
ogy is that the observer must be separated

W
H
H
::M-
m
i^>
M;*.
from the phenomena that are observed, so
that the results of observation are indepen¬
dent of the observer and have universal value.
The distinction between subject and object is
a great achievement of modern European cul¬
ture, which can claim thereby to have given
science its universal quality.
Science has also become inseparable from
technology, which is now available to anyone.
To use technology, all you have to do is follow
the instructions in the manual; you don't
need any special skill or ability. As the father
of the high-school boy said, a human being can
go to the moon just by pressing buttons.
The success of modern technology has led
many people to want to apply its methods to
family and social relationships. Everybody
wants to know the best technique for con¬
trolling or managing others. There has been a
flowering of "how to" knowledge: how to raise
a good baby, how to treat old people, and so on.
The Buddha is shown
meditating (centre) and
preaching on a 5th-6th-
century-A.D. mándala from
Bamyan (Afghanistan).
The social and human sciences have fol¬
lowed in the wake of the natural sciences and
technology. When a researcher can objectify a
specific aspect of a human being this approach
can achieve reasonable results, but if we think
of a person as a whole being, the methods of
natural science do not work. A researcher is
human, so that it is impossible to make a clear
distinction between subject and object; the
quality of the relationship between the subject
and object always influences the results.
The wholeness
ofhuman heings
As a psychotherapist, if I meet a hyperactive
six-year-old boy who cannot concentrate on
his work in the classroom and try to be as
objective as possible and avoid any relationship
with him, all I can say is that he is insecure, of
low intelligence and so on. However, if I try to

establish a good relationship with him, so
that he feels protected and is allowed to behave
freely, his behaviour will change.
The important thing is not so much to
observe his present situation accurately as to
wait for his inner possibilities to show them¬
selves. No positive results can be achieved in
psychotherapy unless there is a relationship
between subject and object. This is also true in
education and some fields of medicine. When
I have come across patients with psychoso¬
matic diseases I have sometimes deliberately
tried not to explore their causes, give advice
or use medical drugs. While I have not "cured"
these patients, their symptoms have sponta¬
neously disappeared.
This approach is completely different fro m
technology, where everything is very clear-cut.
W the unesco Courier February i99b
A father and son are shown in
this detail from an Indian
Buddhist low-relief sculpture
(2nd century B.C.).
What one should do and the kind of responses
one gets are all described in the operating man¬
ual: a specific action produces specific results.
Instead, I wait for something to happen, with¬
out knowing exactly what it will be. My
approach is heuristic and I feel that I am cre¬
ating something. Patients are cured by their
creative activities, which are fostered by the
relationship between them and me.
The Buddhist approach
I think Buddhism has much to teach us about
this kind of relationship.
The most important point stressed by the
Buddhist text known as the Garland sutra is
that no being has its own innate "self-nature"."
I am myself because of an infinite number of
relations that I have with others. This is a rad¬
ically different idea from the common belief
that everything that exists has its own nature
and then has its own relations with others.
The Garland sutra starts from the premise
that there are relationships and that these rela¬
tionships define each being.
This Buddhist idea stems from a state of
consciousness which is different from the
ordinary state in which each object is sepa¬
rated from others. At a different level of con¬
sciousness the demarcations between objects
become blurred and eventually everything
becomes one being which cannot be named.
This whole being is called Nothingness because
it has no name, but actually one might say
that it is Everything.
After this experience, consciousness returns
to its ordinary state in which the whole being
manifests itself as separate objects or creatures.
However, each object is a manifestation of the
whole being. In the Kegon School of Buddhism,
this is known as "the Arising of True Nature".
This is what I do in psychotherapy when
I abandon active intentions and simply wait on
events. This attitude is diametrically opposed
to that of modern science and technology. Our
everyday consciousness is oriented by modern
science towards discrimination, whereas in
Buddhism it is oriented towards fusion.
Those who arc totally dominated by mod¬
ern scientific thinking may feel that Buddhist
ideas are confused or nonsensical. For my part ,
I think we need Buddhist ideas as a necessary
counterweight which may, by admitting the
existence of a relationship between subject and
object, make a positive contribution to the
development of science and technology.
