LISTENING
It's rumba time!
BY ISABELLE LEYMARIE
The deportation of millions of Africans to the Americas during the dark centuries of the slave
trade was one of the worst tragedies of history. It also gave rise to an extraordinary process of
cultural exchange. The story of the rumba shows this transatlantic cross-fertilization at work.
t Afro-American music began making its
way back from the Americas to African
shores in the 1920s. It had changed, and
returned in a creolized, hybrid form which
engendered stimulating new musical forms
such as mbaqanga in South Africa, juju in
Nigeria, "highlife" in Ghana and mbalax in
Senegal. At the same time, contemporary
Africanmusic, influenced by jazz, soul, funk,
rap, Cuban rhythms, reggae, beginne and
calypso began moving to the New World, bear¬
ing fertile seeds of change.
Much secular Afro-Latin and Afro-
Caribbean music is of Bantu origin, from
regions which once belonged to the ancient
kingdom of Kongo. American dances such as
chumbe, paracumbe, fandango, candombe,
yuka, makuta, samba and conga are all
danced to a regular drum beat with strong
hip gyrations and pelvic thrusts and can incon-
testably be traced back to Kongo sources.
The Congolese musician Rido Dieudonné
Bayonne (see box) has recently traced the
remarkable history of the rumba.
The rumba brava, which is derived from
fertility and war rituals, first appeared in Cuba
in the mid-nineteenth century. Today, it is still
danced in the poor neighbourhoods of Havana
and Matanzas, and in Cuban communities in
the United States. The dance has three vari¬
ants: theeroticguaguaucó, the yambu, which
is more buttoned up, and the acrobatic Colum¬
bia, which is usually a men-only dance. The
most popular version today is Úieguaguancó,
and its rhythms have been widely incorporated
into Latin jazz and salsa.
The birth of son
Some years later, a more hybrid rhythm known
as son was born in the rural areas of Cuba's
Oriente province. Spanish in origin, son has
become syncopated through contact with
Blacks. It was initially played using a mar im¬
buía (xylophone) or a tres (a type of guitar
with three double chords), a bongo and a
botija, a jug which the instrumentalist blows
into to produce sounds like a bass. Needy
musicians often made rough-and-ready 1res
out of packing boxes for codfish. Like samba
or calypso, son lyrics are a mine of broad and
satirical humour and constitute a juicy chron¬
icle of Cuban life.
Son took root in Havana in the early twen¬
tieth century. It was censored in the 1920s
during the dictatorship of Gerardo Machado
because it was regarded as too "African", but
it survived in the city's Black neighbourhoods.
Under the influence of jazz, the trumpet soon
became part of son combos, which were seven
strong and usually included two singers. Com¬
petitions were held among different groups
and occasionally degenerated into altercations
requiring police intervention.
In the 1920s, when the tango and popular
Mexican music were all the rage in the United
States, several American firms offered record¬
ing contracts toson groups. The Sexteto Occi¬
dente, the Septeto Habanero, the Septeto
Nacional and the Trio Matamoros all helped
win a reputation for this music which then
very quickly made its way into the homes of the
46
THE UNESCO COURIER 1

Rido Bayonne
o on stage
Further reading and listening about slavery,
Rido Bayonne, and Afro-Cuban music:
Slavery: an Unpunished Crime, Unesco Courier, October 1994.
Interview with Rido Bayonne, in The Body and the Self,
Unesco Courier, April 1997.
"Gueule de Black," Rido Bayonne in concert,
DC Jazz aux Remparts, JAR 64008
La salsa et le latinjazz, by Isabelle Leymarie, Presses
universitaires de France ("Que sais-je?" series), Paris, 1993.
Du tango au reggae, Musiques noires d'Amérique latine
et des Caraïbes ("From the Tango to Reggae, Black Music of
Latin America and the Caribbean"),
by Isabelle Leymarie, Flammarion, Paris, 1996.
Cuban Fire. Musiques Populaires d'expression cubaine,
Isabelle Leymarie, Outremesure, Paris, 1996.
Musiques caraïbes, Isabelle Leymarie,
Actes Sud-Cité de la Musique, Paris, 1996.
white, Cuban middle class. Havana's elegant
clubs soon began ojtening their doors to son
musicians.
Together with rumba brava, son is still
highly popular among Cubans today, and is the
basis of the dance music known as salsa.
From rumba to soukous
At the same time, in Africa and particularly in
Congo and the former Zaire, where music lovers
hear the distant echo of their own musical her¬
itage in Cuban rhythms, many "Latin" bands
were created, their singers reproducing Span¬
ish lyrics phonetically without understanding
what they meant. Promoted under the more
commercially appealing name of "rumba", a
blend of son, West Indian beguine and indige¬
nous rhythms later gave rise to Zairean and
Congolese rumba. Just as anecdotal as its Cuban
cousin, this African rumba recounts the small
details of daily life, and praises the charms of
women and nature using the melodic scansion
of lingala (a Bantu language).
With the rise of Rock n' Roll and the pop¬
ularity of the twist in the 1960s Congolese
groups replaced their acoustic guitars with
electric guitars. Towards the end of the
decade, the soukous, a hippy dance that is
particularly suggestive when performed by
women, became more popular than the local
rumba. Influenced by soul and by the Chris¬
tian hymns introduced to Africa by mission¬
aries, sukous also underwent changes and
became more dynamic and more fundamen¬
tally African.
A festival of rumba
In April 1998, the Congolese composer, band-leader and multi-instrumentalist
Rido Bayonne is organizing a four-day music festival in the Paris suburb of Clichy
la Garenne to commemorate the abolition of slavery in the French colonies in 1848.
The event, entitled "Autour de la Rumba", will feature Cuban and Congolese
music, zouk, Senegalese reggae, hip hop, the art of African griots, and rhythm
and blues. There will also be a more surprising encounter between rumba and
baroque and classical music.
Rido Bayonne's Big Band Afro-Jazz, the Saint-Chaffre du Monastier Band
and a chamber orchestra will join forces for the first performance of Bayonne's
latest composition, Mémoires (Cause à effet) which is inspired by the transat¬
lantic musical saga.
West -African chordophones, Arabic drums, fifty horns and some 20 Western
string instrumentsviolins, cellos and basseswill all perform together. Five
flautists perched in a baobob tree will then play "a hymn to life and to the
spritual communion of the continents." Below them, female singers and dancers,
accompanied by guitar, piano, keyboard, drums, and other percussion instruments
will celebrate the latest forms of this creative blend of jazz, blues, sukuss,
calypso, reggae and rumba.
The slave trade and the upheavals it caused thus give way to a euphoric
musical marriage celebrated byeffervescentrhythms.Thisheartfeltand highly
personal tribute to African ancestors who were forced to make the journey to Amer¬
ica is also a hymn to human brotherhood brought together on this occasion by
the magic of art, and the artist's universal vision and creativity. I. L.
