China: a down-to-earth hereafter
BY FRANÇOISE AUBIN
In Chinese
civilization, the
dead, the gods
and the living
have sound
practical reasons
to keep in contact
Chinese civilization has never held a hard-
and-fast view of the hereafter, although
some aspects of it have never changed. The gods
are believed to be all-pervasive: they are an imma¬
nent part of the earthly world, and if carefully
handled they can help fulfil human aspirations
to material well-being. In Mediterranean soci¬
eties, on the other hand, the gods (or the one
God the creator) are transcendental and live
outside the perceptible universe. According to
another time-honoured Chinese tradition, the
human soul is divided into a series of superior
souls, destined for a spiritual future after death,
and a scries of inferior, material souls linked to
the corpse and the grave.
When China was united into an Empire
in the third century B.C., popular expecta
tions of the afterlife were couched in terms
of a rather dismal sojourn at the springs of
the Yellow River. Those who could do so tried
to avoid this fate by engaging in a frantic quest
for immortality and in mystic journeys under
the guidance of a Taoist master. The disciples
of Confucius, on the other hand, sought only
to achieve a state of moral righteousness with
which to serve the ruler. They regarded immor¬
tality only as an allegory for mental purity.
Between the third and sixth centuries A.D.,
the introduction of Buddhism revolutionized
the religious landscape, and the different reli¬
gions began to adapt to each other. The Indian
religion soon became a Chinese one as its writ¬
ings were translated and as it came to absorb
local beliefs and practices. Taoism, for its part,

On the occasion of a Taoist
festival in Singapore, "paper
money" is burnt as an offering
to the dead by their
descendants.
The turtle and the snake,
symbols of yin and yang,
feature on a contemporary
Chinese print (right).
made substantial borrowings from Buddhism.
Meanwhile, the popular religion practised daily
by lay people of all social classes took from
Buddhism and Taoism a pantheon of protective
gods, and Confucianism continued to uphold
filial piety as the model of all virtue.
Underworld tribunals
By about the ninth century, the shape of the
hereafter had been clearly established. A man is
endowed with three souls or series of souls.
Women are rarely mentioned, except to con¬
firm that they follow their menfolk in the next
world, as they do in this one, although usually
without laying down their lives to do so.
Of the three souls with which men are
endowed, the hun or spiritual soul remains
attached to the gravestone in memory of the
deceased on the family altar and receives trib¬
ute from the descendants in the form of offer¬
ings of incense and food. The earthly soul,
p'o, resides in the grave, and is also sustained
by the gifts of descendants during festivals
honouring the dead. The third soul is tried
by a series of tribunals in an underground
world located, according to the most com¬
mon tradition, on the Eastern Sacred Peak of
T'ai-shan, in Shantung province.
The pragmatism of Chinese civilization
shows itself here. The underworld tribunals,
although Buddhist in origin, arc structured
and run on the lines of imperial tribunals. The
dead person is held there as a prisoner accused
of a crime. But, as in earthly justice, a
favourable verdict can be bought from an
underworld tribunal with paper money
handed over by the family of the deceased.
The time spent beyond the grave is not an
everlasting confinement but a period of transi¬
tion, varying in length, between two earthly
episodes. The usual period is three years, except
in the case of particularly heinous crimes, which
earn the culprit a longer roasting over the fires
of hell. Usually, and especially if the descen¬
dants have been moved by their filial piety to
pay the proper price for their salvation, the
deceased awaits the end of his three years in a
purgatory similar to the earthly surroundings
to which he was accustomed. All his needs are
provided for by his pious descendants, who
burn for him all kinds of objects in the form
of paper a house, furniture and money and
even, these days, a car and a television set.
The burning of paper objects is the stan¬
dard way of transferring goods to the hereafter.
Hell's treasury carefully counts the paper
money sent to it by fire. In exchange for good
treatment by his children and grandchildren
after his death, the deceased shows them that
he is an effective guardian ancestor. In accor¬
dance with the Buddhist theory of transmi¬
gration of souls, the rulers of the hereafter
allow him to return to earth, and he is usually
reincarnated in his own line of descendance, in
accordance with the Confucian theory of the
supremacy of the family.
A seemly death is one where the deceased
leaves behind enough descendants and prop¬
erty to feed the souls of the family. A soul
has to be properly nourished with meat and
rice before it can be benevolent. If spirits are
hungry, they come back to earth and roam
about as ghosts which take pleaure in attract¬
ing misfortune. Various methods of counter¬
ing their malign influence have been found,
from the "spirit wall" blocking off their entry
to villages to fireworks and mirrors meant to
scare them off and a general gift of food which
they are offered when the jails of hell open
their gates to allow the inmates a day out on
the midsummer Feast of the Spirits which has
become popular not just in China but also in
Viet Nam, Japan and Korea.
Gods from the grassroots
Between the ninth and thirteenth centuries,
the services of these forlorn souls were grad¬
ually enlisted so that their violence could be
channelled for the benefit of the community
which worshipped them. They thus became


the guardians of the supernatural good order
and the material welfare of a particular location.
This grassroots creation of a vast pantheon of
protective gods, most of whom had met vio¬
lent deaths in wars or accidents, is a key phe¬
nomenon whose importance in the Chinese
notion of the hereafter has only come to be
appreciated in recent years. It meant that lay
people took over management of the super¬
natural, which had hitherto been the preserve
of specialists in Taoist or Buddhist liturgy,
and thereby established direct two-way links
with the deities.
If the gods really want to live, they must
be effective and protect the community which
sponsors them (and which they sponsor in
return) from such dangers as epidemics, rob¬
beries and floods, and grant the wishes of the
faithful as to their descendants, success in
examinations, healing and wealth. If they do
not do this, they are abandoned by every¬
body and are forced to return to the ranks of
lost souls. The most effective gods, on the
other hand, receive imperial recognition in the
form of an honorary title which may be fol¬
lowed by a promotion in the hierarchy of
nobility if they merit it.
Between the tenth and the thirteenth cen¬
turies, when the coastal area of southern China
became much more prosperous, gods were
born and travelled around with pilgrims and
merchants. They were honoured by roadside
sanctuaries and were transformed themselves
as new needs grew. At the time of the inva¬
sions which engulfed northern China, the
people of the south called more fervently than
ever on warrior gods and protectors.
Since the start of the present millennium,
the gods have taken firm control of all strate¬
gic sites. In towns, the god of ditches and walls
is of key importance. In households, the gods
of the cooking-stove, the threshold and the
cesspit hold sway. Mass-produced coloured
New Year prints showing the gods and aus¬
picious scenes are put up in every home and are
changed every year.
The heaven of theJade Emperor
The emergence of all kinds of gods during the
second millennium revolutionized the notion
of the hereafter, which was softened and
humanized, especially when female gods
become increasingly important from the four¬
teenth century onwards. It also offset the hell-
Opposite page, a 10th-century painting on silk from
Dunhuang entitled the Paradise ofAmithaba, or the
"Buddha of Infinite Light". At centre of painting, the
seated Buddha is shown preaching.
Below, painting on silk by
Korean artist Chai Mying
Kyong (1567-1621) depicts a
group of Immortals dancing
with a crane. The 8 Immortals
are mythological figures
blending elements of Taoist,
Confucian and Buddhist
traditions.
like hereafter, with its repression and red tape,
with a heavenly one comprising a court of
kings and emperors benignly presided over
by an old god from ancient mythology, the
Jade Emperor.
The lesser local gods, however, stay close to
everyday life, mounting guard in houses,
towns and villages and at roadsides. When the
god of the stove, the main household divin¬
ity, makes a detailed report at the turn of the
lunar year on the behaviour over the past year
of all the household's members who have fed
him and over whom he has kept watch, he
does not descend into hell but flies up to
heaven, to the Jade Emperor's court.
Heavens belonging to the two established
religions (those with a liturgy supervised by
religious specialists, in contrast to popular reli¬
gions) have also existed at least since the sixth

century. The Taoist heaven, centred on Mount
T'ai-shan, the holy mountain containing the
entrance to hell, is populated by immortals,
who are delightful and elusive beings.
"Their skin is as fresh as crisp snow, they
are delicate and modest as virgins. They eat no
grains, but breathe the wind and drink the
dew. They climb onto the clouds and the wind
and fly off astride giant dragons to disport
themselves beyond the four oceans [i.e. the
inhabited world]." All Taoists, who practise
asceticism, who have renounced worldly cares
and who fast and eat plants from the moun¬
tains, aspire to such a passage to immortality.
Buddhism offers two kinds of heaven.
One, messianic and apocalyptic, is the Future
* World, presided over by the Buddha Maitreya,
hopes of which have inspired the ideology of
countless popular uprisings throughout his¬
tory. The other is a heaven which offers salva¬
tion the Pure Land, located in the West and
adorned with flowering lotus and precious
stones, which the Buddha Amithaba opens
to all the male faithful (women are excluded)
who have made a sincere appeal to him.
However, this enchanting, ultimate paradise
was prevented from taking serious root in Chi¬
nese society by resistance from local beliefs.
The notion of irrevocable salvation, putting
an end to repeated reincarnations, offended the
feelings of devout sons who venerated their
father's soul in the gravestone and of families
seeking souls to perpetuate themselves throu gh
reincarnation in future generations.
-te-a^g-*^ f#m ;tH X
: fi n n n ñ S .<; /ji ij i; i n . h

