■ What is palaeoecology?

Palaeoecology looks to the past—using the
remains of plants and animals—to reconstruct
ecosystem behaviour and see how these sys-
tems respond to climate change. This work is
done by a wide range of specialists, each with
his or her own particular interest, or fetish you
might say. Some study tree-rings, ice cores
from polar and mountain glaciers, even the his-
tory of forest fires.
The ocean is a particularly rich source of
information. Scientists look to yearly bands of
coral growth, for example, to reconstruct histo-
ries of El Niño over the past several centuries.
My fetish is fish scales deposited in ocean sedi-
ments.
■ What can the ocean tell us that a glacier
cannot?
Ice-cores are wonderful sources of climate
history but they cannot tell us how an ecosys-
tem responds to those conditions. Ocean sedi-
ments provide imperfect pictures that have to
be reassembled, like jig-saw puzzles. They help
us begin to disentangle and understand the
interaction between natural variability in the
ecosystem and human intervention.The trick is
learning to read the language of these natural
archives.
I work with a team (through Scri p p s
Institute in the U.S. and Mexico’s Centro de
Investigación Científica y Educación Superior
de Enseñada) to recover and analyse sediments
from a few rare sites. In one of the best sites—
the Santa Barbara Basin off the southern
California coast of the United States—three
metres of mud give us almost 2,000 years of
history. We first X-ray the mud to reveal the
annual layers.We can then count the fish scales
to reconstruct changes in population sizes of
fish like sardines and anchovies. Then we work
out the background clues. Tiny one-celled ani-
mals called Foraminifera, for example, capture
the history of the water in their calcium carbo-
nate shells. By analysing their remains, we learn
about the temperature and salinity of the water
at the time the shell was secreted, helping us
trace ocean circulation in the past.
■ But isn’t 2,000 years of history just a drop in
the bucket in terms of natural history?
That’s true if we look back over the whole
panorama of earth history. But the past 2,000
years is a critical period for considering the
effects of fishing or greenhouse gas emissions.
What sets our fish scale history apart is the high
resolution.This is like the number of volumes
in a collection of history books. Our work offers
five-year “chapters” with the option of looking
every two years. In contrast, much of earth his-
tory has a far lower resolution because the
measurements used give averages over hun-
dreds to thousands of years.
The fish scale record has played an impor-
tant role in understanding the decline and col-
lapse of the sardine population off California in
the 1950s.While this was immediately at t ri bu t e d
to ove r fis h i n g, the palaeo-record showed that
the population has gone through many increases
and declines over the past 2,000 ye a rs.This evi-
dence was then used by some to argue that the
m o d e rn decline was a purely natural phenome-
n o n . A closer look at the fish scale record, h owe-
ve r , s h ows that this decline differs from the pre-
fis h e ry declines in two way s. F i rs t , it culminat e d
in a collapse instead of an expected four to five -
fold reduction in population size. S e c o n d l y, t h e
p o p u l ation took at least thirty ye a rs longer to
r e c over than if there had been no ove r fis h i n g .
■ What else have you discovered?
Something completely unexpected—from
the shells of a tiny snail flo ating in the upper 100
metres of the ocean. The shells captured the
water age at the time they were secreted. Wat e r
age is measured by radiocarbon (the isotope car-
bon-14) as the last time the shell was in contact
with the at m o s p h e r e . We expected some boun-
cing around in these numbers but not the kind
r e p o rted by our collaborat o rs at the Law r e n c e
L i ve rmore National Labs in Californ i a . D u ri n g
the period studied—350 A . D. to 1940—it
a p p e a rs that there was a 50 per cent reduction in
the rate of supply of older radiocarbon from the
deep ocean to the near-surface ocean off
C a l i f o rn i a .This is still a my s t e ry, but ultimat e l y,
The secrets of the planet’s past lie hidden in the ocean depths.
Palaeoecologists like Tim Baumgartner sift through kilos of mud to
uncover the clues.

The memory of the sea
F rom fis h s c a l e s …
Off A l e x a n d r i a , a 2-tonne section
of an ancient statue is hauled fro m
the sea.


it must be related to the circulation of deep and
i n t e rm e d i ate wat e rs in combination with other
p r o c e s s e s. N ow remember that the ocean is the
main reservoir of carbon diox i d e , so va ri ations of
this magnitude are essential to unders t a n d .
E ve n t u a l l y, we also must compare these dat a
with data from other sites and go back another
5,000 to 8,000 ye a rs.
■ What is stopping you?
First, sites with such high rates of sedimen-
tation are very rare. They must also be deep
enough to avoid stirring by waves and currents.
And the bottom water must be very poor in
dissolved oxygen so that we don’t have worms
burrowing into the layers. Between southern
Chile and western Canada we have identified
ten possible sites, with another promising area
off the Namibian coast of Africa. But develo-
ping these sites is not cheap. A research vessel
can easily run to $15,000 per day.We also need
to help scientists in these countries do this
work. So before we can find more sites, we
must find more funding. ■
Interview by Amy Otchet


…to sunke n
t re a s u re s
Many other archaeological discoveries have
not made front-page news, but prov i d e
valuable information about the past.The exca-
vation of a 14th-century-B.C. trading vessel off
the southern coast of Turkey has helped us
understand trade in the Mediterranean area
d u ring the Bronze A g e . L i s b o n ’s Nat i o n a l
Archaeology Museum has listed 850 ships that
have sunk off the Azores since 1522, their holds
often laden with precious stones and metals.
These wrecks shed new light on trade between
Europe, the New World and the West Indies.
The sea usually preserves vestiges of the
past better than the earth, but archaeological
excavation under water is much more difficult
than on land. Chance plays a role in finding
sunken treasures, but it is technology that has
worked wonders. There is a downside to tech-
nology, however. Remote-controlled submer-
sibles and satellites that can scan the ocean
floor are available only to those who can pay—
mostly modern-day pirates.
Many sites coveted by treasure-hunters may
end up suffering the same fate as the wreck of
the Dutch-flagged G e l d e rm a h l s e n t h at we n t
d own in the South China Sea in 1752.
Christie’s, one of the world’s biggest auction
houses, sold the cargo for $16 million in 1986,
reaping a handsome profit for the salvager.The
recovery of the cargo led to the complete des-
t ruction of the coral-encrusted wreck 
and its resting place, wiping out a chapter of
history forever. ■
Sue Williams
In May 1998 the 25-tonne, 11-metre-tall colos-
sus of A l e x a n d ria made its first voyage when it
was shipped to Pa ris to be displayed in the
square facing the Petit Pa l a i s. In A n t i q u i t y, t h e
s t atue stood before the A l e x a n d ria lighthouse,
one of the seven wonders of the world.After six
centuries at the bottom of the sea and five years
of excavat i o n s , it took barely five weeks to
assemble the four pieces of granite discovered by
archaeologists.The 2,300-year-old statue of the
Greek pharaoh Ptolemy II has at last been resto-
red to its original splendour.
Many mysteries lie at the bottom of the sea.
The most spectacular of them are shipwrecks.
More than four million people have visited the
16th-century English warship Mary Rose since
she was raised in 1982.The wreck of the Wasa,
the pride of the Swedish navy that sank in
1628, has been Stockholm’s biggest tourist
attraction since 1961. Last but not least there’s
the wreck of the Titanic. In 1985 televised pic-
tures of the sunken luxury liner mesmerized
audiences around the world, 73 years after she
came to rest on the ocean floor.
