interview Abbas Kiarostami
'Between
dreams
and reality"
How did you get into films?
Abbas Kiarostami: My roots were in graphic art; 1
branched out into cinema quite by chance. Graphic
art is a kind of minimalist art in which one has to
communicate an idea in a precise and agreeable
form using great economy of means. I learned to
live with the constraints of graphic art, and this
helped me to accept constraints in general and use
them in my films. My son wants to be a film-maker
but I have advised him to learn graphics first.
While I was a graphic artist, I started making
advertising films as well. In advertising films, you
have only thirty seconds or a minute to get a mes¬
sage across. You have to know your target audi¬
ence very well: you have to know how people act and
react: you have to know all about marketing. When
you have to condense a message into one short
minute, you learn what a minute really is. Making
advertising films gave me an opportunity to learn all
about film-making before getting into real cinema .
Today I do everything in my films: I write the script,
visualize the scenes with sketches, direct, supervise
the sound and its mixing, choose the music and
take care of the montage.
What are the possibilities of cinema?
A. K.: To my mind cinema offers greater possibili¬
ties for self-expression than any other art.
Absolutely anything can be depicted in cinema and
this is not really possible in the other arts. In a film
you can use silence or darkness, for instance, to
great effect. At the end of my latest film, The Taste
of Cherry, the central character, Mr. Badii, goes
down into a pit and lies down. The moon disap¬
pears behind clouds and everything fades into dark¬
ness. For a whole minute nothing is shown on the
screen. Life, cinema and light become one. With its
The work of Iranian film
director Abbas
Kiarostami won an
international accolade in
1997 when his latest
film, The Taste ofCherry,
was awarded the Golden
Palm at the Cannes Film
Festival. Two years
before, the Locarno
Festival had organized a
retrospective of all his
work, which is notable
for its imaginative range
and humanity. In this
interview with Romain
Maitra, Abbas Kiarostami
looks back over his
career and describes his
approach to film-making.
magical power, cinema is a remarkable instrument
for stimulating wonder and casting doubt on the
most deeply rooted ideas.
Are there any images or ideas you are not
allowed to show when you make films in Iran?
A.K.: The kind of violent scenes that appear in
movies all over the world arc prohibited in the Iran¬
ian cinema, where it is also virtually impossible to
make any reference to sexuality. Wherever in the
world my films are set, I can never make any allusion
to sex in them.
In Iran, you cannot hold your wife's hand in the
street. In a movie, if a woman falls down in the
street, she can only be helped up by another woman
because touching is involved. And so if you see a
woman tumble in an Iranian film don't be shocked
if a man happens to he standing nearby but docs
nothing to help. It's not that he's unwilling to lift
the woman hack onto her feet but that he is not
supposed to do so. Don't he shocked if you see a
woman drowning in a swimming pool or a lake and
a man is standing around doing nothing. He's not
allowed to do anything. In real life maybe he would
step in, hut not in a movie. It's not that Iranian peo¬
ple are cold-blooded it's just a limitation imposed
on Iranian cinema. Don't be surprised if you see in
an Iranian film a woman wake up in bed wearing
her chudor. In real life this is absurd, but in the cin¬
ema women hav e to wear a chudor all the time. It
is forbidden to show dancing and drinking alco¬
hol but not smoking in the cinema.
To receive an exhibition permit in the 1980s, all
films had to go through a four-stage process involv¬
ing approval of the synopsis, script, cast and crew,
and the final film. The situation has not changed
much since then. Although political and social crit-

icism is not unknown in films, care is taken not to
displease the clerical establishment. Ironically, how¬
ever, prohibitions of this kind hav e helped the Iran¬
ian cinema to achieve success internationally because
it has always had to face the challenge of not show¬
ing certain things or finding inv entive ways of express¬
ing them. The pressure has slackened a little since
the new government took over recently and one hopes
that film-makers will now have more freedom.
Are Iranian films widely distributed outside Iran?
A.K.: I think Iranian cinema today is well placed
internationally. Few countries from my part of the
world make films that have the kind of worldwide
distribution that ours have, not to speak of appre¬
ciation from international critics. Only recently
Iranian film-makers have won four prizes at inter¬
national film festivals. My The Taste ofCherry won
the Colden Palm award at the Cannes Film Festi¬
val, Jaf far Panahi's "Mirror" won the Golden Leop¬
ard at the Locarno Festival, and at the Montreal
Festival Majid Majidi won first prize for direction,
as well as four other awards, for his film "Children
of Heaven". Even more recently Parwiz Shahabazi
won first prize in the young film-maker category
for his film "Traveller from the South" at the Tokyo
Film Festival. This is something very new for Iran.
Compare our situation with that of China. China
was on the verge of the same kind of breakthrough
three years ago. Hut Chinese films were often pro¬
duced in America and many Chinese film-makers
depended on American finance. These films were
given an American-style treatment and lost their
Chinese flavour: American financing changed the
whole structure of Chinese films. Iranian cinema,
on the other hand, may lack technical rigour, finance
to mount expensive productions, and access to net¬
works but it has one invaluable advantage ideas.
Resides, the fact that American films are not dis¬
tributed in Iran is a blessing in disguise because it
means that our film industry has been protected
from stiff competition. What's more, the commercial
success of high-quality Iranian films has led banks
to offer long-term loans for film production, thus
placing the industry on a more secular basis.
H The main character in The Taste of Cherry
decides to take his life. How did you come to make a
film about suicide?
A.K.: Therewere a number of reasons. Firstly, sta¬
tistics show that very few suicide attempts are suc¬
cessful; in other words the desire to live is a lot
more powerful than the desire to die. Secondly,
all religions strongly disapprove of suicide and what
is forbidden naturally attracts curiosity and is
worth looking at closely. We should be free to ask
the question: "Must I continue to live or not?"
Life is a choice and not a sentence, but often we
do not realize this. When we accept life as a bun¬
dle of constraints we are actually making a choice.
I want to tell people: if you choose to live, then do
it well. So many people are standing by the exit
We often do not realize
that life is a choice and
not a sentence. When
we accept life as a
bundle of constraints
we are actually making
a choice. I want to tell
people: if you choose to
live, then do it well.
AN ABBAS KIAROSTAMI
FILMOGRAPHY
Feature-length films:
Mossafer(The Passenger, 1974)
Gozaresh (The Report, 1977)
Avaliha (First Graders, 1985)
Khaneh-ye dust kojast? (Where is
My Friend's Home?, 1987)
Mashqh-e shab (Homework,
1989)
Namay-e nazdik (Close Up, 1990)
Zendegl edameh darad (And Life
Goes On, 1992)
Zir-e derakhtan-e zeytoun
(Through the Olive Trees, 1994)
Tam-egullass (The Taste of
Cherry, 1997)
Short and medium-length films:
Nan va kucheh (Bread and Alley,
1970)
Zange tafnh (Recess, 1972)
Tajrobeh (Experience, 1973)
Do rah-e hal baray-e yek masaleh
(Two Solutions for One Problem,
1975)
Manam mitunam (I can too!, 1975)
Rangha (Colours, 1976)
/Lebas/ baray-e arusi (A Suit for a
Wedding, 1976)
Rah-e hal-e yek (Solution No 1,
1978)
Qazih-e shekl-e aval, qazih-e shekl-
e dovom (The Case: Solution No 1,
Solution No 2, 1979)
Behdasht-e dandan (Dental
Hygiene, 1980)
Be tartib ya bedun-e tartib (In an
Orderly Fashion or Without It,
1981)
Hamsorayan (The Chorus, 1982)
Hamshahn (The Citizen, 1983)
Further reading:
An interview with Abbas
Kiarostami was published in the
July-August 1995 issue of the
Unesco Courier, "A Century of
Cinema".
Abbas Kiarostami, published by
Editions de l'Etoile, Paris, 1997
("Petite Bibliothèque des Cahiers
du Cinéma" series).
door: they neither take part in life wholeheartedly
nor leave it. They live in the shadow of death.
Let us not pass judgment on the act of suicide.
It may be an act of violence, but in my film it is
accompanied by critical enquiry. Mr. Radii wants to
communicate with people; otherwise he could have
quietly ended his life in bed by taking sleeping
pills . Hut the really important thing is that life
goes on, that there is an unending cycle in which
nature sheds its old skin and grows a new one. This
is more important than wanting to know whether a
character is alive or dead at the end of the film.
Actually the film has more to do with life and
death than with suicide and that is not a new sub¬
ject for me. Three of my films Where is My
Friend's 7/ome? (1987), And Life Goes On (1992)
and Through the Olive Trees (1991) are shown as
a trilogy because they were shot in the same loca¬
tion. Put if you replace Where is My Friend's
Home? with The Taste ofCherry, it makes another
trilogy whose theme is the fight for life and aware¬
ness of death, appreciating life and accepting
responsibility for it while knowing that the exit
door is just round the. corner. The Romanian writer
E. M. Cioran once said, "Without the possibility of
suicide, I would have committed suicide quite a few
years ago."
Did you have problems dealing with this issue?
A.K.: It is true that in Iran suicide is forbidden by
Qur'anic law. Catholics too are strongly opposed
to suicide, lint there are also other people in the
world who are not religious, and besides, religious
laws and those who uphold them may not always
have respect for our lives. In I ran we have a religion
with two parallel streams: one is devoid of the spirit
of enquiry and flows backwards; the other is more
developed and accepts enquiring minds.
In your work the plot of one film often blends
imperceptibly into that of another. . . .
A.K.: Yes. This is particularly true of my latest
trilogy in which each film emerges from the previ¬
ous one much like a Russian doll. My films never tell
a story which begins at one point and ends at
another. A new story always begins somewhere along
the way. And the stories are blended together to
such an extent that it's impossible to separate
them. In fact they are all part of a single story.
Another thing: I think it's important that film-mak¬
ers should leave their films somewhat incomplete so
that spectators can complete them using their own
imagination.
Nature is a constant presence in your films.
A.K.: Yes. We are separated from nature but we are
part of it. Industrialization and progress have not
really come to our rescue. To rediscover ourselves,
we must go back to nature. In 77ie Vhsfe ofCherry,
I tried to show the gradual encroachment of the
industrial landscape and people's relation to it.
Nature has been modified and destroyed by human

hand and is being eaten up by expanding cities.
The old taxidermist in the museum says to Mr.
Radii: "Are you in despair? Have you never looked
at the moon? Don't you want to see the stars? And
the nights of the full moon? Don't you want to hear
the whisper of the rain, the song of the nightin¬
gale? You want to close your eyes? My dear fellow,
you should see all these things! Those who live in
the other world want to come over here to see, and
you want to hurry to go there?"
What do you think of the violence that pervades
cinema today?
A.K.: Violence, like kindness, is a part of human
beings, and as long as it exists it is probably neces¬
sary to show it. Rut there is a difference between vio¬
lence as it exists and violence as it is expressed in
films. 1 think violence tends to be artificially treated
in the cinema. The kind of violence that prevails in
real life is cold, grey violence but it is shown in cin¬
ema in red-hot blood and guts form. We have seen so
much of this fake violence that its so-called magic
does not work anymore. Rut the merchants of vio¬
lence go on making fortunes out of conjuring up a
phantasm of this impulse that is inside everybody
and rooted in society. For twenty years most main¬
stream cinema has not shown violence as it really is.
Violence was not treated like this in the past. In
Fritz Lang's The Big Heat (1953), for example, it is
completely internalized so that enormous tension is
built up. The French director Claude Sautet's
Classe Tous Risques (1960) also explored the psy¬
chology of violence with great skill and emotional
realism. Rut what we see now is professional vio-
lence-mongering for its own sake. The irony is that
nobody likes violence but everybody goes to see it.
How do you feel about winning the Golden Palm
at the 1997 Cannes Festival and Unesco's Federico
Fellini Gold Medal later in the year? Will these
awards help your career?
A.K.: They certainly will. I am very proud and happy
that such prizes have been awarded to my kind of
cinema. The fact that such valuable awards are
coming my way is very important because they
encourage film-makers to cany on producing "dif¬
ferent cinema", cinema with a personal touch. They
will attract audiences to come and see this kind of
cinema and give it greater prestige. Good cinema
cannot exist without an audience.
Who are your favourite film-makers?
A.K.: I like cinema which has roots in reality and yet
also explores dreams. There are many film-makers
I like, but if I had to name one it would be Yasu-
jiro Ozu of Japan.
How should the cause of non-commercial
cinema be defended today?
A.K.: Much commercial cinema is churned out in
response to market forces. Rut this process con¬
tains the seeds of its own destruction because there
is a limit to what people can take. The gap between
this kind of cinema and the reality of normal life has
become so great that people do not recognize them¬
selves any more in this kind of film.
There is not much to he done to counter this
trend; it is going to self-destruct. I certainly hope
that a different kind of cinema will come into its own
and that real cinema will put a stop to fake cinema.
To help this to come about, it is crucial that this
new cinema should be riven critical recognition. M
