Prisons for profit / /
BY LEONARD L. CAVISE
rtTKW íH»iuU»wtmw. 'WMtwhWu
A police raid on a Moscow
pool hall breaks up a brawl
between rival gangs.
In the modern era, it has only been since
the 1980s that private, for-profit cor¬
porations have sought to operate entire prison
systems1. The private sector has long been
involved in running various components of
prison systems such as catering, industries,
juvenile offender facilities or community-
based programmes. Only recently, however,
have governmental entities, mostly in the
United States and Europe, considered turning
over the entire management and operation of
a state's or locality's correctional system to
private contractors.
The concept of prison privatization has
given rise to wide debate. Its proponents argue
that private contractors can build larger pris¬
ons faster and thus accommodate a prison
population that is, generally speaking, on the
increase. They also argue that the private sector
is not encumbered by bureaucracy, which is
usually seen as a major impediment to the effi¬
cient operation of a state system. Corpora¬
tions tend to be more streamlined and more
willing to be flexible to meet expanding needs.
Opponents of prison privatization argue
that crime is not a private matter between the
offender and his or her gaolers, but an issue
that concerns society as a whole. If the inter¬
ests of society and the rights of the individual
are to be safeguarded, the "government of the
people" is under an obligation to ensure that
the goals of incarceration are met by the con¬
stant control and monitoring exercised by a
state agency that is not motivated by profit
but by societal and individual concerns.
Cheap labour
The modern prison system came into being
during the period of rapid industrialization in
the Western world in the latter part of the nine¬
teenth century. Prison labour was regarded by
private entrepreneurs as a potentially lucrative '
resource. It was cheap, and the capitalist did
not have overall responsibility for the welfare
of the prison worker. As a result, prison work¬
shops were equipped, and the prisoners trained,
by the enterprise concerned. The entrepreneur
profited from the discounted labour, while the
prison itself often made a financial gain by
entering into a joint arrangement with the pri¬
vate contractors. Abuses were, however, com¬
mon. In France, inmates' living and working
conditions were deplorable and were seldom
monitored by state officials. In Germany, many
contractors supplied only minimal quantiti-
ties of the cheapest food. In the United States,
corrupt prison adminstrators often entered
into agreements whereby the prisoners would
be paid nothing at all for their labour.
The state retained overall responsibility
for the incarceration and rehabilitation of the
prisoner, for dispensing punishment was seen
as too important a government function to be
ceded to private entities. As recently as 1986,
the American Bar Association took a position
against privatization, on the principle that
incarceration is an inherent function of gov¬
ernment. If the private sector is allowed to
control the terms and, to some degree, the
length of incarceration, the argument goes,
the state will have abdicated one of its princi¬
pal moral duties.
Privatization:for and against
Proponents of privatization counter by say¬
ing that the government should retain moni¬
toring and supervisory authority over prisons.
The courts should, for example, review all
prison decisions to grant or refuse parole, grant
or refuse remission for good behaviour, or
restrict or grant rights which might implicate
the Constitution or other legislation. The total

The gavel, symbol of the
judge's authority (U.S.A.).
delegation of all powers to the private sector
would compromise the sovereignty of the state.
On the other hand, to require that the gov¬
ernment actually staff and operate the prison is
too great a concession to symbolism.
We are, at the present time, witnessing a
shrinkage in the role of government. Govern¬
ment programmes and regulatory powers are
facing budget cuts or, in more and more cases,
elimination, particularly in the social sector. At
the same time, community-based correctional
The private
sector runs an
increasing
number of
correctional
facilities in
Europe and the
United Statesa
trend which is
giving rise to
controversy
programmes are being scaled back, while the
prison population of most countries is
increasing dramatically. The humanitarian and
reform-minded approaches to incarceration
exert less and less influence while, with crim¬
inality increasing worldwide, the retributive
and incapacitation models of punishment are
on the increase. The issue in the privatization
debate thus becomes, not whether the private
sector can duplicate the social and rehabilitative
goals of the prison system, but whether it can

house prisoners and dispense punishment as
efficiently as the state. If so, the role of gov¬
ernment will again be minimized and the
stereotype of government-run agencies as inept
and generally inferior will be perpetuated.
Mixed results
Opponents argue that the government still
plays an essential role in many spheres, includ¬
ing the criminal justice system, public health,
the environment, social security, and welfare.
Wth private control, there is a danger that pris¬
oners, traditionally among society's most
neglected members, will suffer abuse and
exploitation for profit. There are concerns about
the development of a " criminal justice industrial
.complex" which could become a political force
that would affect incarceration rates, length of
term, and conditions of confinement based not
upon societal interest but the profit motive.
On the level of legality, the issue is whether
private control constitutes an acceptable dele¬
gation of the discipline- or rule-making
authority. The private controller can hardly
be considered a neutral rule-maker inasmuch as



the expectation of profit will usually be the
dominant rationale for any given rule. A com¬
promise might be to have a state authority
review disciplinary decisions by the prison
for compliance with the governing legislation
or constitution. In that way, the government
would be relieved of the actual running of the
system, while retaining overall responsibility
(and liability) for it.
As the debate continues, many countries
are going ahead with privatization projects. In
1994 alone, the number of privately-operated
facilities increased by more than 20 per cent.
The number of inmates in these facilities is now
more than 30,000 in the United States alone.
Although the largest of these projects is in the
United States, other countries such as France,
Australia and the United Kingdom have opened
privately-controlled prisons. While the phys¬
ical facilities generally seem to be of higher qual¬
ity, the results as regards the quality of food,
educational programmes, and, more generally,
the opportunity for inmates to engage in mean¬
ingful pursuits are mixed. The private compa¬
nies tend to make excellent profits, and all the
estimates indicate that the future for prison
privatization is, in economic terms, bright; but
whether privatization will improve the social
goals of prison remains to be seen.
1. Many prisons in Europe were privately operated in
the Middle Ages and as recently as the nineteenth
century. Author's note.
Right, a representative
of a humanitarian
organization visits
a Rwandan prison in 1994.
©J Langeirn/Sygma, Pans
Food service was one of the
first prison functions
contracted out to the private
sector. Below, meal trays at
the Chateaudun detention
centre (France).
