commentary Federico Mayor
The ethics
of the future
"Our inheritance was not willed to us". With these
words, the French poet René Char reminded human¬
ity, amid the ruins of the Second World War, of its hasic
responsibility towards history. Thus, a generation of sur¬
vivors took up the cause of future generations.
This new approach, this quest for human solidarity
through both space and time, has for over fifty years been
the task of the United Nations in general and of UNESCO in
particular. "To save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war" is the solemn commitment introducing the
Charter of the United Nations. This, too, is what is meant by
UNESCO's Constitution when it speaks of contributing to
peace and security by promoting collaboration among nations
through education, science and culture.
The world has, however, changed in the last fifty years,
as have the issues, the challenges and, it must be acknowl¬
edged, the dangers of modern times. On the eve of the twenty-
first century, diffferent wars are breaking out: we have had
experience of world wars and bloody conflicts between
nations, but today we are witnessing conflicts that tear peo¬
ples apart within nations. This is not the place to dwell on
other forms of violence: violence against hope and the future
of human beings, against their dignity, or the latent conflicts
between cultures and between generations. The scourge
seems to be universal. All over the world, the citizens of
today are claiming rights over the citizens of tomorrow, threat¬
ening their well-being and at times their lives. I repeat:
today's citizens are claiming rights over tomorrow's, and we
are beginning to realize that we are jeopardizing the exercise
by future generations of their human rights. More than ever,
the ethics of the future requires that we devise and dissem¬
inate that culture of peace which was the aim of UNESCO's
founders, and see that it is shared.
Limiting the power of technology
In the economic and social field, debt, division and instabil¬
ity make up the inglorious heritage, the poisoned legacy we
leave to our successors. Look at the earth and the natural
environment: gas emissions, desert encroachment, pollution
and the misuse of natural resources seem to foredoom the
planet. The essential, vital needs of our children, not only the
earth, water and air but also knowledge, freedom and soli¬
darity, are being sacrificed on the altar of short-term expedi¬
ency, ambition and profit, thus encouraging the soft options
and selfishness of a short-sighted age, bringing to mind the
famous saying attributed to the king of a world on the wane:
"Après moi, le deluge".
There are more serious matters still: it is not only society
and the environment but the very essence and biological
integrity of the human person that are imperilled. It is now
within the realms of possibility for humans to modify the
genetic heritage of any species, including their own. They
even possess the grim privilege of being able to plan their own
disappearance. With modern science we have almost reached
the point of no return. Never mind the arguments about the
compensation in technological or financial terms: there will
be no replacement since what is destroyed has no equivalent,
and there will be no payout since what is destroyed is with¬
out price. Who can compensate for genocide? Who would
dare to claim that we can pay for the earth? Ifwe want to pro¬
tect our descendants, we must first of all recognize, accept
and come to terms with this fundamental paradox: progress
and civilization are one side of the coin, but the other side is
the possibility of an apocalypse, of irreversible destruction,
of chaos. A lucid realization ofthat fact is the prime require¬
ment of our responsibility to future generations. Agreeing to
curb the now unbridled power of technology by ethics and
wisdom is henceforth the proper course. Lord Acton's dictum
that "absolute power corrupts absolutely" needs to be
applied to technology, while science needs to be reminded of
Rabelais' saying that "science without conscience is but
ruination of the soul".
But where does science dwell, and where are we to look
for wisdom? We are nowadays able to travel to the other end
of the earth in a matter of hours, and we are able to see for
ourselves that, while the great cities of the industrialized

countries may possess the
knowledge, it is in the
remotest villages that the
wisdom is to be found. On
the eve of the twenty-first
century, we at last have the
ability to reconcile knowl¬
edge and wisdom and to
make them benefit from each
other's virtues. With this in
mind, we in UNESCO drew
up, with the assistance of the
International Bioethics Committee, the Universal Declara¬
tion on the Human Genome and Human Rights which was
adopted by the Organization's General Conference in Novem¬
ber last the first universal declaration to apply to science
and to lay down ethical principles in this field which will
remind us all that we are born free and equal.
Foreseeing in order to build
I said we must in the name of ethics and wisdom agree to
curb the power that technology gives to humans over humans.
The issue looms large and the challenge is a real one. In an
age of globalization and of the acceleration and multiplication
of exchanges, the future appears, if not dark, then at least
unclear. Complexity and uncertainty are the key words of
our time. I therefore invoke the virtues of an education of con¬
cern, since concern stirs us to action, whereas conformity
and optimism benumb us. This is, of course, to assume will¬
ingness on our part to observe and ask questions of the future,
for our temporal short-sightedness is often coupled with a
wilful blindness,when not serving as a justification for it.
Caught in the whirl of the quick fix, held in the tyrannical grip
of short-termism, we do not take the time to shape our actions
or think about their consequences. We are hurtling into the
future with no brakes and in conditons of zero visibility. But
the faster a car goes, the brighter its headlights must be: it is
no longer, therefore, a question of adjusting or adapting
adjustment and adaptation always lag behind events, which
move ahead more rapidly but a matter of taking pre-emptive
action. We should stop talking about adjustment and adap¬
tation and take a clear-sighted, forward-looking approach,
casting a future-oriented eye on the world. We should plant
today the seeds of tomorrow, protecting them as they grow, so
that tomorrow our children may harvest the fruits of our fore¬
sight . To foresee in order to prevent and to foresee in order to
build these are our objectives.
Preserving the human element
Prevention is not merely a possibility: it is an obligation and



The ethics of the future is an ethics of the
fragile and the perishable. We must
bequeath to future generations the right
to live in dignity in a world preserved.
principle which has pre¬
vailed has been that of a
principle of inaction rather
than one of vigilant action.
Risk-taking without knowl¬
edge is dangerous, but
knowledge without risk-tak¬
ing is worthless. Today, alas,
more than five years after
the Rio Summit, what has
been the outcome, where
are the results? The com¬
mitments then made have given way to evasiveness, and
Agenda 21 has to all intents and purposes remained a dead
letter. "Rio plus 5" is "Rio minus 5". We have to ponder this
lesson, and sow within democracy itself the seed that can
revitalize and reconstitute it. That seed is and can only be
the ethics of the future, made central to decision-making,
central to democratic deliberation, central to the kind of
adversarial appraisal that, rather than obfuscating, appeas¬
ing or misleading opinion by serving vested interests, the
authorities and the powers that be, must enlighten the pub¬
lic and form its judgment.
Prevention means first and foremost preserving. The
ethics of the future is an ethics of the fragile and the per¬
ishable. We must hand down to future generations an inher¬
itance that has not been irreparably damaged and polluted.
We must bequeath to them the right to live in a world pre¬
served. This concerns first of all our living environment
the new preoccupation of the present age and such endur¬
ing values as health, education, culture, equality, freedom,
peace, tolerance and solidarity. The Catalan poet Salvador
Espriii told his children: "I have lived to preserve these few
words which I bequeath to you: love, justice and freedom".
We are responsible not only for our tangible heritage; the
essential objects of our duty and responsibility are often
invisible and intangible. The concept of heritage has thus
taken on new meanings in recent decades: from the straight¬
forward preservation of historic monuments to the Con¬
vention for the Protection of the World Cultural and Nat¬
ural Heritage, adopted in 1972, and from the recognition of
our non-material, symbolic and spiritual heritage to the
work currently being done by the International Bioethics
Committee on the protection of the human genome, the con¬
cept of being has gradually pervaded that of having. It is
human beings themselves who are the true common heritage
of humanity, our priceless universal birthright.
At the dawn of a new century and a new millennium, at
a time when the global village no longer seems so distant a
prospect, we must shoulder our responsibilities as citizens of
the world. This means that we must become aware of our
a moral imperative. This idea has indeed already made some position, in human history as well as in space, and must reflect
headway in public awareness and in international law. It has
even given rise to a new principle, enshrined in 1992 at the
Earth Summit in Rio and incorporated into the Maastricht
Treaty and some national standard-setting instruments: I
refer to the precautionary principle. But the view ofthat
on our role on the planet and in history. One's love for one's
neighbour is indeed also to be measured by the respect one
shows for those far distant. Near or far, yesterday or today,
other people are still our fellow creatures. Both in space and
in time, humanity is one body and we are its members.
