India:
cycles of
birth and
rebirth
BYA.S.GNANASAMBANDAN
Household gods pictured on a
contemporary Chinese print.

What role has the time-honoured belief in reincarnation played in Indian society?
Above, ritual cremation on the
banks of the Sabarmati River
outside Ahmedabad, a town in
Gujarat State (India).
I Once upon a time a snarling dog was
I standing outside an Indian temple.
Another dog came up to him and asked why he
was so angry. The first dog replied: "I was a
priest in this temple in my previous birth. The
trustee of the temple, a powerful man, goaded
me into becoming his accomplice in the theft of
the jewellery of the goddess of the temple, and
as a result I am now born as a dog. I am waiting
to see that fellow. As soon I see him, I shall
pounce on him and tear out his throat. The
second dog said: "Please don't do that. I was
that trustee in my previous birth."
This story and others like it were often told
by Indian sages to illustrate the belief, com¬
mon to all schools of Indian philosophy, that
life is a cycle of births and rebirths. After their
death, human beings are reborn into this world
in various forms; all of them have passed
through several earlier births and will pass
through several future births. What they think
and do in this life will determine the form
(human, animal, insect, etc.) in which they will
live their next life, as set forth in the doctrine of
Karma (action) and rebirth. "Accordingly as
one acts, accordingly as one behaves, so does
one become in the next life," says the ancient
treatise known as the Brihadaranyaka Upan-
ishad. "The doer of good becomes good, the
doer of evil becomes evil. One becomes virtuous
by virtuous action, bad by bad action."
What happens to the soul after death and
before rebirth? Each school of Indian philos¬
ophy has its own answer to this question,
although they all agree that there is a celestial
world and that those who do right things and
live a godly life go to it and enjoy its benefits
while awaiting their return to the terrestrial
world.
Because there are differences in the amount

f . ;
and quality of good and evil that people do,
the upper world is divided into seven regions
or lokas; the underworld where evildoers go is
also divided into regions. The doers of good
go to one of the seven different upper worlds
depending on the quality and quantity of the
good they do. The lowest upper world, for
example, is reached by those who do good
and lead a pious life, performing the prescribed
rituals to propitiate the gods, but do not con¬
trol their senses and mind. To go to a higher
upper world one must control one's senses
and one's mind, and as far as possible one's
inner mind also.
Only a human being can achieve emancipa¬
tion (moksha) from the cycle of birth and
death. This fate is reserved for the select few
(jnanis or yogis) who are unaffected by worldly
things or by the pairs of opposites {dwandas)
such as suffering and happiness. According to
the Bhagavad Gita: "The serene one absorbed
9 THE UNESCO fpuRlER MARCH 1998
Lake Brahma in the Thar
(Great Indian) desert,
Rajasthan. in the Atman [eternal self] masters his will, He
knows no disquiet in heat or in cold, In pain or
pleasure, In honour, or dishonour." Only
someone who transcends the pairs of oppo¬
sites attains the lotus feet of the Lord.
Even if a person's soul reaches the seventh
upper world it is still not entitled to achieve
emancipation if a very small amount of
desire even desire for emancipation remains
in his mind.
"Eradicate desire," wrote the southern sage
Tirumoolar.
"Eradicate it even if the desire is to attain
the lotus feet of the Lord.
The more you desire the greater will be
your suffering."
Some believe that the life which goes out
of the body has a form, the sukshma sarira or
astral body, with which we accede to the upper
world or lower world according to the good or
bad that we have done in this one. Another

belief is that a dying person's last thought gives
an indication as to their next birth. This is why
Indian philosophy stresses that you should
go to bed with pure thoughts, repeating the
name of the Lord. If you die in your sleep, the
purity of your last thought will ennoble your
soul through the next birth which will cer¬
tainly be into a higher spiritual life.
Karma and caste
How far have these philosophical tenets and
beliefs been practised in society? Traditional
Indian society was broadly divided into a
minority of intellectuals and philosophers
and a majority which fully accepted their
teachings about the cycle of birth and death.
Even today, illiterate villagers say that some¬
one who harms another person will be born as
a street dog in his next birth.
The doctrine of Karma and rebirth has long
Below, a painting of the Wheel
of Life, one of the most ancient
Buddhist symbols. Gripped by
the claws of Yama, the Lord of
Death, the image depicts the 6
worlds of potential rebirth.
influenced people to do what would lead them
to a good afterlife. It might be said that they
were motivated by a foolish fear of the other
world, which may or may not exist. But what
about the postulates of modern science regard¬
ing the atom, electromagnetic force and energy,
which cannot be perceived by our senses, but
whose existence we accept because wc can see the
results of their actions?
There is however one big difference
between the findings of modern science and the
Indian "life chain" philosophy. The Darwin¬
ian theory of evolution postulates that life
can only evolve upwards, whereas according
to Indian philosophy, those who have reached
a very high spiritual level can come down in the
next birth to the lowest level if they commit
an action in a fit of emotion or anger. There is
no guarantee that people will always rise fro m
one birth to the next. Their next birth is
decided by their thoughts and actions in the
previous one and by the Karma that they have
already accumulated.

This deeply rooted faith in the life chain
has shaped Indian society from time immemo¬
rial. As an explanation of why some are more
talented and enjoy higher social status than
others, and why some suffer while others
enjoy good fortune in this life, it led people
to accept what was inevitable and at the same
time enjoy peace of mind. When people feel
that they alone are the cause of the good and
evil which befall them, they do not try to
blame others for their situation. In the words
of a Tamil poem written in the third century
B.C.: "All places in the world are ours, all
human beings are our kinsmen; good and bad
which befall us are not inflicted by others."
However, as the centuries went by, an intel¬
lectual hierarchy began to rule society and its
- members realized that they could use the doc¬
trine of Karma and rebirth as a weapon to sub¬
jugate the majority and thereby perpetuate
their power. The caste system came to be
twisted into an incgalitarian hierarchy based on
birth. The higher castes began to assert that
the lower castes in the hierarchy were meant to
serve them. Since the majority of the lower
rank were deliberately left without education
and intellectual pursuits they had to accept
this incgalitarian structure based on birth,
which determined what work they should do
in this world.
So for many centuries the theory of a chain
of birth and rebirth helped perpetuate the
inequalities and injustices of the caste system
based on birth. Saint Tiruvalluvar's dictum
that all souls are born equal in this world could
not exert much sway over the majority of peo¬
ple because they were denied the capacity to
read it and understand it.
It is hard to know how far modern Indians
believe in the doctrine of Karma and rebirth
and how much they think about it. Modern
Indian society is a competitive society in which
the pursuit of wealth is accompanied by many
pressures and evils. And yet the majority of
people still have a wonderful way of keeping
their peace of mind. Of someone who acquires
wealth by wrongdoing they are inclined to say
peacefully: "Let him earn, he is not going to
carry anything he acquires now into his next
birth. He has to go empty-handed."
This article is an edited
version of a longer study
prepared for the Unesco
Courier by Professor
Gnanasambandan.
A 13th-century bronze figure of
dancing Shiva from southern
India. The supreme divinity of
Hinduism, Shiva is both static
and changing, destructive and
creative.
