GREENWATCH
A Tokyo street
(Japan).
BY FRANCE BEQUETTE
I In the next ten years, the
I number of people living in
cities will rise to around 3.3 bil¬
lion. Tokyo already has a popula¬
tion of 27 million, Sào Paulo
(Brazil) 16.4 million, and Bombay
15 million. World Bank forecasts
show as much as 80 per cent of
the developing countries' economic
growth occurring in the cities and
major conurbations.
There are both positive and neg¬
ative aspects to these developments.
As the Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development
(OECD) points out in a recent study
on Innovative policies for sustain¬
able urban development, "At each



| Cities:
residents to
the rescue
stage in the history ofurbanisation,
environmental conditions in cities
were improved dramatically. The
process was often slow, but over
time, many epidemic diseases have
been controlled, the supply of clean
water and the removal of wastes
have become routine, the risks of
fire have been contained, and stan¬
dards of comfort and cleanliness
have risen to unprecedented levels .
Cities could not have become as
large and as numerous as they are
now ifenvironmental conditions had
remained unchanged."
In a curious way, the pollution
that cities suffer is largely due to
their wealth. The rich consume a
great deal more energy, water,
building materials and other goods
than the poor, and thus produce
much more waste. This is what is
happening, for example, in the
cities in south-east Asia and Latin
America where rapid industrial¬
ization is taking place only the
rich enjoy the benefits of piped
water and refuse collection.
INCREASINGLY
INSANITARY
CONDITIONS
There is another, often tragic,
aspect to this situation. The poor¬
est of the poor are reduced to liv¬
ing in outer-edge shantytowns in
extremely insanitary conditions
and, lacking the resources to deal
with the problem, the city as a
whole has to endure congestion and
air and water pollution. In Africa,
where some towns and cities are
expanding at a rate of over 7 per
cent a year, municipal sanitation
departments are no longer able to
cope, and it is estimated that as
many as 30 per cent of the popu¬
lation are without running water.
According to a remarkable
report that was published recently1 ,
in many of the world's major cities
runaway population growth, an epi¬
demic of Aids and rising social ten¬
sions have been combined in the last
few years with a steep drop in
incomes. The population living on
the outer edges of the cities con¬
tinues to grow apace, hundreds of
thousands of people are without
running water and 15 per cent of
themwithout sanitation of any sort.
Various voluntary bodies and
non-governmental organizations
have got together, often success¬
fully, to work out solutions. In
Abidjan, an original refuse-collec¬
tion scheme has resulted in the
seashore being cleared of rubbish
and has also given regular employ¬
ment to hundreds of people. Sim¬
ilar schemes have been initiated in
Nairobi, Accra and Ndola (Zam¬
bia), where small-scale enterprises
producing bricks have been set up ,
thus not only providing their
1. "The Urban Environment", appearing in
World liesources, A guide to the global
environment, 1996-97, a report compiled
by the World Resources Institute, ihe
United .Nations Environment Programme,
the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Rank.
I IANUARY 1998

employees with an income but
turning out a cheap, good-quality
building material. Another exam¬
ple of "informal" employment
cited in the same report concerns
a refuse recycling project in Hanoi
(Viet Nam), collecting and cleaning
chicken bones which end up in
Italian pharmacies as calcium sup¬
plements sold at high prices. The
problem is, however, that these
informal activities are much less
well paid than "traditional" jobs.
In the thirteen countries studied in
the report, the average income in
the parallel economy was well
below the official poverty line.
WATER AND THE
ENVIRONMENTAL CRISIS
One key problem concerns the avail¬
ability of clean water. Some progress
has been achieved as a result of the
International DrinkingWater Supply
and Sanitation Decade, but in 1994
at least 220 million people still
lacked a source of drinking water
near their homes. In some cases,
communities of 500 or more inhab¬
itants are served by a single tap. In
some towns, communal taps func¬
tion for only a few hours a day, so
that people cannot build up suffi¬
cient reserves of water for their per¬
sonal needs if it takes too long to
fetch or if the water has to be car¬
ried long distances.
As there are no proper sanitation
measures, the disadvantaged mem-
Washing in water
from a broken
water main,
Bombay (India).
Women in Nairobi
(Kenya) make
bricks for their
own use and
for sale.
bers of the population ha\ e to drink
dirty water, fish in polluted streams,
and eat vegetables that have been
grown by the side of refuse tips.
A further major problem arises
from the threefold harmful impact
of cities on the environment: urban
development on agricultural land,
the extraction and exhaustion of
natural resources, and the dumping
of refuse. The area covered by
downtown Sào Paulo has grown in
fifty years from 180 sq km to more
than 900 sq km, while that of
greater Sâo Paulo now stands at an
incredible 8,000 sq km! The pro¬
ductive areas of land or water
from which food for the cities
comes are gradually vanishing.
Growing pressure on coastal
regions, where nearly a billion peo¬
ple now live, is doing serious dam¬
age to the marine environment.
Development activities pose a
threat to nearly half the world's
coasts. In the diminutive island
state of Singapore, for example,
land is in such short supply that
6,000 hectares have been
reclaimed from the sea, increasing
the land area by 10 per cent in rela¬
tion to what it was thirty years ago.
A hundred and fifty years of recla¬
mation along San Francisco Bay,
the most densely built-up estuary
in the United States, have reduced
the area of the bay by a third.
RESIDENTS TAKE THINGS IN
HAND
The report on the urban environ¬
ment gives many examples of local
schemes being launched, in both
developed and developing coun¬
tries, to keep these harmful
effects in check.
The city of Graz (Austria) had
an idea for reducing pollution from
automobile and machine produc¬
tion, footwear manufacturing and
brewing. A partnership was estab¬
lished with the Chemical Engi¬
neering Institute of the city's Uni¬
versity of Technology, allowing the
companies concerned to set up a
project team to develop a cleaner
production programme. In six years,
not only was the volume of toxic and
solid wastes reduced by 50 per
cent, but production costs also fell,
in some cases by 60 per cent.
Cajamarca (Peru) is one of the
world's poorest cities, with a sub¬
stantial infant mortality rate. The
river Kilish, from which most of
the population get their drinking
water, is seriously polluted. The
provincial authorities devolved
some of their powers on to neigh¬
bourhood councils in the town and
the surrounding countryside, and
these bodies have given top prior¬
ity to water delivery systems. They
are also terracing the badly eroded
slopes of the Andes, establishing
seed banks, introducing health ser¬
vices and carrying out a programme
of refuse collection and park
improvement.
In Colombia's second largest city,
Cali, 350,000 people werelivingin
squalid shacks in the Aguablanca
settlement. To help them make
decent homes for themselves, the
Carvajal Foundation built a ware¬
house selling good-quality building
D \3>URITHE UNESCO lOURIER |ANUARYI998
43

materials at wholesale prices, while
the local school of architecture pro¬
vides plans for simple, solid houses.
The prices of foodstuffs have gone
down since local grocery-store own¬
ers were given some training in man¬
agement techniques, and infant
mortality has been cut by two-
thirds, thanks to the work of vol¬
unteers from the community,
trained by the Foundation to edu¬
cate families in nutrition and
health care.
Towns originally offered people
a place of refuge, of mutual help
and culture. According to nine¬
teenth-century town-planning the¬
orists, they should supply all human
needs. They were supposed to be
the very stuff of civilization. That
was not to be, and therefore when¬
ever the authorities throw in their
hands, dismayed by the scale of the
problems and lacking the political
will, money or resources to cope with
them, personal initiatives are those
most likely to succeed.
FURTHER READING
World resources, A guide to the
global environment 1996-97, The
urban environment, Oxford
University Press, 1996
Innovative policies for
sustainable urban development,
The ecological city, OECD, 1996
A district of
Singapore built on
landfill.
initiatives
A model project
in Brazil
The "Pirajá Memorial Project" is a scheme run by the Centro de Edu-
cctçùo Ambiental Sao Bartolomeu, an environmental education centre in
Salvador, Bahia State, Brazil. Its main aims are the affirmation of cul¬
tural identity and citizenship, and the protection of the environment. The
Pirajá Metropolitan Park, created north-east of Salvador in 1978, is a
1,550-hectare forest reserve surrounded by overcrowded shantytowns
where living conditions are appalling. Malnutrition and cholera are rife,
infant mortality is high. Young people are exposed to violence, racism and
drugs. Many drop out of school.
The park is of great historical and cultural importance, since it was
at Pirajá that a famous battle for Brazil's independence took place. It
was also here that the Jesuits built their first Indian village and that
quilombos (piares where runaway slaves gathered) were later set up. It
is now under violent assault from several quarters: the extremely varied
wildlife is being savagely hunted down, the plant life devastated and the
rivers polluted by refuse, and forest fires are frequent. Black people's
contribution to Brazilian history and culture Salvador being the city
with the largest black population outside of Africa is being ignored,
and places where the rites oicundomble, the Afro-Brazilian religion, were
celebrated are being destroyed. The park's living heritage seemed to be
sinkinginto oblivion.
In 1991 , the Project selected a number of local young people, aged 14
to 18, to work as guides, make contact with other young people and act
as outreach agents in schools and in the community at large. Twenty-six
teachers and 700 students were then recruited to replant and restore
the candomble sites. A library was opened in 1995 and an environmental
education programme was started, offering students a chance to take
part in practical activities, including school vegetable gardens. Seeing
the good work that was being done, UNESCO decided to make Pirajá Park
an experimental zone of the Mata Atlántica Biosphere Reserve.
In 1996, the Project published a newspaper, put on a play, set up craft
workshops for children, spread its activities to other schools, mobilized
public opinion, and asked artists to act as "militants" in the cause of the
park. So many initiatives have been launched that they cannot all be listed
here. Work is now proceeding on the establishment of an open-air museum
to draw attention to the region's history and culture, and the local pop¬
ulation is being encouraged to learn more about nature and respect it.
These activities form part of a wider socio-economic development strat¬
egy for the region, one of the poorest in the world. The United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) and several non-governmental organizations
are already participating, and help of any kind for this fine project
would be welcome.
Projeto Memorial Pirajá
Centro de Educa çâo Ambiental Sao Bartolomeu
Praça 15 de novembro 17 - Terreiro de Jesus
Salvador/BA 40. 025-010 Brazil
Telephone and Fax: (55) 71 3219903
