LISTENING
COLOMBIAN CHAMPETA
BY ISABELLE LEYMARIE
A scene from the Colombian-
French-Venezuelan film Les
rois créoles de la champeta
( The Creole Kings of
Champeta) by Lucas Silva and
Sergio Arria.
The Cartagena region, on Colombia's
Atlantic coast, is fertile agricultural
land which also produces bumper crops of
new music. For years, artists from all over the
Caribbean performed at the city's popular
music festival in the old wooden bullring, an
event fostering cross-fertilization between var¬
ious musical currents. Another rich source of
sounds is the San Basilio palenque, a former
settlement of fugitive slaves 70 kilometres away,
which has jealously preserved centuries-old
Bantu traditions such as lumbalu, a ritual for
the dead accompanied by instrumental music,
dances and songs. Son, a beat from Cuba's Ori¬
ente province, came to the palenque in the
early 1930s, where it is still played on instru¬
ments that are no longer used in Cuba.
For many years African slaves passed
through Cartagena, and even today the city is
the meeting point of a wide array of outside
influences. In the late 1960s, seamen brought
back records of new African popular music,
including soukous from Zaire (which stems
from Cuban son), mbaqanga from South
Africa, makossa from Cameroon and highlife
from Ghana and Nigeria, with which the young
local black community immediately identified.
Soukous caught on like wildfire among young
Born in the
shanty-towns of
Colombia, one of
the most inventive
forms of popular
music today
people from the palenque who sensed their
Bantu roots in the music.
It wasn't long before local DJs and musi¬
cians were experimenting with these rhythms,
reinterpreting them in their own way and, in
the early eighties, blending them with rap and
raggamuffin in lively remixes. That is when a
new kind of music emerged in the black neigh¬
bourhoods in and around Cartagena and in
the San Basilio palenque. It was first known as
champeta, then as terapia criolla ("creóle
therapy"). Today the terms are used inter¬
changeably.
Self-taught musicians
Born in the slums, champeta at first devel¬
oped surreptitiously outside the mainstream of
cumbia and vallenato, internationally known
forms of Colombian popular music which also
originated on the Atlantic coast, and of salsa,
which started in Cuba but has taken deep
root in Colombia.
Champeta is played over huge sound sys¬
tems, or picas (from the English term "pick¬
up"), painted with psychedelic designs in vil¬
lages and run-down city neighbourhoods. A
kind of Latin American soukous, it features a
throbbing bass, front-and-centre guitar and

percussion solos, repeated "breaks" and riffs of
Haitian compas, Trinidadian soca andrap. At
first it was popular among gangs of hoodlums
who squared up to each other around thepicós
with long fishing knives known as champetas
(hence the name of the music). Then it spread
among the working classes, the people of the
port and door-to-door salesmen.



Champeta was created by self-taught musi¬
cians who sing using both the typically African
phrasing of the San Basilio palenque and the
community's Bantu-based dialect. The records
are produced by small, sparsely-equipped,
storefront independent labels. Just about any¬
one can drop in off the street for an a cappella
audition. But as the Colombian film-maker
Lucas Silva shows in his documentary Los
reyes criollos de la champeta ("The Creole
Kings of Champeta"), champemos (exponents
of champeta) have very fixed ideas when it
comes to music. They draw inspiration from
everyday life, sometimes even from American
cartoons shown on television. Anything is grist
for their mill.
A cultural phenomenon
At first, owners of sound systems went down
to the docks to buy the latest hit records
imported from Africa and the Caribbean from
seamen. As in Jamaica, they vied with each
other to attract audiences and to see who had
the most innovative mixer, the most talkative
DJ, the loudest sound system and the widest
range of records.
In the 1980s, a handful of Colombian busi¬
nessmen who realized how popular African
music was becoming locally invited African
and West Indian groups to the Festival of
Caribbean Music. These performers, includ¬
ing Kanda Bongo Man, Bopol Mansiamin and
M'Bilial Bel from Zaire, Mahlathini and the
Mahotella Queens from South Africa and
Coupé Cloué from Haiti, were a smash hit with
the public. Around the same time, Justo
Valdez, a young musician from San Basilio,
founded Son Palenque, Colombia's first souk¬
ous group. "But," he says, "I sing in our lan¬
guage and keep many of the palenque's tra¬
ditional elements."
Champeta singers, rappers and DJs sport
outlandish attire, nimbly engage in hyperbole,
verbal one-upmanship and sexual innuendo,
and using unbridled, colourful language,
bring audiences to their feet with hot dances
that recall despelote, currently popular with
young Cubans in Havana.
Among the rising stars of Colombian cham¬
peta and soukous are the Kusima group,
Shaka the Zulu King of Cartagena, Cándido
Perez ("the doctor of la terapia''''), Luis Tow¬
ers and especially Elio "Boom" (Francisco Elio
Corrales), a young Black from Turbo in the
Antioquia region on the Pacific coast. Boom
started performing songs by Panamanian stars
in his home village at the age of seven and
today lives in Cartagena where he is an idol of
the poor. His first two records La Turbina
and El caballero de la champeta criolla.
sold in thousands. He sings La Turbina in the
language of his birthplace, which he describes
as a mixture of Spanish, Haitian Creole and
English. His fame has spread to Panama,
Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic, Jamaica
and, by word-of-mouth, the Spanish-speak¬
ing communities of the United States.
The commercial success of terapia criolla
spawned a festival, which took place in the
Cartagena bullring for the first time on 2 April,
1997. Headliners included Melchor El Cruel ,
Alvaro El Bárbaro and Dogardisc y Bustafá.
José Quessep, who organized the event, says
"Champeta has always been thought of as
aggressive music for common people and gang
members, but we're sure this festival will show
that it is also a cultural phenomenon that has
taken root in Cartagena and is catching on
world-wide."
Brimming with vitality, champeta is both
nostalgic and a novelty, strengthening the
bonds between Africa and the New World,
and yet again reflecting the boundless cre¬
ativity of Blacks in the Americas .
