The development
of genetic testing
confronts
humanity with
urgent challenges
> Genetic testing and
discriminationBY MICHAEL KIRBY
Above, symbol of the Human
Genome Project. The baby's
silhouette stands out against
a karyotype (chromosome set).
LAt the heart of adverse discrimination
lies difference. Many people only feel
comfortable with others who appear exactly
the same as themselves. Inject an element of
differentiation and such people may feel enti¬
tled to act in prejudicial and even cruel ways.
Sometimes making distinctions may be
justified. A person with a highly contagious
disease may need to be isolated for the pro¬
tection of society and the proper treatment
of the individual. But the history of the cen
tury now drawing to its close has been one
of irrational and unwarranted discrimination.
It is still going on. The grounds have included
the victim's race, skin colour, gender, disabil¬
ity and sexual orientation. All of these are
wholly or partly genetic in origin.
For some people, the fact that an individ¬
ual did not choose to be different does not
matter. Even if the difference is completely
irrelevant, it can sometimes affect most seri¬
ously the individual and the society concerned.

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
proclaimed fifty years ago, has offered the
world a beacon of hope to guide us away from
irrational and irrelevant acts of adverse dis¬
crimination. But whilst much progress has
been made, the abiding challenge of discrimi¬
nation, grounded in the fear of the unknown
and the unfamiliar, remains. Now, at the end
of the century, new potentialities for dis¬
crimination are presented. They arise from the
rapid development of genetic testing which
promises to identify more indelible elements
of human differentiation upon which adverse
discrimination could be based.



Genetic testing
Testing human beings for genetic conditions
is not entirely new. Pregnant women in many
countries have for years been able to undergo
amniocentesis to detect the presence in the foe¬
tus of genetic abnormalities such as Down's
Syndrome. For years, physicians have been able
to test patients for Tay Sachs disease (an inher¬
ited and ordinarily fatal nerve disorder), sickle
This British researcher
belongs to a team that has
engineered a molecule which
"switches off" a gene causing
leukaemia.
cell anaemia and other inherited conditions.
But the progress made over the past decade in
the Human Genome Project will ultimately
ensure that genetic causes of human differences
are identified. Many that are responsible for
inherited cancers and other serious diseases have
already been isolated. Amongst those discovered
are the genes causing several late onset disor¬
ders such as cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy,
Huntington's disease and, most widespread of
all, Alzheimer's disease.
Mistakes can occur in the performance of
tests to identify the presence of genetic dis¬
orders. As with the well-known tests for HIV
(human immunodeficiency virus), there can
be false positives and false negatives. But apart
from this problem, current tests cannot pre- ,
diet, with accuracy, precisely when a genetic
condition will manifest itself. The genetic test
for Huntington's disease (an inherited con¬
dition which manifests abnormal movements
and mental deterioration, generally occurring
in middle age) has a 99 per cent accuracy rate.
But there is enormous variation in the age of
onset and in the range of symptoms that will
appear in a given individual. In the past, fam¬
ily members would often know generally
about inherited conditions which might man¬
ifest themselves in succeeding generations.
Now there is the potential to remove the
uncertainty and to diagnose with near perfect
accuracy the presence of the gene which, in
due course, will manifest itself and, in some
conditions, lead on to profound disabilities or
certain death. Here, clearly, are new founda¬
tions for differentiation between individuals
by reference to a wider category of distinc¬
tions that mark them off from most people in
society. Is this a problem? In these enlight¬
ened and scientific times, need we really be
worried about threats of discrimination on
genetic grounds?
Foundations ofdiscrimination
Unfortunately, despite progress in education
and in domestic and international human
rights law, the past teaches us that wc should
be concerned. Millions of people this century
have lost their lives, or have suffered pro¬
foundly, because of obvious genetic distinc¬
tions. When new distinctions, previously hid¬
den, are added to the list, we should be alert to
provide effective social responses.
As a result of learning the outcome of a
genetic test, an individual's life may be pro¬
foundly changed. A patient learning of the pres¬
ence of a fatal and untreatable disorder may
undergo profound psychological disturbance.
Some may choose not to submit to the test

A scientist points out a defect
on a human karyotype: an
extra copy of chromosome 8
which is commonly found in
some forms of leukaemia.
V
x
fc.
because of the effect which knowledge of a neg¬
ative result could have for the subject's well-
being and that of the immediate family.
The greatest dangers from adverse discrim¬
ination lie principally in the context of social
arrangements which may be affected by knowl¬
edge, or access to knowledge, about an indi¬
vidual's genetic makeup. Take insurance. In the
past, the availability of insurance, and the rates
of premiums, were ordinarily fixed by reference
to a sharing of the risks of the onset of a mul¬
titude of genetic disorders amongst all members
of the insuring public. Now that it is possible
to subject a proponent for insurance to genetic
tests, the sharing of risks may disappear or be
substantially reduced. If the presence of inher¬
ited disorders can be ascertained with near per¬
fect accuracy, the cards may be stacked in favour
of the insurance company. There may be no
risk of the onset of defined disorders. Or it
may be absolutely certain.
Insurers argue that they are merely substi¬
tuting the latest scientific information for the
old-fashioned medical check-ups and replacing
generalized data of life expectancy with accu¬
rate predictive data of genetic disorders. If
insurers can offer policies at lower premiums
to non-smokers, should they not be able to

do so to those who, genetic testing reveals,
are unlikely to manifest a range of life-threat¬
ening inherited conditions? These are some
of the dilemmas we face.
Employers may wish to subject certain
employees to genetic testing. They may argue
that training, the provision of disability bene¬
fits and the costs of sick leave and replacement
justify having access to genetic information con¬
cerning members of their workforce. Theprob-
lem with this is the same as with insurance. Will
the individual with "negative" genetic results be
refused employment? In the relationship
between the individual proponent for insur¬
ance or the individual applicant for employ¬
ment and the potential insurer or employer,
will the former be sufficiently empowered to
refuse access to his or her genetic data?
Unless the law intervenes to prevent threats
of adverse discrimination, will the practical
consequence be that insurers, employers and
possibly the State itself will be empowered to
require individuals to discover the range of
long-term genetic disabilities which, left alone,
the individual might prefer not to know?
DNA fingerprinting in a British
laboratory. Fragments
extracted from an individual's
tissue are processed to
p roduce a kind of genetic
"identity card". DNA
fingerprints are used to prove
whether people are related and
to identify criminals from
tissues left at the scene of a
crime.
Some scientists believe that sexual orienta¬
tion is, at least partly, genetically determined.
If this were scientifically established, would it
help or hinder the world-wide efforts to reduce
discrimination against people on the ground of
their sexuality? It might help by proving that
something so innate is determined naturally
and is not defiantly chosen to flout society's
moral rules. But out of fear or hatred of differ¬
ence, it might lead to demands for destruction
of foetuses showing this propensity.
The diversity of the human gene pool has
been one of the principal causes of humanity's
strength and survival. The ultimate threat of
discrimination would arise from demands to
eradicate all inherited conditions conceived of
as "intolerable". The advance of genetic testing
will therefore present fundamental challenges
to humanity. How do we alleviate unnecessary
suffering and eradicate the scourge of prema¬
ture death from inherited disorders whilst at
the same time retaining the precious variety of
humanity and the diversity of its gene pool?
Social management
On 11 November 1997, the UNESCO General
Conference unanimously adopted the Uni¬
versal Declaration on the Human Genome and
Human Rights (see page 34). This path-break¬
ing charter proclaims, in its first article, that the
human genome underlies the fundamental
unity of all members of the human family as

well as the recognition of their inherent dig¬
nity and diversity. The Declaration addresses
itself to the problem of adverse discrimina¬
tion and says: "No one shall be subjected to



discrimination based on genetic characteris¬
tics that is intended to infringe or has the
effect of infringing human rights, fundamental
freedoms and human dignity".
Translating these principles into effective
protection of vulnerable people against threats
of adverse discrimination is a major challenge
which now faces the international commu¬
nity, the nation states and the professional
and commercial organizations that are involved
in genetic testing.
The international community is to estab¬
lish machines for monitoring the implemen¬
tation of UNESCO's Universal Declaration.
Already an ad hoc group has met in Paris to
consider the ways in which the principles of
the Declaration can be implemented.
Nation states must introduce laws and poli¬
cies to give effect to the principle of non-dis¬
crimination. Several countries have already
enacted laws to govern the use of genetic test¬
ing in particular fields. But so far, comprehen¬
sive laws dealing with the threats of discrimi¬
nation have been slow in coming. The Council
of Europe in 1997 adopted a Convention for
the Protection of Human Rights and Dignity
of the Human Being with regard to the appli¬
cation of biology and medicine. But in most
"The diversity of the human
gene pool has been one of the
principal causes of humanity's
strength and survival." Above,
Silhouettes in the Sun by the
American artist Katherine
Arion.
British researchers cloned a
lamb, Dolly (right), from a
single cell of a ewe in 1997.
societies, the advances in genetic testing have
outstripped the lawmaking process. Protection
of vulnerable individuals, and society, against
the threats of discrimination are mostly left
to depend, if on anything, upon the ethics of
the healthcare professions and such general laws
and policies forbidding unwarranted discrim¬
ination on health grounds as were adopted years
before genetic testing became possible.
Professional bodies such as the Human
Genome Organization, supported by its
Ethics Committee, devise guidelines which
arc recommended to scientists in the field for
their guidance. Industry bodies, such as those
representing insurers and employers, may
adopt rules of self-regulation to limit demands
for genetic test results to circumstances where
they can clearly be justified. But the hard work
of preparing enforceable laws and policies to
address a multitude of issues presented by
genetic testing, lies ahead.
Education in the risks and dangers will have
a part to play. So will the development of
enforceable laws which balance the demands of
those who claim that knowledge of genetic data
is relevant to their decisions against the demand
of the individual to maintain the privacy of
such data and control over its use. In every coun¬
try, lawmakers should have the assistance of
expert and multi-disciplinary bodies to give
guidance on the way in which the right balance
is to be struck. To refrain from providing pro¬
tection against discrimination is to condone the
dangers of the discrimination which will fol¬
low. To do nothing is to make a decision.
