T E R VI E W Marcel Marceau
The art
of silence
You have been appearing on stage all over the
world for more than fifty years. Why is it that you are
more popular abroad than at home in France?
Marcel Marceau: I have performed a great deal
in France. It was here, in 1 947, that I created the
character of Bip, the dreamy little poet who
appears in all my shows. After performing in
Jean Louis-Barrault's troupe, I set up my own
company in 1948, and between then and 1964
I staged twenty-six mime plays, or "mimod-
ramas" as I prefer to call them. Since pure
mimodrama was not recognized as a theatrical
art form I received no subsidy, so I had to
raise the funds for my productions by inter¬
national tours. I have given performances on all
five continents, with particular success in the
United States and Japan, and appeared many
times on television. But my financial difficul¬
ties, particularly after the only partial success
oí Donjuán, a mimodrama adapted from the
play by Tirso de Molina, produced in 1964,
forced me to disband my troupe that year and
begin appearing alone on stage.
I became a solo mime, but unlike singers,
who can be listened to at any time on records
or on the radio, mimes are masters of silence,
soon forgotten if they don't appear on stage
regularly.
Mime is a universal language that doesn't
require translation. Perhaps that is another
explanation of your success?
M.M.: Yes, that's true, but French audiences
seem to me rather conservative, despite the
fact that France has a great tradition of mime
and has produced many famous exponents of
the art. Unesco asked me to be one of its
goodwill ambassadors but unfortunately, as I
am always on tour, I didn't think I could be
very effective in that role, though I did work
with that splendid Organization on a film
defending copyright and authors' rights.
Eventually I asked the French authorities to
help me prevent the art of mime from disap-
The world-famous
French mime Marcel
Marceau breaks his
silence and talks
about the secrets of
his craft and the
highlights of a career
spanning five
decades. Interview by
Michel Fargeon.
pearing. As a result I was able to set up the Mar¬
cel Marceau International School of Mimo¬
drama in Paris, which receives a subsidy from the
City of Paris. It provides courses of training in
several subjects (dance, fencing, acrobatics,
drama) and is attended by students from all
over the world. Some former students arc work¬
ing with me on the preparation of a show, The
Bowler Hat, a tribute to Chaplin that will be
performed internationally in several theatres.
Do you feel when you are on stage that you are
delivering a text, even though you don't say a word?
M.M.: Yes indeed, I feel that I am both an
author and an actor at the same time. Although
my performance is silent, I am not acting by
means of gesture alone. I am using the power
of thought. I communicate with the audience
by means of the thought that goes into every
movement and every pose. Writers make con¬
tact with their readers by means of words and

the way they give form to words through a
story. Mimes are always, by definition, word¬
less, but they present the fable of human life
on stage by means of an art that transcends
words. I often make use of themes that tran¬
scend language, suchas The Heart Eater, The
Cage, or The Mask-Maker, which are the
titles of some of my sketches. They are actu¬
ally parables that express deep thoughts.
Dancers do this by movement, but the mime
does it by remaining motionless, by simply
being there.
Could it be said that the spectators recreate
within themselves what you are doing on stage?
M.M.: Yes, exactly. Unless the audience is
drawn into the action, the mime has failed to
get his message across the footlights, his per¬
formance is closer to mimesis than to the true
art of mime. He has not succeeded in radiating
the poetical aura that evokes in the spectator
what I would describe as a "zen" identifica¬
tion with the character portrayed. Laughter
is aroused by what appear to us as distortions
or discrepancies in relation to what is "nor¬
mal", but the laughing stops when the out¬
come is tragic, when death intervenes. The great
Charlie Chaplin's films illustrate this very well.
Although the cinema audience go along to
laugh at Chaplin's antics, at some point they
stop laughing, they succumb to emotion and
suddenly see the character he plays in a differ¬
ent light. Comedy and tragedy disrupt the
rules established by society.
What influence have Chaplin's films had on your
work?
M.M.: The character of Bip was entirely inspired
by Chaplin. He was very popular when I was a
child, and by the age of ten I was already imi¬
tating his funny walk. He and my teacher, Eti¬
enne Decroux, who invented the grammar of
mime, its rigorous control of the body, inspired
me to opt for the art of silence. I also studied
under Charles Dullin, who taught me about
lyrical rhythm and the inspiring power of the
spoken word. Chaplin in fact started out by
performing in music halls, as a singer, dancer
and acrobat. His performance in silent films was
pure mime and he was so affected by that expe¬
rience that, long after the talkies had come in, he
was still turning down speaking roles.
You could have been a dancer. . .
M.M.: No, I might have had a talent for move¬
ment, but dancing involves pirouettes and leaps
whereas mime, an art of bodily expression, of
what my mentor Etienne Ducroux called
"moving statuary", borrows its postures from
Graeco-Roman statues, giving it scope for
beauty and virtuosity. Immobility is a very
important part of it, but so are acrobatics and
the visual element. Since it can be abstract, sur¬
realist or melodramatic at will, it has an explo¬
sive impact on the feelings. There is in the the¬
atre of mime a kind of inner respiration that
renders visible the invisible, sculpts forms out

of space and lends wings to the characters'
thoughts. Whereas the dancer is more ethereal
and tends to fly away like a balloon, the mime
artist is held down by his body movements.
Do you also find inspiration in art forms like
Japanese kabuki, nôor butho, or African dances?
M.M.: Yes, mime naturally borrows from the
other arts: the Japanese theatre, as you rightly
say, including bunraku, the traditional puppet
theatre, from which I learned a great deal
I've toured Japan twenty or so times and
the Italian commedia dell'arte, the British
music-hall, Indian and Cambodian dancing
and contemporary Western dance. Not need¬
ing words to express itself, mime is in touch
with all cultures
You both design and perform your own pieces,
and recreate and reinvent them with every
performance. Do you have a favourite audience, one
that is more receptive, more knowledgeable than
others?
M.M.: Mime has a grammar of its own that
needs to be respected, an insistence upon clas¬
sical perfection that has to be constantly
upheld and renewed. As to spectators, chil¬
dren are the most receptive; they make a mar¬
vellous audience. In the silent ceremony of
mime, which demands intense concentration,
they are in perfect communication with the
performer. They are totally responsive; unbe¬
known to themselves, they are telling the
story. When I play an angel, for instance, they
identify so fully with the character that they
become that angel themselves, thanks to a
power of imagination that no adult possesses
to the same degree. Like fairy stories, mime
reinstates that imaginative faculty of theirs.
Even though they sometimes become fidgety,
they are spellbound. They think they are magi¬
cians, and so do I.
Why are there so few female mimes?
M.M.: That was true a few years ago, but more
and more women now want to take it up. In
nineteenth-century mime theatre, women
played frivolous creatures or great men's
muses, seductresses or unfaithful wives. They
were always a foil to the male characters. In
her mime play La mémoire des femmes, Anne
Sicco, my former wife, gave women a more
important role than they had in my produc¬
tions, where they only played so-called female
parts, as flower-sellers for instance. There are
more and more parts now for women. Dozens
of them are studying mime in my school.
Why doesn't the cinema show much interest in
mime?
M.M.: Charlie Chaplin and Harry Langdon
were brilliant mimes. Films like Modern Times
(1936), which Chaplin directed and in which
he showed his incomparable mime artistry,
have kept the world laughing for generations,
but it is true that mime does not interest mod¬
ern directors. I am sure film-makers in the next
century will take an interest in it.
How do you manage to stay so young?
M.M.: Although I am over seventy, I still find
time to enjoy life. I also stick to a healthy diet,
not eating much and not drinking alcohol. I
have several projects on the go. As an illustra¬
tor I am working on a book for bibliophiles
entitled La ballade de Paris et du monde. As
an author, I have written a book about Bip
that has been translated into five languages,
and another, entitled Pimporello, a poetical
story about an Italian mime and a young
orphan girl that I would like to adapt for the
screen. Age means different things to different
people, that's all there is to it! {He mimes an
old man who suddenly becomes a child.)
