Seaweed–or algae–is everywhere in our food
n owa d ay s. Chunks of it float around in
Korean soups, paper-thin sheets of it are
wrapped around Japanese rice balls, and it lies
hidden in the algi n ates and carrageenans in ham-
bu r g e rs ,yo g h u rt and straw b e rry ice cream.“ S e a-
weed-based food additives are now so commonly
used in prepared and fast food that virtually eve-
rybody in Europe and North America eats some
processed seaweed eve ry day,”s ays Michael Guiry
of the National Unive rsity of Ireland, w h e r e
m a rine algae are also used as a fertilizer and food
supplement for live s t o c k . In other parts of the
wo r l d , especially the Far East and the Pa c i fic,
seaweed is a traditional part of the staple diet.
There are three categories of seaweed: red
(4,500 species), green (900 species), a n d
brown (1,000 species). Red seaweeds are the
most numerous, green the most widespread
and brown the largest. Some species of kelp off
the Californian coast can grow to  be 50 metres
long, in “forests” that are just as vast and com-
plex as those on land. Every year 140,000
tonnes of kelp are harvested for the extraction
of food additives. Most of the edible green and
red seaweeds are eaten unprocessed.
The most valuable seaweed species are
k n own by their Japanese names: n o ri
(Porphyra), kombu (Laminaria) and wakame
(Undaria). They are so easy to digest and so
It’s great for your health and
easy to farm. Whether you like it
or not, there may be seaweed on
your plate.
Japanese women pre p a re re c e n t l y
g a t h e red algae for consumption.
A n y o n e
for a l g a e ?

rich in vitamins, mineral salts and oligo-ele-
ments that they deserve to be called “the vege-
tables of the sea”. Wakame, for example, has a
very high calcium content,and nori contains 50
per cent more vitamin C than oranges.
In some parts of Asia, seaweed provides the
poor with good, cheap nutrition, and in the
rich countries it helps people lose weight. “It
seems that We s t e rn e rs , unlike A s i a n s , a r e
unable to assimilate seaweed,and that’s why we
consider it to be a low calorie food,” says Guiry.
The total seaweed market is worth over $5 bil-
lion, with food additives alone accounting for
$600 million. Kazutosi Nisizawa , f o rm e r
President of the Japanese Phycological Society,
says “the world’s total yearly harvest is 8.4 mil-
lion tonnes of green seawe e d , 2.8 million
tonnes of brown seaweed and 1.2 million
tonnes of red seaweed.” China is the leader,
producing 3.5 million tonnes of kombu yearly—
the world’s biggest harvest. This is even more
impressive when we know that from the fifth
century on China imported dried seaweed
from Japan, until it began to farm its own in the
1950s, growing the plants on long ropes stret-
ched under the water. The Chinese now hold
the title of the world’s biggest seaweed consu-
mers.
Meanwhile, the Japanese harvest of nori is
the world’s biggest in value, worth a total of
almost $1.3 billion. The Japanese seawe e d
industry employs some 35,000 people. Japan is
also the world’s leading seaweed exporter, rin-
ging up sales of $170 million in 1995, accor-
ding to FAO. Seaweed, of course, is a historic
staple of the Japanese diet. “The Japanese cur-
rently eat some twenty different species, and
they have been using six of them since as far
back as the eighth century,” reports Guiry.
“Seaweed accounts for about 10 per cent of the
modern Japanese diet.” Even the Japanese gods
love seaweed, it seems. “In a book dating back
to 701,” recounts Nisizawa, “it is written that
several varieties of edible seaweed were used as
offerings in the temples.” Even today, there are
towns in Japan where the meal served at the
betrothal ceremony must include Laminaria,
which is believed to bring good luck and hap-
piness. In many countries, seaweed has long
been part of the traditional pharmacopeia, and
scientists today hope to see it as an ingredient
of tomorrow’s medicines. Researchers are cur-
rently trying to isolate substances in seaweed
which could be used to treat high blood pres-
sure, cholesterol, cancerous tumours and other
ailments. ■
Sophie Boukhari
