this month's interview
Novelist
in exile
Luis SepúLveda
What sort of a childhood did you have?
Luis Sepúlveda: I was lucky enough to have a
normal childhood in a family which was imbued
with the spirit of curiosity and which gave me the
urge and the opportunity to travel. From the
age of fourteen onwards, I used to spend my hol¬
idays backpacking around Chile which is 5,000
km from north to south and the neighbouring
countries, Peru, Bolivia, Argentina and Uruguay.
What about your studies?
L.S.: After secondary school in Santiago, I stud¬
ied theatre production at the National Univer¬
sity. In 1969, 1 was given a five-year scholarship
to continue my drama studies at Moscow Uni¬
versity, but it was withdrawn after five months on
account of "misconduct" I had made friends
with some dissidents, who in my opinion were
producing the best art in the Soviet Union. I had
to go back to Chile.
How did you become a writer?
L.S.: Through reading, especially the great
authors of adventure stories like Jules Verne,
Jack London and Robert Louis Stevenson. We
read a lot at home. My grandfather, who was a
Spanish anarchist, loved books and had a small
library. I think the urge to write came from read¬
ing Francisco Coloana, a Chilean writer.
What was your first book?
L.S.: It came out in 1966, a collection of very bad
juvenile poetry I shall never have republished. I
went on writing because I had acquired a taste for
it, but without believing myself to be a writer.
Then one day a friend put together a dozen of
my stories into a book, Crónicas de Pedro Nadie,
and sent it to Cuba, where it won the Casa de las
Americas Prize in 1969. Later it was published in
Colombia and Argentina, and I started to be knov\ n
throughout Latin America. I'd become a writer
Internationally-known
Chilean novelist Luis
Sepúlveda is a defender
offreedomandofthe
environment who has
experienced prison and
exile. Here he talks
about a career in which
political commitment
and a passion for
writing are intertwined.
Interview by
Bernard Magnier
through force of circumstance! I was also writ¬
ing for the theatre and the radio, which I think is
excellent training for a writer because of the need
to meet deadlines.
You had a political role at the same time...
L.S.: While writing I was also politically active,
first as a leader of the student movement and
then in the Salvador Allende administration,
especially in the department of cultural affairs.
I acted as a mediator between the government
and big business, and I also worked for the
department of cultural affairs. I was in charge of
a series of cheap editions of classics of world lit¬
erature for the general public.
Then came the 1973 putsch. . .
L.S.: I was jailed for two-and-a-half years. I
obtained a conditional release through the efforts
of the German branch of Amnesty International
but was then kept under house arrest. I man¬
aged to escape and went underground for nearly
a year. With the help of a friend who was head
of the Alliance Française in Valparaiso I was
able to find work. We set up a drama group that
became the first cultural focus of resistance,
but 1 was rearrested and given a life sentence
for treason and subversion, finally reduced to
twenty-eight years, thanks to my defence lawyer.
This time you were well and truly jailed. . .
L.S.: No, in fact the German section of Amnesty
International interv ened again on my behalf and
my prison sentence was commuted to eight years'

exile, so in 1977 I left the prison for the airport
to fly to Sweden, where I was to teach Spanish lit¬
erature. At the first stopover, Buenos Aires, I
managed to make my getaway.
H That was the start of a long exile. ..
L.S.: Yes, I went first to Uruguay but many of my
friends there, as in Argentina, which was then a
dictatorship, were dead or in prison, so I went on
to Brazil, to Sâo Paulo, but had to leave there for
Paraguay, where I couldn't stay because of the
regime. I went from there to Bolivia and then to
Peru, finally taking up residence in Ecuador
after a great friend of mine, the novelist and poet
Jorge Enrique Adoum, had invited me to attend
a meeting of Latin American writers there. In
Quito I was director of the Alliance Française
theatre and founded a theatrical company and
then I took part in a UMiSCO expedition to assess
the impact of colonization on the Shuar Indians.
Was that important for you?
L.S.: Enormously important. I shared the life of
the Shuars for seven months. It was a decisive
experience that changed my whole outlook. I
suddenly realized what it really meant to be
Latin American, to belong to a multicultural,
multilingual continent over ninety languages,
not counting Spanish and Portuguese with its
own conceptions of time and history, its own rites.
I realized that the Marxism-Leninism I had grown
up with was not a recipe that could be applied
to a continent whose population is mainly rural
and stands in a close relationship of dependence
and protecti veness with nature. I worked in con¬
tact with the Indian organizations and I drew up
the first literacy teaching plan for the Ibambura
peasants' federation, in the Andes.
Then you went on again to another country. . .
L.S.: Yes, but I went on writing short stories the
whole time and I had plans 'for longer works. In
1979, I joined the Simon Bolivar international
brigade, which was fightingin Nicaragua. Imme¬
diately after the victory of the revolution, I
started working as a journalist writing on inter¬
national affairs, but the following year I decided
to leave Nicaragua and go to Europe.
You decided to live in Germany. Why was that?
L.S.: I chose Hamburg as my base because I had
learned German in prison out of admiration for
German literature, especially the romantics,
Novalis and Hölderlin, without whom it is impos¬
sible to understand modern literature and Latin
American literature in particular.

I also have a strong emotional rapport with
Hamburg: it has links with Valparaiso that go
back to the heroic days of sail. In addition, Ham¬
burg is the place with the greatest concentration
of media in Europe, sol had the opportunity to
work for the press and write for television. I did
a great deal of journalism, which gave me the
opportunity to travel widely and spend much
time in Latin America and in Africa.
It was in Hamburg in 1982 that I first came
into contact with Greenpeace. I joined in their
struggle for the environment. For five years, until
1987, I was a crewman on one of their ships.
Later I acted as co-ordinator between various
branches of Greenpeace.
What about your writing in the meantime?
L.S.: I never stopped. My first novel, Un viejo
que leía novelas de amor, (The Old Man Who
Read Lore Stories) came out in 1989, followed by
a second, El mundo delfín del mundo. They
have been translated into many languages. I also
kept on writing for the theatre.
Has living in Europe changed your attitude to
Latin America? Do you feel farther away from it now
or closer to it?
L.S.: I feel much more Latin American than if I
were living in Latin America. But I don't think it
necessary to come to Europe to write Latin Amer¬
ican literature. I can write anywhere in the world.
Distance, I must admit, does have the advantage
of offering a panoramic overview of the conti¬
nent and the reality of life there. The challenge
in these circumstances is to keep yourself well
enough informed to be able to understand the
changes taking place and the reasons for those
changes, which I do by going back every year
I have an excellent information network back
home in the shape of my friends who live there.
That being said, my time in Europe is a rather
happy and persistent accident that has undeni¬
ably left its mark on me. I have soaked up Euro¬
pean culture.
Do these different influences come together in
some way?
L.S.: Literature is one and indivisible. Different
writers take different paths but they all lead to
the same destination. Literature is a great broth¬
erhood. Jean-Marie Gustave Le Clézio, for exam¬
ple, is a European writer but he spends much of
his time in Mexico and his outlook is such that we
regard him more as a Latin American writer!
Latin America is a continent of contradictions
and wide differences but in some respects it is

also an extension of Europe, a continent of emi¬
grants. Borges referred to us Latin Americans of
the southern cone of the continent as Europeans
born in exile. Our way of life follows European
models. We are republics, we fought for our
independence and our political sovereignty, pat¬
terned on that of the French revolution, and the
great poetical founder-figures of our modern lit¬
erature, such as Kuben Dario or Vicente Iluido-
bro, are undeniably mature Europeans.
What makes you write?
L.S.: I write simply because I like writing. I don't
want to do anything else. I gave up journalism
to devote myself entirely to literature. This may
sound like the answer of someone who has been
privileged oran anarchist, but I do what I like
doing and I make my living doing it.
I don't regard writing as a gift from the gods,
a privilege accorded to a certain caste. It's just
a job! It makes me laugh when I hear of authors
who claim to suffer a lot when writing. If they
suffer so much, why do they write they don't
have to be masochists.
M Do you rework your books a lot?
L.S.: Yes, a lot. I'm a very disciplined worker
and I don't regard them as finished unless I have
been over them at least ten times from begin¬
ning to end.
Your books are short. Is that a deliberate
choice? Is there a rhythm you feel obliged to follow?
L.S.: Length and style depend on the story you
want to tell. I have cut fifty pages out of some of
my novels because they got in the way, they inter¬
rupted the flow I wanted to give them.
Is concern for the environment winning out over
the political commitment that typified so many Latin
American writers of the previous generation?
L.S.: They go hand in hand. Literature cannot
change reality, but it can reflect reflect upon
a very important aspect of it. Rediscovering eco¬
logical dignity is very much a political struggle.
Some present-day writers, like Paco Taibo or Rolo
Diez, are just as politically committed as their
predecessors were, but they approach political
matters from the angle of historical memory, by
reference to what has happened and what should
neither be forgotten nor recur. Their approach
is critical, not without passion but far removed
from perfunctory militancy.
Geography getting its revenge on history?
L.S.: A revenge that is all the more necessary
I want to
stimulate my
readers to think
and to sharpen
their awareness
of others
now that the new world order, although it has
done away with the East-West confrontation, is
constantly and increasingly exacerbating the
North-South confrontation.
Latin America is part of the South. We are
alone, but it is better to be alone than to keep
bad company. A political project can't be built
in a day. Our conception of lime must inevitably
be different from the North's conception, but we
have the time.
Do you write to forget barbarism or to
denounce it?
L.S.: All that concerns me as a writer is that my
readers should come to the same conclusion as
my characters, that they should take notice of
what is happening to them and think. I respect
readers' freedom, and 1 have abolutely no wish to
impose anything on them. All I aim to do is give
them food for thought, thus helping them to
discover the rules governing relationships with
others, the rules of respect for others, with their
culture and their traditions, and to sharpen their
awareness of others, which is, incidentally, a tra¬
dition in adventure-story writing.
How do you explain your fascination with travel
and with the extremes of the natural world, the
southern seas or the Amazonian forest?
L.S.: I am not a city person. I like to spend a cer¬
tain lime in towns, but I need to come face to face
with the elemental forces of nature, to proveto
myself that I can survive on my own, relying on
myself, and also to prove that the individual can
live without being dependent on ihe stale.
Or on other people?
L.S.: No, not on other people. We always need
other people. Humans are social animals, but
they oughtn't to get involved in relationships
based on dependence or domination.
You are internationally famous. How does that
affect you?
L.S.: Success came as a pleasant surpise, but
my character hasn't changed. I'm happy to have
freedom of movement and be free to decide what
to do with my time, but it is above all a great
responsibility to bear. I have an ethical posilion
in relation to life and an aesthetic position in
relation to literature. 1 would like the distinction
to be understood, so that readers could say "I
like Sepiilveda's books but 1 don't agree with
his views" or "I like what he writes, so I would
like to know his views". Literature is a means to
an end. M
