Posterity has seen you as a pleasure-seeker and
your philosophy as pure hedonismthe opposite of
the truth, since your whole philosophy of pleasure
revolves around the idea of moderation. But what is
it based on?
Epicurus: Firstly, on the idea that pleasure is
the beginning and end of a happy life. We seek
pleasure only when we are suffering as a result
of the absence of pleasure, and when wc are
not suffering, it is of no concern to us. Sec¬
ondly, on an ordering of our desires: some
are necessary, others merely natural, and yet
others vain. By necessary desires we mean those
that relieve some pain, like the desire to drink
when we are thirsty; by natural but not nec¬
essary desires, we mean those that simply
diversify our pleasures without relieving
pain like the desire to drink good wine.
Among vain desires is the desire to offer
wreathes or erect statues.
Desires which, if unfulfilled, do not cause
pain are not necessary. They involve an appetite
that may easily be restrained whenever it is
hard to satisfy, or when it is harmful. Nat¬
ural desires whose non-fulfillment does not



Plain living
and high thinking
AN IMAGINARY INTERVIEW WITH
THE GREEK PHILOSOPHER EPICURUS
A bust of the Greek
philosopher Epicurus
(341-270 B.C.) from
Herculanum (Italy,
3rd century B.C.)
cause pain and which take the form of a violent
appetite are desires formed by an empty mind.
Such pleasure as they bring comes not from
them but from our vanity.
In what forms of behaviour is this ethic
expressed in daily life?
Epicurus: The simplest of dishes give as much
pleasure as a groaning board when the suffer¬
ing caused by want is absent. B read and water
afford the keenest of pleasures to those long
deprived of them. Leading a simple, modest
life is thus a good way to stay healthy, and
moreover enables a man to face up stout-heart¬
edly to the tasks that life imposes and to bet¬
ter appreciate occasional high living, and for¬
tifies him against the fickleness of fortune.
Hence, when we say that pleasure is the
supreme good, we are not speaking of the plea¬
sures of the debauchee, nor of sensual aban¬
don, as is claimed by certain ignorant persons
who take issue with us and misrepresent our
thinking. We are speaking of the absence of
physical suffering and of moral disquiet; for
neither drunken revelry nor continual feasting,
nor the enjoyment to be had from consorting
with catamites and women, nor yet that deriv¬
ing from tables heavy laden with fish and
meats, none of these afford a happy life, but
reasonable and sober habits, reason ever seek¬
ing after legitimate causes of election or aver¬
sion and rejecting any opinions that might
greatly trouble the soul.
The principle underlying all this, and at
the same time its greatest benefit, is prudence.
It must be adjudged superior to philosophy
itself, since it is the source of all the virtues,
which teach us that happiness cannot be
attained without prudence, honesty and jus¬
tice, and that these things cannot be obtained
without pleasure. Indeed, the virtues origi¬
nate from a happy life, which in turn is insep¬
arable from the virtues.
Adapted from Peri biân dogmatôn km
apophthegmatôn ton en philosophia eudokimêsantôn
("Lives, teachings and sayings of famous
philosophers") by Diogenes Laertius
THE UNESCO ÇpURI ER JANUARY 1998
