From revenge to reparation
BY TONY PETERS
Penal policy takes a new direction by confronting
offenders with the consequences of their acts and
giving them a chance to make amends
Over the past few decades, more atten¬
tion has been focused on the victims of
crime than on criminals. This raises two ques¬
tions. How far do legal systems take into
account victims' demands for justice in the sen¬
tences they mete out to offenders? And to
what extent do sentences respond to those
demands?
Eighteenth-century theories of law and
justice developed by the Enlightenment
philosophers in Europe form the basis of
what is now regarded as classical penal proce¬
dure, whose non-arbitrary character is quite
different from the procedure that prevailed
before the French Revolution. Many forms
of corporal punishment disappeared and were
replaced by simple, clear-cut punishments like
fines and prison sentences.
In the nineteenth century, the purpose of
prison sentences was to make criminals pay
their debt to society. Incarceration temporar¬
ily kept offenders out of the way while serv¬
ing as an example and a warning. Imprison¬
ment was also supposed to give offenders time
to reflect on their misdeeds.
With the citizen's safety uppermost in
Blackwell's Island
penitentiary in New York City
(U.S.A.) in the 19th century.
Period engraving.
mind, classical penologists emphasized a strictly
legal definition of crime and punishment. How¬
ever, as a result of the growing influence of the
behavioural sciences views of delinquency
changed and the idea that a single sentence is
appropriate for all offenders regardless of the
crime committed came under attack. A new
trend emerged whereby sentencing was
required to take each offender's circumstances

and personal history into account. Sentencing
criteria were no longer based on the legal defi¬
nition of the crime but on the threat to society
posed by the offender. A battery of alterna¬
tives to fit specific individuals and situations
were developed from the late nineteenth century
onwards, including prison terms for hardened
criminals, suspended sentences and probation
for occasional offenders and protective and
rehabilitation systems for young delinquents.
Sentences were seen as a useful means of reinte¬
grating the criminal into society.
Crowdedprisons
After the Second World War and the 1948 Dec- g
Jaration of Human Rights, new alternatives f
to prison opened up prospects of more ®
humane sentencing with a view to reintegrat¬
ing offenders into society. But these hopes
came to nothing and alternative sentences
remained by and large marginal. Imprison¬
ment did not become a solution of last resort.
In the 1970s, the flagrant inhumanity of
correctional facilities, the psychological impact
of incarceration and the social exclusion result¬
ing from this form of punishment resulted in
Inmates in Brazil protesting
against poor prison conditions
and the slowness of the
judicial system.
A turn-of-the-century
lecture against alcoholism at
Fresnes prison (France).
Period engraving.
a growing scepticism about the prison sys¬
tem's capacity to rehabilitate inmates. In many
facilities they also led to strikes, revolts and
uprisings, which were sometimes violently
put down.
Since the 1980s, two opposing viewpoints
have emerged. On the one hand, prison seems
to have lost its legitimacy as a punitive insti¬
tution. On the other, some organizations
insist that inmates serve out their full sen¬
tences, thereby restoring the punitive func¬
tion of imprisonment. At the same time, those
who remain unconvinced of the socializing
virtues of deprivation of freedom stress that,
in a democratic state under the rule of law,
inmates are citizens entitled to legal protec¬
tion and basic human rights.
Over the past ten years, crowded prison
conditions have overshadowed ideological dis¬
cussions about the appropriateness, useful¬
ness and humaneness of incarceration. The
average length of sentences has increased and
procedures for early release have become more
complicated. Keeping the offender off the
streets seems to have become the main pur¬
pose of imprisonment.
The debate on sentencing
One major innovation that has emerged over
the past two decades is the idea of reparation.
Recent studies of the victims of crime have
strongly influenced the debate on sentencing.
The question of how far sentences solve the
problems of victims is increasingly being asked.
In this context, the definition of criminality
and the penal approach to it become part of a
horizontal exchange relationship between

"* ^ * - M>.* * w »V^ _ . k .........
Fighting a fire started
during a riot at Dijon prison
(France).
offenders and victims. Both are equally con¬
cerned in the solution that is found for the
problem posed by a criminal offence.
Numerous offender-victim conciliation
projects show that this is in many cases a real¬
istic approach and, what is more, highly sat¬
isfactory for both parties and effective in
changing the offender's behaviour. Concilia¬
tion plays a major role in helping to build a
criminal justice system in which offenders
make some amends to their victims.
In handing out prison terms, little attention
was given to the victim. An intelligent execution
of the sentence should take into consideration
how the offender and victim experienced the
crime. The systematic denial of the meaning
and consequences of the offence and its accep¬
tance or rejection by victims and offenders
strongly dehumanizes the application of the
sentence. Confronting offenders with the con¬
sequences of their deeds and giving them an
opportunity to make amends should become
a basic function and priority of the criminal
justice system in the very near future. In a soci¬
ety where attention is now focused on the vic¬
tim, sentencing which does not require offend¬
ers to make amends to their victims lacks
credibility and meaning.
