Togouna week in D j e n n é
The people of Djenné (Mali) will remember Heritage Week for a long time.From 12
to 18 May, decision makers , r e s e a r c h e rs and local representat i ves gathered in the
ancient tow n , which has been on UNESCO’s World Heritage List since 1988, to dis-
cuss ways of preserving its remarkable earthen architecture while taking the residents’
needs into account.“Togouna”week,named after a Dogon concept meaning a place for
dialogue, thought and exchange,was organized by the ministry of culture, sponsored by
Adam Ba Korané,wife of the chief of state and a historian,and chaired by the minister of
culture,Aminata Dramane Traoré.According to Sirandou Bocoum,a representative of a
Djenné wo m e n ’s gr o u p,“Difficult restoration rules are imposed on us.We are not allowe d
to change the present dimensions of our houses, but they are ve ry small.To d ay we need spa-
cious living rooms to entertain guests.The old entrance halls just wo n ’t do any m o r e .A little
m o d e rnity wo n ’t make our architecture any less authentic,” she say s , adding that the ru l e s
are forcing the townspeople to live in a “perpetual ghetto”. Papa Sy, chairman of an orga-
n i z ation called Djenné-Pat rimoine (Djenné-Heri t a g e ) , shares her point of view. “ T h e
main thing,”he say s ,“is to preserve the façades and other aspects of the appearance of our
homes.The rest should be up to the owner to decide.”
Heritage Week participants demanded that restoration projects underway be redesi-
gned to satisfy the townspeople’s needs. But above all, they asked to take part in futu-
re heritage management projects. Making cultural heritage profitable was also discus-
sed during “Togouna” week.To spread the benefits among as many people as possible,
it is necessary to promote local creativity and the development of economic activities
linked to tourism, such as crafts.
Admittedly, that is a tall order. Meanwhile, Djenné’s Heritage Week proved that
people are more likely to accept a  participatory approach to heritage management than
the top-to-bottom decision-making that has been the rule until now. As the minister of
culture said, the aim of preservation is to foster sustainable human development that
combines economics with culture. Bamba Kiabou ■
Pa s c a l ,L a u t r é a m o n t ,Walter Benjamin, C h a-
teaubriand, Karl Jaspers, Roland Barthes,
Fernand Braudel and others.
There is still a long way to go. In future,
Russia’s publishing industry, including the
production and marketing sides,will have to
be totally rethought.A fresh injection of aid
is indispensable,especially for school text-
b o o k s , u n i ve rsity textbooks and librari e s.
Sales and marketing strat e gies must be
r e va m p e d .Marketing centres already exist,
but aesthetically Russian books still leave
much to be desired.The time has also come
to consider co-editions with We s t e rn publi-
shers. ■
Maria Yakubovich
