interview
Izet Sarajlic
'Poetry
is on the side
of love'
Poetry has been part of your life for half a
century. How do you see this art-form today?
Izet Sarajlic: I'm sorry to see that poetry has lost
the place it should occupy in people's lives, Poets
are partly responsible for this, but the spirit of
the age is also to blame. When I was young,
Neruda, Sartre, Malraux, Camus, Tuwim, Frost
and Ungaretti were the important writers. Living
in that world brought responsibilities as well as
pleasure; you had to surpass yourself. Imagine
having a poem published in a magazine next to
one by Neruda! We couldn't afford to be
mediocre. In today's literary world, it's not dif¬
ficult to pass yourself off as a poet. The poet will
soon belong to an extinct species. I fear that peo¬
ple will eventually stop reading us altogether.
Are you equally pessimistic about the future
of prose?
LS.: Yes, because I think that modern novelists
couldn't care less about that essential thing
known as love. I can't remember the last heroine
I fell in love with. The age of Anna Karenina is
gone for good. Today's novelists write against a
background of violence, and they want to shock
their readers. In modern novels there is a kind
of indifference, a failure to connect, whose causes
I cannot fathom. Is it because writers are trying
to appeal to the culture moguls who announce a
"new sensibility" every five years or so?
After the Sarajevo tragedy, I had the oppor¬
tunity to make several trips abroad. I was amazed
to see splendidly bound works by so many
nonentities displayed in bookshop windows.
There are so many bestsellers and so few great
writers. The era of great art is over. It seems as
though we've lost the joy of creation.
A Russian poet once said that even sadness is
joyful in your poetry. But your recent war poems
give the opposite impression.
LS.: The fact is that all values have been turned
IzetSarajlic is widely
regarded as Bosnia's greatest
living poet. A member of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Academy of Arts and Sciences,
he has published more than
15 collections of poetry and a
volume of memoirs. A volume
of his works was published in
English under the title Poetry
by Dist 136 Press,
Minneapolis, in 1975. His two
most recent books, written in
Sarajevo during the war, have
been translated into French as
Le livre des adieux and
Recueil de guerre sarajévien
(1997). Here he is interviewed
by Jasmina Sopova.
upside down, not only for me but for everybody.
All the old landmarks have gone. Immorality will
soon replace moral values and lies will replace truth.
This change has happened very quickly. If the
world had moved more slowly in this direction
(which actually leads to a dead end), people might
have had the time to prepare themselves psycho¬
logically. But this is impossible because of the
speed at which things are moving.
I feel that civilization took a wrong turning
about thirty years ago, as if the powers-that-be
had pointed it in a direction in which I can see no
future. It appals and depresses me that this utter
confusion is accepted as the normal human
condition.
Was it the war that changed your view of the
world?
LS.: To some extent, yes. I've always thought
that humanity needed responsible politicians
and that there were fewer and fewer of these. It's
no accident that the war which has destroyed my
former homeland should have happened at a
moment in history when there was no longer
anyone capable of giving a constructive turn to
political events and leading this poor world, so
rich in trivia and so poor in basics, into the
twenty-first century.
When foreigners who came to Sarajevo dur¬
ing the war asked me what I thought about the
West's attitude to Bosnia, I used to tell them
that while Tito had had the guts to stand up to
the might of Stalin, nobody today neither the
United States, nor France nor Germany is capa¬
ble of saying "no" to a local bandit.
The war also taught me something else. It
showed me that the behaviour of the world's

thinkers is not only irresponsible but immoral.
And so was the conduct of some of the generals
stationed in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I'm think¬
ing of one of them in particular who was reported
to have raped young Muslim girls who were
brought to him in brothels. Everybody knew
about it. Everybody turned a blind eye.
The war also showed me the meaning of sol¬
idarity. We received great support from ordinary
people, especially in France, Italy and Switzer¬
land, and without it we would not have sur¬
vived. I used to think that the Swiss were people
who didn't show their feelings. Well, it was the
Swiss who showed us more kindness than any¬
one else.
Cultural life in Sarajevo was pretty dynamic,
wasn't it? Musical life, theatre and publishing all
went on.
LS.: The Latin saying whereby people fall silent
when the guns roar is false. Some very fine work
was produced in Sarajevo during the war. It would
be a good thing if foreigners could read some of
the stuff we wrote, so that they could under¬
stand that civil war is a plague, that it is conta¬
gious and that it could happen elsewhere in the
world, in an even more terrible form.
In one of your books, Recueil de guerre, you
say: "If I've survived all this it's thanks to poetry
and to a dozen or so people, ordinary folk, true
saints of Sarajevo, whom I hardly knew before the
war."
LS.: I wrote my two war books in my cellar as
shells whistled overhead. I couldn't, like Eluard,
paint the word "freedom" on the walls of Sara¬
jevo because no walls were left standing. So I said
to my wife: "Look at me, I am like a late twen¬
tieth-century Milton, writing a Paradise Lost oy
candlelight."
But I didn't start out with the idea of writ¬
ing poetry. I didn't care about poetry. It's a long
time since I was interested in poetry. Just before
the war, I wrote that the worst places for poetry
were the very places where poetry could be found.
When I said that poetry had saved me, I meant
that these extremely unhappy war years were per¬
haps the happiest years of my life as a poet. I was
motivated, I had readers, or rather listeners. We
had no paper for printing and I was not on close
terms with the few publishers who had any. In
any case, they specialized in pseudo-religious
work and propaganda, and so I wasn't very keen
on being published by them. Nevertheless, my
poems reached the public, which made me very
happy indeed. During the war, my literary and
moral standing in the eyes of my fellow citizens
seemed to be high. I saw that they wanted to
help me in one way or another. They would step
aside for me when we queued for water, although
'I am Muslim. My wife is
Catholic, herfamily came
from Austria, and our
daughter married an
Orthodox Christian.
I hope that my grandson
will put his hand on the
shoulder of a Jew.
That would complete
the family portrait.'
I naturally never took advantage of that, and
they would give me a cigarette, or an apple for my
grandson.
In those circumstances, poetry becomes
something different, doesn't it?
LS.: When a man has a dressing gown, when he
has enough to eat, when he can step out onto
his balcony, eat cherries or drink his coffee with
his own cigarette and not one he has had to beg
for, then he can think about aesthetics and aes-
theticism. But when he's surrounded by mis¬
ery and is a prey to it as well, when he finds him¬
self completely isolated and degraded, he asks
himself "Where are the simple, normal words?
Have they abandoned art ? "
I have had a portrait of one of my favourite
poets, Boris Pasternak, in my bedroom for a
long time. For me, it was a relic. It's still there,
despite the three million shells that have report¬
edly fallen on the city. One day, when I happened
to be in my bedroom and not down in the cel¬
lar, I looked at it and suddenly thought that even
he, the wonderful Pasternak, no longer meant
to me what he once did. So many fine words,
such perfect harmony, yet nothing about my
suffering, nothing about human suffering.
Has the war changed your poetry?
LS.: I don't think there's any fundamental dif¬
ference between what I wrote before and during
the war. The form may vary somewhat here and
there. When shells are bursting around you, you
have to get it down as quickly as you can, so you
don't pay much attention to form. In any case,
when you have something to say, the form
chooses itself. I'm not the kind of writer who
searches for a poem. A poet shouldn't do that. A
poem should search for and find its poet.
I haven't changed and I haven't felt any need
to. I got into poetry after World War II. In 1942,
the Italian fascists shot my older brother. In
everything I've done since, I've tried my hardest
not to betray the memory of that young man.
I'm now over fifty years older than he was then.
He's the person I'm answerable to.
In today's super-ideological age which repu¬
diates all previous ideologies, I stick to the posi¬
tion I chose at the end of what we now call the
"other" war, 1 939-45. That was a time when we all
believed that love could be revived and we
thought we had to write as if we were planting a
birch tree in the municipal park or fixing a door¬
bell to a door. We were all in favour of love and
remained faithful to it, except for some who
betrayed it during this recent war.
Do you think that such idealism is still
possible today?
LS.: I don't know. I can't think now the way I
> G>uiTHE UNESCO lOURIER APRIL 1998
49

did when I was young. I'm no longer capable of
being as generous as I was then. "Universal"
thoughts are far from my mind. My doorstep is
the limit of my world these days. I'm concerned
about my wife's health, my daughter's job, my
grandson's future.1 I'm eager to redecorate my
flat and put my bedroom in order. If I write a
poem or two amidst all that, well and good, but
If not, too bad. Perhaps I have written enough.
A French television programme about
Sarajevo and your family showed that part of your
flat had been seriously damaged.
LS.: One day, the Chetniks2 shelled my flat three
times. They thought they'd killed me, so they
stopped firing and went away. I received a blow
on the head and collapsed. When I came to, it
was quite funny. A painting had fallen on top of
me and I woke up with my head in the frame, like
a Rembrandt!
I've known you since I was a child but I've
never asked you about your religion.
LS.: I'm a Muslim. So what? I've never lived in a
predominantly religious environment any more
than any of my compatriots. I can't see people as
Orthodox or Muslim or whatever. Religion may
be important to some, but it's a personal matter.
I was in Strasbourg not long ago and I
couldn't understand why everyone kept insist¬
ing on the fact that I was Muslim. They told mc
that it was important to say so. I didn't consider
it to be important at all. In the same way, foreign
journalists who came to Sarajevo would often
ask me whether I thought that all these ethnic
groups could live together. I would always answer
by introducing my family to them and saying:
"My wife is Catholic, her family came from Aus¬
tria and our daughter married an Orthodox
Christian. I hope that fifteen years from now,
when the time comes for my grandson Vladimir
to experience the same kind of sufferings as
Goethe's young Werther, he will put his hand
on the shoulder of a Jew. That would complete
the family portrait."
Do you think that Bosnia has any future in the
present situation?
I.S.: I don't know. Like many people, rightly
or wrongly, I support the Dayton Agreements.
Yet I know that they are not the real solution.
The people who are deciding the fate of Bosnia
have not grasped the soul of the country, but
they talk with amazing glibness about corridors,
republics, federations, and so on.
There's one thing that the West doesn't
understand, or doesn't want to. In Spain, we saw
a dress rehearsal for Western fascism, and in
Bosnia we saw the same thing for Eastern Euro¬
pean fascism. In Spain, fascism came to power,
unfortunately; as luck would have it, ours did
not. But there is no proof that it has definitively
failed. Anything is possible today.
1. Mme Sarajlic passed away shortly after this interview was
completed. Editor
2. Serbian ultra-nationalists. Editor
