'
Â
X.
1. Rock paintings produced by
a society of early gatherers,
Tassih-N'Ajjer, Algeria (so-called
"round head" phase around
5000 B.C.). They show 2
figures, each wearing a
mushroom-shaped mask and
holding a mushroom from
which a line of dots reaches
up to its head. Three elements
of rock art "grammar" are
found In this composition: the
human figure, the mushroom
shape and a set of small dots.
Drawings on pages 10 16
© Emanuel Anati 1997. WARA. Centro Camuno de
Studi Preistorici. Capo di Ponte. Italy
3. Rock paintings of
anthropozoomorphic figures
produced by Neolithic
hunters (5,000-6,000 years
ago) atOuan Meilen in the
Tassili-N'Ajjer.
2. Rock paintings made by hunters of the
Mesolithic period (6,000-8,000 years ago) in the
Levante area of southeastern Spain.
Anthropozoomorphic figures occur in rock art all
over the world and over several millennia. These
are carrying weapons.

iü
40.000 YEARS OF HOMO INTELLECTUALS
The writing
; on the wall
* BY EMMANUEL ANATI
Prehistoric rock paintings and engravings
may be a language with its own grammar
and syntax
4. Rock engravings found at Tamgali
(Kazakhstan). Two anthropomorphic
wolves or foxes armed with hooks or
having hook-shaped hands are moving in
on a small creature with a tail and a
feather on its head. The scene appears
to depict a dance relating to a myth.
Stag hunt (500 B.C.). Chelly
Canyon, California (U.S.A.).
© Monique Pietn. Pans
All over the world, in more than 120
countries, groups of human beings have
left behind examples of rock paintings or carv¬
ings. Rock seems to have been the first support
they chose on which to create their works of
art; it is, at any rate, on rock that examples of
their art have come down to us. Body-paint¬
ing and tattoos, ornaments, decorations,
paintings on bark or on palm leaves, draw¬
ings in sand and collections of unusually
shaped or coloured pebbles are other art forms
that may have existed before rock art, but they
have not withstood the passage of millennia,
while music and the dance have left only indi¬
rect evidence of their existence in graphic rep¬
resentations or in the remains of musical
instruments discovered in the course of archae¬
ological excavations.
Rock art is typically the product of pre-lit-
erate societies, beginning with the emergence of
Homo sapiens and generally dying out when
the communities that practised it acquired a
"written" form of communication. It thus
constitutes by far the most important record
we possess of humanity's history before the
invention of writing. It also provides invalu¬
able source material for the study of human
beings' cognitive development, which is why
it is so important to establish a world data
bank, as the WARA (World Archives on Rock
Art) project aims to do (see Fact file, page 39).
Almost all prehistoric art focuses on three
basic themes: sex, food and territory. Humans'
main concerns seem not to have changed very
much down the ages. . . .
The art and its environment
Before looking at the graphic, intellectual and
ideological content of the works themselves,
we need to clarify a number of essential points
concerning the relationship between them and
their environment.
Space. The natural forms and the position
selected on the rock face are the most obvious
such relationship so obvious, indeed, that
it is often overlooked. In fact, the relation¬
ship between the thing depicted, the sign, and
the positioning of the depiction is a concrete,
physical one, and corresponds to a specific
choice, whether conscious or unconscious.
Comparative studies carried out world-wide
have demonstrated that the artists chose the
positions of their images in accordance with
widely recurring criteria.
The individual. The person making that
choice obviously had a specific identity: he or
she may have been young or old, a shaman or
a lay person art has never been practised by
all and sundry. Another type of relationship
is therefore to be sought in the linkage between
the surviving work of art and the type of indi¬
vidual who created it. In some cases, in tribal
art of a later date as well as in prehistoric art,
it is possible to ascertain whether the work
was executed by an initiate or a non-initiate, by
a man or by a woman.
5. Rock engraving at Tiout (Algeria) produced by hunters some time during the 2nd millennium B.C. The way in
which the various elements are combined shows a certain logic and an ability to synthesize and handle
abstractions. Analysis of the "syntax" of the engraving highlights the parallel between hunting and sex. The
ostrich hunter (centre) is using a bow and arrow and is accompanied by a dog. A line runs from the hunter's
penis to the pubis of a female figure behind him whose gender ¡s indicated by a pair of parallel lines on either side
of her body. Similar lines, or "lips", represent the female sex organ.
Between these two figures is a goat with a triangular symbol between its horns, and the same symbol recurs
on the woman's head. This may be an ideograph providing a particular item of information: the animal figure
associated with it could be a clue to the woman's identity or name. The huntsman's identity is established by
three vertical lines above his head. The figure of the ostrich, the huntsman's prey, is accompanied by two dots,
conferring the status of an object on it and meaning "something to be hunted".

6. Rock engraving by early hunters of the Murray
River region (southern Australia). It features a
schematic outline of a quadruped accompanied by
several ideographs. A sign representing the vulva
occupies a central place. There are also several
series of dots, lines, groups of lines and a dot-and-
line ideograph that recurs several times. This
combination of graphemes denotes a repetitive
syntax characteristic of a certain type of cognition
found world-wide.
7. Quadruped
Tim e. The painting or engraving was made
at a particular time of the day or night, in sum¬
mer or in winter, or even at a particular point in
the artist's personal life, The act of executing it
occurred within a dynamic context, before,
after or during other physical or mental activ¬
ities before or after the hunt, before or after
eating or sleeping, before or after doing other
things. It also took place under particular cir¬
cumstances, at a moment spent in solitude or
in company, during a ceremony or the practice
of meditation, in a noisy place or in total
silence like any other act, it fits into a temporal
and sequential context. We are thus presented
with yet another type of relationship, that
between the work and its temporal context. In
our efforts to recreate that context, we can often
do no more than speculate, even when we are
able to establish whether the painting in ques¬
tion had a public or private function.
Types ofsign
There are several types of sign, and relation¬
ships exist both between similar signs and
between different signs. I apply the term "syn¬
tax" to the mode of relationship (juxtaposi¬
tion, sequence, scene) and "grammar" to the
specific form of each sign.
Three grammatically distinct types of sign
recur everywhere (drawing 1):
Pictographs (or mythographs). These are
recognizable representations of real or imagi¬
nary objects, animals or human beings.
Ideographs. These are repetitive signs or
combinations of signs, sometimes taking the
form of discs, arrows, branches, sticks, signs
in the shape of trees, crosses, mushrooms,
stars or snakes, "lips", zigzag patterns, "phal-
luses" or "vulvas". Their recurrent nature and
the particular relationship between them indi¬
cate that they are intended to convey conven¬
tional concepts (drawings 2 to 5).
Psychographs. These seem neither to repre¬
sent objects nor to be symbols. They appear to
have been created as a result of violent dis¬
charges of energy, perhaps in order to express
feelings about life or death and feelings of love
or hate, but could also be interpreted as
expressing portents or other very subtle per¬
ceptions. They occur more often in cave art
and on moveable objects than in open-air rock
art, in which the choice of rock and its actual
shape seem to fulfil the psychograph's role.
The syntax specific to the art of the early
hunters combines pictographs representing
various common types of animal, such as ele¬
phant and giraffe in the case of the United
Republic of Tanzania or bison and horse in
western Europe, with, in both these cases,
ideographs which are in many cases identical.
Various studies are at present being carried out
on the significance of these combinations of
pictographs and ideographs, but the general
opinion seems to be that they are based upon
the same logic as that which underlies the first
pictographic writing systems, and indeed may
Rock engravings on the
so-called "Newspaper
Rock", Canyonland,
Utah (U.S.A.)
IDEOGRAPHS
Vulva sign
v.
Series
of dots
Groups
of dots
and lines \
Combined
dot-and-lign sign
i ['ri,

9. Quadruped
8. Stylized profile of a quadruped accompanied by ideographs
careved on rock at La Ferrassie, Dordogne (France) by
Palaeolithic hunters (around 27,000-30,000 years ago). The
way of combining the graphemes is reminiscent of
representations found on the other side of the globe, e.g.
that shown on opposite page (drawings 6 and 7).
' //
/
1/
Human and animal figures.
Rock engravings at Toro
Muerto (Peru).
IDEOGRAPHS
Vulva sign
Series of dots
Group of dots
and lines
Pairing of dot
and line
Combined
dot-and-line sign
g
already constitute one such system which
would indicate that the logical process leading
to the invention of writing was already under
way 40,000 years ago (drawings 5 to 9).
A common conceptual basis
The physical dimensions of a picture are a very
inadequate means on which to base an under¬
standing of everything that it represents. In
Renaissance painting, for instance, although
the dove is shown as a particular species of bird ,
to grasp the full significance of a dove appearing,
say, in an Annunciation scene by Fra Angélico
it is not enough to say that there is a bird, in this
case a dove, in the corner of the picture. Only if
the viewer is familiar with the subject being
illustrated by the artist and with the mythical
and conceptual background of the artist's native
region does the full symbolism and specific sig¬
nificance of the dove, representing the Holy
Spirit in Christian mythology, emerge. Simi¬
larly, Picasso's dove of peace is far from being

just a dove: the artist has added to the picto-
graph an ideograph, the characteristically
Mediterranean olive branch, the symbolism of
which we can appreciate only because we have
been initiated into it.
Prehistoric pictographs, often accompa¬
nied by ideographs, should be perfectly "leg¬
ible" to all who are aware of their conceptual
content, but the handing on of the tradition
direct from generation to generation has been
interrupted, and it is precisely the job of the
archaeologist to assemble as much material and
as many observations as possible to try and
determine that content.
10. Stylized profile of a quadruped accompanied by
jdeographs carved around 8000 B.C. on rock in the valley of
the river Lena (Siberia). A vulva sign has been drawn near the
animal's penis. Note the combinations of lines and dots and
the presence of a zigzag motif. Though different in style, the
manner of combining the different elements is reminiscent of
that in the 2 works shown in drawings 6 to 9, illustrating how
certain archaic typologies survived down the ages.
12. Rock paintings at
Rio Pinturas,
Patagonia (Argentina).
Three distinct phases
can be recognized:
group of graphemes,
hand stencils and
prints, stencilled
outlines of animal
spoors, objects
(tools), zigzag motif;
series of animals
added later; series of
dots added later.
13.
11. Quadruped
pgñ(üjjtrl Handprint and
stencilled outlines of
hands
V*
IDEOGRAPHS
Vulva sign
Group
of dots
and lines
Rock engravings of concentric circles
associated with a warrior (right), at Bedolina,
Val Camonica, Italy. (Iron Age, 850-700 B.C.).
Animal spoor
outlines
Animal figures drawn
on top
VWW^AA1 Zigzag
Tool (?axe)
Series of dots added
later

16. Rock paintings at Nabarlek, Arnhem Land, Australia (art of
archaic hunting peoples). Stencilled outlines of hands, animal
spoors and tools. Three of the hands represented are
mutilated, a detail that recurs in archaic paintings all over the
world. Two further ideographs have been added later, a disc
(female) and a "branch" (male).
At many rock art sites and in the earliest
forms of writing, ideographs are signs con¬
veying ideas, in a process of transmission from
writer to reader and from the painter to the real
or imaginary beings to whom the message is
addressed.
Research reveals a number of constants in
rock art, on whatever continent it may have
been produced, such as the use of similar tech¬
niques and colours, a narrow and repetitive
range of subjects, the same ways of combining
different elements, the same type of logic, the
recurrence of a range of symbolic ideographs
and, especially, the combination of pic¬
tographs, ideographs and psychographs
(drawings 10 to 13). This raises further ques¬
tions and suggests that the same structural
basis and the same conceptual dynamics may
underlie all creative art.
Five major categories ofart
In terms both of style and of content, it is
possible to distinguish five broad categories
Concentric circles
engraved in the rock at Oraibi,
Arizona, U.S.A. (Neolithic
period, 5000-3000 B.C.).
17.
Hand outlines
"Boomerang"
Ideographs added
later:
disc (female),
branch (male)
! 18. Drawing of an early Palaeolithic rock engraving,
probably made 27,000-30,000 years ago, at La
Ferrassie, Dordogne (France). The artist skilfully chose
to work on a rock with a natural shape suggesting the
; figure of a bison, adding engravings of horns and an
eye (left). Two vulva ideographs and several cup marks
were also added.
> >'- V
14. Rock paintings in
Queensland (Australia) ^^"
produced by very early hunting
peoples show stencilled
outlines of hands, in
combination with stencilled
animal spoors, zigzag motifs
and shapes of tools. The forms
are grouped according to a
syntax identical to that used in
the earliest phase of the
previous work (drawings 12 and
13) produced on the other side
of the world.
15.
Stencilled
outlines
of hands
Objects:
"clubs" and
an "axe"
Zigzag
of art, each with its own characteristics that
may be found everywhere.
Early hunters: art practised by hunters who
were ignorant of the bow and arrow, com¬
bining signs and figures but without com¬
posing scenes as such. Its syntax consists chiefly
of logical sequences and metaphorical associa¬
tions.

Early gatherers: art practised by peoples
whose economy was based mainly on the gath¬
ering of wild fruit, taking the form of simple
scenes of a metaphorical nature depicting a
surreal world. Much of this art seems to have
been produced in a state of hallucination.
Later hunters: art practised by hunters who
knew how to use the bow and arrow, con¬
sisting of anecdotal and descriptive scenes and
mainly depicting the hunt and events in the
community.
Pastoralists and herdsmen: art practised by
peoples whose main economic activity as
depicted therein was raising livestock, and
focussing on the depiction of domestic ani¬
mals and scenes of family life.
The complex economy: art practised by
peoples with a diversified economy, includ¬
ing farming, and consisting mainly of mytho¬
logical scenes and compositions made up of
signs and patterns.
This classification is necessarily only a
rough outline; there are transitional phases
and groups that display a mixture of charac¬
teristics, and there can also be marked differ¬
ences within a given category. In the present
state of research, however, and given the con¬
siderable amount of evidence available to us, an
approach based on style and subject-matter is
clearly the one to be followed in order to tran¬
scend the limitations of regional frontiers.
Applying a set of criteria based on the sub¬
jects and on the typology of representations, it
has been possible to pinpoint certain recurrent
and significant elements, and also to put for¬
ward the hypothesis that there exist certain

universal reflexes, linked to given ways of life,
that may have influenced not only people's
behaviour but also their thinking and their
associative processes (and hence their ideology)
and, consequently, their art forms. From the
very beginnings of art as we know it, some 40-
50,000 years ago, human beings have acted in
accordance with specific mental processes that
have led them to invent relationships, sym¬
bols, abstractions or sublimations which even
to this day constitute one of their specific uni¬
versal characteristics.
A universal language
Before the advent of Homo sapiens and of art,
the human race had been evolving for four
million years, so that, counting from the time
.when beings capable of laughing and crying
and of wondering about life and the future
first appeared on earth, art may be said to have
existed for only the last one per cent of human
history. In relation to what earlier hominids
20. Rock painting executed by early hunters at Pahi,
Masai Escarpment (United Republic of Tanzania). It
features the stylized outline of a quadruped, probably a
rhinoceros, with a "branch"-type ideograph pointed
towards the vulvo-anal region and a pattern of small dots
forming concentric circles.
19. Symbols of male and
female. The rock engravings
executed by the Neolithic
farmers of the Gobustan
(Azerbaijan, c. 5000 B.C.) use
the same graphemes as those
employed several millennia
before by early hunters. The
"branch" symbolizes the male
sex organ, while the two parallel
lines or "lips" on the woman's
hip stand for the female organ.
achieved, this represented not so much evolu¬
tion as a revolution. Various attempts have
been made to prove that apes and Homo erec-
tus were capable of producing art, supposi¬
tions that are, to my mind, totally unfounded.



The emergence of our identity as Homo sapi¬
ens presupposes the acquisition of a whole set
of specialized functions and particular attrib¬
utes, of being able to see, hear and feel with a
lucidity and in a manner quite specific to the
genus sapiens (drawings 12 to 17).
Some things about rock art from the distant
past are still relevant today. The visual language
of early hunters is a universal language since,
quite apart from systems of representation and
styles that are often very similar in different
parts of the world, it also displays combina¬
tions of figures and symbols that derive from
the same logic, suggesting a similar way of'
thinking and of self-expression (drawing 1 8). It
is not unreasonable to assume that the spoken
language was also based on universal principles
(drawings 19 to 22).
In intellectual terms, it would seem that
the capacity oíHomo sapiens to produce art is
innate. It would perhaps be better to replace
the somewhat pretentious term Homo sapi¬
ens (sometimes even cited as Homo sapiens
sapiens) by that oí Homo intellectualis.
21. Rock paintings by early gatherers at Kundusl (United Republic of
Tanzania). Ideographs have been used to depict the heads of two
anthropomorphic figures so as to make the figures identifiable. One
consists of a chevron pattern with a wavy double line emerging from the
top, probably representing a "branch"; the other is a group of dots forming
a kind of sphere. The resemblance to the previous illustration Is
unmistakable, although the latter dates from an earlier period.
'
22. Illustration of a Great Plains
Indian (United States) story
about the winter of 1876-1877:
"Chief Three Stars [General
Crook] took with him the young
braves of Chief Red Cloud to
fight with them against the
Cheyenne".
Mythical beast over two
metres long, at Helanshan
(China).
