LISTENING
BY ISABELLE LEYMARIE



Pioneer of bebop, Afro-Cuban and Brazilian jazz,
Dizzy Gillespie (1917-1993) was a colourful figure
and, with Louis Armstrong and Miles Davis, one of
jazz's trinity of great trumpet-players.
Roy Eldridge, six years his senior, who was
regarded as the fastest and most innovative trum¬
peter then playing and who was at that time with
Teddy Hill's band. When not rehearsing or per¬
forming, Dizzy spent all his time studying har¬
mony on the piano, a grounding to which he later
attributed his ability to play in any key. It was
about this time that his fellow trumpeter Palmer
Davis, impressed both by his virtuosity and his
non-stop fooling about, nicknamed him "Dizzy".
John llirks Gillespie was born in Cheraw,
a small town in South Carolina. Neither
his father, a builder who led a dance-band at
weekends, nor his mother took much interest in
his education. But young John was bright and
curious about everything, especially music.
Unbeknown to his father, he practised on the
various band instruments stored in the house
and learned to play the trumpet with a neigh¬
bour's son.
As a teenager, he worked for a time on one of
the public-works projects set up by the Roo¬
sevelt Administration under the New Deal. But
manual labour was not to his liking, and he soon
obtained a scholarship to the Laurinburg Tech¬
nical Institute, an agricultural college for Blacks
in North Carolina. He played trombone and then
trumpet in the college band, and started study¬
ing musical theory and trying his hand at the
piano. At weekends he performed with a small
group of teenage musicians. The cornetist King
Oliver, who was giving a concert locally, heard
him play and offered him a job, but Dizzy pre¬
ferred to stay with his friends.
In 1935, he left high school to move with his
mother to Philadelphia, where he sat in on innu¬
merable jam sessions and, at eighteen, joined the
Frankie Fairfax band. His first role model was
The birth of bebop
In 1937, Dizzy moved in with his brother in
Harlem, where he hung around the Savoy Ball¬
room and jammed with the Savoy Sultans, Fess
Williams, Claude Hopkins, Willie Bryant and
Chick Webb. Webb, who had just discovered a
young singer named Ella Fitzgerald, realized
that his was an exceptional talent and often
called him in as replacement solo trumpet. When
Dizzy started his first big band in 1946, he
toured the southern states with Ella and encour¬
aged her to take up scat-singing.
Dizzy became friendly with Mario Bauza, one
of Webb's trumpeters, and, at the Cotton Club,
with the flautist Alberto Socarras, who between
them introduced him to Cuban music. A few
months later, he met the sax and clarinet player
Teddy Hill, who was just about to set off on a
European tour and was looking for a trumpeter.
Dizzy talked him into giving him a break and, in
a career move that went beyond his wildest
dreams, took over from his mentor Roy Eldridge
in the band. He impressed audiences with his
embouchure and perfected his high-register play¬
ing, his soaring riffs and a harmonic concept that
was far ahead of its time (so far that the singer Cab
Calloway, who hired him in 1939, forbade him to

play what unable to understand it he called his
"Chinese" music).
After the commercially-oriented swing era
with its mainly While big bands (Benny Good¬
man, Jimmy and Tommy Dorsey), Black jazzmen
were gripped by a fever of creativity. The most
innovative of them, guitarist Charlie Christian,
Thelonious Monk, drummer Kenny Clarke and
Charlie Parker, the latter fresh from Kansas
City, met for jam sessions in the clubs of Harlem,
including the famous Million's Playhouse. That
was where, according to Miles Davis, musicians
really cut their teeth; they had lo have played at
Minion's to earn a reputation among jazzmen.
Dizzy and his friends experimented there with
unfamiliar harmonies and frenzied tempo, and
created numbers with jokey titles. It was from
these experiments that bebop was to emerge,
soon to lake definite shape in the clubs of Fifty-
second Street, jazz's new centre of gravity.
The elder statesman of jazz
In 1941, Dizzy was accused by Cab Calloway of
throwing a spitball at him during a gig and was
thrown out of the band. He played with various
groups, including the one led by pianist Karl
Hines for which he wrote Night in Tunisia, and
then formed a revolutionary little group with
bass-player Oscar Pettiford, performing at the
Onyx Club on Fifty-second Street, As he tells it,
they played lots of untitled original numbers,
with Dizzy chanting "Dee-ba-pa-n-bebop" as the
lead-in. When the fans wanted to hear one of
these unnamed pieces they would call out for
"bebop". The press soon got hold of the term
and started to call their music bebop.
Dizzy next joined Billy Eckstine's big band,
the first to be inspired by bebop, at the same
time pursuing a career as an arranger. In 1945, a
year that was to be decisive for him, he teamed
uj) with Charlie Parker, his musical alter ego, and
recorded the historic bebop tracks Grooviu'
high, All the Things You Are, Salt Peanuts and
Hot House with various groups of musicians. It
was at this time that he began to blow out his
cheeks like a hamster when playing and to sport
a beret, a goatee and wire-framed glasses, a look
that all his fans hastened lo copy.
In 1946, Dizzy formed a big band that was
joined, the following year, by the remarkable
Cuban conga player Chano Pozo, who could speak
no English. When asked how they managed to
communicate, Pozo would reply: "Dcchee no peek
pani, me no peek Angli, bo peek African". This
was the first time drums played with the hands
rather than with drumsticks entered the jazz
world in the slavery period, Whiles had sys¬
tematically destroyed African-style drums.
Together, Dizzy and Pozo wrote Manteca, Tin
Tin Deo and Cubana lie Cubana Bop, composi¬
tions that led the way for "Latin jazz". A concert
they gave at the Salle Pleyel, Paris, in 1948 had
a stunning effect on all French jazzmen, coming as
a revelation both of bebop and of the red-hot
rhythms of Afro-Cuban music. On 2 December
that same year, at the age of thirty-three, Pozo
was murdered in a Harlem bar.
On 6 January 1953, at a party in a club, an
actor accidentally fell on Dizzy's trumpet, bend¬
ing the mouth and giving it the famous upturned
shape. "My instrument, when you hit a note, Bam!
You hear it right then, instead of waiting," he
said. In 1956, Dizzy, then at the height of his
powers, was sponsored by the State Department
to lour the Middle East and Latin America with
his new big band. Refusing to act as an official
spokesman for the United Stales, he made friends
among the locals in the various countries he visited
and gave free invitations to his concerts to children
and poor people. In Brazil, he discovered the
samba and the bossa nova, which he popularized
in the United Slates, and in Buenos Aires he met
the young pianist Lalo Schifrin, signing him up
for his band a few years later.
In 1964, he ran for the presidency of the
United States on a platform of abolishing racism
and uniting all the peoples of the world. He sug¬
gested that the White House be renamed the
Blues House, and that Miles Davis be appointed
head of the CIA and Max Roach Minister of
Defense. In the late 1960s, he converted to
Baha'ism, a faith of Persian origin that preaches
tolerance and universal love.
Dizzy performed until the end of his life in
many different venues, including the While
House, where, with President Jimmy Carter, he
played Sait Peanuts, the anthem of bebop. "I
like playing. I like people. I love making people
laugh, and I do just as I please", he said. Deco¬
rated by the American and French Governments,
proclaimed bashere (a Yoruba princely title) of
Iperu, Nigeria, he became towards the end of his
days an elder statesman of jazz.
Somebody once asked Dizzy what legacy he
would like to leave behind. "I would like people
to know how to pronounce my name: Dizzy, D-I-
Z-Z-Y!", he answered.
