Tre a s u re h u n t e rs 
b e w a re
Faced with advanced technology, laws full of loo-
pholes and the growing number of treasure hunters
and sports divers, several international organizations,
working under UNESCO’s auspices, are drawing up an
international convention to preserve underwater heri-
tage. But what exactly would it aim to protect?
According to a draft of the text presented in April
1998 by the secretariats of UNESCO and the United
Nations Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the
Sea,“underwater cultural heritage means all traces of
human existence, including sites, structures, artifacts,
and human remains, together with their archaeologi-
cal and natural contexts, as well as wrecks, such as
vessels, aircraft or other vehicles or any part thereof,
their cargo or other contents, together with their
archaeological and natural heritage.”
But this definition “only applies to heritage which
has been lost or abandoned and submerged for at
least 100 years,” explains Graham Henderson, the
chairman of the International Council on Monuments
and Sites’ (ICOMOS) International Committee on
Underwater Cultural Heritage. “It would be left up to
states parties to introduce national legislation cove-
ring sites underwater for less than this period. But it
would leave the Titanic, which sank in 1912, for
example, unprotected.Nor does it apply to any milita-
ry craft or their contents owned or operated by a
state.”
The Titanic case also illustrates the problem of
heritage sunk in international waters, where the “fin-
ders keepers” rule still prevails. The draft proposes
three solutions. States could either exercise tighter
control over the activities of their nationals; ban the
use of their ports by ships engaged in improper exca-
vations; or forbid the entry of improperly raised arti-
facts into their territory. But the negotiating process is
a long one and there is only a slender possibility that
participants will agree on a final version of the
convention before 2000.
In the meantime, treasure hunters can carry on
searching for wrecks. They respond to the reproaches
of legal “purists” by maintaining that they are just as
useful as archaeologists because without their activi-
ties many treasures would remain undiscovered. The
fact is, however, that they often act more like looters
than enlightened amateurs. S. W. ■
