The prehistoric imagination
BY DENIS VIALOU
Prehistoric art combines unity of subject and
technique with an astonishing symbolic diversity
in different cultures and periods
Top, the black bull, a rock
painting in the Lascaux cave,
Dordogne (France).
Prehistoric art was an art closely bound
up with the lives of the hunters and
herdsmen who created it, an art of nature and,
first and foremost, an art of the open air. Scat¬
tered all over the world are millions of rock-
art sites bearing witness to the creative activi¬
ties of human beings over a period stretching
back at least ten millennia into prehistory. The
art in question consists of engravings and, to
a lesser extent (probably because they have not
been so well conserved), drawings and paint¬
ings, on surfaces that vary from region to
region in accordance with their geological char¬
acteristics single boulders or blockfields
(boulder-covered areas), flat rocks and latérite
surfaces, protruding parts of mountainsides or
the walls of rock shelters. In comparison with
this abundance of rock art in open-air sites,
there are relatively few examples in caves.
By contrast, the art of Palaeolithic Europe
and especially that of the Magdalenian period
(17,000-10,000 years ago) is mainly to be
found underground. About 250 caves deco¬
rated with paintings or engravings have so far
been discovered, mainly in France and Spain,
as against ten or so open-air sites, either
engraved rocks or shelters decorated with carv¬
ings. Unlike the art, open to light and life,
created by societies on the move, the parietal
(i.e.wall) art of the caves is hidden away in the
dark depths of the earth.
The symbolic conquest
of the dark
Signs of prehistoric human habitation dis¬
covered in cave mouths in the nineteenth cen¬
tury lent credence to the old myth of the cave
man. In actual fact, however, the great hunters
of the Palaeolithic never lived or stayed for

long in dark caves, and indeed it would be
impossible for humans to live there for long.
This only serves to emphasize the symbolic
significance of the parietal art which was
invented by Palaeolithic painters and engravers
and of which they became masters. These
artists must have enjoyed a high status in soci¬
ety by virtue of their skills and of the fact
that they gave expression to the lore and beliefs
of the communities to which they belonged.
The artists of the Gravettian cultu re (25,000-
20,000 years ago), named after the La Gravette
site in south-western France, were the first to
dare set foot in caves, some ten of which have
so far been reconnoitred, but they never ven¬
tured too far in and away from daylight. The
Pair-non-Pair cave (in France's Gironde départe¬
ment) with its dozens of engravings and the
Gargas cave (Haute-Garonne, France), which
contains both engravings and paintings (out¬
lines of hands), are splendid examples of the
work of these pioneers. The artists of the
Solutrean period (21,000-18,000 years ago),
named after the La Solutré site, also in France,
were scarcely more adventurous: fewer than
twenty caves decorated by them have been
found in France and Spain, but on the other
hand they were remarkably skilful at creating
low-relief carvings at sites in the open air.
The examples of Magdalenian parietal art
scattered about the chambers and galleries of
Head of a bull carved in
limestone, originating from
Angles-sur-Anglin, Vienne
(France).
Ivory head of the "Venus" of
Brassempouy, Landes (France).
This sophisticated
representation of the
human face dates from the
Gravettian period (27,000-
22,000 years ago).
caves, some of them vast (those at Rouffignac in
France's Dordogne region, for instance, stretch
for several kilometres), show that the Magdale-
nians had acquired and perfected the skills
required for working underground: they used
bowls hollowed out of stone, usually lime¬
stone, filled with animal fat and with wicks
made of vegetable material, as lamps that, as
recent experiments have shown, could burn for
several hours.
Cave art and cave architecture
With one or more entrances, chambers, gal¬
leries and one or more accessible extremities,
caves are an ordered and restricted space in
which to work, unlike open-air shelters, which
provide a more or less vertical, two-dimen¬
sional surface like a screen blocking out the
horizon, and even less like an open area of
more or less horizontal rock.
The placing of the rock paintings in rela¬
tion to the topographical features of the cave
is integral to their symbolism. In the Niaux
cave (Ariège, France), for example, certain types
of red-painted signs, some being patterns of
dots and others "claviform" or club-shaped,
appear in combination and are spaced out along
the corridor that leads into and runs through
the cave. Other types of geometrical or abstract
drawings, angular signs for example, occur
almost exclusively in a large apsidal hall known

as the Salon noir, where they are to be found
in combination with drawings of bison and
other animals, also drawn in black.
In a Palaeolithic cave, the thematic structure
of the wall paintings (i.e. the types of signs and
species of animals) and their symbolic struc¬
ture (the spatial relationship between themes)
is thus conditioned by the natural architecture
of the site, the spaces and volumes of which
proceed in sequence from the mouth to the
rear of the cave and back again towards the
mouth and thus towards normal life outside.
The walls enfold the visitor and create an
infinite variety of volumes, some easier of
access or passage than others, some as vast and
impressive as cathedrals and others no better
than oppressively narrow crawl spaces. These
natural properties of the site are also incor¬
porated into the layout of the wall paintings
and contribute to their symbolic significance.
A visitor standing in the middle of the
Rotunda of the Lascaux cave in the Dordogne
is struck by the frieze of huge bulls running
round the chamber on the background of a
band of spotless white rock that stands out
between the blackish base of the walls and the
deeply furrowed, lumpy ceiling.
Open-air sites obviously do not have the
infinite variety of shapes and volumes that
caves and their walls, ceilings and floors pos¬
sess. A rock painting or engraving in a shelter
can usually be taken in at a glance or from a sin¬
gle vantage point. In a cave, on the other hand,
the viewer has to walk through the symbolic
space created by the representations in order to
see and "read" them in their entirety; whether
juxtaposed in groups or isolated and dispersed,
they only come to life as the viewer, and
accordingly the light source, moves along.
Immobilized in the darkness and scattered
about on the surface of the complex and infi¬
nitely varied naturally occurring forms, they
need time in order to be viewed in succession
and then perceived in combination as parts of
a single whole the cave itself.
The ivory "Venus" of Lespugue
(France), a masterpiece of
prehistoric carving (about
22,000 years old).
© Hatala/Musée de l'Homme. Pans
Bear engraved on a pebble,
France, Upper Palaeolithic
(35,000-10,000 years ago).
Subjected to these double limitations of
§ space and time and to the flickering illumina-
I tion of an artificial light source, Palaeolithic
| cave paintings live on only in the memory of
I those who are familiar with them or in the
I immediate experience of those who first come
I upon them. They are outside and apart from
I normal life, belonging entirely and definitively
to the realm of the imagination.
Apart from this physically and symboli¬
cally isolated parietal art, Palaeolithic art exists in
the form of many artefacts: paintings and
engravings done on flat pieces of stone or bone
or on the handles of weapons and tools, count¬
less personal ornaments such as beads, pendants
and bracelets, and statuettes carved in stone,

bone or ivory. All these objects, thousands of
which have been found in many of the occupa¬
tion sites in Europe that were inhabited in Palae¬
olithic times, from the early Aurignacian period
around 35,000 years ago to the concurrent end
of the Ice Ages and of the Magdalenian civiliza¬
tion, represent a vast iconography of symbols,
fully integrated into everyday life. Easily trans¬
portable, they contributed to the development
of exchanges and contacts, and to the propaga¬
tion of ideas and myths.
Artistic unity . . .
The famous Gravettian "Venuses" some hun¬
dred or so statuettes found at occupation
sites in south-western France, at Brassempouy
(Landes) and Lespugue (Haute-Garonne) for
* example, and as far away as the plains of Rus¬
sia, at Kostienki or Avdeyevo, attest to a certain
degree of unity of conception and styles that
were the same or similar from end to end of
Europe for four to five millennia.
In all forms of rock art, in Brazil or Aus¬
tralia, central India, the south-western United
States, the Middle East, southern Africa or
the Sahara, the paintings or engravings com¬
bine three major categories of graphic repre¬
sentation: geometrical figures or abstract signs
(i.e. signs with no explicit figurative reference),
animals, and human figures.
Even when sketchily executed or stylized,
This horse has been painted on
a rock face naturally
suggesting the shape of the
animal in profile and is
surrounded by large blobs of
paint and stencilled outlines of
hands. Pech-Merle cave, Lot
(France), Aurignacian period
(35,000-25,000 years ago).
the representation of animals is usually natu¬
ralistic and is sometimes so accurate that the
species represented can be identified, for exam¬
ple the Magdalenian artists' salmon, the Bush¬
men's Cape eland (Taurotragus oryx), the
Palaeoindians' armadillo, or the giraffes and
ostriches of the Neolithic artists of the Sahara.
Conversely, the representations of the human
figure are treated with a freedom that is some¬
times pushed to such extremes as to make
them almost indecipherable, as in the case of
the painted stick figures in certain rock shelters
in Brazil, which have little additions at either
end that could be the head and the limbs. Pro¬
files and silhouettes are often given zoomor-
phic features in many cultures, and it is just as
common, in rock art of all periods, for the
human figure (as regards the head, hands and
sexual organs, and more rarely the feet) to be
segmented.
Within the limitless range of painted and
engraved signs to be found everywhere in the
world (dots, circles, rectangles, etc.), there are
innumerable points of convergence, which is
not to say that the dots painted by a Palae¬
olithic artist necessarily carried the same mean¬
ing as those done by Palaeoindians.
Another constant is the absence of any
representations of plants, fruits, flowers or
landscapes.
A further point to be stressed is the uni¬
formity of prehistoric artistic techniques, local

variations being of relatively minor impor¬
tance. Drawings and paintings were done using
mineral pigments, mainly ochres and man¬
ganese oxides, or charcoal. Incised engravings
and pecked outlines were always made with
hammer or blade tools fashioned from stone
harder than that of the surface being worked,
which was usually sandstone or limestone.
This identity of subjects and techniques
in prehistoric art, which reflects the relative
uniformity of entirely nature-oriented pre¬
historic ways of life and economies, should
not, however, disguise the fact of its remark¬
able diversity of symbolism.
. . . and diversity ofsymbolism
The choice of subjects and their arrangement
in space in fact create a specific symbolism that
varies from one culture and one era to another.
Neighbouring Magdalenian caves in France
(Font-de-Gaume, Combarelles, Bernifal and
Rouffignac, all in the Dordogne), for instance,
feature a common "tectiform" or roof-shaped
design not found in other Magdalenian caves,
although their animal subject-matter is very
different. Comparative analysis of rock shel¬
ters in the Tassili-N'Ajjer, in the Algerian
Sahara, and in the Drakensberg mountains of
South Africa reveals analogous differences,
and this phenomenon is repeated from site to
site, even when there are hundreds of shelters
on the same site, as at Bhimbetka in central
India.
Within this widespread semantic diversity,
it is possible to distinguish two main trends,
one towards pure symbolism and the other
narrative in character or tending towards a cer¬
tain degree of realism. Generally speaking,
Palaeolithic parietal art (and artefacts) represent
symbolic arrangements in which there is no
discernible link between the juxtaposed and/or
superimposed subjects, figurative or non-fig¬
urative. Horses, bison, mammoths, dots, rec¬
tangles, club shapes and human figures appear
side by side, for no apparent reason other than
the artists' own coded languages.
These main similarities and differences illus¬
trate both the unity and the diversity of the
prehistoric arts practised by Homo sapiens sapi¬
ens in various parts of the world, thirty or
forty millennia ago in the case of the oldest
examples, reflecting the basic links that exist
between cultures, economies and their forms of
graphic expression. The ability to express, to
symbolize, an imaginary universe through the
use of highly diverse systems of symbolic con¬
ventions and norms reflects the unique cultural
characteristics of human communities and the
specificity of their languages and customs, their
beliefs, their myths and their gods.
Figure of a horse
(on right) at Bhimbetka,
Madhya Pradesh (India),
where there are over 500 small
caves and rock shelters
decorated with paintings
(2000 B.C.).
