Offenders' rights bymonikaplatek j
The defence of prisoners' rights is the foundation of
democratic penal policy
Incarcerated persons are still commonly
viewed simply as prisoners, and the
deprivation of their freedom as merely the pre¬
lude to a series of other ordeals. However, the
quite different idea that imprisonment is harsh
enough retribution in itself is slowly and spas¬
modically gaining ground in the law and pub
lic opinion. This shift in attitude is due to the
impact on national legislation of international
regulations covering the rights of minors and
adults subject to detention or imprisonment,
the spread of democracy in many countries
and, especially, the growing acceptance of the
concept of human rights.

The word "rights" can be used only when
clear procedures allowing their enjoyment exist
and unbiased, public and competent bodies
in most countries, the courts guarantee their
proper application.
The general state of a country's prison sys¬
tem is a yardstick of its level of civilization.
Acknowledging that prisoners are still mem¬
bers of society, allowing them to keep most of
the rights enjoyed by free citizens and grant¬
ing them rights specific to their incarcerated
status are expressions of basic tenets of human-
itarianism and social solidarity. Because this
approach defends human dignity, it helps to
prevent crime and improve public safety. Low
self-esteem or lack of self-respect often lead a
person to be indifferent to the rights or dig¬
nity of others, and constitute one cause of
deviant and criminal behaviour. The idea of
prisoners' rights is the basic premise of any
penal policy claiming to be rational, preventive
and concerned with public safety and citizens'
quality of life.
The large number of international regula
tions, resolutions and conventions regarding
prisoners' rights shows how central this issue
is and also how far the actual situation and
legal status of prisoners still fall short of the¬
oretical international standards. In spite of
many efforts to curb, if not end, torture,
physical abuse and humiliating treatment, the
reality inside prison walls remains grim. Only
international acceptance of prisoners' rights
and their recognition on the local level can
bring to prison systems the real accountabil¬
ity which is the essential safeguard of respect
for prisoners' dignity.
Some prisoners have been detained because
they have committed acts of cruelty, others
merely because of their opinions, background,
nationality, religion or even skin colour.
Among them are children, young persons, the
elderly and people with serious illnesses. Oth¬
ers are paying with their freedom for miscar¬
riages of justice and other people's thirst for
power and political ambitions. These inmates
come from many walks of life. But a closer
look at the prison population as a whole
V
Above, life goes on. Inmates
and their children in Matroska
Tishino women's prison in
Moscow (Russia).
Opposite page, family visit at a
Hungarian prison for men.
A drawing class in a Chinese
prison for minors.

reveals that most detainees are penniless, and
lack education or support; they are outcasts



regarded as useless by the rest of society. This
is one reason why the application of prison¬
ers' rights still faces so many obstacles.
For many years, the United Nations sys¬
tem (see Fact file, page 38) and numerous gov¬
ernmental and non-governmental organiza¬
tions have been working to turn the situation
round through a series of legal instruments
including the European Penitentiary Rules,
the American Convention of Human Rights
and the African Charter of Human and Peo¬
ple's Rights. Respect for human dignity is a
basic right of any prisoner, and is a more effi¬
cient pillar of the law than humiliation and
threats.
