> How predictable is nature?
BY JENS ERIK FENSTAD
In spite of
progress in
mathematical
modeling, natural
phenomena still
defy precise
forecasting
Above, a man outside his
home in flood-ravaged Grand
Forks, North Dakota (U.S.A.)
in April 1997.
The future of science is not what it used
to be. The optimistic public perception
that scientific insights and technological advances
would provide a better future has suffered a
severe setback. Such "benefits" of scientific
progress as atomic power, new chemical com¬
pounds and foodstuffs produced by genetic
manipulation now generate uncertainty, even
fear, as to what the future holds in store for
man and nature.
The post-war period was a good time for
modern science-driven technology: it had
played a decisive part in the allied victory and
now it was to be harnessed to the tasks of
post-war reconstruction, promoting increased
welfare, better health and improved security.
Few were troubled if at times scientists and
engineers showed little concern for the preser¬
vation of nature after all, the aim of tech¬
nology has always been to transform nature
for the benefit of humanity. There may, how¬
ever, be limits to what nature can tolerate.
Relatively few doubts were raised until the
United Nations World Commission on Envi¬
ronment and Development issued its report,
Our Common Future, in 1987. By that time
there was growing concern about the environ¬
mental problems progress was bringing in its
wake: the fossil fuels used in industrial devel¬
opment were increasing the carbon dioxide con¬
tent in the atmosphere, threatening to create a
greenhouse effect; urbanization was eating into
agricultural land and woodlands; industrial
expansion was causing increased pollution and
loss of fresh water resources. Further ahead
loomed the threat of the loss of biodiversity.
Addressing these problems, the Commission's
report, often referred to as the Brundtland
Report, advocated a policy of sustainable devel¬
opment, whereby current demands could be
met without prejudice to the legitimate demands
of future generations.
The Brundtland Report became the charter

^^^ nmoKfr« ucncc no wrvt-mm
IHAC>MChM«tf*«OMi «Q MOW3V«
I ¿>.rj TfNUHK IÍAS*MOO>
PROJECT «UHCQ> BT ^V
PUBLIC BANK BHD@
BERSIH Di BUDAYA KITA
>;-. p>.
N.
:,-:
document for the "Earth Summit", the United
Nations Conference on Environment and
Development held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992.
One of the most important things to come
out of this conference was the Rio Declaration,
which set forth guidelines for the future envi¬
ronmental policy of United Nations Member
States. One key element in this was the recom¬
mendation that, in order to protect the envi¬
ronment, nations should apply the "precau¬
tionary principle", which may be summarized
as follows: Whenever there is a threat ofseri¬
ous or irreversible damage, lack ofabsolute sci¬
entific certainty shall not be used as an argu¬
ment for delaying cost-effective measures to
prevent the destruction or degradation of the
environment. Never precisely defined, this prin¬
ciple is open to different legal interpretations
and raises problems about uncertainty and
actual risks.
The Brent Spar controversy
The story of the Brent Spar oil rig provides an
object lesson in the complexities of applying
the precautionary principle in practice. The
24 r
THE UNESCO lOURIER MAY '998
Shell oil company wanted to get rid of this
platform, which had served its useful life in the
North Sea oilfields, by sinking it at a suitable
spot in the Atlantic. The environmentalist
movement Greenpeace successfully campaigned
to persuade the public and hence the politi¬
cians that this would present an unaccept¬
able environmental risk. Shell claimed the
opposite but was not believed, and the plat¬
form was towed to a Norwegian fjord, where
it still awaits its fate.
With the benefit of hindsight, it seems that
the risk analysis carried out by Shell was cor¬
rect and that the Greenpeace assessment was
based on inaccurate data. This does not neces¬
sarily mean, however, that the platform can
safely be disposed of at sea. Scientific risk analy¬
sis is only part of the story: there are strongly
held emotional convictions about the purity
of the sea and opposition to its becoming a
rubbish dump. As a basis for action, risk
analysis needs to take account of all aspects of
a case.
In the Brent Spar case, the decisive issue
was whether sinking the platform at sea would
lead to serious or irreversible environmental
Destruction of rain forest for
housing development (shown
on hoarding in foreground)
east of Ipoh, Malaysia.

The blue and green circles are
computer-generated
theoretical models of how the
distribution of galaxies
evolved. Gold circle at bottom
shows the real distribution as
observed from Earth.
damage. As in many environmental conflicts,
the debate was adversarial in form, which is
usual in normative and legal contexts but has
hitherto been unusual in scientific arguments
overissues of "scientific certainty". Does this
mean that in environmental issues we are con¬
fusing questions of fact with matters of opin¬
ion? Should Shell and Greenpeace have got
together to conduct a dispassionate enquiry
about scientific laws and facts before embark¬
ing, if necessary, on a discussion of the pros
and cons of possible action? Can factual
knowledge be separated from the question of
how that knowledge is used?
A positive answer to the latter question
presupposes that scientific laws exist and that
scientific certainty can be established, at least
within acceptable error limits, which has been
the received view of science and technology.
From Newton's classical mechanics to Ein¬
stein's relativity and up to the time of Bohr's
quantum mechanics, the laws of nature were
expressed in the language of linear mathemat¬
ics, and the future was computable.
The relationship between mathematics and
the laws of nature has, however, become more
complex, and in a way that has implications for
our understanding of the precautionary prin¬
ciple. The fact that those laws are still written
in the language of mathematics no longer
means that the future is necessarily predictable.
To explain this issue, let us see how the math¬
ematical modelling of nature works.
Models ofnature
There are three stages in mathematical model¬
ling: first, the specific scientific and/or tech¬
nological problem is analysed; next, a mathe¬
matical model is created and analysed; and
lastly, efficient algorithms problem-solving
procedures which can be run on a computer
are developed for use, in the scientific context,
in making predictions and, in the industrial
context, in construction tasks. With the rapid
development of computer technology, the
range of applications is vast, testifying to the
central role of mathematics in today's "knowl¬
edge society".
Successful application depends, however,
on the "correct" choice of mathematical model.
One class of models is particularly relevant to
a proper understanding of the precautionary
principle. We often need to understand the
behaviour of a system ora population of indi¬
viduals over a certain period of time, e.g. the
flow of oil and gas in the North Sea fields, or
plant and animal populations in areas with a
high concentration of acid precipitation. The
models used for this purpose can be divided
into three main classes, according to the
dynamics that governs their behaviour.
Nature as a machine
Models of nature as a machine represent our
inheritance from Newton and Descartes. They
are defined by the forces acting upon the body
or bodies involved in the system, and the laws
that determine the system are expressed by a
linear equation. To take as a typical example the
laws governing the trajectories of planets, once
the proper parameter values in this case the
position in space and time and the initial acting
force have been established, the future devel¬
opment of the system is completely deter¬
mined. To use mathematicians' terminology,
the system is defined by a "unitary group",
with time as the independent variable.
This is the kind of mathematics used in
numerical calculations and industrial applica¬
tions. Assuming that our equations faithfully
describe a slice of reality, we extract algorithms
from them, and the computer then goes to

work, either to predict the future state of a
physical system or to produce a set of speci¬
fications for an industrial task. Our confidence
in the equation is sometimes so great that the
results of the corresponding calculations are
presented as true facts of nature.
Computer simulations can be used for
many purposes. In science, measurements can
be extended to values beyond those obtainable
from experiments and observations, e.g. to
study systems under extreme temperature con¬
ditions, and the development of a physical
system can be speeded up, e.g. in studies of
the early universe. In industry, simulation can
replace the use of prototypes it is faster and
cheaper to simulate collisions on a computer
than to crash real cars and can be used in the
design of new pharmaceutical products. The
presupposition underlying all this is that our
models correspond with reality and that the
future is determined by our equations.
Chance and uncertainties
So far we have assumed that the law is deter¬
ministic and that, in principle, the results of
experiments and observations can be measured
with absolute precision, but this is in most
cases too much to ask: wc may be in a situation
characterized by chance and uncertainties.
Mathematical modelling knows, however, how
to deal with such situations.
Where parameter values cannot be precisely
measured for technical reasons, there are estab¬
lished theories for measurement techniques and
many statistical methods arc available for con¬
trolling errors. Where uncertainty is inherent in
the fundamental theory, however, new issues
arise, especially in the case of quantum mechan¬
ics, where the development of a system is gov¬
erned by a probability distribution. In this case
too, the process is nevertheless still determined
by a unitary group. The new feature is the use
of a transformation of probability distribu¬
tions where the Newtonians used point trans¬
formations. The latter allow us to follow
closely the planets in their trajectories, but not
quantum particles.
Another form of uncertainty arises when
the dynamical law is no longer deterministic
but may include a stochastic or random element.
This marks a shift from ordinary to stochastic
equations, which are now widely used in math¬
ematical modelling. The applications arc some¬
times opportunistic: in the absence of complete
knowledge, a random term is added in the hope
of obtaining a better fit with nature. In most
cases, however, our knowledge of nature and
observed fluctuations is sufficiently precise to
Children, the elderly and
people with heart and lung
disorders are particularly
vulnerable to the effects of air
pollution.

The Brent Spar oil rig is
prepared for towing into the
Atlantic, June 1995.
SSW « M~ ^«
provide "faithful" models for phenomena rang¬
ing all the way from the flow of oil and water in
porous geological structures to speculation on
the stock exchange.
Common to the models examined so far is
a belief in numbers and measurements. There
has been a strong tradition in physics accord¬
ing to which theory is driven by measure¬
ments, i.e. by exact numbers. It has been held
that good theories yield numbers, explain
numbers, help design good apparatus, and
allow us to control and manipulate the objects
they describe. But are all theories of nature
equally amenable to numbers and control?
Chaos and catastrophes
The unitary group thus encapsulates the
notion of linearity and the associated possi¬
bility of exact prediction, but despite several
hundred years of progress in physics and tech¬
nology we must conclude that only a few of
nature's phenomena can be modelled in this
way. One solution to the problem is to intro
duce chance and uncertainties, as described
above. Another is to keep to deterministic
equations but to proceed beyond the well-
known domain of linear equations into the
new and largely unexplored territory of non¬
linear phenomena.
Physical theory has always acknowledged
the existence of non-linearity, which typically
occurs where small variations may have large
effects on the future evolution of a system,
but only now is the outline of a reasonably
complete science of non-linear dynamic
processes beginning to emerge. The first really
convincing application of non-linear theory to
a natural phenomenon came in 1 963, when the
meteorologist E. Lorenz published a paper
entitled "Deterministic nonperiodic flow",
which had basically all the "correct" mathe¬
matics. His equations were a simplified form
of those used in modern numerical weather
forecasting, but they were sufficiently complex
to capture the unpredictable even chaotic
behaviour inherent in the long-term develop¬
ment of the weather.

"Chaos" and "non-linear science" have
become fashionable terms but, unlike many
other fashions, there is substance behind them.
The transition to non-linearity marks a change
of paradigm in the modelling of natural phe¬
nomena, but with non-linearity there is no
longer a guarantee for long-term prediction.
This is the lesson we learned from Lorenz in
1963.
Instead of computing a single given future,
wc can, however, simulate various possible
future scenarios. The computer can be taught
to serve another master: there has been a
change-over from "hard" science based on
computable predictions to a broader perspec¬
tive with greater emphasis on insight and a
critical attitude. Hence, though we cannot pre¬
dict the occurrence of the next avalanche, we
can use our models to gain a better insight
into such phenomena and to develop strategics
for warding off their adverse effects.
Earthquakes are also impossible to "pre¬
dict", in the sense of giving the time, place and
strength of a future occurrence within accept¬
able error limits. Such an operation presup¬
poses a system governed by a unitary group,
but the earth as a geophysical system is far more
complex than Earth as a planet. Planets arc pre¬
dictable in their trajectories; they form a deter
ministic system. The earth as a geological system
is in what the experts call "a state of critical self-
organization", where there is a positive prob¬
ability of even the smallest earthquake devel¬
oping into a major disaster. Many attempts
have been made to devise a warning system for
earthquakes, but they have all failed.1
The global processes that drive earthquakes
are typical of the very many global processes
in nature. These processes need to be seen in
conjunction with a social and economic system
committed to a high per capita consumption
of natural resources. It is in this context that
the precautionary principle becomes urgent: we
are dealing with natural processes that we
know to be non-linear, where the dynamics of
the system is poorly understood and where
our interference may have irreversible conse¬
quences. Unlike a standard industrial process,
nature is not a mechanical system that can be
controlled by ingenuity and engineering skills
alone. Instead of relying on our ability to fix
and restore, we must therefore adopt a strat¬
egy of prevention. In these circumstances, the
precautionary principle is more than politi¬
cal rhetoric. It is the best advice that science
can offer.
1 Sec the Uni:sco Courier, October 1997: Natural
disasters: Be Prepared. Editor
"Spiralunar 3D", a fractal
landscape based on the
mathematics of chaos theory,
which is used to analyse
turbulent (non-linear) dynamic
systems.
