The shaman's journey
BYJEANCLOTTES
Shamanism may provide a clue to the meaning of rock art
I With very few exceptions (in some parts
of Australia, for example) rock art all
over the world is a fossil art. Its creators dis¬
appeared long ago, and with them went the
myths and beliefs depicted in their rock paint¬
ings and engravings. Research can thus only
be based on the art of the last two or three
centuries when various peoples in the Amer¬
icas, Africa and Australia still regularly painted
on the walls of rock shelters. This approach is
not without dangers, however. Neither the
reported evidence nor its interpretation is
always reliable. Furthermore, there is no guar¬
antee that a group of nineteenth-century Ab o-
rigines living in a particular area shared the
V^a
same beliefs as their ancestors who produced
rock art in the same region several thousand
years earlier. Comparative ethnology extrap¬
olating practices noted in one place and context
to other world regions should be practised
with extreme caution, in a very general way,
taking into consideration some universal fea¬
tures of human thinking and without hoping
to come up with complete, detailed explana¬
tions that can be applied everywhere.
The term shamanism, first used to describe
Siberian populations, has come to include
beliefs and practices with a common basis
found, even today, among many peoples in the
world. Some of the many characteristics of
shamanistic systems are fundamental and wide¬
spread.1 Here we shall examine three of them.
Other worlds
The first is a belief in a layered universe with
several superposed or parallel worlds. Accord¬
ing to this belief, the events in our world, the
world we live in, are directly conditioned by
the influence of powers living in one or
another of the other worlds. The second fea¬
ture is the belief that certain individuals can in
certain circumstances directly make contact
with the(se) other world(s) and in this way
influence events in our world. They usually
do this for practical reasons to heal the sick
or restore a lost harmony, to create good con¬
ditions for hunting, to bring rain to dry areas,
or, more rarely, for evil purposes. The third
characteristic is that contact with the other
world is made directly, in one direction or
another, through a visit by auxiliary spirits,
often in animal form, which come to the
Left, shaman figure holding a
shaman or towards which he goes. This will snake, and various signs.

The walls of this shelter at
Pleito Creek, California
often be an occasion for identification between (U-S-A'» were comed with
vividly coloured paintings of
the shaman and the spirit, or a belief in a total geometric figures, probably
i r rj from trance visions,
or partial transformation ot the man into an
animal. If the shaman's auxiliary spirit is a griz¬
zly bear, identification between the human
and the grizzly is total. A shaman can also send
his soul into the other world to meet spirits
and obtain their protection and help by going
into a trance, sometimes during collective cer¬
emonies, sometimes alone.
Ethnologists consider that shamanism is
often found in egalitarian societies, usually of
hunter-gatherers, although hunter-gatherer
societies are not all shamanistic. Nor are these
the only societies where shamanistic practices
are found.
The fact that shamanism is found the world
over is not of course due to direct or indirect
contact between distant populations. The ulti¬
mate reason may be, at least partially, rooted in
the inevitable need to rationalize and use the
altered states of consciousness that are part of the
human nervous system and appear in one form
or another in every society. Certain people have
been subject to hallucinations and visions, every¬
where and at all times, for reasons as varied as the
phenomena themselves. These experiences may be
due to drugs or to certain pathological states,
fasting, isolation, darkness, suffering, intense
concentration, or throbbing, recurrent sounds.
Rationalist cultures like ours disapprove of these
phenomena and consider that psychiatrists (for
spontaneous hallucinations) or the police (for
hallucinogenic drugs) should deal with them.
In others visionaries are regarded as being in con¬
tact with otherworldly powers and therefore
become spiritual leaders, prophets or shamans.
This does not mean that they will neces¬
sarily record their visions on rocks. But in
some cases they have done so, and what is
more the ethnographic material collected by
researchers in recent decades reveals many sim-

ilarities in the ways that visionaries think and
act. These convergences are due to the fact that
rock art is the embodiment of similar funda¬
mental beliefs or conceptual frameworks. These
have to do with the sites where the art was
made, the themes depicted, and the reasons
for this form of art.
Decorated rock shelters are often regarded as
two-way "doors" between the real world and
the other world. Spirits can emerge from them
and it is possible to pass through them into
the world beyond and meet spirits. Such places
are also propitious for experiencing visions.
Anyone wanting to be visited by a helpful
Human figures, probably
shamans. Little Petroglyph
Canyon, California (United
States).

F
/ \ y
Three line drawings: Above
left, grizzly bear (Tule River
Reservation, California,
U.S.A.). The bear's facial
secretions recall the nose¬
bleeds sometimes suffered by
shamans during the trance
state (after D. Whitley).
Above, hallucinatory figure
with bow and arrows
(Drakensberg Mountains,
Natal, South Africa; after D.
Lewis-Williams). Above right,
rain-maker shamans capturing
a rain animal (South Lesotho,
recorded by J. M. Orpen in
1874; after D. Lewis-Williams).
spirit or enter the world of the spirits by going
into a trance will go in solitude, which favours
these encounters, to the foot of decorated walls.
When we enter this other world, whether it is
below or parallel to our own, we do so through
a tunnel protected by animal guardians. In Cal¬
ifornia, these were bears or rattlesnakes.
The images themselves were charged with
power they were painted one over the other
on the same walls and each new work drew
from and added to the accumulated power of
those beneath. Certain dominant themes recur,
differing from region to region. In the Drak¬
ensberg Mountains, South Africa, elands pre¬
dominate. In the Coso mountains of central
California, big-horned sheep are the animals
most commonly depicted since they were asso¬
ciated with rain and rain was vital in this desert
area. These distinctive local features illustrate
the choices and beliefs of the creators and users
of this art. Part-human part-animal figures
also appear. These are creatures seen during the
shamanistic journey or as a result of the
shaman's transformation.
The purpose of rock art was often to depict
visions after they had been experienced. David
Whitley, who has studied rock art in the
southwest of the United States,2 considers
that if the Nevada and California visionaries
had not drawn their visions, they would have
"lost" them and died as a result. On other
occasions, the shaman's supernatural journey
was depicted metaphorically. Death, for exam¬
ple, was a metaphor for a trance. In California's
Coso mountains, "killing a big-horned
sheep", the rain animal, meant that the shaman
was going to the other world to bring back
rain. The metaphor of death for a trance and
for sexual relations ("little death") was com¬
mon. Other metaphors were less common and
remind us of the impossibility of grasping
the specific meaning and nuances of art with¬
out direct help.
Rock art could also depict something other
than the visions of a trance and still be linked
to a shamanistic vision of the world. David
Whitely reports, for example, that until the
end of the last century female puberty rites
included several days of isolation, instruction
in maternity taboos, fasting and various cer¬
emonies, and eating native tobacco to provoke
hallucinations during which the girls met an



animal spirit, usually a rattlesnake. Afterwards,
they ran to a painted shelter called the Shaman's
House, and drew their hands on its walls, pos¬
itively or negatively, with red paint (a colour
associated with young girls) to show that they
had "touched" the supernatural.
Bridging two worlds
David Lewis-Williams, a South African
researcher who has spent years studying the
paintings and beliefs of the San Bushmen of
his country, is behind much current research
on shamanism and rock art.3 Before him, sev¬
eral authors had explored this field but with¬
out great success, perhaps due to a lack of a

sufficiently rigorous approach. Following his
work, undeniable links with shamanism have
been established between rock art images pro¬
duced by cultures in different parts of the
world, especially throughout southern Africa
and in North and South America.4 It is even
likely that much European palaeolithic art, or
"cave art" originates in shamanistic practices.
This hypothesis, which is not a complete
or exclusive explanation but an explanatory
framework, is based on several observations.
For more than 20,000 years, deep caves were
used not as dwellings but for drawings. Those
who went into them went into their deepest
recesses. All over the world the underground
world has always been regarded an other-
A shaman with antelope head
and feet touching the
hindquarters of a dying eland
in this metaphorical
representation of a trance
(Drakensberg Mountains,
Natal, South Africa).
world, the realm of spirits and of the dead.
Penetrating into the depths of these caves
therefore was certainly nota simple matter of
exploration. Palaeolithic people knew that they
were in the realm of spirits, and expected to
meet spirits in these caves. The flickering light
of their torches brought the walls to life and
they saw animal shapes on them. We know
this because they very often used the more or
less suggestive natural relief of the walls, which
acted as a kind of permeable veil between this
world and the other-world. Many figures were
also painted or engraved where there were fis¬
sures, gaps or openings in the walls, as if ani¬
mals entered or left the cave at these points.
In addition, many speleologists describe the
hallucinatory effect of caves, where cold,
humidity, darkness and the absence of all sen¬
sory references encourage visions. Caves could
therefore play a dual role: help produce altered
states of consciousness, i.e. visions, and com¬
municate with spirits through the cave wall.5
It thus seems extremely likely that much
palaeolithic art was created in a shamanistic
framework.6 This does not mean, of course,
that all the images of this art are the result of
visions or that they all serve the same purpose.
Human imagination and creativity are limitless

and traditional thinking is never simple. The
same holds true for the world's open-air art.
Some of it, in America, Africa, and perhaps else¬
where, certainly originates in shamanistic prac¬
tices. We cannot, however, impose this model on
all prehistoric rock art irrespective of its ethno¬
logical context. It would only be justified to do
so after making a thorough, critical analysis of
all the elements of the rock art concerned.
1. Michel Pcrrin, Le cbamanisme, Paris, Presses
Universitaires de France ("Que sais-je?" series) 1995.
2. David Whitley, A Guide to Rock Art Sites. Southern
California and Southern Nevada. Missoula, Mountain
Press Publishing Co., 1996.
3. David Lewis-Williams and T. Dowson, "The Signs of
all Times. Entoptic Phenomena in Upper Paleolithic
Art," Current Anthropology, 29, 2, pp. 201-245.
4. S.-A. Turpin (editor), Shamanism and Rock Art in
North America, San Antonio, Rock Art Foundation,
Inc., Special Publication 1, 1994.
5. Jean Clottes and David Lewis-Williams, Les
chamanes de la préhistoire. Transe et magie dans les
grottes ornées, Paris, Le Seuil publishers, 1996.
6. Jean Clottes and David Lewis-Williams, "Les
chamanes des cavernes," A rchéologia, no. 336, 1997,
pp. 30-41.
