>The eu
1. The natural world
BY GORDON BENNETT AND NIKITA LOPOUKHINE
tion
The creation of protected natural areas raises a host of dilemmas
Nature is in a state of constant flux. It
I is shaped over time by dynamic natural
processes such as flooding, fire, wind, volca¬
noes and climate, and in response to these
forces some physiographic features, species
and ecosystems have disappeared and others
have evolved. People, of course, have also
played an integral part in this process, and in
recent times modern technology has dramat¬
ically increased the scope of human influence.
Change is inevitable, but how should we
respond to it? There arc generally three
options. First, a "laissez-faire" or natural reg¬
ulation approach to the management of natural
resources. A more commonly exercised option
is to channel or even arrest change by "active
management", an option frequently associ¬
ated with wildlife, water and forest managers
who are chiefly concerned with the extraction
of resources, although it may also be used to
compensate for damage to natural processes
or for extirpated species. A third option, also
a form of active management, is to try to
restore conditions which once existed or even
create new assemblages of plants, animals and
physiographic features, e.g. creating wetlands
where none previously existed. The ethical
choices facing managers of protected areas arc
intricately linked with all three options.
Systems of protected areas are usually estab- I
lished to embody a country's varied landscape |
in accordance with a bioregional framework. |
For various reasons representation of a biorc- |
gion's full variety is not always a realistic objec- I
tive within a protected area. The size of pro- I
tcctcd areas, their configuration, and the lack of j
< -^
Air view of a tourist complex
in Lanzarote, one of the
Canary Islands (Spain).
Lanzarote has been the site of
a Unesco biosphere reserve
since 1993.

"*"£
N-«
V ..'
Hinchinbrook Island National
Park (Australia).
linkage to other protected arcas all add to the dif¬
ficulty of maintaining representation over time.
Nevertheless, it is often possible to approach
representation by choosing sites that are rela¬
tively undisturbed or that have the necessary
potential. An important aspect of this approach
is to write a goal or purpose statement that
declares the level of desired representation.
Islands in an unfriendly
environment
Most of the world's protected areas are sur¬
rounded by land that is used in ways inimical to
them and are subject to long-range as well as
local influences. The trajectory of a protected
area's ecosystems is likely to be deflected away
from the originally defined representation val¬
ues, and in response the park manager is faced
with choosing cither to ignore the changes or to
address them through one of the options noted
above. The "laissez-faire" option abandoning
the area to the vagaries of influences within and
outside it is, in effect, an acceptance of change.
The ethical dimension of a "laissez-faire"
approach is to determine whether the original
intention to achieve biorcgional representation
and the biodiversity associated with this goal
are placed in jeopardy and whether the outcome
is appropriate. For example, to permit a forest or
prairie fire to burn or to have ungulates prolif¬
erate unchecked has significant consequences on
the biodiversity of a protected area.
It is not our intention here to judge
whether the consequences are good or bad but
to point out that change will occur even when
the decision not to intervene is made. Ethics
here require the manager to be forthright in

providing information on the consequences of
a decision, even a "laissez-faire" decision. The
notion that natural regulation will manage the
protected area does not absolve the manager
from the responsibility of setting objectives. It
is impossible to determine the success of a par¬
ticular management regime unless the changes
arc forecast in advance, debated, agreed upon
by stakeholders and finally set as objectives.
The second option attempting to mini¬
mize change by setting fires, culling, mowing,
girdling, or modifying water flow regimes
raises more fundamental ethical questions:
what right do wc have to alter nature to meet
our objectives? Does the manager of a pro¬
tected area, of all places, have the right to dom¬
inate nature? Are the objectives of conserving
the genetic values, structures and functions of
ecosystems a good enough reason to inter¬
vene? Even if one answers in the affirmative,
the question immediately arises of deciding
which genetic values, structure and functions
are appropriate. The matter becomes a debate
between biocentric and anthropocentric val¬
ues between what might be called "deep ecol¬
ogy" and utilitarianism.
Open discussions
In the past century, the rationale for estab¬
lishing protected areas has moved steadily away
from the utilitarian to the biocentric. The ini¬
tial motivation was to create places which peo¬
ple could enjoy. Later, protected areas grew in
number as societies wished to absolve them¬
selves from guilt over destroying the envi¬
ronment while also responding to economic
opportunities. Today, the ideas of ecological
integrity, biodiversity conservation and biorc-
gional representation are the driving forces
behind the establishment of protected areas.
These goals provide a framework within which
appropriate ecosystem structures and func¬
tions can be defined. Nevertheless, to be assured
of continued support, open discussions on
management objectives must take place. In
these discussions, it may very well be that the
best way of defending proposed objectives
and goals is to present the alternatives to them.
In simple terms, would it be acceptable to con¬
sciously decide to have biodiversity values
decline, lose ecological integrity, and witness
the decline of ecosystem health?
The third option for managing protected
A ranger in Kluane National
Park, southwest Yukon
(Canada), a Unesco World
Heritage site.
areas, centred on restoration, raises another eth¬
ical issue. Restored sites are seldom, if ever, repli¬
cas of the targeted state. Extirpated species and
genetic stock, modified natural processes and
landscapes, and altered physiographic condi¬
tions make it impossible to recreate what may
have once existed. Substituting close represen¬
tatives is not the real thing.
A more fruitful debate arises from the ques¬
tion of whether it is appropriate to reconstitute
the functions and structure of an ecosystem,
particularly in a protected area. If the protected
area contains degraded sites and altered natural
processes, and species have been extirpated fro m
it, should these be restored? The debate over
biocentric and utilitarian objectives is to be'
expected in this context as well.
A fundamental question which arises in all
restoration projects is that of the historical
model which the project seeks to reconstitute.
A wilderness model (prior to European set¬
tlement) is commonly put forward as the
appropriate target in many North American
sites. This is a questionable objective if the
model rejects human influences. Clear evidence
exists that humans have played a significant
role in influencing ecosystems within North
America for thousands of years, as they have
elsewhere in the world. To be ethical, then,
exclusion of human influences is inappropri¬
ate. Instead, the objective should focus on the
restoration of a social fabric where the prac¬
tices of humans sustain the ecosystem and vice
versa.
b
