The “new economy ” has arri ved! An era of
prosperity and social well-being has dawned
for America,and hence the world.There will
be limitless growth and in all likelihood recessions
will be a thing of the past.This is the message that
a section of the American press has been proclai-
ming in the last two years.
“All the elements are in place for an era of long-
term growth,” trumpeted Business Week in August
1998,going on to say, “You ain’t seen nothing yet.
We’re just at the start of a powerful surge in tech-
nology that will boost economic gains into the next
c e n t u ry.” The monthly W i r e d, a pillar of the
“connected society”, has devoted several issues to
this new economy based on a logic of networks and
cyberspace which,so it is claimed,has superseded
the old economy of the industrial era. S u p p o rt e rs of
the new economy doctrine maintain that the health
of the American economy in recent years (in 1997



The e m p e ro r ’s
new clothes
Noted American economist Paul Krugman believes
there may be less to the ‘new economy’ doctrine than
meets the eye
gross domestic product grew by almost 4 per cent,
u n e m p l oyment fell to 4.6 per cent, and inflat i o n
was less than 2 per cent) is not a passing phase.
They regard these good results as the first fruits of
a profound and lasting change due to increased
business productivity, and insist that they are
revolutionary. If they attract relatively little notice,
it’s because they don’t show up in the usual statis-
tical indicators,which were devised for yesterday’s
economy.
H owe ve r , those who sing the praises of the new
economy have been pilloried by a number of lea-
ding economists, headed by Paul Krugman of the
Massachusetts Institute of Te c h n o l o g y. K ru g m a n
admits that “for the first time since the invention of
printing, information processing and distribution
has become one of the leading sectors ,” but he also
‘We have had a favourable turn in the business 
cycle . . . probably also helped by shifts in the labour
market that have reduced the bargaining power of
workers and therefore allowed fuller employment
without accelerating wage increases. The success is
real, but it is also modest, and falls far short of
justifying the triumphant rhetoric one now hears so
often.’
warns that the very low rates of inflation and high
p r o fits recently recorded in the United States do
not justify the “millennial optimism” expressed in
the business press and by some intellectuals.
A b ove all, he believes that these good results
are not linked to an exceptional degree to the extra-
o r d i n a ry productivity increases associated with
i n f o rm ation technologi e s. K rugman and another
American economist,Robert J. Gordon of North-
we s t e rn Unive rs i t y, b e l i e ve that periods of rapid
gr owth in productivity have systematically been
made possible by fundamental innovations eve r
since the beginning of the Industrial Revo l u t i o n .
This process occurred with the coming of electri c i t y
and the internal combustion engine,and the same
thing is happening today as a result of the Internet
and electronics.
K rugman estimates that the major aggr e g ates of
the A m e rican economy are continuing to obey clas-
sical mechanisms. He believes that even if the sta-
tistical apparatus may be out of dat e ,t h at is no rea-
son to underestimate the productivity figures.
The “fundamentals”improved in recent years,
he wrote in Foreign A f fa i rs in May 1998, b e c a u s e
“ we have had a favourable turn in the business cy c l e
. . . probably also helped by shifts in the labour mar-
ket that have reduced the bargaining power of wo r-
k e rs and therefore allowed fuller employ m e n t
without accelerating wage increases.The success is
real, but it is also modest,and falls far short of jus-
tifying the triumphant rhetoric one now hears so
often.”
Finally, believers in the new economy doctrine
maintain that if the United States has recovered its
position of world economic leadership it is because
of America’s advance in new technologies.Wrong,
s ays Kru g m a n . A m e ri c a ’s economic competitors
are not lagging behind because of their slowness to
enter the new economy but for other reasons—
Japan is enmeshed in crises,especially in banking,
and Europe is facing constraints imposed by the
c o n s t ruction of monetary union. “Our curr e n t
sense that we are on top of the world is based on a
huge exaggeration of a few good years here, a few
bad ye a rs elsewhere,” he say s. He notes that one
good old maxim should not be forgotten: n e ve r
underestimate the competition.A precept that not
even the new economy seems likely to disprove. ■
Sophie Boukhari
