Photos by Sebastião Salgado
P E O P L E  A N D  P L A C E S



Land-hungry in Brazil

P E O P L E  A N D  P L A C E S
4 THE UNESCO COURIER



The occupation of vast
under-used estates by
Brazil’s Landless Rural
Workers’ Movement (MST)
might seem like a struggle
from another age. In fact
the movement is offering
new responses to the
greatest scourge of modern
Brazil—social exclusion.
B r a z i l ’s rural population live s. At the top
of the ladder, 500,000 gr e at estat e s , ave r a-
ging 600 hectares each, occupy three-
q u a rt e rs of the arable land. B r a z i l ’s
N ational Institute for Settlement and
A gr a rian Reform (INCRA), a public
b o d y, has found that 150 million hectares
of the fa ze n d a s are under-used, i n c l u d i n g
20 million fert i l e , easily accessible hectares
t h at could be fa rmed immediat e l y.
On 17 April 1996, an MST proces-
sion was marching to the capital of Pará
State in the Amazon region when military
police opened fire at Eldorado dos
Carajás,killing nineteen.Since 1985, over
a thousand people have been murdered,
executed or have “disappeared” in the
W
hen thousands of machete-wiel-
ding Brazilian fa rm labourers take
over their Promised Land it may
look like a scene from the remake of a gr e at
film epic. In reality, it is not the wo r k e rs who
are out of sync with the times but the great
landowners or fazenderos who own most of
the land in Brazil, an enormous country
with 350 million arable hectares.
In few countries is there such a glari n g
inequality in pri vate land ow n e rship as
there is in Brazil. At the bottom of the lad-
d e r , five million families do not have have
e ven the smallest plot to cultivat e . J u s t
a b ove them, six-and-a-half million “ fa m i l y
s m a l l h o l d i n g s ” are packed into the quar-
ter of the fa rmland where 80 per cent of

P E O P L E  A N D  P L A C E S
THE UNESCO COURIER 5
Above, on a sugar pantation near São Paulo. These
workers are known as bóias frias, or “those who eat
cold food”, because they bring their meals in their
knapsacks.
Northeastern Brazil can no longer feed its inhabitants
because of the immobility of the agrarian structure
and the spread of desertification.Right,people in
Ceará State take to the road in search of a better life.
A combative art
The New York Times has hailed Brazilian photographer Sebastião Salgado as the author of “some
of the most compelling photojournalism in the last twenty years,” and as “an artist using journa-
lism as a vehicle for his art.” The French daily Le Monde has dubbed him “one of today’s masters
of black and white photography”.
The 53-year-old economist-turned-photographer has used Paris as a base for years while tra-
veling the world over for his extraordinary photo coverage of the “wretched of the earth”.Between
1986 and 1992, he scoured 26 countries on every continent to capture on film the impact of the
major social transformations taking place. The investigation resulted in a book (Workers: an
Archaeology of the Industrial Age, Aperture Books, 1993 ) published in nine languages and featu-
ring in some 60 exhibitions.
In 1994,Salgado began focusing on migrants. He decided to dedicate six years—up to the year
2000—to covering the hundred million international migrants and some 40 million who stream
into cities from the countryside each year in search of work.
“I want to state the case for migrants and those who take them in. To show their dignity in
their desire to integrate and their courage in facing their ordeals. To show how they contribute their
spirit of enterprise and the richness of their differences. To show, from the migrants’ example, that
we must build the family of all humankind on the basis of solidarity and sharing.”
Convinced that MST is “the only political movement really fighting for human dignity in
Brazil”,Sebastião Salgado has used his work as a photographer to support its struggle. The results
have proven to be a surprising success with “Terra” (Phaidon), a book of 109 photographs taken
in Brazil between 1980 and 1996 with a preface by the Portuguese writer José Saramago and a CD
by singer Chico Buarque. The book featured on Brazil’s best-seller lists for months, and has been
published in seven other countries. At the same time, 45 of the photos were used in an exhibition
of which 3,500 copies were made for Brazil alone, where they are being shown in trade union
offices, churches, universities, cultural centres and public places, as well as in MST premises.
Outside Brazil,non-governmental organizations like Frères des Hommes (France and Belgium),
Christian Aid (United Kingdom) and Solisfond (Switzerland) are promoting the exhibition, which
can be bought for $500.Proceeds from the exhibition and book sales will be used to set up a trai-
ning school for people working in the assentamentos orhomesteads. The celebrated architect Oscar
Niemeyer is ready to donate plans for the school,which is to be built in a suburb of São Paulo and
will enroll around a hundred students at each training session. ■

P E O P L E  A N D  P L A C E S
6 THE UNESCO COURIER
highly visible illustration of the clash bet-
ween exclusion and unfair privilege, they
attracted widespread media at t e n t i o n .
Today, their ranks have swelled to more
than 40,000. Moreover, about 150,000
families have recently been settled on over
five million hectares in more than 1,500
assentamentos, homesteads set up for the
beneficiaries—or the victors—of the batt-
le for agrarian reform.
After being at a standstill for decades,
land reform is starting to pick up speed
again. The first land redistribution law
dates back to 1964, but subsequent mili-
tary governments gave priority to settling
the Amazon region. President Fernando
Above, occupation of the 83,000-
hectare Giacometi fazenda in
Paraná State. After years of
struggle, it should eventually
support 4,000 families.
Left,waiting for land and a home.
process of appropriating unused land or
confirming a usually precarious right of
occupation.
“For big landowners, the peasants’
demands are an intolerable threat,” says
João Pedro Stedile,a member of the MST
national executive. “They strike back vio-
lently with their henchmen or through  a
state machine in which they have a great
deal of leverage.”
The movement has nevertheless been
successful. In 1991, some 15,000 landless
peasant families were living in acampa-
mentos, temporary roadside camps set up
as close as possible to the unused or
under-used lands of the big estates. A
Double page overleaf:after more
than 5 hours on the road,a column
of marchers over 12,000 strong
forces its way on to the Giacometi
fazenda as the dawn mists begin
to clear.

P E O P L E  A N D  P L A C E S
THE UNESCO COURIER 7
Brazil’s agrarian structureHenrique Cardoso says that “the agrarian
structure, which was inherited from the
colonial peri o d , is inadequate and
unjust.” By settling 300,000 families on
more than 14 million hectares between
1995 and 1998, he claims that his
government will have done “more than
has ever been done in the past.” But this
leap forward is also the result of a shift in
the balance of power, for which the MST
is largely responsible.
The rural exodus, in which the urban
population rose from 30 to 80 per cent in
half a century, helped build a wall of
indifference between the towns and the
countryside.With great tactical expertise,
MST thrust the agrarian question into
the spotlight.At the same time,by forcing
its way into the big estates, the movement
has created a series of faits accomplis that
compel the government to take account
of the landless and negotiate with them.
The typical MST member is under thirty-
five, did not finish primary education,has
at least three children, is a descendant of
European immigrants who arri ved in
Brazil in the first half of the twentieth
century, and before joining the movement
worked either as a seasonal day labourer
or a full-time ag ricultural worker.
In just a few years, the movement has
managed to create a network of alternati-
ve economic and social ventures. For
example, 400 “farm co-operation” groups
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
% of estates % of total surface area
over 1,000 hec-
tares
from 0 to 10 hec-
tares



P E O P L E  A N D  P L A C E S
10 THE UNESCO COURIER
exchange information on innovative agri-
cultural methods that are gradually gai-
ning ground among local farmers. Some
850 primary schools and 20 high schools
are up and ru n n i n g, while day - c a r e
centres and community restaurants are
easing women’s load of household chores.
The authorities can no longer sideline
the MST when it comes to agricultural
issues. By building a participatory and
egalitarian structure that goes against the
grain, it offers alternative perspectives to
broad swathes of Brazilian society. Its
adversaries denounce its political radica-
lism and illegal methods, while its defen-
ders call it Latin America’s most promi-
sing social movement. Brazilian econo-
mist Celso Furtado goes so far as to say
that it offers “the only answer to mass
u n e m p l oyment in Brazil” because “ a
return to subsistence agriculture is prefe-
rable to urban poverty.” The MST is
facing this challenge with the slogan of
“Agrarian reform: everyone’s struggle.” ■
Ana Maria Galano
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
Below, a family in its new home in the settlement of
Conquista da Fronteira,Santa Catarina State.
A school at Santa Clara camp, Sergipe State, which
houses 650 families (around 2,500 people).The
teachers themselves are landless workers. Basic
teaching materials are provided by the MST’s
co-operatives. The benches and tables were made 
by the camp’s occupants.
