Pedal power
s i
BY BENOIT LAMBERT
***&>&^ .^-
.... ,i
A clean form of
transport rides
into town
Top, The New Invented Sociable
or The Lover and His Hobby. An
English engraving made in
1819.
Doubts are now being raised about the
aura almost of majesty that sur¬
rounds motor vehicles, which, despite being
too noisy and too big and guzzling too much
energy, have long been regarded as symbols of
national economic success and individual sta¬
tus. Since the 1992 Rio Conference and the
cries of alarm that went up from the scientific
community about threats to the stability of
the earth's ecosystem, transport policies and
especially policies in regard to the car have been
under fire from all sides.
Bicycles have seized this opportunity to
go on to the offensive. Fifty times lighter than
cars, they have plenty going for them. They are
non-polluting, nifty, silent and healthy. The
number of cars in circulation worldwide will
reach the billion mark in twenty-five years or
even less, and this at a time of climate change.
A certain measure of self-restraint in terms of
individual mobility is thus an essential pre¬
caution to be taken to preserve the environ¬
ment, and in fact more and more city-dwellers
want to live in conditions of less pollution
and stress. Cycles, especially when taken in
conjunction with public transport, seem to
provide an answer to this new-found aspira¬
tion to win back the streets and public places
from colonization by the car.
In Amsterdam in March 1994, the Euro¬
pean Union set up a network of car-free cities,
to which sixty towns, including Aosta,
Athens, Barcelona, Bremen, Granada, Gronin¬
gen, Lisbon, Nantes, Reykjavik and Stras¬
bourg, now belong. The main aims are to pro¬
mote policies for sustainable development,
encourage a gradual reduction in the use of
private cars in towns, and serve as an interna¬
tional forum for the pooling of experience in
this field.
The best results achieved so far have been in
Copenhagen, where bicycles are regarded as a
means of transport in the full sense of the
term, and account for 33 per cent of jour¬
neys a share equal to that of public trans¬
port and private motor vehicles. Although,
admittedly, the local terrain lends itself to this
mode of locomotion, it should be pointed
out that the climate the wind in particular
is a considerable disincentive, which never¬
theless does nothing to discourage the towns¬
people. One of the reasons for the bike's
success is the fact that there is an almost unbro¬
ken network of cycle lanes along the streets
and the main thoroughfares. Since 1962, the
policy has been to reduce the number of park¬
ing spaces for cars, often to make way for cycle
lanes, with the result that motor traffic has
gone down by 10 per cent since 1970.
Cycles are small machines that have had a
big impact all over the world with people of
all ages, male and female, rich and poor. In

their quiet way they have helped to shape the
modern world. In the Western countries, at
the turn of this century workers were using
them to get to work, and in this way, while
themselves being an important industrial
product, they contributed to the process of
industrialization and to countries' economic
prosperity.
A breath offresh air
It was, moreover, thanks to the bicycle that a
wind of freedom blew through people's pat¬
terns of behaviour. Weekends in the country
began with the bicycle and, when youth hos¬
tels first appeared in the early 1930s, so did a
new form of tourism, the cycling holiday. The
New Woman on her bicycle became an emblem

of emancipation, so potent that when under¬
graduates at Cambridge (U.K.) protested in
1897 against the admission of women they
hanged a bicycling woman in effigy.
Pedal power is of great importance in the
developing countries, enabling doctors to get
around quickly in wartime in Nicaragua,
allowing foodstuffs to be moved from one
to another of the three markets in Riobamba,
Ecuador, heavy goods to be transported on
Cyclists in Copenhagen
(Denmark).
Stone carving from Pura
Maduwe Karang Temple (Bali)
shows a temple official on a
bicycle made of flowers.
tricycles in Hanoi (Viet Nam), fresh bread to
be distributed to 22,000 sales outlets by 800
tricycles in Bogotá (Colombia), and so on.
In Bogotá again, 100 km of streets are
closed to motor traffic on Sundays for recre¬
ational use by cyclists, and hundreds of thou¬
sands of people take advantage of these ciclovtas

dominicales. In China, where there are over
400 million cycles nearly as many as there
are cars in the world! over 80 per cent of indi¬
vidual journeys are made this way.
Less caloriesper kilometre
For use in town, cycles compare very
favourably in many respects with other means
of transport.
Efficiency: the modern bike has the high¬
est ratio of distance covered to energy input of
any means of transport; at an average speed of
17 km an hour, a cyclist uses between three
and four times less energy per kilometre than
a pedestrian;
Resources: Marcia Lowe, of the World-
watch Institute in Washington, has calculated
that it takes a hundred times less raw material
and energy to make a cycle than it does to
make a car;
Health: a British Medical Association
report published in 1992 pointed out that
cycling is one of the simplest and most effec¬
tive ways of keeping fit;
Cost: the cost of creating a cycle track in
Britain is anything from 67 to 230 times less
per mile than that of building a road, and even
the most expensive bike will always be far
more affordable than a car.
Cycling to a healthier world
Some commentators state categorically that
sustainable development is not feasible without
multimodal mobility combining public trans¬
port and two-wheelers. The irony of the situ¬
ation is that just when the industrialized coun¬
tries are starting to realize the virtues of the
velocipede, some of the developing countries are
trying to clear them off the streets, believing
The modern bike:
a blend of hi-tech
and simplicity
The Lightning
P-38.
Advanced technologies can now
be integrated into bicycles in a
way that can revolutionize their
use. In 1994, a Japanese firm
launched a bike with a small electric
motor and two sensors which calculate the cyclist's effort and his or her
speed. A built-in microcomputer then works out the extra power to be supplied to
the pedal-wheel in order to maximize the rider's performance, e.g. when setting off,
on a gradient or with a head windinconveniences that put many people off as soon
as they are in the saddle.
The Dutch engineer Alan Lentz has developed another interesting innovation, a
solar-powered trailer. The prototype won first prize in the 1993 Dutch Solar Bike
Design Competition, which rewards the best suggestions for the combined use of
solar power and the bicycle. A solar panel connected to a battery is built into the lid
of the trailer and powers a small electric motor that drives the hub. The power
generated is enough to propel the loaded trailer and can even push the bike. For
campers, the battery can supply power for lights, radio, electric razor or any other
electrical apparatus.
An impressive range of increasingly practical accessories is now available.
Furthermore, the one-hour speed record held by the "horizontal" cycleso called
because the rider is in a lying position with his feet up in front of him and back
archedIs 77 kilometres, as against 55 kilometres for a conventional machine. The
horizontal cycle was invented at the beginning of the century and broke a number of
speed records, but was banned from international competitions in 1934because it
was so efficient it enabled lower-rated riders to beat competitors riding conventional
machines! Fortunately, since the 1970s associations for the promotion of human-
powered vehicles in the United States and Europe have revived the horizontal bike.
The back support given by the seat increases the power of propulsion and makes
such bikes much more comfortable. B.L.
There are millions of cyclists In
China. Below, a typical Beijing
street scene.
their replacement by motorized vehicles to be
the outward and visible sign of modernization.
This begs the question as to what "moder¬
nity" means today. Shouldn't we be standing
up for the idea of "cyclomodernity", using
the bicycle to treat the planet's ills ? It has been
reckoned that by the year 2005, more than
half the world's population will be living in
towns and cities, and that by 2025 the num¬
ber of city-dwellers will have doubled to five
billion. At the same time, the worldwide pro¬
liferation of cars has resulted in the "auto¬
mobile phenomenon" becoming almost co¬
extensive with what Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
called the "human phenomenon". In these cir¬
cumstances, bikes come to symbolize a simple
life attuned to the limitations of our bio¬
sphere and responding to the new demands
from a growing number of city-dwellers for
a less motorized environment.
