Eve rything flows in the ocean. It is simply
impossible to manage ocean uses in isola-
tion,without recognizing their interaction.
From fishing to offshore oil deve l o p m e n t , a c t i-
vities interact.W h at happens in one ocean area is
likely to affect others , f l owing across political
boundaries or even the world ocean as a whole.
Hundreds of thousands of pages have been
w ritten about “ i n t e gr ated coastal manage-
ment” designed to take  all these interactions
into account. However, one aspect has been
avoided as far as possible at all the intergovern-
mental conferences because of its politically
highly sensitive nature: the interaction between
military and peaceful uses of the oceans.
This interaction may be of a specific nature.
We have seen problems arise from the exemp-
tion of naval vessels from the environmental
protection rules of the Law of the Sea
Convention.Then there are accidents, such as
collisions involving nuclear naval vessels and
the loss of nuclear weapons at sea.A number of
such incidents have occurred.
The conflict,however,is deeper. And it may
not be possible to ignore it much longer. The
management of peaceful ocean uses is too clo-
sely linked to the control of military uses. This
general problem is related to an elementary
fact: without peace and security there can be
neither economic development nor environ-
mental conservation. The next inevitable step
lies in the integration of sustainable develop-
ment and security.
This integration could be best pioneered at
the regional level. While a number of regional
seas programmes are already in place, the
Mediterranean offers a unique opportunity. By
establishing a regional commission on sustai-
nable development, Mediterranean states have

Peace for the high seas
moved from a sectoral to a comprehensive
approach, opening participation to any high-
level minister involved in ocean affairs. There
would be no reason to exclude defence minis-
ters from this commission, whenever an issue
of regional security conflicts with the peaceful
uses of the sea and coastal regions. These
ministers might form a “virtual regional securi-
ty council” within the commission and promo-
te naval co-operation for peaceful purposes.
In the absence of armed conflict, naval
regional co-operation could extend to joint sur-
veillance and enforcement of pollution regula-
tions or fishing agreements. This co-operation
is already seen in the South Pacific and the
Eastern Caribbean.
Naval co-operation should also extend to
h u m a n i t a rian activities such as search and
rescue, disaster relief or hydrological surveys
and other forms of oceanographic research. In
institutional terms, this is a simple extension of
a process already in course.
Regional seas should be declared, wherever
possible, nuclear-free zones. This is another
way of integrating environmental and political
security while, at the same time, interpreting,
developing and implementing the new prin-
c i p l e , e n s h rined in the Law of the Sea
Convention (Article 88), reserving the high
seas for peaceful purposes. This also includes
the exclusive economic zones.
Promising beginnings have been made with
the Declaration on the Indian Ocean as a Zone
of Peace and the Antarctic Treaty. The Latin
A m e rican Nuclear-Free Zone (established
through the Treaty of Tlatelolco) should now
be extended to the Caribbean. And new zones
wait to be established within the Baltic, the
Arctic, the Mediterranean and the Asian Seas.
Special regional arbitration tri bunals could
make another important contri bution by sett-
ling disputes. Not all regional seas progr a m m e s
will be able to move in this direction at the same
p a c e . Power-political constellations may be
impediments requiring less or more time to
ove r c o m e . But the time has come to put the
issue on the agenda for the next century. ■
*International Ocean Institute
Military imperatives must stop jeopardizing
sustainable ocean management. Regional 
co-operation shows a new era of security is 
within reach.
Elisabeth Mann Borgese*
