Anniversary Elijah ben Solomon ZaliTian,
the gao/7 of Vilna BY HENRI MINCZELES
A great 18th-century Jewish scholar
and spiritual leader who marked
the thinking of eastern Europe's Jewish communities
I Elijah ben Solomon Zahnan, who
I was born in 1720 in Seletz, near
Grodno, was considered to be a genius
from his childhood. Even before he was
thirteen years old and passed the bar
mitzvah ritual admitting him into the
Jewish community as an adult, he had
already become interested in the natural
and religious sciences.
He married at eighteen, and had many
children. After a stay in Keidany with
his father-in-law, he travelled to Poland
and Germany and visited numerous Jew¬
ish communities. Then he settled on the
outskirts of Vilna in the Grand Duchy
of Lithuania, and later moved into a
house of study in the city which was cre¬
ated for him and which he directed.
Thanks to an inheritance, he and his
family had a home and a small stipend for
life, in addition to the regular salary paid
him by the city's Jewish community,
which had elected him its gaon or spir¬
itual leader. By the time he was thirty
years old, his reputation had spread
beyond his own community, but he
nonetheless firmly refused to become a
rabbi or to accept any other official posi¬
tion. He preferred to remain a spiritual
leader and live a secluded life devoted
to study.
The story goes that he studied at
night by candlelight in order to be able to
concentrate, and slept only two or three
hours a day. This also enabled him to
keep up a voluminous correspondence
with rabbis and especially to study the
compilation of law known as the
Jerusalem Talmud.
When he was over forty, he emerged
from seclusion and began to teach some
twenty pupils. His reputation grew even
further. An important rabbi from
Jerusalem paid tribute to him as "the
brilliant light of the century". His advice
was much sought-after and his opinions
had the weight of authority.
The dispute with Hassidism
However, a pietist movement known as
Hassidism developed in Galicia and
spread rapidly to Jewish communities
throughout eastern Europe. Its mysti¬
cism appeared to many as an antidote to
hard times, and instilled in them a com¬
plete change of heart. Hassidism, which
in a sense "democratized" the faith,
preached the joyful adoration of God,
rejected asceticism and attempted to
make the medieval mystical doctrine of
Kabbalah widely accessible.
The gaon of Vilna was violently hostile
to the Ilassidim, whom he described as
"mystics like leprosy on the body of
Israel." lie thought the Hassidie cult of
the Tsaddikim (Just Men endowed with
divine power and perception) could give
rise to false Messiahs. He managed to
have their centres closed and pronounced
an anathema (here m) on their books.
The Czarist authorities became
involved and the dispute became more
than a purely theological debate. A num¬
ber of Hassidie leaders were even briefly
imprisoned. In 1777, two of the move¬
ment's leaders, Menahem Mendel of
Vitebsk and Sehneur Zahnan of Liadi,
vainly attempted to bring about a recon¬
ciliation. Elijah ben Solomon stood firm,
and in 1791 ordered a public burning of
the book written by the movement's
founder, Israel ben Eliezer, known as the
Baal Shem Tov (Master of the Good
Name). This established the ga on as the
leader of the mitnagdim, or those who
opposed the Hassidie movement.
The gaon's message
The ga oil's refutation of Hassidism was
based on the principle of the eternity of
the Talmud, the first five books of the
Bilde, which record Jewish haw, includ¬
ing the ten commandments received by
Moses in the desert. The gaon of Vilna
believed that true Jewish learning could
only be based on a close study of the scrip¬
tures and that it was necessary to know
the Bible as well as all later commentaries
and writings, notably the Talmud.
The gaon also considered that knowl¬
edge of biblical texts should not be eon-
fined to an elite, and that for educational
reasons women should also have access
to it, especially the Book of Proverbs.
He was also interested in the natural
sciences, and claimed that "if a man lias
no knowledge of the secular sciences, he
cannot truly understand the Torah." lie
was a keen student of the natural sci¬
ences and other disciplines including
music and medicine.
1 le is credited with some seventy stud¬
ies and commentaries, more than fifty of
which were printed after his death.
These include explanations and discus¬
sions of Talmudic texts as well as analy¬
ses of Hebrew grammar, a subject which
fascinated him. His pupil Issachat Baer
anthologized his prayers and favourite
reading in a volume entitled Maaseh Rav.
A number of sayings attribu ted to the
gaon of Vilna have survived, such as "The
Torah is like the rain; it nourishes useful
plants and weeds", and "Life is endless
pain and suffering, and sleepless nights
arc our common lot". His personality
helped shape an outlook typical of the
Lithuanian Jew, influenced by the
region's cosmopolitanism and by the per¬
sistence of rationalistic Judaism.
Towards the end of his life, the gaon
was obliged to confront another progres¬
sive reform movement, the llaskala, led
by Moses Mendelssohn, the translator of
the Bible into German. He feared that
this movement would lead to Jewish assim¬
ilation and the loss of Jewish identity.
On the eve of Yom Kippur 1798, the
gaon of Vilna fell ill and died shortly
thereafter. The exact date of his death
is uncertain and some sources date it to
1797. The plain mausoleum where he is
buried is set in the Jewish quarter of the
new Vilna cemetery. It recalls to Jews a
great thinker and rigorous man who was
a faithful servant of Judaism.
