A subversive idea BY PAUL EKINS
The values of frugality fly in the face of the prevailing
economic order
It is doubtful whether many people
would subscribe openly and explicitly to
the notion that human happiness derives
exclusively, or even mainly, from the con¬
sumption of goods and services, or that the
only, or even main, way of increasing that
happiness is to increase consumption. So it is
surprising that this notion has come to exer¬
cise a near-dictatorial power over public pol¬
icy, and thence over the way societies are run
and over the directions in which they are con¬
strained to develop. How has this situation
come about? What results has it had? What
would be the rationale for, and some of the
implications of, an alternative view of how
human happiness comes about, in which fru¬
gality plays a significant role?
Clearly all living things need to consume in
order to stay alive, and humans are no excep¬
tion. The use of matter and energy is neces¬
sary to sustain our bodies and to protect us
from hostile environments. Many, but not
all, human societies have also sought to achieve
more than this by generating (often through
the use of slave or forced labour) surpluses
over and above basic consumption needs in
order to build civilizations. But until rela¬
tively modern times the goal of such civiliza¬
tions was not simply to increase aggregate con¬
sumption. While they seem to have been no
less fond of wealth and power than modern
Windfarm turbines in the state
of Gujarat, northwest India.
societies, they also had complex belief systems
which provided them with explanations of
human life and purpose that went far beyond
accumulation and consumption.
Economic growth:
benefits ana costs
It was the conceptualization of " the economy"
as a macro-social entity, and of economics as a
macro-social science, rather than as household
management (which is the root meaning of the
word) that began to stress the importance of
consumption as an end in itself. Adam Smith,
often called the father of economics, wrote:
"Consumption is the sole end and purpose of
all production." As the economy has come to
dominate public discourse, and as the only goal
of economics is to increase consumption, which
it views as synonymous with human welfare,
this has become the prime objective of modern
societies. No matter what the question, in prac¬
tical politics economic growth is the answer.
This primacy is acknowledged in the collective
term used to describe Western industrial soci¬
eties: consumer societies.
At least for those who tried it first the pro¬
ject of increasing consumption has been phe¬
nomenally successful in its own terms. Eco¬
nomic output in the early industrialized
economies has increased by orders of magni¬
tude over the last 200 years. This has brought
many benefits to the populations which have
participated in this growth. These benefits
should be neither denied nor belittled. They
are so obvious to those who do not yet have
them that in practically every country of the
world their achievement has become the prin¬
cipal social project.
But with these benefits have gone costs.
Most obviously the explosion of consump¬
tion, coupled with the growth of human pop¬
ulation, and the vast increase in the use of energy
and materials that have accompanied them, have
put unprecedented pressure on natural systems.
Other costs are less easy to measure and
quantify but are no less keenly perceived. The
processes of capitalistic accumulation through
competition in markets, the promotion of
which is now generally considered to take pri¬
ority over all other social objectives, have led to
what can only be described as profound social
unease. Social institutions, like the family or
community, disintegrate or degenerate; anti¬
social behaviour crime, vandalism, drug
abuse proliferates; unemployment becomes
less cyclical and more structural at higher levels,

Children at play in Bahía
(Brazil).
and threatens previously secure white-collar
employees; countries that try to sustain com¬
prehensive systems of social security find them
an unsustainable economic burden, those that
do not experience sharp increases in inequality;
and, finally, social values of trust, integrity and
public service are eroded by the increasing iden¬
tification of personal success with private gain.
Clearly not all these phenomena are equally
evident in all countries, but they are ever more
apparent in both industrialized and industri¬
alizing societies. Not only are they negative
effects in themselves, but they threaten to ren¬
der the growth process unsustainable. Growth
in all the old industrial economies is substan¬
tially slower in the 1990s than in previous
decades. It is at least possible that these
economies are beginning to experience social as
well as environmental limits to growth. This is
potentially traumatic in a society for which
economic growth is the be all and end all of
social purpose. Perhaps it is time to ask whether
there are other sources of human happiness
which could be given a higher social profile and
receive greater emphasis in public policy.
Once sources of human happiness apart
from consumption start to be identified, they
seem so obvious that it is difficult to under¬
stand how they were ever allowed to be mar¬
ginalized by the quest for economic growth or
compromised by its consequences. They
include: stable, caring families; secure, con¬
vivial communities; meaningful and satisfying
work; good health; a sense of personal identity
and social purpose; a diverse, beautiful and
sustainable natural environment; and open,
participatory and democratic societies.
Clearly these sources of happiness are inter¬
related in many different ways. Equally clearly
they can be, and have been, adversely affected
by a pursuit of economic growth that does
not recognize their value. A question then
arises as to what concept may be able to tem¬
per modern societies' obsession with growth
in order to give weight to some of these other
sources of human happiness. This is where the
idea of frugality may have a role to play.
Downshifting
In a society devoted to consumption, it is
hard not to identify frugality with notions of
sacrifice, of "doing without" or "giving things
up". Such identifications are, however, mis¬
placed. Certainly frugality implies modest
consumption and simplicity in personal
lifestyle. But these are not motivated by
abstract asceticism or self-denial, but from a
perception that frugality in consumption per¬
mits a greater emphasis to be placed on other
aspects of human experience, which are actually
more personally rewarding and fulfilling than
consumption. Far from entailing self-denial,
frugality in this reading is a means of libera¬
tion. An all-absorbing concern with con¬
sumption is replaced by the pursuit of other
values that yield more happiness.
This may seem fanciful, but in fact just

such a calculus is at the heart of the growing
movement of "downshifting" which has taken
place in recent years, especially in the United
States. Downshifters are people who, by
reducing their employment commitments,
and therefore their income, have chosen some
or all of the following: to have more time
with their families; to contribute to their com¬
munities; to do more work of their own
choosing; to experience less stress; to reduce
their impact on, and/or increase their contact
with the natural environment. So much
momentum had this movement gathered by
1995 that the Wall Street Journal was openly
speculating whether so many people refraining
from market-based consumption could have
a depressing effect on share prices. Such a con¬
cern well expresses how deeply subversive fru¬
gality is of the prevailing economic order.
However, a commitment to frugality in
order to have the time and attention to con¬
centrate on other sources of human happiness
and fulfilment is entirely in line with some
recent theories of human motivation and behav¬
iour. For example, the American psychologist
and philosopher Abraham Maslow postulated
that humans have a hierarchy of needs, in that
they seek first to satisfy material needs of com¬
fortable survival and security, then are con¬
cerned with social needs, including being
accepted and esteemed by their social group,
and then direct their energies towards the sat¬
isfaction of self-actualization needs, seeking to
act in accordance with ideals of love, truth, jus¬
tice and aesthetics in order to realize a higher
human purpose. In this framework increasing
material consumption is irrelevant to human
fulfilment once a reasonable standard of living
has been attained. The striving for further con¬
sumption is indicative of psychological fixa¬
tion and immaturity, a failure to progress to the
realization of higher human potentialities.
The Chilean economist Manfred Max-Neef's
"Some societies had belief
systems which provided
explanations of human life
that went beyond
accumulation and
consumption." Above, the
Forum, ancient Rome's
religious, political and
business centre. Watercolour
by Theodor Hoffbauer (1914).
A family living on the island of
e Mindanao (Philippines).
classification of human needs is similar, except
that he rejects Maslow's hierarchical arrange¬
ment, believing that satisfaction of material
and non-material needs is sought simultane¬
ously. He identifies nine fundamental human
needs (subsistence, affection, protection, under¬
standing, participation, leisure, creation, iden¬
tity, freedom), satisfaction of which is sought
through four modes of experience (being, hav¬
ing, doing, interacting). The means of satisfac¬
tion Max-Neef calls " satisfiers " . Some satisfiers
only satisfy the needs to which they are
directed, while others synergistically satisfy
other needs as well. Less positively, there are
"pseudo-satisfiers", which do not really sat¬
isfy the relevant need; "inhibitors", which sat¬
isfy one need but simultaneously inhibit the
satisfaction of others; and "violators" which
militate against the satisfaction even of the need
to which they are directed. Examples of these
non-satisfiers might be status symbols (which
unsuccessfully seek to address the need for

identity), over-indulgence in watching televi¬
sion (a leisure pursuit which inhibits creativity)
and the arms race (which sought to give both
sides protection but ended up making them
both less secure). From this perspective over¬
emphasis on material consumption is often
evidence of a counter-productive fixation with
pseudo-satisfiers, inhibitors or violators. Con¬
versely, embracing frugality can be a means óf
liberation from negative satisfiers involving
material consumption, in order to concentrate
on satisfying needs of which consumption is
not and cannot be an authentic satisfier.
It seems, therefore, that frugality is a valid,
and perhaps a necessary, value of a society that is
truly promotive of human fulfilment. This
raises questions as to why it occupies little or no
space in the social psyches of industrial cultures,
and why frugality as a value (if not material
deprivation as a fact) is increasingly being driven
out of societies worldwide. The answer to the
second question is largely historical and has to
do with power and empire. Put crudely, cul¬
tures geared to increasing material consumption
developed more powerful weapons than those
which valued frugality, permitting the former to
conquer, and colonize or enslave the latter. Decol¬
onization and independence generally failed to
restore traditional values of frugality, the resid¬
ual of which have suffered a further sustained
assault from the globalization of Western com¬
merce, culture and consumerism.
Unresolved contradictions
The answer to the first question renders very
problematic the rediscovery of frugality in cap¬
italist industrial societies. In such societies, where
the achievement of greater material consump¬
tion has become the dominant social objective,
economic growth is a condition not just of sup¬
posed greater human well-being, but also of
basic economic stability. Capitalism operates
through the generation of economic surplus
that accumulates into capital and generates more
production through investment. Unless eco¬
nomic growth is in prospect, capitalists will not
invest. Economic growth requires increased con¬
sumption, even in the richest societies in the
world. Such a requirement is hardly consistent
with a resurgence of frugality.
Moreover, under capitalism, work is orga¬
nized as employment. The profitability of
business is increased when labour becomes
more productive, and the whole thrust of
technological development has been and is to
raise labour productivity. Yet without eco¬
nomic growth increased labour productivity
in a given labour force means greater unem¬
ployment, with all its attendant personal mis¬
ery and social strain. If a new commitment to
frugality were to hold back growth in con-
"Perhaps It is time to ask
whether there are other
sources of human happiness
apart from consumption."
Above, a shopping street in
Tokyo (Japan).
sumption, but the forces increasing labour
productivity were to continue to operate, then
frugality would have produced unemploy¬
ment, which is hardly a recipe for human hap¬
piness even among the more frugally inclined.
Developing new institutions and ways of
working that can resolve the contradictions
between frugality as an individual value and the
social need under capitalism for investment,
economic growth and more jobs, will not be
easy. It will only happen, of course, if the quest
for frugality becomes a far more widespread
and potent social movement than is currently
the case even with regard to downshifting in the
United States. If greater adherence to the value
of frugality is indeed a necessary part of the
solution to the environmental destruction and
social degeneration brought about by materi¬
alistic consumerism, the transition whereby
frugality is either accommodated to capitalism,
or transforms it into a different social and eco¬
nomic system, is likely to be a rough ride.
