P L A N E T
12 THE UNESCO COURIER
For almost a year now, vast forested
tracts of the globe have been burning
d own one by one. It all began in A u g u s t
1997 in Malaysia and Indonesia. Then in
April this year it happened in the Amazon,
the Philippine island of Pa l awan and ele-
ven States in Mexico.
On 19 September 1997 a state of
emergency was declared in Sarawak, the
Malaysian State in the northern part of
the island of Borneo. About two million
people were wa rned to stay indoors
because of the thick smoke (twelve times
more carcinogenic than tobacco smoke)
from forest fires in Kalimantan,the island
of Sulawesi and Irian Jaya, in Indonesia.
Fumes from the hundreds of thousands of
hectares ablaze affected some 70 million
people in Southeast Asia to va ry i n g
degrees.
Indonesian environment minister
Sarwono Kusumaatmadja said the health
of 20 million of his compat riots wa s
threatened.The least hardy of them died.
Many accidents occurred. Air and sea
traffic was disrupted. An Airbus plane
crashed in Sumatra on 26 September
1997, killing 234 people.
El Ninõ’s fault?
The guilty party was said to be El Niño
(which in Spanish means the Chri s t
Child), a climatic phenomenon which
appears at Christmas-time every three or
four years, and sometimes every seven to
ten.When the trade winds, which usually
blow across the Pacific from east to west,
lose strength, an enormous mass of warm
air about the size of the United States,
normally held in position by winds near
Indonesia,heads for the coast of Peru and
then moves away in the opposite direc-
tion, towards the east.
This movement is part of a climat i c
flu c t u ation known as the El Niño Southern
O s c i l l ation (ENSO) which is thought to be
responsible for the we ather disturbances
around the world last year and this.
In 1997, the monsoon rains came late.
In Indonesia, the fires began in August
during one of the most severe droughts of
the past fifty years. In fact, they had been
smouldering since 1982-83, when a hea-
vily-logged area of 3.5 million hectares—
as big as Belgium—had bu rn e d . T h e
conflagration was helped along by the
abundance of peat in Kalimantan, as well
as by seams of coal and lignite which
sometimes run close to the surface. Even
heavy rains failed to put out the smoulde-



Fanning the flames   
Drought was partly to blame for the huge fires that recently swept through tropical
forests in Asia and Latin America—but the main culprit was human avarice.

P L A N E T
THE UNESCO COURIER 13
ring fires which burned on for lack of
bulldozers to cut wide trenches to act as
firebreaks.
But if unusual weather fanned the
flames, the main culprits were human
beings. A distinction must be made bet-
ween small peasant and big farmer. Both
use fire as a tool, but to different degrees.
A fire on one hectare of land can be put
o u t . Bigger conflagr ations cannot be
controlled and lack of water and fire-figh-
ting equipment, along with difficult
access, mean that forests are lost.
Fire has always enabled the native
peoples of Borneo and Sumatra to live off
the land.Their often-criticized slash-and-
bu rn method of cultivation is not as
harmful to the environment as is some-
times thought, as long as the land is left
fallow for some time.The soil is not natu-
In northern Bra z i l , 10 km from the Venezuelan bord e r, a farmer looks out over land he has cleared by burning.



of greed
rally fertile, so the absorption of ash from
fire over two or three years enriches it.
The secondary forest grows back and fif-
teen or twenty years later the peasants
burn it down again.
Miriem Bouamrane, a young econo-
mist who has lived in Java and Sumatra
and works for the International Centre for
Research on Agroforestry (ICRAF) based
at Bogor, near Jakarta, cites the Dayaks,
one of the region’s main ethnic groups, as
an example. “They aren’t being irrespon-
sible,” she says. “These are age-old prac-
tices. They live in very close contact with
nature and only burn a small area and
watch that it doesn’t spread. They also
worship trees in their religion and are
always planting them. They use the pro-
ducts of the trees but also save from
extinction species like the damar, which
produces the resin which is their main
source of income.” The most convincing
evidence of this is that just about the only
places where the tropical forest survives
are the areas where the Dayaks live.
But the “settlers” which the govern-
ment encourages to leave overpopulated
Java with an offer of between one and five
hectares of land on neighbouring islands
behave differently. They do not have the
same knowledge and try to make quick
profits growing rice, pepper or coffee.
Scorched earth
The Brazilian State of Roraima, along the
border with Venezuela and Guya n a , we n t
up in flames in Ja n u a ry 1998. But accor-
ding to an official of the Amazon Research
Institute (INPA ) , the fire really began
there twenty-eight ye a rs ago, when the
t h e n - m i l i t a ry gove rnment began the sett-
lement of Brazil’s Amazon interior by
l u ring small fa rm e rs from the ove r c r ow-
ded south-central and nort h - e a s t e rn part s
of the country. “In 1978,” s ays Reinaldo
B a r b o s a , “the State had 80,000 inhabi-
t a n t s , 32,000 of them Indians, and was 72
per cent forested. By 1996, the populat i o n
had gr own to 262,000. The settlers
conquered Amazonia by bu rning dow n
the forest.” Like the settlers in Indonesia,
the newcomers in Roraima had used fir e
r ather than bu l l d o z e rs , and between 1978
and 1996 cleared land increased fif t y - f o l d .

The forest—a refuge and a nurs e ry —
was their foe. “The plans of the Settlement
and A gr a rian Reform Institute (INCRA)
only spread pove rty by encouraging the
s e t t l e rs to destroy the forest,” s ays Barbosa.
“The proof is that a hectare of cleared land
in Roraima is wo rth ten times more than a
hectare of forest.” The Env i r o n m e n t a l
Institute (IBAMA) suggests that the sett-
l e rs , who are officially not allowed to clear
more than half of their 100-hectare plots,
s t a rt fires illegally to do the job.
Land ownership is crucial in a country
where two per cent of the landowners
possess more than half the surface area
being farmed and are greedy for more.
Walter Blos, head of the National Indian
Foundation (FUNAI), warns that many
white farmers are keen to get their hands
on the 10 million hectares of Indian reser-
vations that fires have already significant-
ly encroached upon.
Stricter laws
In Indonesia, timber companies and com-
mercial tree plantations have been quite
legally carving up the tropical forests for
more than fifteen years in pursuit of
maximum returns. And fires stoke up the
profits. Not only do the logging compa-
nies not have to clear the forest floor of
unsaleable timber, but they enable the
fire-cleared ground to be planted with
crops like palm oil or eucalyptus which
bring in quick profits.
According to Indonesia’s forestry
minister, between 500,000 and 700,000
hectares of forest have been turned into
plantations in the past fifteen years. On
the burned forest areas, which range in
size from 300,000 to 900,000 hectares,
560 deliberately-started fires were recor-
ded. Sometimes this was to the detriment
of the perpetrators: according to the UN
Food and A griculture Organizat i o n
( FAO ) , the fires in mid-October also
consumed 76,000 hectares of productive
forest and 90,000 hectares of coconut,
palm oil and rubber plantations.
President Suharto reminded the
country that starting fires had been ban-
ned since 1995, but this did not deter the
big companies. In October 1997, 160
Indonesian firms were found responsible
for starting fires. Out of forty-six investi-
In Borneo, a mother and her young son fight a fire
sweeping through their pepper plantation.
g at i o n s , f i ve led to legal action. I n
Malaysia, the seventeen firms found guil-
ty were fined a total of $8,000 and that
was that. In Brazil, President Cardoso
signed an environmental protection mea-
sure into law on 12 February. It does not
punish slash-and-burn, so as not to pena-
lize Amerindians like the Dayaks, who use
the method with care. But it decrees pri-
son terms and the closure of firms found
guilty of ecological crimes. It is tougher
than the law it replaced, which only
enabled the government to collect six per
cent of the fines imposed. But will it be
more of a deterrent?
The experts at ICRAF are very pessi-
mistic. “The forest fires in Indonesia will
not stop until all the country’s forests
have disappeared,” they say. The cause of
the fires in the Amazon and Mexico are
the same. Are the forests there also doo-
med to destruction? ■
France Bequette
