interview Paulo Coelho
The beyond
is accessible
to those
who dare'
In the two centuries since the Enlightenment,
man has become the measure of all things. This
attitude of mind has changed many things for the
better, but it gives short shrift to the spiritual
dimension of human existence. People today need
to rediscover a relationship with transcendence, but
only on condition that it is through their own
experience and that they freely consent to that
experience, which should not be subjected to any
religious authority. By putting forward a model for
an individual spiritual quest in your novel The
Alchemist, you put your finger on this overriding
concern of people today. Perhaps this is one of the
reasons for its tremendous success.
Paulo Coelho: The Enlightenment did not pre¬
vent people from having their irrational side or
rule out intuition or enthusiasm. Humanity
gradually turned its back on them for other rea¬
sons. Yet I am convinced that humanity is now
quietly opening its doors again to things which
it had rejected and ceased to respect. The most
important of these seems to me to be the idea
of mystery. This is something that must be
understood not so much the fact that there is
a limit to human knowledge as the fact that mys¬
tery is part of the human condition. When I fall
in love, it is not because the person I love is the
best in the world or even the best person for me.
Love is beyond reason, and so is spiritual quest¬
ing. Why do we need spirituality? I do not know.
That's part of the mystery. Some people have
sought a recipe for the human condition. "You've
got to do this," they tell us. "You've got to do
that." I don't trust them. But I do trust those
who have sufficient humility to respect the mys¬
tery surrounding our lives and to acknowledge
that there are major reasons that are beyond our
Brazilan writer Paulo Coelho has won international acclaim with his prizewinning
philosophical tale The Alchemist, which has sold more than 10 million copies worldwide.
He is also the author of Diary ofa Magus: Lessons in the Art ofSelf-Discovery, an account of
a pilgrimage he made to Santiago de Compostela, and of By the River Piedra I Sat Down
and Wept. His most recent book. Mount Five, which retraces the life of the prophet Elijah,
has just been published. Since 1997, Paulo Coelho has been a special adviser to the
Director-General of Unesco for the "Routes of Faith" project*.
Here he is interviewed by Baghat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat.
See the Uitsco Couritt. M ly 1995, "Tlie Pilgrim's Way", p. 16
understanding. When I wrote The Alchemist, I
obviously did not know that it was going to be
such a success. I only wanted to write about what
I firmly believe, which is that everybody needs to
live out their personal legend.
This is what's new, that people who feel the need
to get down to essentials no longer have to go
through a priest, a rabbi or an imam. The Alchemist
suggests that they can find self-fulfilment by
pursuing a personal quest which is a source of
fulfilment rather than a curtailment of their
freedom. This changes a lot of things.

P.C.: We all feel an inner need to see the world not
only as it appears to our senses but as a vaster
intangible reality embracing the Whole. This is
what I called the "soul of the world" in The
Alchemist. Spirituality, which caters for this need,
can therefore only be a personal quest. There is a
path to God, marked by signs which are so many
letters of an alphabet ensuring direct communi¬
cation with the divine. However, this does not
preclude the need at certain times for collective
adoration and prayer. At those times, we turn
to religion. Religion is there to satisfy a desire to
belong to the community, to find brothers and
sisters. But it does not show us the path to God.
This path starts from within each of us. It is up
to us to unravel the thread	
Yet your own personal quest first led you in
different directions. At one time you were a hippie
and then you flirted with left-wing politics	
P.C.: Yes. I have tried just about everything. I
have wanted to live my life to the hilt. I was raised
by the Jesuits, which is the best way of com¬
pletely losing your faith, because God is forced
on you. I left the Catholic church precisely
because it had been forced on me. I returned to it
later after a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela,
not because it is the best or ultimate religion but
simply because I carry it within me. The world
opened up in the 1 960s. People, especially young
people, started to travel, meet and make contact
with each other. It was a magic moment, a
moment in the history of humanity when an
entire generation set about answering basic ques¬
tions such as: What am I in this world for? Who
am I? Why was I born in Brazil instead of in
Egypt? These questions have been pursuing peo¬
ple ever since the dawn of time. They can't be
avoided, even if people sometimes feel they have
given up on them. In an attempt to answer them,
people have explored the three paths of art, sci¬
ence and spirituality. These are three very differ¬
ent things, but they impinge on each other. In
fact, the three overlap and blend together. But
there are certain things that it is very dangerous
to mix up. Spirituality and art can cross-fertilize
one another and great scientific geniuses often
have poetic intuitions. But when people want
to find some kind of scientific basis for religion,
the result is catastrophic. The experience of faith
belongs to an order of reality that cannot be
reduced to the world of concepts or be forced
. into a scientific mould.
Collective religious experiences are creating
many conflicts, instead of prompting people to
understand each other better and share things	
I am convinced
that humanity
is now quietly
opening its doors
again to the idea
of mystery.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The Alchemist, a fable
about following your dream.
Harper, San Francisco, 1993
* By the River Piedra ISat
Down and Wept, Harper, San
Francisco, 1996
* Diary ofa Magus: Lessons
in the Art ofSelf-Discovery,
Harper, San Francisco; 1995
P.C.: The experience of true faith always brings
us back to the Other. This being so, the first per¬
son I see is my neighbour. There is a sense of joy
which I want to share with him or her. If that joy
is not shared, it ceases to be joy. On the other
hand, in sadness that is truly shared there is room
for joy	
Even misfortunes are opportunities to learn the
price of things.
P.C.: Yes, provided we persevere along the path of
our own personal legend, provided that we do
not give up. Unfortunately, in the course of their
journey, many people betray the dream which
connects them to the soul of the world. They sac¬
rifice it to the acquisition of social status. If a per¬
son's true vocation is to become a gardener and if
by becoming a gardener that person achieves self-
fulfilment, nothing should deter him or her.
However, in our day, people will be forced more
and more often to abandon their dream often
under family pressure and become lawyers or
doctors. They will forget their personal legend,
they will lose their sense of belonging, they will
no longer have the resources to transform each
experience and each misfortune into a fresh oppor¬
tunity to lift themselves up	
No sooner has the hero of The Alchemist
decided to follow his dream than he is robbed.
You can imagine his disillusionment! He who
had found the inner strength to fulfil his personal
legend, who thought, as if by right, that the
whole world would conspire on his behalf, finds
himself alone and penniless. You need courage
to launch out into an unknown world, aban¬
doning all you possess. At the threshold of our
quest, the fear of stepping into an unknown
world and the desire to stay at home lie in wait
for us. It is a crucial moment of initiation. But we
cannot stand on the threshold for ever. We must
dare to move. Only corpses do not move. Life is
movement. But where to? This is what we all
have to discover for ourselves.
The need to cast off from our moorings	
P.C.: To do this, we have to give free rein to our
rebellious side. I am a great believer in inner rebel¬
lion not lifelong rebellion or rebellion without
cause or restraint, but rebellion against the force of
habit, against the fear of change which is really
fear of living rebellion that will enable us to
make our own way by strengthening our deter¬
mination. Take the example of the struggles wc
have to wage with the family from childhood on.
My mother was always opposed to my personal
destiny. But at the same time she helped me find

the strength and skills to control myself, persevere
and find my own way. Without this conflict, I
would never have developed willpower. These are
quite legitimate struggles!
I do not know where this rebellion comes
from. It is a force which is liberated in us and
which liberates us in turn. It is the quest for per¬
sonal space and time. We cannot accept that our
life span should be measured in terms of so many
years of primary school, followed by secondary
school and then a job. All this is only our col¬
lective space-time and it should on no account sti¬
fle our personal space-time. It is necessary to
strike a balance between the two.
You say that we do not know where we are
going, and yet you speak of rebellion. Isn't there a
contradiction in this?
P.C.: Yes there is, fortunately. This is what free¬
dom is all about. There has to be rebellion against
the forces of inertia and death in order to liber¬
ate the forces of life and creation, which are not
programmed in advance. Otherwise, there would
be no freedom. By that I mean freedom in its
existentialist sense, in other words a compro¬
mise. I am free, I can leave this room right now,
but I won't because I have freely imposed a cer¬
tain code of behaviour on myself. I am also free
to write a book, but to do so I have to sit at the
computer for several hours a day. I impose this
constraint on myself in complete freedom. On
the other hand, if I am sitting in front of the
computer and all the ideas are already in my head,
there will be nothing creative about it. We have to
leave a space so that inner freedom can express
itself.
How did you set about writing The Alchemist?
What ideas did you start out with? Did you know
how the story would develop beforehand?
P.C.: You may be amazed to learn that the story
of The Alchemist comes from the Thousand and
One Nights. It is quite a short tale, only a few
lines long, about a hidden treasure for which the
hero searches far from home, only to find it even¬
tually within himself. I took four guiding ideas
from it: the personal legend, the language of
signs, the soul of the world and the need to lis¬
ten to one's heart. I started the novel with this
very short tale as my guide. The rest was vague,
like being in a fog. The only thing I knew was
that the boy would eventually return to his start¬
ing point. Therewere times and this is the expe¬
rience of creation when I felt as if I was trapped
by my own story. At one point, the boy has to
transform himself into the wind. It is a matter of
life or death. He has to do it. But how do you

Alchemist seeking
the philosopher's
stone (1848), oil
on canvas by the
French painter
Jean Vetter.
start describing such a thing? As you can imag¬
ine, I myself have never transformed myself into
a wind. I panicked	 Then I told myself that I
had to take the plunge and I went right on to the
end of the book.
Hemingway used to say that when he started a
novel he had no guiding theme, but that when he
stopped writing in the evening, he knew what he was
going to write on the following day. . . .
P.C.: In my youth, when I came across quota¬
tions like that, I used to say to myself that they
were hooey. Now I know they make sense. The
wellsprings of creation bubble up in ways that are
to some extent unpredictable. In Hemingway's
case, the limits of the predictable were on the
following day. The day after that was always a
blank page. Writers are like pregnant women.
They have made love with life and have a child
without knowing who the father is.
In my own case, I don't write all the time. I
let two years go by between one novel and the
next. Things happen during those two years
which, together with many others that happened
long before, beget a novel in me, like begetting a
child. Everything we say today may find its way
into some future book.
Frédéric Rossif, the well-known film director
who died some years ago, once met a Sufi mystic in
a cave in Iran and asked him: "What is a saint?" The
holy man's answer struck everybody to whom Rossif
told the story. It was: "A saint is a man who has
pardoned God".
P.C.: That was a brilliant answer. It strikes a par¬
ticular chord with me since my book Mount
Five starts out from the idea that we should
struggle with God. According to the Bible, God
should be accepted as a father. Personally, as I
said earlier when talking about my mother, I am
rather more inclined to wrestle with Him. It is a
legitimate struggle. Pardoning God implies that
one has already fought with him, as a way of
gradually coming closer to Him.
By raising all these questions, The Alchemist
has gone well beyond the realm of literature.
P.C.: The novel has inspired a classical symphony,
composed in the United States, which will be
played at Tarifa in Spain next June. This concert
will also be an occasion for an international debate
to be held on religions and on ways and means of
defusing the religious wars that are threatening us.
It is in this capacity, in fact, that I have been
appointed an adviser to the Director-General of
Unesco.
