Zimbabwe: a healer in
the marketplace
Gordon Dhliwayo, a n'angaor
traditional healer, at a market
in the suburbs of Harare, the
capital of Zimbabwe.
In Zimbabwe,
traditional
healers are on call
to solve all kinds
of medical, social,
spiritual and
cultural
problems
Fin his "office" in the Mbare musika, a
market on the outskirts of Harare, the
capital of Zimbabwe, Gordon Dhliwayo is
almost hidden behind heaps of twisted roots,
earthtone powders, forbidden furs, horns,
bones and shells that clutter the small table in
front of him.
Dhliwayo is a n 'anga or traditional healer.
To reach him for consultation, you pass by
umpteen tables of tomato and cabbage sell¬
ers, browse over piles of fruit, and continue
through the kitchenware section mainly
hand-carved wooden utensils and baskets
beautifully woven with intricate designs.
The ordinariness of the dozen healers prac¬
tising in the market is striking. Dhliwayo wears
a dingy jump-suit, and were it not for the horse
tail in one hand and the tortoise-shell in the
other, you might take him for a garage hand.
His appearance belies the powerful talents ances¬
tral spirits have bestowed upon him.
One secret his grandmother never told him
was to put butter on a burn. A good n'anga
knows that crushed ostrich egg is the proper
remedy, and instead of a low dose of buffered
aspirin when baby has a headache, Dhliwayo
BYKRISTOPHERWALMSLEY
recommends pulverized sea shells rubbed into
a small incision on the infant's head. Grown-ups
should smoke twigs of the mufandichimuka
bush and call him in the morning.
Mutual respect between modern
and traditional healers
Nineteenth-century colonialism bred scepti¬
cism which resulted in the Witchcraft Sup¬
pression Act, which forbade traditional heal¬
ing in what is now Zimbabwe. Today, the
n 'angas at Mbare's musika and another 25,000
of them throughout the country are licensed
by the Zimbabwe National Traditional Heal¬
ers Association (ZINATHA). This associa¬
tion was established in 1980, shortly after the
Rhodesian government was replaced by a par¬
liamentary democracy, and the country
renamed itself Zimbabwe.
Since independence, ZINATHA has offered
recommendations to the government on the
acceptance and use of traditional medicine. Cur¬
rently, the association is co-operating with the
University of Zimbabwe on research into the
herbs used by its members. Mutandi Sibanda,
a spokesman at ZINATHA, estimates that 96
per cent of the population consult n'angas,
including patients from abroad and even West¬
ern medical doctors practising in Zimbabwe.
What may have disconcerted the colonists
is that n'angas offer more than health care. If
your afflictions are not in your body, but in
the courtroom, the n'anga has a cure. Some
n 'angas have had to face the courts on charges
of malpractice. Sibanda notes, however, that
since legal recognition of the herbalists under
the auspices of ZINATHA, such cases and
other allegations of quackery have decreased.
Understanding and mutual respect between
modern and traditional healers have developed
outside the courts through workshops and
information exchanges. Most significant is the
training n'angas are receiving to incorporate
HIV/Aids awareness, prevention and care activ¬
ities into their work.
"As long as we have our society," says
Sibanda, "there will be a need for the n'anga
to help with medical, social, spiritual and cul¬
tural problems."
