Living to tell the tale
BY PETER FENWICK
© Steve Schapiro. Sygma, Pans
Many people have crossed to the 'other side' and
returned with surprisingly similar stories
In the American film Heaven
Can tVa/r(1978), Warren
Beatty, above, plays a
footballer who dies
prematurely and is given a
second lease of life on earth.
* Raymond Moody, Life
after Life, Bantam Books
(38th printing, 1983).
I It is likely that for as long as man has
I been aware of the certainty of death he
has contemplated the possibility of survival.
There is nothing particularly new about the
notion that people can "die" and live to tell the
tale. Myths and legends recounting these talcs
go back well over 2,000 years. But it was not
until 1973 when the American psychiatrist Dr.
Raymond Moody collected the first contem¬
porary accounts of near death experiences
(NDEs) that it was recognized that these were
worthy of serious scientific study.::"
Studies of the NDE produced some fasci¬
nating data, and raised some interesting ques¬
tions. It is clear that these experiences are not
specific to near-death situations they also
occur as a response to extreme stress or terror
or pain, in childbirth, under anaesthesia, spon¬
taneously, and possibly also during sleep.
Moreover, not everybody who comes near
death has an NDE.
Although cross-cultural studies indicate
that NDEs have a strong cultural component,
it is unlikely that they are entirely the product
of cultural expectations, because there are many
accounts of children too young to have such
expectations who have had NDEs. If they are
dreams or hallucinations, why do so many
people dream more or less the same dream, or
have more or less the same hallucination?
The other side
No two near death experiences are identical,
but there are uncanny similarities between
them. In the majority of cases the NDE is a
profoundly emotional experience, vividly
remembered for years. Dr. Bruce Greyson, a
psychiatrist and editor of the American/o«r-
nal ofNear Death Studies, has laid out a blue¬
print of a characteristic experience, although
the features do not always occur in the same
order, and few people experience every event.
The experience often starts with feelings
of peace, joy or bliss, described as more than


ordinary happiness. If there is bodily pain, it
drops away. The out-of-body experience often
follows, the person seems to leave his or her
body, and can look down on it from some
vantage point, usually near the ceiling. They
may then enter what is usually described as a
dark tunnel, which they pass or float through
rapidly without making any physical effort.
At the end of the tunnel is a pinpoint of light
which grows larger as they approach it.
For many people the light is the most sig¬
nificant part of the experience. It is nearly
always described as white or golden, brilliant
but in spite of its brightness not dazzling.
Often the person feels drawn towards it.
Sometimes it manifests itself as a "being" of
light, an intensely emotional and positive pres¬
ence that is warm and welcoming and loving.
At some point people sense a barrier
between them and the light, sometimes a phys¬
ical barrier such as a gate or fence, sometimes
simply a feeling that this is a point beyond
which they cannot pass. They may glimpse an
idyllic pastoral scene beyond the barrier, or
see people, usually dead relatives, sometimes
beckoning to them, sometimes signalling to
them that they should go back.
The feeling that it is not yet their time to
go is a very common feature of the experience.
Sometimes people will make the decision to go
back themselves, usually because they feci their
families still need them. Sometimes they are
sent back either by the being of light or by the
relatives they have met.
More rare is the "life review", a sort of Day
ofJudgment which some people experience, in
which their past actions are reviewed. Some
have a life preview, in which they are shown
events which are to take place in their future,
and told there are tasks ahead of them which
they must go back to complete. The return
to the body is sudden and rapid, often
described as a "snapping" back into their body
as if on the end of an elastic cord.
Cultural variants
Nearly everyone who has the experience says
that through it they lose any fear of death.
Often their attitudes change in other ways. Life
often seems to have an added purpose and value
after such an experience. It may confirm reli¬
gious belief for those who previously held it
and many of those who have no particular reli¬
gious belief return believing that death is not the
end. A few people believe they have been given
The Hereafter (1938),
oil on canvas by the Belgian
painter René Magritte.
Opposite page, "The Elect",
detail of Heavenly Paradise, a
panel from Visions of the
Hereafter (c. 1500-1516) by the
Dutch painter Hieronymus
Bosch.
psychic powers such as precognition or the gift
of healing, after the experience.
The near death experience is intriguing for
two major reasons. First it is very common
some studies suggest that between a tenth and
a third of people who have had a cardiac arrest
had an NDE. This makes a prospective study
feasible. Secondly it seems to be a universal
human experience and not a culture-bound one,
although it is, as might be expected, influenced
by the particular culture in which it occurs.
In Indian experiences, for example, the pos¬
itive feelings of peace and joy which seem to be
a significant hallmark of Western experiences are
much less often reported. Out of body and
tunnel experiences are rare. Instead the subject
is taken by "messengers," and as a result of
some bureaucratic bungling, usually a case of

mistaken identity, is finally brought or pushed
back. Stigmata seem to be a quite common
phenomenon of the Indian NDE. In one
reported case, for example, fissures were seen in
the skin on the front of the knees of a man
who had had an NDE in which he reported
having been captured by ten people who cut
his legs off at the knee to prevent his escape.
Relatives or friends do not play a significant
part in Indian experiences, while well-known
figures in Hindu mythology do.
But even within Western cultures there are
differences in the NDE. The life review, for
example, is far more often reported in Amer¬
ican experiences than British ones, religious
figures tend to figure more prominently, and
the experiences have an evangelical quality
which probably reflects the more fundamen¬
talist religious culture of that society.
The NDE is almost always a positive expe¬
rience. Glimpses of Hell are rare. Is this because,
where life after death is concerned, we are all
past-masters at giving ourselves the benefit of
the doubt? Or because the stereotypical view
of heaven, with pastoral landscapes and fig¬
ures in flowing robes, is more frequently
depicted and more likely to be fixed in mem¬
ory than archetypal visions of Hell?
It has been suggested that the reason why so
few hellish experiences have been described is
that they are quickly forgotten. However, it
seems more probable that people who have bad
experiences are just as strongly affected by them
as people who have good ones, but they are
much more reluctant to talk about them. But 1
o.
perhaps the most likely explanation is that J
when an experience includes feelings of peace |
or joy, as about 80 per cent do, these are para- ®
mount and override everything else, so that
whatever else occurs is interpreted in this pos¬
itive light. Many experiences include moments
of terror and in the absence of positive emo¬
tional feelings these may colour the experience
so that it is felt as neutral or even "hellish".
The search for an explanation
Is there any scientific explanation for the
NDE? Is it nothing more than a hallucina¬
tion, a trick played by a brain disordered by
drugs, pain, lack of oxygen, or sickness? Some
experiences are clearly drug induced. Of the
other explanations which have been advanced
anoxia, hypercarbia, the release of endorphins
during pain or stress while some of these
may be involved in the NDE in some cir-
32 r
m THEUNESCO lOURIER MARCH 1998
This statue of Vaishno Devi, a
form of female energy or
"shakti", stands in the Hindu
sanctuary at Kulu, Himashal
Pradesh State (India).
cumstances, none can account for every aspect
of the experience or are applicable in every sit¬
uation in which NDEs occur.
The NDE confounds many of our assump¬
tions about how the brain works, and it is dif¬
ficult to find a rational scientific explanation
for it. Many NDEs occur during uncon¬
sciousness, when the brain is theoretically inca¬
pable of building the coherent and often com¬
plex models which people who have had NDEs
report. Moreover, memory does not function
in unconsciousness, so even if the brain was
able to make such models, they should not be
remembered. From the point of view of both
memory and model-building, it should be
quite impossible to have an NDE when brain

function is seriously compromised or the brain
is seriously damaged. And yet there are cases in
which this has happened. To explain it we have
to postulate that the brain can retain the capac¬
ity for making images in unconsciousness and
that when the memory circuits are damaged,
memory can be retained by some other means.
There is evidence, stretching back to the
first brain mapping experiments of Wilder
Penfield in the 1930s and 1940s, for the
involvement of the temporal lobes. Penfield
found that stimulation of the temporal lobes
produced sensations of leaving the body, feel¬
ings of tranquillity, hallucinations of people.
Some people reported having flashes of mem¬
ory. The right temporal lobe is primarily con¬
cerned with emotion, and the NDE is a very
emotional experience. Most people say that
the NDE is ineffable, impossible to describe
or categorize, and this suggests that it may be
arising in the right hemisphere, which is con¬
cerned more with spatial than verbal func¬
tions. The loss of spatial boundaries and deep
feelings of unity which are characteristic of
the NDE arc probably due to an alteration in
right hemisphere function.
Perception of time is often altered during
an NDE and the misordering of events in time
is yet another right-hemisphere function.
NDEs always seem to carry the feeling of
absolute reality; often they are felt to be more
real even than everyday life. This attribution of
certainty to ongoing perception is possibly
another temporal lobe function. A similar feel¬
ing of "knowing" something emotionally is
sometimes experienced by people who have a
right temporal epileptic focus.
Beyond the frontiers ofscience
Thus it seems likely that the NDE is mediated
by the temporal lobe. But this still leaves two
questions unanswered. How does such a coher¬
ent integrated experience like the NDE occur
during unconsciousness when it is impossible
to postulate an organized sequence of events in
a disordered brain? And why is it that spon¬
taneous experiences in which it seems highly
unlikely that there can be a physical or psy¬
chological mechanism at work, also sometimes
occur?
One possibility is that the NDE is a form
of mystical experience, and the brain struc¬
tures which mediate it arc probably the same
structures which mediate any mystical expe¬
rience. The nineteenth-century Canadian psy
chiatrist Richard Bucke (1837-1 902) was one of
the first Western scientists to try to define the
characteristics of the mystical experience. The
nine features he listed were: feelings of unity,
feelings of objectivity and reality; transcen¬
dence of space and time; a sense of sacredness,
deeply felt positive mood; paradoxicality
the experience is felt to be true even though it
violates Aristotelian logic; ineffability; tran¬
siency; positive change in attitude or behaviour.
The probability is that the NDE is a mys¬
tical experience, timeless and independent of
death, but part of the spectrum of normal
human experience. If wc accept this, it explains
why not everybody who is near death has one,
and why there is no common cause.
Does the NDE do anything to confirm the
continuation of personal consciousness after
death? People who have had the experience say
that it does. But to accept this we have to step
beyond the boundaries of science, which does
not accept subjective experience as evidence.
Only by trying to establish a new science, which
does attempt to explore and to validate human
subjective experience can we decide whether
there is in fact meaning behind the mechanism
of the NDE and perhaps even allow for the
continuation of personal consciousness.
The world of the hereafter is evoked in two books published (in French) in the
Unesco Collection of Representative Works. One, Gan Bao's In Search of Spirits
(Sou shenji; published by Gallimard, Paris, 1992) comes from ancient China; the
other, Han Mahlsook's The Melodious Song of Souls (Arumdaun Yongga;
published by L'Harmattan/UNESco Publishing, Paris, 1995) is from modern
Korea. Although very different in tone, both works are a hymn to life and love in
which the dead are closely linked to the everyday experience of the living.
