Africa: the breath of life
BY NIMROD BENA DJANGRANG
In African tradition, the material and spiritual worlds
are contiguous
At some time or other, every school-
child in French-speaking Africa has
recited this poem:
Listen more to
Things than to people
The voice ofFire can be heard,
Listen to the Voice of Water
Listen in the Wind
To the sobbing bushes:
It is the Breath of the Dead Ancestors,
Who have not departed
Who are not beneath the Earth
Who are not dead.
The Senegalese poet Birago Diop (1906-
1989) called this poem Breaths, to describe a
person's space. All beings everywhere overflow
the place where they are, surpass their specific
location, have more to them than their body.
Only a single side of a person is ever visible,
while the other remains invisible. This division
also explains the importance of the shadow
that a person bears, a shadow or nether side of
the body. Looked at in this way, the beyond
is less a metaphysical notion than something
rooted in tangible reality, its soul, energy and
Breath.
Diop's poem, like a well-sung song, is an
invitation to understand the "Breaths" that
invigorate "things": fire, water, wind, grass,
bushes, huts, a woman's breasts, forests. It is a
list of everyday things, an inventory of the
rural African's environment. One criticism that
can be made of Diop is that his use of capital let¬
ters for Fire, Voice, Ancestors and Earth is inap¬
propriate. It is perfectly natural for the spirit of
the dead or the gods to find embodiment in
these phenomena. In the African tradition, the
gods are usually approachable.
At home with the gods
The gods arc the breath of the universe. African
religions could be described as an attempt to
define nature in terms of vital force and har¬
mony. This is why the word animism is often
used to describe them. The poet invites us to
listen to the "Voice of Fire", the "Voice of
Water" or the "sobbing bushes" because they
are the crucible of energy, the place where the
world's harmony prevails.
Into the intangible content of "breath"
comes a fragment of the cosmic force which
underpins the natural equilibrium. In West,
Central, Eastern and Southern Africa, human
beings are regarded as an integral part of nature.
The idea of dominating or using nature does
not exist. Religion is about increasing the cos¬
mic energy of which human beings arc a con¬
stituent part. Lack of respect for nature is seen
Left, carved mythological
figures adorn the door of a
Dogon granary (Mali).

as an energy failure or breakdown. There is no
such thing as sin or blame. Sacrifices are
intended to repair the field of living forces.
Nobody is exempt from this system. In
the voodoo religions of the Gulf of Benin, a
priest-medium who can no longer attend to
the replenishment of energy because of illness
or old age is simply done away with, because
his incapacity imperils nature and society. It is
possible for the flame of the world to be extin¬
guished, but this must not be allowed: the
flame must burn for ever.
As we noted earlier, the "flame", "breath"
or natural energy is not something "beyond"
the world, but rather the "secret" of the world,
its most intimate part. Elsewhere, Diop writes
that "Those who are dead have never
A village among the sand
dunes in the region of Gao
(Mali). departed/They are in the Shadow which lights
up/And in the shadow which deepens/They
are in the tree that rustles. . . /They are in the
Hut, they are in the Crowd/The dead are not
dead". In a sense, the visible world seems only
to connect with its invisible counterpart, so
that the dividing line between life and death is
erased. The "visible" must keep watch over the
"invisible", and the "body" over "breath".
So there arc only the living, visible or invis¬
ible. Life is so constituted that the visible owe
gratitude and goodwill to the invisible. This is
why prayers to the gods and the spirits, and
the sacrifices owed to them, arc made with
great discretion; there is no need for altars or
monumental temples. Ritual and other reli¬
gious practices are performed at home, with

everyday food grain that has just been har¬
vested and water that is sprinkled on the dry
ground as a libation before people drink.
Worshipping the dead
Looking more closely at the poem "Breath ",
we can see that it contains intimations of the
immortality of the soul. Or at least this is
hinted at. We usually think of breath as being
as inconsistent as the soul, which wc imagine as
something indeterminate, hardly even air, "vir¬
tual nothingness", as the French philosopher
Vladimir Jankclcvitch called it. This "virtual
nothingness" distinguishes the immaterial
nature of the soul from absolute nothingness
and denotes a soul which vegetates, thereby
surviving the disturbances caused by the com¬
ing of death.
These moments when the soul "vegetates"
outside life are not a form of purgatory. Exiled
between heaven and earth, the soul cannot take
refuge in God, who is not interested. The leg¬
ends of the Dogon people of Mali tell how
God went away after creating the world, never
to return. The Xhosa of South Africa regard
God as not only inaccessible but unconcerned
about human beings, who have to fend for
themselves from the moment of their creation.
Hence the malicious urges of the souls exiled
between heaven and earth. If they make a baby,
a hunter or a confused rich man ill, it is because
they are asking to come back to life. This hap¬
pens when they become someone's "sponsor"
or "ancestor" in other words the surplus
energy of the living.
This is how people tune in to the strength,
the breath of the universe, which is "physi¬
cally" speaking an "organ" wafting air that is
cool, or at least damp. In many African lan¬
guages, the same term is used to designate the
spirit, the act of breathing and the faculty of
thought. The dead too want to "breathe".
Their transition from the other side of life is
evidence of what they were: like efficient
"functionaries" they have fulfilled their oblig¬
ations to life. Thus, if they want to become liv¬
ing creatures again, in other words ancestors,
altars and sacrifices must be made for them,
followed by regular, permanent rituals.
Sacrifice renews the vital force of the dead,
restoring balance to the world in general. "The
dead are thirsty", say Dogon "initiates". The
living are called upon to nourish the dead. In
so doing, they prevent the dead from exhaust¬
ing their energy, which in this instance is
described as "thirst". This "thirst" disturbs
families which have not yet built altars to hon-
"In Africa, human beings are a
constituent part of cosmic
energy". Below, the Masai
Mara National Reserve, Kenya.

our their dead. Failure to do this puts the dead
in a delicate position and the living do not
fare much better. Uneasiness and tension build
up in such families, which are destined to suf¬
fer illness or accidents.
At this point, a mediator appears in the
shape of the village soothsayer or sorcerer. He
tells them that ancestor worship is their way to
salvation. The ancestors must be brought back
to life by "breathing" into them the energy
contained in the blood and food that are indis¬
pensable to the living. For as long as the dead
remain unhonoured, they will always be
troublemakers who disturb the peace of the
living. In order for them to become acclima¬
tized, they must be allowed to "leave death
behind". There is a "no-man's-land" that is
beyond life and just short of death. Removing
them from this limbo is the only way to com¬
pletely restore them to the status of the living.
As the French ethnographer Marcel Gri-
aule noted, African religious thought is a
hymn of praise to the restorative powers of
water. Water is the breath and the rich soil in
which something can take root and give birth

to all aspects of life. Thinking about an after¬
life is the act by which the living and the dead
drink living water from the same gourd.
Entrance door to a fortified
farmhouse, or tata, of the
Somba people (Benin).
Outside the house, protective
conical altars, trophies and
fetishes are used for sacrifices
to the gods and ancestors.
A 19th-century bronze
Dogon sculpture of an
ancestral couple (Mali).
