^The right to know BY NICHOLAS A. ASHFORD
What are the legal and ethical responsi¬
bilities of industrial enterprises when
communities and workers arc at risk from the
sudden and accidental releases of toxic and/or
radioactive substances into the atmosphere?
Well-known examples of such incidents
occurred at Seveso (Italy) in 1973, at Bhopal in
India in 1984, at the Three Mile Island (Penn¬
sylvania) nuclear power plant in 1 979, at Cher¬
nobyl in Ukraine in 1985, off Alaska in 1989
and the French coast in 1978 due to oil spills
from the supertankers Exxon Valdez and
Amoco Cadiz, as well as a large number of
chemical production and petroleum refining
catastrophes.
Such events sometimes engender legislative
responses. The passage of the U.S. Emergency
Planning and Community Right-to-Know
Act (1986) and the so-called first and second
Seveso Directives of the European Union
(1982) are examples. In the United States, the
Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 require
increased attention to the risks of sudden and
accidental releases, placing obligations on both
government and on industrial firms.
Democratic risk management
Right-to-know, the mandatory sharing of
information between management, workers,
and the community, embodies a democrati¬
zation of risk management decisions.
Early right-to-know legislation in the

United States and elsewhere addressed workers'
and communities' right to know scientific
information about the ingredients in chemicals
and materials used in production, waste con¬
tent, actual chemical releases to the environ¬
ment, and information about exposure to grad¬
ual, expected pollution. But technological
information about potential system failures,
unexpected chemical reactions and releases, and
ameliorative control technology is also needed,
and here, right-to-know legislation is more
recent and less adequate. While risk manage¬
ment plans requiring "worst case scenarios" to
be explored by firms are increasingly common,
obligations to identify superior, inherently
safer technologies are notably absent. In addi¬
tion, much of the important information is
held closely by industrial firms and is not
shared with either workers or the community.
The relevant rights and obligations under
right-to-know fall into three categories.
*" The duty to generate and/or retain infor¬
mation, i.e. a firm's obligation to compile and



The public's right to be informed about risks of
industrial accidents and man-made catastrophes is still
far from fully recognized
retain a record of certain facility-based events
such as near misses or system failures.
*" The right ofaccess (and the corresponding
duty to disclose upon request), i.e. the right of
a worker, union, community member or
agency to request information and access to
information held by a manufacturer or
employer.
*" The duty to inform, i.e. the firm's obligation
to disclose, without request, information
needed by government, workers, and com¬
munities to understand the potential risks of
sudden and accidental releases; to assess the
adequacy of in-placc technology and human
resources that can prevent, minimize or address
Alaska (U.S.A.), May 1989: the tne consequences of those risks; and to iden-
battle against the oil slick tify the technological options that could have
discharged after the . . . .
supertanker Exxon Valdez ran been adopted but were not.
aground.
Conflict analysis
The law establishes legal rights and provides
remedies to correct their violation. But it also
recognizes that conflicts of legitimate interests,
conflicts of legal duties, and differences in per¬
ception of what is right or wrong, fair or unfair,
require an appropriate balancing in the fash¬
ioning of remedies. Indeed, there are both legal
Hydraulic engineering class in
a Chinese university.

Chemical spillage training
(Malaysia).
iv remedies (usually of statutory origin) and equi¬
table remedies that give great discretionary
power to the courts or adjudicating institu¬
tions. In examining questions of conflict, the
law views behaviour in the context of relation¬
ships, and will sometimes find a duty when
none was intended by original legal arrange¬
ments, because it was reasonable that workers
or the community expected certain behaviour
on the part of an industrial enterprise.
The law does not, however, always serve
the ethical interests of society so nobly. Leg¬
islation and legal institutions can be compro¬
mised by powerful special interests. In addi¬
tion, if there is a lack of societal consensus or
interest about a moral issue, the law may cither
not address that issue or fail to give helpful
guidance concerning the boundaries of fair or
equitable behaviour. Thus, it is important to
engage in both a legal and ethical enquiry con¬
cerning human and institutional behaviour.
16
In the context of the risk management of
low probability, high catastrophic events, legal
and ethical norms are in a state of consider¬
able flux. Conflicts of interest and conflicts of
duty (for example, for the corporate or gov¬
ernment official in charge of protecting the
community and workers) abound. Just how
much should workers and the community be
told? Given the arguable scientific uncertainty
of constructing worst-case scenarios for sud¬
den and accidental releases, questions of what
risk communication activities and preventive
actions to take or not to take may reflect dif¬
ferences in perceptions of fairness and
risk-averscness. In possible contrast, a duty
on the part of industrial firms to identify and
implement superior, inherently safer tech¬
nology that would both reduce the risks of
sudden and accidental releases and bestow cost
savings on the firms themselves, would seem
to be morally irrefutable.

Students in Zanzibar are
taught how to dispose of
agricultural chemicals as part
of a Netherlands Council of
World Development project.
Internal conflicts among the duties of var¬
ious stakeholders (firm and government offi¬
cials, workers, community residents) can lead
to psychological distress and sometimes to
unethical behaviour. Community residents
may feel torn between a duty to be well
informed (so as to anticipate and respond
appropriately to danger) and a duty to main¬
tain their own peace of mind (which is con¬
ducive to rational thought) and present a calm
exterior for the benefit of their families.
Environmental and public health profes¬
sionals have experienced conflicts between their



duties to prevent panic in the community and
to inform the public of potential danger, as
well as between the duties associated with their
roles as scientists, wage earners, public servants
and employees of a particular branch of gov¬
ernment. Other individuals who work for
governmental agencies have experienced con¬
flicts as a result of their multiple roles as pro¬
moters and regulators of a particular industry,
such as nuclear energy.
Conflicts arise from the relative significance
of "subjective" versus "objective" informa¬
tion and from the nature and degree of uncer¬
tainty, error, and/or risk that is tolerable.
Community residents, workers, and agency
professionals may disagree about priorities:
residents and workers worry about experts'
ability to assess and control risk, while
"experts" fret about citizens' and workers'
"unreasonable demands" for certainty. All the
members of a group will not necessarily share
the same views on these matters. Conflicts
occur between those trained and socialized in
a technical field and those who identify more
closely with humanistic traditions.
Anxiety and stress affect key figures who
are faced with unprecedented situations, scien¬
tific uncertainty, and a need to make decisions
quickly. Since the catastrophic incidents men¬
tioned above, professionals have acquired expe¬
rience and received specialized training. Never¬
theless, in the political controversies that
develop and the continuing scientific uncer¬
tainty surrounding sudden and accidental
releases of toxic substances, government officials
and professionals still find their personal moral
integrity threatened. Workers or residents of
communities where a dramatic accident has
recently occurred, arc generally not well pre¬
pared to cope and can be expected to respond
emotionally and with confusion. They need
to be treated in a non-patronizing way like any
other victims of natural disasters, with under¬
standing, patience and counselling.
As risks become more uncertain and seri¬
ous, the case for fuller partnerships between
industrial firms and their workers or commu¬
nities concerning risk management options
becomes stronger and more ethically imperative.
Shared decision making
Participation by members of the affected com¬
munities is an essential element in construct¬
ing ethically-sound risk management deci¬
sions. This can be facilitated in a number of
ways, notably including the utilization of
advisory panels.
A variety of possible technical and legal
interventions is available, from minor to major
changes to plant and production, from train¬
ing existing personnel to hiring new profes¬
sionals, from adopting specific legal require¬
ments to suggesting administrative processes.
Both new laws and institutions and informal
ad hoc mechanisms are needed to involve the
affected public and other key actors more fully
in risk management involving sudden and acci¬
dental releases of toxic and radioactive sub¬
stances. In general, the earlier that people are
involved, the more effectively adverse effects
and loss of trust arc likely to be avoided or
minimized. Firms, government, communities
and workers have begun to explore ways to
address the problems. Law provides little
structure at this time, but the ethical and moral
imperatives remain.
