China: the full treatment BYTINGHOR
Chinese doctors see illness as triggered by unbalanced relations between the organs and treat
the body as a whole rather than its constituent parts
In a Chinese hospital,
surgery is performed under
local anaesthetic induced by
acupuncture.
Doctors in modern Chinese hospitals
wear ties and white coats and look very
much like their Western counterparts. How¬
ever, the similarity stops there.
At the beginning of a consultation, a doc¬
tor takes your pulse in a special way, with
three fingers, and then carefully examines your
tongue. He will use imagery to describe his
diagnosis. "The wind and the cold have
attacked your lungs," he might say.
The medicines used are mostly extracted
from plants, but animal and mineral sub¬
stances are also prescribed. In this particular
case the purpose of the pharmaceutics will be
to "chase away the wind and the cold and add
some earth to produce gold."
In other cases, the doctor may order an
acupuncture session, or the application of burn¬
ing "sticks" of medicinal herbs (moxa treat¬
ment), or else Chinese massage to "unblock
the meridians". Other remedies include suction
cups, plasters and wires under the skin.
The notion ofbalance
Chinese medicine is as old as Chinese civiliza¬
tion itself but it was only established as a for¬
mal doctrine in the third century B.C. Its the¬
oretical basis, which has never changed since

then, springs from the Taoist principles of
yin and yang, the five movements, and qi.
Taoists use these terms to describe natural
phenomena. Thus day îsyang and night is yin.
The two are intertwined and blend to produce
a complete day. The whole universe works on
the same principle. When yin and yang are in
harmony, we feel well. When they are not, wc
feel ill. When they are separated, death ensues.
The aim of Chinese medicine is to restore
abalance, to harmonizeyin and yang through
the "five movements" represented by nature's
five most common elements, wood, fire, earth,
metal and water. Taoists have studied the rela¬
tionships between the five and devised a sys¬
tem of references enabling them to understand
the world, including all aspects of life.
A map of the body
In accordance with this system, doctors have
divided the body up into five kinds of func¬
tions, each represented by an "organ". Physi¬
ologically speaking, each function is the basis
of another one and is under the control of a
third. The lung, for example, is supported by
the spleen and is controlled by the liver. Illness
occurs when these links are disturbed. If the
spleen does not give the lung sufficient sup¬
port, the lung becomes diseased. Hence the
spleen has to be stimulated so it supports the
lung properly again, making treatment more
effective. This is why, in the example men¬
tioned above, the doctors decided to "add
earth (the spleen) to produce gold (the lung)."
But how do you "add earth" ? The answer is
through qi, one of Taoism's most metaphysical
rthe UNESCO Courier February 199«
Above, a country doctor
takes a patient's pulse in
Sichuan (China).
Qj (air or breath), one of the
basic concepts of Chinese
medicine, informs the doctor
via the pulse about the state of
each physical organ. Right, a
17th-century Chinese
engraving.
concepts. In modern Chinese, the word means
"air", but Taoists use it to explain particular nat¬
ural or social tendencies. To Chinese doctors, it
means, broadly speaking, a function. Certain
plants or animal or mineral products have the
ability to improve the qi of certain organs. Qi
also tells the doctor, through the pulse, the state
of each organ (depending on whether the pulse
is strong, weak, fluid, delicate, noisy, etc.). The
appearance of the tongue is also qi "speaking" to
the doctor. And it is qi which travels around all
the body's "meridians".
Meridians pass right through the entire
body and connect the inner organs to the sur¬
face. There are fourteen main ones, with 360
points of contact with the skin from inside the
body. By stimulating the meridians, e.g. with
needles, or with "burning" moxa herbs or by
massaging the contact points, qi can be
adjusted to re-establish the balance of the
body's yin and yang.
All imbalances are due to a "change of cli¬
mate" brought about either by one of the six
"external causes" (wind, cold, heat, humid¬
ity, drought and fire) or by one of the six
"internal" ones (happiness, anger, sadness, anx¬
iety, obsession and terror). There arc other
causes which do not fit into either category,
such as unhealthy life-styles or accidents.

Chinese doctors do not try to make an in-
depth diagnosis of a part of the body. They
make an overall prognosis and treat the patient
as a whole. They do not treat a specific com¬
plaint, such as an ulcer, but the entire body.
The biological mechanism involved in such
therapy has not been clearly established. Some
think doctors encourage patients to cure them¬
selves. Others believe the immuno-defence sys¬
tem is activated. Be that as it may, the strategy
of helping "good" qi to chase away "bad" qi
avoids aggression against the body and mini¬
mizes side-effects, and it is this that has helped
to make Chinese medicine popular in the West.
Question marks
Is it scientific? "Cold" and "wind" cannot be
seen under a microscope, and there is no scien¬
tific way of measuring qi. Thus, although
researchers have found "traces" of meridians in
the laboratory, Western doctors do not consider
Chinese medicine as being scientific. On the
other hand, some Chinese doctors claim that
modern methods of scientific investigation arc
still too limited and rudimentary to detect the
basic principles applied in Chinese medicine.
But the aim of medicine is not the same as the
The 5 "movements" or most
common material elements in
nature: wood, fire, earth,
metal and water. Their balance
keeps the body in good health.
A model used to teach
acupuncture in China.
The y/n/yangsymbol
depicted in the form of fish.
The interaction of these two
complementary principles of
Chinese philosophy
is thought to maintain the
harmony of the universe and
the human body.
aim of science. Therapy is first and foremost
the art of healing. If something works, you do
not need to know the reason why.
Is it better than other systems of medi¬
cine? Like them, it is more effective in some
instances than others. Its global approach helps
in treating psychosomatic illnesses and chronic
or functional diseases, for example. Acupunc¬
ture works with sporting injuries. But Chinese
medicine is not so good when it comes to
emergencies or acute conditions. It is not magic
or universal it is not a panacea, in fact.
What of orthodoxy? The apparent ortho¬
doxy of natural medicines is an illusion of
which we should be wary. In Chinese medicine,
as in other areas, there are fashions, fads and
trends. A search for traditional remedies at all
costs leads to bigotry and superstition. The
spirit of the ancient wisdom should certainly
be preserved, but the world is a changing place.
When practised outside China, Chinese med¬
icine encounters new circumstances, new aims
and a different range of drugs. Even in China,
people from the north are not treated med¬
ically in the same way as people from the
south. The best way to grasp the most subtle,
traditional and authentic aspects of Chinese
medicine is to understand that its essence is
its ability to adapt.
