An economy of sharing
BY MARIE ROUE
There is no place
for selfish
individualism in
nomadic hunter-
gatherer societies
Bushmen in the Kalahari
Desert (Botswana).
| There are two radically different ways
I for members of a society to satisfy all
their needs: by producing a lot, as in Western
societies, or by not wanting a lot, as in those
the American anthropologist Marshall Sahlins
has called "Zen" societies. The "Zen" way cho¬
sen by hunter-gatherer societies is to stop pro¬
ducing food as soon as they consider that the
quantity in hand has reached a level sufficient
for their needs.
It has been shown, and statistically con¬
firmed, that, contrary to a widespread mis¬
conception, population groups who live by
hunting, fishing and gathering do not live in
utter privation, nor are they constantly in
search of permanently inadequate food. On
the contrary, they may be said to have created
"the first affluent society", spending only a
few hours a day on meeting their material
needs and keeping the rest of their time free for
recreational and social activities. It is only
observers who are unaware of these people's
cultural values who find their few plain pos
sessions so inadequate. Nomads, for instance,
set particular store by light, portable objects,
but this does not make them poor. One
observer has testified that "their extremely
limited material possessions relieve them of
all cares with regard to daily necessities and
permit them to enjoy life."
Sharing and solidarity
However, not all hunter-gatherers live in an
earthly paradise where they need only to stoop
to pick fruit and vegetables and where game
animals give themselves up voluntarily. There are
some groups or families within these societies
who can never manage, or can manage only at
certain times, to meet all their needs, while any
group is bound at times to include individuals
who are too sick, too young or too old to take
part in productive activities, and disaster can
sometimes befall the harvest or the hunt. It is
in such circumstances that the sharing of
resources becomes especially important.
What is the point of sharing? Some

Inuits hunting for seal in
Greenland.
observers claim that it fulfils the same func¬
tion that of risk limitation in "traditional"
societies as insurance policies do in Western
societies. By sharing a surplus that in any case
could not be consumed in the immediate
future, individuals or families are ensuring
that other members of the group will do the
same for them when the time comes. Other
observers, however, are not entirely satisfied
with this materialist explanation, since it pre¬
supposes an egalitarian, turn-and-turn-about
system, when in fact that is far from being
the case, and it is rare for those who are never
on the giving end to be excluded from the
benefits of sharing. Why, in that case, do the
Every summer the Cree Indians
of Chisasibi (Quebec, Canada)
gather on the site of their
former village. Below, meals
are prepared jointly and
served to everyone present.
ablest hunters who, as everyone knows, pro¬
duce more than they can consume, continue to
hunt large animals when nearly all the meat
will be consumed by people other than their
own kith and kin? For prestige and the atten¬
dant social advantages, to qualify as a hus¬
band, a son-in-law, a partner in some under¬
taking or simply an envied neighbour these
are some of the possible reasons.
One good turn
deserves another
Beyond these reasons of self-interest, how¬
ever, underlying the good hunters' generosity
is a whole outlook that is intolerant of selfish
individualism. In the past, Western mission¬
aries and travellers often misinterpreted atti¬
tudes quite unlike those that prevailed in the
villages where they themselves grew up. Seeing
how Eskimos and Bushmen feasted when
food was abundant, so that sometimes there
was nothing left over for lean times to come,
they reproached them for their lack of fore¬
sight and their gluttony. But in fact feasting is
another way of redistributing to the com¬
munity as a whole the foodstuffs brought
back by its more fortunate members, thus
strengthening the social fabric.
There arc also rules of sharing whereby
"one good turn deserves another" through¬
out life, as with the Arviligjuarmiut Inuits
when they share a seal they have killed as a
team working together. Each member of the
E unesco Rubier January 199s

team always receives the same part of the beast
and indeed takes his name from it "my
shoulder", "my head", and so on.
Some of the peoples living in the Arctic
and sub-Arctic regions believe that the ani¬
mals caught by a hunter have given themselves
to him, so it is not surprising, for example,
that among the Cree Indians of Quebec the
hunter's generosity to his companions in the
hunt should match that of his quarry. If the
favour was not returned, the cycle would be
broken and the animals would not let them¬
selves be caught. Similarly, when a feast is given
everything must go, a custom that astonished
those who first observed the Algonquins' way
of life and is still maintained today. When the
whole village visitors included is invited
to a feast, guests will find a plastic bag by the
side of their plates, an invitation to them to
take away anything left over when they have
eaten enough, to be shared with those who
could not be present.
Many peoples the Mbuti of the former
Zaire, the Canadian Cree and Inuit, the Batck
of Malaysia and the Nayaka of southern India,
to name but a few are ignorant of the West¬
ern dichotomy between nature and nurture. In
many cases, they see their relationship with
the natural world of animals, plants and places
A group of Danis, a people
living in Bauern Valley, western
New Guinea (Irian Jaya),
prepare a meal. Their economy
is based on farming, food-
gathering in the forest, fishing
and hunting.
from which they receive gifts as a genuine
child-parent relationship. They therefore
regard sharing nature giving to humans or
humans giving to one another as an essential
part of their lives, expressing an outlook on
the world that could be described, in Nurit
Bird-David's words, as a "cosmic economy
of sharing".
A Bedouin encampment
In Iraq.
