Don is from Sri Lanka. I met him in the
Greek port of Piraeus.A victim of his coun-
t ry ’s civil wa r , his wife and two of his three
children were killed when someone blew up the
bus they were on.To support his surviving child,
Don decided to go to sea.In Madras,he embar-
ked on a freighter bound for Canada.
When the ship called at Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Don checked the time it was due to
leave before going ashore. But when he came
back earlier than the scheduled embarkation
time, the ship was gone. He had no identity
p a p e rs—the captain had confis c ated them
when he signed up—and no money. He was
taken in at a seamen’s hostel where he mana-
ged to find legal assistance.
To prove he was telling the truth, Don
wrote a long, detailed report on the ship’s cargo
and on events that had occurred during the
voyage and gave the names of the rest of the
crew.The document was sent to the Center for
Seamen’s Rights in New York, where it was
checked and certified as accurat e . T h e
Canadian agents of the ship’s Greek owner
were ordered to buy Don a plane ticket home,
but they refused to pay him his back wages.
Don, who still works at sea despite his
ordeal, is a modern-day galley slave—exploi-
ted, badly paid or not paid at all—recruited by
a front company to crew dilapidated ships
often flying a flag of convenience.
One-third of the world’s 37,000 cargo ships
fly such flags.There is no link between the shi-
powner and the country of registration. All the
owner has to do is sign up at a consulate anyw-
here in the world and pay. According to one
London University transport economist,“com-
panies register their ships under these flags so
as to maximize profits and minimize costs by
avoiding economic regulations and require-
ments which apply to vessels registered in their
own countries.”
They are spoiled for choice—twenty-seven
countries offer the facility, which is purely a
matter of money. Registering a ship in Cyprus
is 65 per cent cheaper than in Greece and even
less expensive if the country chosen is a tax
haven like Panama, Bermuda or Gibraltar.
Such flags mean there are no rules on hiring
practices or working conditions to follow. The
crews have no trade union protection or social
security benefits. In fact, they have no rights at
all.
On the dockside in Piraeus, seamen from
the Philippines, Malaysia, Ghana and Chile all
had grim tales to tell. One man who refused to
clean the ship’s toilets was tethered to the mast
by a 1.5-metre chain for two days without
water on the equator, and then locked in his
cabin. Another told how his ship ran out of
food for the last eight days of its voyage and the
crew survived by catching a shark.Another sea-
man recalled how his ship’s freezers, full of
Senegalese shrimps, broke down and the crew
had to eat their rotting contents day after day.
Yet thousands compete for such jobs, ready
to pay anything from $300 to $1,000 to be
taken on, after buying a passport, seaman’s
papers and sometimes an officer’s or engineer’s
certificate, all of them available on the quiet at
ports from Piraeus to Lagos. Some captains
confiscate the crew’s papers as soon as they
embark, reducing them to slaves.
International organizations concerned with
these issues have their work cut out.After more
than a decade of negotiations, the United
N ations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD) drafted an interna-
tional ship regi s t r ation agreement in 1986
aimed at preventing shipow n e rs
from dodging their responsibilities
by vanishing into thin air whenever
a problem arises.Twelve years later,
it is still not in force because fewer
than forty countries have ratified it.
A code of conduct has been appro-
ved by fif t y - s e ven countries bu t
rejected by those which offer flags
of convenience.
In 1996 the Intern at i o n a l
Labour Organisation adopted
seven new recommendations on the
hiring of seamen and their pay,
hours and working conditions. The
countries that ratify them agree to
carry out inspections and publish
Recruited by unscrupulous shipowners to sail in rust buckets flying
flags of convenience, many sailors leave their rights ashore.

On the waterfront in the Fre n c h
port of Le Havre, seamen wait to
be hire d .
the results. But inspectors are few and far bet-
ween.
Owners of ships that fly flags of convenien-
ce are under no legal obligation to keep their
vessels in good repair or look after their crews.
Says Michael Roussos, a Greek Jesuit who
helps stranded sailors in Piraeus: “If only ships
could weep!” ■
France Bequette
