E D I TO R I A L
December 1998 - The UNESCO Courier 9
■
D rugs destroy, c o rrupt and kill.They must not be fought with half-hearted or short -
term measures.We need to wage war on them—one of the very few wars we must all
be invo l ved in. But let’s be clear about the enemy. I t ’s essential to strike at the sources
of drugs, and therefore the traffickers. But it’s even more important to attack the causes
of demand,and here too we must aim at the right target.
At the dawn of the twe n t y - first century, the excessive use of dru g s , encouraged by
powerful—and abominable—economic interests,cannot be regarded simply as an indi-
vidual problem, as an unfort u n ate encounter between a person and a toxic substance.We
cannot ignore the personal aspect, but the use of drugs has grown into a social phenome-
non which is destabilizing the economic, political and cultural relationships of societies.
O ver and above personal responsibility, societies must act to promote a way of life that ru l e s
out drug abuse.
The drug addicts are not the guilty ones. We need to give them care and assistance
before they tear their families apart and destroy their own live s.The main enemies are the
causes of the demand for dru g s — m a r gi n a l i z at i o n ,e x c l u s i o n , extreme pove rty or revulsion
from excess.
The backcloth to these trends is the moral crisis caused by the disappearance of tra-
ditional landmarks from even the most isolated societies.This vacuum makes some people
feel they are living in a meaningless world and drives others to think only about their own
p e rsonal success and achieve m e n t s.To fight the demand for dru g s , we have to go to the root
of the problem and gi ve life a purpose by promoting social activities which respect the env i-
ronment and the values of tradition and culture,whether they be of a religious, personal
or some other nature.We must offer young people not just the means to live but a reason
to do so.
Preventive education can play a very important part here as long as it is formative as
well as informative. Only then can it become an important tool in building and streng-
thening character, especially of young people,by encouraging new ways of thinking and
new lines of conduct.It should open doors which lead to new horizons,whether they be
ideological, cultural or spiritual,or sporting , technical and artistic.
This first phase of local and national action goes with specific political steps that cost
m o n e y, which should be found by earmarking a share of gross national product. C h a ri t i e s
can temporarily tide things over but cannot provide permanent solutions.We must build
d e t ox i fic ation centres which will also provide professional training, places where dru g
dependence can gradually be reduced.We must also take legal steps to fight drug traffic-
k e rs , control narcotics production and halt money-launderi n g, as well as seeing that dru g
addicts can get free treatment.
But measures taken at local and national level can only really be effective if they are part
of a coherent and comprehensive international programme.To draw up and implement
such a progr a m m e ,g ove rn m e n t s ,i n t e rn ational institutions, n o n - g ove rnmental organiza-
tions (NGOs), e x p e rt s , and friends and relat i ves of addicts must all work together. D e t e r-
mined and unanimous action by the whole society is essential to confront this growing
t h r e at to the security and dignity of new generat i o n s. It calls, in fa c t , for a new planet-wide
moral contract. ■
Wa r
on d r u g s
Federico Mayor
Societies must
act to promote a
way of life that
rules out drug
abuse… We must
offer young
people not just
the means to live
but a reason to
do so.
