Each of us is
responsible for
replacing the
logic of force
with the logic of
reason and
respect for the
views of others
E D I TO R I A L
October 1998 - The UNESCO Courier 9
O n the threshold of a new millennium,the issue of responsibility is taking on a new
dimension.Humankind is still beset by war and violence.It also faces new global
c h a l l e n g e s.The impact of human activity on our planet is so gr e at that for the firs t
time in recorded history, we may be approaching the point of no return .The widening
asymmetry within and between countries,environmental destruction and flourishing arms
sales raise doubts about many of civilizat i o n ’s values and standards. H ow can we handle
new global threats? History shows that no situation is hopeless if risks are identified early
enough.
The conflicts that have arisen since the end of the Cold War have erupted not as a
consequence of new freedoms but in reaction to earlier oppression or repression.S u s p i c i o n ,
intolerance and hatred built up over decades,even centuries. But alongside the armed strife
of recent ye a rs , humankind has begun to demonstrate a new skill in resolving confli c t s.
M o z a m b i q u e , El Salva d o r , the Philippines, the changes in South A f rica that would have
been inconceivable just a few years ago, the efforts for peace in the Middle East and, finally,
the beginnings of a settlement in Northern Ireland are all examples proving that conflict is
not inevitable. They demonstrate that breakthroughs to peace can be made by dialogue,
mediation,negotiation and imagination—not force.
T h at is why the transition from a culture of war to a culture of peace is the foremost
challenge as the twentieth century draws to a close.To succeed we—all of us,day in and day
out—must not only do away with approaches based on force and imposition, but profoundly
change cultural attitudes and daily behaviour.
We must use imagination and resolution to go to the roots of world problems and nip
conflicts in the bud or,better still,prevent them.Learning to live together means daring to
s h a r e ,d a ring to do things differently, d a ring to dream of a better, s a f e r , more just and humane
world.It also means having the resolve and courage to transform our dreams into reality.
Here I wish to underline the pivotal role of education in promoting a culture of peace.B y
education,I mean not only formal instruction in schools but also informal training within a
whole range of cultural institutions, including in the ve ry first place the family and the media.
Who will be responsible for changing the culture of war into a culture of peace?
Governments,parliaments,intergovernmental organizations,we might reply.The answer is
correct, but it is not the only one.The transformation cannot be achieved without the active
i nvo l vement of those with financial resources and influ e n c e .This answer would also be tru e ,
though only partly so. For in the final analysis, replacing the logic of force and confrontat i o n
with the logic of reason and respect for the views of others is a responsibility that belongs to
all nations and all citizens, to each of us no matter how gr e at or small the scope of our
individual responsibility.The challenge of promoting a culture of peace is so broad and far-
reaching that it can only be accomplished if it becomes a pri o rity for the entire United
Nations system.The dream of achieving a world without strife and violence is what led the
f o u n d e rs of UN E S C O to make saving future generations from the scourge of war the
organization’s prime goal.
The Mahatma Gandhi said, “In the midst of darkness, light preva i l s.” It is that light
which is spread by the democratic values enshrined in UN E S C O’s constitution: j u s t i c e ,f r e e d o m ,
equality and solidarity. n
A universal
responsability
Federico Mayor
