Alternatives to jail
BY JOSÉ LUIS DE LA CUESTA ARZAMEN DI
The application of non-custodial
sentences should be encouraged
wherever possible
Despite efforts to improve the quality
of inmates' lives, in most countries
prison is still by and large a place of exclusion
and segregation, synonymous with injustice
and pointless suffering. The steadily rising
prison population is straining the system's
capacity to breaking point and hindering the
application of more ambitious penal policies
that look further than the immediate prob¬
lems of imprisonment and overcrowding. Secu¬
rity requirements are so pressing in over¬
crowded prisons that the authorities do little
to create effective rehabilitation and social rein¬
tegration programmes (although such pro¬
grammes do exist). Add drug abuse in prison
and its associated problems Aids being the
most serious and the control of prison gangs
over inmates, and the picture looks grim indeed.
The prison system's difficulties in achiev¬
ing objectives such as rehabilitation and social
reintegration are not exactly new. Deprivation
of freedom, which was institutionalized in
the European judicial system during the late
eighteenth century, was intended as a more
rational and humane response to criminal acts
than the punishments that had previously
been meted out. But its framework of appli¬
cation prison soon proved incapable of
solving the individual and social conflicts that
crime brings about or reveals. Since then,
prison as an institution has always been in cri¬
sis. Its legitimacy has been called into ques¬
tion, and penologists have sought new ways of
improving the situation and, at the same time,
IP THE UNESCO (3)URIER |UNEI<>98
Two social rehabilitation programmes for young offenders in Los Angeles, California (U.S.A.).
Above, working in a school for severely handicapped children. Above right, a poetry reading
with senior citizens.

¿VftUfryvCúvv
G ruvberget, below, is a former lumberjacks' village north of Stockholm where inmates
can spend a few days' vacation with their families. It was purchased by the Swedish
prison service in 1971.
m

looked for alternative solutions. This trend
has been gathering momentum since the sec¬
ond half of the nineteenth century.
A wide variety of alternatives to custodial
sentences are currently in use in many penal
systems. The most noteworthy include:
Attenuated execution ofsentences, includ¬
ing detention at home, semi-liberty, freedom
on licence, and various forms of discontinu¬
ous detention (e.g. during leisure time and/or
at weekends);
Probation, which ranges from a suspended
sentence to conditional remission of a sen¬
tence and a broad gamut of probationary and
conditional release measures;
Alternatives to custodial sentences that
benefit the offender as much as society. In
addition to fining, as traditionally used in
penal codes, many other alternatives now exist,
THE UNESCO GîURIER JUNE 1998
Top, young offenders at a "fire
camp" in Los Angeles, where
they train alongside
professional firefighters.
Above, physical training at
Harris County boot camp near
Houston, Texas (U.S.A.).
including accessory penalties or penalties that
restrict freedom or impose a ban on profes¬
sional activities, the deprivation or suspen¬
sion of certain rights and payment of dam¬
ages to the victim by the offender.
Community service as an alternative to
prison has been highly successful in many
European countries.1 Introduced for petty
delinquents in the United Kingdom in 1972,
this penalty deprives offenders of their free
time but should not prevent them from ful¬
filling their normal professional commitments.
Convicted offenders are required to do
between 40 and 240 hours of unpaid, socially
useful work over a period of one year to eigh¬
teen months. Community service is performed '
for charitable, humanitarian associations and
could include such tasks as helping the sick
or collecting blood or organs.
Community service is not applicable in
every case. It is primarily suitable for teenagers
and young adults who, though they have
committed minor offences, have not had their
sentences conditionally suspended. To become
common practice, this type of penalty requires
the creation of an assistance and supervisory
service as well as sufficient numbers of com¬
munity service jobs.
The search for alternatives to incarceration
is no remedy for the prison system's short¬
comings. The prison population includes
many individuals who have not been sen¬
tenced, but who are being held for question¬
ing or have been remanded in custody by a
court decision and are awaiting trial. In many
countries, they account for up to 50 per cent
of the total number of inmates.
Theoretically, these prisoners benefit from
the presumption of innocence, but their expe¬
rience of prison life is not really different from
that of convicted offenders. Methods other
than incarceration must be found to ensure
that they show up for trial. Some already exist,
such as mandatory rules of conduct, surrender
of certain documents, and bail. Judges should
encourage these practices as alternatives to
prison.
1 Community service as a main or alternative sentence is
applied in European countries including Austria (for
minors), Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, the
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and
Switzerland.
