Words for music
BYADÁMFELLEGI
In spite of the large number of festivals, concerts
and cultural gatherings, often of a very high stan¬
dard, that are held worldwide, each year, classical
European culture, traditionally the culture of
elites, is attracting fewer and fewer young people.
Artists themselves painters and musicians
alike bear their share of responsibility for this
deplorable state of affairs. Since they disdain
change and are indeed hostile to it, they rely on
refining their art, in the hope that virtuosity alone
will be sufficient to bring back the audience which
they no longer command. The grave error they com¬
mit is that they do not make adequate allowance for
public, expectations and disregard the fact that, in
art, lack of communication rules out any possibil¬
ity of communion with the work.
My own experience as a pianist has taught me
that a few simple but well-chosen words of intro¬
duction often make it possible for the public to go
deeper into the work I am about to play and to appre¬
ciate it all the more. The form which this brief intro¬
duction takes matters little: it may be a formal or
historical analysis, a biographical overview, putting
the work in perspective through comparisons or a
general cultural commentary. The important thing is
to give an idea of the work being presented.
50 r

Obviously, the length of the introduction should
not exceed that of the piece itself. The performer
speaking should be sincere and convinced of what he
is saying, and should use language that a child can
understand. Care should be taken to avoid technical
jargon. It is essential for the performer in person to
present the work about to be played. Using a tape
recorder to play a pre-recorded message is likely to
alienate the audience. On the other hand, the con¬
tortions and mimicry in which a virtuoso in swallow¬
tails may indulge while playing ran have a deterrent
effect on would-be music-lovers.
At each of my recitals I endeavour to say a few
words, in four languages, about the masterpieces
which I am going to perform, masterpieces which
are now so seldom played in public, such as the
sonatas of Mozart and Beethoven or Bach's ÏVie
Well-Tempered Clavier. Through this approach, I
believe that I have found a way of combating one of
the afflictions currently affecting the world of
music. Unfortunately, the effectiveness of such an
approach does not prevent it from being disre¬
garded by professionals who, like me, have been
brought up to worship the technicalities of per¬
formance, to the detriment of a broader approach
to the work and its reproduction. I
