Three exceptional figures
BY ADAM ROBERTS
Frugality as a moral and
political protest against
the established order
Epictetus
(50-125 A.D.)
I Frugality implies care or sparingness in the use or supply of
food and other resources. The first "frugal" people were
those who lived by gathering fruit (fruges in Latin), and were des¬
ignated as frugal by the Romans, whose life has also been described
as "a frugal thing, sparing in food, temperate in drink, modest in
clothing, cleanly in habit." I would suggest that a frugal person is
one who is able to make informed decisions concerning his or her
use of resources, and does so believing that moderate consumption
allows other pleasures or benefits to be enjoyed.
The lifestyles of frugal individuals illustrate how the idea of "fru¬
gality" differs from others such as meanness or prudence. If frugal¬
ity is to do with making rational choices about consumption and how
to live one's life, frugal persons must have the opportunity not to be
frugal and yet choose to be this way. To adopt a frugal way of life is to
adopt an ethical, if not a political, position. Here are some examples:
Stoicism was prominent between 300
B.C. and 1 80 A.D., as a philosophy
and a guide to right conduct. Roman
Stoics were interested, almost exclu¬
sively, in ethical and political issues of
concern to all people, not only the
privileged few. Four beliefs characterize
the Stoics' view of the world: that all
people are radically equal and part of
the natural universe; that there are nat¬
ural laws; that a person should live in
perfect conformity with nature; and
that fate is determined. The text
Encheiridion contains Epictetus'
thoughts, many of which reflect his
attitude towards consumption and
frugality. Here is his advice to a young
man sitting down to a great feast: "But
if when things are set in front of you,
you do not take them but despise
them, then you will not only share a
banquet with the gods but also be a
ruler along with them." Here is a sign
that frugality is a political action.
Choosing to control, strictly, how
you consume is a controversial act.
Epictetus warned about this too, and
discouraged his followers from show¬
ing off: "When you have become
adapted to living cheaply as far as your
body is concerned, do not make a
show of it, and if you drink water do
not say at every opening that you
drink water. If you wish to train your¬
self to hardship, do it for yourself and
not for those outside." D

Henry David
Thoreau
(1817-1862)
A young, Harvard-educated Ameri¬
can, Henry Thoreau chose in 1845
to live alone for two years in a wooden
forest hut not far from Concord
(Massachusetts). While his university
contemporaries were away making
small fortunes, trading and dealing,
Thoreau built his hut using a few hand
tools and some old planks, planted
beans and listened to the water ripple in
Waiden pond. Ridding himself of the
trappings of a "civilized life" and try¬
ing to live sclf-sufficicntly, he was
repeating the experience of the early
American settlers. The difference was
that he wrote about it, and celebrated
the virtues of a simple life. "The ancient
philosophers, Chinese, Hindoo, Per¬
sian and Greek, were a class than which
none has been poorer in outward
riches, none so rich inward," he
enthused, hoping to emulate them in
both respects. His book Waiden (1854)
is a manifesto against modern indus
trial life and an account of the two
years when he drank water from his
pond, had a diet of pulses and pos¬
sessed a minimum of objects. He wrote
that he would rather "sit on a pump¬
kin and have it all to myself, than be
crowded on a velvet cushion." In his
hut there were only three chairs: one
for solitude, two for friendship and
three for society.
He did all this by choice, aware that
he had an option to return from such
a life to a more "comfortable" one, but
confident that "the so-called comforts
of life arc . . . positive hindrances to the
elevation of mankind." However,
Thoreau eventually chose to opt out of
his life-style, and after two years he
returned from the woods to write and
publish his book. But because of his
experience he felt he had become a wiser
observer of human life "from the van¬
tage point of what we should call vol¬
untary poverty."
Mahatma Gandhi
(1869-1948)
y
s
¿The Great Soul" Gandhi is a pow-
I crful example of a man who used
issues of frugality and poverty in his
philosophy, politics and private life.
In 1888, when he moved from India
to Britain, he joined the London Veg¬
etarian Society. There he met George
Bernard Shaw and the travelling lec¬
turer and socialist Edward Carpenter,
who was then known as the "British
Thoreau". At that time he read the
Bbagavadgita, which would become
his "spiritual dictionary", and became
fascinated by two Sanskrit words in
particular, aparigraha (non-posses¬
sion) and samabhava (equability).
These influences led Gandhi to have an
"irresistible attraction to a life of sim¬
plicity, manual labour and austerity",
and the belief that man has to jettison
the material goods that cramp the life
of the spirit.
Ever since St. Francis of Assisi
sought a life of poverty, chastity and
humility, those who have preached such
values have been seen as dangerous by
authorities. Thus, when Gandhi moved
to South Africa and set up as a farmer
near Durban, where he and his friends
could live a simple life by the sweat of
their brow, he took the first step
towards becoming a controversial polit¬
ical activist. Gilbert Murray later
warned, about Gandhi, that "Persons in
power should be very careful how they
deal with a man who cares nothing for
sensual pleasure, nothing for riches,
nothing for comfort or praise."
Six years later, Gandhi moved nearer
to Johannesburg, and set up another
farm, which he named Tolstoy, after
the great Russian writer with whom
he corresponded. Soon he began his
political career, campaigning against
racial laws in South Africa and the
removal of voting rights from
"coloured" voters. Back in India, he
took frugality to its extreme, by con¬
ducting fasts for political ends (he also
fasted to "stir the conscience and
remove mental sluggishness"). In 1947
he fasted in an attempt to stop riot¬
ing between Hindu and Muslim com¬
munities in Calcutta. Four months
later, in Delhi, such a fast brought
about another communal truce.
