Ton-Thatlïêt
talks to ISABELLE LEYMARIE
Ton-That Tiêt, who was born in 1933 in Hue, the former capital of imperial Viet Nam, and has
lived in Paris since 1958, is a composer who has succeeded in marrying Western musical styles
with a profoundly Oriental form of thinking and sensibility. Silence, as well as the expressive
beauty of sounds, plays an important part in his works, which reflect their author's
preoccupation with the harmony between humanity and the universe.
How did you come to Western music?
Ton-That Tiêt: When I was about fourteen or fif¬
teen, I wanted to play the violin. My brothers and sis¬
ters clubbed together to buy me one, which they
arranged to be sent from France. One of my cousins,
who played the violin a little, gave me lessons, but
when he emigrated to France, I found nobody in
Hué to replace him and I had to work on my own,
with a method and scores which I ordered specially.
How did you continue your studies?
T.-T. T.: I dreamed of going to Paris and entering
the Conservatoire. I worked and saved for two years
in order to pay for the journey. When I got to Paris,
I was introduced to a teacher at the Conservatoire,
Georges Dandelot. My knowledge of music theory
was so sketchy that I had to start all over again, or
almost. I had so much work that I had to give up
the violin. I soon learned that I could not work at an
instrument and go in for advanced theoretical stud¬
ies at the same time. I also studied counterpoint
with Madame Honegger at the Paris Ecole Nor¬
male de Musique. At the end of two years, I
obtained a degree in harmony and applied for a
place at the Conservatoire.
Were you already composing?
T.-T. T.: Not yet. However, in order to be accepted
in the composition class, I had to submit some¬
thing. I composed a piece for string quartet which
left no abiding impression. When I started to study
composition in the early 1960s, I was attracted by
serial music and started studying it by myself. At
the time, many of my fellow students were com¬
posing in that idiom. However, my teacher Jean
Rivier advised me to give it up. One day he said to

me: "Go back to Asia and try to find your own way".
He encouraged me to go deeper into my knowledge
of Asian traditional music and to study Oriental
philosophy. André Jolivet, who took over from him,
was also a considerable influence on me in that
respect. Rediscovering Oriental thinking was an
important step, because it created a mental uni¬
verse which enabled me to find my own personal
style. At the end of three or four years, Jolivet saw
that the path I had chosen was beginning to emerge.
How did you rediscover Vietnamese music?
T.-T. T.: The Guimct museum in Paris has a col¬
lection of recordings of Vietnamese music and used
to hold concerts of Oriental music. The musicolo¬
gist Tran Van Khê, who worked there, introduced
me to lîiulilhist music.
How did you come across the idea of composing
on the basis of the five elements: wood, fire, earth,
metal and water?
T.-T. T: By stud) ing Chinese philosophy, and espe¬
cially ihcYiChing. My first work, an orchestral piece
called Five Elements, which was based on the Yi
Ching, was composed in 1972, and I returned to the
same theme in 1981. However, I did not use the Yi
Ching in a random fashion, like John Cage, or as a div-
inatory form, since that did not interest me. What
fascinates me in the Yi Ching is the explanation it
gives of the evolution of the universe. I also took an
interest in Great Vehicle Buddhism, but strictly
from a philosophical standpoint, since I do not prac¬
tise any religion. The two main themes of my work
are humanity and the universe. Buddhism and the
other Oriental philosophies stress universal love and
the fact that all human beings are brothers.

Do you use Asian instruments in your
compositions?
T.-T. T.: I used a single-stringed instrument on one
occasion, in a piece for flute and magnetic tape
commissioned by the French Institute for musi¬
cal-acoustical research and co-ordination (IRCAM).
What projects do you have in hand at the moment?
T.-T. T.: I am working on a second ballet for the
Régine Chopinot company I already wrote one
for them in 1996 on the theme of fire, in harmony
and opposition with the five elements. I am now
looking into the concept of time. I am interested in
handling this theme in the Oriental rather than
Western manner. The West invented linear and cycli¬
cal time, whereas in Asia the concept of time draws
on its absence, since time does not exist in the uni¬
verse. The Yi-Ching speaks neither of beginning
nor end. There is no original "big bang".
You are also endeavouring to safeguard the
musical traditions of Viet Nam.
T.-T. T.: In 1992, 1 had an opportunity to attend


some courses on traditional music at Hanoi Con¬
servatory and I was appalled at what I heard: the
music had been altered and harmonized and new
features had been tacked on to it.
The following year, in Hanoi, I met a very old
woman who was a wonderful exponent of catru, a
style of singing notable for its vibrato and special
vocal techniques. She was the only surviving expo¬
nent of this style. I asked her to train some young
singers, so that the tradition would not be lost. In
fact, the family of musicians accompanying her
had a daughter who sang some catru. Madame
Quach Thi Ho agreed to take her under her wing.
In Hué, I contacted all the performers of tra¬
ditional music. I organized a meeting with the three
leading master musicians and asked them to recre¬
ate a court music orchestra.
They regularly sent me cassettes, so that I could
hear what progress they were making. After one
year, the imperial orchestra was proficient, but
the younger musicians still had tobe trained. I was
amazed to find that the girl who was learning cairu
had perfectly mastered the vocal technique. I was
subsequently able to organize a concert of tradi¬
tional Vietnamese music at the Maison des Cul¬
tures et du Monde in Paris in 1993. I
