Political prisoners
BYDIRKVANZYLSMIT
Inmates whose
status is a subject
of controversy
Above, South African political
prisoners and their families
explode with joy in a post¬
release rehabilitation centre.
© DarryJ Evans/Vu. Pans
Few concepts in penology are as con¬
tentious as that of the "political pris¬
oner", the implication of which is that such
prisoners form a discrete group of detainees
who, because of the nature of the conduct for
which they have been incarcerated, should be
treated differently.
The first point of contention is usually as to
whether the existence of a discrete category of
political prisoners should be recognized. The
qualification "political" indicates that the pris¬
oners concerned have committed acts which
directly challenge the authority and legitimacy
of the government that is detaining them. Rec¬
ognizing that they are "political prisoners"
therefore entails recognition by a government
that it is facing a challenge going beyond that
posed by "ordinary criminals", whose infringe¬
ment of the laws of the land is not aimed specif¬
ically at the government itself. The result is that
governments are often very reluctant to admit
that they are holding "political prisoners" in
their gaols.
In democratic societies, it is unacceptable
for a government to maintain power by
imprisoning those who do not support it.
Where large numbers of a government's oppo¬
nents are imprisoned without trial under
emergency legislation or following the decla¬
ration of martial law, it is difficult for that
government to deny outright that it is hold¬
ing people in its gaols for political reasons.
Governments that act in this way usually claim
that such measures are temporary and intended
to prevent disorder. In these circumstances,
public campaigns demanding that such
detainees be either charged or released may be
very effective, since the government has already
conceded the principle that its conduct is
undemocratic.
Terrorists orfreedom fighters?
The position is more complicated if oppo¬
nents of a government are imprisoned after
having been charged and convicted under the
criminal law. Such a course is attractive to gov¬
ernments, since it enables them to deny that

the persons concerned are political prisoners,
and to claim that they are being held because
they infringed the criminal law and not because
they opposed the government of the day. In
this way, the government can attempt to cap¬
italize on the legitimacy which the criminal
law as a whole possesses in most societies.
Opponents of a government imprisoned
after being convicted by the criminal courts can
and do object to their incarceration on a num¬
ber of grounds. Most simply and directly, they
can claim that they were not guilty of the
offences with which they were charged, but that
their convictions were the result of biased or
unfair procedures. Second, they can challenge
the offences as defined in the criminal law by
arguing that they were not "ordinary crimes"
but conduct which had been criminalized by
the government in order to muzzle its oppo¬
nents. Third, they can reject their convictions
directly by arguing that the conduct which the
government attempts to criminalize, treason
for example, is justified because of the essential
illegitimacy of the government itself.
Debates about what constitute political
offences and who should be regarded as polit¬
ical prisoners may transcend national borders.
When one state seeks the extradition of an
alleged offender from another state in order to
bring him or her to trial, international law
Former dissident Vaclav Havel
on his election as president of
the Czech and Slovak Republic
in 1990.
The Burmese political leader
Aung San Suu Kyi (upper left,
holding microphone), was
held under house arrest in
Rangoon from 1989 to 1995.
In 1991 she was awarded the
Nobel peace prize.

allows the request to be denied if the extradition
is being sought to try that person for an offence
of a political character. This exception to general
extradition agreements is controversial. States or
their courts differ about whether a particular
offence is political in character. States may also
agree among themselves that certain forms of
conduct are so reprehensible that their perpe¬
trators should be subject to extradition, irre¬
spective of the fact that they were conducted
with a political motive. International conven¬
tions which allow the extradition of persons
suspected of aircraft hijacking or terrorism are
examples of an emerging international consen¬
sus to limit the political offence exception, but
the difficulty remains that a person who is
regarded as a terrorist by some may be regarded
as a freedom fighter by others.
'Prisoners ofconscience'
One way to avoid difficulties of definition is
by focusing on only some of all those
detainees who may be regarded as political
prisoners. Amnesty International, for exam¬
ple, has been particularly successful with its
campaigns on behalf of "prisoners of con¬
science". It has defined as prisoners of con¬
science all persons detained because of their
beliefs, but has specifically excluded those who
have used or advocated violence. This meets
the objection that the organization is sup¬
porting the cause of "violent terrorists". How¬
ever, many prisoners who were motivated by
political ends and who may have turned to
violence only as a last resort have been excluded.
On this test, for example, Nelson Mandela
could not be regarded as a political prisoner,
for in his many years in prison he did not
renounce the violent overthrow of the then
South African Government.
In practice, the solution of the problem as
to who is a political prisoner has often been
pragmatic. Typically, governments insist that
all those who claim political status are ordinary
criminals, but mete out different treatment
to certain subgroups of them. In Northern
Ireland, for example, the British Government
consistently refused to grant Republican or
Loyalist detainees the status of political pris¬
oners, but at various times granted them a
special-category status, which meant that they
were subject to regimes very different from
those applied to other prisoners. Attempts to
reverse this special-category status met with
g strong resistance from the prisoners.
| Even qualified recognition of a special
¡" political prisoner status has potential advan-
| tages for the prisoners concerned. At the most
| general level, such public acknowledgment
| that their actions are motivated by ideals of
° social and political change may advance their
g cause. Even limited special status may mean
Apartheid opponent Nelson
Mandela spent nearly 30 years
in prison. In 1993 he shared
the Nobel peace prize with
Frederik De Klerk and was
elected president of the
Republic of South Africa the
following year.

that prisoners whose alleged offences were
politically motivated are grouped together.
There are numerous examples of such prison¬
ers developing increased solidarity and com¬
mitment to their shared cause while in prison.
There are also examples of individual political
prisoners obtaining a special status while in
prison because the government that put them
there recognized that it might have to negoti¬
ate with them at some future date.
Recognition of a special political prisoner
status is potentially a mixed blessing, how¬
ever. There are many examples of political pris¬
oners being treated with particular severity.
Quite simply, a state may decide to use its
prison system to break the morale of its oppo¬
nents. Labour and concentration camps in
wartime are variations of the prison system
which have been used to this end, with
» depressing frequency. There are even instances
of courts colluding in this process. In South
Africa, for example, in 1978, a group of pris¬
oners managed to approach the highest court
in the land to ask for some access to news of
current events. In court, they defined them¬
selves as political prisoners, a status which the
authorities at that time vigorously contested.
The court accepted this self-imposed catego¬
rization but used it to argue that, precisely
because the applicants were political prison¬
ers, they could be denied news which was rou¬
tinely available to other prisoners.
When the rule of law
is flouted
In practice, the status of political prisoners may
also play a part in determining when they will
be released from custody. In this respect too, the
impact may be positive or negative. Political
prisoners may be required to serve a far higher
portion of their sentence before being consid¬
ered for parole. On the other hand, a change of
regime or even a shift in the political climate
may lead to early release for those whose
offences may be regarded in the new circum¬
stances as being of a political character.
Such flexibility is contrary to the rule of
law, since it indicates that, where political pris¬
oners are concerned, executive intervention is
allowed to disrupt the normal operation of the
criminal justice system. The rule of law requires
the system to operate according to clear, pre¬
viously determined and impartial principles.
The fact that the rule of law is routinely
flouted in these instances indicates that the
imprisonment of political dissidents is never
an ideal way of solving a political dispute, but
is an admission of failure in the political sphere.
Governments should recognize that when
prisoners claim political status it is a signal
that they and the section of the population
which supports them feel excluded from the
political process. Almost certainly, political
solutions rather than the intervention of the
criminal justice system are required to meet
this challenge.
the Unesco Kurier june 1998
FUJI RDPn
Drn o i
The snow-covered yard, by Michael Inns.
© Michael Inns/inside Eye/Panos Pictures. London
My friend Sami, by Mohamed Manssor.
© Mohamed Manssor/inside Eye/Panos Pictures, London
