Curbing the mighty shrimp 
With “prawn farm is prison farm” as his slogan, S. Jagannathan led thousands of
India’s poor farmers and fishers in a seven-year struggle to ban the country’s lucrative
shrimp industry—a Herculean feat as India is one of the world’s top producers. Despite
outbreaks of police violence, passive resistance groups rallied the support of environ-
mental and consumer groups at home and abroad before convincing the Indian Supreme
Court that people’s fundamental rights had been violated by the industry.
“While millions of people were denied a square meal a day, the country was being
forced to produce shrimp for the affluent abroad,” says Jagannathan,an 85-year-old dis-
ciple of Gandhi.“Even as the government was withdrawing subsidies from the farmers,
hundreds of millions of rupees were given as loans and subsidies to big business entering
shrimp farming.”
With fish stocks plummeting,aquaculture had been hailed as a godsend,particularly
for developing countries interested in a new cash crop. Investors streamed into India’s
coastal states like Tamil Nadu,where the area under shrimp cultivation rose from 250 hec-
tares in 1991 to 2,000 in 1995 and production grew from 450 to 3,000 tonnes.
Suddenly, local communities found the “outsiders” (shrimp cultivators) alienating
them from the land they had depended on for generations. At the same time, saltwater
and chemicals used for fertilizer and feed were seeping out of the vast ponds of brackish
water used to grow the shrimp. The run-off and salinization damaged crop lands, man-
groves, drinking water and groundwater aquifers. The brackish water ponds also drained
fresh water supplies as saline levels rose with evaporation.“To raise one tonne of shrimps
requires 50 to 60 million litres of water, half of which is fresh water,” says Bisham Gujja
of the World Wide Fund for Nature. In addition,about 2.5 million cubic metres of effluent
were discharged off the east coast daily.
Presented with these reports, the Supreme Court ruled in December 1996 that vir-
tually all shrimp farms within 500 metres of the high tide line had to be closed by 31
March 1997 and a new aquaculture authority was to apply the “polluter pays”principle.
However, farms continue to operate through “flimsy technical arguments”, says Gujja.
“But investors have pulled out of the industry. Even if the law is amended,aquaculture in
India will never be the same because investors will be careful to follow environmental
regulations and avoid displacing people—at least,that is what the hope is.” G. B. T. ■

