Invisible chains
*£G
BY LINDA JOHANSSON
Sweden's electronic tagging project
miurowHUwntt
Electronic tagging is still only
practised in a few countries,
including Sweden and the
United States. Above, an
electronic bracelet strapped to
a young offender's ankle in
Tucson, Arizona (U.S.A.).
© Patrick Bard/Editing, Pans
Imprisonment is the most expensive
form of punishment in modern soci¬
ety. In Sweden, the upkeep of an inmate in an
open prison costs approximately 1,500 kroner
($200 or £120) a day, and around 2,000 kroner
($250 or £160) in a closed prison. Studies have
shown that incarceration has a negative impact
on detainees, who are forced to leave their fam¬
ilies, jobs and social life, and that prisons are
breeding grounds for criminality where young
inmates learn about crime from more experi¬
enced lawbreakers.
To address these issues, Sweden launched a
pilot project in 1994 in which minor offend¬
ers can choose to be put under electronic sur¬
veillance instead of going to prison. In six pro¬
bation districts, lawbreakers sentenced to
prison terms of two months or less were given
the option of living at home and wearing an
electronic ankle bracelet. Results surpassed
expectations and three years later the pro¬
gramme was expanded to include all offenders
nationwide sentenced to terms of three
months or less. Nearly half the 4,000 people

eligible for electronic tagging in the first six
months of 1997 had been convicted of
drunken driving.
O ffenders must meet several requirements
to be eligible for the programme. They must
have a recognized home, aphone and a job. In
addition, they must pay 50 kroner ($6 or £4)
a day for the duration of their sentence to
Victim Support, a charitable organization. A
1997 study showed that several offenders who
did not request the bracelet said the reason
was they could not afford the 50 kroner a day
or had neither a job nor a home.
Probation officers do all they can to assist
applicants, including trying to find them jobs
and slots in training programmes. A tempo¬
rary phone line paid for by the national pris¬
ons and probation administration can be
installed and offenders are encouraged to ask
relatives or friends to help them find hous¬
ing. Those who cannot afford the 50 kroner a
day are exempted from payment.
The tag is fastened around the offender's
ankle. A 50-centimetre high electronic trans¬
mitter installed at his or her home beams sig¬
nals to a surveillance centre. If the tag is
removed or the offender leaves home, the
transmitter immediately triggers an alarm and
the centre rings up the offender's home to
check for a possible malfunction. If the
offender is found to have broken the rules,
the tag is withdrawn and the rest of the sen¬
tence must be served in prison. But that sel¬
dom happens. The study showed that per¬
mission to work was suspended for
misconduct in only 5 per cent of cases, usually
because the offender had been drinking alco¬
hol. Infractions were most common among
offenders serving longer sentences.
Tight restrictions on movement
A probation officer draws up a tight schedule
that must be rigorously followed. Freedom
of movement is strictly limited. Offenders are
only allowed to leave home during working
hours, except for one hour each Saturday and
Sunday. If they are more than ten minutes off
schedule, the alarm is set off.
Most of the people who have been elec¬
tronically tagged say that it's at least as dis¬
tressing as being in a prison where there is
greater freedom of movement. In addition to
restrictions on leaving home, total abstinence
from the consumption of drugs and alcohol
is required. Probation officers make surprise
visits at all hours of the day or night, and at
these times offenders have to take an alcohol
breath test.
"If I didn't have a family," said Jan-Erik
Bengtsson, after wearing his tag for a very long
week, "I would rather have stayed in jail. I
can't even take out the garbage and I feel like
I'm always being watched. The breath tests are
very demeaning. You don't feel trusted and
it's very unpleasant not knowing when the
probation officer will show up." But like most
people who wear a tag, Mr. Bengtsson still
thinks it has some advantages. He can work
and continue living at home with his com¬
panion and their three children.
Electronic tagging has resulted in much
heavier workloads for probation officers,
many of whom say they no longer have
enough time for their regular duties and believe
that prison staff should be responsible for
keeping tabs on tagged offenders. They con¬
sider themselves overqualified for such tasks
most of them are sociologists with several
years of higher education behind them.
But electronic tagging also results in sav¬
ings. The upkeep cost per offender is approx¬
imately 450 kroner a day, two-thirds less than
the cost of imprisonment, and several correc¬
tional facilities have closed down for lack of
inmates. The next step will probably be to
include in the programme offenders sentenced
to terms of up to four months. The possibil¬
ity has been raised of extending eligibility to
lawbreakers sentenced to up to eleven months,
but the authorities prefer to act cautiously so
as not to jeopardize the potential of this alter¬
native to imprisonment.
Eighteenth-century convicts
employed on public works in
Bern (Switzerland). Period
engraving.
© Jean-Loup Charmet, Pans
