The hard way back BY AMADOU CISSEDIA
*§£ wKSE' aSot
After eight years and four months in
custody, I was released on parole two
years ago.
At the end of the day, a prisoner's release
depends on the law, in the fullest sense of the
term. The system must not only be concerned
with punishment; it should also keep track
of each inmate's moral development by means
' of interviews. The prison service must be inter-
Painter Amadou Cissé Dia at
the opening of one of his
exhibitions in Dakar (Senegal)
in 1994.
ested in their fate. In the facility where I was
held, administrators and warders kept an eye
on every move we made, good or bad, and
wrote up reports on our behaviour. I believe
those reports play a decisive role.
During my eight years of confinement, I
saw several judges visit the prison to make
direct contact with certain inmates. That
enabled them to understand the prisoners,'
true personalities. I am sure that this in-depth
knowledge is crucial in the decision to release
them.
Getting back into society is a tough propo¬
sition for any ex-convict. But people must
realize that in some cases crime is a curable dis¬
ease. An inmate who really wants to change,
who has thought deeply during his years
inside and who has come to enjoy work
knows what he wants to become and what he
wants to do. He has a clear picture of his past
and present. He knows why his life has been
filled with pain and suffering and he thinks
back nostalgically to when he was a child.
He would like to have a second chance.
He finally manages to understand society,
something he had never done before because he
had never stopped and taken a close look at
human behaviour. He discovers the self-respect
and inner peace that come with honest work.
He wants to cling to happiness with all his
might. That is why it is vital for an ex-convict
to find a way to make a living.
The road to rehabilitation is fraught with
pitfalls that only the bravest souls can avoid.
The main problem is the relationship with
society; an ex-convict needs plenty of under¬
standing.
Speaking for myself, I am successfully
working my way back into society. I am start¬
ing to make my mark as a painter. I managed on
my own to obtain a commission to paint a
large fresco in a bank. Some of my works are
in local collections and I am earning an honest
living.
I had already dabbled in painting before I
went into prison, but it was while I was inside
that I began to take it seriously. By steadily and
painstakingly devoting myself to painting all
those years, I acquired a passion for work.
