Waste not, want not
BYHISANORI ISOMUR
,*&
In today's consumer society traditional
Japanese values based on moderation
are more relevant than ever
LTheJapanese have never sought to tame
nature; they have endeavoured to bring
nature closer to them and to live in symbio¬
sis with it. The Japanese garden, for example,
which is a re-creation of nature, is entirely
based on the principle oishakkei (literally, a
"borrowing of landscape"), whereby a real fea¬
ture of the landscape is introduced into an
artificial setting, and a bonsai may be regarded
as an artificial, miniaturized symbol standing
for nature in its entirety.
In the formal gardens of Western coun¬
tries, the artistic conception is human-cen¬
tred. People cut and prune trees into sym¬
metrical shapes and build fountains whose
jets present a reverse image of waterfalls, and
statues are erected and arranged for ornamen¬
tal effect. Japanese gardens, on the other hand,
seem at first sight merely to be a downscaled
version of nature, and the signs of human
handiwork are unobtrusive, if not invisible.
A 'floating' life
in a 'floating' world
For the Japanese, nature and the world are syn¬
onymous. Over the centuries, they have
accordingly developed a way of life based on
moderation and respect for everyday objects.
But Japan is today a consumer society, and
the Japanese have become very materialistic.
Contrary to a common misconception,
Japan was already an economic power in the
sixteenth century, and its standard of living
may well have been even higher then than it is
now. At the time of the Ashikaga shogunate
(the Muromachi period, 1337-1573), the coun¬
try was very prosperous, as may be judged

"The tea ceremony is a
sequence of ritual gestures
and a moment of harmony
encompassing the world in its
entirety." Left, a photo of the
tea ceremony taken in the late
19th century.
from the splendour of the temples of that
period, a prime example being the Kinkaku-ji,
or Golden Pavilion, in Kyoto. However the
influence of Buddhism, Zen Buddhism in par¬
ticular, produced a reaction against such osten¬
tation and a "renaissance" of aesthetic and
moral criteria, a return to a tradition that
emphasized simplicity, sobriety and purity
of form, as typified in architecture by the
shôin style in sixteenth-century architecture.
This aesthetic is reflected inJapanese classical
literature. The author of the Heike monogatari
("The Tale of the Heike", second half of the
twelfth century), for example, considers all for¬
tune to be fleeting and all prosperity to be
doomed sooner or later to disappear. The com¬
bined influence of Buddhist culture and the
hard living conditions caused by a rugged climate
have led the Japanese to regard life on earth as a
"floating" life, constantly changing and finally
vanishing. The term ukiyo means both "float¬
ing world" and "world of privation".
For the Japanese, the ideal of beauty is to
be found in communion with nature. The tea
ceremony, an art that proceeds from the zen
aesthetic, is not only a sequence of ritual ges¬
tures but a moment of harmony encompass¬
ing the world in its entirety. It was codified in
the sixteenth century by Sen no Rikyû, who
also created the wabi sabi aesthetic beauty
shorn of all ostentation that charms by its
simplicity underpinned by the Buddhist
teaching that plenty cannot endure and is not
to be found in immoderation. What should be
respected is the transience of things.
A tradition ofmoderation
Respect for all things is thus a traditional atti¬
tude in Japan. There arc some colloquial expres¬
sions, mottainai for instance, that express the
chary national attitude to any kind of waste.
Older people can remember saving water all
their lives, though water is plentiful every¬
where in Japan. There is a single bathtub for
each household, and people use it in the
evenings after washing outdoors. But habits
are changing and Japanese girls who used to
wash their hair in the morning (asa-shan) now
shampoo it again in the evening (yoru-shan).
Grandparents also used to tell their grand¬
children not to leave so much as a single grain
of rice in their bowls, an attitude that was in
fact prevalent in all countries before waste was
urged upon us by the consumer society. The
Japanese have an insulting term for someone
who wastes things monogoroshi, "killer of
objects". Anyone to whom it is applied is a
kind of social outcast since, according to an
idea whose roots go back to animism, even
inert objects have a soul.
On a more down-to-earth level, we learn
from sixteenth- and seventeenth-century
archives that the reason why there were so few
"Moderation was prevalent
before waste was urged upon
us by the consumer society."
Right, a car dump in Japan.
. I

waste-bins in Japanese cities was that people
then made a point of using every object as
long as possible.
"In Japan Zen Buddhism
produced a return to a
tradition that emphasized
simplicity, sobriety and purity
of form." Above, a zen garden
in Kyoto (Japan).
"A bonsai may be regarded as
a miniaturized symbol of
nature. The traditional way of
life in Japan, in communion
with nature, was founded on
moderation and respect for
Changing times, changing ways
Since the 1950s, Japan has modelled itself on
the United States, a land of plenty where to be
frugal is a vice and to consume a virtue. This
trend, which is affecting more and more coun¬
tries, inevitably raises problems. If a country
like China, for example, were to indulge in everyday objects." A dwarf
unrestrained mass consumption, the earth's tree raised in a Pot <below>-
., 1-11 the bonsai typifies the
resources would very likely soon run out. Japanese ¡deal of the garden
Twenty years ago I bought a German car. It as a re-creation of nature,
has so far done 280,000 km and I am still using
it, to the derisive amusement of some of my
friends, most of whom change cars every other
year. The dynamism of the Japanese economy
is fuelled by such behaviour patterns on the
part of consumers. In fact, the law itself encour¬
ages people not to hang on too long to the
same material goods. Motor vehicles, for exam¬
ple, have to undergo a thorough roadworthi¬
ness test after seven years, and an annual test
thereafter. The test costs the equivalent of about
$900, and it costs about $1,100 to send a vehi¬
cle to the scrapyard an incentive on the part of
the authorities to sell as soon as possible.
Since the earth's resources are limited, it is
essential that our ways of life should change,
that we find a new "global way of life". In a
22
the UNESCO Courier ianuary 1998
White Paper on the life of the nation, the
Japanese Government has advocated a return to
tradition, an idea summed up in the expression
"progress in tradition". With modern tech¬
nology it is possible to conserve energy and
protect the environment while at the same
time maintaining a growth rate conducive to
the raising of living standards. We, the con¬
sumer countries, should therefore work
together to find a middle way that encourages
neither American-style waste nor withdrawal
into the past.
