The first stirrings
of creation BY ROBERT G.BEDNARIK
Rock art, found in almost all the world's regions,
is a mine of information about early man's intellectual development
Handprints in a rock shelter
at Rio Pinturas in Argentina's
Chubut province.
Prehistoric rock art is by far the largest
body of evidence we have of human¬
ity's artistic, cognitive and cultural beginnings.
It is found in most countries of the world,
from the tropics to the Arctic regions, in sites
ranging from deep caves to high mountains.
Many tens of millions of rock art figures or
motifs have been found, and more are being
discovered each year. This massive, semi-per¬
manent and cumulative record is the most
direct evidence we have of how pre-humans
first became human and then evolved complex
social systems.
Some widely held misconceptions about
the origins of art must be dispelled at the out¬
set. Art as such did not appear suddenly, but
developed gradually with the cognitive evo
lution of humans. By the time that the famous
cave art of France and Spain was being pro¬
duced, art traditions are thought to have been
well established at least in southern Africa,
the Levant, eastern Europe, India and Aus¬
tralia, and no doubt in many other regions
that have yet to be examined adequately.
When were humans first able to produce
abstractions of reality? In addition to its inter¬
est for the art historian and the archaeologist,
this question is of wider concern, if only
because ideas of cultural precedence have been
effective in shaping racial, ethnic and national
value judgments and even fantasies. The notion
that art began in the caves of western Europe
furthers myths of European cultural prece¬
dence, for example. Secondly, the origins of art

Rock carvings at an open-air
site at Twyfelfontein, Namibia.
are thought to be intimately intertwined with
the emergence of several other distinctively
human faculties: the ability to form abstract
concepts, to symbolize, to communicate at an
advanced level, to develop a notion of the self.
Apart from prehistoric art we have no tangible
evidence from which to infer these capacities.
The beginnings ofart
Art production was preceded by "non-utili¬
tarian" behaviour patterns, i.e. behaviour that
seems to lack practical purpose. The earliest
discernible archaeological evidence for this is
the use of ochre or haematite, a red mineral
pigment collected and used by people several
hundred thousand years ago. These early
humans also collected crystals and petrified
fossils, and colourful or oddly shaped pebbles.
They had begun to distinguish between ordi¬
nary, everyday objects and the unusual, the
exotic. Presumably they had developed con¬
cepts of a world in which objects could be cat¬
egorized into different classes. Evidence of
this appears first in southern Africa, then in
Asia and finally in Europe.
The oldest known rock art was produced
in India two or three hundred thousand years
ago. It consists of cup marks and a meander¬
ing line hammered into the rock of a sand¬
stone cave. At about the same time, simple
line markings were made on a variety of
portable objects (bone, teeth, ivory and stone)
which have been found at the camp sites of
early humans. Sets of bunched engraved lines

first appear in central and eastern Europe; they phase rock art also appears in Europe, the old-
developed into distinctive arrangements that est known example being an arrangement of
can be recognized as motifs such as zigzags, eighteen cup marks in a French cave, on a rock
crosses, arcs and sets of parallel lines. slab placed over a child's burial spot.
This phase, which archaeologists call the Perhaps the most interesting aspect of this
Middle Palaeolithic (perhaps 35,000 to 150,000 period is the cultural uniformity that prevailed
years ago), is crucial in human intellectual and throughout the then-settled world. Despite
cognitive development. This was also the time differences in tools, doubtless due to responses
when people developed seafaring capacity, and to environmental differences, cultural behaviour
crossings of up to 180 km were eventually was surprisingly consistent. The use of ochre
made by colonizing parties. Regular ocean nav- and the fairly uniform repertoire of geometric
igation clearly required an advanced system of markings are indications of a universal artistic
communication, presumably language. language among archaicrTomo sapiens, includ-
People of this period also mined ochre and ing the Neanderthal people of Europe and oth-
flint in several world regions. They began ers about whom we know from fossil remains,
building large communal dwellings of mam- Figurative depiction in the round (sculp-
moth bones in southern Russia, and erected ture) first appears in Israel (c. 250-300,000 years
stone walls in caves. But most importantly, ago), as modified natural form, then in Siberia
they produced art. In Australia, some speci- and central Europe (c. 30-35,000 years ago), and
mens of rock art may be up to 60,000 years later in western Europe. By 30,000 or so years
old, as old as human occupation of the conti- ago, rock art included complex finger mark-
nent itself, and hundreds of sites contain ings on soft cave surfaces in Australia and in
examples which are thought to predate the Europe, and hand stencils in France. Finally,
cave art of western Europe. But during this two-dimensional pictures of objects began to
Stylized animal figure at
Helanshan, Ningxia (China)

Examples of early rock art,
dating back to the Middle
Palaeolithic (35,000-150,000
years ago). Object (c) is a
tooth, (d) is a fossil nummulite,
and the rest are bone
fragments. The finds are fro m
Ukraine (a-c), Hungary (d),
France (e) and Bulgaria (f).
appear; the oldest examples, about 32,000 years
old, are from France, followed by paintings
from Namibia in southern Africa.
By about 20,000 years ago, quite recent in
terms of human history, cultures began to
diverge noticeably. In western Europe, Upper
Palaeolithic people developed sophisticated tra¬
ditions of both sculpted and graphic art for
ritual or decorative use. By 15,000 years ago,
this tradition produced glorious masterworks
in such caves as Altamira (Spain) and Lascaux
(France), and thousands of finely carved fig¬
urines made of stone, ivory, bone, clay or other
materials. This is the time of the finest poly¬
chromatic cave art, painted or engraved with
the confident strokes of master artists. Graphic
art traditions elsewhere, however, developed
very differently. In Russia and across Asia, geo¬
metric art forms were elaborated into highly
developed systems, some of which resemble
formal records, while others may have been
mnemonic devices, memory prompters
designed to record texts.
From about the end of the Ice Age, about
10,000 years ago, rock paintings begin to appear
outside caves. This almost certainly reflects the
selective survival of rock art rather than a new
preference in the choice of sites. Rock paint¬
ings can survive very well in the stable envi¬
ronments of deep limestone caves but not on
rock surfaces that are more exposed to damage.
The apparent proliferation of rock art around
the end of the Ice Age therefore indicates, not
an increase in art production but that a thresh¬
old of preservation has been crossed.
On all continents except Antarctica, rock
paintings now bear witness to a multitude of
art styles and cultures, to the progressively
increasing ethnic diversification of humanity
on all continents, and to the development of the
major religions. Even the recent historical devel¬
opments of mass migrations, colonization and
religious expansion are all reflected in rock art.
Dating
There are two basic forms of rock art, petro-
glyphs (or carvings) and pictographs (or paint¬
ings). The motifs of petroglyphs were created
by engraving, hammering, incising or abrading
Rock carvings of four human
figures. Toro Muerto (Peru).

t rock surfaces. In pictographs some material
was added to the rock surface, usually paint.
The distinction is important because it deter¬
mines approaches to dating.
The methodology of dating rock art scien¬
tifically has only developed over the last fifteen
years or so. It is still therefore in its infancy, and
nearly all the world's rock art remains effec¬
tively undated. This does not mean that we
have no idea of its age, however, since there are
often various indicators of approximate or at
least probable age. It is sometimes possible to
determine the age of rock paintings quite accu¬
rately, especially when the paint contains organic
' substances or microscopic inclusions that arc
datable through their radiocarbon content.
Careful interpretation of such analytical results
can make dating quite reliable.
Set of 18 cup marks on the
underside of a rock slab placed
over a Neanderthal child's
grave (France).
© Robert Bednank. Melbourne, Australia
Stylized painted animal
figures at Raisen, near Bhopal
(India).
.*v.
Dating petroglyphs, on the other hand,
remains very difficult. Most current methods
seek to establish the age of a mineral skin that
may have formed over the rock art and thus
provide merely minimum ages. One technique
is to analyse microscopic organic material
encased in such mineral skins; laser technology
can be used successfully for this purpose. But
currently only one method is available to deter¬
mine the age of the petroglyph itself. It is based
on the fact that the mineral crystals that were
fractured when the petroglyph was hammered
into the rock initially had sharp edges, which
became blunt and rounded with age. By deter¬
mining from nearby surfaces of known ages
how fast this process operates, the age of a pet¬
roglyph surface can be estimated.
Several archaeological dating methods can
also provide limited assistance. If, for instance,
an archaeological, datable layer of soil covers
petroglyphs on a rock wall, it can be assumed
to provide a minimum age for the rock art.
Stylistic comparison has often been used to
construct chronological frameworks for rock
art, but not very successfully.
The most promising methods of studying
rock art often resemble those of forensic sci¬
ence. For instance, paint components may tell
us how the paint was mixed, what implements
and additives were used, where the pigment
came from, and so forth. Human blood,
which was used as a binding agent in the Ice

Age, has been detected in ancient Australian
rock paintings. Australian researchers have also
found as many as forty very thin superim¬
posed layers of paint at many sites, indicating
continuous repainting of the same rock sur¬
faces over long periods of time. Like the pages
of a book, these layers record the history of
the site's use by artists of many generations.
The study of such sequences is only just begin¬
ning and may result in entirely new insights.
Paint brush fibres have been found in rock
art paint, and so has pollen which can indi¬
cate vegetation contemporary with the time
of painting. In some French caves, distinctive
paint recipes have been identified from their
chemical makeup. In the case of charcoal pig¬
ment in a black painting, even the genus of
the tree from which the charcoal originated
has been established.
Rock art research has become a scientific
discipline in its own right, and already draws
on many other disciplines, from geology to
semiotics, from ethnography to computer
science. The methodology includes colour
enhancement of electronic imagery derived
Stencilled outlines of
boomerangs, axes and hands.
Carnarvon Gorge, Queensland
(Australia).
© Robert Bednank, Melbourne, Australia
from very faded, barely visible pictures; vari¬
ous specialized recording techniques; and
microscopic study of tool marks and minute
residues.
fragile vestiges
Methods of rock art conservation are also
being developed and increasingly applied. Rock
art panels and even entire sites are being repli¬
cated in order to protect the original from
deterioration. Yet much of the world's pre¬
historic art is now severely threatened. Acid
rain dissolves the protective mineral coating
that covers many petroglyphs. Increasing cul¬
tural tourism, encroaching urban, industrial
and mining development, even misguided
research all take their toll.
Efforts are being made in some countries
to protect and preserve this remarkable but
fragile cultural resource. International agencies,
especially UNESCO, can help by encouraging
international uniformity of protective legisla¬
tion, streamlining research and applied science,
and helping develop global approaches to rock
art conservation and site management.
