The healing power of faith BYJANESCHREIBMAN
In India, the sick visit the tombs of saints in search of a cure
Top, a sick child who has been
cured is ritually weighed
during a pilgrimage to a
saint's tomb. The equivalent of
her weight in sugar will be
given to the priest.
For centuries the faithful have been mak¬
ing pilgrimages to the burial sites of holy
men throughout the Indian subcontinent. The
pilgrims believe that these saints, some of
whom are women, have supernatural powers,
and that when they died God empowered them
with a benevolent force called baraka that
emanates from the grave and can be used to per¬
form miracles for the living.
Different rituals have evolved at these sites to
unite the faithful with this special power and
give them spiritual strength. Some of these prac¬
tices are universal and some are specific to certain
tombs. One very common ritual is for a person
to be chained to a railing surrounding the tomb
or to a part of the building housing it.
The supplicants remain chained until they
feel united with the power of the saint. This
may take a few hours, or involve attempts
lasting several days. After experiencing this
union, supplicants wear the chains wrapped
around their arms as a badge of honour. It is
also common to see the faithful walking in
circles around the tomb until they drop from
dizziness or exhaustion. When have recovered
their strength, they get up and continue. The
faithful are led through these rituals, which
also constitute an attempt to invoke the spirit
of the deceased, by hereditary priests who are
often descendants of the holy person buried
there. When an infertile woman gives birth,
or a sick child is cured, the child is brought
back to be weighed, so that a gift of raw sugar
amounting to the exact weight of the child
can be offered. This is accepted by the priests
on behalf of the saint.
If the tomb is located near a body of water,
either natural or artificial, the water is consid-

ered to be imbued with curative powers and
the pilgrims immerse themselves in it fully
clothed in the case of the women. Another
common ritual is that of fumigation. Incense
is burned near the tomb. If the illness or mis¬
fortune is due to a spirit that has entered the
body it will be "smoked out".
Lavish decoration
Any type of behaviour, as long as it is not
destructive, is accepted at these locations. Peo¬
ple are allowed, even encouraged, to forget
everyday restraints and sing, dance or shout to
their hearts' content. The tombs are lavishly
decorated, and many sites house additional
shrines and cenotaphs dedicated to lesser sacred
personages.
A visit to the tomb is a break from the
arduous routine of daily life and the strict
social controls of Indian society. The more
popular locations arc equipped with small
rooms around a courtyard in which entire
families can stay overnight, or for a few days.
Visits to these tomb sites have become part
of the secular tradition of the people, attract¬
ing them regardless of their religious affiliation
or walks of life. They are places where rich and
poor, uneducated and educated, Muslim,
Hindu, Christian and Jain all come together,
some to be cured of illnesses and some to be
helped to cope with their everyday problems
lost love, debt, despair. People whose wishes
have been granted return to give thanks
throughout their lifetime.
A mother gives
her daughter a ritual bath.
85?"
A young woman makes a wish
by knotting string on the
latticed wall of a saint's tomb.
