Culture and health
BY CLAUDINE BRELET-RUEFF
Modern medicine may be coming round to the idea
that the sick are not 'machines' but people rooted in
their cultural and natural environment
Medicine, perhaps more than any other
of the activities that contribute to our
survival, depends on the cultural context in
which it is practised, dealing as it does with
birth, suffering and death, those essential fea¬
tures of our human condition. People have
been receiving medical attention since long
before biology and chemistry came into being,
long before the advent of Western-style pre¬
ventive medicine. Highly efficient therapies
some of them, such as the trepanation and
dental surgery performed by the Incas, involv¬
ing the use of amazing techniques have been
employed for thousands of years.
Only recently, however, have such tradi¬
tional forms of medicine been studied in the
West. Their significance and value have been
more deeply understood by Westerners thanks
to the worldvicw of modern physics (relativ¬
ity and quantum theory, thermodynamics)
in which everything is seen in terms of inter¬
action and decolonization, which has given
peoples previously held in contempt an
opportunity to make the voices of their cul¬
tures heard once more.
Western medicine, which had hitherto
regarded human beings as "machines", is grad¬
ually coming round to the idea of treating
"the whole person", in accordance with an
outlook that in some respects links up with
that held in traditional societies. The medical
model that is thus emerging is no longer inter¬
ested solely in disease but in health in a general
sense, and in the psychological and cultural
factors from which it stems.
Those who extol the virtues of progress
are sometimes annoyed by certain "irrational"
aspects of traditional forms of medicine, but
the fact is that they spring from cultures that
firmly believe in the existence of a network of
interdependences between human beings and
the universe at large; a person's relationship
with nature, in the broadest sense, is regarded
as that of a humble partner, not a proprietor.
The various types of traditional medicine,
from shamanism to Ayurveda, reflect widely
different ways of thinking, but all of them, as
the following examples show, tend to see
humans as an integral part of the world as a
whole, and science and spirituality as being
different points on the same continuum.
Shamanism
A feature common to the various forms of
shamanism found all over the world, from
Siberia to Amazonia, is the practice of diag-

nosis and therapy through an ecstatic state. In
addition to possessing a profound, albeit
empirical, knowledge of the medicinal prop¬
erties of plants, the shaman performs also as
poet, soothsayer, healer and sometimes magi¬
cian and ventriloquist as well, but he is above
all else an initiate. Initiation, the personal expe¬
rience of the threefold mystery of suffering,
death and resurrection, bestows an aura of the
sacred on him. While he is officiating, his body
is covered in signs and objects symbolizing
his powers. He is able to communicate with
spirits that arc invisible to the eyes of the
uninitiated, and his words translate the mur-
A man with a peace pipe is
silhouetted against the sky in
Canyonlands National Park,
Utah (U.S.A.). North American
Indians traditionally regard
smoking the peace pipe as an
act symbolizing that they
belong to the world. The pipe
is ritually presented to the
4 points of the compass before
being lit.
murs of the deep forest or the windswept
steppes.
As an initiate, he is able to enter in spirit
into his patient's body, to drive out demons
and pursue them in the world beyond. The
convulsing womb of a woman about to give
birth thus becomes a universe peopled with
monsters and mythical beasts, metaphorically
representing the contractions and fears with
which she must contend. The shaman can give
the ailment not only a name but also material
form, removing, often by sucking, from the
patient's body or soul the crystals and blood-
soaked down he has chewed.

*&*:
A man leaning on a crutch
consults a physician-priest.
This low-relief scene adorns a
royal tomb of the 6th Dynasty
(mid-3rd millennium B.C.) at
Aswan in Egypt.
While the shaman is performing his rites,
the patient is never isolated from the world. As
during voodoo ceremonies in Brazil or Benin,
all his kith and kin arc on hand during the
"therapeutic drama" that helps purge the sick
of their ills. The responsibility for coping
with suffering is shared.
Medicine in ancient Egypt
In addition to the meagre information about
ancient Egyptian medical practices that can be
gleaned from papyri, we can appreciate the
anatomical knowledge required by the tech¬
niques used in the process of mummification
to remove the brain, viscera and eyeballs, and
the Egyptians' command of the antiseptic
properties of the essential oils, resins, herbs
and spices they used not only to embalm the
mortal remains of their dignitaries but also
to treat many illnesses.
Like scribes, sorcerer-physicians were trained
in a "house of life" whose supreme master and
first initiate was the ibis, symbol of the god
of wisdom. When sleeping, the ibis curls itself
up into the shape of a heart, just like the hiero¬
glyph which represents "goodness" and which
is made up of three signs vibration (or air), the
individual (through whom life on earth is car¬
ried on), and the mouth (through which
breathing, also manifested in the beating of the
heart, passes). As in Chinese medicine, the "heart
speaks" throughout the body.
Hippocrates, the famous Greek physician
of Antiquity, who had studied the healing art
in the temples of Egypt, divulged the lessons
he had learned. His aphorism "We are what we
eat" and his pronouncements on the impor¬
tance of the interaction between people and
their environment tie in with the explanation
given in the Ebers Papyrus Treatise on the

functioning and knowledge of the heart:
"Four vessels (metou) lead to the liver and
convey moisture and air to it. They then cause
all kinds of illnesses." As well as being the seat
of the intelligence, the "heart" is also the organ
that powers and steers the body, distributing
energy thereto via the metou, which carry air,
waste products and blood. Each individual's
blood is held to pulsate at its own specific fre¬
quency. This pulsatory conception of the
human being might explain why so many of
the incantations that have been rediscovered
were not accompanied by any form of treat¬
ment. Others were performed at the same time
as particular potions were administered.
Rationalists are often put out by the mag¬
ical aspect of pharaonic medicine, such as the
use of sacred sleep in temples. This therapy,
probably induced by hypnosis that weakened
self-awareness, might have remained a puz¬
zling phenomenon if sleep cures had not come
to be used in modern clinics.
As disciples and servants of Thoth, the
compassionate god entrusted by Ra with the
protection of humanity, the sorcerer-physi¬
cians did not claim to have invented the spells
they intoned or the treatments they pre¬
scribed. Their lore came from the gods. Learn¬
ing alone is not, however, enough to make a
good physician, whose status is indissociable
from that of priest. Not only must he study
while young, work hard and long so that
knowledge, as it were, comes naturally and
grows of its own accord, but he must live an
upright life, since "holy things should be
taught only to those who are pure".
Aztec angst
A god of the Mixtee Indians of
Mexico (1200-1500 A.D.)
associated with medicine.
Underlying the culture of the Aztecs was a
sense of dread stemming from their belief that
the world they knew was doomed to be wiped
out by fearsome earthquakes, just as the four
previous worlds had been annihilated by cat¬
astrophes. The gods had had to sacrifice them¬
selves in order to overcome death, and humans
likewise had to pay the price of their survival
in human blood. The Spanish chronicler y

A Dayak shaman in
Kalimantan (Indonesia)
exorcises a spirit which has
possessed a child.
Bernardino de Sahagún, who arrived in Mexico
in 1 529, relates that never a day passed but that
women were sacrificed to the goddess of salt,
or children to the rain gods. Their hearts were
torn out in order that the sun might not die.
From their earliest years, children were sub¬
jected to the severest discipline of a mystical
and military hierarchy. Depending on the
social class to which they belonged, boys were
educated either in local schools which pre¬
pared them for the productive work of the
community, or in religious schools whose
austerity trained them for their future roles as
priest-physicians or high officials of the state.
Illness was seen as a divine punishment
provoked by a disturbance of the cosmic bal¬
ance resulting from the failure of the sick to
conform to the natural order to which every¬
one should submit on pain of unleashing the
wrath of the gods and bringing on further
cataclysms. The responsibility of the sooth¬
sayer-priest {ticitt), as the humans' go-between
with the gods, was therefore not so much to
treat ailments that had been sent as punish¬
ments as to find out, especially by means of
astrology and sacred numerology, what the
sick had done to displease the gods. He
employed simple forms of divination (recov¬
ery was guaranteed if grains of maize thrown
down on the ground or into a pot of water did
not separate; otherwise the patient would die)
but also used hallucinogenic plants such as
peyotl (Anhalonium lewinî), a small spineless
cactus, and sacred mushrooms such as the teo-
nanacatl (Paneolus campanulatus), which were
eaten to induce the collective trances that
accompanied human sacrifices.
The Aztec pharmacopoeia comprised some
12,000 medicinal plants ipatli) which were sold
A Quechua Indian in Ecuador
blows tobacco smoke at the
V head of a patient. Tobacco is
one of the most widely used
plants in the regional
pharmacopoeia.

The annual "Awile" ceremony
held near Lake Ahémé (Benin)
to drive out evil and banish the
previous year's sufferings.
in the markets of the main towns and were
sometimes grown in the floating gardens
known as chinampas. They were used mainly
for the purpose of treating minor ailments.
Among the Aztecs, where the individual was
absorbed bodily into the community, illness
was regarded primarily as the sign of some
disturbance of the cosmic order, fraught with
the dread of a punishment on which their
afterlife depended.



Sacred medicine
and all-round health
Although it is clear from these few examples
that traditional medicine is indissociable fro m
the spiritual path chosen by the society within
which it is practised, there are certain features
common to all forms of such medicine that are
absent from modern medicine. These are:
'«* a holistic approach to the individual, seen
as a multi-dimensional at once physical,
mental, social and spiritual being who lives
in close interdependence with his or her nat¬
ural environment and with the vast, mysteri¬
ous cosmos;
a view of the physician's role as being close
to that of the priest, or indeed the sorcerer, at
any event of the initiate who needs to have
direct experience of death and suffering. The
physician has to be upright and pure, and is
held accountable to men and the gods, if not
indeed to life itself;
'* learning based upon observation of living
reality and a thorough, albeit empirical,
knowledge of the natural environment and
natural resources, including cosmic rhythms,
which are reflected in the fluctuations observ¬
able in human health.
Traditional medicine's characteristically
global approach to life and the human being is
attracting growing interest in the West, which
nowadays takes a would-be holistic view of the
world holos being the Greek both for
"whole" and for "sacred". Hence, the defini¬
tion of health given by the World Health
Organization (WHO) can also serve as a uni¬
versal definition of the human being consid¬
ered in all his or her many dimensions: health
is "a state of complete physical, mental and
social well-being and not merely the absence of
disease or infirmity." This definition bids
modern society to draw inspiration from the
wisdom of traditional medicine. It offers
modern medicine an opportunity to find the
path of harmony and wisdom.
