Fe a rs for a new millennium
Genetic manipulation, the emergence of unknown viruses and the impact of new information
technology are three fears of the future shared by environmentalists and the public at large.
In the next 20 years, specialists say, radically new threats will be added to the list of those beset-
ting the planet today. In a survey carried out in 72 countries by the French ministries of research and
the environment with support from the European Commission, a thousand scientists were asked to
rank the dangers in order of importance.The poll’s results were published in early 1998.
Genetics and biotechnology top the list of concerns. “Basically this has to do with genetically
m o d i fied organisms,” says Alain Pavé of the French National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS).
“ People are afraid that genes introduced into certain plants will spread into the environment. Th i s
is possible either through hybridization of different plant species or through a virus that picks up
the genes and takes them elsewhere.”
S e c o n d , researchers are afraid that the results of their work are analysed too hastily. “ C l i m a t e
forecasting is a typical example,” says Pa v é .“ The models converge where temperature increase
at planetary level is concerned, but there is no agreement as to how it will affect different regions.
The data we have cannot justify worldwide measures to cut greenhouse gas emissions.”This does
not prevent catastrophic scenarios on the consequences of global warming in local contexts from
making the rounds.
Researchers themselves are sometimes tempted to engage in more or less inspired guess-
w o r k . For example, they fear the emergence of new diseases “through fear of viruses like HIV or
Ebola spreading from their natural environments,” Pavé says. “In all like l i h o o d , Aids developed as
a result of contact between people and wildlife in central A f r i c a . But we still don’t know what
mechanisms govern these phenomena.”
Some scientists are wary of new information technology, which they regard as a threat to
d i v e r s i t y. “Our environment is shaped by culture,” Pavé explains. “If societies become standardi-
z e d , so will landscapes.” H o w e v e r, he acknowledges that no one knows what the long-term
effects of information technology will be. Perhaps that’s precisely why people are worried.
S. Bou ■
