The world’s oceans could provide a limitless
source of energy, according to Indian che-
mist Madanjeet Singh, an intern at i o n a l
a u t h o rity on the subject. But exploiting ocean
energy is no simple mat t e r , if only because the
possibilities of doing so differ from region to
region.Experiments have been carried out with
tidal and wave power and with ocean therm a l
e n e r g y. Few applications of these technologi e s
are currently in use, but their number could
increase in the coming centuries—if they attract
investment on a massive scale.
Ocean tides constitute a clean and inex-
haustible energy source, free from the climatic
irregularities which are a constraint on wind
and solar power. But places suitable for exploi-
ting them are few and far between, for if a tidal
power plant is to operate efficiently certain
conditions must be met. A river estuary where
the difference between high and low tide is at
least five metres is necessary. It must be pos-
sible to construct a dam, and there must be a
nearby source of electricity supply to make up
for the intermittence of power production lin-
ked to the times of high and low tides.
One of the world’s most suitable sites is the

H a r n e s s i n g
ocean energ y
The tidal power station at La Rance (Fra n c e ) .

estuary of the river Rance, in western France,
where the difference between high and low
tides averages 8.17 metres, peaking at 13.5
metres during the equinoxes. The world’s first
tidal power plant began operating there in
1966. It is still the biggest, with a capacity of
240 megawatts (MW).
Tidal power plants consist of a high-capaci-
ty dam built across an estuary to hold back the
water at high tide.At low tide sluice gates in the
dam are opened to release a cascade of water
that drives a turbine to generate electricity.
In China, says Singh, “eight plants with a
total capacity of 6,210 kilowatts exploit tidal
energy.”There is a 20MW plant at Annapolis in
Canada. But although many other suitable sites
exist, construction costs are considered too
high, especially as hydroelectric power is plen-
tiful and cheaper. Tidal power plants are plan-
ned on Russia’s White Sea and on the Severn
and Mersey estuaries in the United Kingdom.
Putting the waves to work
In 1945, Japan became the first country to
consider using sea waves as an energy source,
followed by Norway and the UK. The first
power plant to use wave power, OSPREY
(Ocean Swell Powered Renewable Energy),
began operating in northern Scotland at the
beginning of August 1995. A 2MW facility,
OSPREY was designed along the following
lines: waves entering a kind of submerged
chamber open at the base pushed air into tur-
bines to generate electricity sent via an under-
water cable to the shore about 300 metres
away. Unfortunately, the plant was damaged by
the waves and then destroyed by a storm.The
engineers who designed it did not give up,
however, and a cheaper and more efficient ver-
sion is being developed to supply small islands
with much-needed electricity and to power a
seawater desalinization plant.
Quite different technology is needed to turn
the sea’s thermal energy into electricity. The
sea’s surface temperature in the tropics ranges
from 27 to 31°C all the year round and that of
deep water ranges from 6°C at a depth of 1,000
metres to almost 0°C at 4,000 metres. This
temperature difference can be used to power a
motor based on the same principle as that of
the heat pump. A liquid is turned into gas in an
evaporator, and then drives a turbine which
generates electricity, before passing through a
condenser, where it is turned back into liquid.
The snag is that the process requires huge
turbines. The first practical application of this
method was by the French engineer Georges
Claude, who in 1930 loaded pipes and turbines
onto a ship off the coast of Cuba. American
engineers are working on the idea of siting floa-
ting power plants off the southern coast of the
U.S. and one facility has been operating in
Hawaii since 1981. Such plants could supply
floating cities of the future with electricity, air-
conditioning and fresh water, while the unpol-
luted,nutrient-rich cold water brought up from
the depths could be used to breed fish and
shellfish and grow edible seaweed.
But according to Scottish engineer S. H.
Salter, the most promising device is a “tapering
c h a n n e l ” , i nvented by a Norwe gi a n , E ve n
Mehlum.As Singh describes it,“The waves are
funnelled into a tapered natural or artificial
channel. The water level rises and the water
e ventually spills into an elevated reservo i r
behind the narrow end of the channel. The
water then flows back to the sea through a tur-
bine, generating electricity in the process.”This
reliable, low-cost system is already operating in
Norway and Java.
Salter believes that if we use our imagina-
tion we will find an endless variety of ways of
harnessing the sea’s energy. One of them would
be to use the difference between sea levels. In
Egypt, water running through an underground
canal linking the Mediterranean to the El-
Qattara depression could be used to generate
electricity. In Israel, the same principle could
be used in a canal between the Mediterranean
and the Dead Sea which would gradually des-
cend 400 metres, although the estimated bil-
lion-dollar price tag is a deterrent.
Mr. Singh concludes that “clean energy
from the sea will be especially popular when
the price of oil is no longer governed by econo-
mics but by environmental costs. Cutting car-
bon dioxide emissions will help save the pla-
net.” ■
France Bequette
0
1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1996
15.7% 14.9% 21.8% 26.2% 25.4% 31.5%
Millions of barrels/day
World onshore and offshore petroleum production
O f f s h o reOn s h o re
15
30
45
60
75
Offshore coal deposits
Chromite
Diamonds
Tin
Iron
Marine aggregates
Mineral sands
Gold
Placers
Platinum
Calcareous sands
Rare earths
