For most people their gr e atest invo l ve m e n t
with the sea is when they stand on a beach
and look out to the horizon only a few kilo-
metres away.Ye t ,b e l ow the surface and beyond the
h o rizon is a hidden deep ocean that influ e n c e s
the lives of eve ryone on Eart h .Arguably the most
i m p o rtant influence of the oceans is the role that
they share with the at m o s p h e r e , biosphere and
cryosphere in determining the Earth’s climate.
Scientific exploration of the oceans started
only 125 years ago with the global circumnavi-
gation by the British admiralty vessel HMS
Challenger. That and subsequent expeditions
mapped the oceans’ depths and water proper-
ties (temperature and salinity) so that by the
mid-twentieth century we had developed a
g e n e r a l , if imperfect, u n d e rstanding of the
ocean’s physical processes.
Today, scientists are in the middle of a
major project—historically even more impor-
tant than the work of the Challenger. It is called
the World Ocean Circulation Experi m e n t
(WOCE) and is part of the the World Climate
Research Programme. The project is charting
the complex ocean currents using modern
research vessels, buoys and robot instruments
to collect very precise measurements. Satellites
are observing sea surface temperature, winds,
waves, tides and the changes in the sea surface
slopes caused by currents. By using some of the
world’s largest computers to analyse this data,
we are beginning to reveal the ocean as clima-
te’s hidden engine.We are about to enter a new
age of ocean exploration.
To understand in the simplest terms the key
role of the ocean, think of it as an enormous
reservoir for the sun’s heat.The oceans have an
extraordinary capacity to store and move heat.
In fact, the heat needed to warm the top three
metres of the ocean by one degree Celsius
would warm the entire atmosphere by the same
amount. This enables the ocean to save the
excess heat of summer and then slowly release
it during the next winter. We clearly see the
effect this has by comparing the temperature
differences between winter and summer on an
island and in the middle of a continent at the
same latitude. For example, the Azores and
Kansas City are both close to 400 N and yet the
temperature ranges are 70 and 290 C respecti-
vely.
This storage capacity is just one part of the
climate equation. Ocean currents also carry
heat around the world.The Gulf Stream and its
branches, for example, bring heat from Florida
towards Ireland and onwards to the Arctic, lea-
ving northwestern Europe about 100 C warmer
than Labrador, which sits at the same latitude.
In simple terms, the ocean’s surface current
system carries heat from the equator towards
the poles, the water returning in cold deep cur-
rents. Scientists on the Challenger saw evidence
of this when they measured surface equatorial
water of almost 300 C, while at the bottom tem-
peratures were near 00 C.
The heat transport is enormous too—the
North Atlantic, for example, is carrying heat
polewards at the rate of 1,000 million mega-
watts (equivalent to fifty times the global popu-
lation’s energy consumption). This system of

We are on the threshold of understanding 
the oceans’ role as the lungs of the planet 
and a driving force behind climate.
C l i m a t e ’s hidden engine
John Gould*
Satellite image of ocean surface
c u r re n t s. Red areas are those
w h e re heat exchange with the
a t m o s p h e re is most intense.

warm and cold currents is referred to as the
thermohaline circulation. The Atlantic branch
is in some ways the key to the global system. A
r o u n d - t rip on the thermohaline “ c o nve yo r
belt” can take a thousand years.
The thermohaline circulation is dri ve n
partly by the winds and the earth’s rotation and
partly by the conversion of surface water to
cold, deep dense water at high latitudes. Its
name, thermo (heat), haline (salt), gives a clue
as to how it works.The salt prevents water free-
zing when heat is lost to the atmosphere in the
polar winters, and so dense water (below 00 C)
sinks to the seabed in small, intense “chim-
neys” and feeds deep, narrow currents threa-
ding their way equatorward along the ocean
floor. This water slowly mixes with warmer
water above it and thus completes the
“conveyor belt”.
By mapping these circulation routes, scien-
tists are on the threshold of understanding the
oceans’ role in climate and its variability. The
present El Niño event is a wonderful example
of why this is important. When an El Niño
occurs, warm water usually held in the western
e q u at o rial Pa c i fic by the prevailing winds
migrates eastwards towards South America.
This causes weather changes both locally and
around the world. Thanks to an observational
n e t work of Pacific bu oys and computer
models, we were able to predict in early 1997
that an El Niño was starting. However, we
could not precisely forecast the severity of the
impacts on weather patterns around the globe.
We still cannot be sure which of the many ano-
malous events in 1997 were attributable to El
Niño, but past experience suggests that many
were.
As we learn more about climate we start to
see other patterns emerging. The difference
between atmospheric pressures measured in
the Azores and in Iceland is a measure of the
strength of westerly winds over the Atlantic.
This North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) index
can be linked to colder and warmer winters in
Europe as the winds bring heat from the ocean
to the land.This helps to explain the unusually
mild European winters of the early 1990s. In
contrast, the bitter cold and snow of the 1940s
which led to Hitler’s botched assault on
Moscow were linked to extremely low NAOs.
Clearly, the ocean holds a key to more pre-
cise and longer-range we ather predictions.
With advanced warning, farmers could plant
drought-resistant crops if need be. An early
forecast of unusually high temperatures or wet
conditions might enable doctors to prevent the
onslaught of tropical diseases.
Predicting climate is a harder problem.The
uncertainty surrounding global warming and
the impact of greenhouse gas emissions has
given a new impetus to ocean research.WOCE
has involved scientists from thirty countries
making observations over the past eight years.
That experiment’s findings and our knowledge
of El Niño will be built on by a new project on
Climate Variability and Predictability (CLI-
VAR) to model all aspects of the climate from
the seasonal/interannual monsoons to long
term (decades to centuries) climate variability
and the possible influences that humanity may
have.
We have much to learn about the effects of
global wa rming on the seas. The list of
concerns is endless. Rising sea temperatures
affect everything from sea level rise to availabi-
lity of fish stocks. Some computer models sug-
gest it could also trigger a breakdown of the
Atlantic component of the “ t h e rm o h a l i n e
conveyor belt”, which might create at least a
temporary end to Europe’s relatively mild cli-
mate.
Finally, global warming might also affect
the ocean’s capacity to absorb carbon dioxide
(one of the most problematic gr e e n h o u s e
gases).The seas currently draw about two bil-
lion tonnes of CO
2
out of the atmosphere each
year. (To put this in context, human activities
release about seven billion tonnes each year).
However, rising temperatures limit the sea-
water’s physical capacity to absorb CO
2
. Can
we afford to take even more risks and neglect
the oceans? ■
* Southampton Oceanography Centre, UK

Surface circulation of ocean waters.
S i m p l i fied chart of the thermohaline circ u l a t i o n .
Warm Shallow
C u r re n t
Cold and Salty
Deep Curre n t
Sea-to-Air 
Heat Tra n s f e r
