‘I’ve never sailed this far South.Yachtsmen
seldom come here, i t ’s magi c a l . I t ’s an
honour to stick my nose down here.This is
A d venture with a capital A ” . Canadian ya c h t s-
man Gerry Roufs uttered those words before the
sea swa l l owed him up during a violent storm bet-
ween Australia and Cape Horn early last ye a r.
His death is an awesome reminder of the ve ry
real dangers incurred by these adve n t u r e rs ,w h o s e
t h rilling exploits grip the public’s imagi n at i o n .
Frenchman Christophe A u g u i n , who won the
1996-97 Vendée Globe, the dangerous round-
t h e - world race via the South Pole that took Roufs’
life,is another example of bravery.
Auguin, Roufs and other weather-beaten
heroes like them are too modest to cry victory
over the elements. Florence Arthaud, the first
woman to win a transatlantic race, is one of the
grittiest figures in the world of long-distance
racing. On land she is surrounded by a circle of
friends, but she loves being alone on the ocean.
The yachtswoman’s intense relationship with
the sea led her to give up everything at eigh-
teen, including medical school and a cozy life
with her family in Paris’ chic 16th arrondisse-
ment. Arthaud, who has been nicknamed “the
sweetheart of the Atlantic”, says she was drawn
to sailing because it brings her back to life’s
basics: eating, sleeping and surviving.
Solitude is the recurring theme in the lives of
all these sea-fa r e rs. From England’s
Tr a n s atlantic along the historic route betwe e n
Plymouth and Newport , which made the legen-
d a ry French yachtsman Eric Tabarly fa m o u s , t o
the Vendée Globe, which does not allow compe-
t i t o rs to receive any assistance or stop off at
p o rts of call, long-distance racing is first and
foremost a personal challenge. Isabelle A u t i s s i e r ,
a Frenchwoman from the Pa ris suburbs and one
of five sisters , s ays that sailing “makes me feel
totally self-sufficient. I do just what I wa n t , w h e n
I wa n t . M aybe I’m really trying to prove some-
thing to myself—or to others ” .
Alain Bombard, who vo l u n t a rily cast himself
a d rift in an inflatable dinghy in 1952, s ays one
of the century ’s wildest exploits was Gérard
d ’ A b ov i l l e ’s solo voyage across the Pa c i fic in a
r ow b o at . Like a modern - d ay galley slave , he set
out from Japan in July 1991, reaching the We s t
Coast of the United States in November of the
same ye a r. D ’ A b ov i l l e , the total solo adve n t u r e r ,
f u l filled his wildest dreams and proved to the
world that willpower can move mountains.
A l t h o u g h , in his own wo r d s , he did not spend “ a
single enjoyable moment” on the lonely cros-
s i n g, D ’ A b oville achieved his goal. “I thought
for sure crossing the Pa c i fic was impossible, bu t
mulled the idea over in my mind a long time.
W h at I liked about it was reaching my goal. I
got a huge thrill out of slowly working my way
across the wo r l d ’s biggest ocean, which cove rs
half the globe.”
D r. Jean Y ves Chauve , a long-distance
racing specialist and the official physician for
most of the sport’s major events, says that, in
addition to a love of taking risks and accepting
challenges, these far-roving adventurers seek a
very personal kind of “retreat” from the world.
As he sees it, solo long-distance yachtsmen—
and women—are eager to discover the unk-
nown latitudes of their own minds, most likely
coming home stronger and wiser.
The experience changes some of them fore-
ve r. B e rnard Moitessier, who inspired many
people to start sailing, n e ver went home from the
first round-the-world race, the Golden Globe,
organized by the British in 1969. Although in the
l e a d , after sailing past Cape Horn the gr e at sea-
man decided to set out around the world a
second time instead of heading for England. H e
d i d n ’t drop anchor until reaching Po l y n e s i a .
“ W h at does it mean to go round the wo r l d , s i n c e
the horizon never gets any closer?” he pondered
Landlubbers all over the world
thrill to the exploits of intrepid
solo yacht racers.

in La Longue Route, a firs t - h a n d
account of his voya g e .
Many will set out in search of
a world Isabelle Autissier calls
“the other side”, looking for the
unusual beauty that Moitessier
found so stunning in these latitudes. The far
south of the A t l a n t i c, Indian and Pa c i f i c
oceans—the roaring forties, the screaming fif-
ties—is a boundless watery wilderness where
none but a few thrill-seekers would ever dare to
venture. Cam Lewis, who in 1993 became the
first yachtsman to sail around the world in less
than eighty days, wrote in his log book about
not seeing any land, ship, plane or sign of
human life for weeks. He described the sense of
peace that came over him on the open sea and
what it was like listening to the sound track of
The Big Blue in stereo as the boat rode the
crests of the waves in a violent storm, giving
him just enough time to glimpse the vast
expanse of ocean before plunging into a trough
again.
Yet even when they take all the necessary
precautions, those who venture out on to the
open sea  risk their lives. Especially since the
high-tech craft they sail today zoom ahead at
amazing speeds.The corporations that sponsor
them want to see their investments pay off.
Speed is the name of the game. A case in point
was the 1998 Whitbread round-the-world race
that pitted the best international racers against
each other. New Zealander Grant Dalton
wrote in his log book that this way of sailing is
unsafe, but wondered whether he and his fel-
low competitors had any choice. If you don’t
want to finish last, you have to tear ahead at the
risk of being smashed to bits.
Advertisers have been quick to seize upon
the public’s fa s c i n ation with long-distance
yacht racing as a way of reaching promising
new markets.The genuine seaman, Dr. Chauve
says, has the power to make others experience
adventure vicariously. These races do have a
strong impact on the collective imagination. A
million people turned out in the Breton port of
Saint Malo to watch the start of the Rum
Route race in 1994. Several hundred thousand
onlookers welcomed Christophe Auguin on his
return when he reached the French Atlantic
port of Les Sables d’Olonne. On a chilly win-
ter’s day a crowd over 300,000-strong cheered
on Bruno Peyron and his crew as their catama-
ran finished a round-the-world voyage in less
than 80 days. The yachtsman from La Baule
got some idea of the public’s enthusiasm from
the thousands of messages that poured in
during the hair-raising adventure. “I’m thin-
king of you all every day. It helps me forget the
metro and the blues,” said one message from
Pa ri s. A hospital surgeon followed eve ry
moment, writing “hang in there—we’re kee-
ping up with you hour by hour.We admire your
courage and willpower.” A message from the
French Alps read, “you fellows are doing what
other people only dream about.”
In countries other than France, the excite-
ment of experiencing these adventures vica-
riously runs even higher.The United Kingdom
has knighted its gr e atest ya c h t s m e n . N e w
Zealand made eight attempts to win the presti-
gious America’s Cup before succeeding at last
in 1995. It was a great triumph for the three
million New Zealanders, who live in the teeth
of the wind and the sea all year round, and
they’re counting on a repeat performance when
Auckland hosts the America’s Cup in 2000.
But national feelings should not come into play
here.The sea has no borders. It is open to every
dreamer. All it takes is a little humility on the
part of those setting out and imagination on
the part of those who stay ashore. As Bernard
Moitessier wrote about his joy at being before
the mast, “Wind, sea, boat and sails, a world
that is both compact and considerable, without
beginning or end, a part and yet the whole of
the universe, my private universe, all my own.”
■
Dominique André



Sea f e v e r
In San Diego, C a l i f o r n i a ,a n
enthusiastic crowd turns out to
cheer the winners of the A m e r i c a ’s
Cup in 1995.
‘Sailing makes me feel
totally self-sufficient.
I do what I want,
when I want. ’
