S O M A L I A’S BITTER HARV E S T
w Dan Kiambi
An ambitious international project to maintain crop variety in a war-torn country
In 1989 a scientist travelled from Somalia to Ke n ya
with a precious cargo in his luggage—a complete
duplicate set of the 284 samples of sorghum and
maize genetic material from Somalia’s Baidoa/Afgoi
gene bank. His destination was the Ke n ya National
G e n e b a n k , where the collection would be conserved
along with 27,000 samples of genetic material from
a wide range of crops.
At the time the scientist could not know just
how important this trip was to be. Two years later,
a civil war broke out in Somalia.It is still not over,
and one of its casualties has been the
Baidoa/Afgoi research and conservation centre.
The entire gene bank of local plant crop varieties
has been wiped out.
According to a survey carried out in 1996-97, t h e
continued state of unrest in Somalia not only seve-
rely damaged farm production,but also led to the loss
of some local crop species altogether.This is why the
duplicate collection held in Ke n ya became so impor-
t a n t . In 1996, with funding from the European
U n i o n , through the Somalia Office in Nairobi, i n
c o l l a b o ration with Co-operazione Italiana Nord-Sud
(CINS) and the National Genebank of Kenya,scien-
tists from the International Plant Genetic Resources
Institute (IPGRI) embarked on an ambitious project.
They would reproduce crop seed material from the
genetic samples stored in Ke n ya and repatriate it to
Somalia for planting.
The project concentrated on the Middle
Shebelle, a fertile flood plain in Somalia, covering
the three districts of Balaad, Bulu Burti and
Jowhar. Researchers assessing the effects of the
war found that farmers there had access to a very
limited number of crop varieties. Seeds were often
scarce and of low quality. Hungry families, too
poor to buy new seed, were eating the very seed
stocks they were hoping to plant for food.The war
had destroyed irrigation systems, as well as crucial
farming equipment including milling machines,
water pumps and tractors.
After consultations with local administra t o r s,
farmers and NGOs working in the area, p r o j e c t
scientists introduced 151 sorghum and 14 maize
samples that had previously been multiplied gene-
tically by the National Genebank of Ke n ya and air-
freighted to the project site. The materials were
supplied to 90 farmers for on-farm trials in nine dif-
ferent villages, three in each district. A parallel on-
station trial was set up at the CINS project site at
D e g a n l e y, in Balaad, for comparison.
After about a year, farmers had selected 13
varieties out of the 165 samples for further trials.
If the farmers were happy with the results, they
would adopt them as part of their farming practi-
ce. The project also set up a new gene bank of
over 240 samples of the reintroduced seed mate-
rial at Deganley, just in case.
But disaster struck again. Rival factions of the
Somali warlords attacked the base at Deganley and
destroyed the new gene bank, including some mate-
rial collected in Somalia during the project. Th e
a t t a c kers stole the centre’s computer with all the data
and software. They also held one CINS expatriate
scientist captive for three days before releasing him.
In November 1997, following this attack, the
project terminated its activities in Somalia. It was
not possible to follow up the on-farm trials to see
how farmers got on with the 13 selected elite
plant varieties. But the results already looked pro-
mising and farmers have the seeds. With luck,the
best ones will filter into the farming systems in the
course of time and help re-diversify the genetic
base of sorghum and maize, if not in the project
site, then elsewhere in Somalia. n
w Regional Office for Sub-Saharan Africa (Nairobi) of
the International Plant Genetic Resources Institute.
