Crimes against 
humanity
The first definition of these crimes was given
in the Charter of the Intern ational Military
Tribunal set up by the Allies to prosecute the
major Nazi war criminals (the Nuremberg
Tribunal) in 1945. It runs as follows: “murder,
e x t e rm i n at i o n , e n s l ave m e n t , d e p o rt at i o n , a n d
other inhumane acts committed against any civi-
lian population, before or during the war, or per-
secutions on political, racial or religious grounds
in execution of or in connection with any crime
within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal,whether or
not in violation of the domestic law of the coun-
try where perpetrated.”
The United Nations Convention on the Non-
Applicability of Stat u t o ry Limitations to Wa r
Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity of 1968
added the following provision:“eviction by armed
attack or occupation and inhuman acts resulting
from the policy of apartheid, and the crime of
genocide.”
Genocide
This term coined by Raphael Lemkin, a
Polish-born American scholar, comes from the
Greek word genos (race or tribe) and the Latin
suffix cide (from caedere, to kill).
Regarded as the most serious crime against
h u m a n i t y, it was legally defined by the
Convention for the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide, which was unani-
mously adopted by the United Nations General
Assembly on December 9, 1948, entered into
force in 1951, and has so far been ratified by 130
states. Three major conditions for the identifica-
tion of genocide (article 2) are:
1) The victims must belong to a national, ethni-
cal, racial or religious group, as such. Political,
economic or cultural groups (e.g. the victims of
the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia) are thus 
excluded.
2) The members of this group are killed or perse-
cuted because of their membership of the group.
3) Genocide is a planned collective crime com-
mitted by those who hold state power, on their
behalf or with their express or tacit consent.
Article 3 defines as punishable acts: genocide;
conspiracy to commit genocide;direct and public
incitement to commit genocide; an attempt to
commit genocide; and complicity in genocide.
Article 4 stipulates that all persons commit-
ting genocide shall be punished, whether they are
constitutionally responsible rulers, public officials
or private individuals.
The International 
Criminal Court (ICC)
The notion of an international penal tribunal
is mentioned in the 1948 Genocide Convention.
But it was not until 1998 that 120 countries (out
of 160 participants) meeting in Rome adopted a
statute for a permanent International Criminal
Court (ICC) to sit in The Hague (Netherlands).
The Court will be created when 60 states have
ratified the treaty on its statutes, a process which
should take two or three years.
The ICC will have (non-retroactive) jurisdic-
tion over war crimes, crimes against humanity,
and genocide, under certain conditions.
Signatories have the opportunity not to recognize
its jurisdiction over war crimes.
Ad hoc 
War Crimes Tribunals
The War Crimes Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia was set up by a resolution of the UN
Security Council in May 1993. Based in The
Hague, it is empowered to prosecute those char-
ged with serious violations of international law on
the territory of the former Yugoslavia, including
war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genoci-
de.
So far 91 persons have been charged (inclu-
ding Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic), 31
of whom are in custody. Sentences ranging from
seven days to 20 years have been handed down to
eight defendants. Four trials are currently being
held.
The Tribunal for Rwanda, based in Arusha,
Tanzania, was set up by the UN Security Council
in November 1994. It has jurisdiction over the
same crimes as the above, committed in Rwanda
or neighbouring countries between January and
December 1994.
So far, 48 persons have been charged, 38 of
whom are in custody. Five defendants have been
sentenced, including three to life imprisonment
for genocide. Three trials are currently being
held. ■



B u i l d i n g b l o c k s
of international justice
War crimes presuppose combat between nations. Genocide and crimes against humanity, on
the other hand, may be committed during conflicts within states. An international criminal
c o u rt to try these offences is in the works.
