tely make possible a genuine redistri bution of
i n c o m e .
The fight against human poverty needs more
time than the fight against income poverty alone.
This disparity is probably even greater in coun-
tries particularly subject to economic instability
(East Asia), or where the socio-economic system
has suffered a major shock (the former Soviet
Union), or where the human development poten-
tial is still a long way from being fully achieved
(sub-Saharan Africa).
The extraordinary way in which apparently
entrenched situations can be reversed in the
struggle against poverty throws sharply into ques-
tion the “sustainability” of the policies followed
so far and also of those which are going to have to
be adopted to tackle the long-term human conse-
quences of crises which can be solved relatively
quickly in narrowly economic terms. A new chal-
lenge for the start of the 21st century is how to set
up mechanisms to guarantee human security in
the face of the multifarious risks inherent in a glo-
balized economy. n

The economic crises of the late 1990s hit harder than 
those of ten years ago. How can the world’s poor be sheltered
from the uncertainties of a globalized economy?
Another lost decade?
Thierry Lemaresquier and Mümtaz Keklik*
n
At the end of the 1980s, when East and
Southeast Asia were starting to set the pace
not only for economic performance but also
for reducing income poverty, a weakened sub-
Saharan Africa and Latin America were painfully
emerging from a lost decade.
A string of disasters in the 1990s—economic
c ri s i s , debt and political paralysis—wiped out the
a d vances these continents had made over the pre-
ceding 20 ye a rs and plunged new sectors of their
p o p u l ation into pove rt y. The same kind of stri k i n g
contrasts can be seen in a survey of the 1990s—new
c atastrophes afflicting entire regions and dashing
hopes of a substantial world-wide reduction of
p ove rty at the dawn of the third millennium.
The crisis that has gripped East Asia since
1997 has jeopardized at breathtaking speed the
hard-won economic achievements of the last 30
years. In the former socialist countries of Eastern
Europe and the former Soviet Union, what is
politely called a “transition” has, for want of the
economic, legal and political infrastructure nee-
ded for the switch to a market economy, led to a
collapse in real wages and a dizzying rise in inco-
me disparities. In sub-Saharan Africa, the hopes
raised by the recent resumption of growth in
some countries have been cancelled out by the
AIDS epidemic.
Do the 1990s already represent a lost decade?
As we emerged from the 1980s, despite all the
economic disru p t i o n s , i m p r ovements in such
fields as adult literacy, life expectancy and infant
mortality helped to limit the negative impact of
loss of income by many people.Unfortunately the
same cannot really be said of the crises which
East A s i a , the “ t r a n s i t i o n ” s t ates of Eastern
Europe and the countries of sub-Saharan Africa
are facing today.Why?
The short - t e rm effects of a recession can be
cushioned by va rious macro and micro-econo-
mic measures, including maintenance of social
spending and extending society’s safety nets. B u t
when the crisis is so violent that it sweeps away
most of the progress made in the field of human
d e ve l o p m e n t , the situation is quite different.T h e
solutions then call for the use of not just the stan-
dard economic measures but also for a long-term
commitment to making social policy more effec-
t i ve and reforming the institutions which ultima-
The short-term effects of a
recession can be cushioned by
various macro and 
micro-economic measures,
including maintenance of social
spending and extending society’s
safety nets
* Thierry Lemaresquier and Mümtaz Keklik 
are respectively director and consultant in the Social Development
and Poverty Elimination Division of UNDP’s Bureau of Development
Policy.
Of the 4.4 billion
people in deve l o p i n g
c o u n t ri e s, n e a rly thre e -
fifths lack basic
s a n i t at i o n .Almost a
t h i rd have no access to
clean wat e r. A quarter
do not have adequat e
h o u s i n g.
