Can we p re vent c r i m e s
against humanity?
Canadian judge Louise Arbour, former chief prosecutor with the
International Criminal Tribunals (ICT) for ex- Yugoslavia and Rwanda, 
b e l i e ves international law is making great strides in violence pre ve n t i o n
How has setting up ICTs helped the groups of
people directly concerned to turn the page on
atrocities they have experienced?
These tri bunals have been a spectacular innovat i o n .
For the first time, the intern ational community has
shown its concern not only with the short term—
stopping armed confli c t — but also with the long
term. It has noted that in the Balkans and Africa’s
Great Lakes region there was very little hope of
achieving lasting peace based on reconciliation and
social reconstruction unless the truth about past
events was established.The recording by interna-
tional inve s t i g at o rs of irrefutable evidence of cri m e s
prevents history from being falsified and the past
from being distorted.
When the truth is told, the need to dispense jus-
tice becomes obvious. I t ’s ve ry important to pin cri-
minal responsibility for any crimes that have been
committed not only on those who actually committed
them but also on political and military leaders. In so
d o i n g, the law at least recognizes that the victims
h ave a legal status and to some extent restores their
d i g n i t y. It also stops them from setting themselves on
a course for reve n g e , an agenda which can be handed
d own from generation to generat i o n .
Do you feel the ICTfor the former Yugoslavia
has helped victims to come to terms with the
burden of memory, a process which is crucial to
reconciliation? In Bosnia, thereÕs a kind of
ÒapartheidÓ between communities.
The ICT has not yet contributed to reconciliation
in Bosnia because it has not been given the neces-
sary resources. Justice cannot be fully done part-
ly because of the refusal of some governments to
gather evidence and arrest people who’ve already
been indicted.
The existence of an ICTfor the former
Yugoslavia doesnÕt seem to have prevented the
events in Kosovo.
The ICT did not have an immediate deterr e n t
effect because the UN Security Council didn’t use
its resources to oblige Serbia (the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia) to carry out the arrest warrants the
ICT had issued.This encouraged the criminals to
feel that in practical terms they were going to enjoy
impunity and immunity. Throughout the Kosovo
conflict, from January to June 1999, I repeatedly
urged the intern ational forces there to arrest people
under indictment. I think this was the right deter-
rent message to send to the parties in Kosovo.
It’s clear that those who committed crimes in
K o s ovo were more aware of the risk of being
indicted and that this influenced their methods.
The common gr aves in Kosovo dug up by ICT
investigators have provided a lot of evidence, cer-
tainly enough to make the authors of these crimes
realize that the law can always find such evidence,
whatever lengths the criminals may go to in order
to cover up their crimes.
How has the ICT helped to promote reconcilia-
tion in Rwanda, where people are afraid of the
massacres starting again?
M i l i t a ry leaders , people accused of ve ry seri o u s
responsibilities for the genocide, m i n i s t e rs and eve n
the former prime minister (who has confessed his
guilt) are awaiting trial in prison in A ru s h a , in Ta n-
zania.They are no longer in a position to fan the
flames of tension, so the risk of violence has been to
some extent reduced. In Rwanda,even more than
in Bosnia, the culture of impunity has existed for
d e c a d e s.Violence goes in cy c l e s , but responsibility
for it has not been proven.The ICT represents a
change of direction in this respect but it wo n ’t have
an immediate impact.
What can we expect from the proposed
International Criminal Court (ICC), which will
be the first permanent institution of its kind?
Setting up the ICC is a huge and irreversible step
for the world.When it’s up and running it will be
able to respond fairly quickly to events and to indict
suspected criminals before they can commit furt h e r
m a s s a c r e s. ICTs were set up after crimes were com-
mitted in Bosnia, C r o atia and Rwa n d a . But in
K o s ovo, indictments were made at the highest leve l
at the beginning of June 1999 for crimes com-
mitted between January and May. Such speed was
possible because the ICT and its infrastru c t u r e
were already in place.
So an ICC, if it has the necessary muscle, will be
able to act and intervene in real time,which is an enor-
mous step forwa r d . If there’s the political will to arr e s t
people who’ve been indicted, e f f e c t i ve prevention of
c rimes against humanity can be env i s a g e d . ■
Interview by Martine Jacot, 
UNESCO Courier journalist
