The central figure in your best-known novel,
Pereira Declares, A Testimony, is an 
ageing and lonely widower who is in charge 
of the cultural pages of a newspaper.
Why did you choose an anti-hero as your
main character?
I’ve always been drawn to tormented
people full of contradictions. The more
doubts they have the better. People with
lots of doubts sometimes find life more
oppressive and exhausting than others,
but they’re more energetic—they aren’t
robots. I prefer insomnia to anaesthesia. I
don’t go for people who lead full and
satisfying lives. In my books, I’m not on
the side of the authorities. I’m with those
who’ve suffered. My first novel, Piazza
d’Italia, was an attempt to write history
that hasn’t been written, history as writ-
ten by the losing side, in this case the
Tuscan anarchists. My books are about
losers, about people who’ve lost their way
and are engaged in a search.
What are they looking for?
T h e y ’re looking for themselves through
o t h e rs , because I think that ’s the best way
to look for oneself.The main character in
Indian Nocturn e, who retraces the steps of
a friend who’s disappeared in India, is invo l-
ved in such a quest. And so is Spino, t h e
character in The Edge of the Hori zo n w h o
t ries to find out the identity of an unknow n
corpse.I don’t know whether these people
are going to find themselve s , but as they live
their lives they have no choice but to fa c e
up to the image others have of them.T h e y ’r e
forced to look at themselves in a mirr o r ,a n d
they often manage to glimpse something of
themselves.
After the success of Pereira Declares with the
Italian public, there was some talk of your
running for election to the Italian Senate. Do
you regret ruling out that opportunity?
No, I’m happy to go on living the life
I’ve chosen. I’m a university teacher and I
like my job. Literature is my life of cour-
se, but from an ontological point of view.
From an existential point of view, I like
being a teacher. Literature for me isn’t a
wo r k a d ay job, but something which
involves desires, dreams and fantasy. I
don’t want to promote my own image
either. I don’t like going on television or
mixing in literary circles. I live quietly at
home among my family and fri e n d s.
Besides, there are politicians who do the
job far better than I ever could. I think it’s
more interesting to keep a sharp eye on
politics. My job is to look at what politics
is doing, not be a politician myself.
Your latest novel, “The Lost Head of
Damasceno Monteiro” (1997), is based on the
story of a man who was murdered in a
Republican National Guard police station on
the outskirts of Lisbon and whose headless
body was found in a park. Why did you use
this real-life event?
I was in Portugal when this shocking
act occurred. I was deeply revolted.When
a crime offends human nature, it offends
us personally.You feel both horrified and
guilty. My emotions, sensitivity and ima-
gination as a writer were moved by this
event. Look, I have here the documents
drawn up by human rights investigators
from the Council of Europe in Strasbourg
who monitor conditions of detention in
European countries. They talk about the
relations between the police and citizens
in police stations—places of detention to
which you or I would be taken today if we
broke some law or other in the street.
A N TONIO TA BUCCHI: 
A COMMI TT ED DOUBT ER
An Italian novelist jolts the forces of complacency in the world of fact as well as fiction 
If a politician’s job is to 
soothe people, to show that
all’s well because of his or 
her presence, mine is to
disturb people, to sow the
seeds of doubt. The ca p a c i ty 
to doubt is very important for
human beings. For heaven’s
s a ke, if we don’t have any
doubts, we’re fin i s h e d !
1. Ludwig Wittgenstein,Austrian-born British
philosopher (Vienna 1889-Cambridge 1951), was
one of the founders of modern analytic
philosophy. “The limits of my language constitute
the limits of my mind,” he wrote in his Tractatus
Logico-Philosophicus. In “Plato’s Gastritis”,
Tabucchi criticizes this logic, which he describes
as “very sensible but very limited”because “it
only allows us to talk of what is known”.
Did you use these documents when you were
writing the novel?
Ye s , I wanted to know about the situat i o n
in Po rt u g a l , which is rather concern i n g .R e a-
ding other reports made me realize things are
the same nearly eve rywhere else in Europe,
including in countries which seem more
d e m o c r at i c. But democracy isn’t a state of
p e r f e c t i o n . It has to be improve d , and that
means constant vigi l a n c e . I thought I had to go
b e yond the actual event and talk about it
through a novel—to gi ve fictional treat m e n t
to this violent occurr e n c e . In a nove l ,my fee-
lings and sense of outrage can find a broader
means of expression which would be more
symbolic and applicable to many European
c o u n t ri e s.
What was the Portuguese public’s reaction 
to the book?
I didn’t get many requests for interv i e w s.
People generally don’t go in for self-cri t i c i s m ,
so I’m not surp rised when a foreign writer is
attacked for looking too closely at this kind of
i n c i d e n t .But when Sergeant José dos Santos,
the killer, finally confessed to his crime and
was sentenced to 17 ye a rs in jail, the Po rt u-
guese press asked me how I’d been able to pre-
dict the outcome of the trial in my nove l , as if
I was a fort u n e - t e l l e r. I was in Istanbul at the
t i m e ,and when I got back to my hotel I found
n e w s p a p e rs had fa xed me lists of questions.
But I don’t think I have any particular talent
for prediction, because when you have three
or four elements in hand,you don’t have to be
a genius to reach certain conclusions.Fa n t a s y
and imagi n ation are also a kind of intuitive
k n owledge which doesn’t have much to do
with Wittgensteinian logi c,1 as I said in my
book “ P l at o ’s Gastri t i s ” . But they are a form
of know l e d g e , one involving suspicion and
d o u b t .

K EEPING HIS OP T IONS OPEN
Antonio Tabucchi is used to writing his novels on
hot, empty July afternoons in Lisbon, where he
lives for six months of the year. But this summer, he
had other things on his mind. None of his colleagues
in the International Parliament of Writers was able
to go to East Timor to write about the referendum
there in late August, a historic step in the Timorese
people’s fight for independence from Indonesia. He
hesitated to go to this island 700 kilometres from
A u s t ralia because he was afraid he wouldn’t be able
to get back in time to give key evidence in favour of
a gypsy family in a court case in Florence.
This is a ty p i cal situation in the 56-year-old wri-
ter’s life. Tabucchi waits for things to happen and
keeps all his options open. He knows that an encoun-
ter with a book, a picture or a person can give a new
twist to a person’s life. His own changed after he read
on a train journey a poem called Ta b a c a r i a ( “ T h e
Tobacconist’s”), by the Portuguese poet Fe r n a n d o
Pessoa (18 8 8 - 19 35). He went to study in Lisbon and
developed a passion for the country which, he says,
is now part of his “genetic baggage”.
With María José de Lancastre, he has tra n s l a t e d
much of Pessoa’s work into Italian and written a book
of essays and a play about him. In 1992, he wrote a
novel in Portuguese, Requiem: A Hallucination, which
a friend later translated into Italian for him. Ta b u c-
chi is married to a native of Lisbon and has a daugh-
ter “who is more Portuguese than Italian and a son
who is more Italian than Po r t u g u e s e ” .
He was born in Vecchiano, a village not far from
Pisa, in Tuscany. Nearby is the University of Siena,
where he teaches literature six months of the year.
The subject of his next course will be the Brazilian
poet Carlos Drummond de Andrade (19 0 2 - 87 ) ,
whom he got to know in Rio de Janeiro.
Tabucchi writes a column for the Italian new s-
paper C o r r i e re della Se ra and for Spain’s El País.
Among his various awards are France’s Medicis
Prize for the best foreign novel in 19 87, Europe’s
Jean Monnet Prize in 1994 and the Nossack Prize
from the Leibniz Academy in 1999.
In the 1995 Italian parliamentary election ca m-
paign, the hero of his novel P e re i ra Declare s
b e came the symbol of left-wing opposition to com-
m u n i cations magnate Silvio Berlusconi. Many
people identified with the Portuguese journalist
who, in 19 38 during the Salazar dictatorship, com-
mitted a bold act of rebellion. Today Tabucchi is
k n own first and foremost as “the author of P e re i ra” .
This book continues your debate with the
Italian semiologist and writer Umberto Eco.
What’s the root of your disagreement with
him?
Eco sees the intellectual as an organizer
of culture, someone who can run a maga-
zine or a museum. An administrat o r , i n
fa c t . I think this is a melancholy situat i o n
for an intellectual. I claim the right to take
a stand once in a while. When something
strange happens in the world or in yo u r
h o m e , you have to look into it to see if yo u
can pin it dow n , work it out, talk about it
and sound the alarm : “Look out! This is
happening in my home, in my tow n , in the
wo r l d , which is also my home.” On the
other hand, an intellectual would be totally
witless if he said: “Something terrible is
happening in my home but I can’t get
interested in it because I’m putting toge-
ther a catalogue for an exhibition of pain-
tings in my local museum.”
So what do you think an intellectual should be
doing?
If a politician’s job is to soothe people,
to show that all’s well because of his or
her presence, mine is to disturb people,to
sow the seeds of doubt. The capacity to
doubt is ve ry important for human
beings. For heaven’s sake,if we don’t have
any doubts, we’re finished! An intellectual
is going to have doubts, for example,
about a fundamentalist religious doctrine
that admits no doubt, about an imposed
political system that allows no doubt,
about a perfect aesthetic that has no room
for doubt. Doubts are like stains on a
shirt. I like shirts with stains, because
when I’m given a shirt that’s too clean,
one that’s completely white, I immediate-
ly start having doubts. It’s the job of intel-
lectuals and writers to cast doubt on per-
f e c t i o n . Perfection spawns doctri n e s ,
dictators and totalitarian ideas.
Are you absolutely certain about this?
There are some fundamental values
i t ’s impossible to be wrong about.
Nobody can disagree with the saying “do
not do unto others what you would not
have done unto yourself”. That’s some-
thing basic, that’s part of human nature. I
don’t have any doubts either about the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Perhaps some more should be added to
the list, but I don’t have the slightest
doubt about human rights.
Doubts begin when political action is taken.
For example, was it right or wrong to underta-
ke military intervention in Kosovo to stop
human rights violations?

article entitled “Florence, the capital, but
the capital of gypsies”—note the use of
the word “but”. In it, a columnist sneered
at seminars on gypsy culture that had
been organized by the Michelucci
Foundation, of Fiesole, near Florence.
Fifty years after half a million gypsies
were exterminated in the Second World
War—thousands of them in Auschwitz—
we’re again preparing the mass killing of
this minority.
Why are gypsies so often the target of this
kind of violence?
Xenophobia manifests itself especially
against civilizations and cultures that are
weak because they lack economic
r e s o u r c e s , means of subsistence or land. S o
nomadic people are the first targets of this
kind of aggr e s s i o n . Sometimes it isn’t phy-
sical violence but violence in the form of
i n t o l e r a b l e , subhuman living conditions
like those the gypsies on the outskirts of
Florence have to put up with. I ’ ve cri t i c i-
zed this situation in a report that wa s
recently published in Italy2. M a ny gypsies
h ave fled their own countries and are
nomads by necessity after escaping from
the war in Yu g o s l av i a . A society which
c o n s i d e rs itself civilized can’t treat people
like that . I t ’s contrary to the notion of
culture and hospitality, to the ve ry spirit of
our civilizat i o n , which ori gi n ates in
Ancient Greece and European humanism.
What did you mean when you titled one of
your articles “I am an Albanian”?
The salt of any interesting civilization
is mixture.A civilization that’s closed and
i n ward-looking is steri l e . C i v i l i z at i o n s
that are worthy of attention have mana-
ged to incorporate a variety of ingredients
and elements. As a writer, I’ve always
been interested in others. The most
important basis of any novel is wanting to
be someone else, and this means creating
a character. We all want to be someone
else but without ceasing to be ourselves. I
think it’s very important to defend this
“The salt of any interesting civilization is mixture.” Above, Berlin police gesture Romanian 
gypsies to move on.

Xenophobic violence 
is the most serious conflict 
in Europe today, one which 
I think it’s imperative 
for intellectuals and writers 
to oppose in word and deed
article published by one writer was com-
pletely different from and contradictory
to that published by another the day befo-
re. I think this is very important.
But politicians also have to make decisions.
There comes a moment when doubts have to
be left behind.
Ye s , but I still prefer politicians who lis-
ten to the doubts of others and start hav i n g
a few doubts themselve s. I t ’s ve ry useful
when politicians have doubts because there
are so many choices to be made in the
wo r l d . U n f o rt u n ately politicians in Europe
these days are more concerned with fig u r e s
and accounts than with pri n c i p l e s.T h e y ’r e
like Eco’s intellectuals: political adminis-
t r at o rs and bu r e a u c r at s.
One of the most worrying kinds of violence in
Europe nowadays is rooted in xenophobia.
What do you think about that?
Xenophobic violence is the most
s e rious conflict in Europe today, o n e
which I think it’s imperative for intellec-
tuals and writers to oppose in word and
deed. It has broken out in many coun-
tries, for economic and social reasons like
u n e m p l oyment and clandestine migr a-
tion. But we have to make a distinction
between skinheads, for example, who are
simply the embodiment of brute force,
and people whose speeches and writings
p r ovide theoretical backing for racial
hatred and attacks on minorities. This is
being done openly, with virtual impunity.
In June 1999, Italy’s third-biggest news-
paper, Giornale della Toscana, printed an
2. Gli Zingari e il Rinascimento, Librerie Feltrinelli,
April 1999.
Yes of course. But remember that
during the Kosovo war, writers could
express themselves freely, which I think
was a very good thing. Many members of
the International Parliament of Writers
(IPW) did so because we set up a network
of newspapers , including L i b é rat i o n
(France), El País (Spain) and Corriere
della Sera (Italy). Every day, a writer
spoke up. There were many conflicting
viewpoints, but I think writers’ opinions
were expressed with great freedom during
the war. Who were the only people who
d i d n ’t have any doubts at the time?
Politicians and the military. But writers
expressed one doubt after another. An

idea in real life too.
What has had the greatest influence on your
political life?
It’s hard to say. Perhaps the story of
my country, my childhood, my grandfa-
ther, the First World War. My interest in
human rights originates in anti-war fee-
lings that go back to my childhood. I was
born in the Second World War during the
Nazi invasion of my country. I vividly
remember the stories my grandfather told
me about the carnage of the First World
War, which people tend to forget was one
of the worst massacres in human history.
So this antipathy to violence goes back to
my childhood, to my grandfather and to
the anarcho-libert a rian and republican
tradition of my native Tuscany.
You’re one of the founders of the International
Parliament of Writers. How did it get started?
Three hundred intellectuals from
around the wo r l d , including To n i
M o rri s o n , Günter Grass and Octavio Pa z ,
founded it in 1993 after the murder of the
A l g e rian writer and poet Tahar Djaout.
The idea was to set up an organization to
p r o t e c t , almost phy s i c a l l y, w ri t e rs and
intellectuals threatened with deat h , p e rs e-
cuted or imprisoned in their countri e s. A
year lat e r , we set up a council of about 50
m e m b e rs. Its first president was Salman
R u s h d i e , who was unfort u n ately not just a
symbol but a living target of such pers e c u-
t i o n . Our current president is the Nigeri a n
w riter Wole Soy i n k a .We have a network of
about 30 “ r e f u g e ” cities which offer wri t e rs
and their families a decent place to live and
enough money to subsist and take part in
the city’s cultural activities—its librari e s ,

East Timorese lining up to cast ballots in the August 30, 1999 referendum 
on independence or autonomy.
schools and associat i o n s.
Are any of these cities outside Europe?
Yes, they exist in Brazil and Australia.
Mexico City recently became a refuge-
city, in line with a tradition going back to
the 1920s and 1930s, when the Mexican
capital took in many persecuted intellec-
tuals from Europe. I went to Mexico City
in March 1999 with the secretary-general
of the IPW, the French writer Christian
Salmon, to sign an agreement whereby
the Mexican authorities provided a refuge
for two writers,Vladimir Arsenijevic from
Serbia and the Kosovar-Albanian writer
Xhevdet Bajraj. Both of them now live in
Casa Citlapletel, a house run by the
Friends of the IPW association.
Has any IPW action given you particular
satisfaction?
Everything it’s done has been useful.
Our notion of a writer is a very broad one.
It includes Shakespeare and a journalist
working on a newspaper in a remote villa-
ge in Afghanistan. But I’m very happy
that Italy, whose only refuge-city so far is
Venice, will soon have three more such
towns in Tuscany—Grosseto, Pontedera
and Certaldo. I’m very fond of Certaldo
because it was the birthplace of
B o c c a c c i o, the gr e at medieval Italian
novelist. They’re all quite small towns
where writers can get together more easi-
ly than in a big city.
The IPW organized support for the August
1999 self-determination referendum in East
Timor. Why?
When you have a foreign invasion—in
this case by the Indonesian army—wri-
ters, intellectuals, newspapers and maga-
zines are the first targets of repression.
Xanana Gusmão, the Timorese leader, is
a poet and a journalist. In 1994, the IPW
voiced support for the self-determination
of the Timorese people in the name of
fundamental principles of justice and civi-
lization. More recently, we asked for the
referendum to be held without fraud and
without violence by the anti-independen-
ce militias which are conniving with the
Indonesian regime. I think the internatio-
nal community, the United Nations, will
have to insist and bring pressure to bear
so a military power like Indonesia doesn’t
crush the people of this little island. So I
agree with Nobel Peace Prize winner José
Ramos Horta when he says that if you call
for troops to get out of Kosovo, you must
also demand the withdrawal of
Indonesian troops from East Timor, even
though the public seems to think that a
European country is more important than
a tiny island in the Indian Ocean. People
have a right to live, even on an island
which seems insignificant to most people.
n
Interview by Asbel Lopez
