Lung Ouane Phothiphanya is tired but happy.
In the main room of Wat Xieng Thong, one of
the most splendid pagodas in Luang
Prabang, the former Laotian royal capital, he has
just finished his daily rehearsal of traditional pup-
pet theatre with a group of young pupils. Now 75
years old, he is the only remaining practitioner of
this art.
“There used to be 12 of us in this neighbou-
rhood, but now I’m the only one left. Rehearsals
started a couple of months ago, with help from
the ministry of culture, and I think the puppets
will be saved,” he says as he puts away the two
sticks he used to mark time during the show.
Nearby, the local children and a handful of tou-
rists are still under the spell of the music and
gentle movements of these little puppet charac-
ters, who range from benevolent princes to villa-
ge jesters and fearsome demons.
At the other end of the city, near the Talat
Dara market, children go in the evenings after
school and all day on Saturdays to the Young
People’s Cultural Centre, where their activities
include music, traditional drawing, weaving, and
reading stories. “We’ve still got a lot to do to
maintain the intangible parts of our cultural heri-
tage like dancing, music, poetry and puppetry,
and develop and pass them on to the children,”
says Khamphouy Phommavong, the local repre-
sentative of the ministry of culture. “Traditional
music is still alive and dance is starting up again.
Tourism is helping this to happen.”
A cautious opening
Luang Prabang has taken on a new lease of
life.The former capital of northern Laos, on the
banks of the upper Mekong river, it was harshly
treated by the rulers who took power in the 1975
revolution, abolished the monarchy and set up
the People’s Democratic Republic of Laos.
Some of the city’s inhabitants were sent to re-
education camps. The city withdrew into itself,
many houses became derelict, the shops on the
main street closed down, the pagodas were deser-
ted and traditions faded out. Few tourists ventu-
red into what was almost a ghost town. Things
slowly began to change in the 1990s, as the
government—which had sought to introduce “a
new way of thinking” and then “new economic
methods”—became more flexible and the coun-
try opened up economically.
And now the city, which today has 60,000
inhabitants, has come back to life. Since 1995,
many small businesses and restaurants have ope-
n e d . And tourists have returned to Luang
Prabang, increasing from 19,000 in 1996 to
44,000 in 1998, according to official figures.The
city now has 45 hotels, compared with only six in
1993.
The authorities have always been cautious,
fearing that a too sudden upsurge in tourism
would bring with it drugs,prostitution and dama-
ge to the environment. Nevertheless, entry into
Laos has been made easier. Visitors no longer
have to go through government-approved travel
agencies or get special permission to drive around
the country. Since 1997, entry visas have been
issued on arrival. Also, the decision to declare
1999 and 2000 as “years of tourism” perhaps
indicates a change of heart by the government, or



Luang Pra b a n g
a ghost town returns to life 
w Francis Engelmann
The former royal capital of Laos is turning back to its traditional culture
and its arc h i t e c t u ral heritage
w The author of Luang Prabang
( AS Ap u b l i s h e r s, Pa r i s, 1 9 9 7 ) , and a
member of the UN E S C O m i s s i o n s
that prepared the listing of Luang
Prabang as a World Heritage site.
Evening prayers for young monks at Wat Xieng pagoda,
built in the 16th century.

at least some people in it. At any rate, official
figures show that last year tourism became the
country’s main source of income.
The traditional way of life in Luang Prabang is
one of its charms for the alert stroller. N o i s y
m o t o r - b o ats on the Mekong have been banned
and have to keep their distance from the city. T h e
r e l i gious life of the monasteri e s , goldsmiths at
wo r k , women we aving among the stilts support i n g
the houses and old ladies taking offerings to pago-
das are scenes that captivate touri s t s.
Visitors are more numerous when the city’s
famed religious or ethnic festivals are going on.
The main event, the Laotian New Year in mid-
April,features parades,dances and the procession
of the Buddha Phra Bang, the city’s spiritual
guardian. As well as these festivities, which have
recovered their former spirit,there are a variety of
family celebrations, which passing visitors are
often generously invited to join in.
This cultural renaissance goes side by side
with the longer-term job of preserving the city’s
architectural standards, which has been a matter
of concern for the last decade. “In 1990, all we
planned was the partial restoration of the old
royal palace and the city’s finest pagodas,” says
Thongsa Sayavongkhamdy, director of museums
and archaeology in the national capital,Vientiane.
“Gradually we realized that the beauty of Luang
Prabang was something to be seen as a whole—
not just the religious buildings but also the houses
around them, and then nature itself, the jewel of
it all.”
A protected zone has been marked out in the
old part of the city and a preservation and deve-
lopment plan is almost ready. Plans for improving
sewage treatment are on the drawing board. A
broader urban development plan will enable deci-
sions to be made about future extensions of the
city and the startup of businesses near the new
stadium, just below the old town.
Since Luang Prabang was put on UNESCO’s
World Heritage List in 1995—600 of its buildings
are classified—many houses have been restored
along traditional lines. Koutis—monks’ dwellings
typical of the city’s architecture—have been resto-
Vientiane
Luang Prabang
China
Viet Nam
Thailand
Cambodia
Myanmar
(Burma)
Gulf of
Tonkin
LAOS
One of Luang Prabang’s many colourful festivals: a procession starring a wild boar, the symbolic animal of 1998,celebrates the Laotian New Year.

red or rebuilt in their original form. The finest
pagodas have also been refurbished. Most of the
saffron-robed novices who can be seen in and
around them are children of needy families who
r e c e i ve secondary education in the pagodas
thanks to money donated by the faithful.
The House of Heritage has played a key role in
the successful restoration of Luang Prabang’s
architectural heri t a g e . It brings together seve r a l
g ove rnment ministries and attracts sizeable fun-
ding from abroad. “The streets and the quay s i d e s
of the Mekong and its tri bu t a ry were restored
firs t ,” s ays Laurent Rampon, a Frenchman who is
one of the three foreign experts working perm a-
nently at the House of Heri t a g e , of which he is the
main architect. “ We now want to clean and bri g h-
ten up the alleyways which lead to important bu i l-
dings such as the house of Lung Khamlek.” T h i s
big edifice perched on stilts is one of the rare
examples of Luang Prabang’s pre-colonial ari s t o-
c r atic architecture. Some outstanding wo o d wo r k
was crafted during its restorat i o n , which wa s
recently completed.
Tight regulations
for building and restoration
The people of Luang Prabang come to the
House of Heritage for help and advice on buil-
ding, repairing and extending houses in the pro-
tected zone. No building work can be done
without permission from the House,which makes
sure that projects harmonize with the style of the
old town. But the restrictions imposed by the new
regulations and concern for the general good are
not always accepted without complaint. Some
people are benefiting from tourism,but others see
the city’s listing as a World Heritage site as inter-
ference in their right to alter their houses as they
please or, for example, to fill in a pond at the bot-
tom of their garden.
Even the bonzes sometimes object to the new
rules. “Why do I have to ask someone who usual-
ly goes down on his knees before me what colour
tiles I’m allowed to use to mend the roof of my
pagoda?” asks one venerable monk who dislikes
not being absolute master in his monastery. A
scheme to help the bonzes will soon be under way
with Norwegian funding. In co-operation with
the Buddhist clergy it will seek to preserve the
authenticity of the religious heritage and revive
certain skills traditionally practised by the bonzes
such as stencil painting, enamelling, giltwork and
religious sculpture.
“ We want to rely on the people and see that
they benefit from protection of the heri t a g e ,” s ay s
Chansy Phosikham, Luang Prabang’s gove rn o r.
“ We also have to think about the social and econo-
mic development of the whole city.” A small tax on
t o u rism activities has been proposed. R a m p o n
s u p p o rts it because “it will enable us to subsidize
the use of traditional building mat e ri a l s , which are
c u rrently too expensive for many small house-
ow n e rs and also sometimes not ve ry good quality.”
It remains to be seen whether people will accept
such a tax.
Despite the problems, a lot has been achieved in
Luang Prabang. Some of it is due to we l l - p l a n n e d
foreign help, especially from the European Union,
UN E S C O and the French gove rn m e n t .“ N ow - f o r g o t-
ten building mat e rials such as whitewash and tradi-
tional plasterwork have been analysed in laborat o ri e s
a b r o a d ,” s ays Phommavo n g .“ We ’ ve also been helped
by experts who have worked with us for long per-
iods and who we ’ ve gradually learned from.And we
c o u l d n ’t have done it all without the tireless help of
Y ves Dauge.”
D a u g e , the mayor of Chinon in central
France, and a member of the French parliament,
has set up “decentralized co-operation” between
the administration of the two cities (something
new for Laos) and has lobbied for Luang Prabang
at international level. He says the Laotians were
suspicious at first, but then came to trust him, as
they have retained control of the operat i o n s
throughout.
Laotian culture ministry officials reckon that
what has happened in Luang Prabang has signifi-
cantly changed the way people think. It has led to
“the drafting of regulations and especially a new
attitude by the authorities to the question of heri-
t a g e ,” s ays Sayavo n g k h a m d y. “Officials come
from elsewhere in Laos to see what’s being done
in Luang Prabang and to get ideas from it.”
But “the most wonderful thing” about Luang
Prabang is “the kindness and generosity of its
inhabitants,” says Santi Inthavong, who has resto-
red a former royal residence and turned it into a
hotel. “This heritage is so fragile that I wonder
whether it will survive the growth of tourism.” n
Luang Prabang is famed for its traditional houses with wood façades.
‘ We want to rely 
on the people and see 
that they benefit from protection 
of the heritage’
