Humanity is about to set a new record.Nearly
two-thirds of the planet’s population will be
living in cities by 2025, UN population
experts say. Until now, rural people have out-
numbered city-dwellers.
World population, according to the same pro-
jections, will top eight billion in 25 years’ time,
including five billion in cities.The increase will be
particularly spectacular in the cities of the develo-
ping world, whose total population will double to
four billion. We are going to see an unpreceden-
ted exodus of people from rural areas.
The demographers’ predictions are only ten-
tative of course (see box on opposite page). But
the flow of people into megacities in developing
countries is well under way. Several sociological
changes are behind it.
Cities used to need muscle-power for the jobs
they provided, the experts point out. But today
they no longer attract people just because of their
economic potential. “There’s plenty of evidence
that they can go on steadily attracting people even



Living with L e v i a t h a n
In the year 2015, t h e re will be 30 mega-cities with more than 8 million inhabitants—
22 of them in A s i a . How will they cope?
when the job-generating sectors are in bad shape
or disappeari n g,” s ays Philippe Haeri n g e r , a
research supervisor at the French Scientific
Institute for Development in Co-operat i o n
(ORSTOM).
People no longer move to urban centres
because they are fairly sure to find work.They do
so because they want to leave the countryside
where there are too many people tilling the land
and because they hope to leave poverty behind.
Rightly or wrongly, the city seems to offer pro-
gress and freedom, a vision of opportunity, an
irresistible lure.
The result is that both inside and outside
c i t i e s , there are more and more squat t e rs and poor
h o u s i n g .U r b a n i z ation in the developing world dif-
f e rs from that in the industrialized countri e s , s ay s
Canadian town planner Richard Stern , head of
the Urban Communities Centre at the Unive rs i t y
of To r o n t o, in “the speed of the process, the gr ow-
th of pove rt y, the extent of urban sprawl and the
expansion of the informal economy.”
Martine Ja c o t
UN E S C O Courier J o u r n a l i s t
Fortress-type housing
complexes are becoming
increasingly common in all the
world’s large cities. Here, a
high-security dwelling in
Cruzeiro, one of Brasilia’s
satellite cities.

The South’s urban re v o l u t i o n


How are the authorities in the developing
world’s urban areas responding to such “inva-
sions”? In today’s deregulated world, the trend is
to question the very idea of providing the general
population with basic urban services, most obser-
vers note. For want of resources, cities in develo-
ping countries are increasingly abandoning their
public service function.
China is still an exception to this in seve r a l
way s. O f ficials there, in a context of ri gid plan-
ning—though this has eased in recent ye a rs — a r e
t rying to prevent the influx of more rural migr a n t s
than the city economies can cope with, as the
example of Shanghai show s. Can such a policy,
which works fairly well for the moment, s u rv i ve the
political and economic changes under way ?
At the other end of the scale is Lagos
(Nigeria), whose expansion is chaotic. About 200
slums have sprung up in this African city. Every
now and then, one of them is bulldozed without
notice and without heed for its inhabitants. But
Lagos survives thanks to the vibrant ingenuity of
its millions of citizens. Another revealing city is
Jakarta,where the authorities themselves have joi-
ned in frantic property speculation. As a result of
this speculation, more than 4.5 million people
have been evicted from their homes in the last 30
years, with little compensation, to make possible
the construction of high-rise blocks, which some-
times stand empty.
How do the original inhabitants of a city react
to the massive influx of people from outside? In
more and more cities, you see smart neighbou-
rhoods protected by guards—what Brazilian
researcher Teresa Caldeira calls “fortress-cities”.
In these fortified enclaves, built partly in respon-
se to real or imagined lack of security, the roads,
sewage system,schools and other community ser-
vices are private. Outside them, public areas have
been abandoned to the least fortunate members
of the society and the infrastructure there is
crumbling or inadequate.The middle and poorer
classes also defend themselves in their own neigh-
bourhoods. One surprising case can be found in
the satellite cities just outside Brasilia, where iron
railings protect the houses, from fancy villas to
the humblest shack.
Will the mega-cities of the 21st century be
made up of islands of “social tribes”—“anti-
cities”of walled enclaves,whose wealthy residents
refuse to pay taxes to provide facilities for the
city’s less fortunate inhabitants? Will cities still
integrate their inhabitants?
“The existence of a slum means the authori-
ties have failed,” says Anthony Pellegrini, an
urban development expert at the World Bank.
The bank encourages projects where the state and
the private sector join hands to help the less for-
tunate buy plots of land in areas with an infra-
structure. Other experts say the “anti-social”
aspects of globalization should be blamed. They
would like to see the big cities of the next centu-
ry return to their original function as a crossroads
and a meeting-place. n
T h e re are hardly 
a ny open spaces left 
on the globe. . . .T h e
planet has turned into
a boundless wo rld city.
Yakov Okunev,
Russian writer
