Will tourism save the ksars and kasbahs of
the valleys and oases of southern
Morocco? Perched on rocky crags, these
f o rtified buildings made of compacted eart h
mixed with water and chopped straw are a draw
for foreign tourists in search of unusual architec-
tural sites. One jumping-off point to see them is
Ouarzazate in the Atlas Mountains, 200 kilo-
metres south of Marrakesh. This remote and
ancient little town has become a busy tourist
centre. With a total 5,502 beds in its officially-
approved hotels, it attracts more than 450,000
overnight visits every year.
The Ouarzazate region contains 300 of the
thousand or so kasbahs that have been identified
in Morocco. These structures, which come in all
sizes, are notable for the beauty of their architec-
ture and their imaginative use of space. But they
are also fragile and many of them are extremely
dilapidated.
Single-family dwellings in fortified villages or
ksars, into which there is a single entrance, kas-
bahs are remarkable for their defensive architec-
ture, usually featuring towers atop each of their
four corners. The upper parts of some of these
two- or three-storey buildings, which have roof-
terraces resting on beams made from the trunks
of palm-trees, are lavishly decorated.
Fragile and dilapidated
The earthen building material of these fragile
constructions does not stand up well to the
ravages of time and the weather. A ksar only
remains intact for about two centuries. In the
past, its occupants would then leave and build
another ksar nearby. But social and economic
changes in Morocco and the region at large in
recent decades has dealt a heavy blow to the
constant renewal of the ksars.
The end of the trans-Saharan caravan trade,
the disappearance of insecurity, the emergence of
a centralized nation-state and the spread of tele-
vision (reception dishes seem to sprout from all
the dwellings) have all helped to overturn the tra-
ditional way of life in oasis societies. Nowadays,
communities whose members have not emigrated
to more prosperous regions use cinder blocks to
build small houses outside the old walls and
mosques made of stronger material. These buil-
dings are too hot in summer and too cold in win-
ter, but some of them have basic amenities such
as water and electricity.
However, recent events in the village of Aït
Ben Haddou, a village about 35 kilometres from
Ouarzazate, show there is still hope for the ksars.
Thought to have been founded in the 11th centu-
ry, Aït Ben Haddou has six kasbahs and some 50



A slow re s c u e for Moro c c o ’s
earthen citadels
w Mohamed Berriane
Reviving southern Moro c c o ’s ancient fortified villages 
is no easy task
w Geographer, professor at Mohammed V University, Rabat,
Morocco
When the river is in full spate, the fortified village of Aït Ben Haddou is difficult to reach.

Aït Ben Haddou
Marabout
Area
occupied
by the
new
village
Former
ksar
Wadi El
Maleh
Road
0  400 m

houses, all in ruins. Its inhabitants have moved
out and over to the other side of the wadi (river),
nearer to the main road. Today 84 families live in
this modern settlement.
A masterpiece of architecture and landscape,
the old village of Aït Ben Haddou was included on
UN E S C O’s World Heritage List in 1987. It was the
first ksar to be preserved under a stat e - s p o n s o r e d
scheme to save the kasbahs of southern Morocco.
The progr a m m e , launched a decade ago by the
m i n i s t ry of culture and backed by the United
N ations Development Programme (UN D P) ,
UN E S C O and the World To u rism Organizat i o n
(WTO) , aims to foster tourism in the region as we l l
as saving endangered items of cultural heri t a g e .
Mixed results
The job has turned out to be an arduous one.
Standard restoration methods are little use because
the ori ginal building mat e rials are not ve ry strong.
They can only prolong the life of an earthen bu i l-
ding for a few ye a rs at most.The only effective way to
p r e s e rve a ksar like Aït Ben Haddou is to pers u a d e
the villagers to return to live in it and care for it on a
d ay - t o - d ay basis.To make it habitable, the ministry
of culture has asked other ministries for help. As a
r e s u l t , the public works ministry has looked into how
to improve access to the village, which is diffic u l t
when the ri ver is in full spat e .The education minis-
t ry has approved the building of a Koranic school
inside the ksar until there are enough children to jus-
tify opening a pri m a ry school.The national electri c i t y
board has agreed to install solar energy equipment.
But the number of people invo l ved and the maze
of bu r e a u c r a cy have meant only some of the goals
h ave so far been achieve d . Cleaning and preserva-
tion work has been start e d , architectural surveys of
the village houses have been made and a prov i s i o n a l
overall plan has been drawn up.The narr ow streets
h ave been pave d , the banks of the wadi strengthened
and a footbridge built to provide access to the ksar
when the water level ri s e s. R e s t o r ation and renova-
tion work has been done on some covered passage-
way s , the façades of houses, the mosque and the
most lav i s h l y - d e c o r ated bu i l d i n g s.
But the village has not yet come back to life.
Its only inhabitants are three families which never
went away because they were too poor.
Developments that might lure residents of the
new village outside the walls to move back into
the old one—such as building an access road and
a proper bridge over the wadi and providing drin-
king water and electricity—are a long way off.
There are several reasons for this. The minis-
tries of culture, housing and tourism are not co-
ordinating their efforts.There is also a shortage of
funds because of a general decision to cut public
spending. Finally, legal tangles are holding up
work on restoring the houses because the owners
of the kasbahs—several heirs who are mostly joint
owners—now live elsewhere in the country or
even abroad.
Because of these problems, the authorities have
o f ficially dropped plans to include Aït Ben Haddou
and the kasbahs of the south in the list of local tou-
rist “ p r o d u c t s ” .They are deemed too fragile and pre-
cious to be able to stand up to mass touri s m .
But the inhabitants of the village have not
given up hope of getting some income from tou-
rism and have taken up where the government
has left off. Several foreign films have been made
on the site and the paving of the access track has
spawned a modest tourist infrastructure. Twenty-
five bazaars and souvenir shops have been ope-
ned, eight of them in the old village, as well as
four café-restaurants which also offer lodging.
Some emigrants who have returned from
abroad have even taken a chance by building a
couple of small hotels. Many organized excursions
from Marrakesh and Ouarzazate now include a stop
at Aït Ben Haddou, which is attracting around 400
visitors a day.The money from this has helped the
inhabitants of the new village to do up their houses
and buy an electricity generator.
Restoration work inside the ksar is slowly
going ahead, and the local people have set up the
Aït Aïssa A s s o c i ation for Culture and
Development, which keeps a close eye on the res-
toration work and takes part in meetings about it.
Aït Ben Haddou even seems to have started a
trend. In a number of other villages people have
recently started restoring kasbahs and converting
them into small hotels. n
Classical restoration techniques are of little help in safeguarding the fragile architecture of
southern Morocco’s ksars. One solution would be to draw back villagers who have abandoned
these fortified villages.
Many organized excursions 
f rom Marra kesh and Ouarzazate 
now include a stop at Aït Ben Haddou,
which is attracting around 400 visitors 
a day. The money from this 
has helped the inhabitants 
of the new village to do up their houses
and buy an electricity genera t o r.
