In the space of a single day, their land,
home and belongings might be eroded
by wat e r , and their live l i h o o d , e ve n
their lives, lost. But this does not deter an
e s t i m ated five million Bangladeshis from
settling on chars, t e m p o r a ry alluvial islands
made up of sand and laye rs of silt deposited
by the country ’s three major ri ve rs , t h e
B r a h m a p u t r a - Ja m u n a , the Ganges and the
Meghna.“Land is rising and disappearing
all the time. I have shifted my home 20
times,” says Akbar Ali Khondokar, a 73-
year-old man living on the island of Jigat o l a
in the Jamalpur district of northern Ban-
gladesh.
Of the three ri ve rs , the Brahmaputra-
Jamuna is the most unpredictable. It changes


DANCING WITH THE RIVERS
w Gilles Saussier
Dire poverty has driven some five million Bangladeshis to migrate to “ c h a r s ” , islands that are
periodically submerged by the country’s mighty rivers
Newly emerged grazing land on the north side of Sandwip island in the Bay of Bengal.
w Gilles Saussier is a French documentary
photographer. These photos and a longer version of the
accompanying article appear in his book Living in the
Fringe (Figura Association, Paris, 1998).
To reach the market place on the mainland,char-dwellers have to walk miles over the dry riverbed 
of Jamuna river (Tangail district).


c o u rse constantly, and we aves around the
innumerable chars, d e t e rmining all aspects
of life on these islands. In March and A p ri l
the Jamuna is almost dry,whereas from June
o n wards the flood season starts and the
water level can rise as much as six metres.T h e
average life span of a char is from 10 to 25
ye a rs. Once a c h a r is submerged, p e o p l e
settle down on the neighbouring islands and
wait for the water to recede. But if the char
is fully eroded, months or ye a rs may pass
before they can go back to it.
Paying taxes
on underwater land
In some cases it was several generat i o n s
ago that the poorest of the poor fled the
mainland and opted for a no less uncert a i n
existence on the chars. “Land is fresh and
f e rtile on the char. The harvest is better
than on the mainland,” s ays Keru Ta l u k d a r ,
a peasant now settled on the island of Ruli-
para in Tangail distri c t , central Bangladesh.
There are no precise statistics on the
char population of Bangladesh. So preca-
rious is the fate of the chars that there is
usually no post offic e , health centre or eve n
e l e c t ricity on any of these islands.The char-
d we l l e rs depend on boats to commute to the
mainland, which can be between two and
eight kilometres away.
For the char people, land is the main
Barkat Ali Mandol
Gabshara Char,
Bhuapur Thana,
Tangail district
I am 95.I was born on this char. When I was a
child many trees grew on the char and it was
like the mainland.I went to school naked. We
did not wear as many clothes as today;habits
were different. The char was eroded when I was
between 5 and 7.Since then I have moved my
home more than 7 times. The char was more
stable when I was young. Until I was 45, I
moved only twice. When I was living in the
shade of my father, life was very easy. But when
I started to live alone, life became very tough.
Before we ate our own rice. Now I have to buy
rice because of floods and erosion.I lose my
harvest almost every year.

resource but it has no permanent bounda-
ri e s. They keep property title deeds and
even pay taxes for land under water in the
hope of cultivating it again one day, once the
island re-emerges. Since there is no admi-
n i s t r ation on the islands, the char-dwe l l e rs
settle land disputes among themselve s. O n
the Jamuna ri ve r , they even sell and bu y
land under water in the hope that it will sur-
face again. For example, the char of Ruli-
para re-emerged 25 years ago and people
continue to live there today.
Human live s ,h owe ve r , are rarely lost on
c h a rs along the Ja m u n a , unlike those on
the coastal belt, because dwe l l e rs can fore-
cast floods several days in advance by obser-
ving weather conditions. The char people
constantly keep monitoring the water leve l
and when the ri ver starts to rise during the
monsoon season they leave the islands with
their belongings and return only after the
water recedes.
‘Apart from the cyclones,
life is sweet on the chars’
Children and the elderly are part i c u-
larly vulnerable during these times, as pro-
blems of storing and cooking food, and of
d rinking wat e r , can lead to malnutri t i o n
and diarrhoea.The dry season also brings
t r o u b l e : a large part of the ri ver dries up, a n d
t r avelling between chars or to the main-
land becomes extremely difficult over the
sandy ri ve r b e d . The char-dwe l l e rs must
walk as many as eight kilometres carrying
their produce under the scorching sun. B u t
the char people accept loss and uncert a i n t y
as part of their live s. “When at last our
houses become decent and the land grows
f e rt i l e , erosion comes and we have to begi n
all over again,” explains Hayat u n , a wo m a n
from Rulipara char.
For those living on chars in the Bay of
Bengal, the threat comes from the nearby
s e a .B e t ween 1960 and 1992 no fewer than
12 cyclones devastated the coastal region.
The most tragic were in 1970 and 1991
killing respectively 300,000 and 138,000
people.But the char-dwellers take the risk
because “The air is healthy.There is enough
room to breed cattle.In one year I can eat
more fish here than during a whole life on
the mainland. A p a rt from the cy c l o n e s ,l i f e
is sweet on the chars ,” s ays Fazlur Rahman
who lives on the Dhal char, one of the
outermost islands of the Bay of Bengal. n

A newly settled landless family cooks food on Gazaria island at the mouth of the Meghna estuary (Bay of Bengal).
Char-dwellers plough newly emerged land on Rulipara island (Tangail district).

Jotish Chandra Koibarta
Chachra,
Lalmohan Thana,
Bhola district
I am around 60 years old.I was born in
Chachra, two miles from the present bank,but
since then it has been eroded,and now the
place is in the middle of the river. I lost my first
wife and four sons in the 1970 cyclone. I do not
remember the name of my wife, but the names
of my elder sons were Horimohon and
Kalimohon. They were 15 and 13.When the
storm began we took shelter on a high point
next to a pond.And when the waves became
higher and higher, I succeeded in tying myself to
the top of a pile of bamboos.
I saw my family being washed away before my
eyes.
Villagers walk along an embankment as they return to their villages devastated by the 1991 cyclone.
(Bay of Bengal).
A young char-dweller crushes beans with his feet.

“The river breaks this way and wanders that way;that is its game,” say the char-dwellers.
Below, a poor landless peasant.
Golapjan
Patila Char,
Fasson Thana Char,
Bhola district
On Bhola island we were landless.
A landlord from our locality, Osmanganj,settled
us on Patila Char 20 years ago. Here our
homestead was eroded four times. We lost many
trees from erosion. The sea is very near now and
I am afraid of the high tide when it rolls. It
sounds like a bellowing buffalo. In the 1991
cyclone I sheltered on an artificially raised
mound where a land-owner kept his buffalos.
We had to survive on wet rice and fruits of
kaora trees. We didn’t have a fire until the local
official sent one of his men to bring us a flame.
It was a hard struggle to keep the fire alive.

Char-dwellers living on a flood-shelter in the middle of the Jamuna-Brahmaputra river watch the coming of a monsoon shower.

Halimon
Shaheber Alga Char
Ulpur Thana
Kurigram District
I was born in Tangail District in 1896. I came as
a 15-day-old baby with the first migrants to this
char. Then it looked different from today: it was
covered with trees and a type of grass called
catkin;there were wild animals. British people
came to hunt on the char. They stayed in
temporary camps.
Because of erosion I have shifted my home
more than 10 times. I remember that during my
childhood harvests were good. There was
happiness and peace on the chars. Now, there is
nothing.Before, there were rich and poor people
too, but the poor had,at least, some way of
earning their living. Now, most of us are poor.
People have to go work on the mainland to
survive.

Footprints in fresh mud on newly emerged and disputed land on Shahjalal char, Bay of Bengal.
In a sand-storm,char-dwellers push a three-wheeled rickshaw loaded with rice bags over the bed of the Jamuna during the dry season in Tangail district.
