In twelve months we enter the year 2000:what better time to chart a new course,by
working together every day to make possible a new society of peace,a society based
upon the democratic ideals enshrined in UN E S C O’s Constitution: l i b e rt y, j u s t i c e ,
equality and solidarity?
There can be no lasting peace without sustainable deve l o p m e n t . There can be no
d e velopment without lifelong educat i o n , without democracy, the sharing of resources to
avoid the immense disparities separating the developed from the less developed countri e s.
Within eve ry country, some citizens want for nothing, while others lack almost eve ry t h i n g .
The century that is drawing to a close has seen great discoveries and inventions, of
which antibiotics and telecommunications are but two, but the logic of force has preva i l e d
at a terrible cost—the lives of millions of human beings,m a ny of them in the flower of their
youth.Nothing of value has ever been achieved by violence and coercion.
We cannot continue to be indifferent to the wasting of our resources in the production
of weapons to be used against enemies, whether actual or potential.We cannot tolerate the
fact that , for economic reasons, thousands of helpless children are victims of sexual abu s e
or exploitation at work.We cannot continue to allow water to be polluted, forests to be
destroyed,the air of our planet to be contaminated.We cannot accept the predominance
of one culture over all others; nor can we afford to lose the diversity of the physical and
spiritual heritage that we must pass on to future generations.
We must say all together: enough is enough! Let us draw new hope from the turbu l e n t
h i s t o ry of the twentieth century.Through non-violent rebellion, c r e at i ve resistance and
refusal to accept the unacceptable, let us take steps to ease the transition to dialogue,
tolerance and reasoned consideration of that which divides us, and invent imagi n at i ve
s o l u t i o n s.
The Nobel Peace laureates,with UNESCO and the United Nations,have launched an
international appeal to transform the culture of war and violence into a culture of peace
and reconciliation.This initiative demands the participation of everyone,within families,
communities, nations and regions, and offers values that can inspire young people and
future generations to shape a world of justice,solidarity, liberty and prosperity.
Let us all, c h i l d r e n , young people, women and men of all ages, unite around this
manifesto and create a global movement for a culture of peace and non-violence. Let us
make our voices heard by decision-makers ,p a r l i a m e n t a ri a n s ,m ayo rs.Let us make full use
of the media to arouse the conscience and commitment of the world, working, giving,
sharing, reducing the distances that have divided us,healing the wounds that have given
us pain.
Let us dare to take up the challenge and fashion together this new future, and start ri g h t
away to prepare for the year 2000,the International Year for the Culture of Peace. ■



A time
for hope
Federico Mayor
The International Year for the Culture of Peace
proclaimed by the General Assembly of the United
Nations will begin at the end of this year. Now is
the time to start preparing to take part
We must say all together:
enough is enough! Let us
draw new hope from the
turbulent history of the
twentieth century. Through
non-violent rebellion,
creative resistance and
refusal to accept the
unacceptable, let us take
steps to ease the transition
to dialogue, tolerance and
reasoned consideration of
that which divides us, and
invent imaginative
solutions.
