You say that the development model 
which has been proposed as a panacea 
for more than half a century is leading nowhere.
Why?
Economic development is one of the
great myths of the 20th century. In the
1 9 7 0 s , people firmly believed Brazil
would conquer poverty and become a
world power. The same thing was said
about India, Mexico and many other
countries. But the fact is that on the eve of
the 21st century, more than 100 countries
have not developed, and only three have
managed to make a breakthrough—South
Korea, Taiwan and Singapore, represen-
ting less than 2 per cent of the population
of the so-called “developing world”.
Development in general, which has
been tried through socialism and is now
being tried through capitalism, has not
happened. For the poor countries, the
choice is no longer about how to develop
but about how to simply survive the chal-
lenges of the technological revolution and
darwinist global competition.
But some world indicators, e.g.for life
expectancy and infant mortality, are improving. .
.
The fact is that in the year 2000 about
1.5 billion people will be living in poverty
on less than a dollar a day and 2.3 billion
on less than two dollars a day, and that in
nearly 100 countries real per capita inco-
me has not increased for 15 years. The
World Bank’s dollar-a-day poverty line
and the UN Development Programme’s
Human Development Index show the
enormous extent of poverty in the inap-
propriately-named developing world.The
existence of vast numbers of people living
in a state of deprivation with such low
purchasing power means that their coun-
tries are “quasi-nations”, unable to carry
out any national project and to be part of
the global economy.
You think many countries are or will 
soon be “non-viable national economies” or,
even worse, “ungovernable chaotic entities”.
Why?
Most of these countries suffer from
what I call “the virus of economic non-
v i a b i l i t y ” — e x p l o s i ve urban populat i o n
growth and production which is focused
on raw materials at a time when the tech-
nological revolution needs less and less of
t h e m . The convergence of these two
trends dramatically hinders development
and creates a structural deadlock which
leads countries so afflicted to “stabilize”
the non-viability of their economies. Not
all non-viable economies collapse.
Countries with the strongest population
growth and the least ability to survive are


OSWALDO DE RIVERO:
D E BUNKING THE MYTHS OF
‘ D E V E L O P M E N T ’
the ones that break down into “ungover-
nable chaotic entities” (UCEs).
What are these UCEs like?
Basically the government loses control
over large segments of its territory and
population. In such economically non-
viable countries, poor income distribu-
tion, spiralling population growth and
technological backwardness lead to social
exclusion, which in turn stirs up ethnic,
ideological and religious animosity. Large
areas of the country fall under the control
of warlords, drug traffickers, ideologically
motivated guerrillas or a mixture of all
three. So chaos grows, civil society vir-
tually disappears and the populat i o n
becomes dependent on the Red Cross or
Doctors without Borders. The country is
in a state of permanent destabilization.
This what I call an “ungovernable chaotic
entity”.
Could you give us some examples?
UCEs are in a constant state of inter-
nal violence, where fighting altern at e s
with truces, as, regrettably, we have seen
in A n g o l a , S i e rra Leone, A f g h a n i s t a n ,
S o m a l i a , L i b e ri a , C a m b o d i a , R wa n d a ,
B u ru n d i , B o s n i a , C h e c h nya , H a i t i ,
Albania and Colombia.
Does this only happen in the countries of the
South?
There are policies which create exclu-
sion in some rich countries of the North.
In several U.S. cities, there are neighbou-
rhoods which seem as if they’ve been
transplanted from the Third Wo r l d .
There’s also exclusion in France. But
these countries don’t become UCEs
because the state hasn’t lost control of the
In a recent book El mito del desarrollo ( ‘ The Myth of
D e v e l o p m e n t ’ ) , Peruvian diplomat Oswaldo de Rivero warns that
many national economies will become non-viable in the 21st
century and analyses the failure of current development theories
w h i c h , he says, are taking the world down a blind alley.

territory. Right now, Russia is the only
country that can be called developed—
because it belongs to the G8 group of
countries—where there are signs that the
central government is disintegrating.
Apart from their economies,
does anything else make countries 
of the South non-viable?
Ye s , and this is something I want to
look at in a future book. I think non-deve-
lopment and non-viability also stem from a
cultural problem. In these countri e s — a n d
I’ll talk about Latin A m e rica because that ’s
w h at I know best—personal relat i o n s h i p s
are more important than the rat i o n a l
approach to problems which you find in
E u r o p e .A l s o, L atin A m e ri c a ’s a traditional
s o c i e t y, without a capitalist spirit of enter-
p rise or an inve n t i ve scientific community.
Its culture is not based on science, but on
l i t e r at u r e , painting and music.T h at can be
an adva n t a g e , but development cannot
take place in a capitalist economy without
a scientific inclination and Latin A m e ri c a
d o e s n ’t have that . In Brazil, Argentina and
Pe ru , liberalizing the economy wo n ’t auto-
m atically sprout a lot of inve n t o rs and
m a n a g e rs like Bill Gat e s. These countri e s
must find other ways to deve l o p. T h e y ’r e
not going to manage it by adopting the
U. S . model because they don’t have the
same cultural roots.
You say the coincidence of the technological
revolution and the urban explosion is one of the
main reasons why development is impossible.
Why?
Today’s technological revolution trig-
gers off a process of natural selection
which leaves by the wayside thousands of
unskilled people and tons of raw materials
at the very moment when an urban demo-
graphic explosion is occurring in most
poor countries. The United Nations and
the Intern ational Labour Organisat i o n
(ILO) reckon that if the population of
these nations keeps on growing, about a
billion new jobs will be needed at the
beginning of the next century. How can
jobs be found for so many people with the
new technologies? The technologi c a l
revolution and the urban explosion are
therefore on a collision course.
But these two phenomena are virtually
inevitable. So what can be done?
I don’t think there’s an easy remedy
and that’s what shocks people about my
book. You’re not going to get a solution
while the urban population keeps growing
in the world’s developing countries. In the
meantime, there’ll have to be social welfa-
re subsidies and programmes to fight
poverty and create jobs. This isn’t going
to solve the problem, but at least it will
limit the damage.
Will this situation last forever?
It doesn’t matter if it lasts 100 years.
Things will only change when the world’s
birthrate falls, which is expected to hap-
pen sometime around 2050, but until
then there’ll be tremendous social and
political upheavals in the world. Human
beings only learn through experiencing
disaster, not through reason or theories.
People feel compassion about T h i r d
World poverty, but they don’t realize the
damage that’s being done. When serious
disturbances break out,not just ecological
ones but political and social disturbances
which also affect rich countri e s , t h e n
maybe we’ll start thinking about a new
system of co-operation.
You say that if globalization closes the gap
between rich and poor countries, the result will
be ecological disaster. So is there any way out at
all?
The model of consumption in ri c h
c o u n t ries isn’t viable for them either in the
long term .Yet they’re trying to pass on the
p at t e rn of consumption of about a billion
people to almost five billion inhabitants of
Reality vs consumer dreams:in Pakistan,a man goes about his daily tasks, heedless of the advertising billboards
above.

u n d e r d e veloped countri e s. The irony is
t h at unemploy m e n t ,p ove rty and exclusion
p r e vent such pat t e rns from being adopted.
If they were adopted, five billion credit
cards would soon destroy the planet’s bios-
p h e r e .There wo n ’t be any solution until all
humanity reduces its level of consumption
and income is better shared out by a sys-
tem of intern ational co-operat i o n .
In your view, the structural adjustment
programmes of the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund have not worked.
Has the cure been worse than the disease?
In the long term, yes. In the short
term, they’ve managed to stabilize the
macro-economy and curb inflation. But
they’ve failed in the long term because
they haven’t laid the foundations for capi-
talist development in those countri e s.
They adjusted production but didn’t
modernize it. The neo-liberal develop-
ment theory says once countries have
liberalized their economies, they must
produce goods on the basis of the compa-
rative advantages they enjoy on the world
market. But the only comparative advan-
tage these countries have is their raw
materials. The world economy is deman-
ding more and more goods and services
with high technological content, but the
u n d e r d e veloped economies are still
exporting relatively untransformed raw
materials and products with low techno-
logical input.
Why has this failure been so resounding in
Africa?
African economies have specialized in
exporting bananas, cocoa, minerals and
tropical products which,together with the
population explosion, is a deadly trap.
The continent is the best example of what
I call the conjunction of two “viruses of
n o n - d e velopment”—the population explo-
s i o n and the production of raw materials.
IMF and World Bank officials are obses-
sed with the complete deregulation of the
e c o n o my, when the real problem of
u n d e r d e veloped countries is histori c a l
and cultural: their lack of a capitalist spi-
rit and a scientific tradition to modernize
their production.
Do you see any chance of African countries
being able to reverse this trend?
For the moment, no, none at all.
You regard development aid as a kind of
“Mother Teresa policy”.What do you propose in
its place?
International aid is, paradoxically, the
most striking indication of non-develop-
ment. It won’t solve the problem. But at
least we have to set up systems of interna-
tional co-operation and not treat coun-
tries as equals when they’re not. Ghana,
for example, c a n ’t compete with the
United States in the global market.
Special rules must be set up for develo-
ping countries. Such rules used to exist,
but they’ve all been dismantled.
You propose setting up a transnational
ecological system.What would it be like?
Ecological problems will sooner or
later put a brake on the expansion of
high-consumption capitalism which is
using nature as a raw material and slowly
eating it up. The United Nations isn’t
tackling the problem very well because it
can’t do so without the help of the trans-
national companies, for it is they who are
doing the producing and developing both
AN UNDIPLOMATIC DIPLOMAT
“We must dare to think the unthinkable,” says Oswaldo de Rivero in his book El Mito del Desarrollo
( “ The Myth of Development”),1 which has had a big impact in Latin America and will soon be publi-
shed in English.He argues that development does not exist,or at least not as we have understood it for
the past half-century.
De Rivero is a former Peruvian diplomat who was born in Lima in 1936.He is neither a university pro-
fessor nor a government spoke s m a n . His opinions are based on a profound knowledge of the international
scene acquired during more than 20 years’ experience in a broad range of international forums.
He has represented his country at the United Nations General Assembly and on the Security Council;
he is a former ambassador to the United Kingdom and Russia,president of the Economic Commission of
the Non-Aligned Countries’ summit,president of the Group of 77 countries and chairman of the council
of the Latin American Economic System (SELA), a regional intergovernmental body set up to encourage co-
operation and integration among Latin American and Caribbean countries. He has also been president of
the World Conference on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and the United Nations Disarmament Conference and
led the Peruvian delegation during the Uruguay Round of GATT world trade negotiations.
A lawyer with a degree from the Catholic University of Lima, de Rivero abandoned his diplomatic career
because of “a profound disagreement with the present Peruvian government”. Today he lives in Geneva,
where he works as a United Nations consultant, contributes to the Peruvian daily newspaper La República,
and is currently writing a new book. n
1 Mosca Azul editores, Lima,1998.
These days, the future of many economies and national cultures is
not decided in government ministries or parliaments but on the
international financial marke t s
Wrestling with poverty:Rocinha,one of the largest favelas in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

dirty technologies and green technolo-
gies.These firms must be represented in a
t ri p a rtite intern ational body in which
g ove rn m e n t s , t r a n s n ationals and civil
society are represented. A solution can
only be based on negotiations between
the real players.
How powerful are the transnationals?
The rationale of globalization has
s p awned a new faceless non-gove rn m e n t a l
economic ari s t o c r a cy—the transnat i o n a l s.
These day s , the future of many economies
and national cultures is not decided in
g ove rnment ministries or parliaments bu t
on the intern ational financial markets.
Only 10 industrialized countries export
more than the wo r l d ’s 10 richest compa-
n i e s.Yet the World Trade Organization dis-
cusses intern ational trade problems
without these companies. At the Rio Eart h
S u m m i t , countless plans and measures to
protect the environment were put forwa r d ,
none of which have come to fru i t i o n
because the companies responsible for the
e nvironmental damage made no commit-
ment to them. The trouble is that the
t r a n s n ationals have more and more powe r
but no global responsibility.
How can we get them to assume these
responsibilities?
It’s clear that international institutions
no longer reflect the new world power
structure. We can’t go on having diploma-
tic get-togethers between representatives
of governments without any real power to
alter global economic and ecologi c a l
trends. Let’s start by giving the transna-
tionals a place and a vote in international
b o d i e s , because nothing can be done
without them.
This doesn’t guarantee they’ll change their
attitude.
It won’t be easy to change their poli-
cies since the transnationals are ve ry
shrewd and choosy about how and where
they invest.What might change their atti-
tude is the fact that if globalization conti-
nues to create exclusion, they’ll have to
start investing in poor countries to create
markets there. But they’ve already got an
enormous potential market anyway. The
opening up of the Chinese economy
b rings the transnationals 300 million
c o n s u m e rs , the equivalent of the
American market. India brings in another
150 million people with real purchasing
power. So there are still new markets to
be won. . . . And so the process will be a
long one.
So what can the worst-off countries be offered?
Many countries which only produce
raw materials and have a rapidly-growing
urban population are having to wrestle
with shortages of water, energy and food.
To cope with these problems, what I call
a “ n ational surv i val pact” is needed,
because without water, food and energy
there can be no state or civilized life and
no society that can develop. This is the
s i t u ation in countries like Guat e m a l a ,
Peru and Bolivia in Latin America, and
Bangladesh, India and even China, in
Asia.
What does this “survival pact”involve?
A minimum level of development is
impossible without energy, water and
food. How can you educate a child who

hasn’t been properly fed, how can you
industrialize a city without water,how can
public utilities work without electricity? A
national survival pact involves seeking
secure supplies of energy, water and food
because without them no development
plan can work. But these days there are
no development plans, there’s only the
market. It is thought, absurdly, that the
market will produce development. But
that has never happened. All the develo-
ped countries emerged thanks to protec-
tionist trade policies. It’s impossible for a
country to switch from exporting cotton
to producing computer chips as a result of
the invisible hand of the market. Such a
country will need to have an industrializa-
tion policy and take protectionist mea-
sures, at least temporarily, in order to
develop.
Is there anything constructive about
globalization?
The globalization of communications
is good for the cultural exchanges and
contacts it makes possible and because it
fosters a global awareness of human pro-
blems and suffering. It’s also positive at a
political level—here I’m thinking
particularly of how these days we keep
track of governments that violate human
rights.
But in economic matters, globaliza-
tion imposes a monolithic doctrine. It
sells us a development model that is non-
viable. Instead of creating a “global villa-
ge”, it creates a worldwide collection of
gated communities of wealthy, elegant
people who share the same lifestyle and
pattern of consumption, and destroy the
environment. Behind these ghettos, there
are shanty-tow n s , slums and subu r b s
where water, energy and food are scarce,
and crime, unemployment, violence and
pollution are rife.
Why do you think your book made such an
impact in Latin America?
I think it was successful because a new
awareness is emerging. A large part of
Latin America’s political class has suppor-
ted the single neo-liberal development
model, but people are starting to have
doubts about it.The book came out just
after the big economic crises in Asia,
Russia and Brazil. If it had come out
before,I would have been called pessimis-
tic or crazy.When I had finished the book,
people asked me how I was going to
publish it when Buenos Aires is full of
Mercedes cars and there are dozens of
shopping centres in Santiago de Chile
and Lima. But all that’s just a façade. Of
course, if you go to Caracas,Buenos Aires
or Rio and stay in the hotel where World
Bank officials stay, you’ll get the false
impression everything’s fine. But if you
venture just a short distance away, you’ll
see there are really two countries in one.
So do we have to give up the idea of
development because it’s a kind of suspect
ideology?
I’m not against the market economy
and I don’t say that capitalist deve l o p m e n t
s houldn’t exist.But the laws of the market
“In the 1970s, people firmly believed Brazil would conquer poverty.“ Above, Brazilian miners carrying bags weighing up to 60 kilos.
It is thought, a b s u r d l y, that the market will produce development.
But that has never happened.
All the developed countries emerged thanks 
to protectionist trade policies

fear? A society can neither live like this
nor go forward. Sooner or later, that
youth of 20 will have to get down to the
business of changing the world’s only sys-
tem of development because it works
against him.
And to a young person in an industrialized
country, what would you say?
The consumer society inoculat e s
people against compassion. I’d tell those
young people to get “ d i s - i n o c u l at e d ”
because the way the world’s going, their
children and grandchildren are going to
s u f f e r. A predat o ry attitude has been
encouraged in human beings, that the
strongest win, consume and then forget. I
think lots of young people are aware of
this problem. But most of them live a life
of instant gratification in a sort of moral
vacuum and don’t see any connection
between their own well-being and people
dying in Africa.
Isn’t your attitude over-pessimistic?
I think we have to see things straight.
That’s why I talked about a national
survival pact. Development technocrats
have come up with highly complex plans,
from education to steel production, but
the basics have been forgotten: popula-
tion growth, lack of food, energy and
water. Big countries with nuclear wea-
pons,like India, Pakistan and China,have
serious water supply problems and have
to import food and energy. They’re giants
with feet of clay.That isn’t development. I
am sending out an alarm signal to alert
the poor countries against being hypnoti-
zed by a mirage—the mirage of the tech-
nological development that exists in the
United States and Europe and is virtually
impossible for them to achieve. These
countries must take survival measures,
because otherwise there will be no stable
societies. You can’t have health without
water, production without energy, or life
without food. My book is an appeal for
the poor countries to concentrate on
these essentials. This is what must be
done and done properly. n
Interview by Araceli Ortiz de Urbina 
and Lucía Iglesias Kuntz
UNESCO Courier journalists
are not natural laws. The market can be
regulated and geared to making people
happy. We can’t use it like the law of gra-
vity and say that those who stumble
should fall, that those who aren’t compe-
titive should die. That’s economic darwi-
nism. What’s missing really is a moral
revolution. The problem is ethical, pro-
foundly ethical and cultural. We’ve had a
technological revolution, but we haven’t
had an ethical revolution.
What would you say to a 20-year-old living in a
developing country?
It depends on which social class they
belong to. If they’re from a rich family,
they’ll have no problems, except the risk
of being kidnapped. If they’re middle
class, they’ll have to be realistic and stop
thinking that when they graduate from
university they’re going to find a job, start
a family and live well. I wouldn’t dare to
say anything to a poor person, because in
underdeveloped countries the poor live in
hell, the middle class in purgatory and a
group surrounded by bodyguards lives in
the paradise of global consumption. But
at what cost and with what burden of
