SHEDDING STRA I TJACK ET S
Dance, like other art-forms, has been alive since
time immemorial, never ceasing to gain new
ground. At the temple of Palaiokastro, in Crete,
dance was offered to Zeus to make the vines and
farm animals fertile. Ceremonies like this were to
be found from India to pre-Columbia America. Is it
possible to draw the line at which dance evolved
from a communal rite to a form of self-expres-
sion? What about the period in India, for example,
when dance forms originally derived from martial
arts became “performances” in their own right? 
With a touch of humour, the anthropologist
Johann Kealiinohomoku refers to classical ballet as
“a kind of ethnic dance”. Ballet became popular in
France under Louis XIV, who set up the first royal
dance academy in the West. Indeed the king him-
self danced in public until 1670. The matrix of
artistic dance, ballet also opened a new vista for cul-
tural exchange, with Italian opera troupes visiting
France in the 17th century. But it was not until the
start of the 20th century, with the break ushered in
by the birth of modern dance, that this art form
espoused influences from much farther afield.
An insatiable curiosity for universal and spiritual
forms of expression inspired the work of America n
c h o r e o g rapher and dancer Ruth Saint-Denis whose
passion for Oriental dance was first sparked by a
cigarette poster of an Egyptian goddess. Her famous
E gypt, Greece and India which she performed
across the United States in 1916 was a mix of pyr-
rhic dances, scenes from the banks of the Nile and
the Ganges and evocations of nirvana. Another of
her famous compatriots, Isadora Duncan, the high
priestess of “barefoot dance”, sought to liberate the
body from the straitjackets of the past by conjuring
up an imaginary version of ancient Greece.
This search for “truth” of the body continued
to grow throughout the 20th century, with constant
exchanges between “here” and “e l s ewhere” in a
dialogue first between the United States and
Europe and then with the Orient. In London in
1916, the Japanese dancer Michio Ito created a
modern version of a traditional Japanese n ô
d ra m a , At the Hawk’s We l l , with the Irish poet
W. B . Yeats. Another Japanese dancer, Ta k a y a
Eguchi, came to Germany to learn from the legen-
d a ry Mary Wigman and then returned to his
homeland to add a new dimension to modern
expressive dance.
In Paris, colonial exhibitions introduced the
public to Javanese, Kurdish, Persian and Armenian
dancers. After World War II, this cultural exchange
and intermingling resumed with a new dynamic.
From the late 1970s, the spectacular rise of modern
dance owed much to the seeds sown by German,
A m e r i can and Japanese dancers and teachers. 
France was a meeting point. Some of the lea-
ding figures in the French dance world were
foreign—among them Americans Susan Buirge
and Mark Tompkins, Hideyuki Yano of Japan,
Hungarian Joseph Nadj, the Afro-American Elsa
Wolliaston and Angelin Preljocaj of Albanian
origin. The impact of the movement was felt to
v a rying degrees all over Europe.
Today Europe and North America have lost
their choreography monopoly as enthusiastic
young audiences around the world throng to see
n ew forms of artistic expression. Dance is increa-
singly nomadic in chara c t e r. The dancer travels yet
works within his or her own space, while some
c h o r e o g raphers go so far as to see the stage as a
“ f ragment of mental space”. J-M. A. n
Il a été une fois , by the Vietnamese choreographer Ea Sola.
