T HE DE ATH PEN A LTY :
A BOL I T ION GAINS GROUND
w Martine Jacot
Countries that have abolished capital punishment now outnumber those applying it. 
But four countries still account for 80 per cent of all executions.
n
In the teeming jumble of daily news,
one important human rights event
passed almost unnoticed recently: on
June 2, 1999, Russian President Boris
Yeltsin commuted the death sentences of
716 people to life imprisonment. The
death penalty was thereby effectively abo-
lished in Russia, in line with its commit-
ment upon joining the Council of
Europe1 in 1996. In that year, Russia exe-
cuted 40 death row pri s o n e rs , s a d l y
almost a dark world record.
Russian Justice Minister Pave l
K r a s h e n i n n i k ov said the presidential
decree was “a historic day” for his coun-
try. The decision may encourage the for-
mer Soviet bloc countries wishing to
become members of the Council of
Europe to follow suit or risk being barred
in the future.
Tipping
the balance
The Council was the first body to sign
(in 1983) an intern ational agr e e m e n t
obliging the signatories to abolish the
death penalty in peacetime. The treaty
(Protocol 6 of the European Convention
on Human Rights) came into effect in
1985. Since the Berlin Wall came down,
22 former or new European countries
have dropped capital punishment, at least
for “ordinary” crimes. The most recent
were this ye a r: L at v i a , C y p rus and
Northern Ireland. In 1998, Azerbaijan,
Bulgaria, Estonia and Lithuania took the
same step for all categories of offences
and Kyrgyzstan and Turkmenistan decla-
red moratoriums on executions.
Europe is not the only continent
w UNESCO Courier journalist A drawing by French artist Roland Topor (1938-1997) published by Amnesty International in 1982.
1 Set up in 1949, the Council of Europe, based in
Strasbourg (France), aims to strengthen
democracy, human rights and rule of law in its
member-states, which have grown from 23 before
the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 to 40 today.
where the abolitionist cause has made
h e a d way. Amnesty Intern ational notes
that the number of countries that have
totally abolished the death penalty has tri-
pled over the past 20 years—from 19 in
1979 to 68 by April 1999. To this list can
be added 14 more countries that impose
the death penalty in wartime only and 23
others where it is considered to have been
abolished “in effect” because they have
not executed anyone for at least ten years.
This total of 105 states compares with
the 90 countries or territories that have
executed at least one of their death row

1,067 people were executed and 1,657
death sentences imposed. Tax evasion has
been a capital offence in China since
1997, which brought to about 60 the
crimes punishable by death there.
About a hundred people were execu-
ted in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in 1998 according to Amnesty,
and 66 in Iran. In the United States (see
p. 39), 68 prisoners were executed, most
by lethal injection.Three of the U.S. pri-
soners were under 17 when they commit-
ted their crimes. Since 1990, only six
c o u n t ries—the United Stat e s , I r a n ,
N i g e ri a , Pa k i s t a n , Saudi Arabia and
Yemen—have continued imposing death
sentences on people who were minors at
the time of their offence. But in Yemen, a
presidential decree has just put an end to
this practice.The UN Convention on the
Rights of the Child forbids the death sen-
tence in the case of minors and has been
ratified by all UN member-states except
for Somalia and the United States.
A contagious effect
on neighbouring nations
Is the United States—regarded, like
France, as a “cradle of human rights”—
having a contagious effect on some of its
38 The UNESCO Courier - October 1999
E T H I C S
prisoners over the past 20 years. Today
countries opposing the death penalty out-
number those applying it. The “balance”
tipped only recently, between 1997 and
1998. When you look at the picture over
the whole century, progress is even more
impressive: in 1899 only Venezuela, Costa
Rica and the tiny republic of San Marino,
in Italy, had decided to abolish the death
penalty.
Such progress is clearly linked with
the gr owth of local and intern at i o n a l
human rights move m e n t s. The deat h
penalty is increasingly thought of as a
cruel and inhuman punishment. Its irre-
ve rsibility always touches people’s
consciences in cases where it turns out
that innocent people have been victims of
a r b i t r a ry or unfair tri a l s , cases which
receive more and more publicity these
d ay s. I n t e rn ational pressure has also
increased. 1999 saw the tenth anniversary
of the UN General Assembly’s adoption
of its first protocol calling for the aboli-
tion of the death penalty.
Many countries decided to abolish
capital punishment as a way of turning
over a new leaf following long periods of
political repression. This is what happe-
ned not only in the former communist
countries of Eastern Europe but also in
South Africa (1997) and before that in
L atin A m e rica—in A r g e n t i n a , B r a z i l ,
Peru, Nicaragua and El Salvador.
A cradle
of human rights
Elsewhere, action by courageous poli-
tical leaders has been needed to overcome
local public opinion that has remained
mostly in favour of the death penalty.The
French socialist government,for example,
abolished the death penalty in 1981 soon
after taking office. But opinion polls sho-
wed it was not until 18 years later, in
1999, that a majority of the public polled
finally turned against the death penalty,
despite France’s reputation as the “cradle
of human rights”. In other countries, the
process has sometimes been a very long
one. Belgium and Greece repealed the
death penalty in 1996 and 1993 respecti-
vely, more than 20 years after carrying out
their last executions.
Despite this progr e s s , A m n e s t y
International reminds us that at least
1,625 prisoners were executed in 1998 in
37 countries, four of which—China, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United States and Iran—accounted for
80 per cent of the total.
In China, for want of official figures,
Amnesty estimates that in 1998 at least

neighbours? In the Caribbean, rampant
c rime has fired support for capital
punishment among gove rnments and
public opinion. Nine prisoners were exe-
cuted by hanging in early June 1999 in
Port-of-Spain, capital of the Caribbean
state of Trinidad and Tobago, five years
after the last execution took place there.
The Bahamas used the gallows again
twice in 1998, after a two-year pause.
While the last execution by hanging in
Jamaica took place in 1988, there’s a high
risk that the practice could be resumed:
there are 40 people on death row there,
several of whom have almost exhausted
all legal recourse.
The myth
of deterrence
Rampant crime was also used by the
authorities in the Philippines to justify
restoring the death penalty in December
1993, with the first execution being car-
ried out in February 1999.Yet this coun-
try was the first in Asia to abolish capital
punishment, in 1987, after the fall of
President Ferdinand Marcos.The current
head of state, Joseph Estrada,has stressed
his determination to attack poverty—the
“compost-heap of crime”—but without
abolishing the death penalty. Recent opi-
nion polls show about 80 per cent of
Filipinos are in favour of it. Over the past
six years,914 people have been sentenced
to death in the Philippines.
But so far no study has shown clearly
that capital punishment is a deterrent.On
the contrary, the murder rate has fallen in
several countries that have abolished it,
such as Canada, a neighbour of the
United States. Amnesty International and
other human rights organizations hope
the U.S., among others, will at least abo-
lish the death penalty for people who were
minors when they committed their crime,
as well as for the mentally ill and the
elderly. n


Progress is clearly linked 
with the growth of local 
and international human rights
movements. The death penalty
is increasingly thought of 
as a cruel and inhuman
p u n i s h m e n t .
