“Bali was wonderful until your guidebook
came along,” said a member of the
a u d i e n c e ,d u ring a talk I gave recently about
the pitfalls of touri s m . “ W hy are you sending all
those visitors to Burm a ,d o n ’t you know how horri b l e
the gove rnment is?” q u e ried another, r ather angri l y.
Questions like these are raised almost eve ry
time I speak about my life as a guidebook publisher.
According to this line of reasoning, I should be
ashamed of myself for helping to ruin dozens of
places round the wo r l d , not to mention propping up
a string of corrupt regi m e s. In my view, the situat i o n
is rather different.
When my wife Maureen and I founded
Lonely Planet Publications over 25 years ago the
world was, from a tourism point of view, a much
less crowded place. I can easily measure that
growth by simply glancing at my bookshelf—our
first South East Asia on a Shoestring guidebook
covered the region in 144 pages. The latest 10th
edition takes 936 pages to do the same job, and if
you added up the individual guidebooks we have
for countries in the region they would tot up to
over 5,000 pages, an information overload no
visitor would contemplate carrying around.
Maureen and I put that first regional guidebook
together in a backstreet Singapore hotel room.
Our entire staff could fit into one car to go out for
lunch.Today they’re scattered around four offices
on three continents and it would be standing
room only in a 747.
Has big tourism ruined Bali?
We started with a ve ry simple philosophy : we
were the small-time operat o rs who couldn’t compete
head on with the big publishers in London or New
Yo r k . So we would produce guidebooks to the places
nobody had ever thought of writing about. In retros-
pect it was an amazingly clever idea. By the time the
“big guys”had woken up to the tourist boom that wa s
taking off from airp o rts all over the world we had
c a rved out a name for ours e l ves as publishers for the
new destinations suddenly topping the statistics lists.
This hard-won reputation gave us the stature to
m ove on to the more established and familiar touri s t
d e s t i n at i o n s.To d ay, h owe ve r , there are no undisco-
vered corn e rs. Name the destination and there are
probably half a dozen guidebooks about it.
So have we “ruined” Bali and dozens of other
untouched paradises? Have we demolished pristi-
ne cultures by drowning them in a never-ending
flow of tourists? Absolutely not. For a start we’re
only one influence amongst many. If guidebooks
were the huge influence many people seem to
assume they must be, airlines would be welco-
ming me aboard with open arms and upgrading
my tickets. In fact I’m just another anonymous
“bum on a seat”.
While many places have taken off as tourist
destinations during the last 25 years, Bali offers a
fine example of how the boom arises. Turn the
clock back to the 60s and you find a virtually tou-
w Publisher of the Lonely
Planet guidebooks


P h i l o s o p h y
of a guidebook guru
w Tony W h e e l e r
The man behind Lonely Planet, a guidebook series originally designed for tra v e l l e rs 
eager to quit the beaten tra c k , defends his re c o rd

rist-less Bali—not because we hadn’t published a
guidebook about the island Jawaharlal Nehru, the
first prime minister of independent India, dubbed
“the morning of the wo r l d ” . In fa c t , t h e
Indonesian government was distinctly unwelco-
ming to all overseas visitors. But even the subse-
quent change in government did not suddenly
open the floodgates of tourism. Bali didn’t take
off as a major international destination until air-
lines started scheduling regular flights, until big
hotels were built, until the island’s small, specia-
list image and reputation was disseminated to a
mass audience.
Has this leap to big tourism ruined Bali? Well,
first of all tourism is not the only agent of change.
Recent Asian economic mayhem apart , I n d o n e-
s i a ’s economy has been on a roll for the past 20 ye a rs
which Bali has clearly been a part of, whether it’s
been the green revolution doubling rice output or
the cottage industry clothing manufa c t u ring making
“made in Bali” a familiar label wo r l d w i d e . C u l-
tural changes have also taken root independently of
those linked to touri s m .I t ’s hard to believe that tou-
rism has a tenth of the influence of the Hollywood
videos now found in even the most remote cor-
ners of the world.
Tread lightly and 
be culturally aware
So tourism is not the only agent of change but
has it had such a terrible impact? Clearly, i t ’s brought
in a lot of money.We old Bali hands may regret how
much noisier, h ow much more crowded and
modern the island has become. However, I doubt
whether you’ll find many Balinese complaining.
Park the motorcycle and go back to walking to the
market? No thanks. Flick the lights off and go back
to oil lamps at night? Not a chance. And most
i m p o rtant of all, go back to the days when harve s t s
were uncertain and rice shortages were a regular
occurrences? Well would you?
Progress does not necessarily take a toll on
culture. In fact it’s often quite the opposite, and
again Bali is a fine example of the positive effects
of tourism. The island’s much-vaunted artistic
skills were essentially moribund when the first
Western visitors turned up in the 1930s. They
prompted a revival but nothing compared to
today’s artistic boom. Sure there’s a lot of mass
market art being churned out but that’s just a
broad foundation for a smaller output of higher
quality work. In Bali tourism has contributed to
change but this change has certainly not ruined
the place. The dancers may be performing for
tourists in hotels rather than the nobility in the
palaces but they are still dancing. Quite possibly
they wouldn’t be if there weren’t such a high
demand among visitors.
I believe guidebooks have played a positive part
in that change and in part that ’s because guidebooks
h ave changed as we l l .The modern guidebook is fa r
more than just a list of hotels, restaurants and “ h ow
t o ” i n f o rm at i o n . We firmly believe that better
i n f o rmed visitors are not only better visitors but also
visitors who enjoy themselves more. If you know
something about the dance, the music, the cere-
monies, the architecture, the food, the customs—
central elements of a culture—you enjoy the place
more. I think we’ve always been aware of that and
looking back at our early guidebooks I’m encou-
raged to see that we’ve always stressed the impor-
tance of fitting in, treading lightly and being cultu-
rally aware. We now have much larger budgets to
work with and can afford to put more time,energy
and expenditure in producing sections on specialist
cultural issues. Of course we ’re not alone in this acti-
vity, other guidebook publishers are equally aware
t h at a modern guidebook has to be much more
than simply a manual for the practicalities of trave l .
In countries like India with a wide range of reli-
gions some understanding of that rich backdrop can
make the travel experience immeasurably more ful-
filling and our India guide includes a section intro-
ducing the country’s varied range of religions. In a
r e gion like T i b e t , where religion underpins eve ry ele-
ment of everyday life, our guide tries to introduce
Buddhist iconogr a p hy, the importance of pilgri-
mages and the monastic lifestyle.
The evidence that modern travellers demand
this sort of coverage is easy to measure. Sure there’s
a lot more tourism these days but the gr owth in gui-
debook publishing has far outstripped the expansion
in the number of travellers.
Tourists appreciate that a good guidebook can
be a money- and trouble-saver that quickly pays for
i t s e l f, but they’re equally aware that it can make their
t r avels a more rewarding experi e n c e . I firmly believe
that travel and culture can live together,and good
guidebooks can help make that a reality. n
On Kuta Beach in Bali (Indonesia),a tourist indulges in a massage offered by a local woman.
We old Bali hands may re g ret 
how much noisier, how much more
c rowded and modern the island 
has become. H o w e v e r,
I doubt whether you’ll find 
many Balinese complaining
