In 1995, UNESCO created a Cities for Peace Prize to pay tribute to city governments
which have succeeded in “strengthening social solidari t y, i m p r oving living conditions
in troubled neighbourhoods and developing genuine urban harm o ny ” .E ve ry two ye a rs ,
five cities,each from a different world region, are thus recognized.
The gove rnance of cities has become a vital issue of our time and UN E S C O’s Management
of Social Tr a n s f o rm ation (MOST) progr a m m e , launched in 1994, includes studies of change
in urban settings which are reported back to city offic i a l s. UN E S C O b e l i e ves that cities, a n d
especially mega-cities,are the laboratory of a new age where the future of humanity will
be decided.
Most of the world’s population will be concentrated in cities by the beginning of the
next century, and the percentage of people living in urban areas will have just about 
doubled between 1950 and 2015. The numbers of city-dwe l l e rs will have increased 
fivefold over the same period,and the number of people living in cities of over a million
will have gr own more than eightfold.This dizzying rate of urbanizat i o n , which is going on
as headlong as ever in most poor countri e s , upsets the natural equilibrium and the checks
and balances which have always operated up until now.
Cities consume enormous amounts of energy, exhaust water supplies, and devour food
and materials. In exchange,they pour out sewage and pollution.Their physical environ-
ment is wo rn out because it can no longer provide the input or absorb the output.And city
g ove rnments are exhausted by trying—when they see fit and when they are able—to respond
to the basic needs of citizens by providing such things as housing, running wat e r ,s e we rs ,
lighting and proper roads.They often prove just as powerless—or indifferent—to use for
the benefit of the whole community the surplus energy and problem-solving ingenuity which
citizens have .Yet this tremendous vitality is the basis of the dynamic development of so many
cities today.
Between pressure from below and paralysis at the top, the city has become a micro-
cosm of the future of our civilizat i o n . It is in cities where lies the gr e atest danger of a shat-
tered society where people think only of themselve s. Unless we create links between all its
i n h a b i t a n t s , the unity of a city bu rsts apart . It breaks up into countless groups which deve l o p
along the lines of class, race,culture and religion.Such ghettos cannot come together to
f o rm a genuine whole. On the contrary, the way they close off from each other, s o m e t i m e s
i nvolving physically defending themselves against other parts of the city, c r e ates a kind of
urban apartheid.
The words city, citizens and civilization have the same root.A citizen was originally a
p e rson who had the right to live in a city and who, by exercising rights and fulfilling duties
like every other citizen, helped build a civilization.This means that the humanization of
cities is crucial for the future of all of us. And it is not an impossible dream.There are plenty
of examples,in the North, South,East and West,where it has taken shape.
But the price is the creation of a city administration in which people can play a full part
and which is based on a revival of true citizenship. Only in this way will the city serve its
inhabitants by using the creat i ve capacities of eve ryone—men and wo m e n , young and old,
rich and poor. n



Federico Mayor
The words city, citizens and civilization have the same ro o t .A citizen was 
originally a person who had the right to live in a city and who, by exercising 
rights and fulfilling duties like every other citizen, helped build a civilization.
C i t i e s, c i t i z e n s,
and c i v i l i z a t i o n
