Imagine an urban area whose popula-
tion has increased from 300,000 to
nearly two million in 40 years. It
sprawls out in every direction and its
growth seems unstoppable. This is the
case of Tunis, which has even started
filling in some of the salt lakes on its per-
iphery and building modern neighbou-
rhoods on the reclaimed land.
As you go north of the capital,past the
big port of La Goulette and the old sub-
urb of Kram, you suddenly come upon a
vast expanse of meadowland, green in
winter and yellow in summer, that is dot-
ted with the remains of walls, heaps of
stones and the stumps of still-gleaming
marble columns. These are the outskirts
of Carthage, in Antiquity the prosperous
capital of the Roman province of Africa.
Towards the sea, the landscape is
again dominated by buildings, forming an
immense garden city interspersed with
the splendid ruins of the ancient city. Its
suburbs stretch further north as far as
ancient Megara, overlooked from a height
by the village of Sidi Bou Saïd, whose
white domes have for centuries stood out
between the sea and the sky.
Unexcavated 
remains
C a rt h a g e , a city both mythical and
r e a l , was founded in the 9th century B. C .
by the legendary Queen Dido (also
k n own as Elissa), who hailed from
Phoenicia. It became the Mediterranean’s
most fo rmidable maritime trading powe r
until the rise of the Roman Empire,
which destroyed it in 146 B. C . Its for-
tunes then revived under the Romans.
Only ruins are left of the Phoenician city,
but the remains of Roman and Byzantine
C a rthage are more abundant and gi ve a
good idea of what one of the biggest
cities of ancient times was like. But a
large part of the old city is still bu ri e d
a n d , if steps are not taken, m ay stay hid-
den foreve r.
To get an idea of the threats that hang
over ancient Cart h a g e , you have to climb
atop the hill of Byrs a , which was the site
of a Phoenician fortress and then the
Roman foru m . To d ay the hill is occupied
by the St Louis basilica, which was bu i l t
in early colonial times, and the form e r
a r c h b i s h o p ’s palace, n ow a museum.
From here, you can see over the entire
plain of Tu n i s. Nearly all the narr ow
coastal strip between the lake and the sea
is built up. Teeming slums fill the sou-
t h e rn end of the stri p. F u rther nort h ,b e t-
ween Carthage and the seaside resort of
M a rs a , are chic residential suburbs where
e ve ry rich or politically powerful Tu n i s i a n
dreams of living.
C a rt h a g e , which was supplanted by
Tunis more than a thousand ye a rs ago,
seems to have become once more a sym-
bolic place of power since Habib
B o u r g u i b a , independent Tu n i s i a ’s firs t
p r e s i d e n t , established the presidential
palace there. The urban pressure seems
i n e x o r a b l e , whether from the poorer
areas or from the zone of luxurious villas
which look on to them. Tunis has no
more room to expand and is gr e e d i l y
e yeing a 500-hectare area which has been
set aside as a future archaeological park.
The site of Carthage has been protected
for the past 30 years, and new building
has been virtually halted. Urbanization
began at the end of the last century, with
the construction of the railway from Tunis
to La Goulette and Marsa. Under the
French protectorate, villas and housing
estates began encroaching on the area.
After independence in 1956, this creeping
expansion accelerated dramatically. The
city grew in size because of population
growth and an exodus from rural areas. A
new gove rnment-fostered middle class
sharpened appetites for land and proper-
ty speculation. Concrete spread like a lava
flow.
A rescue 
operation
In the early 1970s, awareness began to
spread, both in Tunisia and abroad, that
the remains of Carthage were in danger of
disappearing forever. On May 19, 1972,
UNESCO Director-General René Maheu
launched an international campaign to
save the site, which was put on UNESCO’s
World Heritage List in 1979. Rescue ope-
rations soon began. As a dozen teams of
archaeologists from several countries got
to work, the Tunisian government took



CA RT H AGE’S 
LONG - AWA I T ED RESCUE
w Sophie Bessis
Despite 30 years of protection, the site of the great city of Antiquity is still being eroded by urban
pressures. A major conservation project now in the works should pave the way for new exca v a t i o n s
w Freelance journalist
Carthage
Port of Tunis
1 1.5 3 km
Tunis
Bardo Museum
Medina
Ariana
Lake Tunis
La Marsa
La Goulette
Sidi Bou Saïd

steps which led in 1985 to the declaration
of a 600-hectare zone of Carthage and
Sidi Bou Saïd as a protected area where
new construction was mostly banned.
Heritage campaigners breathed a sigh
of relief. But if the worst has been avoided
over the past 15 years, threats still loom.
The fight to save Carthage has been
conducted at various levels. It aims to halt
the spread of poor housing as well as to
curb the appetite of the wealthy who are
determined to put up buildings and of
businessmen who want to promote hou-
sing development in a zone where land
values are the highest in the country.
There is little sympathy for the morato-
rium on such development. Why, people
ask, should a building project, which is
either necessary or profitable, be banned
just to preserve past history which only
interests an educated minority of
Tunisians? 
Over the years, six orders have cut
back the area of the future archaeological
park planned in 1985. Two zones were
reclassified as part of the urban area and
were quickly built on, while luxury villas
h ave sprouted around the fa m o u s
Phoenician ports. Some land has been
gi ven to the Polytechnic Institute to
expand its campus. Squatting by poor
people in the Ellil district on the edge of
Carthage has also been allowed.
These encroachments on the protec-
ted zone are worrying but not alarming,
according to one expert, and so far the
core of the site has been preserved. But
the pressures are so strong today that tou-
gher laws are now needed as well as the
creation of the long-awaited Carthage-
Sidi Bou Saïd archaeological park, whose
physical existence would finally put an
end to such pressures.
Things are moving along slowly. Since
1991, a cabinet committee chaired by
President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali has
overseen the Carthage project, for which
the president has always expressed strong
support. Officials are working on a pre-
servation and development plan for the
park which is expected to be much more
detailed and restrictive than the 1985 pre-
servation order. It will authorize public
expropriation of any part of the site,
enabling the government to buy the land,
most of it still privately-owned. It will ban
division of plots of land and the building
of housing estates and, with the 1994
Heritage Code, will complete the coun-
try’s set of preservation laws.
UNESCO dispatched a team of experts
to Tunis in March 1999 to take a look at
the plan.They reported that it was “use-
ful and coherent”, though it “risked set-
ting off conflicts, mainly with landowners
. . . but also for other reasons, including
financial ones.” The stat e , they said,
“should make a substantial investment to
gain control of the land by buying it.”
So all the obstacles have not yet been
overcome, but if the determination of the
politicians holds, the preservation plan
should come into effect before the year
2000. To mark the occasion and also
launch a new series of excavations, the
Tunisian authorities want to stage an
international conference on Carthage in
January 2000.
By making the establishment of the
park irreversible, Tunisia will be the only
Mediterranean country to have protected
600 hectares of land in the centre of its
biggest urban area. Tunis will be the only
Mediterranean city with a park of such
size and with such a rich history. For the
past 30 ye a rs , f riends and admirers
of Carthage have been fighting to make
this great dream come true. So far the
battle has not been lost—but it has yet to
be won. n
After independence
in 19 56, urban expansion
a c c e l e rated dra m a t i ca l l y.
The population increased,
and a new middle class
sharpened its appetite
for land and property.
Concrete spread like 
a lava flo w
An upmarket residential area around the port of Phoenician Carthage.
