How does the giant chemical and biotechno-
logy company Monsanto manage to keep
control of its herbicide Roundup, e ve n
though other companies now have the right to
make it? The answer to this simple question
r e veals the power of pri vate sector research.
Under the pressure of competition, firms have
developed formidable capacities to innovate and
to market their discoveries.
Monsanto, with a turnover of more than $8
billion in 1998, is an excellent example of such a
firm. Several of its discoveries have helped far-
mers and consumers. It developed the biodegra-
dable herbicide Roundup in the early 1970s.
Farmers who use it are relieved of the long and
tiresome job of weeding. They just have to take
care not to damage their crops as they apply the
herbicide, which can increase yields by an estima-
ted 30-50 per cent and bring more land into cul-
tivation.
A big 
money-spinner
Roundup, which can be used on about 100
crops, is a big money-spinner for Monsanto,
though its exact contribution to the firm’s profits
is not known. In the early 1990s, the herbicide’s
patent expired in several European countries and
the product was copied by rival firms. Monsanto
did not lose control of it however.
Monsanto’s research teams are in close and
constant communication with the firm’s sales
force, who monitor changes in the market, and
with its strategic planners, who work out what
kind of future a product has. So when Roundup
was no longer legally protected, Monsanto was
ready. Since 1989, the firm has come up with
many by-products of the herbicide.These can be
sold at a higher price than the basic product,
whose manufacturing costs fell by around 20 per
cent between 1990 and 1998.
The economic goal of Monsanto’s researchers
is to encourage work which is part of its industrial
s t r ategy and drop work which is outside it.
Products arising from such research are also
quickly put on the market. Monsanto, like most
other chemical and pharmaceutical companies,
spends four to five times more on advertising and
marketing than it does on research in the strict
sense.
To stay ahead of the pack, the firm asks its
researchers to anticipate changes in the market.
In 1972, a biochemist in its agricultural division,
Ernest Jawarsky, went back to university to study
cell growth. Seven years later, he set up the firm’s
Molecular Biology Group (MBG), which in 1982
succeeded in genetically altering a plant’s cells.



The American firm Monsanto’s flagship pro d u c t , R o u n d u p, highlights a strongpoint 
of private-sector re s e a rch—its capacity to create and market new pro d u c t s
Staying a h e a d of the pack Pascal Byé*
The MBG has ties with consultants trained at
many prestigious institutions, such as Berlin’s
Max Planck Institute. In this way, it taps into the
findings of state-funded research on the genome
of plants to further its goal of extending the life of
Roundup.
In 1988, Monsanto announced it had develo-
ped genetically-modified plants that were immu-
ne to Roundup. If farmers used them, they would
no longer have to take precautions to prevent the
herbicide from damaging their crops.The compa-
ny is creating new outlets. Cotton, for example,
requires a lot of herbicides but is damaged by
some of them. By developing a cotton seed resis-
tant to Roundup, Monsanto opened up a new
market—one for new seeds—and at the same
time expanded the market for its own herbicide,
which can now be used by cotton growers.
Industrial research often seems more valuable
and less suspect than publicly funded research,
which is sometimes accused of going off in expen-
sive directions. There is a downside, however. To
ensure profitability, Monsanto has dropped entire
areas of research. Its new products are also
increasingly seen as a threat to the environment
by those who oppose genetically-modified orga-
nisms (GMO). They are also condemned by
those who think plant seeds should remain part of
the common heritage of humanity. n
* Researcher at the French
National Institute for Agronomic
Research
