July/August 1999 - The UNESCO Courier 37
Tourism and culture : rethinking the mix
The Roman city of Po m p e i i , a stone’s throw
from Naples, was bu ried beneath volcanic ash
when Vesuvius erupted in 79 AD. It was res-
tored pretty much intact as a result of systematic
e x c avations which began in 1748, but in recent
ye a rs it has been facing a second, s l ower death at the
hands of a host of largely unwitting culprits. The
ruins attract a flood of visitors , whose numbers
rose from 863,000 in 1981 to nearly two million in
1 9 9 8 .There are not enough attendants patrolling the
site to prevent the murals,frescos, mosaics,sculp-
tures and other fragile remains from being damaged
(or even stolen).The site has been poorly adminis-
t e r e d , to put it mildly. The official previously in
charge is currently under inve s t i g ation for
embezzlement.
On top of this, the ravages of time and the
weather have been aggravated by the fact that the
authorities have often opted to continue excava-
ting instead of making sure that buildings already
unearthed were properly preserved. Forty-nine of
the site’s 64 hectares have now been excavated,
but whereas in 1956 visitors could see 64 houses
or buildings in the ancient city, for the past few
years they only been able to see 16 because the
others have been cordoned off for protection.
Concern about the situation is widespread.
“At this rate, in 10 years’ time there won’t be
much to see at Pompeii,” said Andrea Carandini,
one of Italy’s most eminent archaeologists, in
1 9 9 5 . A year lat e r , the U.S.-based Wo r l d
Monuments Fund (WMF) classified Pompeii as
one of the world’s most endangered sites. In
1998, the city was put on UNESCO’s World
Heritage List.
Three years ago, a page was turned when a
respected expert, Pietro Giovanni Guzzo, was
appointed superintendent of Pompeii.The follo-
wing year, the Italian parliament gave the site
a d m i n i s t r ation broad financial independence.
Until then, visitors’ entry fees went directly to the
government, which allotted varying amounts of
money to the country’s archaeological and histo-
ric sites.
“Since my appointment, I’ve concentrated on
setting up an independent administration and
above all on trying to prevent damage to the
archaeological monuments,” says Guzzo, who has
introduced a “theme walk” with arrows to direct
visitors around the huge site. He has a budget of
$11 million, three-quarters of which comes from
the sale of tickets and items associated with the
site. However, studies have shown that “saving”
Pompeii will cost about $310 million.
Help has been promised or is under way from
museums and universities in Italy and abroad, as
well as the WMF, which decided last year to pro-
vide $600,000 over three years, mainly to fund a
general assessment of the state of the site and the
drafting of detailed criteria for restoration work.
To further boost Pompeii’s resources, a law
passed by the Italian parliament in 1997 said
“private firms who want to take part in the resto-
ration can obtain tax breaks under certain cir-
cumstances.” Wild rumours have spread recently
about the supposedly “imminent” conversion of
the site into a “theme park” with guides dressed
in Roman togas, but Guzzo has categorically
denied there are any such plans. nw UNESCO Courier journalist



Pompeii puts its house in ord e r
w Martine Ja c o t
Engulfed in volcanic ash 2,000 years ago, the ancient Roman city was slowly dying 
a second death. But help is on the way
Limiting the number of visitors entering a house at a given time (above, the villa of the
Vettii) is one proposal currently being studied in Pompeii.
‘At this ra t e, in 10 years’ time 
t h e re won’t be much 
to see at Po m p e i i ’
