W EDDING
BEL L S
F OR WEB AND TV ?
w Francis Balle and Sophie Boukhari
The divide between the Internet and television is fading fast. How will television survive 
this whirlwind of convergence? 
w Francis Balle, a French university lecturer, 
author of Dictionnaire des médias (1998) and Médias 
et sociétés (9th edition, 1999) and Sophie Boukhari,
UNESCO Courier journalist
n
Does the future of television lie in the
Internet, as many people in the global
a u d i ovisual industry believe ?
Television has ruled the media roost
during the second half of this century. But
is the familiar TV set, watched passively
from a distance by lolling couch potatoes,
now destined to be dethroned by the
interactive computer, operated by users
working inches from the screen? Or will
TV and computer combine to spawn a
new generation of hybrid products and
audiovisual services, resembling neither
the TV set nor the computer as we know
them?
Imagine for example a screen full of
images you could activate any time you
l i k e d . If you were watching the fil m
Titanic, you would use an infra-red remo-
te control to click, like a computer mouse,
on the face of Leonard DiCaprio to fetch
a biography of him from the Web or send
him an e-mail. You would click on his
shoes to buy a pair of the same kind or
even click on the wreck of the famous
ship to download,for a price,other videos
about it.
Conglomerates 
locked in battle
We’re not there yet. Indeed, any pre-
dictions must be offered with a grain of
salt. After all, is anyone clever enough to
predict exactly what the tumultuous affair
between the Internet and television will
give birth to? However, crystal balls aren’t
needed to see the increasingly fuzzy line
b e t ween television and the computer.
After sizing each other up as rivals, the
worlds of computers and the audiovisual
media have realized they need each other
and can gain from technological “conver-
gence”. With the digital revolution, any
text, drawing, sound or picture can be
turned into standard computer format
and used either on the Internet or on tele-
vision (as it goes digital).
This has set off major shifts in a new
industry arising at the crossroads between
audiovisual services, computers and tele-
communications. A major battle is raging
between two giant conglomerates. On one
side is the world’s biggest Internet service
provider, America Online (AOL), which
has joined forces with Philips and
DirecTV, the leading U.S. satellite digital
television operator, in a bid to win the
race to capture the next century’s custo-
mers. On the other side, AT&T, the worl-
d’s biggest telecommunications firm and
the main U.S. cable operator (which also
provides high-speed Internet access) has
teamed up with Microsoft,which is trying
to impose its software on the Internet net-
works and in the new decoders used by
digital TV sets.
Many factors are pushing the two
worlds of the Internet and television
towards each other. The Net is drawing
away more and more viewers from TV
and threatening its revenue from adverti-
sing. Recent surveys in the U.S. show
television viewing (which averages four
h o u rs a day compared with three in
Europe) has dropped since the under-30s
have plugged in to the Web. The trend is
expected to accelerate as more young
Americans get high-speed Web access,
which is currently only available in
700,000 homes.
The big guns of the Web—those who
provide services and software—want to
turn TV viewers into Netizens so they can
expand their markets. The number of
Internet users is tiny compared with the
Digital technology makes it possible to transmit a video via the Internet.

The Net prov i d e rs are also using this
same method to offer TV viewe rs an endless
range of online serv i c e s — i n f o rm at i o n ,t r a i-
ning and entert a i n m e n t . Far from killing off
TV in ye a rs to come, I n t e rnet will actually
gi ve it a second wind by drawing it furt h e r
(than cable or satellite) into the age of dive r-
sity and abu n d a n c e .
At the same time as the Net goes on
television, television will stake new terri-
tory on the Net by offering access to exis-
ting TV channels and new “webchannels”
set up specially for it.
TV programmes
live on the Net
This expected boom in TV on the
I n t e rnet is a bit surp rising in view of the
ve ry poor quality of the images. At present,
putting a video film online is a bit like
t rying to get a camel through the eye of a
n e e d l e . The feed down a telephone line is
far too slow and irr e g u l a r. Reception qua-
lity va ries according to the bandwidth and
the number of people connected. T h e
images come through at the rate of four or
five a second (five times slower than a nor-
mal television transmission), the size of the
picture is no more than 25 cm2, and line
congestion causes frequent sudden breaks
in transmission. But TV channels, from the
going online for the first time will be acces-
sing the Net via television. There is a good
chance this will happen in developing coun-
t ries too. In India, the Sat yam Infoway ser-
vice provider has just brought out a box
which allows TV viewe rs to access the Net.
In Bri t a i n , the majority of the population is
expected to take up digital television within
a matter of ye a rs. C h ris Smith, the Culture
S e c r e t a ry, said last September he wa n t e d
the new technology to bring the Intern e t
into eve ry home.
With Internet heading into the home,
electronic commerce is set to take off—
which just happens to be one of the aims of
the technological conve r g e n c e .The viewe r ,
for example, will see an adve rtising banner
at the top of the screen announcing a bar-
gain price for, s ay, a pair of jeans. It will take
just a click of the remote-control to get to
the maker’s website and order a pair.
number of people who watch television.
In rich countries,95 per cent of the popu-
lation watch television, but only 20-35 per
cent of families have computers, which
still scare a lot of people because they are
complicated to use and are still associated
mostly with the workplace.
Cyberspace
in the salon
So at the dawn of the 21st century,
sound, video images and television pro-
grammes are proliferating on the Web.
Meanwhile, as television becomes digital,
it is starting to offer interactive facilities
and access to the Internet.
Since WebTV was launched in the
United States in 1996 and purchased by
Microsoft the following ye a r , the race has
been on to provide television viewe rs with
access to the Net via their TV screens.T h i s
facility is currently being offered through
b oxes linking the TV set to a telephone
l i n e . As digital TV spreads, s u p e r - d e c o d e rs
will gi ve future viewe rs access—through
c a b l e , s atellite or radio—to a profusion of
channels (many of them paying) as well as
to the Web and other interactive digi t a l l y -
p r ovided serv i c e s , such as pers o n a l i z e d
we ather forecasts and news serv i c e s , d at a-
banks which can provide in-depth mat e ri a l
about TV progr a m m e s , shopping centres
and home banking. Recent surveys suggest
t h at there will be 61 million decoders ope-
r ating in the world by 2003.
There seems to be a gr owing consensus
t h at the Net will not become a really wides-
pread medium until it reaches people’s
homes through the TV set. A recent surve y
in Britain showed that 70 per cent of people
Internet technology encourages active participation by users hunting 
for information on the Web.
There seems to be a growing
consensus that the Net will
not become a really
widespread medium until 
it reaches people’s homes
through the TV set

How much longer can the couch potato survive?
smallest to the major netwo r k s , k n ow that
over the next decade big innovations will
t r a n s f o rm the scene, with gr e ater speed,
3D images, full-screen pictures and other
i m p r ove m e n t s.
According to the managers of
Comfm, a French Web portal (gateway
site) which provides access to radio and
TV stations around the world, in mid-
1999 over 100 TV stations were transmit-
ting their programmes round the clock
live on the Net. Hundreds of other gene-
ral and specialist channels offer audiovi-
sual archives, either free or paying.
By broadcasting television on the Net,
you can reach a global audience much more
cheaply than by cable or sat e l l i t e .A l s o, in an
increasingly competitive environment due
to the skyrocketing supply of programmes
on offer,TV stations plan on using the We b
to make themselves more at t r a c t i ve . Fo r
example a “webviewer”, during a football
m at c h , can look up biographies of the
players or the history of the teams by clic-
king on a banner which runs across the
s c r e e n . A viewer can also plunge deeper
into a subject while the TV news is on by
delving into the Web to get extra informa-
tion and video mat e rial which is available on
demand. It remains to be seen, however,
whether this mass of material will overw-
helm the average viewer.
Online TV stations, despite their cur-
rent hesitations, also dream of becoming
successful Web portals. The programmes
would draw in consumers and then steer
them towards virtual shopping centres.
They would sell not just videocassettes,
games and CDs but all kinds of other
items, from clothes to cheese.
S e veral of the big networks are also
hoping to win back on the Web some of the
v i e we rs they are losing to new stations and
to the Net. The major networks are bu s y
setting up websites which complement
their television programmes without com-
peting with them.The giant U. S . n e t wo r k ,
A B C , has launched the firs t - e ver live inter-
a c t i ve “ we b - o n l y ” news progr a m m e . I t
goes out on the Web in the middle of the
d ay, at 12.30, to target a new audience of
o f fic e - wo r k e rs during their lunch-break.
Special-interest
TV channels
An entirely new kind of TV, the web-
channel, is also emerging in the shape of
countless small stations operated by com-
panies, political organizations and spe-
cial-interest groups (medicine and
cooking, for example). One big advantage
they have is that production and broad-
casting costs are negligible. Many of the
people setting up such webchannels think
mass television has a limited future.They
are betting that audiences will become
more and more fragmented just as they
did with the growth in cable-and-satellite
d e l i vered progr a m m e s. With digi t a l i z a-
tion, this fragmentation is expected to
increase and give rise to television com-
munities,with viewers tuning into thema-
tic programming.While watching highly-
specialized channels, webviewers can look
up material about the topic being presen-
ted or chat with other people connected
to the site.
More than 40 million people—about
a quarter of all those online—already have
software to access these sites and down-
load sound and video from them onto
their computers. The wo r l d ’s leading
a u d i ovisual port a l , B r o a d c a s t . c o m
(recently taken over by Yahoo!), gets half a
million visitors every day.
W h at about the future? As television
and the Web conve r g e , will the familiar old
TV set disappear? It seems unlikely, since
the two means of communication are dis-
tinct—the Internet meets the needs of the
i n d i v i d u a l , and television addresses a mass
a u d i e n c e .They also have different publics—
the active Net-user and the passive T V
v i e we r. So we can be fairly sure TV will
s t ay T V, w h at e ver kind of screen we shall use
to watch it. There will always be people
who want to lap up the programmes offered
on their favourite channel. Mass TV will
always have a role in broadcasting major
events which bring a mass audience toge-
ther,such as the funeral of Princess Diana
or the World Cup football final. n
