n
In 1989, the fall of the Berlin Wall was rightly welcomed because it marked the
collapse of a system that provided a degree of equality but rejected freedom.Today
there is a strong possibility that the system gradually spreading all over the world—
a kind of neo-liberal fundamentalism—may also collapse.In its obsession with freedom,
vital though freedom is, this fundamentalism disregards equality, a term which should
not be regarded here in purely static and statistical terms, but as something dynamic
and ethical. Equality can only be truly practised in a context of social solidarity or—to
borrow from the vocabulary of the French Revolution—of fraternity.
On the one hand, we have a world that is immensely rich in resources, p o s s i b i l i t i e s ,k n ow-
ledge and experi e n c e ; its constituent societies are freer and more dynamic than eve r.T h e r e
is an extraordinary potential for everyone to live a better life. But at the same time,new
and ever higher walls are being built both between peoples and between social groups within
individual countries.We are experiencing a travesty of development, which is creating a
world bipolarized into extremes of wealth and poverty.
The most common reactions to this disastrous situation are ve ry often the result of two
misapprehensions.The first can only be described as ideological or doctrinaire since it is
not based on the facts as they can be observed.It says that since the dominant system of
values and things is by definition more than sat i s fa c t o ry, the persistence of impove ri s h m e n t
is merely a temporary blip. Enough time has elapsed,h owe ve r , for us to see that this is not
the case, including in countries where this system has been part of the established order
for more than a century. One statistic is particularly eloquent. In just over 30 ye a rs ,
world production has approx i m ately doubled, but the gap has more than doubled betwe e n
the income of the 20 per cent of the world’s people living in the richest countries and the
income of the wo r l d ’s poorest 20 per cent, according to the United Nations Deve l o p m e n t
Programme.
The second misapprehension stems from another form of blindness and illusion,
namely the belief that poverty can be regarded exclusively as a moral issue,as if it had no
other kind of implications for those who are not poor.G l o b a l i z ation is, h owe ve r , a two - way
process. It enables the countries of the North to export their values and their paradigms
as well as their goods and capital to the countries of the South, but it also makes them much
more vulnerable to the backlash of crises that afflict these countries. Even in the North,
the cult of competitiveness is undermining situations once considered extremely stable.
The tide of precarity is rising steadily, so that people who have never been poor no longer
regard poverty as a distant prospect but as one so close that it could engulf them at any
moment.
Because of inadequate socio-economic deve l o p m e n t , the extraordinary upsurge of demo-
c r a cy over the past 30 ye a rs remains a ve ry fragile process, and there is a risk that the trend
m ay be reve rs e d .When hunger, disease and ignorance preva i l ,c i t i z e n s ’p a rt i c i p ation in deci-
sion-making becomes either non-existent or a mere charade.D e m o c r atic institutions become
empty shells, r e p r e s e n t ational bodies existing in form only and devoid of real signific a n c e .
Social divisions caused by economic distortions exacerbate the failures of democracy
which in turn pose serious threats to civil order within countries and to peace between
nations. It is high time to face these obvious facts. n



Myths and
i l l u s i o n s
Federico Mayor
The tide of precarity is
rising steadily, so that
people who have never
been poor no longer regard
poverty as a distant
prospect but as one so
close that it could engulf
them at any moment
