Genes of i n e q u a l i t y
wMohamed Larbi Bouguerra
New drugs and treatments based on genetic re s e a rch are set to widen existing disparities 
in access to medical tre a t m e n t
w Former director of Tunisia’s
National Institute for Scientific
and Technical Research and
author of La Recherche contre le
tiers monde (“Research against
the Third World”;PUF, Paris, 1993)
and La Pollution invisible
(“Invisible Pollution”;PUF, Paris,
1997)
Medicine in the 21st century is likely to be based
on genetics.The decipherment of DNA being
done as part of the intern ational Human
Genome Project will probably unleash a flood of
a p p l i c ations which will make it possible to improve
the physical condition of human beings at a time when
m a ny experts are saying the limits of “ c o nve n t i o n a l ”
medical care have been reached.
O ver the next two decades, gene therapy, i m m u-
nology and cell culture enabling production of total-
ly uncontaminated blood (for people with leukemia,
for example) are expected to make gr e at stri d e s.T h e
availability of a range of prenatal tests designed to
spot genetic anomalies in embryo s
will boost the development of genetic counselling
s e rv i c e s.
But who will benefit from all this? Right from the
s t a rt of the Human Genome Project in 1990, Ja m e s
D.Wat s o n , one of the discove r e rs of DNA’s double
helix structure, has campaigned for this great pro-
ject to stay in the public domain. “The wo r l d ’s
n at i o n s ,” he has said, “must realize that the human
genome belongs to eve rybody on the planet and not
to individual countries.”
Most discove ries and new treatments have come
out of laborat o ries in the rich countri e s , but people
from countries of the South have also contributed
their brain power and hard work. It was an Indo-
n e s i a n , Joe-Hin T j i o, who prove d , in 1956 in
S we d e n ,t h at human beings have 46 chromosomes.
In 1968,in the United States,Indian Nobel Prize-
winner Har Gobind Khorana became the firs t
person to synthesize a human gene.
Lack of resources
and political will
Analysis of the DNA of some indigenous peoples
has yielded valuable genetic data for scientists who
h ave subsequently declared discove ries made on the
basis of it to be their own intellectual propert y.
One such population study, for example, i d e n t i-
fied the genes of a man of the Hagahai tribe (Pa p u a
New Guinea) which provide immunity to the leu-
kemia virus HTLV.
But owing to lack of resources and political
w i l l , m a ny poor countries have trouble putting
together a serious policy on science which would
reduce their total dependence on rich countri e s

and enable them to work out research priorities.
Some of these countries howe ver have human exper-
tise and facilities which allow them to contri bute to
work on DNA sequencing.
India, for example, has six laboratories where
this can be done, all of them linked to the Hydera-
bad Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology.
Some Indian specialists would have preferred to
sequence the DNA of pat h o l o gical organisms
(microbes, mosquitoes, contaminants,etc.) which
are common in India, r ather than that of human
beings chosen at random. In this way, it would have
been easier, they say, to develop applications that
would be immediately useful to people in India.
This is an ongoing debate because nobody can gua-
rantee that analysis of the human genome will lead
to medical treatment for people in the countries of
the South, where there are fewer profits to be made
than in the North.
Light-years away
from medecine’s new horizons
The other big question is that of access to the new
f o rms of treat m e n t . E ven in rich countri e s , w h e r e
public spending on health is being cut, these thera-
pies will be ve ry expensive — at least to begin with—
and are likely to trace a new frontier between the we l l -
off and the rest of the population (see page 26). S o
it is not ve ry likely that treatment of this kind will really
reach the people of the third wo r l d .The countries of
the South are also light-ye a rs away from the new
h o rizons of medicine because they lack basic health
facilities and trained health wo r k e rs.
Should some countri e s , or even whole regions like
A f rica south of the Sahara, not be part of today ’s
d e b ate about bioethics just because they might be
excluded from the benefits of tomorr ow ’s medicine?
The answer is no. F i rs t , because their inhabitants are
sometimes directly invo l ve d . The eliminat i o n , f o r
e x a m p l e , of some “ h a rm f u l ” genes through germ - l i n e
therapy—if it were ever applied on a wo r l d - w i d e
scale—could be ve ry harmful to them. In accor-
dance with the phenomenon known as pleotropy, a
single gene can control several characteri s t i c s.T h u s
the recessive gene of cystic fibrosis may play a part in
fighting cholera.
Sickle-cell anaemia (an abnormal form of the
red pigment of the blood, haemoglobin) affords
some protection against the deadly form of the
malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum. If the
gene that triggers this condition is eliminated, do
we risk seeing even more cases of malaria? This is
a very gloomy prospect in a world where malaria
is already killing two million people a year and
when none of the big pharmaceutical companies
have invested money to look for a vaccine. More
generally, the whole planet is concerned by the
risk of reducing the genetic reserves available to
future generations by altering or eliminating cer-
tain genes. Is it not presumptuous and dangerous
to anticipate their needs when nobody yet knows
what kind of environment they will be living in?
No one on the planet should be excluded from
discussions about mat t e rs affecting human exis-
tence, which are of course of universal concern.
Bioethics is about the absolute, intrinsic worth of
every individual—the very essence of human life.
The lines it draws between what is possible and what
is acceptable should be worked out with the invol-
vement of all the world’s cultures,even if they are
minority or dominated cultures.
What’s more, bioethics again poses the urgent
question of solidarity among human beings in the
face of illness.When genetic medicine no longer just
s e rves the rich but also enhances their lifestyle,
prolongs their lives or enables them to produce
children with specific characteristics, can we deny
the people of poor countries the benefits of know-
ledge which would free them from the scourge of
d e b i l i t ating parasitical diseases, of Aids and of here-
ditary afflictions? How long could such “medical
apartheid” fail to affect the consciences of those
living in the countries of the North? n
