A h m a d o uKo u r o u m a
anAfrican novelist’s
inside story 
Ahmadou Kourouma is a writer from Côte d’Ivoire whose relatively slender
but highly original output—three novels published over 28 years—draws up
an eloquent indictment of the injustices imposed on black Africa
Your first novel, The Suns of Independence,
published in 1970, has won acclaim as a
masterpiece and has sold 100,000 copies.
But you had a hard time finding a publisher
for it. Why?
The book was rejected for two reasons.
F i rs t , my style had a certain ori gi n a l i t y
stemming from the particular way in which
I used the French language. Some readers
found this disconcert i n g . S e c o n d , m a ny
people disliked the conception of the
n ove l . I had structured it in the kind of way
used by the A m e rican writer John Dos
Passos earlier this century. I ended the fic-
tional part of the book with a section I
would describe as documentary. After tel-
ling the story of the protagonist, Fa m a , I
d e s c ribed situations and events that took
place in Côte d’Ivoire at the time of the
Cold Wa r. I talked about things that might
be called sensitive . Some A f rican publi-
s h e rs even sent the manuscript back to me
with scat h i n g, almost insulting comments.
How did you come to master what was for
you a foreign language—French?
I had no choice in the matter. I didn’t
know how to express myself in any other
language. My English was poor, and I
have never learned Arabic. In school I was
only taught French and, like everyone
who went to school before decoloniza-
tion,I wasn’t allowed to speak our mother
tongue, Malinke1. So I had to use French
to describe Malinke people and tell sto-
ries of Malinke life.Some people have cri-
ticized me for “bashing” the French lan-
guage and giving it a Malinke twist.
It has even been said that you have “cuc-
kolded” French.
Whatever people might say, I am not
trying to change French.What I’m inter-
ested in is reproducing to the fullest pos-
sible extent the way my characters live
and think. My characters are Malinke.
And when the Malinke speak, they follow
their own logic, their own way of looking
at the world. That approach doesn’t go
into French. The sequence of words and
ideas in Malinke is different from what it
is in French. There is a big gap between
what I describe and the form in which I
express myself, a gap much bigger than
the gap when an Italian speaks French,
for example. I repeat, my objective is not
formal or linguistic. What I’m interested
in is reality. My characters must be cre-
dible and to be credible they must speak
in the novel as they speak in their own
language.
How would you describe the Malinke lan-
guage?
Some people may disagree, but it seems
to me that African languages are on the
whole far richer than European lan-
guages. They have a wide range of words
to denote one and the same thing and a
multitude of expressions to describe one
and the same feeling, as well as many
mechanisms for creating neologi s m s.
Malinke alone has around ten of these.
African languages are rich in proverbs
and sayings which people constantly refer
to. So it’s not surprising that sometimes
we get bogged down when we use French
to describe our lives and our psychologi-
cal universe.The French language, on the
other hand, is the product of a Catholic,
r ationalist civilizat i o n . T h at ’s obvious
from its structure, its way of analysing
and describing reality. Our language is
influenced by fetishist spirituality and is
closer to nature.
Western authors often speak 
of writing as a physical,vital,
organic need. For you, it is more a way 
of getting a hearing.
For us African writers, writing is also a
matter of survival.When I wrote The Suns
of Independence, I wanted to campaign
against abuses of social and economic
power. That was a vital and absolute
necessity! All contemporary French and
other European wri t e rs have devo t e d
some of their work to the four years of
o c c u p ation and oppression that their
c o u n t ries endured during the second
world war. But in Africa we had 100 years
1 . The Malinke are the largest of the gr o u p s
composing the Mande ethnic gr o u p. Most of them
l i ve in Guinea, M a l i , Senegal and Côte d’Ivo i r e ,
where they make up 11 per cent of the populat i o n .
C o nve rted to Islam in the 11th century, t h e
Malinke have ruled powerful empires which they
d o m i n ated by force of numbers ,a rms and
economic powe r.They are reputed to have a good
head for bu s i n e s s , and are also known as Dioulas, a
word meaning “ m e r c h a n t s ” in Malinke.

Hard facts
“We African writers work in gruelling condi-
t i o n s,” says Ahmadou Ko u r o u m a .“ W r i-
ters are seldom rich anywhere in the world, but for
us things are even tougher. We have fewer
r e s o u r c e s, fewer readers and fewer publishers.”Th e
only available statistics, which are not recent but
are probably still valid, reveal that sub-Saharan
Africa publishes three times fewer titles than the
average for developing countries and 25 times
fewer than that for the developed countries.
“ There are two ways of writing in A f r i c a ,” Ko u-
rouma says.“ The first is to write about Africa and
Africans. Writers denounce situations they know
relatively well,and run risks by shouting out the
t r u t h .They can’t expect big sales. They write for rea-
ders in developing countries, where people either
can’t read or can’t afford to buy books.The second
is to write for a wider public by tackling topics that
are of interest to non-Africans as well as A f r i-
c a n s. There are African authors living in Fra n c e, f o r
example, who write for an exclusively European
r e a d e r s h i p. They are European writers even if they
were born in A f r i c a . Others manage to publish best
sellers in France and are read in Africa as well, b u t
that is more unusual.
“I think that we should try and write for eve-
ryone by presenting our problems as universal
human problems.We should follow the example
set by the best Latin American litera t u r e. But A f r i-
cans are changing.The first African authors took
up the pen to show that they too could express
themselves as writers, that they too were human
b e i n g s. At the time, some people had doubts
about that. . . . My generation has gone further
than that. We have often chosen literature as a
campaigning medium.” n
of occupation, and it’s vitally important
for us to talk about this and analyse its
consequences and effects. We had as
many massacres as Europeans did during
the last war and under authori t a ri a n
Stalinist regimes. In my second novel,
Monnew, which was published in 1990, I
wanted to get across the message that we
too have endured great suffering. That
suffering is also the subject of the novel I
recently finished.Its title is En attendant le
vote des bêtes sauvages (“Waiting for the
wild animals to vote”), and it’s based on
the tragedy of the Cold War in Africa.
The sufferings you describe are intense and
extreme. But in this novel you express gra-
titude to a dictator for his “courage” in tel-
ling his compatriots that they were “thie-
ving, lazy savages.”
That remark does not refer to the people
“down below”,as we say, but to those “on
top”, the dictators’ buddies. Resignation
was the only option for the people down
below, whom I describe as “coarsened by
their beliefs and their poverty, patient and
dumb”.The Cold War prevented African
countries from finding a way out of their
predicament. It kept a millstone around
their necks. Foreign powe rs gave the
orders and pulled the strings, picked the
dictators that suited them and sent in
their military whenever there was any
resistance.
But it was the most brutal, ignorant leaders
who won the internal power struggles in
African countries.
Yes, and they also had to be cynical.The
foreign powers needed them. Apart from
a few exceptions, they didn’t want bright
p e o p l e . Those who wanted to defend
Africa, who wanted to strike a balance
between the two sides by playing cat-and-
mouse with them, were immediately eli-
minated.
But when opposition movements came on
the scene at the beginning of the democra-
tization process after the Cold War, they
turned out even worse than the dictators.
T h at ’s a fa c t .The earliest opposition leaders
t u rned out to be dru n k e n , d ru g - a d d i c t e d
l o o t e rs without principles or scru p l e s. A n d
the opposition leaders who returned after a
long exile we r e , as I have described them,
“ p e rsons alien to their country ’s people and
For us African writers, writing is also a matter of survival.
When I wrote The Suns of Independence, I wanted to
campaign against abuses of social and economic power.
That was a vital and absolute necessity!
© Ulf Andersen/Editions du Seuil, Paris

way of life” and therefore incapable of gr a s-
ping what was really going on. I t ’s true that
both wanted first and foremost to take
r e venge and to get ri c h .W hy? Because they
all still believed in the mirage that power is
all that mat t e rs.
People had given up and let their lea-
ders behave as village chiefs did in tradi-
tional Africa. The dictators thought they
could go it alone,taking decisions without
e ven listening to their advisers.
Government money was their money. All
those who got rich were pawns of the
government.The dictator’s power was so
absolute that all kinds of things were
expected of him. To gi ve you one
example, in my country even today, when
a fairly well-known person dies, the fami-
ly still expects the head of state to pay
10,000 or 20,000 French francs ($1,800
or $3,500) for the funeral!
Since that’s how things were, it’s not
surprising that democratization got off to
a very bad start.The old power structure
and all its works had to be destroyed,
because eve rything revo l ved around
t h e m . It was impossible for any t h i n g
constructive to be built on the existing
foundations, not only by the corrupt dic-
tators and their cronies, but also by the
opposition leaders who came back from
exile abroad and hadn’t a clue about what
was really going on. People always behave
in the same way. As the Malinke proverb
says,“The dog won’t give up its awkward
way of sitting.”
One criticism that has been made of your
most recent novel is that in Africa reality
and magic seem to be inseparable. Your
anti-hero, the dictator Koyaga, defeats all
his adversaries largely because of the
strength of his magical powers.
I don’t believe in magi c. And when
Africans ask me why I don’t, I say that if
magic really existed, we wouldn’t have
allowed the abduction of 100 million
people, of whom perhaps 40 million rea-
ched the Americas and 60 million died on
the way. If magic really worked, the slaves
would have turned into birds, say, and
would have flown back home. I don’t
In West Africa, hunters belong 
to a brotherhood which is at the top 
of the traditional social hierarchy.

A B I D JA N
C Ô T E  D ’ I V O I R E
Liberia
Burkina Faso
Mali
Yamoussoukro
Boundiali

believe in magic because when I was a
boy, I saw forced labour. If magic existed,
the victims of forced labour would have
been able to escape. But in a novel you
have to describe your characters’ mentali-
ty and ideas. Power and magic are insepa-
rable in the minds of most Africans. The
dictator not only has power and money,
he also has the best fetishists and sorce-
rers. Because they are the best, the dicta-
tor is invulnerable and his power is limit-
less. For the dictator’s entourage and for
the people at large, power and magic are
one.
So how can Africa be successful 
in a world where science and technology
are increasingly important?
Rationality will gain ground at the same
time as democracy, which is still far off
but is slowly coming in. It won’t solve
every problem, but we already have its
f o u n d ation stone—the spoken wo r d .
Everywhere, we say what we want, and
that’s quite an achievement. And one
important thing we can say—and see—is
that the chief’s almighty power is on the
way out. The press can now expose
corruption and abuses of power; a leader
has to campaign against his opponents in
elections; it’s possible to get rich without
being a stooge of the government. The
leader is no longer a superman. He no
longer has everything going for him. He
has to shoulder duties and responsibili-
ties. He is becoming like everyone else.
And consequently the magical part of his
power is disappearing.
And yet at the end of your latest 
novel the dictator is forced to hold elec-
tions, but “if people refuse 
to vote for him, the animals will 
come out of the bush, get hold of ballot
papers and elect him with a landslide majo-
rity.”
Odd as it may seem, many people think
that kind of thing is possible.They’re even
sure presidents get elected that way. But
we ’re making some headway. B e f o r e ,
either there weren’t any elections at all, or
if an election was held, the dictator only
had to ask for 99 per cent of the vote for
his wish to be granted. Now he is forced
to cheat. Votes from wild animals are the
last refuge of dictators in distress. n
Interview by
René Lefort and Mauro Rosi.
