The evil that men do. . .
◗ Tz vetan To d o rov
The collective memory must be free to come to terms with grief and shape a better future
◗ Mr Todorov, who was born in
Bulgaria and has lived in
France since 1963, is a director
of studies at the French
National Scientific Research
Institute (CNRS). His books
translated into English include
Morals of History (University of
Minnesota Press, 1995), French
Tragedy: Scenes of Civil War,
Summer 1944 (Dartmouth
College Press, 1996) and
Convergences: Inventories of
the Present (Harvard
University Press, 1993).
‘W
e must draw a veil over all the horr o rs
of the past,” said Winston Churchill not
long after the end of the Second Wo r l d
Wa r. Around the same time, the A m e rican philoso-
pher George Santayana issued a wa rn i n g, o f t e n
r e p e ated since, to the effect that “those who forget
the past are condemned to repeat it.” For those of
us who have experienced the painful history of the
20th century, which of these two injunctions is the
most useful? W h at should we do—forget or
r e m e m b e r ?
The two operations are contradictory in
appearance only. Remembering is always, by defi-
nition, an interaction between forgetting (erasu-
re) and complete preservation of the past—some-
thing that is virtually impossible. The Argentine
writer Jorge Luis Borges creates a character in his
s h o rt story Funes el memori o s o (Funes the
Memorious) who remembers every detail of his
life. It is a terrifying experience.
Memory selects from the past what seems
important for the individual or for the communi-
ty. It organizes this selection and imprints its
values on it. Peoples prefer to remember the glo-
rious pages of their history rather than shameful
episodes, and individuals often try unsuccessfully
to free themselves from the memory of a trauma-
tic event.
How to live with painful memories
Why do we need to remember? Because the
past is the very core of our individual or collecti-
ve identity. If we do not have a sense of our own
identity and the confirmation of our existence
that it provides, we feel threatened and paralyzed.
The need for an identity is thus quite legitimate.
We have to know who we are and what group we
belong to. But people, like groups, live among
other people and other groups. And so it is not
enough simply to say that everyone has the right
to exist. We also have to consider how our exerci-
se of this right affects the existence of others. In
the public arena, not all reminders of the past are
worthy ones, and those that encourage revenge
are always suspect.
The victims of evil may, in their personal lives,
be tempted to try to forget the experience com-
pletely, blotting out painful or humiliating memo-
ri e s. To a woman who has been raped, f o r
example, or a child who has been the victim of
incest, might it not be better to act as if these
traumatic events never happened? We know from
people’s reactions that this is unwise, because
such a blanket refusal to remember is dangerous.
Repressed memories remain more alive than ever
and give rise to severe neuroses. It is better to
accept a distressing past than to deny or repress
it. The important thing is not to go to the other
extreme and endlessly brood over it, but to gra-
dually distance oneself from it and neutralize it—
in a sense to tame it.
This is how mourning functions in our lives.
First we refuse to accept the loss we have expe-
rienced and we suffer terribly from the sudden
absence of a loved one. Later,while never ceasing
to love them, we give them a special status—they
are neither absent nor present as they were befo-
re. A distancing process develops, and eases the
pain.
An act of faith in the future
Communities are rarely tempted to try to for-
get completely evil events that have befallen
them.Afro-Americans today do not seek to forget
the trauma of slavery their ancestors suffered.The
descendants of the people who were shot and
burned to death in Oradour-sur-Glane1 in 1944,
do not want the crime to be forgotten.In fact they
want to preserve the ruins of the village left by the
event.
Here too, as in the case of individuals, it might
be hoped that the barren alternatives of totally
erasing the past or endlessly poring over it could
be avoided.The suffering should be inscribed in
the collective memory, but only so that it can
increase our capacity to face the future. This is
what pardons and amnesties are for.They are jus-
tified when crimes have been publicly admitted,
not to make sure they are forgotten but to let
bygones be bygones and give the present a new
chance. Were Israelis and Palestinians not right
when they met in Brussels in March 1998 and
noted that “just to start talking to each other, we
have to leave the past in the past”?
When Churchill called for for a veil to be
drawn over past horrors, he was right in a sense,
but his injunction must be qualified by all kinds
of conditions. No one should prevent memory
from being regained. Before we turn the page,
said future Bulgarian president Jeliu Jelev after
the fall of communism, we should first read it.
And forgetting means very different things to evil-
doers and to their victims. For the latter, it is an
act of generosity and faith in the future; for the
1.A French village where the SS massacred 642 persons as
a reprisal for attacks by the Resistance.

A person or a community may need to appro-
priate the memory of a past hero or—more sur-
prisingly—a victim as a way of asserting their
right to exist.This serves their interests, but does
not make them any more virtuous. It can in fact
blind them to injustices they are responsible for in
the present.
The limits of this kind of remembering, which
emphasizes the roles of the hero and the victim,
were illustrated during the ceremonies held in
1995 to mark the 50th anniversary of the bom-
bing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. In the United
States,people were only interested in recalling the
heroic role of the U.S. in defeating Japanese mili-
tarism. In Japan, attention focused on the victims
of the atomic bombs.
But there is a lot to be said for rising above
one’s own suffering and that of one’s relatives and
opening up to the suffering of others, and not
claiming an exclusive right to the status of former
victim. By the same token, accepting the wrongs
we have done ourselves—even if they were not as
serious as the wrongs done to us—can change us
for the better.
The past has no rights of its own. It must
serve the present, just as the duty to remember
must serve the cause of justice. ■

Me m o ry: making p e a c e with a violent pas t
former it results from cowardice and refusal to
accept responsibility.
Yet is remembering the past enough to preve n t
it from repeating itself, as Santayana seems to say ?
Far from it. In fa c t , the opposite usually happens.
To d ay ’s aggressor finds justific ation for his actions
in a past in which he was a victim. Serb nat i o n a l i s t s
h ave sought justific ation by looking ve ry fa r
back—to their military defeat by the Turks in
K o s ovo in the 14th century.
The French justified their belligerence in 1914
by referring to the injustice they had suffered in
1 8 7 1 . Hitler found reasons in the humiliat i n g
Tr e aty of Ve rsailles at the end of the First Wo r l d
War to convince Germans to embark on the
S e c o n d . And after the Second World Wa r , the fa c t
t h at the French had been victims of Nazi bru t a l i t y
did not prevent them—in many cases the same
people who had joined the army after fighting in
the resistance—from attacking and tort u ring civi-
lians in Indochina and A l g e ri a . Those who do not
forget the past also run the risk of repeating it by
r e ve rsing their role: there is nothing to stop a vic-
tim from later becoming an aggr e s s o r.The memo-
ry of the genocide which the Jews suffered is vivid
in Israel, yet the Palestinians have in turn been vic-
tims of injustice.

Portraits of people who disappeared under the Pinochet regime look out from a wall in Santiago de ChileÕs Humachuco Renca neighbourhood.
