w The year 2000 must be a new beginning for us all. Together we can transform the
culture of war and violence into a culture of peace and non-violence.This transforma-
tion demands the participation of each and every one of us. It must offer young people
and future generations the values that can inspire them to shape a world based on jus-
tice, solidarity, liberty, dignity, harmony and prosperity for all.The culture of peace can
underpin sustainable development, environmental protection and the well-being of
each person.
w In November 1997, the United Nations General Assembly proclaimed the year
2000 as the International Year for the Culture of Peace. UNESCO is responsible for co-
ordinating the activities of the Year worldwide.
w A group of Nobel Peace Laureates who met in Paris to celebrate the 50th anniver-
sary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights drafted Manifesto 2000 for a
Culture of Peace and Non-Violence1. Made public in Paris on March 4, 1999, the
Manifesto is open to signature by people all over the world.The goal is to present 100
million signatures to the United Nations General Assembly in September 2000.
w Manifesto 2000 for a culture of peace and non-violence
Recognizing my share of responsibility for the future of humanity, especially for the
children of today and tomorrow, I pledge in my daily life, in my family, my work, my
community, my country and my region, to:
–1 Respect all life. Respect the life and dignity of every person without discrimina-
tion or prejudice.
–2 Reject violence. Practise active non-violence, rejecting violence in all its forms:
physical, sexual, psychological, economic and social, in particular towards the most
deprived and vulnerable such as children and adolescents.
–3 Share with other s. Share my time and material resources in a spirit of generosity
to put an end to exclusion, injustice and political and economic oppression.
–4 Listen to understand. Defend freedom of expression and cultural diversity, giving
preference always to dialogue and listening without engaging in fanaticism, defa-
mation and the rejection of others.
–5 Preser ve the planet. Promote consumer behaviour that is responsible and deve-
lopment practices that respect all forms of life and preserve the balance of nature
on the planet.
–6 Redisco ver solidarity . Contribute to the development of my community, with the
full participation of women and respect for democratic principles, in order to crea-
te together new forms of solidarity.
You can sign Manifesto 2000 on the Internet:
www.unseco.org/manifesto2000
or send a signed copy to:
International Year for the Culture of Peace
UNESCO,
7 Place Fontenoy,
F-75352 Paris 07 SP France
Fax: + 33 (0) 1 45 68 56 38
1.Among the first signatories were Norman Borlaug, Adolfo Perez Esquivel,the Dalai Lama,
Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev, Mairead Maguire,Nelson Mandela, Rigoberta Menchu Tum,
Shimon Peres, Jose Ramos Horta, Joseph Rotblat,Desmond Mpilo Tutu,David Trimble, Elie Wiesel,
Carlos Felipo Ximenes Belo.



I pledge 
in my daily life,
in my family,
my work,
my community,
my country 
and my region,
t o. . .
FOR A NEW
B E G I N N I N G
