“I grabbed the basket we used for sto-
ring beans and maize, threw in a
couple of blankets and some nappies
and put one of my children in it,” said a
44-year-old peasant woman. “I hoisted
another child on my shoulders and tied a
piece of rag to a third and kept him in
front of me. I was carrying another child
in my belly. We had to spend the night in
the forest. I was knee deep in mud and
the kids were up to their eyes in it.”1
Similar tragic stories could be told by
thousands of Colombian families who are
being forced to abandon their homes
because of civil war, which is mainly
being fought between paramilitary forces
and guerrillas. Since 1985, forced popula-
tion movement has affected 1.5 million
(308,000 in 1998) of the country’s 38
million people. More than two-thirds of
the refugees are from the countryside.
“People leave because they can no
longer live off the land,” said Hernán
Henao, director of the Regional Studies
Institute at the University of Antioquia, a
few days before he was murdered on May
4 1999. “Armed groups use intimidation,
threats and massacres to stop the peasants
going to the villages to buy and sell.” One
by one, in families or in groups, people
are fleeing the countryside. Many die on
the road. Most end up in the poverty-
stricken outskirts of the cities. Only five
per cent organize themselves into new
“resettlement” communities or return to
their land.
As farmers leave the countryside,local
food production comes to a halt.
Swissaid,a Swiss non-governmental orga-
nization working with displaced commu-
nities, the Diocese of Apartadó and the
International Red Cross, is trying to res-
tore this production, especially in the
Urabá region, one of the hotspots of the
civil war. The first priority is to guarantee
food security by collecting seeds of basic
foodstuffs lost during the war.The second



C O L O M B I A :
THE SEEDS OF RETURN
w Leticia Reyes
As terror and death stalk rural Colombia, preserving biodiversity is a priority for the food security
of displaced communities
is to re-establish family plots, which are
traditionally tended by the womenfolk
and where a wide variety of crop species
are grown.
The Indians,
guardians of biodiversity
Participants in the programme start
by making an inventory of lost varieties
and then go looking for them in nearby
villages. If there has been a massive exo-
dus of people,there will be no neighbours
and therefore no seeds. The job then
becomes harder. “In an area where eve-
ryone has left, you can lose a variety that
a community has been using for centu-
ries,” says Hans Wiederkehr, Swissaid’s
representative in Colombia. A lot also
depends on how long the population dis-
placement lasts. “ N o rth of the Rive r
Atrato, for example, not a single one of
the 47 known rice varieties identified
there were left when people returned to
the area a year later.This was long enough
for rice,maize,bean and plant seeds to be
lost, because their germination period
varies between three and six months.
Yucca and plantain seeds, however, can
survive for about two years.”
But how can people recuperate the
seeds when they live in an atmosphere of
fli g h t , f e a r , t h r e ats and death? “ W h at
we’re doing can only succeed because the
communities retain a basic capacity for
self-management,” said Wiederkehr. “In
this sense, the contribution of the Indians
(who were living in the region when the
Spaniards came), has been crucial becau-
se they’ve turned themselves into what
you might call ‘guardians of biodiversity’.
For more than 500 years, the Indians
have lived like nomads, so they’re very
good at organizing themselves and resis-
ting.”
In early 1995, for example, all the 700
or so people in the Zenú Indian village of
El Volao in Uraba left the protected zone.
In the second half of that ye a r , S w i s s a i d
and the Indigenous Organization of
Antioquia helped launch “ P r o j e c t
R e t u rn ” , which included a proposal for
sustainable ecological fa rm i n g . Two ye a rs
l at e r , t h r e e - q u a rt e rs of the population of
El Volao had returned and just over half
the “ b r e a d b a s k e t ” va ri e t i e s — m a i z e , ri c e ,
y u c c a , b e a n s , plantains and ya m s — w h i c h
existed before the exodus had been reco-
ve r e d . To d ay, more than 150 kinds of
w Colombian journalist
In Colombia,banana seeds can survive for about two years, whereas rice, maize and bean seeds are lost after 3-6
months.

plants gr ow in the vegetable gardens ten-
ded by the wo m e n . Some of them, i n c l u-
ding chillies, sweet potat o, basil and
pigeon peas, possess considerable genetic
d i ve rs i t y.
Recuperating all the seeds is very dif-
ficult. The project’s promoters say the
Colombian gove rn m e n t ’s short - t e rm
humanitarian aid policies often hamper
efforts to preserve and restore biodiversi-
ty. “The authorities offer ‘improved’seeds
and animal va rieties without thinking
about the harm they might do to local
genetic biodive rs i t y, and especially
without taking into account the knowled-
ge accumulated by local people over the
centuries,” says Swissaid’s Germán Vélez.
“They also encourage the intensive use of
c h e m i c a l s , marketing techniques and
one-crop farming ,” he adds.
The projects have developed in very
different ways depending on whether they
involve people returning to their own
land—as the Zenú Indians did—or going
to “temporary settlements” far from their
original homes, as in the case of the
region’s black communities.The situation
of the latter is very precarious. For them,
public services, including health, are vir-
tually non-existent and food is scarce.But
these communities, descended from esca-
ped slaves (maroons), are good at organi-
zing themselves.
Preservation of biodiversity 
hangs by a thread
At the end of 1998, 3,500 A f r o -
Colombian peasants, refugees in the tow n
of Pava r a n d ó , began talks with gove rn-
ment officials to fund their return home.
Since then, they have launched a “ Fo o d
S e c u ri t y ” p r o gramme with support from
S w i s s a i d . The menfolk go to nearby com-
munities in search of seeds, while the
women distri bute them to the ve g e t a b l e
g a r d e n s , identify medicinal plants and
exchange know - h ow.The women know all
about crop cy c l e s , soil quality and espe-
cially the needs of the fa m i l y. S e veral food
crops have already been harvested thanks
to teamwork and preparat o ry wo r k s h o p s.
Committees have also been set up to look
after seed storage. But the security situa-
tion is ve ry serious—12 peasants we r e
murdered by a group of paramilitaries on
A p ril 7 1999—and leaving the settlements
is become increasingly dangerous.
The fact is that in Colombia preserva-
tion of biodive rsity hangs by a thread.
W h at ’s more, both Indians and peasants
h ave only ve ry slender chances of being
able to return for good to their land (their
rights to which were recognized in 1993)
and reclaim their dignity in a country
where fundamental rights are violated on
a daily basis and where violence is des-
t r oying the links between land, c o m m u n i-
ties and traditional resources. M e a n w h i l e ,
it is reckoned that eve ry hour, o n e
Colombian family is being forced to leave
their home. H ow long can this go on? n
1.From Desarraigo y Futuro:vida cotidiana de
familias desplazadas de Urabá (“Displacement and
the Future:the daily life of refugee families in
Urabá”).Medellín,Regional Studies Institute of
the University of Antioquia,1998.
