The end of the millennium has seen some remarkable advances in political demo-
cracy. Oppressed peoples everywhere are at last, or once again, tasting freedom.
They owe these victories largely to themselves, to the intelligence, determination,
and even the genius of their citizens.
But this freedom will be fragile as long as it is cast in a single mold, the vehicle of a
uniform globalization which speaks with a single voice, primarily that of commerce.
Principles may be universal; the mechanisms that infuse life into them are shaped by a
host of features that are specific to each society.
No vision of democracy—which transcends politics and includes economic, social
and cultural life—can really take root if it is a sterile copy that fails to take account of
the history and myths, the values and traditions of each people.While these roots are
necessary, however, they provide no justification for citing “cultural relativism” as an
excuse for violating the basic principles on which the rights of human beings are foun-
ded. Respect for “cultural identity” cannot legitimize anti-democratic practices.
A second danger arises from the fact that the field in which these rights are elabo-
rated and exercised is all too often limited.The recent commemoration of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights was a reminder that human rights comprise not only
political and civil rights but also, on exactly the same basis, economic and social rights,
such as the right to a job, housing, health and education.
One and a half billion people live in dire poverty.Their most fundamental right, the
right to life, the bedrock of all other rights, is constantly threatened. So the still unfini-
shed struggle to extend and strengthen human rights includes the duty to promote
development.
This duty is not only a matter of legal formalism or an ethical imperat i ve .
Fundamental freedoms will remain ve ry fragile as long as pove rt y, exclusion and inequa-
lities pers i s t . The forces of globalization encourage the  establishment of the rule of law,
but a ve rsion of law biased in favour of rules needed for successful business activity.T h e y
also do more to sharpen economic and social tensions rather than to reduce them.
The momentum created by efforts to establish the rule of law in a growing number
of countries is coming up against a major obstacle.The principles and rules that govern
international relations are increasing their influence on the lives of nations, but they are
very far indeed from being democratic.The strongest still hold sway.
This is true where individual states are concerned.They feel their wings have been
clipped, and see their legitimate prerogatives being eroded by the rise of a kind of pri-
vate-sector absolutism,which tends to limit the functions of government to security and
mediation,paralyzing its role as the guarantor of the general interest and depriving it of
the necessary means to apply the rule of law.
It is also true of the community of states because there is still no world structure
which is accepted as the embodiment of the force of law. The United Nations is a
unique international democratic forum, but its authority has been weakened first by
nearly half a century of the Cold War and then by unilateral actions taken by the major
powers, in defiance of the very principles they profess to defend.
The rule of law is indivisible; it must encompass freedom and welfare, individual
countries and the world at large. n



ALL HUMAN RIGH T S
F OR ALL
Federico Mayor
As this issue goes to press,
UNESCO is in process of electing
a new Director-General.
In accordance with UNESCO’s
Constitution, UNESCO’s
Executive Board, comprising
representatives of 58 Member
States, recommends a single
candidate to the UNESCO
General Conference. The
Conference, in which each of
UNESCO’s 187 Member States
has one vote, is the
Organization’s sovereign
governing body. It will take a
decision on the Board’s
proposal on November 12, and
the new Director-General will
assume his functions a few
days later.
Further details about the
election will appear in the
next issue of the Courier.
