p r e s e rve the history of the repression in the collec-
tive memory.
The Commission’s report has neve rtheless had
a considerable impact.The truth began to come out,
opening up new opportunities for “justice as far as
possible”. Under the current president, Eduardo
Frei, the courts have handed out prison sentences
to the former head of the DINA, the dictat o rs h i p ’s
secret police,and to other military and police offi-
cers involved in the repression.1
But two big issues have been put on the back
bu rner—the crimes covered by the amnesty law
(committed between 1973 and 1978) and the res-
ponsibility of General Augusto Pinochet. M a ny

Chile: 
doing a deal with m e m o ry
◗ Oscar Godoy Arc a y a
Chileans have made a pact to ease the transition to democra c y. But the collective memory 
has played a more crucial part in pro g ress tow a rds a rule of law
◗ Professor at the Institute 
of Political Sciences of the
Catholic University of Chile and
a member of the Academy of
Social, Political and Moral
Sciences of the Institute of
Chile
1 Manuel Contreras, the former head of the DINA, was
sentenced in Chile for the murder in Washington of
Orlando Letelier, Minister of Foreign Affairs in the Allende
government,because Chile’s amnesty law does not cover
crimes committed abroad. In July 1999, in a decision
described as “historic”, Chile’s Supreme Court confirmed
the indictment of high-ranking officers on the grounds that
when victims’ bodies could not be found, the crimes
involved were “permanent and not subject to limitation”
and therefore not covered by the amnesty law. Editor
T
he question of human rights violations by stat e
o f ficials during the military dictat o rship is not
a priority in the current political debate.Chi-
leans have been saying this since 1990 in political
s p e e c h e s , in the media and through public opinion
p o l l s.Yet at regular interva l s , this serious issue fla r e s
up in the national debate.When it does, political
figures feel obliged to make amends, but as a rule
they prefer to let time do its work. Is this passivity
or a laissez faire attitude that should be legally
condemned?
“Justice as far as possible,” was the line taken by
Pat ricio Ay lwin while he was president.The work of
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (see box
page 27) formed part of this approach. Its aim wa s
to compile a list of victims of human rights violat i o n s
under the military regime and identify the guilty par-
t i e s. The idea was to establish the tru t h , awa r d
m at e rial and moral compensation to the victims, a n d
lay the foundations of national reconciliation.But
the Commission’s work has been limited by an
amnesty law passed under the military regime. In
other words, its role has been largely symbolic: to
An anti-Pinochet demonstration outside the Chilean embassy 
in Madrid in October 1998.

Chileans and foreigners wonder why a democratic
g ove rnment has not managed to repeal a law which
seems a disgrace and was passed in undemocratic
circumstances.
H ow is it that Pinochet has remained beyond the
reach of the law and that his political and criminal
responsibility has not been established? The answe rs
to these questions are connected to the special
nature of Chile’s transition to democracy, which
includes an unspoken agreement to keep the
amnesty law on the books and guarantee immunity
for Pinochet.The transition is the result of a pact,
whose effects have been strengthened by the exis-
tence of a right-wing electorate comprising up to 40
per cent of vo t e rs and an electoral system that pre-
vents a majority from dominating parliament.A gr e e-
ments have been made; there has been neither pas-
sivity nor laxity.
Reawakened memories
The society’s collective memory is stronger than
this, however.Whenever a debate arises about the
political heritage of the military regime or someone
tries to amend the constitution,memories are rea-
wakened of pri s o n e rs who va n i s h e d , e xe c u t i o n s
with or without trial and the torture inflicted on
thousands of Chileans. There is no collective
amnesia: the wickedness of the crimes has left an
indelible mark.
For nearly nine ye a rs , there was a tug-of-war bet-
ween collective memory and political determ i n at i o n
to forget. On the one hand, s e veral legal actions we r e
s t a rted against Pinochet and members of his regi m e .
On the other, one could point to a certain sluggi-

shness in the legal system, a veto by the arm e d
forces, and the feeling that drawn-out legal pro-
ceedings against Pinochet would not catch up with
him and that he would die a natural death before
coming to tri a l .This was the situation when he wa s
arrested in London.
Pinochet enjoys immunity because he has a
d i p l o m atic passport and is a senator for life, a n d
the Chilean gove rnment has accepted this. T h e
g ove rnment maintains that it cannot accept foreign
jurisdiction over him that it has neither recognized
by treaty nor through ratification of an internatio-
nal legal instrument.
I approve of this approach because states are
subject to international law even if it conflicts with
my ideals. I also approve of it because I think the
democratic transition is our business. I would like
to see,in my lifetime,Chilean courts put Pinochet
on trial for what he did and remove him from par-
l i a m e n t . I would like to see the armed forces quietly
accept and respect court decisions and see the pro-
Pinochet right accept the requirements of the rule
of law and representat i ve democracy. In sum, I
would like to see judicial sovereignty in Chile fully
deployed,as part of the rule of law in a strong and
established democracy.
P i n o c h e t ’s detention has moved the Chilean
justice system forward. Politicians have turned a
spotlight on the crimes of the dictat o rs h i p, a n d
public opinion is starting to accept that globaliza-
tion doesn’t only involve trade. This is a process
which is taking us towards a cosmopolitan society
equipped with supra-national bodies based on
freedom and the defence of human rights. ■
