F ORESTS: A HOT DEAL 
F OR A COOL ER WORL D
◗ Sophie Boukhari
Forests can play a key role in combating the greenhouse effect but current proposals for using
them raise a thicket of thorny issues
◗ UNESCO Courier journalist
Many reforestation projects are underway in Brazil, but deforestation is still gaining ground. 
According to Greenpeace, 80 per cent of the felling is illegal.
■
Why are industrialists so keen on
trees these days? After the Japanese
vehicle-maker Toyota (see page 13)
and others, the French car firm Peugeot
launched a huge reforestation project in
late 1999. The result will be 10 million
trees growing on 12,000 deforested hec-
tares in the heart of the Brazilian
Amazon.
The aim of the $10 million project,
says Peugeot chief Jean-Martin Folz, is to
“make the idea of a carbon sink a reality.”
In other words, to show that reducing
consumption of fossil fuels—gas, oil and
coal—is not the only way to fight global
warming. By using the ability of vegeta-
tion to absorb and store carbon dioxide
( C O2) , the main greenhouse gas, t h e
amount of CO2 in the atmosphere can be
reduced.
Tropical forests:
a controversial role
Through the process of photosynthe-
sis a growing tree gives off oxygen and
absorbs water, light and CO2, which is
why expanding forests are what is known
as “carbon sinks”. Full-grown forests on
the other hand cease to be carbon sinks
and become carbon reservoirs.They store
huge amounts of carbon above and below
ground and play a neutral role in the CO2
equation. The carbon dioxide given off
when old trees decompose can be offset
by that which is absorbed when young
trees gr ow in their place. And when
forests burn, they give off CO2 and beco-
me sources of carbon.That is the theory.
In practice, however, very little is known
about the global carbon cycle and the role
of forests in it.
It is also unclear how forests will react
to global warming. “There are uncertain-
ties regarding the implications of increa-
sed CO2 concentration in the atmosphere
for photosynthesis, forest growth rates
and changes in carbon stocks in forests,”
says Indian scientist N.H. Ravindranath,
one of the three co-ordinators of a special
r e p o rt on forests produced by the
I n t e r g ove rnmental Panel on Climat e
Change (IPCC). Today’s carbon sink can
become a source of CO2 tomorrow.
According to currently available data,
the world’s main forest carbon sinks are in
the countries of the North (the United
S t at e s , C a n a d a , Europe and Russia).
After centuries of deforestation,mainly to
create farmland, these regions have been
gaining trees again in the past 100 years
or so. As a result of the revolution in
intensive agriculture, less land is needed
for farming.
On the other hand, large-scale defo-
restation is still taking place in tropical
countries where land hunger is constantly
increasing (see box opposite page). This
contributes to the increased concentra-
tion of greenhouse gases in the atmosphe-
re. The role of tropical forests in this
context is highly controversial. In theory,
as mature forests they should absorb as
much CO2 as they give out. But recent
studies suggest they actually absorb more
CO2 than was thought. In fact, says Youba
Sokona, deputy director of Enda Tiers
M o n d e , a non-gove rnmental organiza-
tion,“we have no clear idea of the state of
forest resources or the way they behave in
developing countries.” Forest sur veys are
very expensive, and not many have been
done in the countries of the South. The
estimates of the Food and Agriculture
O r g a n i z ation of the United Nat i o n s
(FAO) have sometimes been questioned.
Carbon 
credits
Despite all these unknown factors, the
notion of carbon sinks has become highly
topical—for political rather than scientific
reasons. It came of age in 1997, when it
was introduced into articles 3.3 and 3.4
of the Kyoto Protocol on Climat e
Change.
Under the protocol, which was the

Article 3.3 says that “direct human-indu-
ced land use change and forestry activi-
ties, limited to afforestation, reforestation
and deforestation since 1990” can be
used by states parties to meet their com-
mitments. For example, a company may
fund a reforestation project in its own
c o u n t ry, or else a country like T h e
Netherlands,say, could sponsor tree plan-
t ations in Po l a n d . In 2008-2012, t h e
amount of CO2 these trees have absorbed
or “sequestrated” will be calculated and

Women carry seedlings into a wooded area as part of a forest rehabilitation project in Tanzania.
result of tough negotiations in the wake of
the 1992 United Nations Framewo r k
C o nvention on Climate Change, t h e
i n d u s t rialized countries promised to redu-
ce their annual net emissions of gr e e n h o u-
se gases by an average 5 per cent a ye a r
until 2008-2012, using the 1990 level as a
b a s e . To do this, some countri e s , n o t a b l y
the United Stat e s , insisted on the esta-
blishment of three “ flexibility mecha-
n i s m s ” .
The first involves setting up a market
where the rich countries will bargain with
each other to buy and sell emission per-
mits. The second is a “joint implementa-
tion” (JI) arrangement under which they
will earn carbon credits in exchange for
funding reduction of emissions in former-
ly communist eastern Europe through,
for example, industrial cleanup projects.
The third is a “clean development mecha-
nism” (CDM), which is like JI but ope-
rates between industrialized and develo-
ping countries. Many environmentalists
have sharply criticized this “international
trading in hot air” and accuse the coun-
tries that are the worst polluters of see-
king to shirk their obligation to thorough-
ly revamp their own energy consumption
practices.
Including the carbon sink idea in the
Kyoto Protocol is another way of making
the Protocol’s application more “ fle x ible”.
counted as part of such countries’ reduc-
tion in their own greenhouse gases.
Article 3.4 adds, without going into
specifics, that other human activities rela-
ting to carbon sources and sinks can be
taken into account. “These articles are
last-minute compromises,” says Michel
Raquet of Greenpeace Europe. “They
were drafted without much idea of their
implications or whether everyone agreed
on the meaning of the terms used. In fact,
they vary from one institute or country to

Villagers water seedlings at a tree nursery in India.
another.” Future negotiations will sort
this out.
These talks will also try to decide—
this will be a far-reaching debate—whe-
ther or not to include carbon sinks in the
CDM. If they are included, rich countries
will be able to fund afforestation or anti-
deforestation projects in poor countries as
a way of obtaining carbon credits, instead
of carrying out often more costly schemes
at home to curb emissions from industry
or transport.
The Intergove rnmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC), the scientific
organ of the 1992 Convention,thinks that
carbon sinks can play an important role.
As the FAO report notes,“IPCC has esti-
mated, with a medium level of confiden-
c e , t h at globally, carbon sequestrat i o n
from reduced deforestation, forest rege-
neration and increased development of
p l a n t ations and agr o - f o r e s t ry betwe e n
1995 and 2050 could amount to 12 to 15
per cent of fossil fuel carbon emissions
over the same period.”
Arthur Riedacker, a French expert
involved in the IPCC’s work, also points
out that such schemes produce biomass
and timber, so reducing fossil fuel
c o n s u m p t i o n . Biomass is a renewa b l e
energy source. Wood can replace plastic
or concrete, whose manufacture uses
hydrocarbons. But Ashley Mattoon of the
Worldwatch Institute says the trade-off in
carbon sinks may be “a major loophole
[in the Protocol] which admits vast quan-
tities of fossil carbon into the skies” and
“encourages types of forestry that aren’t
very good for forests.”
Questionable
gains
To head off these dangers, everyone
agrees the carbon sink idea should be very
closely examined and tightly regulated.
The IPCC, which will report back in
2000, will have to be more precise about
the meaning of the terms “afforestation”,
“ r e f o r e s t at i o n ” and “ d e f o r e s t at i o n ” i n
article 3.3 so as to prevent abusive prac-
tices developing. For example, the text
currently says a country can chop down
an old forest and replace it by one of fast-
growing trees, notes Greenpeace expert
Bill Hare.The felling would not be coun-
ted in the country’s emissions but the
reforestation would earn carbon credits.
So the country involved would gain, but
not the atmosphere or the environment,
because an old forest and its soil contain
more carbon, which would be released by
the felling, than a managed forest ever
will. Biodiversity would also suffer.
Another problem would arise if Japan,
say, were to fund a forest protection pro-
ject in Malaysia. In return, it would ask
for carbon credits equal to the emissions
which the felling of the forest would have
produced. But how can we be sure that
the protection project is actually respon-
sible for preventing the forest from being
destroyed? And what is the point of pro-
tecting, say, a stretch of African savannah
if the local population can simply chop
down trees further away?
For the moment, the world is roughly
divided into three camps about the issue
of carbon sinks. One consists of several
rich countries (including the U.S., New
Zealand and Australia) that want a broad
definition and flexible use of carbon cre-
d i t s. In some countri e s , like New
Zealand, carbon sequestration from tree
plantations covers a very high percentage
of their greenhouse gas emissions. If they
are unrestrictedly taken into account in
2008-2015, they will allow such countries
to meet their commitments without
taking any steps in areas such as industry,
transport and human settlements.
In the U.S., which has pledged to cut
its emissions by 7 per cent over the next
10 years, the carbon sink mechanism is
being used to persuade Congress to drop
its refusal to ratify the Kyoto Protocol,
says Mattoon. The Clinton administra-
tion argues that the sinks “could compri-
se a significant portion of the country’s
total required emissions reductions.”
A recent article in New Scientist maga-
zine said Washington is even pressing for
article 3.4 to be amended to include

waste from wood products in the defini-
tion of a carbon sink. It is certainly better
to bury paper and wood waste in the
ground than to burn it and release more
CO2 into the atmosphere. But how far is
this going to go? “The spirit of Kyoto
demands that we should focus on things
t h at produce fewer greenhouse gases,
which means encouraging energy-saving,
transport reform and improved industrial
processes and housing, with improve-
ments in forestry practices as an extra,”
says Riedacker.
Conflicting 
interests
A second group includes European
countries which take a cautious stand and
are waiting for the IPCC report before
making up their minds.The third group is
mostly made up of poor countries, which
are divided on the issue, s ay s
R av i n d r a n at h . “ T h e y ’re interested in
development, not so much in carbon,”
says ENDA’s Sokona, who is a member of
the IPCC working party.
E ve ryone has different wishes and
constraints as far as development goes.
India, China and the countries of sou-
theast A s i a , which have competitive
industries, seem opposed to introducing
forestry projects into the CDM. They
would prefer the rich countries to invest
in them via industrial projects, which
would include more technology transfers.
But some Latin American countries,such
as Costa Rica, are basing their develop-
ment on eco-tourism, so they have an
interest in improving their forests.
Africa, where half of all greenhouse
gas emissions are caused by deforestation,
is hesitating because in a continent where
food security is still the top pri o ri t y,
people fear farmland will be lost if trees
are planted. But Africa’s weak industrial
base means it will probably not benefit
much from the CDM if forestry projects
are not included in it. So some experts are
in favour of it under certain conditions.
“Protected parks don’t interest us,”
says Sokona. “They mean moving people
off land without giving them anything in
return. It’s too easy for rich countries to
come and plant trees in our countries,put
a fence round them and earn carbon cre-
dits. However, I’m in favour of agrofores-
try, which meets our needs.”
Few countries have taken a clear stand
so far. Others are still making their calcu-
lations and trying to work out their posi-
tion. The real battle over the world’s
forests will come after May 2000, when
the IPCC will make its report. ■
