Under the big top of Italy’s Embell Riva Circus, an equestrian act prepares to go through its paces. The circus, owned by the Bellucci family, 
tours mainly in southern Italy.



CIRCUS
FLASHBACK S
◗ Photos by Massimo Siragusa; text by Tonino Guerra
Massimo Siragusa’s circus photos conjures up a world of happy memories for Italian poet 
Tonino Guerra, the scriptwriter of Federico Fellini’s 1974 film Amarcord (‘I Remember’)
■
When autumn began and leave s
from the chestnut trees covered the
road between the station and the
square, a moment would come when I
would open the window overlooking our
vegetable garden and see with delight the
tent of the little circus which had been
pitched on the village green overnight.
When I opened the same window in
springtime, my surprise came from the
cherry tree, bursting with white blossoms.
I was a small boy then, full of excitement
at discovering the big top which had gone
up in front of our house.The evening air
was filled with the sounds of trumpets
and the rumble of drums.
It was usually the same circus that
Federico Fellini had applauded before me
in Rimini, the chief town of the Adriatic
R i v i e r a , near the village where I wa s
b o rn—Santarcangelo di Romagna. I
remember how Fellini and I often talked
about it during the shooting of Amarcord,
the film in which he remembered his
youth in Rimini.
By then, both of us had been living in
Rome for many years. On Sunday mor-
nings, Fellini would often drive me to
Cinecittà1. He just loved to be there when
it was deserted and quiet. He would ask
for the keys to Set no. 5 and we would
make our way to that dank, empty place.
Let the show begin!
As soon as we arrived, he would say in
a voice charged with emotion: “Let the
show begin!” and would start to switch on
the lights one by one. We watched the
1.The centre of the Italian film industry, founded
62 years ago on the Via Tuscolana just outside
Rome.

4 The UNESCO Courier - December 1999
P E O P L E  A N D  P L A C E S
This lanky giraffe is one of many performing animals in the Moira Orfei Circus. The Orfeis are a famous Italian circus family.
A lonesome clown looks into a mirror before going into the ring.

The spotlight picks out spinning hoops and silhouettes a high-stepping dancer during a Rome performance of the Togni family’s three-ring American Circus.
A tightrope walker with the Roncalli Circus treads the high wire in Vienna (Austria). The Roncalli is a German circus, but most of its performers are Italian.

Acrobats caught by the camera in mid-air during a performance by Livio Togni’s Circus in Palermo.
An elephant arrayed in a fluorescent costume.Flying trapeze artists of the American Circus.

P OET, 
S TOR Y-T EL L ER 
A ND
SCRIP TW RI T ER 
The Italian poet Tonino Guerra, who was born
in Santarcangelo di Romagna in 1923, gra-
duated in education studies from the University
of Urbina and is a world-famous scriptw r i t e r. He
has written over 100 screenplays, which have
been made into films by directors including
Michelangelo Antonioni (with whom he has just
written L’ Aq u i l o n e, an illustrated story for the
third millennium, published by Editoriale Delfi,
Cassina, Milan), Andrei Tarkovsky, the Ta v i a n i
brothers, Federico Fellini, Francesco Rosi and
Vittorio de Sica.
Some of his poems and short stories have
been translated into English, French, German,
Dutch and Spanish. Of one poem, H o n e y, the
great Italian writer Italo Calvino has said: “To n i n o
G u e r ra turns everything into fiction and poetry —
via the spoken word, writing or film, in Italian or
in the Emilio-Romagna dialect. We should all
learn his dialect so we can read these wonderful
stories in their original language.” ■
To contact Tonino Guerra, write by e-mail to
<delfi@pointest.com>
fuzzy glow from the dusty bulbs dotted all
around the huge drab area, and the
sounds and images of shows we had seen
as children came flooding back.
On days when the circus was in town,
even my mother Penelope joined in the
fun. Every morning, she would ask the
keeper of the African animals for the
droppings of the giraffes and the old lion,
and would use them to work wonders on
the flowers she grew in old saucepans.
The beautiful photos by Massimo
Siragusa which illustrate this scrapbook of
golden memories take me back to those
childhood days as well as my long visits
with the prodigious Fellini to Set no. 5
(one of 16) at Cinecittà. For him this set
was the real Via Veneto, the Via Veneto of
La Dolce Vita. Set no. 5 served as the back-
drop when the coffin with the great direc-
tor’s body was displayed to the public for
the last time on November 1, 1993.
These memories also take me back to
Russia, one of the countries I’ve loved
most, and bring to mind the time when I
worked for the director A n d r e i
Khryanovsky. A few years ago, I gave him
the script of a cartoon story called The
Grey-Bearded Lion. A film was recently
made of it which tells the story of a little
circus whose main attraction is an unu-
sual lion called Amedeo, or Teo to his
friends. As the years go by and he gets
older, divisions grow among the small
family of circus folk.
The great Popov
I also remember, like so many colou-
red bubbles, the times when I met the
gr e at Russian clow n s , e s p e c i a l l y
Karandash, who was so short that when
he stood behind a table, he seemed to be
sitting at it.
And Popov, the great Popov who per-
formed his finest routine one day when he
was in Amsterdam. He entered the ring
and prepared to eat a meal in a small
spotlight which lit up part of the ground.
When he finished, he gathered up the
light with his hands, as if it were bread-
crumbs, a trick he’d worked out with the
lighting technician. Just as he was leaving
the ring, he put the light in a shopping
bag. He received so much applause that
he stopped and threw the bag towards the
audience, which was then flooded with
light.
I can’t forget either the statues that
Ilario Fioravanti, an old sculptor from
Cesena, shaped with hesitant child-like
hands. In Pennabilli (the village in the
Marches region of Italy between Pesaro
and Urbina where I’ve lived for the past
d e c a d e ) , he assembled all the stat u e s
which reminded him of the circus and cir-
cus life.They are still in the rooms of an
old palazzo in the heart of the ancient vil-
lage, the Bargello. In cells which once
held prisoners, Fioravanti’s statues now
stand as if waiting for a round of applau-
se that might break out at any moment,
applause suspended in mid-air.
There’s something irresistible about
this world that floods my memory with
joy but also fills me with melancholy—the
last notes of the music we heard in the vil-
lage as the circus caravans prepared to
leave and then went on their way. The
sounds trailed away in the fog and beca-
me a kind of poignant lament that, stan-
ding on the tips of our toes, we strained to
hear until the very last note.
Afterwards, we would gather on the
patch of ground where the circus ring had
been. Sometimes we’d plant candles and
create a ring of light around us. ■

An elephant of the Embell Riva Circus gives its trainer a ride.
The ringmaster of the Moira Orfei Circus.
