from the acronym of Niños y Adolescentes
Tra b a j a d o r e s (“Child and Teenage Wo r-
kers”), a movement that has sprung up in
L atin A m e ri c a . It began in Pe ru (see art i c l e
page 39) in the 1970s, spread to many other
Latin American countries a decade later,
and then to West Africa and India in the
1990s. It is now making headway in Asia,
notably Thailand.
The Nats are also trying to build a
worldwide structure to gi ve them a voice in
matters that concern them.They oppose a
legal minimum age for starting work and are



Child l a b o u r :
Sophie Boukhari* a lesser evil?
n
For the media, child labour is a guaran-
teed tear-jerker. Jo u rnalists nearly alway s
r e p o rt on the most heart-rending situa-
tions—children working down mines, c h i l d
domestic servants being beaten and raped,
kids preyed on by paedophiles. We s t e rn
c o n s u m e rs are stepping up campaigns to
b oycott goods produced by child wo r k e rs.
More than 250 million of the wo r l d ’s
children work at jobs (see box ) .This fig u r e ,
which UNICEF calls “ m o n s t r o u s ” , h a s
s p u rred most NGOs and We s t e rn gove rn-
m e n t s , along with the United Nat i o n s , t o
make a determined effort to eradicate child
l a b o u r.
“Kids in poor countries have the right to
a childhood, just like you and me in
E u r o p e ,” s ays Robert Saintgeorge, s p o-
kesman for the Intern ational Labour Orga-
nisation (ILO)’s worldwide programme to
abolish child labour, launched in 1992.
“Turning children away from education is
like abolishing the future,” s ays the head of
the ILO in France, Jean-Daniel Leroy.
But some of the young would-be bene-
ficiaries in developing countries are objec-
t i n g . Thousands of children and adoles-
cents, mostly of them living in towns and
cities, claim they have a right to work in
proper conditions. They are called Nat s ,
When there is no possibility of schooling, perhaps it’s better for children 
to work in dignity than hang out in the stre e t s. Some childre n ’s movements are contesting
United Nations policy to abolish child labour
* UNESCO Courier journalist
Child workers in Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

250 million child worke rs in the world
The International Labour Organisation (ILO) says 250 million children between the ages of five and
14 are working—61% of them in Asia,32% in Africa,7% in Latin America and a small number in
rich countries (two million in the European Union).One in three children in Africa works, one in four
in Asia and one in five in Latin America.
On top of that,15-20% of children in developing countries work for no pay, often as domestics or
f a r m w o r ke r s.Two-thirds of child workers live in the countryside:20% of them are between 5 and 9 years
old,compared with only 5% in this same age bracket in towns and cities.
About 120 million children work full time.This means they can neither go to school or learn a trade
and have little time to play. n
strongly against boycotts of goods they
make for export , which are produced by
only 5 per cent of all child workers, accor-
ding to the UN. They want the UN to
“make a distinction between exploitation of
children and other forms of work which
help their development.”
In fact the ILO conventions are beco-
ming more fle x i b l e . The first one, w h i c h
dates from 1919, set the minimum age for
factory work at 14. But the main interna-
tional legal instrument is Convention 138,
signed in 1973. This fixes the minimum
age at 15 (or at the end of compulsory edu-
cation) and makes many exceptions.
Punishable crimes
But most developing countries think
this is too strict and only about 20 of
them have rat i fied it. A more widely
accepted version is currently being nego-
tiated in the ILO and is due to be adop-
ted in June 1999 in Geneva.This one will
deal only with the most inhuman and
dangerous categories of labour, like slave-
ry, prostitution, drug trafficking and work
harmful to health.
For the Nats, these activities should
not be regarded as work but as punishable
crimes. Their existence, they say, should
not be an excuse to throw the baby (a
child’s right to work) out with the bath
water (the inhuman tasks they are some-
times forced to do).What’s more, accor-
ding to Michel Bonnet, a former ILO offi-
cial who has written a book called Le
Travail des enfants:ter rain des luttes (“Child
Labour: A Battleground”)1 only 10 per
cent of Nats live in intolerable conditions,
mostly in Asia.
At big conferences, complains Dibou
Faye, a 14-year-old maid from Senegal,
“adults speak for us. They say that if chil-
dren work, they’re no longer children.
When I was seven,I would’ve preferred to
go to school. But as my parents didn’t
have the money to send me, I decided to
work instead.” Since the maids in Dakar
have organized themselves, and march in
the annual May Day procession alongside
trade unionists, their working conditions
have slightly improved.
“When one of them is beaten or wron-
gly accused of something, she can count
on the support of others and can lodge a
complaint. Before, the police wouldn’t
e ven listen,” s ays Hamidou Coly, o f
ENDA, an NGO that supports Nats in
West Africa. ENDA provides the children
with an education geared to their situa-
tion (in the evenings and with the content
worked out with the students), legal aid
and help in negotiating cheaper medicine
and hospital care.
“In Africa,” says Coly, “the minimum
legal age for starting work is usually 15.
Education is compulsory and supposedly
free up to the age of 12. But even if they
go to school until then, what are kids
going to do between 12 and 15?”
N ats are being helped by organizations like
E N DA in A f ri c a , MANTHOC in Pe ru and
C o n c e rned for Working Children in India.
This does not rule out “the risk of being
m a n i p u l at e d ” , s ays Bonnet, who nonethe-
less welcomes the emergence of the Nat s.
“They want to be respected, get a
decent wa g e , h ave work breaks, a n d
access to education and health care.What
they don’t want is to wake up and find in
their district some ill-thought-out project
from a rich country which is going to lose
them their job.”
Duncan Green, a British worker with
the Catholic Aid A g e n cy, who spent seve-
ral months last year with the Nats in Lat i n
A m e ri c a , laments that “most [We s t e rn ]
adults think child wo r k e rs in the T h i r d
World are the equivalents of the little boy s
used as forced labour in British fa c t o ries in
V i c t o rian times.” Not so, he say s.“ Wo r k i n g
gi ves them self-confid e n c e , k n ow - h ow and
money to feed themselve s.”
UNICEF and the ILO have been for-
ced to recognize this. “The lesson of 1994
has been digested,” Leroy says.That year,
the owners of textile mills in Bangladesh
sacked 50,000 child workers after a bill
was put before the U.S. Congress to ban
the import of clothing made by child wor-
kers. Some of the children thrown out of
work were forced to go begging or beco-
me prostitutes.
Accepting that working in a factory is
better than being on the street, UN agen-
cies set up a programme enabling some of
the children to be rehired and also have
access to education and health care on the
job. Brutal solutions should be avoided,
says Saintgeorge, “but we can’t legalize
child labour. If we do, we’ll have no way
of controlling it in many countries.”
Minimum standards
The UN recognizes it is unrealistic
and dangerous to want to abolish child
labour. Developing countries, often for-
ced to cut social spending, do not have
the resources to provide education for all
and social security coverage for poor chil-
dren. But the UN continues to campaign
for abolition. UNICEF “is strongly
urging the World Trade Organisation to
adopt a ‘social clause’,” which wo u l d
require minimum standards from compa-
nies, including a ban on child labour.
This ambiguous position illustrat e s
the complexity of the problem. “Whether
they work or not,poor children are at risk.
You just have to know which risks are the
worst,” says Bonnet. n
1.Editions page deux publishers, Lausanne,
Switzerland.
In Delhi, India,working children join in a
demonstration organized by Bel Mazoor Union
for street and working children.
