WA NG A RI MU TA MAAT H A I :
K EN YA’S GREEN MIL I TA N T
A noted environmental and pro-democracy activist hopes the next millennium will see a new
African leadership that puts people first
You once said that the quality of the
environment cannot be improved unless and
until the living conditions of ordinary people
are improved. Could you enlarge on this?
If you want to save the environment
you should protect the people firs t ,
because human beings are part of biologi-
cal diversity. And if we can’t protect our
own species, what’s the point of protec-
ting tree species?
It sometimes looks as if poor people are
d e s t r oying the env i r o n m e n t . But they are
so preoccupied with their surv i val that they
are not concerned about the long-term
damage they are doing to the env i r o n m e n t
simply to meet their most basic needs.
So it is ironic that the poor people
who depend on the environment are also
p a rtly responsible for its destru c t i o n .
That’s why I insist that the living condi-
tions of the poor must be improved if we
really want to save our environment.
For example, in certain regions of
Kenya, women walk for miles to get fire-
wood from the forests, as there are no
trees left nearby. When fuel is in short
supply, women have to walk further and
further to find it. Hot meals are served
less frequently, nutrition suffers,and hun-
ger increases. If these women had enough
resources they would not be depleting
valuable forest.
What is at stake in the forests of Kenya and
East Africa today?
Since the beginning of this century,
there has been a clear tendency to cut
d own indigenous forests and to replace
them with exotic species for commercial
e x p l o i t at i o n . We ’ ve now become more
aware of what this invo l ves and have reali-
zed that it was wrong to cut down indige-
nous forests, thereby destroying our ri c h
b i o l o gical dive rs i t y. But much damage has
already been done.
When the Green Belt Movement (see
box page 47) started its campaign in 1977
to plant trees, Kenya had about 2.9 per
cent of forest cover. Today the forested
area has further dwindled to around two
per cent.We are losing more trees than we
are planting.
The other important issue is that the
East African environment is very vulne-
rable. We are very close to the Sahara
desert, and experts have been warning
that the desert could expand southwards
like a flood if we keep on felling trees
indiscriminately, since trees prevent soil
erosion caused by rain and wind. By clea-
ring remaining patches of forests we are in
essence creating many micro-Sahara
deserts. We can already see evidence of
this phenomenon.
We hold civic education seminars for
rural people, especially farmers, as part of
campaigns to raise public awa r e n e s s
about environmental issues. If you were to
ask a hundred farmers how many of them
remember a spring or a stream that has
dried up in their lifetime, almost 30 of
them would raise their hands.
What has your Green Belt Movement (GBM)
achieved and in particular to what extent has
it prevented environmental degradation in
Kenya?
The most notable achievement of the
GBM in my view has been in raising envi-
ronmental awareness among ordinary
citizens, especially rural people. Different
groups of people now realize that the
environment is a concern for everybody
and not simply a concern for the
government. It is partly because of this
awareness that we are now able to reach
out to decision-makers in the govern-
ment. Ordinary citizens are challenging
them to protect the environment.
Secondly, the GBM introduced the
idea of environmental conservat i o n
through trees because trees meet many
basic needs of rural communities. We
started out by planting seven trees in a
small park in Nairobi in 1977. At that
time we had no tree nursery, no staff and
no funds, only a conviction that ordinary
country people had a role to play in sol-
ving environmental problems.We went on
from there and now we have planted over
20 million trees all over Kenya.
The act of planting trees conveys a
simple message. It suggests that at the
very least you can plant a tree and impro-
ve your habitat. It increases people’s awa-
reness that they can take control of their
e nv i r o n m e n t , which is the first step
toward greater participation in society.
Since the trees we have planted are
visible, they are the greatest ambassadors
for our movement.
Despite the Rio Earth Summit of 1992 and the
Kyoto Climate summit in 1997, there has been
no significant progress in environmental
protection programmes and campaigns at a
global level. Why?
Unfortunately, for many world leaders
development still means extensive far-
ming of cash crops, expensive hydroelec-
tric dams,hotels,supermarkets,and luxu-
ry items, which plunder human and
natural resources. This is short-sighted
and does not meet people’s basic needs—
for adequate food, clean water, shelter,
local clinics, information and freedom.
As a result of this craze for so-called
d e ve l o p m e n t , e nvironmental protection
has taken a back seat.The problem is that
the people who are responsible for much
of the destruction of the environment are
precisely those who should be providing
leadership in environmental protection
campaigns. But they are not doing so.
‘The act of planting trees
conveys a simple message. 
It suggests that at the very
least you can plant a tree and
improve your habitat. 
It increases people’s awareness
that they can ta ke control of
their environment, which is 
the first step toward greater
participation in society ’

Also, political power now is wielded
by those who have business interests and
close links with multinational corpora-
tions (MNCs). The only aim of these
MNCs is to make profit at the expense of
the environment and people.
We also know that many world political
l e a d e rs are persuaded by MNCs not to pay
attention to declarations made in intern a-
tional environmental conferences. I stron-
gly believe that as citizens we should refu-
se to be at the mercy of these corp o r at i o n s.
C o rp o r ations can be extremely merciless,
as they have no human fa c e .
You started your career as an academic. Later
you became an environmentalist, and now you
are called a pro-democra cy activist. How would
you describe your evolution in the last 25 years?
Few environmentalists today are wo r-
ried about the we l fare of bees, bu t t e r fli e s
A 20 - MIL L ION -T REE
GREEN BELT
In a country where women play a marginal role
in political and social affairs, 59-year-old Wa n-
gari Muta Maathai’s achievements stand out as an
exception. A biologist, she was the first woman
from East Africa to receive a doctorate, to become
a professor and chair a department—all at the Uni-
versity of Nairobi.
Maathai began to be active in the National
Council of Women of Kenya in 1976 and it was
through the Council that she launched a tree-plan-
ting project called “Save the Land H a ra m b e e” (a
Swahili word meaning let’s all pull together). The
project was renamed the Green Belt Movement
(GBM) in 1977.
The GBM initiated programmes to promote
and protect biodiversity, to protect the soil, to
create jobs especially in rural areas, to give
women a positive image in the community and to
assert their leadership qualities. 
The overall aim of the GBM has been to create
public awareness of the need to protect the envi-
ronment through tree planting and sustainable
management. Nearly 80 per cent of the 20 million
trees planted by the GBM have survived. At pre-
sent the GBM has over 3,000 nurseries, giving job
opportunities to about 80,000 people, most of
them rural women.
In 1986 the GBM established a Pan-African
Green Belt Network and has organized work-
shops and training programmes on environ-
mental awareness for scores of individuals from
other African countries. This has led to the adop-
tion of Green Belt methods in Tanzania, Uganda,
Malawi, Lesotho, Ethiopia, and Zimbabwe.
Maathai, who is a member of the UN Secre-
t a ry General’s Advisory Board on Disarmament,
has won 14 international awards, including the
prestigious Right Livelihood Award. She won the
award, presented by a Swedish foundation and
often referred to as an Alternative Nobel Prize, in
recognition of her “contributions to the well-
being of humankind”.
In a country where single-party rule prevailed
for decades, Maathai has been teargassed and
severely beaten by police during demonstra t i o n s
to protect Kenya’s forests.
“The government thinks that by threatening
me and bashing me they can silence me,” says
Maathai. “But I have an elephant’s skin. And
somebody must raise their voice.”
Maathai, a mother of three children, is cur-
rently involved in a struggle to save the 2,50 0 - a c r e
Karura forests, northwest of Nairobi, where the
government wants to build housing complexes.
■
and trees alone. They know that it is not
possible to keep the environment pure if
you have a gove rnment that does not
control polluting industries and deforesta-
t i o n .
In Kenya , for example, real estate deve-
l o p e rs have been allowed to go into the
middle of indigenous forests and bu i l d
e x p e n s i ve houses. As concerned indivi-
duals we should oppose that . When yo u
s t a rt intervening at that leve l , you fin d
yo u rself in direct confrontation with poli-
cy - m a k e rs and you start to be called an
a c t i v i s t .
I was teaching at the University of
Nairobi in the 1970s, when I felt that the
academic rights of women professors
were not being respected because they
were women. I became an activist at the
u n i ve rs i t y, insisting that I wanted my
rights as an academic.

Meanwhile,I found myself confronted
by other issues that were directly related
to my work but were not clear to me at
the outset, like human rights.This direct-
ly led me to another area, governance. As
a result I was drafted into the pro-demo-
cracy campaign.
I realized in the 1970s that in a young
democracy like ours it was very easy for
leaders to become dictators. As this hap-
pened they started using nat i o n a l
resources as though they were their per-
sonal property. I realized that the consti-
tution had given them powers to misuse
official machinery.
So I became involved in the pro-
democracy movement and pressed for
constitutional reforms and political space
to ensure freedom of thought and expres-
sion. We cannot live with a political sys-
tem that kills creativity and produces
cowardly people.
With your academic qualifications you could
have lived a comfortable life in the U.S. or
e l s ewhere in the West. But you decided to
come back and settle down in Kenya. In the
last 25 years, you have been verbally abused,
threatened, beaten, put behind bars and on
many occasions forbidden to leave the
c o u n t ry. Have you ever regretted returning to
Kenya and becoming an activist?
I did not deliberately decide to beco-
me an activist, but I have never regretted
the fact that I decided to stay here and to
contribute to the development of this
country and my region. I know that I have
made a little difference.
Many people come up to me and tell
me that my work has inspired them.This
gives me great satisfaction because in the
earlier days, especially during the dicta-
torship, it was difficult to speak.
Until a few years ago, people used to
come up to me in the street and whisper
“I am with you and I am praying for you.“
They were so scared of being identified
with me that they did not want to be
heard. I know a lot of people were afraid
of talking to me and being seen with me
because they might be punished.
I have been a greater positive force by
staying here and going through trials and
tribulations than if I had gone to other
countries. It would have been very diffe-
rent to live in the West and say my coun-
try should do this and that. By being here
I encourage many more people.
Do you think you were subjected to virulent
attacks and abuses because you questioned
men’s decisions?
Our men think A f rican women should
be dependent and submissive , d e fin i t e l y
not better than their husbands.There is no
doubt that at first many people opposed
me because I am a woman and resented
the idea that I had strong opinions.
I know that at times men in positions
of influence, including President Daniel
Arap Moi, ridiculed me. At one time
Members of Parliament accused me and
ridiculed me for being a divorced woman.
I have felt that deep inside they were
hoping that by calling into question my
womanhood I would be subdued. Later
they realized they were wrong.
In 1989, for example, we had a big
confrontation with the authorities when
we were fighting to save Uhuru Park in
Nairobi. I argued that it would be ridicu-
lous to destroy this beautiful park in the
centre of the city and replace it with a
multi-storeyed complex.
Uhuru Park was the only place in
Nairobi where people could spend time
with their families outdoors.The park was
a wonderful place for people to go becau-
se it was a place where no one bothered
them.
When I launched the campaign oppo-
sing the construction of the “Park-mons-
ter“, as the project later came to be
known, I was ridiculed and accused of not
u n d e rstanding deve l o p m e n t . I didn’t
‘At one time Members of
Parliament accused me and
ridiculed me for being a
divorced woman. I have felt
that deep inside they were
hoping that by calling into
question my womanhood I
would be subdued. Later they
realized they were wrong’
Nairobi
Tanzania
0      100 km
Indian
Ocean 
Uganda
Sudan Ethiopia
K EN YA
Mombasa
Kakamega
Kisumu
Nakuru
Nyen
Embu
Garissa
In Madagascar, a woman plants rice in the ashes of a felled area of forest, home to the last survivors 
of a lemur species.
K EN YA FACT FIL E
Republic of Kenya (Jamhuri ya Kenya)
A former British colony, gained independence in
1963 and became a republic the following year.
Area: 582,646 sq.km
Capital: Nairobi
Population: 28.4 million
Languages: Kiswahili, English
Life expectancy at birth: 52 years
Adult literacy rate: 79.3 %
GDP per capita: $372
President: Daniel T. Arap Moi
Monetary Unit: Kenya Shilling 
(74 shillings=$1 US)
Source: UNDP Human Development Report 1999

T A L K I N G  T O …
A member of Kenya’s Green Belt movement. 
study development but I do know that
you need space in a city. Fortunately
other non-gove rnmental organizat i o n s
and thousands of ordinary people joined
our protests and finally the park was
saved.
The government, which wanted to
destroy that park, has since declared it a
national heritage.That’s wonderful.They
could have done that without fighting and
without ridiculing me.
What made you stand in the presidential
elections in 19 97? Despite your popularity, why
didn’t you win a sizeable number of votes?
I decided to stand for election for
several reasons. In 1992, when a multi-
party system was legalized in Kenya for
the first time, I tried very hard with other
political groups to unite the opposition,
but in vain.When there were many oppo-
sition candidates running for the presi-
dency, I withdrew from the campaign.
As expected, the opposition lost those
elections and everybody now accepts that
the campaign we launched for them to
unite was right. We wanted to form a
government of national unity within the

T A L K I N G  T O …
‘This generation of Africa n
leaders will go down 
in history as a very
irresponsible one that has
brought Africa to its knees.
During the past three deca d e s ,
A f r i ca has suffered from 
a lack of visionary and
altruistic leaders committed 
to the welfare of their people’
opposition in 1992. This is exactly what
they are now clamouring for.
In the 1997 general elections,my idea wa s
to persuade the opposition to unite and fie l d
a strong candidate from one ethnic commu-
nity against the ruling Kenya A f rican Nat i o-
nal Union (KANU).1 But I was called a tri-
balist by some opposition groups for
proposing that idea.When all my efforts to
unite the opposition fa i l e d , I decided to ru n
for president.
But during the campaign I also came to
realize that in this country it is ve ry diffic u l t
to get elected without money. I didn’t have
m o n e y. I realized that it doesn’t matter how
good you are, h ow honest you are and how
p r o - d e m o c r atic you are, if you don’t have
money to gi ve to the voter you wo n ’t get
elected.So I lost.
All this gave me a new experience.
Now I can speak as an insider. I also rea-
lized that people here are not yet ready for
democracy and we need a lot of civic edu-
cation and political consciousness. People
here are still controlled by ethnicity and
vote along ethnic lines. The ethnic ques-
tion became a ve ry important issue
during the last elections.
Despite having enormous natural resources
A f r i ca still lags behind other continents in terms
of development and growth. Why is this?
Poor leaders h i p, without any doubt.T h i s
g e n e r ation of A f rican leaders will go down in
history as a very irresponsible one that has
brought A f rica to its knees. D u ring the past
three decades, A f rica has suffered from a
lack of visionary and altruistic leaders com-
mitted to the welfare of their people.
There are historical reasons for this.
Just before independence was granted to
many African countries, young Africans
were promoted by colonial rulers to posi-
tions until then unoccupied by the local
people and were trained to take over
power from the colonial administration.
The new black administrat o rs and
burgeoning elites enjoyed the same eco-
nomic and social life-styles and privileges
that the imperial administrators enjoyed.
The only difference between the two in
terms of the objectives for the country
was the colour of their skin.
In the process, the A f rican leaders aban-
doned their people, and in order to maintain
their hold on power they did exactly what
the colonial system was doing, namely to pit
one community against another. T h i s
internal conflict continued for decades in
m a ny A f rican countri e s , draining their
scarce resources.
So what we need is to improve our lea-
d e rs h i p. If we don’t there is no hope,b e c a u s e
h i s t o ry teaches us that if you cannot protect
w h at is your own somebody will come and
take it. If our people cannot protect them-
s e l ves they will continue to be exploited.T h e i r
resources will continue to be exploited.
It is also true that Western powers,
especially the former colonial masters of
this region, have continued to exploit
Africa and have continued to work very
closely with these dictators and irrespon-
sible leaders.That is why we are now deep
in debt, which we cannot repay.
A f rica also needs assistance from inter-
n ational gove rnments to improve its eco-
nomic standing. For example, most foreign
aid to A f rica comes in the form of curat i ve
social we l fare programmes such as fa m i n e
r e l i e f, food aid, p o p u l ation control pro-
gr a m m e s , refugee camps, p e a c e - k e e p i n g
forces and humanitarian missions.
At the same time, hardly any resources
are available for sustainable human deve-
lopment programmes such as functional
e d u c ation and training, d e velopment of
i n f r a s t ru c t u r e , food production and pro-
motion of entrepreneurs h i p. There are no
funds for the development of cultural and
social programmes which would empowe r
people and release their creat i ve energy.
I am hoping that in the new millennium
a new leadership will emerge in A f ri c a ,a n d
I hope this new leadership will show more
c o n c e rn for the people and utilize the conti-
n e n t ’s resources to help A f ricans get out of
poverty. ■
Interview by Ethirajan Anbarasan,
UNESCO Courier journalist
1.The Kenya African National Union (KANU)
was formed in 1960, won the country’s first post-
independence election in 1963, and has been in
power ever since.
