
Regina Reszka started out working in East Germany’s re s e a rc h
l a b o ra t o r i e s.After the Berlin wall came down, she took a crash course 
in capitalism
A German chemist’s
double l i f e Manfred Ronzheimer*

For Regina Reszka of Berlin, the hardest part
is juggling two careers: research and business.
“There’s an abyss between the worlds of com-
merce and science,” says the 46-year-old chemist,
who founded a biotechnology company called
GOT in 1995. She embodies a new breed of
scientist,found around the world, who are increa-
singly at home with balance-sheets as well as test-
tubes. Reszka has never stopped working in the
lab and says she is still a researcher deep down.
But these days, scientific results are not the only
thing she is after. She must also come up with
funding.
GOT works on cancer-fighting substances
based on liposomes, which are tiny drops of fat.
The main gene-therapy technique the company is
developing helps enhance them with bits of DNA
capable of limiting the spread of cancer cells. It
could be used in cases where chemo- or radiation
therapy fails.
Reszka was not trained to win markets and fin d
sponsors. She studied chemistry in Leipzig before
s t a rting her career on the eastern side of the Berlin
wa l l , at the cancer research institute that was a part
of East Germany’s powerful Academy of Sciences.
After reunification in 1990, she joined the Max
Delbrück centre of molecular medicine (MDC), a
major national research institution.But Reszka no
longer found her work fulfilling.Tired of writing
scientific articles and speaking at congresses, she
wanted to help alleviate the suffering of cancer
p atients in a direct way. So she founded a company
for what she calls “ethical” reasons.
Reszka and her five colleagues started GOT with
nothing but their savings (450,000 Deutschmarks, o r
$ 2 5 0 , 0 0 0 ) . But they had good reason to think that the
e x p e rience was wo rth try i n g . In the 1990s, m a ny
r e s e a r c h e rs in the former German Democratic Repu-
blic caught the business bu g .M a ny had lost their jobs
when laborat o ries closed down and research insti-
tutions were restructured in 1992. S e veral form e r
A c a d e my of Sciences institutes shut dow n , l e av i n g
14,000 scientists unemploye d .The result: the crea-
tion of a slew of small companies.

*Journalist in Berlin,Germany
The German gove rnment has encouraged
biotechnology development for several years. In
1996, the research ministry granted GOT a 1.4-
million-Deutschmark (approximately $800,000)
subsidy. In November 1998, the Länder of Berlin
and Brandenburg awarded the company their
Innovation Prize. Its team works at the Max
Delbrück centre, which groups together hospi-
tals, public institutions and laboratories rented
out to private companies. One of GOT’s star pro-
cesses has been patented as part of an MDC-
managed project.
Reszka says the company’s priority is to begin
the second stage of tests on this process. She
needs “a partner with strong nerves” because the
o p e r ation will cost 10 million Deutschmarks
(approximately $5.5 million). She met several
other recently-founded biotechnology firms and
venture capital companies at the Bio-Europe
Pa rt n e ring conference held in Berlin in
December 1998. Venture-capital firms invest in
innovative projects, making big profits if major
companies purchase their innovations and put
them into mass production.
American companies were out in force at the
conference. With biotechnology innovation pro-
gressing at a snail’s pace in North America since
1997, they are increasingly interested in Europe.
“I was amazed to hear Americans making me
offers to set up a joint-venture right away,” says
Reszka. “We’re negotiating with two major lipo-
some-manufacturers based in the United States.”
Reszka is out to win the West—unless the opposi-
te happens. n
