F OR EAST EUROPE’S WOMEN, 
A RUDE AWA K ENING
◗ Elisabeth Kulakowska
Women are starting to react to the fallout from eastern Europe’s economic transition which has 
hit them hard, bringing growing poverty, social decline and prostitution
■
In Romania and Russia, they have
started by highlighting domestic vio-
lence. In Poland, they are fighting for
legal abortion. In Bulgaria and Hungary,
they campaign to make girls aware of the
dangers of making “easy money” through
prostitution. Women everywhere in eas-
tern Europe are trying to organize in
defence of their rights. They have an
uphill job on their hands.
The political and economic changes
which have swept the former countries of
the Soviet bloc since the early 1990s have
generally pushed women aside, both eco-
nomically and in terms of their presence
in gove rnment and administrat i o n .
Equality of the sexes is still written into all
the national constitutions of central and
eastern Europe. But the reality is quite
different.
The first
to be fired
A UN I C E F r e p o rt , Women in
Transition,1 which looks at 27 formerly
communist states, confirms this in detail.
“While communism brought wo m e n
many advantages, especially in education
and health care, it did not manage to
bring real equality of the sexes,” said
UNICEF director-general Carol Bellamy
when the report came out in September
1999. “Today, in the transition to a mar-
ket economy, the situation of women is
deteriorating.”
Since 1990, in every country of the
r e gion except Hungary, e c o n o m i c
◗ Freelance journalist
Women held some 14 million of the 26 million jobs that have disappeared in eastern Europe since 1989.
Some, like this Romanian woman, have gone back to work in the fields.
r e s t ru c t u ring has especially affected
industries with a large number of women
workers. Where there are both male and
female employees, the women have been
laid off before the men, in line with well-
k n own discri m i n at o ry practices which
send women “back to their homes”.
“Of the 26 million or so jobs that have
disappeared in eastern Europe since
1989, about 14 million were held by
women,” says Bellamy. Today unemploy-
ment among women is about five per cent
higher than among men.
Employers, especially in Poland, will
sometimes ask a job applicant to take a
test to prove she is not pregnant. In
Bulgaria and Romania, the newspapers
are filled with blatantly sexist job adverti-
sements.
Because of the seriousness of the eco-
nomic crisis, governments have sharply
cut social welfare expenditure.They have
also abolished many laws passed under
communism that gave privileged status to
single mothers and mothers with young
c h i l d r e n , and provided for infa n t s
through day-care allowances or crèche
facilities.The ending of these benefits has
reduced women’s chances of getting a job
or finding a new one. And when women
do have a job, they get paid less than their
male colleagues. The gap in pay is an ave-
rage 24 per cent in Russia, 16 per cent in
Poland and 15 per cent in Hungary,
UNICEF says. According to specialists, the
result is a “feminization of poverty”.
One of the most serious consequences
of the economic crisis and the opening of
national borders is the growing number of
young women who are being lured into
prostitution or enmeshed in international
sex rings. About half a million young
women from eastern Europe, including
Russia, are now prostitutes in the West,
according to the Polish NGO La Strada
and the Vienna-based Intern at i o n a l
O r g a n i z ation for Migr at i o n . R e gi n a
Indsheva, head of the Women’s Alliance
for Development, in Sofia, says, “10,000
Bulgarian prostitutes are ‘on the market’
1 The report was produced by UNICEF’s Regional
Monitoring Project (MONEE) at the UNICEF
Innocenti Research Centre in Florence, Italy. It
analyses in detail how the fall of communism has
affected the 150 million women and 50 million
girls who live in central and eastern Europe, in
the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
and in the Baltic states.

in most cases the attacker runs no risk of
prosecution. In Armenia, Bulgaria and
Georgia, hitting a spouse is not illegal. In
Slovenia, it is only punished in “serious”
cases but not where there is only “light”
injury, defined by the law as “a fractured
nose, rib, light contusions and punched-
out teeth.”
Each ye a r , “60,000 women in
Bulgaria are beaten by their partners and
only one per cent of rapes are reported to
the police,” says Indsheva,whose Alliance
is campaigning against the indifference of
the authorities.
In Poland, abortion has stirred up tre-
mendous debate. It was allowed between
1959 and 1993, and was then severely
38 The UNESCO Courier - February 2000
E T H I C S
e ve ry year in the countries of the
European Union.”
Sexually transmitted diseases, inclu-
ding A i d s , are spreading. One yo u n g
woman in every 100 in Russia has syphi-
lis, according to UNICEF. In the 27 coun-
tries sur veyed in the report, cases of HIV
infection rose from 30,000 in 1994 to
270,000 by the end of 1998, says Bellamy.
In addition, there is rising alcoholism and
drug addiction among younger and youn-
ger women, especially in Russia.
Domestic violence against women, a
taboo subject that was totally hidden
under communism, has recently made
headlines for the first time in Romania
and Poland.The UNICEF report says that
“a survey in Moscow showed that more
than one in three divorced women had
been beaten by their husbands.” Conjugal
violence is forbidden by law in Russia, but
restricted until 1996, when it was permit-
ted again before being banned once more
a year later except in cases of rape, a
deformed foetus or when the mother’s life
is in danger. These decisions have been
greatly influenced by the Roman Catholic
Church. More than 30,000 secret abor-
tions take place in Poland every year,
according to local NGOs. The Po l i s h
Fe d e r ation for Women and Fa m i l y
Planning, founded in 1991, is campai-
gning along with other organizations for
legalized abortion.
Romania has gone in the opposite
direction. There, abortion was banned
between 1965 and 1989 by the Ceausescu
regime and was allowed without restric-
Three young women caught unawares by a photographer in Moscow’s Gorki Park.

‘Each year, 60,000 women 
in Bulgaria are beaten 
by their partners and only 
one per cent of rapes are
reported to the police’

tion after 1990.This led to a sharp drop
in the hitherto very common practice of
abandoning unwanted children in dead-
end “ o rp h a n a g e s ” . In many countri e s
(including Hungary, Lithuania, Slovenia,
Slovakia and Ukraine), access to abortion
has been either challenged or restricted.
Equality slogans
with a hollow ring
Barbara Labuda, an adviser on social
questions to the president of Poland, was
a fervent advocate of women’s rights in
the 1980s in Solidarn o s c, e a s t e rn
Europe’s first independent trade union.
This tiny blonde-haired wo m a n , w h o
founded the women’s group in parliament
in Warsaw, admits she is sometimes dis-
heartened by the lack of involvement,
especially political invo l ve m e n t , o f
women in eastern Europe.
Only 13 per cent of the members of
Po l a n d ’s parliament are wo m e n . I n
Bulgaria,the figure is 10.4 per cent, in the
Czech Republic 10 per cent, in Estonia
12.9 per cent, in Hungary 8 per cent, in
Romania 7 per cent, in Slovakia 14.7 per
cent and in Slovenia 7.8 per cent.
Demands by women for a better social
status are still generally scorned in eastern
European societies. “The slogan about
equality of the sexes was drummed into us
for years by the communist party, but we
knew perfectly well it did not correspond to
reality,” says Labuda.“This is why women
now are very wary of us.”
Women feel crushed by a very heavy
daily burden which discourages activism,
says Erzsebet Szabo, Hungary’s official
mediator between the government and
citizens complaining about abuses by
public officials.
Networking
businesswomen
Bellamy is less pessimistic. For a start,
democratization in eastern Europe has
led to the setting up of many women’s
associations and NGOs that are very acti-
ve campaigners. In the Czech Republic,
for example, 70 per cent of the members
of NGOs are women, and 85 per cent of
NGOs were run by women 
in 1984. Poland, where civil society was
the first to organize during the commu-
nist regime, has some 200 associations
and groups working to promote the cause
of women or defend their rights. The
dozen biggest of them have at most 100
m e m b e rs. Romania has about 60
women’s associations, as do Albania and
Bulgaria.
Women are also getting more and
more involved in business. In nine of the
countries2 studied by UNICEF, a quarter
of commercial companies are headed by
women. In Bucharest, C ristina Gri g o r e s c u
runs AFIR which, with 100 members , i s
e a s t e rn Europe’s first bu si n e s swo m e n ’s
association. In all the other countries in
the region, businesswomen are forming
networks, especially to fight the reluctan-
ce of banks to provide credit to women.
The Beijing
connection
A turning point for women’s organiza-
tions in eastern Europe came in 1995.T h at
ye a r , for the first time, they were able to
take part freely in the United Nations Inter-
national Women’s Conference when it met
in Beijing.They made new contacts, with
each other and with We s t e rn organizat i o n s.
Since then, the KARAT Coalition has
brought together 10 associations (from
A l b a n i a , B u l g a ri a , the Czech Republic,
M a c e d o n i a , Po l a n d ,R u s s i a ,R o m a n i a ,S l o-
va k i a , Ukraine and Hungary) and holds
regular conferences.
In all the countries,such organizations
are just starting out on a long journey and
their achievements so far are few. But they
are all still fighting, and counting on sup-
p o rt from younger generat i o n s , to ensure
that women of the post-communist era are
not labelled as “second-class citizens” and
t h at democracy can thus be truly respec-
ted in their countries. ■
2 The Czech Republic, Slovakia,Yugoslavia,
Bulgaria,Romania, Estonia,Latvia,Lithuania and
Russia.
