37
Rebel without a pause?
◗ Jeroen de Kloet
‘Bad boy’ Cui Jian, C h i n a ’s first long-haired rock icon, has pulled off another musical coup
by becoming the first artist to adapt hip-hop to the mainland. His hoarse voice has long
s i g n i fied anger, confusion and pain,especially during the 1989 student revolt when his hit single,
“Nothing to my Name”,became a veritable anthem.Despite the government’s attempts to
silence his voice by routinely banning his concerts, Cui Jian carries on with the rapper’s stac-
cato precision.
Cui Jian fired the first hip-hop salvo with the single “Get Over That Day”, which appeared
on a compilation album entitled Born on the First of July featuring rock bands from Hong
Kong, Taiwan and Mainland China reflecting on the handover of Hong Kong to Chinese rule
in 1997.While other groups celebrated “Chineseness”,Cui Jian questioned the wisdom of
the state and its people:“If love suddenly blossoms between my sister [Hong Kong] and me
[Chinese youth],how are you [the mother] going to deal with it?”Clearly put,what if main-
land youth falls for Hong Kong’s capitalist culture and rejects the political status quo?
M u s i c i a n s, record companies, journalists and academics often construct rap as the coun-
tercultural sound of the 1990s. Of course, this aura of rebellion neatly hides the sexism and
materialism so often displayed in the music.But in the case of Cui Jian,rap works. His most
recent album, an eclectic mix of rap and rock that has sold over 400,000 copies (not including
pirated versions),questions the nationalism and materialist Zeitgeist of post-1989 China.
To interpret Cui Jian as a political rebel fits in a little too neatly with the We s t ’s prevalent view
of China as an overtly politicized space.The desire to see dominant ideologies subverted indirectly
celebrates liberal Western society.H o w e v e r, perhaps Cui Jian has become more of a rebel against
the people than for the people.As China’s new generation starts feasting on the fruits of economic
r e f o r m s, Cui Jian confid e s :“ This is a time when people don’t believe in anything.The new gen-
eration just wants to have fun, to be cool, to have good [sex] and to have money …”Will Cui Jian
be upstaged in the “New China”, where people care more about economics than politics? No
m a t t e r, the rebel raps on:
We are so focused on making money that everything will be forgotten (…)
Ha! If you ask me what the next generation will be like;
I’ll give you a straight answer: why should I care?*
*“Idiots”from the album, The Power of the Powerless , 1998
◗ Ph.D. student at the Amsterdam School of Social Science Research
