E D U C AT I O N : THE LAST FRONTIER FOR PROFIT
DOROTHY SHIPPS
ASSISTANTPROFESSOR OF EDUCATION AT TEACHERS COLLEGE, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY (U.S.). SHE IS CO-EDITOR, WITH LARRY CUBAN, OF Reconstructing the
Common Good in Education (STANFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS, 2000)



Echoes of corporate influ e n c e
Although business leaders in the United States influenced 
school policy in the past, today their clout is largely unrivalled
1 . C O R P O R ATE A M B I T I O N S
L ooking to business is nothing new in edu-
c a t i o n . A century ago, schools adopted
reforms based on their reputed economic
benefits to individuals and the newly
industrializing urban society.The current
era has at its core a resurrected and strengthened
version of this notion. In both eras, reformers have
agreed that whatever public schools do to improve
individual students’ job opportunities has direct
economic consequences for the nation as a whole,
and for cities in particular.
The difference today is that corporate refor-
mers have gained the upper hand, tilting a tension-
filled compromise that had prevailed over the past
100 years. Corporate leaders have assumed the
unrivalled moral authority to define the purposes
and methods of public schooling in response to the
new technology-driven global economy. Hailed as
victorious generals in the battle between capita-
lism and socialism,many espouse a millennial vision
that links education to global free markets.Schoo-
l i n g, they tell us, hedges our national bets in the
global competition for market share and predicts
which students become good employees.But history
also cautions us that the long-term consequences of
t o d a y ’s experiments are probably less well unders-
tood than their advocates imagine.
The transfer of management methods from busi-
ness to schools began with a critique of school failure.
Between 1880 and 1920, different proponents had
their own economic justifications for reform. C o r-
porate leaders criticized urban schools for failing to
respond to a newly industrialized, c e n t r a l i z e d , a n d
increasingly integrated world economy.They sought
Honing job skills: Parisian school pupils perfect their enamel work in the early twentieth century.

1 . C O R P O R ATE A M B I T I O N S
centralization and effic i e n cy,frequently invoking the
powerful metaphor of scientific management or
“ Ta y l o r i s m ,” using the stopwatch and management
to discover the “one best way.”These principles had
been instrumental, industrialists of the time believed,
in creating the American industrial revolution and the
wealth of powerful international companies. Th e
quest for effic i e n cy of those decades led to the pro-
blems we must now repair, notably the rigid and
bureaucratic structure of our school systems.
To d a y, public schools continue to adapt new
business efficiency techniques in what seems to be
a constant recycling process. S c i e n t i fic manage-
ment,it turns out,was only the precursor to a host
of ever newer management theories aimed at encou-
raging greater worker productivity, and hence
greater national wealth.
When schools become levers
to attract business investment
These trends have echoes in the management
reforms prescribed for and adopted by schools.S o m e
seek increased effic i e n cy through decentralized school
governance while others imagine that outsourcing
(or contracting) the management and operation of
schools will lift educators’ performance because
incentives are lacking in secure government jobs.
All this is happening against the backdrop of eco-
nomic globalization, which inevitably creates poli-
tical tensions by pitting governments against one
another in competition for transnational corporate
jobs and global capital. Our current era mimics the
turn of the century to the extent that international
capital flows and transnational production processes
i n fluence both corporations and governments.To d a y,
technologically induced speed,growth among inves-
t o r s, concentration of wealth, and interconnected-
ness have increased the effects of this global specu-
lation and decreased the capacity of governments to
regulate business and markets. Not surprisingly, t h i s
global market ideology has been broadly recognized
as a force in national education policy.
Reforming local schools becomes one of the
ways that cities engage in the global competition to
provide production resources to corporations.Wh e n
formal schooling is seen as a key element of pro-
ductive capacity,a view reinforced by the decline of
manufacturing and the rise of information-based
technologies in the U. S. , the quality of the local
public school system takes on renewed importance
for business leaders and local politicians alike.
Today’s corporate leaders have uncommon access
to elected political officials and government agency
h e a d s, the wealth of large corporations to draw
u p o n ,and the ability to affect local and regional eco-
nomies simply by making business decisions.
Schools are treated as engines of economic
development to lure businesses to a particular city
or state, so corporate and local political leaders
cooperate in their governance and redesign. I n
short,school policy becomes labour policy.
This powerful combination of corporate,n a t i o n a l
and state executives is happening  at the expense of
education professionals. In contrast to the turn of the
c e n t u r y, when educators played a pivotal role in
debates by emphasizing the role of schools in deve-
loping citizenship, today they have been largely dis-
c r e d i t e d . Selecting school leaders from outside the
field has become both symptom and spur to this
decrease in the educator’s status.A small but influ e n-
tial group of school districts is choosing leaders from
among the ranks of businessmen, politicians and
the military, rather than educators.
All this is taking place with little evidence that
recent management solutions will turn around poor
schools, nor that improvements in school perfor-
mance protect against declines in productivity or the
business cycle. Yet there are more troubling pro-
blems with reform strategies that pit the market
against government in education.One is that edu-
cation is reduced to its narrowest economic pur-
poses.According to a 1992 survey, corporate exe-
cutives most want schools to emphasize “a basic
understanding of math and science” and “ s o u n d
work habits such as self-discipline, timeliness and
dedication to work.” These are laudable goals, but
r e flect a narrow set of traits that employers predict
their workers will need in an information economy.
The corporate model of reform pays little heed
to other expectations of public schools: b u i l d i n g
just and tolerant communities, reducing distrust of
one another and our shared institutions, safeguar-
ding democratic ethics and introducing children to
the cultural wisdom of the world. We are also wit-
nessing the abandonment of many kinds of equality.
Neither markets nor business ethics routinely put
equality or fairness above profits.Whole groups of
people will not fit the prevailing model of what it
takes to be competitive in an educational market-
place in which competition is the guiding principle
of improvement. Another disturbing trend is the
anaemic citizenship that economic justifications for
schooling envision. Increasing the emphasis on indi-
vidualism is likely to exacerbate a pattern of civic
disengagement many already find disturbing in its
scale and scope.
A balancing act to re a c h
a healthy equilibrium
We need a contemporary counter-movement to
restore a healthy equilibrium of goals for our public
s c h o o l s. This movement would be grounded in a
very different educational critique that rejects the
metaphor of market (or management) failure, a n d
instead tackles the problems in our schools as symp-
toms of a widespread civic breakdown.The solutions
to school failure would then hinge on common
c o n c e r n s,rather than rigorous individual competition
and accountability. In addition to academic criteria,
parents and reformers would craft student perfor-
mance measures that reward active citizenship, t o l e-
rant and respectful behaviour, and cultural know-
ledge in the arts,history and languages.This reform
m o v e m e n t , seeking equity and tolerance, w o u l d
revitalize democratic institutions, and not merely
aim for more efficient production. ■
