RENÉ LEFORT
DIRECTOR OFTHE UNESCO COURIER



Je r u s a l e m :
s o u rce of sound and fury
In a small precinct of Jerusalem’s Old City, 4,000 years of history have generated 
a religious, symbolic and mythical intensity unmatched anywhere in the world
sraelis and Palestinians do agree upon at
least one point: their most recent
negotiations at Camp David stumbled
over the future status of Jerusalem,and
especially a tiny 15-hectare area—a
precinct perhaps more holy, sacred and
exalted in the eyes of several religions
than any other in the world.
The heart of the problem—a quasi-
rectangular area measuring just under
500 metres by 300, carved out of the rock
at its northern end and elevated on the
east and west sides where the land
slopes—is about a fifth of Je r u s a l e m ’s
Old City, forming its southeast corner.
Temple Mount to the Jews and the
Haram al-Sharif (The Noble Sanctuary)
to Muslims forms a platform that seems
suspended in the air: its walls, s o m e t i m e s
rising up 40 metres, tower above the
entire Old City and far beyond.
The approaching tourist, pilgrim or
worshipper is confronted by these colossal
walls of hewn stone blocks up to 10 metres
l o n g. They were built under Herod the
G r e a t .Recognized by the Romans as king
of the Je w s,he rebuilt the top of the Je w i s h
temple from 19 B. C. and completed most
of the reconstruction by around 9 A . D.
Detailed descriptions have survived
which talk of the temple’s size and
splendour—50 metres long,wide and high,
This article is based on the work of
Oleg Grabar, an Islamic art expert who is
professor emeritus at the Institute for
Advanced Studies at Princeton University
( U. S. ) , and of Ernest-Marie Laperrousaz,
honorary professor in the religious studies
department of the École Pratique des
Hautes Études in Paris and author of a
1999 book about the temples of Je r u s a l e m .
Inside the Dome of the Rock.
The Kotel,also known as the Western Wall or the Wailing Wall.

on an esplanade bordered by hundreds
of white marble columns,some of them 30
metres high. Giant doors and stairways
led out onto the square itself. But after a
fire started by the legions of the Roman
emperor Titus in 70 A . D. ,what remains of
this building besides religious beliefs,m y t h s
and even ideology, all of them stronger
and more powerful than before? No trace
of the Temple has been found. Fr o m
H e r o d ’s building, only a few large
gateways and most of the walls have
s u r v i v e d .
One part of the walls, on the west
s i d e, was called the Wailing Wall by
Christians in the Middle Ages. The Jews
simply refer to it as the Western Wall (the
Ko t e l ) , the place where they came to pray
and mourn. For centuries they have
considered it the holiest place of Ju d a i s m .
Some say it was built on the foundations
of the wall around the first Jewish Te m p l e.
Archaeologists, however, think the only
remains of this earlier wall are actually
part of the present eastern wall.
“And behold, I propose to build a
house for the name of the Lord my God,
as the Lord spoke to my father David,
saying ‘ Your son, whom I will set on your
throne in your place, he shall build the
house for My name.’”
Thus spoke Solomon, son of King
David,who united the 12 tribes of Israel
into a kingdom with Jerusalem as the
c a p i t a l . Solomon bought a hill called
Mount Moriah and it was there, m o r e
than 3,000 years ago, that he built the
first Jewish temple, between 960 and 953
B. C. Its dimensions might have been
modest—only about 30 metres by 10 wide
and 15 metres high—but literary sources
praise the splendour of its interior
decorations made of gold,silver, bronze
and Lebanese cedarwood.
An eternal Covenant
and rules to respect
Above all else, it housed at its centre
the Ark of the Covenant, placed inside
the Holy of Holies whose sole entrance
was a door that from the 6th century B. C.
only the high priest could pass through. I t
was the home of the Eternal.
The Ark enclosed the two blocks of
stone—the Tablets of the Law—which
Moses received from God on Mount
S i n a i .These sealed the Covenant between
a “chosen people”and the single God of
the Israelites, whom they later proclaimed
the sole God of all humanity.M o n o t h e i s m
was born.
The Covenant was a contract. G o d
ordered the faithful:“You shall have no
other gods before me” and “you shall not
make graven images,” and laid down the
main moral and liturgical rules. If they
respected God’s law, the faithful would
not only become “a great nation”living in
happiness and prosperity,but God would
also give them a land of their own.
Because the Covenant was eternal,
they would own the land for eternity. I f
they carried out their divine obligations,
they could live there. If they did not,G o d
who gave the land could take it back and
relinquish his people to the miseries of
e x i l e.But an eventual return was promised:
“if you return to Me, and keep My
commandments and do them, t h o u g h
some of you were cast out to the farthest
part of the heavens,yet I will gather them
from there, and bring them to the place
which I have chosen as a dwelling for My
n a m e.”
Exiles there were. Israelites from the
northern kingdom of Samaria were exiled
in Assyria seven centuries before Christ.
Jews from Judea were exiled in Babylon
after the destruction of the First Temple
by Nebuchadnezzar in 587 B. C.And after
the destruction of the Second Temple by
Aerial view of Temple
Mount/Haram al-Sharif
from the southwest. Inside the Al-Aqsa mosque.
Reconstruction of the Second Herodian Te m p l e, by Israeli archaeologist Leen Ritmeyer, 1 9 7 7 .L

the Romans in 70 A . D. , Jews were exiled
for nearly 2,000 years. During all this
t i m e, religious Jews implored God, t h r e e
times a day, 365 days a year, to restore the
Temple and thus the Covenant between
G o d , them and their land,at the centre of
which was Temple Mount.
“If I forget you, O Je r u s a l e m , Let my
right hand forget its skill! If I do not
remember you,Let my tongue cling to the
roof of my mouth” (Psalm 137). Th e s e
words are recited at every Jewish marriage.
Where exactly was the First Te m p l e ?
Historians and archaeologists generally
agree it was on Mount Moriah.The A l t a r
of Holocausts was probably at the very
t o p, in line with the rules of the time
about choosing the site of a shrine and
erecting it.There is a rock on the Mount
that the Torah—the first five books of
the Bible—says was the rock where
Abraham proved, 1,000 years before it
was written,that he worshipped God to
the point of being ready to sacrifice his
son Isaac. The first Covenant was made.
Abraham—or Ibrahim in the Ko r a n —
is usually considered the ancestor of both
Jews and A r a b s. More than 2,000 years
l a t e r, it was from this same rock,a c c o r d i n g
to Muslim tradition, that the Prophet
M o h a m e d , arriving from Mecca after a
mystical night journey, ascended to
h e a v e n .The faithful can see the supposed
venerated footprint of the Prophet.
In 638, Caliph Umar conquered
Je r u s a l e m . The esplanade the A r a b s
discovered was by now a wasteground
littered with ruins and had not been used for
religious purposes for centuries, as if to
signify that the city had lost its Je w i s h
c h a r a c t e r. Written sources say that the
esplanade was even used as a rubbish dump
after serving as the site of a Roman temple.
Later writings described how Umar
cleaned up the esplanade and the rock.
Since then, because more remains have
been found, speculation has given way to
c e r t a i n t y.Construction work and what one
would call today restoration were done to
make the esplanade a religious and social
centre for the new Muslim community. I t
was enlarged over several centuries.
The Haram takes its
present-day shape
The southern and eastern walls were
partly rebuilt. The two present-day
platforms on the esplanade were laid out.
It was probably on the southernmost of
the two that the first mosque—in fact just
a shelter to keep the sun off worshippers—
was built, the Al-Aqsa mosque (“the
furthest mosque” in A r a b i c ) . On the other
higher platform, the Dome of the Rock
was built soon afterwards, around the turn
of the 7th and 8th centuries. Ever since
t h e n , its dome,atop an octagonal building
which Suleyman the Magnificent later
adorned with coloured tiles that are still
t h e r e, has towered over the Haram and
nearly all of the city and its suburbs.The A l -
Aqsa mosque was then rebuilt several
t i m e s.

Abraham, or 
Ibrahim in the Koran,
is usually 
considered the 
ancestor of both 
Jews and Arabs
UNESCO AND JERUSALEM’S OLD CITY

The Crusaders (1099-1187) took over
the entire esplanade but did not
permanently alter it. When Saladin
recaptured Jerusalem from them, h e
removed all trace of their presence and
restored the buildings to their previous
s t a t e. It was his dynasty, the Ay y u b i d s, a n d
then above all the Mamluks, rulers from
the 13th century to the beginning of the
1 6 t h , who transformed the Haram into
what it is today.
They increased the number of places
for prayer and built religious schools
(m a d r a s a s) , along with libraries,
retirement homes and hostels for pilgrims.
The Haram now had both religious and
secular buildings, which jutted out over
the edge of the walls.
The Koran makes no clear reference
to Jerusalem as a holy place.At the outset,
Muslims were to face towards the city
when they begin to pray. But right from
the start, the mosque the Koran calls “ t h e
furthest sanctuary,” where it says the
Prophet went after his celestial journey
from Mecca,was associated with the holy
places that were developing in Je r u s a l e m .
Th e n , probably from the 8th century,
the stories of the mystical journey and
of Mohamed’s ascent merged and a very
powerful emotional, i n t e l l e c t u a l ,r e l i g i o u s
and personal link grew between al-Quds
(“the holy”),which is the Arabic name for
Jerusalem,and the Muslims.
3,000 years of demolition,
rebuilding and restoration
It became the third holiest city of
Islam,after Mecca and Medina in Saudi
A r a b i a , and a very important place of
p i l g r i m a g e. Some Muslims believe that
the Kaaba, the construction that stands in
the centre of the mosque in Mecca and
which contains the Black Stone attributed
to Ibrahim,will be transported at the end
of time to stand near the Dome of the
R o c k .Th e r e,all Muslims will face God on
Judgment Day.
The Haram, the Temple Mount, has
seen never-ending construction,
d e m o l i t i o n , rebuilding and restoration
for nearly 3,000 years now. The same
stones have perhaps been used in the
same places to build temples both to
pagan gods and to the one God of the
world’s three monotheistic religions.
Over the centuries, the various
masters of the city, because they were
always both religious and secular, e r a s e d
all trace of their conquered predecessors
and used new monumental buildings to
flaunt their power on the esplanade
overlooking the entire city.
This Je r u s a l e m , around which exiled
Jews built their identity,was a celestial one.
“Somewhere between heaven and earth,
often closer to heaven than earth, Zion [a
hill near Temple Mount] beckoned and
gave meaning to the lives” of these exiles,
say Jean-Christophe Attias and Esther
B e n b a s s a , authors of a recent article in
the French magazine Notre Histoire.
From the end of the 19th century, t h e
Zionist movement, although mostly
composed of secular Je w s, “made the
ancient myths relevant to the present
d a y ” and “took possession of the holiness
of the land,” according to Attias and
Benbassa. Jerusalem was seen as both a
physical and a celestial place, as a
promised land and a national territory.
Compromise vs coexistence:
resolving religious conflict
In 1980, the Israeli parliament decreed
that “all of reunified Jerusalem is the
capital of Israel.” At the same time,
nationalism was rising among the
P a l e s t i n i a n s, partly in response to the
Israeli move, and one of their principal
goals became the proclamation of
Jerusalem as the capital of a future
Palestinian state. The Umma, t h e
worldwide Muslim community, i n s i s t e d
that the Haram was inalienable.
Temple Mount or the Haram: today
this site is doubly sacred to the faithful
and to many non-religious people, a n d
sometimes exploited by two nationalist
c u r r e n t s.Will there be a conclusion where
one side wins all and the other agrees to
lose everything? Can the two sides share
these strata of historically interwoven
masonry steeped in such passionate
emotion? Shimon Peres, who as Israeli
foreign minister was one of the architects
of the Oslo Accords, is fond of pointing
out that political conflicts can be solved by
compromise, but religious ones can only
be settled through coexistence. ■

Can the two sides 
share these strata 
of historically
interwoven masonry 
steeped in 
such passionate 
emotion?
