At the dawn of the 21st century, states and
the international community can no longer
refute the fact that humanity is made up of
two sexes, not just one.This discovery, a precious
legacy of the century that just closed, has brought
women’s existence into the limelight. One of the
great democratic challenges for societies over the
next century will be to mature so that both sexes
are able to live their lives on an equal footing,
with all their differences, contrasting history and
culture, but also with equal rights and responsibi-
lities.
Women’s rise to power and their participation
in politics are the vital signs of a healthy demo-
cracy. If only this vision that emerged from the
1995 Beijing Women’s Conference could spread
worldwide! I would call it a radicalisation of
democracy. When women take part in the public
arena, contributing to the ongoing, shared effor t
to shape better ways of living together, a qualita-
tive leap occurs. Their participation fills a gap
which has until now prevented the emergence of
a truly democratic culture.
Archaic attitudes
Equal sharing of decision-making by men and
women is a pre-requiste for democracy. In Brazil,
women hold half the civil service jobs (they are
more qualified than men), but only 13 per cent of
s u p e rv i s o ry positions. The ultra-modern bu i l-
dings in the federal capital, Brasilia, stand in
sharp contrast with the persistence of intellectual
and emotional outlooks which hark back to the
19th century and hinder women’s empowerment.
But attitudes are not the only obstacle to
women’s ambitions. The structure of society and
the way men and women run their daily lives are
other stumbling blocks.
The Inter-American Development Bank has
had the good idea of giving the Institute for
Cultural Action, an NGO in Rio de Janeiro, the
task of setting up a pilot programme to train
Brazilian women for positions of political and
social power, an experiment which is to be exten-
ded to the rest of Latin America. Participants
include trade union and NGO leaders,key figures
from the black and indigenous communities,
company executives, civil servants and policyma-
kers.
These women of different ages, educational
backgrounds and ethnic origins are all aware of
one fact: they are paying a very high price for a
social contract that was negotiated when women
were in a position of weakness,and agree that this
has to change.
Re-mapping the division between
public and private life
Women account for 46 per cent of Brazil’s
working population and hold 51 per cent of the
university degrees, but still perform almost all
tasks at home, in the private sphere. A study of
300 women in positions of responsibility by the
Centre for Women’s Leadership (CELIM) in Rio
de Janeiro revealed the difficulty they had in
making choices, their temptation to give up and
the risk of pulling back in the face of increasing
obstacles. Their difficulties show that there is an
urgent need to re-organize the use of time,to stri-
ke a new balance between responsibilities and to
re-map the division between public and private
life. Household tasks must be recognised as time-
consuming, socially and economically vital and a
serious check on women’s ambitions.
Women in positions of power must constantly
prove that they can behave like men. They keep



For a fair sharing 
of t i m e
◗ Rosiska Darcy de Oliveira
Women may have entered public life on a massive scale, but they are still 
on their own when it comes to running the household. A new balance must 
be struck if there is to be genuine democra c y
◗ President of the Centre for
Women’s Leadership (CELIM),Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil
2 The political are n a

quiet about having to look after children, run a
household and care for elderly parents. Bringing
those issues out into the open would mean admit-
ting “flaws” that men do not have, for the simple
reason that they delegate such work to their
wives.
By drawing a veil of silence over their home
life as if it were something illicit, women are allo-
wing a basic fact to be hidden: the world of work
relies on a domestic zone run by them. Women
have changed, but the world of work has not and
they are reaching the point of exhaustion. Filled
with a deep sense of injustice, they are asking
themselves: “Where did I go wrong?”
Understanding that humanity is composed of
two different but equal sexes has several implica-
tions. Society must redefine itself because women
are turning up in public carrying children in their
arms and breast-feeding them, and because they
have their own awareness and language that come
from life experiences which are different from
those of men.
An untenable
double burden
Articulating issues affecting public and private
life is complicated, but that does not mean the
equation is impossible or that the problems they
raise should be brushed aside—especially since
the two worlds of public and private life are inter-
twined and mutually supportive.The balance bet-
ween the two has now been upset. Women have
entered public life on a massive scale, but the
organization of home life—how time is used and
who is responsible for what tasks—is still the
same, as if nothing had changed. And yet such a
world, where women are expected to soldier 
on just as before, “simply” adding to their lives
experiences hitherto reserved to men, is called
egalitarian.
That misunderstanding is fueled by an age-old
tradition of dismissing the world of women, even
by women themselves. Because society does not
consider what they do in the home as having any
major social significance, it fails to add this part
of their lives to the other side of the equation.
This is why the massive migration of women
from the home to the public arena is occurring
without societies having to think seriously about
how and by whom domestic work will be done in
the future (and which women still do, but at what
cost!).The double burden, resulting from an out-
dated social contract, is putting women under
mounting pressure by speeding up their lives to
an untenable pace.We are facing a social problem
that society as a whole must solve and not, as
many think, a problem that women must settle by
working even harder.
As new areas of power open up to women,
both sexes must take a fresh look at how they use
time. Re-arranging it is a challenge to society’s
imagination. But has this necessity sunk into the
minds of decision-makers? I do not think so. This
poses a major problem because it is a missing
building block in the construction of our demo-
cracies.
The everyday work of CELIM is proof of this.
Women must put these issues on the political and
economic agenda, thereby contributing to a more
radical definition of democracy. Feminism’s new
demand for a different sharing of time also opens
a debate that goes beyond the interests of women
a l o n e . In the final analysis, time and its
constraints define the limits of our own lives and
the range of choices we make, in accordance with
the meaning we give to our own existence.
The equality equation is increasingly complex.
It is not enough to wipe out the last traces of dis-
crimination in public life. A new definition of
equality will emerge when both sexes start sharing
responsibility in the private realm. Otherwise, the
issue will be distorted and women will lose all
chance of succeeding in public life. ■
Being there: A woman nursing her child during a political rally in Tokoza, 
South Africa.
