H e r z e g ovina but it had no specific
context of place or time. As co-author of
the film script,I wanted to situate the plot
in a definite place and time. So in the
film, everything happens in the course of
a single night in Belgrade.A night “haun-
t e d ” by ordinary people whose pat h s
cross and clash. Each person is a powder
keg, so there’s an explosion.
When we were filming in 1998, I was
expecting a social explosion. I’d felt it
coming in the streets of Belgrade during
m a ny anti-gove rnment demonstrat i o n s
I’d taken part in. But I didn’t think the
film was going to foreshadow a far more
painful explosion, with a rain of missiles.
As an opponent of the regime of Serbian
President Slobodan Milosevic, what was your
position on the NATO bombing in the spring of
1999 that was supposed to overthrow him?
The Powder Keg came out in Paris on
March 24, the day the bombing started.
The France 2 television channel had
scheduled me for a live interview after its
eight o’clock evening news programme.
So I was in the studio, waiting for the
news to end, when I saw live the first
shells exploding over my country. I was so
upset I had to leave the studio before I
could speak.The presenter asked me what
I was going to do. I said I was going to
find a corner to weep in. I didn’t go back
to the studio.
In the days that followed, I really
couldn’t decide whether to return to my
country or carry on with the opening tour
of Powder Keg. Should I be in Belgrade or
should I be going round Western cine-
mas? I chose the second option. I took
part in hundreds of public discussions
and gave as many interviews, trying to
explain that the bombing would only
increase the violence in my country.
When there’s a war on, what can 
a film-maker do?
You can’t be indifferent to war, espe-
cially if it’s ravaging your own country.
But what can you do in practical terms?
It’s very hard for film-makers to react
quickly with their only tool, film. A poet
can rouse the masses at the height of a
war. But a film-maker works slowly and
needs a lot of funding, which means that
when the war is in your own country, your
hands are tied.
Anyway, you need to step back a bit,
in time if not in place. It’s very hard to
make a good war film in the heat of batt-
le. The film-maker should denounce war
while staying neutral. But in fact we very
often take sides, consciously or uncons-
ciously. They say history is written by
people on the winning side. The same
goes for war films.That’s why I don’t like
this kind of film, with all due respects to
Stanley Kubrick’s Full Metal Jacket, the
most brilliant war film of all time, and
Jean Renoir’s La Grande Illusion.
I decided to wage my war on war not
through my work but through my position
as a film-maker. I did that extensively
when my latest film, The Powder Keg,
came out in the spring of 1999, by talking
to cinema audiences and in the media all
over Europe and the United States.
The Powder Keg deals with war but it isn’t a
war film.
For me, war is a total eclipse of human
conscience. It’s that darkening which the
film deals with. The script was based on
an excellent play by Dejan Dukovski, a
Macedonian playwright who a few years
ago, when he was only 26, managed to
capture the mood of the Balkans today.
The play dealt with the war in Bosnia and


SERBIAN 
FIL M - M A K ER 
GORAN PASKA LJEV IC
The director of a dozen feature films internationally acclaimed for their blend 
of lyricism and realism talks about the background of his latest film, which deals with 
‘the eclipse of human consciousness’ caused by war
Events proved me right.The Serbian poli-
ce, paramilitary and army immediately
began expelling Albanians from Kosovo. I
was ashamed of that and ashamed that
such actions were taking place “in my
name” as a Serb. And the violence is still
going on. Now Kosovo, at last a secure
place for Albanians, has become a hell not
only for Serbs but also for Turks, Gypsies
and even for Albanians who don’t support
the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA).And
Milosevic is still in power.
I tried to explain that the bombs were
actually falling on Serbian democracy and
that by destroying the country, they were
strengthening Milosevic’s hold on power.
How, after bombing Serbia, can Europe
say to the Serbian people that they should
reject the authoritarian, short-sighted and
selfish Milosevic regime and replace it
with Western-style democracy? As a result
of this war, the Serbs have lost the few
points of reference they still had. They
don’t know where to turn.The regime has
led them up a blind alley, the opposition
is sporadic and disunited; Europe has
betrayed them. If I spoke out publicly
against Milosevic in Serbia today, the
authorities would reply at once: “Don’t
listen to him, he’s a NATO hireling.” Not
many people would give me a hearing.
Serbia’s pro-government press has already
accused you of “treachery”.
Ye s , t h at was in September 1998,
before the NATO bombing. It said I’d
betrayed the Serbian people for having
told the Italian newspaper La Repubblica
that Milosevic was the main person to
blame for the situation in Kosovo. The
author of one article even suggested I
ought to commit suicide if I had any self-
respect left. Without dramatizing my
present situation, I don’t think I’m safe


from a contrived “suicide” on the streets
of Belgrade. But that doesn’t stop me cri-
ticizing the regime, just as I denounced
the bombing. One shouldn’t confuse the
regime with the people, even if the people
are partly responsible. I’ve noticed that
the two have been bracketed together
both in my country and in the West.
What do you think is the people’s share 
of responsibility?
There was a time when Milosevic was
hailed by millions of Serbs. He was voted
into power three times. OK, the third
time the elections were rigged, but they’d
voted for him before that. But that said,
they were tricked.The rise of nationalism
in the former Yugoslavia wasn’t sponta-
neous. We know who the main culprits
we r e . Milosevic in Serbia, F r a n j o
Tudjman in Croatia and Alija Izetbegovic
in Bosnia and Herzegov i n a . They all
played the nationalist card to entrench
t h e m s e l ves in powe r. I t ’s a card that
always works at troubled moments in
history.
Why didn’t anti-nationalist intellectuals in the
former Yugoslavia react strongly enough to
the rise of nationalism?
Many of us did react, but we have very
little room for manoeuvre. Our vo i c e
doesn’t carry very far. We don’t have any
power and we had no money to reach a
wide audience, either at home or abroad.
But let me ask a few questions. Why
were the Western democracies so indiffe-
rent to the democratic movement in
Serbia? Why did they make Milosevic “the
guarantor of peace”by accepting him as a
s i g n at o ry of the Dayton accords in
November 1995? When we took to the
streets in 1997 after the municipal elec-
tions, it was 10 days before French TV
decided to show that something was hap-
pening in Serbia. Yet these demonstra-
tions went on for three months. If we’d
had a bit of material aid at that time—no
more than the price of a single Tomahawk
missile—we could have set up indepen-
dent media, and Serbs could have heard
another version of events instead of just
the government’s.
You’re regarded as a committed artist. What
But let me ask a question.
Why were the We s t e r n
d e m o c racies so indifferent 
to the democratic movement 
in Serbia?

closeness to life. And if it’s going to refle c t
life fa i t h f u l l y, it has to draw on metaphor,
just like poetry. The Powder Keg is realistic
but it’s a metaphor too. Nights in Belgr a d e
a r e n ’t all like the one in the fil m .
Have you been criticized for being 
pessimistic?
Yes, several times. The public’s need
to see films that end with a ray of hope
comes from the theory of socialist realism
that was dinned into us at school, at any
rate into those of us who were brought up
in eastern Europe. Communism collap-
sed and socialist realism with it, but its
golden rule of “be optimistic and believe
in a radiant future” still lives on in the
public’s mind. Oddly enough, it’s the
American film industry that went furthest
with socialist realism, by introducing the
notions of hope and optimism as intrinsic
parts of a film. From then on it was hard
to convince the public that these were not
the criteria by which a film should be jud-
ged.
I ’ ve been particularly criticized by
some of my compatriots who live abroad
and think the media has already gone
quite far enough in “tarnishing the image
of the Serb people” and that there was no
need for me to contri bute with T h e
Powder Keg. Has anyone ever criticized a
French film-maker for tarnishing the

do you mean by commitment?
Politically, my commitment has lain in
carefully avoiding joining any party or
accepting a government job. I value my
independence and my freedom. For me,
being committed means having a dialecti-
cal relationship with reality and never fin-
ding oneself outside or above it.That’s the
sense in which my films are committed.
Guardian Angel denounces the dreadful
reality of the trade in Gypsy children, The
Dog who Loved Trains the plight of social
outcasts and Someone Else’s A m e ri c a
exposes the situation of immigr a n t s.
Although I stress feelings in my films, rea-
lity is their dominant theme.
Which school of film-makers do you 
belong to?
You’re asking me to do the critics’
job! I don’t see myself shut away in a dra-
wer, even one lined with velvet and silk.
I’m claustrophobic. I tend to see myself as
being on a vast plain inhabited by disad-
vantaged people whose fate concerns me.
That’s the backcloth. Form is of seconda-
ry importance. I tailor it to the story I
want to tell. That’s why all my films are
different. The one consistent thread is
their humanism. The cinema classics I
feel closest to are those of the Italian neo-
realist Vittorio de Sica. They are full of
feeling but they say more about Italy than
any documentary. I also feel close to the
works of the French director Jean Renoir,
which are both poetic and realistic.
I don’t like films that go off into wild
fantasies. Dreams are important in our
lives, but life isn’t just dreams. It’s reality
that hurts. Dreams only interest me inso-
far as they bandage wounds.
I also don’t like films that take too
pessimistic a view of life in order to serve
a political cause,however just it might be.
Your films seem to be metaphors rather 
than messages.
I usually send messages by e-mail.
Has life got a message? No. The wonder-
ful thing about life is that it’s a great
mystery whose secrets we constantly have
to discover.The beauty of film for me is its
I’ve been particularly criticized
by some of my compatriots
who live abroad and think the
media has already gone quite
far enough in ‘tarnishing the
image of the Serb people’ and
that there was no need for me
to add my contribution with
The Powder Ke g.
A demonstrator defies police in Belgrade, February 1997.

A still from Goran Paskaljevic’s film The Powder Keg

image of the French people?
As an artist from the Balkans, do you think
Western audiences expect something special
from you?
I sometimes feel they expect me to
have an answer for everything, in my
films, in public debate, and in interviews
with journalists. A French film-maker is
questioned about aesthetics; I am asked
what I think of NATO. People also expect
my films to denounce this or that policy.
But I repeat, politics isn’t my business. I
shall be making my next film in Mexico
and it will look at disease and death.
Nothing to do with Serbia. But I always
find I’m defending a gi ven area—the
Balkans—and defending my work within
that area. People forget I’m just someone
who thinks and who tries to express,
through films, what he thinks.
At the 1999 Venice film festival, Scandinavian
critics said The Powder Keg was over the top
and unrealistic. Did they think the film was
too “Balkan”, not universal enough?
The film did go to the limit as far as vio-
lence was concerned and some of the situa-
tions shown might be considered impro-
b a b l e . But there was less blood in it than in
m a ny Hollywood love stori e s. I wanted to
s h ow that no country holds a monopoly on
violence and that any one of us, a ny w h e r e
in the wo r l d , at any time, can be a prey to it.
T h at human beings are not inherently evil
but become destru c t i ve because they’r e
egged on by circumstances. I t ’s in this sense
t h at my film is unive rs a l .
If the Scandinavians did not feel it was
their kind of film, it was perhaps because
they felt that their structured and well-
ordered society is impervious to violence.
Latin American critics and journalists in
Venice, on the other hand, reacted as if
the film might have been made in their
countries, and so did the Italians and to
some extent the French. Later, the res-
ponse of the American public confirmed
for me that the film could have been made
in the Bronx or Brooklyn.
To criticize it for being unrealistic is
like saying Van Gogh’s skies are too blue.
Art isn’t a carbon copy of nature. The
extent to which a film is realistic is of
s e c o n d a ry import a n c e , because reality
itself is relative. The important thing, as
with all art, is that the film is authentic.
Film is an art-form, but it’s also an industry,
isn’t it?
Above all it’s an art, but an expensive
art. This means a film-maker always has
to think about profitability, a concept
from the world of industry and commer-
ce. For fear of not being able to keep on
making films, directors often try to please
a wide public which has been suckled
from its earliest years at the breast of
Hollywood, has acquired a taste for it and
doesn’t want to be weaned.But I trust the
wider public, all the same. I don’t think
the public always wants to see the world
through rose-coloured spectacles. T h e
success of Will It Snow for Christmas?
(1995), the first film by French director
Sandrine Veysset, reassures me about this.
I think it’s the distributors who’ve impo-
sed this false idea of the uniformity of the
public which allows them to always take
the easiest path.
But you’ve made a Hollywood-style film,
Twilight Time. Later you said you’d lost your
soul. Why was that?
I t ’s not, s t rictly speaking, a Hollywo o d -
type fil m . It was ordered by Hollywood and
filmed in Yugoslavia.I gave in to the temp-
tation of the huge amount of money I was
o f f e r e d . When yo u ’re young and used to
working with ve ry little money and you see
the gleaming prospect of gold ingots before
your eye s , you don’t have the strength to
say no.You tell yourself that at last you’re
going to be able to fulfill all your dreams as
a film-maker. But from the start of the fil-
ming, I realized money was creating more
problems than the lack of it and that it’s fa r
from being a guarantee of artistic freedom.
It was a lesson to me. I lost my soul because
I had to make too many compromises.
Do you think there’s such a thing 
as a “Balkan soul”? If so, how would 
you describe it?
It does exist, but it’s impossible to
define. Just when you think you’ve got it
in your grasp, it slips away from you. But
that’s what makes it “Balkan”and why it’s
so splendid. It’s dishevelled and smiling,
emotional and vulnerable. It likes to day-
dream, it has a sense of humour and self-
mockery. It isn’t pragmatic, it’s rather
fatalistic, it believes in myths and it’s
stubborn, very stubborn—to the point of
self-destruction. ■
Interview by Jasmina Sopova,
UNESCO Courier journalist
