The case for bringing the ideas and values of
the private sector to primary and secon-
dary education sounds fine on paper. G i v e
local schools operational autonomy.Th e n
abolish geographical enrolment zones and
allow parents to choose which school their child
will attend so that schools have to compete to attract
s t u d e n t s. In the resulting educational “ m a r k e t p l a c e,”
schools will improve their teaching and student
achievement records.
Such was the thinking that New Zealand applied
to the running of its state education system in the
1990s under a series of legislative changes known as
Tomorrow’s Schools reforms.The reform plan was
the boldest experiment with market-based educa-
tion ever carried out by a developed country.
Overnight, the system goes local
and parents take charge
What were the results? The answer is at best
m i x e d . It was good for some schools and some stu-
d e n t s, but disastrous for other schools, many of
which served disproportionate shares of disadvan-
taged students.As New Zealand policymakers now
busily retreat from the reforms, their experience
offers some warnings for other countries thinking
about moving down the same road.
The application of market principles to the deli-
very of public education was a natural step for New
Z e a l a n d .This island nation of 3.8 million people had
gone through a serious economic crisis in the early
1980s that had left the country close to bankruptcy.
In 1984 a new Labour government was elected that
decided to break with tradition and restructure the
c o u n t r y ’s economy around neo-liberal themes.By the
end of the decade, the government extended the
restructuring effort to the social sectors of the eco-
n o m y. First came the national health system, t h e n
housing and welfare. Education was next.
EDWARD B. FISKE AND HELEN F. LADD
EDWARD B. FISKE, FORMER EDUCATION EDITOR
OF THE NEW YORK TIMES, AND HELEN F. LADD, PROFESSOR
OF PUBLIC POLICY STUDIESAND ECONOMICS
AT DUKE UNIVERSITY (U.S.). CO-AUTHORSOF A BOOK ON
NEW ZEALAND’S SCHOOL REFORMS, WHEN SCHOOLS COMPETE: A CAUTIONARY
TALE (BROOKINGS, 2000).



New Zealand: the price of 
the market model
The country with the most 
free-market public education 
system in the West is now 
trying to rescue schools 
caught in a downward spiral
3 . N OTES OF CAU T I O N
Maori language classes at a primary school in Te Koha, New Zealand.
E D U C AT I O N : THE LAST FRONTIER FOR PROFIT

NEW ZEALAND
34
3 . N OTES OF CAU T I O N
In 1989, Parliament abolished the national
Department of Education and turned control of
primary and secondary schools over to locally
elected boards of trustees, dominated by parents.
Virtually overnight, one of the world’s most tightly
controlled public education systems became one
of the most decentralized.The central government
continued to fund the education system,negotiate
teacher contracts and enforce accountability
through an inspectorate system.
Innovation versus the downward
spiral of low-performing schools
Two years later a new government controlled by
the conservative National Party ratcheted the stakes
up another notch. Parliament abolished neighbou-
rhood enrolment zones and gave parents the right to
choose which school their child would attend. P r i-
mary and secondary schools found themselves com-
peting for students in an educational agora. P u b l i c
relations and marketing skills became as integral
to the job description of principals as knowledge of
curriculum and the ability to manage a faculty.
Many schools prospered under the new arran-
g e m e n t s, especially those serving middle and upper-
middle class students. Such schools had the social
capital among their parent bodies to elect boards of
trustees with the governance, financial, legal and
other skills needed to run an educational institution,
and some  principals with entrepreneurial instincts
took full advantage of their new-found autonomy to
offer innovative educational programmes.
The Gladstone Primary School in Au c k l a n d ,f o r
e x a m p l e, began offering a programme organized
around the theory of “multiple intelligences” a r t i-
culated by Harvard University psychologist Howard
G a r d n e r.“No one is restricting us,”said Colin Dale,
the principal.“ The potential is now there to do wha-
tever you want. I t ’s all about meeting needs and per-
f o r m i n g. If you get it right,people will flock to you.”
Self-governance did have its price.The workload
of principals and teachers increased substantially and
many schools serving large numbers of disadvan-
taged students found it difficult to muster boards of
trustees with the requisite governance skills.
For their part, New Zealand parents enthusias-
tically embraced their new right to choose where
their child would go to school. Substantial num-
bers of students began venturing outside their local
neighbourhoods to attend classes. Their numbers
included many Maori and Pacific Island students
from low-income families who saw an opportunity
to flee low-performing urban schools.
From the point of view of parents,moving up the
scale in choice of school is understandable and even
r a t i o n a l .But in New Zealand,parents judge the qua-
lity of schools by the ethnic and socioeconomic mix of
their students.Schools with a preponderance of Euro-
pean students are seen as superior to those with large
numbers of Maori and Pacific Islanders. In the new
educational marketplace, schools serving predomi-
nantly white students have grown in size during the
1 9 9 0 s, while those serving large numbers of minority
students saw their rolls decrease.They could not com-
pete for either high quality teachers or motivated stu-
d e n t s.The cost of transportation and optional school
fees have also limited minority access to the most
desirable schools.
Although other countries might design a compe-
titive system somewhat differently from New Zealand,
the forces unleashed by parental choice are under
any circumstances likely to push systems towards
greater polarization.By defin i t i o n , in any competitive
environment some participants will be successful and
others will fail. Th a t ’s the way markets work. We
observed situations in New Zealand where schools
operating on a level playing field were engaged in
vigorous competition for students that probably
redounded to the benefit of both.The problem is that
the playing field is not always level. Enrolment data
show lower income and minority students are dis-
proportionately represented among schools that are
unable to compete. There has been an enhanced
concentration in schools at the bottom of diffic u l t -
to-teach students—those from poverty-stricken homes,
those whose English is weak,those with learning dif-
ficulties and those who are suspended from other
schools for disciplinary reasons.
New Zealanders describe the loser schools as “ s p i-
r a l l i n g ”d o w n w a r d .Once they begin to fall behind in the
educational marketplace,downward spiralling schools
find their problems compounding and feeding on each
o t h e r.Lower student rolls means fewer teachers,w h i c h
means a less attractive academic programme, w h i c h
means even fewer students.Schools become losers;s o
do the students and families served by them.
The return of the state and the 
need for policy safeguards
By the mid-1990s public pressure began buil-
ding on the Ministry of Education,a policy - o r i e n t e d
successor to the abolished department, to assist
these spiralling schools. The ministry began offe-
ring managerial assistance,then moved toward more
direct intervention. By 1998 top ministry offic i a l s
were conceding that the educational marketplace
would never work for as many as a quarter of
s c h o o l s.
One may ask whether it is defensible, on moral,
practical or other grounds, to organize the delivery of
public education so that you know from the outset
that a properly working system will seriously exa-
cerbate the problems of some schools.The creation
of losers might be justified if competition led to an
overall improvement of the system as a whole and the
losers would still be winners in absolute terms. Or it
might be justified if the Ministry of Education,a w a r e
that competition leads inevitably to unsuccessful
s c h o o l s,stood ready with a safety net.Neither condi-
t i o n ,h o w e v e r, was present in New Zealand.
The country’s decade-long experience with
market-based reform demonstrates there are no
panaceas in school reform. The trick is to adopt
reform strategies that will protect the positive values
of self-governance and competition while minimi-
zing their negative consequences through appro-
priate policy safeguards. ■
