We often hear that this will be the century
of women, in light of the tremendous
strides that have been made in the past
thirty years or so. Although it is far too soon to
confirm this prediction, it can safely be asserted
that the twentieth century was marked by their
struggle to leave the home,where they were confi-
ned by the ancestral division of roles along gender
lines. Around the world,women have campaigned
to win the rights they have been denied and to
build, side-by-side with men, the future of the
planet.
True, such struggles had already been waged
in the past, although they were deliberately shun-
ned in official historical accounts. But the brief
revolts of this special “minority”, which accounts
for over half of humanity, did not change the
place of women in their societies. They may have
ruled the roost, sometimes enjoying undeniable
respect, but nevertheless they were still born to
serve men and bring their husbands’ descendants
into the world.
Education:
their first struggle
Yet, at the start of the twentieth century, the
traditional distribution of roles, seemingly legiti-
mised by every religion and frozen in a “natural”
order, began to crumble under the two-pronged
assault of modernisation and women’s struggle
for their collective emancipation. They waged
many battles to gradually obtain, despite set-
backs, a change in their status—which is still far
from achieved.
The first struggle of the twentieth century was
for education. In 1861, a young woman gradua-
ted in France with a baccalaureate, a highschool
leaving exam, for the first time. In 1900, the first
female university was founded in Japan.The same
year, girls won the right to secondary education in
Egypt and the first girls’school opened in Tunisia.
Young women who could made the most of these
new educational opportunities, not only to beco-
me better household managers and good educa-

◗ Freelance journalist 
based in Paris
tors for their children, as the main discourse of
the period suggests, but also to do something
unprecedented: to enter the forbidden spheres of
public life, to exercise citizenship and to partici-
pate in politics.
Throughout the twentieth century, women
waged a battle on two fronts: by fighting for their
own rights and taking part in the major social and
political emancipation movements. In 1917, the
Russian Bolshevik Alexandra Kollontaï became
the world’s first woman cabinet minister. African
American Rosa Parks triggered the civil rights
movement by refusing to give up her seat to a
white man on an Alabama bus in 1955. Djamila
Boupacha was a heroine of Algeria’s war for inde-
pendence.Women were entirely committed to the
goals of these movements but seldom received
anything in return for participating in them.Once
their countries’ new masters took power, they
often found themselves sent back to the kitchen.
But they continued fighting for their own rights,
and it is on this front that they achieved their
greatest victories.
The earliest feminist movements, which first
appeared in the West in the late nineteenth centu-
ry, focused on workplace and civil rights issues.
I n d u s t ry needed wo m e n ’s labour, which wa s
underpaid in comparison with that of their male
counterparts. ‘Equal pay for equal work!’ deman-
ded American and European women, who began
setting up their own trade unions and organizing
strikes. They made unquestionable strides, but
after more than one century of struggle, most
women around the world still earn less pay for
equal work.
The right to vote
The second objective of the twentieth centu-
ry’s pioneers was participation in public life,
which hinged first and foremost on having the
right to vote. The struggle was long and some-
times violent, as shown by the British “suffra-
g e t t e s ” who demonstrated in the streets or
Chinese women who made their demands heard



One battle after another
◗ Sophie Bessis
Women fought for their rights throughout the twentieth century. In the past severa l
d e c a d e s, their struggle has truly become global, but all is far from won
1 Fo rceful voices

by invading their country’s new parliament in
1912. Everywhere, the fierce resistance of the
political world progressively yielded to determi-
ned women’s movements.
Scandinavia is where women first won the
right to vote and to run for election, with Finland
leading the way in 1906. The First World War
t h rust them into the forefront, with most
European women winning the right to vote in
1918 and 1919, although French and Italian
women had to wait until after the Second World
War to at last be recognized as citizens. Outside
the West, women also organized to demand their
rights. Groups were founded in Turkey, Egypt and
India. In 1930, the first congress of women from
the Near and Middle East gathered in Damascus
to demand equality. Throughout this peri o d ,
women eve rywhere declared that , outside of
motherhood, they had the right to be just like
men, and that men could not deny them this
right.
Control over their
own bodies
For a while, women’s rights movements took a
back seat to the Second World War and liberation
struggles in the European colonies. The fight
against fascism and, after 1945, c o l o n i a l i s m ,
mobilized all their energy. Women distinguished
themselves in these struggles,but that did not suf-
fice to establish their rights as a gender. However,
the world continued to change.With independen-
ce, many women in the South won access to
schooling, salaried employment and, in a few
exceptional cases, the closed world of politics. In
Western countries, the post-war period saw them
enter the work force on a massive scale.The gap
between social reality and the discriminatory laws
defended by exclusively male power structures
grew wider.
In the West,the second generation of feminists
emerged in the wake of the libertarian move-
ments of 1968. Picking up where their elders left
off, they broadened the scope of their demands,
for late-twentieth century feminists no longer
aspired to the right to be “just like men”.
Challenging the claim of the “white male” to
represent universality, their goal was to achieve
equality while remaining distinct as women.The
women’s liberation movement that first emerged
in the American middle-class claimed the right to
control one’s own body. Feminists fought for
contraception and abortion rights in many coun-
tries where one or both were against the law, and
for autonomy and equality within the couple.
“The personal is political,” proclaimed women
inspired by Marxism and psychoanalysis.
“Workers of the world, who washes your socks?”
chanted demonstrators in the streets of Paris in
the 1970s. In France, the Veil law legalizing abor-
tion unleashed emotional debate in 1974.
Many Third World women could not identify
with the struggles being waged in the West and
insisted on leading their own battles at their own
pace. However, these Western feminist move-
ments breathed new life into the cause.
Recognizing the changes and proclaiming their
intention to accelerate them, the United Nations
declared 1975 “International Women’s Year”
and organized the first international women’s
conference in Mexico City.
Already proclaimed in the Unive rs a l
Declaration of Human Rights in 1948, sexual
equality was reasserted in 1979 by the
Convention on the Abolition of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women, which became a
precious emancipation tool in the North as well
as the South. At UN conferences in Copenhagen
in 1980, Nairobi in 1985 and Beijing in 1995,
women from both hemispheres found common
ground, demanding the right to “have a child if I
want it, when I want it,” rejecting Malthusian
principles and claiming their place in political
In Munich, Germany, a poster printed for Women’s Day on March 8,1914 demands the right
to vote for women.

bodies that until then had decided the world’s
future without them, struggling against religious
fundamentalism that jeopardizes their modest
gains.
Misogyny of the
political class
Of course, the struggle of Kuwaiti women
against those who have denied them the right to
vote or Indian women against the forced abortion
of female fœtuses is not the same as American
women’s battle against their own fundamentalists
or French women’s campaign against the misogy-
ny of the political class.Women’s movements take
different approaches depending on the continent
and do not necessarily have the same priorities,
but the struggle has nonetheless become global
d u ring the past several decades. In the last
t we n t y - five ye a rs , women have gradually in-
creased their presence in public life, although it
can hardly be said that the doors are wide open
for them. From Africa to Asia, women’s organiza-
tions have multiplied and acquired experience.
But their victories remain incomplete and the
future is uncert a i n . From the nightmare of
Afghan women to the ways in which equality is
resisted in the so-called most advanced countries,
the obstacles show that there is still a long way to
go. Will women see the end of the struggle in this
century that has just begun, the one which sup-
posedly belongs to them? ■
