◗ Berlin-based journalist
GERM A N Y :
T ILT ING 
AT WINDMIL L S
◗ Hartmut Wewetzer
Germany is the world’s top producer of energy
from wind power. But whether more wind farms 
should be built is sparking fierce debate
■
The north German plain is looking
different these day s. Where once
fie l d s , m e a d ows and forests stret-
ched as far as the eye could see, t o d ay the
landscape is dotted with spectacular
w i n d m i l l s , some of which tower 100
metres or more above the gr o u n d .
The further north you go, the more
there are. In East Friesland (Lowe r
S a x o ny) and on the west coast of
S c h l e swig-Holstein (where windmills
c r owd the horizon) thousands of small
businesspeople (Germ a ny ’s associat i o n
of wind energy producers has more than
6,000 members) have built huge wind
fa rms to produce electricity for the nat i o-
nal gri d .
Since 1997, G e rm a ny has ove rt a k e n
the United States as the wo r l d ’s leading
producer of wind energy. It accounted for
700 of the 2,035 megawatts (MW) of
new wind energy capacity installed
worldwide in 1998 (the equivalent of the
output of two large nuclear powe r
p l a n t s ) . Each ye a r , new records are set. I n
the first quarter of 1999 alone, 228 new
wind turbines were hooked up to the
n ational gri d . The number of turbines in
G e rm a ny rose from about 6,200 in
Ja n u a ry 1999 to 7,200 by the end of that
year (3,750 MW).
But so far these devices produce only
1.3 per cent of Germ a ny ’s electri c i t y.T h e
rest comes largely from fossil fuels (58
per cent), nuclear plants (36 per cent)
and hy d r o p ower (5 per cent). The wind
energy association predicts that by 2020
about 25,000 wind turbines will be ins-
t a l l e d , producing 30 per cent of the coun-
t ry ’s electri c i t y. G ove rnment sources say
t h at some 30 billion Deutschmarks ($1.8
billion) will be spent on strengthening
the sector.
Wind powe r ’s success in Germ a ny is
p a rtly based on public and media appro-
va l . G e rm a ny is the only We s t e rn country
where nuclear power has, since the
1 9 7 0 s , met almost unanimous and often
violent opposition. The anti-nuclear
m ovement led to the birth of the Green
p a rt y, which has been in gove rn m e n t
with the Social Democrats since the end
of 1998. This coalition wants a rapid
s h u t - d own of nuclear power stat i o n s ,
although it has not yet reached an agr e e-
ment with the energy distri bu t o rs. If they
fail to agr e e , a law may be passed to res-
t rict the life of nuclear plants to 30 ye a rs ,
forcing the industry to close them one by
o n e .
Global warming is another argument
in favour of using wind power, a non-pol-
luting energy source. Germany has pled-
ged to reduce its greenhouse gas emis-
sions by 21 per cent between 1990 and
2010.The public largely sees this as evi-
dence of an “ecological revolution” and a
new civilization where humans are at
peace with nature.
Subsidized wind farming
The only problem—a big one—is that
wind energy is very expensive. Extracting
one kilowatt/hour of energy from the
wind costs four times as much as using
fossil fuels. So the political decision to
develop renewable energy, taken by the
previous government and reaffirmed by
the present one,can only be applied if aid
is available in the form of tax breaks for
firms producing wind energy, low-interest
bank loans, subsidies from the state and
from provincial governments and favou-
rable legislation.

The 1991 “ i n t e gr ation law ” , which is
the key to the present system, obliges the
e l e c t ricity distri bu t o rs to buy wind energy
at guaranteed prices (90 per cent of the
p rice paid by consumers ) , and this enables
the wind fa rm e rs to make a profit .
But the growth of wind energy seems
to be threatened by the opening up of the
energy market, which started in April
1998 and has sharpened competition and
reduced the price of electricity paid by
consumers.This trend worries wind ener-
gy firms because they sell their product at
prices which are specifically tied to consu-
mer prices. With their profitability in jeo-
pardy, they want more subsidies to pro-
tect themselves against the ups and downs
of the market.
Meanwhile, opposition to wind power
is growing. A few years ago, it chiefly
came from the electricity distributors,
who campaigned to have the 1991 law
declared unconstitutional.They failed but
managed to get it amended to limit their
obligation to buy wind energy, which now
comprises a maximum 5 per cent of the
electricity they purchase. But in some
parts of northern Germany, this quota is
not enough to absorb the output of wind
energy, and producers are looking for
other outlets. A proposed new law would
be even more advantageous to renewable
energy than its predecessor in that it
would abolish the 5 per cent rule.
The fiercest opponent of wind energy,
Prof. Otfried Wolfrum, from Darmstadt,
thinks that to continue backing wind
energy is “a disastrous stupidity for the
environment, for human beings and the
economy”. The current policy, he says,
will in the coming years produce a loss of
about 30 billion Deutschmarks (around
$15 billion),which consumers will pay for
in the form of electricity costing more
than it would if the distributors were not
forced to buy wind energy. He says wind
fa rms are simply “a licence to pri n t
money”.
He and other economists argue that
subsidized wind energy may be creating
jobs now but will end up cutting down on
t h e m . ( U n e m p l oyment in Germ a ny is
over 10 per cent.) If energy prices are not
competitive in Germany, they say, some
electricity firms will move their plants to
c o u n t ries where conditions are more
favourable. On top of this, these “appal-
ling machines” are a blot on the landsca-
pe in important tourist areas. Wolfrum,
the founder of Germ a ny ’s League to
Protect the Countryside, has made him-
self spokesman for a citizens’ movement
that is growing fastest in areas where wind
turbines are most common.
Wind energy has become the centre of
a major battle in Germany. Wolfrum’s
strong at t a c k s , contained in his book
“Wind Energy, a False Alternative”, have
provoked an equally strong riposte. An
influential member of the lower house of
the German parliament, H e rm a n n
Scheer, a wind energy lobbyist who recei-
ved the 1999 Right Livelihood Award,
also known as the A l t e rn at i ve Nobel
Prize, recently even accused Wolfrum of
using “fascist” arguments, which gives a
good idea of how heated the debate has
become. Scheer, working with journalists
and environmental campaigners , h a s
published a reply to his opponent’s book
called Windy Protest.
Despite these polemics, the rapid
d e velopment of wind energy seems set to
c o n t i n u e . In case public anxiety about
h a rm to the countryside increases, w i n d
energy entrepreneurs are planning to
build wind fa rms out at sea.The biggest is
s l ated for a spot 35 km east of the Baltic
island of Rügen and will comprise 200
turbines capable of generating 1,000
m e g awat t s.This is roughly the output of a
big nuclear power plant, s ays a spokesman
for W i n k r a - E n e r g y, the company concer-
n e d , “and from the shore, you wo n ’t be
able to see a single windmill.” ■
Wind power supplies these pyramid-shaped houses designed by architect Gerard Schouten at Huizen (The
Netherlands).
The fiercest opponent of 
wind energy, Prof. Otfried
Wolfrum, and other
economists argue that
subsidized wind energy may
be creating jobs now but 
will end up cutting down on
them. If energy prices are not
competitive in Germany, 
they say, some electricity
firms will move their plants
to countries where conditions
are more favourable.
