All too often, education has been touted as the key to transforming nomadic identity,
which goes a long way towards explaining its patchy record
SAVERIO KRATLI
RESEARCHER AT THE INSTITUTE OF DEVELOPMENT STUDIES
(SUSSEX)
ife in the dry lands is harsh. There is no
sheltering shade, the sun cracks the soil
and watering the animals is a daunting
task in the dry season.But the pastoralists
know how to survive. They know that
nobody can go without eating and drin-
king for as long as they can,except per-
haps the other group of pastoralists on the
other side of the escarpment. When the
rainy season finally comes, if indeed it
ever does, the pasture is glorious and the
herd fattens quickly.They know their ani-
mals one by one, their colour and beha-
viour, their “parents”and so forth,going
back several generations.To the pastora-
lists, these animals are more than beau-
tiful;they have individuality.
A clash of cultures
When addressing the education of
pastoralists, it is all too often forgotten
that to be a  “pastoralist” means being
Turkana (Kenya),Rabari (India),Qash-
qa’i (Iran), or from some other commu-
n i t y. It is an identity these people take
pride in,a complex and sophisticated way
of life which,with all its harshness, they
profoundly love.E d u c a t i o n ,h o w e v e r, h a s
mainly been intended as an instrument to
transform the pastoralists into something
else. The history of mass education pro-
grammes for nomads has been that of an
encounter between people seeking new
ways of adapting to an evolving context—
monetarization of the economy, c o m m o-
dification of labour and privatization of
land—and a broad set of actors, f r o m
p o l i cy-makers and project officers to tea-
chers and local officials, who widely
believe that nomads have to be “saved”
from their way of life. It is upon this cul-
tural clash that the “problem”of delive-
ring mass education to nomads has been
framed and policy solutions devised.
The bias behind
nomadic education
After years of war in Somalia, schools have re-opened despite poor conditions.

Nomadic herders number several tens
of millions of people, mainly in African
dry lands, the Middle East, and south-
w e s t , south and central A s i a .They include
some of the most vulnerable of all sou-
thern populations. They often make a
significant contribution to national food
p r o d u c t i o n . M o b i l i t y, harsh environ-
mental conditions and remoteness have
always stood as barriers to the provision
of formal education, and millions of
nomadic pastoral children remain out-
side the system.
Political motives
underpin initiatives
M o n g o l i a , a country where the majo-
rity of the population is nomadic, stands
as a case apart. Compulsory state edu-
cation for children between eight and 18
began in 1940.The system relied on hun-
dreds of schools with dormitory facilities
built in all rural settlements. Education
was free,accounting for more than15 per
cent of GDP. Schools were well staffed,
with highly motivated and comparatively
well-paid teachers, most of whom came
from a nomadic background.Within the
following 20 years, Mongolia passed from
around two to more than 90 per cent lite-
r a cy and by 1990,before liberalization, t h e
country had almost reached a rate of 100
per cent. This unprecedented fig u r e —
unmatched ever since with a nomadic
population—can hardly be explained in
terms of innovative programme content.
The standard curriculum was highly aca-
demic and teacher-centred in nature. I n s-
tead, the crucial factor had more to do
with a sympathetic human environment
and the absence of a rift between the cul-
ture of the school and that of the nomads.
But Mongolia is a chiefly nomadic
c o u n t r y.Although scarce documentation
and widely differing contexts make it dif-
ficult to paint a general history of nomadic
e d u c a t i o n , political motives always
underpin initiatives. In Somalia,a short-
lived rural development campaign laun-
ched in 1974 took a bold approach: the
government simply closed down all
secondary schools for one year and sent
20,000 students and teachers to the coun-
tryside to teach literacy to the largely
nomadic population.They used methods
learnt in Koranic schools, writing letters
on a blackboard, reading them aloud and
asking pupils to repeat. This was, at least
in intention, a two-way campaign, as one
of the slogans underlined: “ What you
k n o w, t e a c h ; what you do not know,
l e a r n .” Hindered by the 1974 drought,
the campaign was nevertheless a surpri-
sing success: in only seven months,9 1 0 , 0 0 0
of the 1.2 million students registered sat
the final test and 800,000 passed.
A more common reason for provi-
ding education to nomadic pastoralists
emerged when a number of newly inde-
pendent African states realized that some
of the dry lands and the livestock were
valuable “ n a t i o n a l ” r e s o u r c e s. As such,
pastoralists had to become more closely
integrated into the economy, notably by
increasing production. The task of
“ m o d e r n i z i n g ” the nomads was left to
e d u c a t i o n . The Kenyan case is instruc-
t i v e. In 1970, the Parliament amended
the Anglo-Maasai agreement,which kept
the reserves closed to non-Maasai, and
launched a programme aimed at impro-
ving enrolment by setting up low-cost
boarding schools. But the new educa-
tional facilities were flooded by pupils
from non-pastoral ethnic groups and were
disregarded by the Maasai. In the late
1 9 7 0 s, when an evaluation found that the
boarding schools were operating below
c a p a c i t y, the government decided to tem-
porarily cut funds to the programme.
Some analysts argued that carrying out
education in the absence of economic
development and related social services
had been a mistake.The 1984-1988 Deve-
lopment Plan concentrated on improving
livestock resources, marketing facilities
and banking services, assuming that
demand for education would stem from
increased monetary resources. R a t h e r
than look at the programme’s shortco-
m i n g s, the blame was put on pastoralists’
“backward” way of life. All that policy-
makers had to do was reverse the equa-
tion: from education as a path towards
development, to development as a path
towards education.
Mainstream explanations for the fai-
lure of education provision in pastoral
areas usually blame the recipients. It is
assumed that the problem stems from the
nomads’ obsolete way of life and cultural
c o n s e r v a t i s m , rather than from the inca-
pacity of a national system to respond to
the living conditions of a signific a n t
number of its citizens.Research is practi-
cally inexistent on the impact of educa-
t i o n .Figures on enrolment and attendance
rely on local records that are often incom-
plete and inaccurate,yet these figures are
usually the main yardstick used to mea-
sure the outcomes of education pro-
g r a m m e s. The most profound impact of
these programmes remains an untold
s t o r y. Social norms, networks and rela-
tionships of authority play a critical role in
pastoral livelihood systems, which edu-
cation often tends to undermine.A divide
often sets in between educated and non-
educated members of communities.
Recent research underlines how projects
of directed change are embedded into
education programmes for nomads, t e n-
ding to antagonize local learning and
socialization patterns. Although govern-
ments may no longer be trying to trans-
form pastoralists into settled farmers, t h e y
are still trying to transform them into
“something else,” such as “ m o d e r n ”l i v e-
stock producers, as in Nigeria.
Hooking nomads 
to the system
With the push for decentralization
and cost-sharing in education over the
past ten years, some governments are tur-
ning to innovative partnerships with inter-
national development agencies rather
than investing in mass education pro-
g r a m m e s. Pastoral areas are particularly
t a r g e t e d , given that they have the lowest
l i t e r a cy rates. A few non-formal educa-
tion programmes are now focusing on
providing a service directly related to life
in pastoral societies.By moving away from
the emphasis on productivity, there is
room to address crucial livelihood issues
such as resource access, c o n flict manage-
ment and local advocacy. In Senegal, t r a i-
ning modules have been developed in
local languages for pastoralists. In Ke n y a ,
an out-of-school programme launched in
1992 has set up learning centres offering
non-formal primary education to nomad
c h i l d r e n , with strong community invol-
v e m e n t .
But these alternative approaches do
not address the structural inadequacy of
education systems.They are often about
getting beneficiaries “ h o o k e d ” to “ fit the
s y s t e m ,” and are but a parallel second-
class education. Unless the power issue
behind the formal/non-formal divide is
a d d r e s s e d , even the best education pro-
grammes may only result into channel-
ling out-of-school children into persis-
tently unresponsive systems. ■
Although governments 
may no longer 
be trying to transform 
pastoralists into 
settled farmers, they are
still trying to 
transform them into 
“something else,”
such as “modern”
livestock producers
