It is a phantasmagoric world. When
European trave l e rs discove r e d
Angkor in the 19th century, they
were astounded by the grandeur and the
my s t e ry of the temples, c overed with
sculptures of “airy figures stifled and cru-
shed by the forest,” in the words of the
French writer Guy de Pourtalès. “I have
before me,” he wrote,“not only an empty
capital but 700 years of unrecorded histo-
ry. And death’s most dreaded prodigy:
s i l e n c e .” The silence that enve l o p e d
Angkor when it was abandoned in the
15th century seemed immutable, bu t
appearances can be deceptive.
A fa bulous archaeological site, t h i s
gr e at stone skeleton is also a living place, at
once the realm of divinities and a city of
m o rt a l s , where eve ry d ay business is stee-
ped in customs from a prestigious past.
Tales of a nine-headed 
serpent
Between the 9th and the 14th centu-
ries,Angkor,the capital of the kingdom of
Cambodia, grew up between the Kulen
hills and Tonle Sap, the Great Lake. At
the height of its power, the kingdom
included parts of present-day Thailand,
Laos and Viet Nam. Over the centuries,
kings who practiced religions that came
from India, Hinduism and Buddhism,
erected monumental stone temples where
they honoured their gods. They also built
an elaborate hydraulic system comprising
huge reservoirs (baray) linked to a net-
work of canals, dikes and moats.
Only one contemporary description of
Angkor’s former splendour has survived.
It was written by a member of a Chinese
diplomatic mission, Chou Ta-Kuan, who
a rri ved in A u g u s t , 1 2 9 6 . His vivid
account includes anecdotes about the
daily life and customs of Angkor’s inhabi-
tants. He wrote that every night in a gol-
den tower, the king had to mate with a
nine-headed serpent that took on the
appearance of a woman. In the palace,
bare-breasted women “as white as jade”
wore their hair in a bun.At the other end
of the spectrum, the commoners were
described as “rude, black and very ugly”.
The nobles were carried about in gold
palanquins and dressed in precious
fabrics whose patterns were an indication
of rank. They lived in houses with lead
and tile roofs, while those of “the com-
mon people were covered only with that-
ch”. Farmers tilled their fields on the
banks of the great lake. In the dry season,
when the waters receded from the flooded
forest around the lake, the farmers came
down from the hills and grew rice.
When the Siamese conquered and
plundered Angkor in 1432, the king and
his court left the devastated city. The
forest overran the ruins. Wooden buil-
dings and writings on latania leaves and
scraped hides disappeared, victims of the
damp climate and insects.
In the late 19th century, archaeologists
◗ French ethnologist who has been working at Angkor
(Cambodia) for the last seven years.
T IMEL ESS
A NGKOR
◗ Fabienne Luco
A fragile thread of continuity connects life around the ancient capital of the kingdom 
of Cambodia to the distant past
Angkor Wat:  realm of divinities and city of mortals.
1.The precise functions of these hydraulic
engineering works have given rise to considerable
debate.As well as providing water for irrigation
they reflected the symbolic role of water within an
architectural cosmogonic conception in which the
temples are an earthly representation of the city
of the gods surrounded by the oceans. This
irrigation system has for the most part either
dried up or been filled in.The only operational
section is the western baray which has been
repaired and today still provides water for some
dry-season rice-fields.

p ower of at t r a c t i o n .
The topographical conditions provide
an ideal setting for modern dwellings. In
the past, people left a profound imprint
on the earth by building networks of
roads and dikes as part of a water mana-
gement system. The plain is still shaped
by vestiges of these large-scale enginee-
ring works. In search of high ground that
will escape flooding during the rainy sea-
son, Cambodian farmers find the terrain
highly suitable for building their homes.
How long has the current population
lived in the area and what is the nature of
their relationship to Angkor? Unfortun-
ately, there is little information on the size
and location of ancient villages. The few
recent local writings vanished during the
torment of the Khmer Rouge period.And
French explorers in the late 19th century
considered the temples more important
than the people who lived around them—
only five or six villages seem to have been
recorded.They consist of groups of two to
ten houses built around squares in the
heart of the forest.
Do the local people consider them-
selves heirs of the Angkor tradition? Their
history is obscure; village memory goes
back no further than two or three genera-
tions. A few scraps of ancient history have
come down to us orally, but it is impos-
sible to establish with certainty whether
they are real or imaginary, history or
i n t e rp r e t at i o n . The building of the
temples is said to have taken place in a
mythical period peopled by figures who
were half-divine, half-human. The villa-
gers believe that these imposing monu-
ments can only be the work of divinities
or of people who came from elsewhere
and knew much more about architecture
and sculpture than they do.
The legend surrounding the founda-
tion of the temple of Angkor Wat tells the
story of Preah Ket Melea, son of the king
of heaven and a mortal woman.The divi-
began deciphering the inscriptions and
scenes depicted in the bas-reliefs carved
in the stonework of the temples, which
contributed precious information to their
understanding of historical timelines and
myths, battles and aspects of everyday
life, including hunting, fishing, marketing
and habitat.
Today, life in nearby villages is much
the same as when it was captured in those
ancient sculptures. The wooden wheel-
barrow that squeaks as it is pushed round
a corner is identical to one on a bas-relief.
The vendor dozing in front of her stall at
the market in Siem Reap, the provincial
capital (population 75,000) seven kilo-
metres from Angkor, is resting in the
same position as her distant ancestor
depicted by a sculptor. On the basin of
Srah Srang, located in the heart of the site
and bordered by two villages, the fisher-
man casting his net makes the same ges-
ture as his counterpart of seven centuries
ago.
More than an outdoor museum,
Angkor is home to religious and rural life
revolving around the temples. Inside col-
lapsed sanctuaries and more recently-
built Buddhist pagodas, smoke from
incense threads its way heavenward befo-
re statues of ancient gods and the
Buddha. At the threshold of a temple or
on a heap of loose stones, the eye comes
to rest on cigarettes, rolled betel leaves
and candles set down by an anonymous
hand. They are offerings to one of the
many neakta, land spirits who often dwell
in Angkor’s statues.
A celestial
architect
One of these spirits, Ta Pech, lives in a
huge termite nest in the southern pavilion
of the first wall surrounding Angkor Wat.
Ta Pech has a reputation for malevolence.
According to a monk, “People say that
when an aircraft flies over Angkor,it must
make three turns around Ta Pech; other-
wise, there is a chance it may crash into
the lake. If you give Ta Pech wine and
cigarettes, he can also divulge winning
lottery numbers.”
Other signs of human activity can be read
in the present landscape.The grid pat t e rn of
nearby rice paddies appears behind the screen
of ve g e t ation that cloaks many of the temples.
Not always visible from the tourist routes, a
score of villages can be made out through
gr oves of sugar palms. They are home to
some 22,000 people in a 300 square-kilo-
metre area. Such a high population density on
an archaeological site is due as much to the
lie of the land as to the temples’ e c o n o m i c
nities said they were disturbed by the
smell of Preah Ket Melea and asked his
father to send him down to Earth. The
king acceded to their request, offering his
son the opportunity to have an exact
replica erected on Earth of any edifice in
heaven with the help of Preah Visnukar,
the celestial architect whom villagers still
invoke whenever a building is construc-
ted. A modest man, Preah Ket Melea
chose the stable. An ox was released onto
the plain of Angkor and the place where it
lay down was designated as the site for
Angkor Wat.
Ebbs and flows
of memory
From the orally-transmitted past, vil-
lagers above all recall the wars against the
Siamese and the Chams, a people from
Champa, a vanished kingdom that was
located in the centre of present-day Viet
Nam, and the accompanying raids and
forced displacement of populations. “We
Cambodians are accustomed to wa rs.
When you look at the bas-reliefs, you see
m a ny battle scenes from the days of
Angkor. Since then, those images have
constantly repeated themselves,” says a
farmer. The scenes depict distant times
called boran (“ancient”, in Khmer), or
muoy roy chnam (“100 years”). Nobody
can accurately date them, as this com-
ment by a villager illustrates: “My father
says the temples were there when he was
born.They must be very old.”
By and large, the local people have dif-
ficulty imagining that a connection may
exist between them and the people who
built Angkor. However, in a village north
of Angkor Thom there are reports of
families who claim to descend from the
kings of Angkor. In the early 20th centu-
ry, they still lived in small, tumbledown
wooden hovels at the foot of the royal
palace. After the French began restoring
the temples, they had to move north.
Their current living conditions are the
same as their neighbours’, but they enjoy
a certain recognition.“Like the king, they
have the power of life or death over the
villagers,” says one local resident.
Today, Angkor’s hydraulic system no
longer functions and farmers use rain to
water the rice paddies which are still their
economic mainstay. Due to the lack of
irrigation and the poor quality of the
sandy, clay-filled soil, there is only one
meagre harvest a year (less than one
tonne per hectare). Complementary acti-
vities are necessary, such as fishing, mar-
ket gardening, palm sugar production,
sales of handicrafts to tourists and work
ANGKOR
Phnom Penh
0 100 km
Thailand
Laos
Viet Nam
Gulf of Siam
Tonle Sap
South
China
Sea
Siem Reap

on the temple restoration projects.
Technical jobs such as motorcycle, radio
and television repair and battery-charging
are also emerging.
A n g k o r , t h e n , c r e ates jobs for the local
p o p u l at i o n . In the late 19th century, a f t e r
French explorers recognized the temples’
h i s t o ric and artistic va l u e , ve g e t ation wa s
cleared away and stones that had lain half-
forgotten in the middle of the forest resur-
fa c e d . In 1907 the Angkor Conservat i o n
A u t h o rity (the French archaeologi s t s ’ f o r-
mer headquart e rs and the present sculptu-
re storage site) began restoration wo r k .T h e
few villagers who lived within the temple
complex itself were hired as “ c o o l i e s ” . B y
the late 1960s, over 1,000 people we r e
working on the site.
The tourist
revival
Before March 1970, when a coup
d’état toppled Prince Norodom Sihanouk
and war came to Cambodia, the local
people had begun crafting small, hand-
made wooden items, including musical
instruments (flutes and violins), toy ox-
c a rt s , k n i ve s , a xes and fin e l y - w r o u g h t
canes. They started making and selling
these objects anew when tourists began
streaming back in the early 1990s. In
1999, the estimated number of visitors
was put at 350,000, a figure expected to
triple by 2005.
The people living on the site seldom
enter the temples, even when they are
close to home. “We’re just farmers. I
heard my grandfather say that during the
Angkor epoch,folks like me were not allo-
wed within the walls of the capital,
Angkor Thom,” says one villager. “Only
n o b l e s , civil servants and merchants
could venture inside. It was the same for
the temples: only priests and dignitaries
could enter them.”
These are something more than remi-
niscences of a bygone age. Today, reli-
gious rituals in the temples are celebrated
mainly by masters of ceremony who come
to honour the neakta. Local people wor-
ship these spirits, especially in the vil-
lages, by calling upon a medium incarna-
ting the supernatural beings. Most of the
tokens of devotion laid in front of the sta-
tues in the temple of Angkor Wat have
been left by tourists from other parts of
Cambodia and Asia on a religious pilgri-
mage to the site.Local religious activity is
c o n c e n t r ated in more recently bu i l t
Buddhist pagodas. Especially numerous
within the walls of Angkor Thom, the
pagodas were built near the temples as a
way of honouring new divinities in the
shadow of the old. Continuity in Angkor
can still be felt in the local people’s daily
lives.
As peace returns and Angkor gears up
for major tourism deve l o p m e n t , the people
living there must meet new challenges and
s t rike a delicate balance. Villages along the
road-embankments are gr owing rapidly, a n d
settlement has become dense in some form e r-
ly scattered communities.This is a direct out-
come of the population gr owth that followe d
the Khmer Rouge period (1975-1979).To d ay,
there are five children in the average fa m i l y,
and half of all Cambodians are under the age
of sixteen.
Rice paddies are steadily encroaching on
the bushy plain. Angkor is protected by royal
decrees which limit the expansion of farm-
land and the cutting of firewood.Traditional
secondary activities, such as palm sugar and
charcoal production, are now seldom practi-
ced. In Angkor, many issues remain unresol-
ved, including preservation of the temples
(especially from plunder), protection of the
e nv i r o n m e n t , ru n away population gr ow t h
and the development of tourism.
The loss of traditional values, accelerated
by opening up too fast to the outside world,
is another cause for concern. The chain of
oral transmission broke down during the
Khmer Rouge period, and it has proved
impossible to revive some ancient traditions.
Television, now in every village, is speeding
up the loss of cultural identity. It is vital to
s ave A n g k o r ’s architectural heri t a g e , bu t
equally important to protect its intangible
heritage: the tales, legends and place names
that only local people know. ■
Modern times: Angkor’s challenge is to strike a balance between preserving its heritage and coping with expanding tourism.
