A giant among 
On the whole, the film market has taken a nosedive as cinema
admissions have fallen to a fifth of what they were ten years ago.
There is one exception: the American film industry is making huge
gains in the U.S. and worldwide
The U.S. alone invests more in the film industry than any
other country for which statistics are available.
The second in line is the European Union,with a total
investment of $2,559 million in 1999.
Top ten leaders in film production, 1999 U . S . share of local box-office, 1999% Comparison with 1990
Source: Screen Digest (contact: David.Hancock@screendigest.com)
Source: Screen Digest (contact: David.Hancock@screendigest.com)
IN V E S T M E N T
Among the world’s top ten producers, India and the U.S. are neck-to-neck.
The European Union ranks third with 706 feature-length films produced in
1999, however it has captured only three per cent of 
the U.S. market.American films compose roughly half the market 
in nine out of the ten leading movie-producing countries and territories
in the world.
PR O D U C T I O N

Cinema screens in the world’s regions per million
population in 1998 
The number of cinema screens in each country per million
population in 1998
% Comparison 
with  1988
Source: Screen Digest (contact: David.Hancock@screendigest.com)
Sources: Screen Digest (contact: David.Hancock@screendigest.com); UNESCO Institute for Statistics.
Admissions (per million population) have followed the same
pattern as the number of screens (see below). The only
regions to witness an increase are North America and the
A u s t ralia/New Zealand/Pa c i fic Islands re g i o n . Between 1988
and 1998, the annual number of movie-goers fell to less than
a seventh of what it used to be in Central and South A s i a ,
l a rgely because of an explosion in the production of pira t e
v i d e o s. In Central and Eastern Euro p e, the situation is even
w o rs e : admissions have fallen by more than 33 times
following the disentegration of state-run film industries.
AD M I S S I O N S
In North America and the region of Australia/New Zealand/Pacific Islands,
the number of screens per million population is on the rise. A steady
decline, however, has been recorded in Central and South Asia (the
world’s most populous region) as well as in Central America/the
Caribbean. Meanwhile the number of screens operating in Central and
Eastern Europe has plummeted.The situation elsewhere remains stable.
SC R E E N S
 dwa r v e s
