The industrialized world’s first public edu-
cation system is under siege, with fierce
attacks pitched from all sides in the U.S.
political arena. First the administrative
leadership of large urban school districts
is reeling from accusations of being ineffic i e n t ,
overly bureaucratic and more preoccupied with
rules and regulations than with providing quality
education to students. M e a n w h i l e, t e a c h e r s, s t u-
dents and parents,especially those from low-income
areas, are the targets of blame for what has been
characterized as the “rising tide of mediocrity that
threatens our very  future as a nation and a people.”
Never before has education received such atten-
tion in a presidential campaign. The nation tuned
into televised debate where Al Gore and George
Bush clearly marked out the battle lines.The Demo-
crat pledged to pump $115 billion more into a school
system in need of  greater accountability and inno-
v a t i o n ,while the Republican vowed to dismantle the
system and replace it by privately managed schools
that operate on marketplace principles.
At the centre of the debate lies the highly
controversial voucher plan: instead of paying taxes
to support their local public school, parents can
opt to use that money to send their child to a private
school.In 1998 Florida became the first to adopt a
statewide plan,while California and Michigan will
vote on similar initiatives in November 2000.Cali-
f o r n i a ’s is notably supported by Tim Draper, a
Silicon Valley venture capitalist. The proposed
p o l i cy : to provide state-funded scholarships of $4,000
(compared to the $5,627 per student the state now
spends) to any parents who want to send their chil-
dren to private or parochial schools.
Despite their power, teacher unions have been
left to the margins of the debate. Often castigated
as stubborn defenders of the status quo, u n i o n s
have been forced into a defensive posture, a t t e m p-
ting to fight off the most radical reform measures
while working to raise the salaries and benefits of
their members, which are widely recognized as
inadequate.Although the American Federation of
Teachers and the National Education Association
continue to play a major role in statewide elec-
t i o n s, their influence in the debate over educational
reform has been minimal.
Support for the privatization camp is drawn lar-
gely from certain corporations which perceive public
education as hopelessly unfix a b l e, religious conser-
vatives who want to exercise greater control over
what their children are taught, and a growing
number of middle-class parents whose children
already attend private schools and who resent being
taxed to support a system they do not patronize. I n
most states, this coalition has been unable to muster
the support needed to implement privatization pro-
posals beyond a small number of isolated cases.
But this appears to be changing.
Other constituencies who once were viewed as
reliable supporters of public education now appear
willing to back efforts to radically transform the
system and replace it with new models, many of
which remain undefined and untested. A recent
study conducted by the Joint Center for Po l i t i c a l
and Economic Studies found that 88 percent of
African Americans were in favour of education
choice plans, with the highest support (95 percent)
coming from families earning less than $15,000 a
y e a r. For parents whose children have long consti-
tuted a “captured market” and been forced to attend
the most inferior schools, the various privatization
proposals hold out the promise of providing access
to quality education.
The white middle class takes flight
How do we explain this groundswell of interest?
The answer is far from straightforward.Though the
right to education is not guaranteed by the U. S.
c o n s t i t u t i o n , access to education has effectively
become a universal entitlement. Moreover, many
s i g n i ficant advancements in civil rights for racial
minorities, the disabled, language minorities, and
more recently gays and lesbians, have first been
achieved in public education before spreading to
other sectors of society. Schools in the U. S. a r e
governed locally, and throughout the country com-
munities increasingly look to their public schools for
solutions to a growing list of social problems.
Yet so many schools are in such a lamentable
state that the entire system is now under attack.
Severe funding cuts in the 1980s forced many school
districts to eliminate academic programmes (such as
a r t , music and athletics), increase the number of stu-
dents per classroom,and reduce access to services such
as counselling. Fractious labour relations, d e c a y i n g
buildings and an array of social problems, many of
which are related to impoverishment of the children
they serve,have overwhelmed school personnel.
Such conditions have compelled many middle-
class families to flee urban school districts and trans-
formed many schools into institutions of last resort.
African American and Latino students are grossly
o v e r-represented in these failing schools.So it may
be only natural to find their parents increasingly
open to voucher proposals.
28
PEDRO A. NOGUERA
URBAN SOCIOLOGIST, PROFESSOR AT HARVARD UNIVERSITY’S GRADUATE SCHOOL
OF EDUCATION



When parents want out
In the U.S., parents are claiming the right to spend their tax money as
they see fit and are rallying in growing numbers behind voucher plans. A
critical look at the school choice controversy
2 . C ATERING TO DEMAND

Fe a r, racial prejudice toward mino-
r i t i e s, and the arrival of new immigrants
have also contributed to the flight of the
white middle class. States such as Cali-
f o r n i a , Florida and New York have
experienced substantial increases in
public school enrolment due to the
immigration of large numbers of A s i a n s
and Latin A m e r i c a n s.As the demogra-
phics of the student population has
c h a n g e d , registered voters, t y p i c a l l y
older and disproportionately white,h a v e
been less willing to cover the costs of
public education through tax increases.
The airline model and the
future of schools left behind
Despite their many weaknesses,
public schools continue to offer one
of the only sources of mobility and
social support to poor and working-
class families. Under voucher schemes,
elite schools may become even more
selective as an  increase in the demand
for admission allows them to raise the
cost of tuition and moves them even
further beyond the reach of low-
income families.And what will happen
to those schools and students left
behind?  Funding is based largely on
e n r o l m e n t , so it seems unlikely that
the undesirable schools will receive
the resources needed to improve.Th e
State of California’s legislative analyst
projects a major cut in public school
funding if the children already in pri-
vate schools receive vouchers and if
five percent of those in the public
system use vouchers to leave.
Shifting the burden
of responsibility 
The essential difference between
the present situation and what is likely
to occur after privatization is that indi-
viduals rather than government will
bear responsibility for ensuring access to
quality education. Advocates point  to
the example of the new airlines that
were established shortly after the indus-
t r y ’s deregulation in the 1980s. M o s t
of the new airlines no longer exist,
h o w e v e r, and those that do are widely
seen as offering inferior quality albeit at a lower
p r i c e.But the advocates still argue that  new schools
c o u l d n ’t possibly be worse than the public ones now
operating in certain districts. But unlike public
s c h o o l s, which are required to  meet legally establi-
shed educational standards (mainly teaching cre-
dentials and  accessibility for students), there is no
guarantee that private schools will be held to similar
r e q u i r e m e n t s.
The advocates seem to be gaining the political
a d v a n t a g e. In such a climate,defence of public edu-
cation must be based upon more than its potential to
i m p r o v e, but on evidence that this can in fact be
d o n e.Public education is in desperate need of reform,
and those who value and appreciate its role in society
must be at the forefront of efforts to hasten the pace
of change, otherwise A m e r i c a ’s “one best system”
could very well be terminated. ■
Children and parents rally in Dayton,Ohio, for the freedom to pick their schools.
E D U C AT I O N : THE LAST FRONTIER FOR PROFIT
