O f f s h o re
t h r e a t s
The impending flood of offshore
courses may do more than lure
students away from the public
system. It may shake a pillar of
national cohesion, says Gajaraj
Dhanarajan, head of the
Commonwealth of Learning* 
A re online degrees offered by fore i g n
u n i versities eroding the position of
national institutions?
The impact has not been significantly felt yet,
because a large part of the population in developing
countries cannot afford  to pay for courses travelling
via the Internet from offshore sources. Even when
such courses are heavily subsidized, as is the case
with the African Virtual University, the cost is pro-
hibitive.An AVU course from Canada,the U.K.or
the U.S. is said to be around $200-300 per credit.
Th a t ’s probably the monthly salary of an academic
in one of the countries with an AVU site.
What about in the longer term?
Academic environments run the risk of being des-
tabilized in countries where offshore courses are
d o w n l o a d e d . Students who can afford these courses
are the ones who have already enjoyed previous pri-
v i l e g e s, notably a much better secondary educa-
t i o n . Offshore degrees provide yet another privilege:
they’re an attractive proposition for those wishing
to get jobs abroad besides being prized by local
employers. So two types of  student communities
might evolve: an underprivileged class that attends
a local university and a privileged class that can
use a brand-name “ f o r e i g n ”e d u c a t i o n .This is likely
to create resentment. The local academic commu-
nity could also become demoralized if it sees itself
serving only the second best.
So there is a threat to national cohesion?
Ye s. In many developing countries,higher education
is seen as a key component of nation-building. I
fear this is in danger of being damaged for a number
of reasons including a mismatch between offshore
curricula and local hopes of building national cohe-
sion,maintaining cultural integrity and addressing
local resource needs.What we are seeing with off-
shore courses is the dumping, at an international
l e v e l , of products created for domestic consumption.
H ow much leverage do governments have in
this context?
There is very little they can do without running into
INTERVIEW BY CYNTHIA GUTTMAN
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST
a string of criticism including accusations of erecting
barriers to the free flow of information. Local legis-
lation concerning quality and curriculum can be
applied to foreign institutions in real space, but is
much more difficult to do in cy b e r s p a c e. G o v e r n-
ments could  tax those delivering the product, b u t
ultimately the customer pays.Taxing the user is also
d i f ficult to justify because students could argue that
t h e y ’re already paying for a quality they can’t get
l o c a l l y. Governments could take a stronger moral
l i n e, saying yes to a free market but stipulating that
a significant part of the curriculum must address
local human capital development needs.They have
to be persuasive in presenting those arguments in
global fora like the World Trade Organization.
H ow can local institutions improve their stan-
d i n g ?
Local capacities have to be developed, and these
include making education accessible to those who
cannot study within campus walls. Online education
is not the only solution.There are open universities
in the developing world that do a very good job of
taking knowledge to learners through a variety of
methods but which are supported at the village level
by mentors who can help students. These capaci-
ties ought to be developed. Universities in develo-
ping countries should become dual-mode institu-
tions to cater to the off-campus population. If those
capacities include e-learning, w o n d e r f u l . But our
aim should be to improve access to learning and to
internationalize education. This does not mean
making education a trade.The issue is too important.
Commodifying education does not augur well for the
cause of internationalizing edu-
c a t i o n .
■
*The Commonwealth
of Learning is an
international organi-
zation to encourage
the development
and sharing of open
learning and distance
education knowledge,
resources and technolo-
gies. For more informa-
tion,see www.col.org
