Euskera—the Basque language—is spoken by
some 600,000 people in the Spanish Basque
country and Navarra, and another 80,000 in
the Pyrénées Orientales department of south-
western France. Its origins are unknown, but it
has probably existed for over 4,000 years.
Euskera’s development was severely stunted
during Spain’s 40-year Franco dictatorship. Then
came a major recovery. Euskera became a shared
literary language, won recognition in 1979 as a
joint official language with Spanish, and has been
promoted through teaching.
Basque literature has also been flowering in
the hands of a group of dedicated writers. One of
them,Bernardo Atxaga, 48, who won the Spanish
National Fiction Prize in 1989 for Obabakoak, is
the first writer in the Basque language to achieve
an international reputation.
Did the crackdown on Euskera during the Franco
era really happen, or is it a myth?
It definitely happened, but it’s also true that
Euskera wasn’t doing so well before the Civil War.
Only a society that can afford to have doctors on



A B a s q u e writer 
leaps into tra n s l a t i o n
“ E u s ke ra , ialgi adi kanpora ” (“Basque language, step forward ! ” ) . B e r n a rd A t x a g a◗
couldn’t agree more with these words from a 16th-century Basque song.
◗ Among Bernardo Atxaga’s
works published in English are
Lone Man (Harvill,1996) and
Obabakoak (Vintage, 1993)
call on Sundays, as it were, can afford to be
concerned about saving its language. Before the
war, the Basque country was confronted with ter-
rible economic problems. Saving the language
was a miracle only intellectuals and priests could
have performed. My own case is typical, in a way.
My grandfather and great-grandfather were car-
penters. They had plenty of other things to worry
about than preserving the language. I had a diffe-
rent kind of education from theirs, and it led me
to ask why I was losing the use of a language that
I had inherited. Political repression was fierce
when I was a child. My brothers and I were bea-
ten at school if we were caught speaking Euskera,
the language we spoke at home. We knew we ris-
ked punishment if we spoke Basque in public.
With the coming of democracy, Basque autonomy
and laws covering language, the situation changed
totally within a few years. Today Basque is a
compulsory school subject. What do you think about
this?
English is compulsory too.This is a very com-
plex issue. How far does a state have the right to

lay down the law in education? At present, all
states do so. The education ministry plays a very
important role in all countries, and the area of
freedom in this sphere is very small. That being
said, people who live in the Basque country and
don’t want to know anything about our language
and culture aren’t worthy of respect.
Do you think Euskera is used too much as a political
pawn?
I really don’t think so. I don’t see how half a
million people can cause much mischief for 35
million Spanish-speakers. On the contrary, I
think there’s been a lot of unfairness on the part
of the majority group. National newspapers never
print anything positive about our language. I
think that’s unjust.
The unification of Euskera around an agreed version
of the language continues to provoke controversy.
Do you think standardization was necessary to
enable Euskera to survive?
No language in the world can develop if it is
fundamentally divided. All languages spin off
variants, but at the same time they seek the com-
mon basis without which no language can per-
form its higher functions. You can’t write books
about architecture in pidgin,you have to use stan-
dard English, which is better qualified to express
what you want to say. Among English-speakers,
each community develops its own accent, its own
way of using the language. You can be for or
against this but, as a language teacher I know
used to tell his Chicano students: “You can speak
Spanglish if you like, but if you want to study law,
you’ll have to write in English.” All languages that
develop tend towards simplification. The same
friend told me that language is nowhere more
complex than in a village. In Chicago or New
York, English is a lot simpler than it is in a remo-
te village in Ireland.
You’re completely bilingual. Why do you always
write first in Euskera?
In literary terms, I’m used to thinking in
Euskera. My stories or poems come to me in
Euskera. It’s my personal language, the one I use
to jot down ideas in my notebooks, whether I’m
in Stockholm or Madrid. I’ve become used to
doing that. It’s not much to do with ideology, it’s
just the way I work. Some writers need to go into
a monastery and stay there for a few months
without setting foot outside. My writing ritual
involves writing first in Basque. I’ve come to the
conclusion that it isn’t very important. I might
just as well write in some other language.
But you insist on translating your own work.
Some languages are quite close to each other,
they’re like tracings that match when you put one
on top of another. This is the case with Catalan
and Spanish. I see translation as a physical leap,
and the jump from Catalan to Spanish is like
stepping off the pavement onto the road. With
Basque, the leap is enormous. And leaving it to a
translator is a risky business. My translations are
usually the work of several hands. Close friends of
mine produce a rough draft and I extract a final
version from it. It’s very hard to explain what it’s
like being a bilingual writer. Sitting down to
translate one’s own work is a mind-bending expe-
rience. Every time I do it, the gap between the
two texts seems to widen.
Yet your books are translated into other languages
from Spanish. Isn’t that a bit of a cop-out?
Not at all, because I believe that language is
always part of a person’s way of life, and for me
Spanish is also a first language.There are two first
languages in my life and luckily I can express
myself just as well in both.
Do you consider yourself a nationalist?
I rather like Spain. I’m not in favour of politi-
cal independence. I don’t think Spain’s a bad
society or a bad country.You can be part of it and
have a critical eye. ■
Interview by Lucia Iglesias Kuntz,
UNESCO Courier journalist

I see translation 
as a physical leap.
And the leap from Basque 
to Spanish is enormous
