The teacher asks her pupils to listen
to the tape of a radio news item in
which a gove rnment official say s
i m m i grants are to blame for other people
being out of wo r k .The statement makes a
strong impact. The children, fifth gr a d e
pupils at a school in the Parque Ave l l a n e d a
d i s t rict of Buenos A i r e s , fall silent. T h e n
A m p a r o, a 10-year-old Bolivian gi r l , s p e a k s
u p. “When I was in hospital,” she say s ,
“they didn’t want me to stay.They shouted
at my mother and said: ‘go back to yo u r
c o u n t ry.’They didn’t gi ve my father a job
because he’s Bolivian.”
The news story, and Amparo’s reac-
tion to it, gave the children the idea of
choosing “Immigrants at School” as a
topic for their radio broadcasting work-
shop.
“We chose the subject because most
of the children here are Bolivian,” says the
QUIET PL E ASE! 
CHIL DREN TA L K ING
◗ Silvia Bacher and Monica Beltran
Armed with microphones, tape recorders and cameras, the schoolchildren of Buenos Aires 
are learning to express their opinions and look at the news with a critical eye
school librarian, Fany Opino. “The first
thing we do is collect information. Then
we rehearse the programme before it goes
on the air. But the most important thing
is that the children not only think about a
situation they come up against every day,
but that they feel they’re being listened
to.”
The radio workshop is part of a Media
Production in Schools scheme started up
10 years ago by the Journalism, Commu-
n i c ations and Education Committee of the
city of Buenos Aires.The scheme is known
as the child journalist project but its aim is
not so much to train young reporters as to
increase the children’s capacity to express
their opinions and to use the media to help
them to think for themselves.
For the “Immigrants at School” work-
shop, the children were asked to go out
and interview immigrants, in some cases
their own relatives. They wrote up their
reports, read them out in class and dis-
cussed them.Then they collected material
about racial discrimination from books
and magazines. Finally, they worked out a
structure, chose some music and put their
radio programme together.
In the child journalist scheme, the
process whereby children investigate, dis-
cuss, defend their opinions and listen to
others, is more important than the end
product, whether it be a newspaper, a
video or a radio programme. In other
words, the school is given the key task of
training citizens who can think critically
about the world they live in. “The work-
shop on immigrants helped me to unders-
tand why people sometimes shout at me
in the street,” says Maria Esperanza, ano-
ther Bolivian pupil.
According to the teacher, making the
radio programme enabled the children to
know what it feels like to be rejected
because of skin colour or place of origin.
It also taught them to look at radio and
television news with a critical eye and,
through their own communication media,
◗ Respectively communication and education specialist
and Buenos Aires-based journalist
“Keep the presses rolling!” Media workshops in Buenos Aires schools have mobilized tremendous enthusiasm.

to protest against the plight of those who
feel victimized.
Producing radio programmes and
magazines is a well-established activity in
many countries’ education systems. The
Argentine programme has some unique
features, however, because of the political
and social context in which it developed
in the late 1980s. The long years of mili-
tary dictatorship and censorship had ins-
tilled a culture of silence into Argentine
society. Within communities, the lines of
communication were broken or frayed.
The media production project seemed to
be a good option for strengthening demo-
cratic practices via the school and for
repairing the social fabric by building
bridges between the school and the com-
munity and teaching children to interpret
c ritically messages transmitted by the
media.
Breaking the culture 
of silence
This objective may well be the key fac-
tor in the success of a programme which
has managed to survive both lack of fun-
ding and political vicissitudes. In 10
years, the number of schools involved has
grown from 34 to more than 200, most of
them in poor neighbourhoods of Buenos
Aires. About 50,000 children, mostly of
primary school age but also some older
children and some in special schools, have
worked as reporters, editors, announcers,
picture or film editors, researching, plan-
ning and producing more than 600 school
m a g a z i n e s , 700 hours of radio pro-
grammes broadcast by local radio stations
and about 100 videos.
The fact that the topics covered by the
to see some ballet and, helped by craft
and science teachers , made the 
puppets and wrote the script,” says the
school’s music teacher, Lucia Salgado.
One of the biggest and most pers i s-
tent obstacles to changing the old educa-
tion model is the lack of properly trained
t e a c h e rs , and so theoretical and practical
teacher training has been made a key ele-
ment in the child journalist scheme.
Once a week over two months, groups of
interested teachers get together to produ-
ce and discuss media mat e rial with the
help of a colleague who has classroom
e x p e rience of the scheme. With UN E S C O
s u p p o rt , the programme has since 1994
built up a network of 350 teachers with
special skills.
New horizons for teachers
Participants say the media workshops
help them to recover their appetite for
enquiry and learning in a school context
which is by and large unexciting. For the
children, they mean greater freedom and
more contact with real life. “The work-
shops allow us to interview people and go
out into town, while in the classroom we
read and study to pass exams,” says one
young reporter. They open new horizons
for teachers like Monica, who described
how she learned to have more respect for
the children’s experience and realized that
she had no monopoly on wisdom. “The
workshop enables us to break free from
stereotypes and find out things for our-
selves,” she says.
Teachers taking part in the experi-
ment agree that producing radio pro-
grammes and newspapers is a good way
of fostering children’s verbal and writing
skills since it doesn’t involve reciting a les-
son from memory but getting across per-
sonal ideas and opinions clearly and effec-
tively so that readers and listeners outside
the classroom can grasp them.The school
newspapers the children produce, either
in the form of a single sheet or a magazi-
ne, are distributed in the school and the
neighbourhood.The videos they make are
workshops are suggested by the children
themselves and reflect their interests and
needs is in itself a small revolution.Titles
such as “From junior to senior”,
“Generation 2000” and “From caning to
caring” give an idea of the subjects that
most interested these budding journalists:
relations with adults, human rights, vio-
lence, ecology and discrimination.
Some topics are directly related to the
school curriculum (the role of women in
history, mathematics, climate change and
health care); others focus on community
problems and lead to specific action.
Children who took part in one journa-
lism workshop, for example, were worried
about the disappearance of trees near
their school, so they carried out a “tree
c e n s u s ” in the neighbourhood. T h e y
interviewed the oldest residents, talked
with experts and officials, and expressed
their concern in a video made for the
community. Then they launched a cam-
paign to replant the area with trees.
Other children made a video about
the rights of children “so that adults know
more about us and don’t mistreat us.”
This led them to take an interest in the
lives of street children, some of whom
they interviewed to find out how they
managed to survive.
Workshop activities can also be purely
creative and artistic. The presence of a
Ukrainian child among sixth-graders at a
school in the Caballito district gave the
children the idea of collecting informa-
tion about Slavonic history and culture.
Next, they decided to create a puppet
s h ow based on Strav i n s k y ’s ballet
Petrushka and to video it. “They resear-
ched the composer’s life and work, went
Budding journalists choose photos for their school newspaper and learn about page layout.

usually shown at school festivals and
other special events that parents and
neighbours can attend. Since 1994, radio
programmes have been broadcast weekly
on FM community stations as part of a
series called “Kaleidoscope: Children’s
Voices.”
Learning to decode 
media messages
The purpose of the Buenos A i r e s
scheme is not to set schools against the
media but to channel the natural enthu-
siasm of children and teenagers. Latin
American children spend an average of
four hours a day watching TV or listening
to music on the radio. A r g e n t i n a ’s
Educational Television Foundation disco-
vered that out of 10.5 million households,
9.5 million have a television set and more
than half of them are signed up with some
kind of pay-TV, making Argentina num-
ber three in the world in terms of cable
TV subscribers.
By the time children get to the age of
16, they’re spending about 46,000 hours
a year sleeping, 22,000 watching TV and
13,000 at school. “Television became the
main cultural activity of the 20th centu-
ry,” says Sara Critto, the head of the
Fo u n d at i o n . “But schools don’t take
account of this and children aren’t pro-
perly prepared for it.”
The most influential media in Latin
American countries—radio, TV and the
written press—are often controlled by
small but powerful groups which usually
obey economic interests and pay little
regard to the citizen’s right to informa-
t i o n . W h at ’s more, the social context
leaves little time for the clash of ideas and
p r ovides meagre access to sources of
information outside television and radio.
This sometimes produces audiences
addicted to certain editorial approaches
which sacrifice accuracy to newsiness.
But using the latest computer or a fil m
camera doesn’t necessarily sharpen the cri-
tical fa c u l t i e s.Technology cannot replace the
t e a c h e r , whose role should be to help chil-
dren analyse the news. By producing infor-
m at i ve mat e ri a l , children learn how to accept
the existence of conflicting viewpoints, d i s-
tinguish opinion from facts and objectivity
from sensat i o n a l i s m , and find out how to
attract a reader’s or listener’s at t e n t i o n .
All these experiences help children
u n d e rstand the nuts and bolts of
c o m m u n i c ation from the inside. T h e y
soon realize that a news story is not the
same thing as “the fa c t s ” but a
c o m p i l ation that is rarely 100 per cent
o b j e c t i ve because it depends on who is
doing the report i n g . The A m e ri c a n
e s s ayist Alvin Toffler has said that to
p r e vent children becoming passive
r e c e i ve rs and to teach them how to
decode media messages, “the best thing is
to gi ve them video cameras and send
them out to film something by themselve s.
They will soon learn to interpret the
media in a critical way. They’ll also fin d
out how easily images and ideas can be
m a n i p u l at e d , h ow to spot hidden
a d ve rtising in entertainment progr a m m e s ,
and see how politicians use demagogi c
pictures and opportunistic poses.”
Media programme production will not
become widespread in Latin A m e ri c a n
schools until political leaders are conv i n c e d
of the need for them and the reluctance of
the schools is ove r c o m e .The impact of the
media is so gr e at that schools cannot stand
by and do nothing.Whether teachers like it
or not, the media are in competition with
schools as agents of socializat i o n .
Teachers should realize that although
they have little money to buy new equip-
ment and although there are many obs-
tacles to tackling extracurricular subjects,
the media and new technology can be
their allies and schools are the most sui-
table place to teach children how to mas-
ter media skills, interpret media messages
and equip children to question them. ■
When they are given a video camera and sent out on an assignment, young people can find out for
themselves how journalism works.
