1 ❘ Making it happen
Je r u s a l e m’s cub re p o r t e rs
◗ Claudine Meyer
I s ra e l ’s pro l i f e rating community TV stations are becoming 
a power in the land. The enthusiasm of their staff helps to compensate 
for lack of funding
The Hebrew expression Lev Haïr means the
“heart of the city”. It is also the name of a
community centre housed in one of the
white stone buildings that are common in the old
neighbourhoods of west Jerusalem, where they
were built at the end of the 19th century to
decongest the ancient city trapped within the
walls.
The doors of Lev Haïr, one of 180 social wel-
fare and leisure centres dotted all over Israel, are
open to everyone and everything, including the
smells that waft in from the nearby Machane
Yehuda Market—the scent of coriander, fresh
mint, guava fruit and the plaited loaves of bread
that Jews break at the start of the Sabbath.
The garbage trucks going up Agrippas Street
rattle the windows.Yoram has closed the blinds of
his photography shop, and his two inseparable
young assistants,Yoni and Yossi, hurry off to shut
themselves away for a couple of hours in a room
at the centre. Here, every Sunday evening, the 15
or so volunteer staff of the local community TV
station, set up three years ago, meet with their
teacher, Gilad, a 34-year-old ex-yoga instructor
who is studying for his Ph.D in Hebrew poetry.
The younger members of the team, like 15-
year-old Roï, are all keen to learn about the tech-
nical side of television—how to hold a camera,
record sound and do lighting.The older ones are
more concerned about what’s going into the next
programme. Because of lack of resources the pro-
grammes only last half an hour.They go out three
times a week on cable Channel 9.
Israel has had cable TV since 1988. Despite
one of the most expensive monthly subscriptions
in the world (around $35), 70 per cent (920,000)
of households have signed up for it and have
access to more than 40 channels, i n c l u d i n g
Channel 9, which only carries community TV.
The variety of topics tackled by the Lev Haïr
team gives some idea of its inclusive nature. Age
differences are blithely ignored by the staff, which
includes Yossi and his mother Shoshana,Anat and
his brother Alon, and Sylvia and Wolf, who have
three little blonde children. Such blood ties bet-
ween staff members sometimes lead to family
wrangles, but a strong sense of camaraderie soon
d e veloped between lay and religious people,
locals and outsiders, emigrants from east and
west, and Jews and Arabs. The team is a kind of
microcosm of Israeli society. Its common deno-
minator is a desire for self-expression.
No taboos
Everyone has had a chance to take a year-long
basic training course for 400 shekels instead of
the usual 2,000 ($470). Over 26 sessions, they
learn how to film and do montage and pick up◗ Jerusalem-based journalist
Bristling rooftop antennae in the old city of Jerusalem.

English jargon such as “shooting . . . pan . . . tilt
up. . . tilt down”. They also discuss supposedly
taboo subjects including the three Ps—politics,
pornography and publicity. Some of the students
have been keen enough to go on Sundays to the
Zippori training centre, tucked away in the heart
of Jerusalem’s vast pine forest, and brush up their
skills.
Teams like this are appearing all over Israel.
There are now 150 community television stations
set up either by neighbourhood groups or by cul-
tural communities such as Iranian Jews who
speak Pe rs i a n , n e w c o m e rs to Israel from
Ethiopia, or Russians who have arrived in large
numbers since the fall of the Soviet empire. For
all of them, community TV is a forum where
people can say what they feel about all kinds of
things, from their taste in music to their distaste
for bureaucracy.
This flowering, greatly helped by the steadily
falling price of equipment, is what local people
want. Community TV fills in the gaps left by the
national channels. “These channels don’t fully
take into account the diversity of the country’s
population, which contains microcosms and cul-
tural minorities with strong sub-cultures,” says
Yehiel Limor, professor of communication scien-
ce at Tel Aviv’s New School for Media Studies.
The role of local television is particularly impor-
tant because “the local press only stops being
parochial when it brings out weekend editions,”
Limor says, referring to leisure magazines whose
content is usually superficial.
Local gripes
Local television tries to “get things moving”,
and on many occasions has been successful. In a
three-minute interview with the head of Bezek,
the national telecommunications company, a
team from the Gonenim centre managed to speed
up repairs to public phone boxes smashed by
vandals, after users had campaigned in vain for
months. People living in the new out-of-town
neighbourhood of Ramot got a bus service after a
televised interview with the head of the Egged bus
company.
These tussles with local authorities have beco-
me common. A team of reporters questioned the
mayor of the mixed Jewish-Arab town of Ramle
about garbage collection. At first he was hostile,
but after a critical TV programme he improved
the service. In exchange, the reporters abstained
from making a follow-up film,so the mayor could
save face and criticism from the townspeople did
not spread.
Today, the Lev Haïr community TV team has
decided to tackle the sensitive issue of how the
local market and night-time garbage collection
disturb the lives of those living nearby. Shlomi,
who is something of a philosopher, is sitting on a
pile of broken crates and discarded fruit. He
laughs and says he’ll read extracts from what
great thinkers have said about this kind of subject.
Michal says the real issue is that many of the wor-
kers are young Arab boys who stack the stalls with
produce, throw away empty boxes and swill down
the paving-stones when squashed tomatoes and
mangoes have made them slippery. A martial arts
enthusiast, he willingly talks about this serious
topic instead of his favourite subject, tokaido.
M i c h a , a choreogr a p h e r , calls for a progr a m m e
about the gr owth of the underground culture.
Sylvie suggests a vox pop fashion programme to
find out what people think of the famous “ b o b ” ,
the little cloth hat wo rn by Zionist ve t e r a n s. A n
amusing and surrealist vox pop programme wo n
the humour prize at Israel’s last annual communi-
ty TV contest and got its authors a weekend holi-
d ay at Shefaim kibbu t z .The question addressed in
the programme wa s : “Do you prefer white or ye l-
l ow stripes on pedestrian crossings?”
Short of shekels
The last item on the agenda is money and a
report on a demonstration held in Tel Aviv in
mid-November to persuade the communications
ministry not to cut the team’s 20,000-shekel
(around $4,700) annual operating budget, a sum
which would just about buy a camera. Additional
funding amounting to 10,000 shekels ($2,350)
comes from various money-raising activities held
during the year.The proceeds go to each of the 80
member stations of an association led by a tireless
enthusiast and campaigner for communication
rights, Zeevic Zaavi.
Zaavi, who is in his 50s, keeps a stock of com-
munity TV productions in his video library and
compiles from them a 30-minute weekly magazi-
ne for young people called Alternatives, which
Channel 9 has been broadcasting for nearly a
Community media increasingly reflect the diversity of Israel’s population and cultural
minorities. Above, market scene in Jerusalem.
News doesn’t happen,
i t ’s created. If there were
no journalists, t h e r e
wouldn’t be any news.
There would simply be
f a c t s.
Carlos Luis A l v a re z ,
Spanish journalist (1932-)


year. The ultimate aim is to broadcast for five
hours each afternoon.
Meagre though they are, subsidies are vitally
important for the Lev Haïr centre, and Gilad,
who has nearly finished training a second team,
has a shopping list of equipment he needs.Top of
the list is a third camera, this time a digital one,
and a cutting room so as to avoid having to spend
nearly 1,500 shekels ($350) a month on paying
staff at the Philippe Léon community centre,
where two team members, Yehuda and Walid, are
currently working. One is an immigrant from
France and the other was born in Ras-el-Amud,
east of Jerusalem.
The dream of course is to have a real studio,
like the lucky people in the Baka neighbourhood
who can do studio interviews and broadcast live
debates at election time.
Community TV can also try to find private
sponsors, but Gilad has no business staff who
could spend time looking for would-be investors.
He relies heavily on municipal authorities who,
Zaavi thinks, are “gradually coming to unders-
tand the importance of neighbourhood TV in hel-
ping them to find out what citizens want and
satisfy local needs. Instead of carrying 95 per cent
bad news,” he says, “these stations improve the
image of towns which often have problems. By
doing this, they can help to attract investors and
skilled workers.” ■
