The long march of women towards an equal
share of political,social and religious power is
far from over,whatever the country or system
of government.
France has just passed a parity law to break dow n
the resistance that has stymied the advancement of
women in politics for the past half-century. F r o m
n ow on, political parties must run an equal number
of women and men candidates in local elections and,
more broadly, in elections based on the proport i o n a l
s y s t e m , although the law is flawed with regard to
l e gi s l at i ve contests. In any eve n t , of course resort i n g
to legi s l ation is an admission of those part i e s ’r e s o u n-
ding failure to meet wo m e n ’s expectat i o n s , e ve n
though they are shared by the public at large. In the
belief that a seat for a woman means one less seat for
a man, F r a n c e ’s highly conservat i ve political leader-
ship does all it can to stop progress in its tracks.
I call these fa i n t - h e a rted advances a “ p i e c e-
meal”policy. Things look different and machismo
is less fierce, but at the end of the day there are still
not enough women to make their voices heard. We
know from the Scandinavian experience that they
need to hold at least a third of the seats in parlia-
ment to form a critical mass.
Women look at politics in their own way. M u c h
less attracted to the exhilarating feeling that power
can bring, they view it mainly as a way to change
t h i n g s. As mayor of a town with 25,000 inhabi-
t a n t s , I tend to consider parks more important than
parking lots. Housing lay-out can set off lively dis-
cussions about how to design kitchens, which for
me are friendly places that should open up onto
living rooms. I have noticed that male politicians
tend to talk much while we women are much better
at organizing our time.
I am tempted to say that women and men have
different attitudes about how to organize space and
time. Our participation leads to the emergence of a
certain, unknown reality which escapes the focus of
political action because it remains hidden in a corn e r.
It is there, but it cannot be seen. For example, is it
n o rmal for a wo m a n ’s career to be penalised by a
function—motherhood—that only she can fulfill?
The landscape of women’s rights is one of stark
contrasts. In Western countries, the march towards
equality has achieved uneven results. In others, it is
fraught with alarming setbacks,the cruelest example
being Afghanistan,where women are deprived of the
most basic ri g h t s. The women of Kosovo whom I
met recently still lack access to health programmes at
a time when mother and child mortality rates there
have reached alarmingly high levels.
Major United Nations conferences from Mexico
City to Beijing have helped women emerge from the
shadows.They need laws to defend their rights,and
institutions to gi ve those laws teeth. L aws may be
n e c e s s a ry sometimes, but they are not enough. T h e y
must be accompanied by a social movement led by
women.Nothing can ever be taken for granted when
wo m e n ’s rights are concern e d , and eve ry victory femi-
nists win is a fragile one because feminism,though it
fits the textbook definition of a movement for social
change,is not yet recognised as a political fact.
Everything depends on women’s will when their
rights are won: the right to education, work, control
their bodies, m ove about freely, own propert y, and so
o n .And the women who have come the furthest must
not forget to stretch their hands out to those who have
been left by the way s i d e . In A l g e ri a , women have suc-
ceeded in pushing back all forms of fundamentalism.
Women can indeed breathe new life into politics
and make it more accessible,more human and non-
violent as soon as they realise the power that comes
from working together. ■◗ Former French minister of women’s affairs, mayor 
of Lisieux, a deputy in the French parliament and chair 
of the Council of Europe’s committee on equal opportunity for men
and women



Closing ra n k s
Every victory feminists win is a fragile one, says former cabinet 
minister Yvette Roudy.◗ To defend their rights, women have to be 
at the helm of a strong social movement
Women can indeed 
b reathe new life into politics 
and make it more accessible,
m o re human and non-violent 
as soon as they realise 
the power that comes fro m
working together.
