Since the early 1990s, pluralism and
independence have become new
watchwords for media in developing
countries. Regimes that had been authori-
tarian, in some cases since independence,
have genuinely committed themselves to
freedom of the press. Constitutions and
l aws have been amended, codes of
conduct drawn up and press councils
established.
But these developments have not
taken place everywhere, and their results
h ave not always been conclusive .
However, a number of countries have
managed in the last few years to create a
free press in extremely difficult circum-
stances and set up a model self-regulato-
ry structure. One of them is South Africa
(see box opposite page).
The symbolic date of change wa s
November 9 1989, when the Berlin Wall
came dow n . In central and eastern
Europe, the explosion of press freedom
was such that in some countries journa-
lists had to pick up the job as they went
along because there were not enough pro-
fessionals to teach them.
An explosion
of press freedom
But the shock wave rolled beyond the
borders of the former Warsaw Pact coun-
tries. Developing countries in Africa and
Asia under one-party rule underwent a
similar transform at i o n , t ri g g e ring the
same kind of media explosion, albeit in a
range of different situations.
The context in Africa is one of civil
wa rs , i n t e rn ational conflicts and eve n
genocide, for which some media, such as
the notorious “hate radios”, bear direct
and crushing responsibility. In Rwanda
and Burundi, virtually all the media are
under government control. Fighting is



MEDIA SEL F -CON T ROL ,
T HE SOUTH’S NEW OP T ION
◗ Jean Huteau 
As part of a growing trend in the developing world, press councils are encouraging 
responsible journalism and press freedom
◗ Former editor-in-chief of the French news agency
Agence France-Presse and co-author, with Henri Pigeat,
of a book on media ethics to be published by UNESCO
later this year.
still going on in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where 84 journalists have
been imprisoned, media outlets have been
taken over or shut down,newspapers bur-
ned and their offices looted.
Africa, Asia and Latin America have
also seen countless unwa rranted libel
actions, censorship, harassment, arrests
and killings of journalists. Over the last 10
years, 58 journalists have been murdered
in Algeria and 44 in Colombia. Ethiopia
has jailed more journalists than almost
any other country in the world.
But this tragic decade also saw encou-
r a ging changes. UN E S C O helped to point
the way forward in 1988 when it produced
a new communications strategy based on
independence and pluralism.The collapse
of the Soviet bloc depri ved deve l o p i n g
c o u n t ries of a point of reference and bac-
k i n g . Since independence, m a ny of these
c o u n t ries had adopted the model of the
o n e - p a rty stat e , which was seen as the only
way to generate the energy needed to tack-
le economic backwa r d n e s s.
The 1990 summit of French-speaking
states at La Baule, in France, called on
the countries of francophone Africa to
introduce more democracy. The English-
speaking states of the Commonwealth,
meeting in Harare (Zimbabwe), the follo-
wing year, followed suit and resolved to
expel countries which did not comply.
This was what happened to Nigeri a ,
Africa’s biggest country, then under mili-
tary rule.
In May 1991, the W i n d h o e k
Declaration, drawn up after a UN E S C O
seminar and later approved by UN E S C O’s
Executive Board, said that an “indepen-
dent, pluralistic and free press” was vital
for “democracy and economic develop-
ment”. The death knell had sounded for
the notion of the media controlled by a
one-party state to promote national deve-
lopment. Similar declarations were made

w i l l , ove r - z e a l o u s n e s s , ignorance and
political and religious pressure.” T h e
press mixed politics with intrusion into
private life, sometimes descending into
the gutter.This led to a vicious circle whe-
reby the authorities used media excesses
as a pretext to strike at the newly-free
media by arresting and jailing journalists.
Many private individuals sued the press.
Côte d’Ivo i r e ’s gove rnment and jour-
n a l i s t s ’ trade unions decided to interve-
ne in September 1995 by drawing up a
code of conduct and establishing a press
council modelled on those in Germ a ny
and Quebec; one half of the members
are publishers , the other half journ a l i s t s.
This gave birth to the Press Freedom
and Professional Ethics Monitor
( O L P E D ) . On World Press Freedom
D ay in 1999, the World A s s o c i ation of
N e w s p a p e rs and the French-based non-
g ove rnmental organization Report e rs
Sans Frontières noted that there we r e
“genuinely independent” press organs in
Côte d’Ivoire and that journalists could
work safely.
Adopting a code of conduct and set-
ting up an independent press council to
monitor its application and hear com-
plaints from the public are the first two
self-regulatory measures taken in develo-
ping countries to head off government
intervention and regulation which would
bring unforeseeable restrictions. In the
d e veloping wo r l d , mechanisms of this
kind also educate the public and promote
press freedom.
A trend is now underway. Press coun-
cils were set up in South Korea, India,
N e p a l , B a n g l a d e s h , S ri Lanka and
Indonesia in the years after 1960. In the
1990s, a dozen more appeared—in the
Philippines and Mozambique in 1991,
Ghana (1992), Nigeria (1992 ; revived in
1999), Fiji (1993), Côte d’Ivoire (1994),
Senegal (1996), and Pe ru , T h a i l a n d ,
South Africa and Tanzania (1997).
Indian communications expert K.S.
Venkateswaran thinks that “an effective
press council can ensure that the reader is
not short-changed by unscrupulous or
shoddy journalistic practices. The council
can give him a platform from which to
T HE SOUTH AFRICAN EXA MPL E
in respect of every continent by confe-
rences in Alma Ata (Kazakhstan),
Santiago (Chile), Sana’a (Yemen) and
Sofia (Bulgaria).
Laws and constitutions were amended
in Benin and Mozambique in 1990,
Burkina Faso (1991), M a d a g a s c a r ,
Ghana and Kenya (1992), N i g e ri a
( 1 9 9 3 ) , Cameroon and post-apart h e i d
South A f rica (1996) and T h a i l a n d
(1997). In Cameroon, public pressure
forced the government to enact press
freedom measures in 1991 as a prelude to
free elections and the abolition of censor -
ship the following year.
Watchdogs against
bias and inaccuracy
In countries that are sometimes having
their first taste of freedom, excesses and
errors seem almost inevitable, including
press violations of pri va cy, libel and
c a l u m ny, outrageous behaviour and
unwarranted intrusion. Some new jour-
nalists lack experience and training. The
issue of responsibility, which no free
media outlet can dodge, soon arises.
Côte d’Ivoire, which had been marked
since independence in 1960 by censor-
ship and self-censors h i p, is a good
example.The explosion of freedom spaw-
ned about 80 political parties and a hun-
dred or so newspapers and other publica-
tions. Two years later, only a dozen of the
40 daily papers were still appearing and
the government-controlled press had the
upper hand. But the media had become a
forum for debate.
After the media explosion, the press
was criticized for “lack of training and
professional responsibility, t ri v i a l i t y, i l l

1. Panos Institute, Médias et déontologie en Afrique
de l’Ouest, L’Harmattan, Paris, 1996, p.45.
*I’ve come 
to make
my media culpa *

ventilate his grievances against biased,
inaccurate or inadequate reporting on
matters of legitimate public interest.”
He points out that a council can act
more quickly and more cheaply than the
c o u rts in cases where “for example, t h e
g ove rnment or a public sector undert a k i n g
is alleged to discri m i n ate unfairly against
c e rtain newspapers in, s ay, the allocation of
a d ve rtising or newsprint (as often happens
in many developing countri e s ) .”
When Algeria set up an information
council in 1990—an institution that could
be criticized on the grounds that half the
members were government representa-
tives and the other half journalists—it was
an unprecedented step towards freedom
of expression in the Arab world.When the
country got caught up in a spiral of
repression in 1994, the council was dis-
s o l ve d . N i g e ri a ’s press council was a
casualty of dictatorship but was revived
after free elections in 1999.
When Morocco began political
reform, a journalistic code of conduct was
adopted and there were calls for a press
council. But the most liberal example of
self-regulation is South Africa, which set
up a system in 1997 (see box) clearly
based on the Swedish model, the oldest
and one of the most respected in Europe.
In Asia, a seminar organized in 1996
by the Asian Media Inform ation and
C o m m u n i c ation Centre (AMIC) in
Singapore and Bangkok’s Chulalongkorn
University revealed that in most Asian
countries press councils were not protec-
ting the local media against attacks on
press freedom or offering ordinary citi-
zens the means to counter abuses by the
media. Since then, however, AMIC has
offered many courses and written mate-
rial about laws and self-regulation mecha-
nisms. A press council has been set up in
Thailand and Indonesia’s press law was
recently amended. A big effort is also
being made in this area by the Asia Press
Fo u n d at i o n , which includes 15 or so
media institutes in the region.
The need for codes of conduct is
bound to increase with the world media
boom. However wide the North-South
gap may be, nothing suggests that the
growth of the media in developing coun-
tries—though too slow and inadequate—
is going to stop. Despite often tragic obs-
t a c l e s , wa rs and economic inequality,
media expansion will continue, even in
developing countries. In two big demo-
cracies, Brazil and India, the circulation
of the daily press grew by 24 per cent and
47 per cent respectively between 1993
and 1997. Such advances involve setting
up or strengthening regulatory and self-
regulatory mechanisms.
A framework
for independence
As soon as a national press achieves a
s i g n i ficant level of organization and
influence, the issue of its responsibility
inevitably arises. Experience has shown
that a press like South Africa’s, despite
the country’s colonial past and history of
d i s c ri m i n at i o n , has inherited cert a i n
structures which were helpful when it
came to devise a self-regulatory mecha-
nism. It was the same in India where,
taking a cue from the British press, the
media played an important part in the
achievement of national independence.
Pakistan, which turned away from such
structures, has had a lot more difficulty
establishing an independent press.
In developing countries where struc-
tures of this kind exist, journalism has a
promising future. A framework for inde-
pendence and pluralism has now been
defined. While it would be a mistake to
ignore the fact that great obstacles lie
ahead, the encouraging progress made so
far must be welcomed. ■

2 .Ve n k at e swa r a n , K . S .( d i r ) . Media Monitors in A s i a,
Asian Media Inform ation and Communicat i o n
Centre (A M I C) ,S i n g a p o r e ,1 9 9 6 . p. 2 .
