“My wife and her mother died
without ever seeing our family home
again,” says Ivan Kamber,a retiree in
his 70s who lived until December 1991 in
a magnificent 17th-century baroque
house in the centre of Dubrovnik. “My
brother-in-law, the painter Ivo Grbic, is
still living in a hotel. All his canvases went
up in smoke, along with his ethnographic
collection and photo archive. I try to get
by in this 30-square-metre studio that the
city provided us with in June 1992.I hope
that I shall soon be able to return home.”
A scorched façade and soot-covered
walls are all that remains of the splendour
of Kamber’s old home, which was hit by
fire-bombs on December 6, 1991.
Eight other buildings in Dubrovnik’s
historic centre were just as badly dama-
ged.Their ruins bear eloquent witness to
the recent history of this unique jewel of
the world’s cultural and historic heritage,
which was described in 1929 by the
English playwright George Bernard Shaw
as “paradise on earth”.
A rain
of shells
The medieval commune of Dubrovnik
was founded in Late Antiquity (earlier
than the 7th century AD), and grew first
under Byzantine and then Venitian rule.It
became an independent republic in 1358.
A maritime and trading power that rival-
led the Venetian Republic, it reached its
apogee in the 15th and 16th centuries. It
even managed to keep its political inde-
pendence under Ottoman ru l e , w h i c h
began in 1526. But it was sacked in 1806
during the Franco-Russian war, and lost
its status as a city-state two years later. It
came under French rule and was ceded to
Austria in 1815. A century later, it beca-
me part of Yugoslavia.
D u b r ov n i k ’s urban fa b ric dates from
the 13th century, when its imposing fort i-
fic ations began to be bu i l t . These 1,940-
metre-long walls and ramparts still stand
i n t a c t . The austere elegance of the histori c
centre is a perfect blend of Gothic,
Renaissance and Baroque architecture,
making Dubrovnik the incarn ation of what
the Swiss art historian Jacob Burckhardt
called “the state as a work of art ” .
The city’s style and identity have sur-
vived despite being hit by many earth-
quakes over the centuries, including one
in 1667 which killed half the inhabitants.
More recently, two severe quakes dama-
ged about 1,000 buildings in 1979, the
year the city was put on UNESCO’s World
Heritage List (see box).
The repair work was not complete
when Dubrovnik was attacked in the
autumn of 1991 by the Serbian-
Montenegrin army. The Yugoslav conflict
dealt a terrible blow to the cultural heri-
tage of a city which, apart from the siege
of 1806, had never before come under
fire.Within a year, about 2,000 shells rai-
ned down on the walled city, damaging
563 of its 824 buildings and two-thirds of
its famous “fifth façade”—the roofs which
provide a large part of the city’s beauty
and harmony. Public and religious buil-
d i n g s , h o m e s , cobbled streets, s c u l p-
tures—all Dubrovnik’s ancient heritage
was threatened with destruction. At the
beginning of the bombardment, the city
was placed on the List of World Heritage
in Danger.
Bandaging
the wounds
Reconstruction soon got under way,
but it was not easy to reconcile the urgent
needs of the people of a wounded city
with the imperatives of restoring a World
Heritage site. The first priority was to
provide the inhabitants with a minimum
degree of comfort, e.g. tarred felt was laid
on broken roofs to keep the rain out. But
provisional measures of this kind were
soon replaced by long-term restoration
project. In February 1993, UNESCO laun-
ched an action plan to save Dubrovnik,
and specialists got down to work.
To rebuild the roofs, the original raf-
ters had to be strengthened—some of
them dated from the 16th century. Some
490,000 tiles had to be replaced.The ori-
ginal tiles, known as kupa in Croat, had
been made in the village of Kupari, about
15 km from the city, and dated from the
time of the Dubrovnik republic. But the
workshops had closed at the beginning of
the 19th century, and specialists now
faced the delicate task of finding a kind of
tile which could as far as possible be
made using the original techniques and
materials. After painstaking research they
found a solution, and a Croatian and a
French firm were commissioned to
manufacture the replacement tiles.
Restoration that rigorously respects
the principle of authenticity is no easy◗ Dubrovnik-based art historian and journalist



DUBRO V NIK
REBORN
◗ Maja Nodari
Seriously damaged by the conflict in former Yugoslavia, the great medieval city on the shores 
of the Adriatic has been restored in record time
The historic centre of Dubrovnik was badly damaged
by fire bombs in December 1991.

task when so many old crafts have died
out. After a war, when resources are scar-
ce, it is even harder. Tourism, which was
Dubrovnik’s livelihood, was wiped out by
the war. Revenue from two million over-
night hotel stays per year had been the
main source of funding for heri t a g e
conservation. But in 1998, the municipal
authorities recorded barely 650,000 over-
night stays.
A 7-year
repair job
But determ i n ation tri u m p h e d , a n d
C r o atian and intern ational teams of
architects, sculptors, restorers and other
experts managed to complete the bulk of
the work within 7 years. In December
1998, Dubrovnik was taken off the list of
World Heritage in Danger.
Much of the funding came from the
Croatian government and the Dubrovnik
R e c o n s t ruction Offic e . But the wo r k
could not have been done without aid
from private Croatian and other sources,
notably The Intern ational Trust for
Croatian Monuments (United Kingdom)
and the Rotary Club of Klagenfurt
( A u s t ri a ) . UN E S C O took immediat e
action. It drew up a list of the damage,
earmarking $300,000 for the most urgent
work and launching an intern at i o n a l
fund-raising campaign.Alone, Dubrovnik
could not have tackled a repair job with
an estimated price tag of more than
$18,500,000 for the city within the walls
and $30 million for the urban area as a
whole.
A rtists also pitched in to help. T h e
famous Croatian pianist Ivo Pogorelic gave
t wo charity concert s , one in London and
one in Brussels,whose proceeds made the
first financial contri bution to the costs, e s t i-
m ated at $500,000, of rebuilding the head-
q u a rt e rs of Dubrov n i k ’s summer festiva l , a
p r e s t i gious cultural event that since its
inception in 1950 had attracted theat r e
companies,musicians and folk performers
from all over the world.The headquarters
building is one of Dubrovnik’s most beau-
Dubrovnik’s church of St Ignatius and Jesuit college during restoration work.
tiful palaces, built just after the 1667 ear-
t h q u a k e .On December 6, 1 9 9 1 , fire bombs
completely destroyed the second storey, t h e
rich interior decorat i o n , and archives recor-
ding over 40 years of activity.
Stone from 
ancient quarries
Stonemason Vinko Fa b ris dipped into
his own stock of stone for the most deli-
c ate repairs on the church of St Blaise,
the city’s patron saint, whose nart h e x ,
p i l l a rs and balustrades had been seri o u s-
ly damaged.The ori ginal stonework came
from the nearby island of V rn i k , w h o s e
n ow-abandoned quarries had been
exploited since A n t i q u i t y. To d ay Fa b ri s
uses time-honoured methods to extract
small quantities of limestone from these
q u a rri e s. He is the living embodiment of
a longstanding tradition of the island of
K o r c u l a , where he was born and from
where the bu i l d e rs of Dubrovnik took
most of their stone.
For six weeks, he and a Dubrovnik
sculptor, Ivo Jasic, worked together to
reconstitute the church’s balustrade.
“Although we were restori n g, n o t
creating,” says Jasic, “it was an honour for
me to be involved in the collective work of
art that is Dubrovnik, where the great
local and international masters have left
Dubrovnik
Zagreb
Italy
Croatia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Hungary
Slovenia
Adriatic Sea

their mark.”
The church’s baroque festoon, to the
right of the main entrance, was restored
by French craftsmen Frédéric Mohus, a
s t o n e - c a rve r , and Jean Garder, a sculp-
t o r , who fa m i l i a rized themselves with
the z u b at k a, an ancient Croatian serr a-
ted tool, to obtain results as close as
possible to the work of the old master
c r a f t s m e n .
The damage to the church was a big
b l ow to the inhabitants of Dubrov n i k ,
who have revered St Blaise since 972
w h e n , according to legend, this mart y r
from Sebastia, in Asia Minor, s aved the
city from attack by the Ve n e t i a n s. On the
pretext of wanting to stock up on wat e r
and food on their way to the East, t h e
Venetians landed in Dubrovnik and took
a d vantage of their hosts’ kindness to note
the layout of the fort i fic ations and towe rs
in order to prepare a plan of at t a c k .
St Blaise then appeared in a dream to
a priest, Stojko, as an old man with a
white beard and revealed the Venetians’
intentions. In this way he saved the city
and became its patron saint and the sym-
bol of its freedom, neutrality and well-
being. For centuries, his effigy appeared
on coinage, official seals and state flags.
Statues of him guard the gates of the city.
He is still revered today and on February
3 each year, a solemn procession takes
place in his honour.
In recent years, the parade has passed
through streets cluttered with scaffolding,
but the Dubrovchani have not abandoned
hope.They know that in a few years’ time
their city will have regained its former
peaceful rhythms, its crowds of admiring
visitors from all over the world, and its
charm, immortalized nearly 400 years ago
by the Croatian poet Ivan Gundulic who
wrote that “all the gold in the world, all
the silver and all the blood cannot buy
your perfect beauty.” ■
A battered building receives first aid after the December 1991 bombardment.

‘Although we were restoring,
not creating, it was an honour
for me to be involved 
in the collective work 
of art that is Dubrovnik, 
where the great local and
international masters have left
their mark’
