9
T HE “ MIRACL E ”OF T HE RHINE
◗ Urs Weber
Fish are once again swimming in the Rhine River but it took an ecological catastrophe 
for the countries it flows through to clean up their act
◗ Editor of the regional supplement of the Swiss daily
newspaper Basler Zeitung, in Basel
■
For decades, the Rhine was one of
E u r o p e ’s most repelling waste dumps.
To d ay, c o n c e rted efforts by all the
c o u n t ries along its banks have restored the
ri ve r ’s health.The symbol of that recove ry
is the mighty salmon, which swims once
more in its wat e rs : over 200 have been
caught since 1996. But the road to success
was long and hard.
Europe’s busiest waterway, the Rhine
is navigable over a distance of 883 kilo-
meters stretching from its source near
Basel to its mouth in the Netherlands. For
centuries, many cities and major indus-
trial areas, such as the Ruhr Valley, have
occupied its banks. One of the world’s
densest road and railway networks follows
its course.The river also irrigates areas of
intensive agriculture and vineyards pro-
ducing highly-prized wines.
Other crops, such as maize, tobacco,
sugar beet and market garden produce
(often in greenhouses), which consume
high amounts of fertiliser, are greater
threats to the environment. Run-off from
dairy and pork farms also cause damage.
Thousands of people drink water drawn
from the river, while urban waste flows
into it. A glance at the Rhine’s geography
(see map and box) shows that civilisation
puts huge strains on the river, which flows
through five countries, making it a proto-
type of co-operation in intern at i o n a l
waters.
A subject of treaties
An 1816 treat y, one of Europe’s
oldest, established the Rhine as a navi-
gable waterway. The accord was updated
in Mainz in 1831 and replaced in 1868 by
the Mannheim Act, which set up the
Strasbourg-based Central Commission of
the Rhine, whose purpose was to guaran-
tee freedom of movement on the “inter-
n ational wat e r way.” Dikes were bu i l t
along its branches and marshland was
dredged to make it navigable for vessels
with draughts of up to 3,000 tonnes.
In 1885, five countries along the river
signed an agreement of quite another
sort,the Salmon Treaty.The International
Salmon Commission was set up to pro-
tect the fish, which were vanishing from
the river as a result of pollution and dams
t h at prevented them from migr at i n g .
Salmon swim out to sea when they are
about 18 months old and return to the
place where they were born to spawn at
the age of four or five years.The countries
along the Rhine decided to encourage the
introduction of young salmon into the
river.
But during the nineteenth century,
major civil engineering projects were built
in and around the river without any prior
b i l ateral agr e e m e n t s. Decisions we r e
taken and work done which threatened
neighbouring countries or towns further
downstream. In 1807, the Grand Duchy
of Baden (stretching from Basel to
Mannheim and later absorbed into
Wu rt e m burg) unilaterally decided to
canalise part of the river. The German
hydraulic engineer in charge, Jo h a n n
Tulla, straightened out its course, increa-
sing the water flow. Those “ i m p r ove-
ments” had a disastrous impact on the
water table of the upper Rhine plain,
whose level fell. The softwood forests
were no longer regularly flooded, a featu-
re of the river’s plain, and dried out.
Joining forces
against pollution
The Grand Canal of Alsace, which
France began in 1920, was also built
without consulting neighbouring coun-
tries. The decision was made by the vic-
tors of World War I as part of the Treaty of
Versailles. The canal enabled France to
build 10 hydroelectric plants and dams
between Basel and Strasbourg, not to
mention others on tributary rivers, which
blocked the movement of migratory fish.
The waterway, which was widened in
1950, lowered the level of the Rhine.
The river did not become Europe’s
cesspit until the mid-twentieth century.
Huge amounts of liquid waste, mostly
from towns, farms and expanding indus-
tries, were dumped into the river with
impunity. The level of phosphates from
fertilisers and household products such as
detergents reached alarming levels. The
fish population dwindled and in 1935 sal-
mon vanished entirely. It was also increa-
singly difficult to draw drinkable water
from the river, and it often smelt like car-
bolic acid and tasted salty.
After World War II, most European
states refused to negotiate with Germany.
But, unlike what happened in 1919, the
idea of a joint effort to ensure the future
of the Rhine gained ground. In 1946, the
Netherlands asked Switzerland to take
part in a discussion on pollution in the
river.
The participants settled for a new
international conference on salmon in
Basel in 1948, when it was noted that the
great fish really had disappeared from the

Rhine. The need to set up a permanent
intergovernmental body to handle general
pollution issues then became clear and
the Intern ational Commission for the
Protection of the Rhine (ICPR) was esta-
blished on June 11, 1950 at a meeting of
representatives from the countries along
the river (plus Luxembourg) that agreed
to fund it.
The results were slow in coming.
Water pollution steadily wo rsened for
over 20 years. But at least countries had
decided to take regular samples of the
Rhine’s water, which led to a system to
monitor water quality along the river’s
entire length.
The persistence
of hard metals
In 1963, the first draft agreement to
clean up the Rhine was signed in Berne.
The same year, the ICPR was given a per-
manent headquart e rs , first in Lux-
embourg and from 1964 in Koblenz.
Since then, a secretariat has collected and
distributed valuable data on the river’s
condition and drafted progress reports on
various ecological problems.
The Commission operates in a rather
innovative way, which experience has pro-
ved to be useful. Environment ministers
and officials from each member state
gather at ICPR meetings on a regular
basis. Decisions are taken jointly and each
country, Land or regional government
adopts the ensuing measures. But neither
the ICPR nor its secretariat has any exe-
cutive or coercive power to speak of, such
as the authority to order the construction
of new fa c i l i t i e s. S i m i l a r l y, t h e
Commission draws up env i r o n m e n t a l
projects for the Rhine, but if adopted they
are funded and implemented by each
member country. The secretariat simply
m o n i t o rs their application along the
river’s entire length.
In 1976, the European Community
(later the European Union) joined the
ICPR, lending it more authority, and sub-
sequent measures began to show results.
Between 1970 and 1974, the river’s oxy-
gen content was still between only two
and four milligrams per litre—too low to
support the growth of any organism.
But between 1970 and 1990, t h e
countries along the river spent $38.5 bil-
lion on building a string of purification
plants. The oxygen level steadily rose and
some of the river’s biodiversity returned.
However, experts noted that the purifica-
tion plants did their work after the pollu-
tion had occurred, limiting the effects
without tackling the causes. Furthermore,
S W I TZ ERLA ND
0 100 km
V IL LAGE - NEUF
SELTZ
KO BL ENZ / M O SEL KO BL ENZ / RHEIN
BIMMEN / LO BI T H
KA MPEN
V UREN
H AGES T E IN
REK IN GER
FRA NCE
A US T RI A
GERM A N Y
LUX EMBOURG
NET HERLA NDS
Le k
Wa a l
N e d e r - R i j n
L i p p e
I j s s e l
R u h r
Wu p p e r
S i e g
La h n
M a i nN a h e
N e c ka r
Aa re
Vo rd e r r h e i n
B o d e n s e e
H i n t e r
r h e i n
S a r re
S a u e r
S a a r
I l l
R h i n e
R h i n e
M o s e l l e
M o s e l
A h r
E rf t
AN IN T ERN AT IONAL WAT ERWAY

the plants could only eliminate a small
amount of the heavy metals in the water.
“The river has some ability to clean
itself, but this has been over-estimated,”
says Anne Schulte-Wülwer-Leidig, a bio-
l o gist in Koblenz. So the Rhine still
contained high amounts of heavy metals,
such as mercury, cadmium and zinc, and
harmful substances, including polychlo-
robiphenyls (PCBs),benzene and atrasine
(from pesticides).
In 1976, the ICPR member-countries
signed a convention on chemicals that
ranked some as dangerous and put them
on a “black” or a “grey list.” Maximum
levels were set for cadmium, mercury and
other particularly harmful substances.
Those steps were taken at a time when
manufacturers were able to acquire tech-
nology to eliminate or separate out dan-
gerous toxins during the production
stage. Previously, they could only be filte-
red out at the end.
That same year, the countries along
the river signed an agreement on chlo-
rides to reduce the Rhine’s salt content
from 500 to 200 milligrams per litre along
the German-Dutch border. The high
level, which spoiled drinking water, was
mainly due to waste from potash mines in
Alsace (slated for closing in 2004) and in
Lorraine flushing into the Rhine and the
Moselle,as well as to chemical waste from
plants along the river Main.The salt level
in the river Weser, polluted by potash
discharges from the Werra, sometimes
reached 3,000 mg/litre.
People living along the Rhine were in
for a terrible shock in November 1986
when a fire broke out at the Sandoz che-
mical plant at Schweizerhalle, near Basel.
The water that firefighters used to put out
the blaze flushed huge amounts of insecti-
cides and pesticides into the ri ve r ,s p a r k i n g
an ecological cat a s t r o p h e . E nv i r o n m e n t a l
awareness rose and the affected populat i o n
and their representat i ves demanded that
m a n u fa c t u r e rs take much tougher action
against pollution.
“The Basel disaster enabled the ICPR
to set higher goals in its 1987 Rhine
Action Programme for Ecologi c a l
Rehabilitation,” says Koos Wieriks, of the
ICPR secretari at . Commitments we r e
made to cut the amounts of the most
hazardous pollutants in half by 1995.
Many experts thought this target could
never be reached, but ICPR samples sho-
wed that from 1985 to 1992, mercury in
the river at the German town of Bimmen-
Lobith, near the Dutch border, fell from
six to 3.2 tonnes, cadmium from nine to
5.9 tonnes, zinc from 3,600 to 1,900
tonnes, atrasine from 10 to 3.7 tonnes
and PCBs from 390 to 90 kilograms.
Special chemical purification plants
were built up- and downstream from
Schweizerhalle. “The 1987 programme
won credence for the idea that the Rhine
was a total ecological system,” s ay s
Schulte-Wülwer-Leidig. Under the pro-
gramme, the Rhine was to become a place
where salmon, p i k e , p e r c h , trout and
other fish could thrive once more. But to
achieve that goal, the water quality had to
be further improved,an objective that was
reached before the 2000 target dat e .
Industrial development once transformed the Rhine into a veritable wasteland.



‘The Basel disaster 
enabled the IC PR to set 
higher goals 
in its 19 87 Rhine Action
P r o g ramme for Ecologica l
R e h a b i l i ta t i o n ’ .

Agricultural fertilisers are one of the river’s main pollution sources.
Since 1991, more than a million young
fish have been released into the Rhine and
its branches.
But the troubles of the migrating fish
were not over. In 1996, the first salmon
caught in the river for many years was
hooked just before the Iffezheim dam,
near Baden-Baden. The fish came from
the North Sea but because of the dam
could not reach the branch where it was
born. Salmon only spawn in the places
where they started life.
With the help of ecology movements,
the reluctance of power station owners to
build costly bridges or complex networks
of passageways for the salmon is gradual-
ly breaking dow n . Such facilities are
already under construction at Iffezheim,
at the confluence with the river Ill (which
has no dams on it), at a cost of about $6
million, and at Gambsheim, in Alsace.
Basel residents are being consulted about
planned changes in the landscape that
would help the salmon migrate. Egon
Oberacker, a professional fisherman in
the Swiss town of Nordbaden, is pleased
that fish will be more plentiful now. But,
he says, “we still can’t live off fishing
alone, as we once did.”
The idea of an integr ated ecosystem
t h at will enable a rich va riety of animal and
plant life to thri ve in the Rhine and its
branches once more has come a long way.
In 1998, the ministers of the Commission
set targets to restore natural areas as part
of a global ecosystem stretching from the
mouth of the Rhine to the Jura, the A l p s ,
the Rhine mountain range, the old soft-
wood forests of the flo o d p l a i n s , a n d
streams of the Rhineland-Pa l at i n at e , t h e
Black Forest and the Vo s g e s.
M e a n w h i l e , not all the pollution pro-
blems have been solve d . One of the most
s e rious is in the Rhine delta’s huge basin in
the Netherlands, where tox i n - filled mud
dredged from the port of Rotterdam has
been dumped since the 1970s. C o n t a m i n a-
tion levels are falling now, but several of the
old toxins in the ri ve r ’s sediment are only
ve ry slowly being eliminat e d . And all along
the Rhine, the main source of pollution is
still fa rm fert i l i s e rs , which seep into the ri ve r
e ve ry time it rains. ■

In 1996, the first salmon
caught in the river 
for many years was hooked 
just before the Iffezheim dam,
near Baden-Baden
