S h o p p i n g he

Menswear in Bloomington,Minnesota (United States).

PHOTOS BY MARCO PESARESI,TEXT BY VICENTE VERDÚ
MARCO PESARESI ISAN ITALIAN PHOTOGRAPHER.
VICENTE VERDU IS A SPANISHJOURNALISTANDWRITER , ANDWINNER
OFTHE ANAGRAMA ESSAY PRIZE IN 1996

5
ea v e n
The shopping mall acts as an oasis
where the world of holidays 
is in incessant rebirth and regeneration
Like a cosmos where the light never dims, shopping malls play multiple
roles in modern-day culture: that of a Godless paradise,of a timeless space,
of an absolute getaway without landmarks.The shopping mall is an enter-
tainment venue, and its greatest achievement lies in cultivating the fantasy
that one has stopped existing in some way without ever really dying.Wi t h
its background music, controlled climate and round-the-clock operations,
the polished halls of a mall stand as a metaphor for a happy trip to nowhere
in particular—a perfect holiday.
In contrast to the places where people work,the shopping mall acts as an
oasis where the world of holidays is in incessant rebirth and regeneration,as an
enclosed space where time never acquires a restrictive dimension,where sen-
sations obey the calls of seduction, a v a i l a b i l i t y, flattery and reward instead of
duty and penance.Streets in shopping malls are circuits turned towards providing
entertainment or pleasure, just as holidays,at least in their intent.The world’s
largest mall—Canada’s West Edmonton in the western province of A l b e r t a —
covers a space equivalent to 100 football pitches, and according to Je r e m y
R i f k i n , author of The Age of A c c e s s,contains the largest indoor amusement park
in the world, the largest indoor waterpark,a golf course, 800 shops,11 depart-
ment stores,110 restaurants, an ice-skating rink,13 nightclubs and 20 cinemas.
The plans for the planet’s very first mall were drawn up in 1924 by 
J. C. Nichols in Kansas City, and the centre that resulted, with its Mediter-
ranean architecture, tiled fountains and cast-iron balconies, became the pro-
totype for those built after World War II. All shopping malls currently
boast similar fountains, w a t e r f a l l s, tropical plants, ocean blue patios, m a r b l e
They are the ultimate entertainment destinations: walled
kingdoms outside space and time 
where the weary can give free rein to the pleasure principle
and consume in a holiday spirit

Shopping heaven
sightlines and the latest pop tunes.This host of links between the
holiday and the shopping centre helps alleviate the distress
caused by regimented time.
There are no clocks in shopping centres, and no impa-
tience over wasting valuable time. In contrast to nature’s bound-
less space, the mall offers an illuminated cavern that has neither
beginning nor end, but is shaped like a Moebius strip.Within it,
time is shattered,and what is left in place is space made fun.
The average American,according to sociologist William
Kowinski,author of the The Malling of America, visits a shop-
ping mall every ten days, and spends over an hour and a quarter
there on each occasion; the most frequently given reason for this
pilgrimage is a desire for “ e n t e r t a i n m e n t .” Indeed the shop-
ping malls of the future have been billed as entertainment
centres in which people will be able to shed the burden of their
own selves.M i n n e s o t a ’s Mall of A m e r i c a ,w h i c h
until just recently was the largest in the world, i s
visited by over 45 million people each year,
among them package tourists from Australia.
The place has become a kind of sacred site of the
sort discussed by the late Romanian philoso-
pher Mircea Eliade. It has the same power of
attraction as Mecca or the Vatican, where one
has to go at least once in a lifetime.
Working is the mundane side of life, b u t
being a consumer is potentially its most poetic or
symbolic pay-off. While the average worker is
asked to be realistic and pragmatic, c o n s u m p-
tion can stimulate every possible dream, e v e n
the dream of salvation in the form of liberation
from the constraints of space and time.
Nothing seems to threaten this walled
kingdom protected by security guards and wat-
ched over by increasing numbers of closed cir-
cuit cameras. Sociologist Peter Hemingway has
argued that the mission of mall architects and
designers consists in providing a sugared dream,
where one can buy,play and experience without
ever having to go outside—where one can
change experience like one switches television
c h a n n e l s,using the credit card as the all-powerful
Open Sesame.
L o u d s p e a k e r s,closed circuit cameras,v i d e o
recorders and monitors are integral parts of a
system that is aimed at the production of a totally
autonomous universe. Inside the mall’s walls, i t
can be spring even if snow is falling on the streets
o u t s i d e,or autumn though it is baking hot under
the summer sun.Weather has no real meaning,
Working is the mundane side of life, 
but being a consumer is potentially its
most poetic or symbolic pay-off
Gadgets.Bloomington,Minnesota.

7
and is only a pretext for a change in fashion. Different segments
of the mall can resemble Th a i l a n d , the Ty r o l , China or Canada,
since its inner space has been transformed into a dolled-up uni-
v e r s e, just like paradise. In Scottsdale,A r i z o n a , the Borgata repro-
duces the Tuscan village of San Gimignano in the middle of the
d e s e r t ,while Olde Mistic Village in Connecticut is a carbon copy
of the main street in a New England town from around the start
of the 17th century. The vogue for copying, a key trait of global
s o c i e t y,has forged an alliance with the shopping mall in its bid to
make places and dates vanish. In the inaugural ceremony for
West Edmonton,one of the centre’s creators,Nader Ghermezion,
declared that people would no longer have to “go to New Yo r k ,
P a r i s, Disneyland or Hawaii.We can offer you all that here!”
Assembled under one roof, built to copy the best of all
w o r l d s, with a selection of the best the globe can offer.Wh e r e a s
any given shop in a city has had to choose its urban location in
accordance with historical and geographical dictates, the shop-
ping mall is free from any such demographic tradition—indeed
it is free from history entirely.The main criterion for a mall’s loca-
tion is simple:how fast people can get there. Father and son. Bloomington, Minnesota.
Big or small? A shopper ponders in the Gum, Moscow (Russia).

The mall is constantly changing its 
appearance, anchoring itself to an evolving 
present in a magical process
Sweet and sour. Taipei (Taiwan).
A quiet moment in the Forum des Halles, Paris (France).

The mall is constantly changing its appearance, a n c h o r i n g
itself to an evolving present in a magical process that eludes all
threat of death. Freed from the pull of gravity, the mall is now
s o c i e t y ’s most revered safety valve, with such importance as a
social and political symbol that terrorists intent on disrupting
normal life choose it as a prime target. By planting a bomb in
a mall, they attack the contemporary vision of dreamland. In this
“ s p a c e s h i p,” the city’s most benevolent and leisurely impulses
are now distilled. The world of work, illness and repression
has been extracted; all that remains is soft-flowing leisure and
purchasing power.
Independent, beyond the pull of gravity, open all hours,
without prisons, sweet-smelling, tropical and radiant,the shop-
ping mall is a parody of utopia. Mornings are the same as after-
n o o n s,Sundays as Mondays,China as A r g e n t i n a , Rome as New
York; potential purchases are in abundance, changing only to
match the spiral of constant progress and advertising them-
selves as the best items going. Faced with this spectacle, t h e
visitor is invited to partake of the profusion as if he or she were
on holiday and about to dive into the sea.Buying becomes like
dipping in the ocean—disappearing, forgetting oneself and eve-
rything else. All becomes one in the newest passion of the day.
■
All the fun of the fair. The Gum,Moscow.
