■
“Pollution has managed to do what
350 years of wars, invasions and nat-
ural disasters have failed to do. It has
begun to mar the magnificent walls of the
Taj Mahal,” declared U.S. President Bill
Clinton during his visit to the 17th-centu-
ry monument in the city of Agra earlier
this year.
O ver the past two decades, the fate of
the country ’s foremost tourist at t r a c t i o n
has repeatedly come into the spotlight.
Time and time again, e x p e rts have wa rn e d
t h at environmental pollution is eat i n g
away at the monument and discolouri n g
its once translucent white marble. But the
p r e s c ription—to control pollution by relo-
c ating a number of industries around the
Taj Trapezium Zone (TTZ), a 10,400 sq.
km area around the monument—is pitting
c o n s e rvationists and env i r o n m e n t a l i s t s
against business interests and unions.
Besides the Taj Mahal, the zone includes
t wo other world heritage monuments, t h e
A gra Fo rt and Fatehpur Sikri . So what
should take precedence—the monument
or the thousands of wo r k e rs employed by
the fa c t o ries in the area? The stakes are
such that the case is being fought out in
the country ’s Supreme Court .
The culprits include the Mat h u r a
R e fin e ry, iron foundri e s , glass fa c t o ri e s
and brick kilns, not to mention the con-
tinuous flow of traffic along the highway s
s k i rting the city. On repeated occasions,
sulphur dioxide emissions from industri e s
in the area have reached levels ten times
a b ove the prescribed standard leve l .C o m-
bined with oxygen and moisture, s u l p h u r
d i oxide settles on the surface of the tomb
and corrodes the marble, f o rming a
fungus that experts refer to as “ m a r b l e
c a n c e r ” .
◗ Delhi-based journalist with the Indian 
bi-weekly Frontline 



TOX INS
A ND THE TAJ
◗ T K Rajalakshmi
India’s most celebrated monument continues to be threatened by pollution despite various
court orders to close down harmful factories in Agra
Foundries in the protected zone around Agra are being urged to switch to more eco-friendly technologies.

Blaming pollution and regulat o ry neg-
ligence for the Ta j ’s decay, M a h e s h
Chandra Mehta, a prominent env i r o n m e n-
tal law ye r , filed a case before the Supreme
C o u rt of India in 1984. He pointed out
t h at the white marble had blackened in
p l a c e s , while inside, the monument wa s
being eaten by fungus, especially in the
inner chamber, where the ori ginal gr ave s
of Emperor Shah Jahan and his belove d
wife Mumtaz Mahal lie. Mehta pleaded
with the court to order the va rious indus-
t ries to take anti-pollution measures or to
c l o s e . He also stressed that pollution wa s
affecting the health of wo r k e rs and people
living in A gr a ’s residential areas.
Switch to gas
It was not until 1996 that the
Supreme Court finally ruled that the
industries in the area were actively con-
tributing to air pollution and ordered
major industrial units to install pollution
control devices. “Not even a one per cent
chance can be taken when—human life
apart—the preservation of a prestigious
monument like the Taj is involved,” stated
the court order. The court ordered 292
coal-based industries to switch to natural
gas or else to relocate outside the protect-
ed zone by April 30, 1997. Coke, the fuel
commonly used in the cupola furnaces in
foundries,is known to cause high levels of
air pollution. Factories that opted for
relocation would be obliged to re-employ
workers under favourable terms and to
give them a one-year bonus. And if their
plant were to close down, workers would
be entitled to six years’ worth of wages in
compensation.
As a result, the oil refin e ry and a num-
ber of A gr a ’s foundries installed expensive
pollution control devices. Sterling Machine
Tools (SMT), the biggest fa c t o ry in A gr a ,
obtained a gas connection from the Gas
A u t h o rity of India. But according to a
senior personnel manager, it takes time for
production to reach the same levels as
before and for wo r k e rs to adjust to the new
t e c h n o l o g y. “The gas furnace costs around
Rs50 lakhs ($120,000). While we have the
m o n e y, small units do not,” he said.
Quite a number of factories did noth-
ing about relocating or switching to nat-
ural gas. Some claimed that the cost of
these operations was prohibitive: accord-
ing to one industry representative, the
basic equipment runs between Rs30 to
Rs40 lakhs ($75,000 and $100,000),
almost a quarter of annual sales for a
medium-sized company. Smaller firm s
say that the cost of applying for a gas con-
nection, which includes  a pre-payment,
cuts into annual sales. Even if they did
close down and sell their land, factory
owners claim that this would not cover
workers’ compensation. Foundry owners
also claimed that finding skilled or even
semi-skilled replacements for specific
tasks in the relocated areas would be
difficult.
Delay tactics
In August 1999, the Supreme Court
struck again, ordering the closure of 53
iron foundries and 107 other factories in
Agra that had not cleaned up their act.
The order has become a call to arms for
f o u n d ry ow n e rs , wo r k e rs , trade union
representatives and small-scale industry.
However, industry is buying time: it filed
a review petition through the Uttar
Pradesh State government and obtained a
reprieve on the court order’s implementa-
tion.The matter comes again before the
Supreme Court this summer.
In the meantime, A gr a ’s Iron
Founders’ Association are building up
their case.They argue that 3,000 cottage
and engi n e e ring units depend on the
foundries, and that about 300,000 work-
ers are directly or indirectly employed by
them. They hold that the technology for
using natural gas in their industries is
not yet ready. Mehta claims that this is
a “ d e l aying tactic”: in 1995, i n d u s t ry
experts had said that gas could be used as
industrial fuel. “If the technology was not
available then, they should have stated so
at the time.” According to Mehta, the
required technology has been developed
by the National Metallurgical Laboratory
and would help turn the hundreds of
foundries in Agra into more efficient and
less polluting units. While Mehta contin-
ues with his legal bat t l e , his cru s a d e
against industrial pollution earned him
the 1996 Goldman Environmental Prize
and the Ramon Magsaysay Award for
Public Service in 1997.
Although union leaders are firmly
opposed to any relocation or factory clo-
sures, the battle has brought other con-
cerns to the fore. According to a leader
from the Centre for Indian Tr a d e

Foundry workers burning an effigy of their factory’s owner to protest relocation.

Unions, the entire foundry industry is
highly exploitative and the working con-
ditions hazardous.The majority of work-
ers are employed on a contract basis
despite having worked for long periods
in the foundries—which means they
would receive no protection if factories
were to close. And a lack of information
appears to hang over the whole saga:
Ram Sharan, a worker in his mid-thirties
from Bihar, said that he had vaguely
heard about foundries relocating and
was quite certain that he would lose
his job as a result. Workers at GT Iron
Industries, a casting unit slated for clo-
sure, said that they had heard about the
court order but didn’t know where they
would go if the unit closed down. They
had left their villages in Uttar Pradesh
and other provinces many years ago and
were living in rented accommodation in
the city. But despite these conditions,
workers state that it is better than being
jobless.
Industries  aside, the Taj Mahal is an
economic asset in and of itself: two mil-
lion tourists visit the Taj every year, mak-
ing it a major source of revenue and for-
eign exchange for the region. It keeps
hotels, craftsmen and small businesses
thriving. In May this year, the Supreme
Court banned cars and parking within
500 metres of the Taj’s boundary walls. It
ordered the shifting of about 70 shops
from the precincts of the white marble
m a u s o l e u m . While experts agree that
some of these measures have helped to
improve air around the Taj, pollution lev-
els have not dropped to safer limits as
none of the factories have actually been
closed down.
Air pollution, dust, lack of greenery,
traffic and the presence of noisy diesel
generators around Agra are all harming a
prized tourist attraction. To date, politi-
cians have tended to side with industry
while the judiciary has backed the cause
of the Taj. But in the meantime, the mon-
ument to eternal love continues to
breathe in the fumes. ■
“Marble cancer” caused by sulphur dioxide is
yellowing the Taj’s once translucent surface.
