3
T HE MAGIC OF THE MIRROR
◗ Photos by Alex Webb, text by Fabrizio Mejía Madrid
The uprising in Chiapas has forced Mexican society to look at the Indians straight on, 
perhaps for the first time, and to start weaving with them a truly common future
◗ Alex Webb is an American photographer with 
the Magnum agency.
Fabrizio Mejía Madrid is director of culture at the
municipality of Mexico City. A contributor to the daily 
La Jornada, he is the author of three books, including
“Small Acts of Civil Disobedience”, published in Spanish
in 1996.
■
I seemed to notice a movement from
beneath her shawl, a kind of sudden
v i b r at i o n . I looked down at the
wo m a n ’s feet and was start l e d : her cal-
loused heels bore all the dust and dirt of
ye a rs walking barefoot. I placed a coin in the
woman’s permanently open palm,and ran
into the Museum of Anthropology. I was
seven or eight years old. I asked my father
about the woman to whom I had just been
told to gi ve some money. “ S h e ’s an Indian,”
he replied. “But something was mov i n g
inside under her clothes,” I insisted. “ I t
must have been her child,” my fat h e r
c o n c l u d e d , and we walked on into the
M ayan room of the museum without say i n g
a word.
The image of that Indian woman in
Mexico City has haunted me every year
since. It is not really an image, more like
fragments of a body—an outstretched
hand, the soles of her feet, the coppery
colour of her arm—and the suggestion of
another being moving beneath her
clothes. When you come across them in
the cities, you don’t look at them directly.
They, the Indians, lower their eyes as if to
acknowledge that the colour of their skin,
their “defective” Spanish and their rural
Children in front of a mural featuring Emiliano Zapata in Polhó, a village located in the Chenalhó municipality, in the heart of Chiapas.
garments have made them invaders in this
land of mestizo nationalism. They have
never had looks or expressions. Nobody
can remember their faces.
In contrast, the term “ i n d i g e n o u s
people” — as opposed to “Indians” — is
part and parcel of Mexican history. Like
millions of other Mexican children, I
grew up seeing murals by Diego Rivera,
where the Aztecs came to represent sym-
bols and values, but not people. From as
far back as I recall, “indigenous” has
meant that under the earth on which we
walk there are vestiges of women and men
who erected pyramids to worship the sun,
dreamt about the number zero, sacrificed
virgins and predicted eclipses. But bet-
ween the “Indian” and the “indigenous”

identification, a form of magic and a mir-
ror that creates a third party: neither one-
self nor the other, but that which makes
us similar, that in which we both recogni-
ze ourselves. This reflection of the other
which is also my own self in another per-
son’s gaze was exactly what was denied to
me by the country to which I belong. For
500 years the Indians were not men and
women who had to be wiped out, but
simple non-humans who survived thanks
to a national evasion: not looking at them
head-on, in the eyes. Looking in the eyes

there has never been any connection
beyond the fact that neither had a face.
For centuries the Indians submissively
joined the growing mass of invisible spec-
tators of a distant country, of an ethereal
land which changes without the need to
involve those who are watching it. The
image of the “Indians” was one of pea-
sants always waiting for land,justice, edu-
cation and health. We knew they existed
because there were millions of them,
though we stayed deaf to what they were
t rying to tell us. Taken into account
because of their sheer number, t h e
“Indians” ended up being tackled as a
“problem” in the 1970s: that of migration
to the cities. The so-called “Marias”—
“Indians” who asked for charity dressed
in highly coloured clothes—were the fai-
thful reflection of the failure of our shared
life and of the only offer that we made to
help them belong to Mexico: stop being
Indians.
When on January 1, 1994, the Indians
in Chiapas rebelled once more against
contempt, they did so covering the whole
face apart from the eyes. They made the
country look at them. They knew that
morality started by looking at someone in
the eyes. It is the source of empathy, of
Revolutionary images on a wall in Polhó express some of the inhabitants’ aspirations.
of the Indians made us capture in their
reflection the very part of ourselves that
exists in the other,the foreign in each and
every one of us.
Four years on, the women from an
Indian community displaced by a “low-
intensity war” were the architects of ano-
ther major change. After the massacre of
women and children in Acteal on
December 22, 1 9 9 7 , the women of
X’oyep decided to rise up against the
army’s presence. Already forced out of
their homes, they were not ready to be
drawn into hostilities once again. They
pushed the soldiers with their bare hands
right to the village’s boundaries, while
one of them carried in her hands X’oyep’s
last hen. Riled by indignation, she defen-
ded the bird and together with the other
women, triumphed over a professional
army. The moral strength of the Tzeltal
Indians of X’oyep rested in January 1998
on their physical weakness and on their
small number, but also on their opposi-
tion to war.They are the poor people who
refuse to be helped by a country which
allowed the Acteal massacre to take place.
In their resistance there is a moral stance
that connects me to them: neither would
I resign myself to a great “national plan”



The image of the “Indians”
was one of peasants always
waiting for land, justice,
e d u cation and health. 
We knew they existed 
b e cause there were millions 
of them, though we sta y e d
deaf to what they were try i n g
to tell us.

Standing guard at the entrance to Polhó.
A rope marks off Zapatista territory, barring its access to foreigners.

A memorial to villagers killed in Acteal in 1997.
MEX ICO’S 
P OOREST STAT E
Along with neighbouring Yucatan and Oax a ca ,
Chiapas, a state in southern Mexico, has the
c o u n t ry’s highest proportion of indigenous
people: 42.5 per cent of its three million or so
inhabitants are Mayans. Nationally, there are
approximately 10.6 million indigenous people
out of a population of 92 million, 80 per cent of
whom are mixed-race.
Mostly rural, Chiapas breaks Mexico’s
p o v e r ty records. In 1995, it was estimated that
59 per cent of the population were living on less
than the minimum income necessary for surv i v a l
(then put at $150 a month). That situation is
partly explained by the fact that Chiapas, so far
from Mexico City, is the state where land reform
was the most weakly implemented. When the
reform ended in 1992, half the land in Chiapas
was still in the hands of large landowners.
That is the context in which the “Zapatista
Army of National Liberation” (EZLN) led by “sub-
commandante” Marcos burst upon the scene on
J a n u a ry 1, 1994, a symbolic date because it mar-
ked the entry into force of the NAFTA free-trade
agreement with the United States and Canada.
EZLN rebels overran seven Chiapas municipali-
ties, including the city of San Cristobal de las
Casas, demanding “d e m o c ra cy, freedom and jus-
tice for all Mexicans.” A ceasefire was declared
after two weeks of fighting with the army in
which, according to official sources, 159 people
were killed, though human rights groups put the
death toll at over 400. On February 21, 1994, the
EZLN and Mexico’s federal government began
talks for the first time, mediated by the bishop of
San Cristobal, Mgr Samuel Ruiz. Signed on
Fe b r u a ry 16, 1996, the San Andres accords on
the rights of indigenous peoples were rejected by
the authorities, on the basis that national sove-
reignty had to be protected.  
The cost of breaking off the negotiations has
been high. For example, 45 alleged EZLN sym-
pathizers were killed in the village of Acteal on
December 22, 1997.
In March 1999, 2.5 million Mexicans took
part in a consulation organized by the EZLN on
i n t e g rating indigenous law into the Constitution.
The strategy of the guerrillas, whose objective is
not to seize power, consists of gathering support
from national and international civil society for a
democratisation of Mexican society. ■
that I have not chosen.Their actions have
made them famous because they entailed
a nationalism without patriots: they did
not want any happiness that would des-
troy them for their own good. In the
hands that pushed out the army, I saw the
“Marias” of my childhood disappearing.
The distance between looking
and listening
Although we have become more
willing to tolerate difference, we are still
no more ready to listen to and understand
the voices of difference.The idea of diver-
sity in Mexican society brings to mind
divided ghettoes where contact between
one tradition and another inevitably wea-
kens one of them.Moving from the ethnic
to the ethical does not mean we should
strive to preserve that diversity, but rather
absorb what it is trying to tell us. It is the
gap between looking and listening, bet-
ween accepting that the Other exists and
experiencing its fragility as one’s own,
between opening windows and building
bridges. It is this gap that we have to nar-
row: to go from living alongside each
other to experimenting with living toge-
ther. I know that with the X’oyep women
we will travel that road. ■
Mexico
Tuxtla Gutiérrez
Chiapas

A refugee family in X’oyep, to the northeast of Tuxtla Gutiérrez.
Musicians performing in Polhó.

Refugee children in X’oyep.
A government military post in Chenalhó.
