INSIDE THE EMOTION MAC H I N E
Peter Lunt, a social psychologist at University College London and expert on the impact 
of television, pins the vogue for “reality” on changes in public emotional life
Do you see reality shows as a new tele-
vision genre, or something that has
evolved from previous programmes?
Reality television seems to have two dif-
ferent origins.One of them is the changing
form of the talk-show, which from a very
gentle format based on celebrities’ public
relations evolved via presenters like Phil
Donahue and Oprah Winfrey in the
United States into something that shifted
interest from the everyday life of a cele-
brity to celebrating everyday lives.
Take the programma Queen for a Day
as an example. This was a gameshow in
the U. S. in the 1960s for middle-class hou-
s e w i v e s,who would file in the studios and
be selected on the basis of their hard-
s h i p s : the people who had the most heart-
rending and difficult stories got to tell
them to the audience, there was a vote,
and the most worthy person was crowned
Queen for a Day, and given all sorts of
presents. It was a momentary reversal of
social status, like putting the ordinary in
the position of the king, which was done
in medieval fairs and tournaments.
But to understand reality television, y o u
also have to look at another genre, w h i c h
is fly-on-the-wall documentary. In the
1960s, especially in Britain, this formed
part of a cultural trend towards repre-
senting ordinary lives in cinema and tele-
v i s i o n .And what you see there is a move-
ment from celebration to something
closer to scrutiny or surveillance.
But in contrast to fly-on-the-wall docu-
m e n t a r y, the presence of cameras in these
new shows is absolutely crucial.
That is very important. Compared to pre-
vious shows, the new programmes have a
much more managed feel.Jerry Springer [ a
U. S. talk-show] is a good example of this
f o r m a t .A first person comes on and is given
lots of time to discuss an intimate problem—
everything is quite calm.Then there’s a gra-
dual build-up of tension as other people
are levered into the process.Then the people
who come much later get much less time,
leading much more intensely to an emo-
tional eruption.The idea is that we’ve lost
the ability to express ourselves,and that it’s
only in these carefully structured and
managed public spaces that we can do this.
You can see similar structuring elements in
other reality shows.There is the inevitability
of voting, an underlying push in the pro-
cess that is highly ritualized.
A re you saying it is increasingly difficult to
e x p ress emotions without some kind of
intervention?
I’m not making radical arguments that
w e ’re completely transformed in our
emotional life, though some thinkers have
argued just that.The most I’d want to say
is that this new mode of public expression
and scrutiny of emotions is of central
importance to how we think about our-
selves and experience our emotions.Th e
appeal of these programmes is very much
based on that.
How do you explain the success of these
shows in so many different countries?
I am inclined to link this to the globalization
of culture.The new kinds of global social
relations are precisely formulated through
m e d i a t i o n , through business, t h r o u g h
t r a v e l , and are not grounded in the tradi-
tional collective social forms. The same
goes for work,which is no longer a life-long
career but requires fle x i b i l i t y,a d a p t a b i l i t y
and the construction of teamwork within
o r g a n i z a t i o n s.What we now know is that
we all live in these sorts of artific i a l l y
constructed relations—which are not arti-
ficial anymore,but have become our reality.
How do you interpret the connection bet-
ween these pro g rammes and new tech-
nologies, many of which seem to under-
mine people’s privacy?
There’s been a lot of vague talk recently
around issues of privacy. In the case of e-
c o m m e r c e, for instance,everyone knows
that companies have a lot more informa-
tion about them. So there’s something
being worked through here about this
extraordinary explosion of information
about individuals, and what this implies
for how they can live and be private,
expressive individuals.The programmes
stand I think as a metaphor for that—
and no more. The shows work because
they push these buttons, though they defi-
nitely don’t provide any interesting ana-
lysis of the question. ■

All eyes on the reality game
In Germany, Jana and Juergen go to their bedroom for the first time in the Big Brother house.
INTERVIEW BY I. B.
