Just as ecology depicts the world as a series of
interlocking parts ranging from the single cell
to the ecosphere, the planet’s languages can be
presented as a system based on gravity. Today the
keystone of that system is English, a “hypercen-
tral” language around which a dozen “supercen-
tral” languages gravitate. Between 100 and 200
“central” languages, linked to the supercentral
ones through bilingual speakers, are in their turn
s u rrounded by 4,000-5,000 “ p e ri p h e r a l ” l a n-
guages.
These languages do not all have the same
we i g h t , the same vigour or the same prospects.T h e
future of the vast majority is in doubt, and more
and more efforts are being made to preserve them.
L a n g u a g e s , like baby seals or whales, are regarded
as endangered species (see pages 18 and 19).
But anxiety is not only focusing on the “ p e r-
i p h e r a l ” l a n g u a g e s. C o n c e rn is also being expres-
sed about the widely-spoken hyper or super-central
l a n g u a g e s , including English and French. In the
United Stat e s , o r g a n i z ations such as US English,
US First and Save Our Schools are campaigning
for English to be recognized as the country ’s sole
o f ficial language in face of gr owing bilingualism
due to substantial Hispanic immigr at i o n . I n
F r a n c e , the 1994 “ Toubon Law ” was an attempt to
r e g u l ate the use of French by resisting the use of
words borr owed from other languages.
The myth
of language purity
Language purity is a myth which leads only to
stagnation. The Latin that Cicero spoke is per-
haps a pure language, but nobody speaks it any
more. Today different versions of Latin that have
developed over the centuries are used. They
include Italian, Spanish, Romanian, French and
Catalan.
This my t h , this desire to protect, i l l u s t r ates a
thoughtless fear of change, of borr owing words and
expressions from other languages. It is as if only
stability could somehow guarantee identity. H ow
far can or should policies to protect languages go?
Is it possible to keep alive language forms abando-
ned by their users , sustaining them by a kind of
d rip-feed or other forms of intensive medicat i o n ?
Some language policies have been successful.
In Turkey in the early part of the 20th century,
Kemal Atatürk used authoritarian methods to
reform the spelling of Turkish, and struck out of
the Turkish dictionary words borr owed from
Arabic and Farsi. Indonesia has adopted a uni-
fying language, Bahasa. In other countries, things
have been less straightforward. Arabization in
Algeria is still confronted by major obstacles, and
the attempt by the late Guinean president Sekou
Touré to make his country officially multilingual
was a total failure.
“Language war”:
a convenient metaphor
A language policy can only work if it is attu-
ned to the way in which a society is evolving.Only
rarely can a language or reform be imposed on
people against their will. Is it possible to defend
(or save) a language whose speakers don’t want it
any more? The issue is not the language itself but
the importance attached to it by its speakers. A
language policy cannot ignore them.
A language disappears not only because it is
dominated by another, but also—and perhaps
above all—because people decide to abandon it
and do not pass it on to their children.The term
“language war” is a convenient metaphor, but
languages themselves cannot wage war on each
other. It is people who struggle, fight or agree
with each other. We can follow their conflictual
relationships by looking at the relationship bet-
ween their languages.
Linguists are always sorry when a language dies
o u t , but languages are not museum pieces. T h e y
belong to the people who speak them and constantly
change and adapt to their needs. They are there to
s e rve people and not vice-ve rs a . The evolution of
language forms and the relationships between them
is an ongoing process, and while some die, o t h e rs
are born , sometimes before our eye s.
Since the collapse of the Berlin Wall and the
break-up of Yu g o s l av i a , new countries have
appeared and new languages are making them-
selves heard—Bosnian,Serbian, and Croatian,for
example, which until recently were considered to
be a single language, Serbo-Croat. The speakers
of these languages are affirming their identity by
stressing and increasing the difference between
them, though this only amounts to a few dozen
words. Likewise, the division of Czechoslovakia
U s e rs
a re choosers
◗ Jean-Louis Calvet
States ra rely manage to force people to use a language against their will.
The fate of languages ultimately depends on their speake rs’ needs
◗ Professor of social linguistics at
the University 
of the Sorbonne, in Paris,
and author of a score of books,
which have been translated into a
dozen languages. His works
published in English include
Roland Barthes, A Biography
(1995).

into the Czech Republic and Slovakia has pushed
the Czech and Slovak languages further apart.
In francophone Africa, local forms of the offi-
cial language, French, are emerging. Slightly dif-
ferent variants of French are spoken in Senegal,
Gabon, Niger and Côte d’Ivoire.
These differences, slight though they are so fa r ,
perhaps herald a break-up of French, which may
become a kind of mother tongue for a new genera-
tion of speakers , just as Latin is the mother of the
Romance languages.The same goes for English,A r a-
bic and Spanish.The Spanish spoken in Madrid is
not quite the same as that spoken in Buenos A i r e s ,
and there are differences between London English
and Bombay English.The Arabic of Rabat is not at all
the same as that spoken in Riya d h .
The function of languages influences their
f o rm . The languages used for trade in the markets
of A f rican capitals are gradually becoming different
from their ve rnacular form s. The Wolof spoken in
Dakar is no longer the Wolof that rural people
s p e a k , and the Bambara heard in Bamako is not
the same as that spoken in Ségou, 230 kilometres
away.
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
in various situations, Creole languages developed
as a linguistic solution to the communication pro-
blem faced by slaves speaking different languages
when they were taken to the
Indian Ocean islands or to the
C a ri b b e a n . Using European
tongues such as English,
French or Po rtuguese as a
basis, they created languages
which today are different. A Mauritian, a Haitian
and a Guyanese cannot understand each other,
even though their languages have a common
ancestor—French. Perhaps the children of immi-
grants will one day speak, along with the langua-
ge of their host country, a Germanicized version
of Turkish, say, or a Frenchified Arabic.
An ever-changing
language map
English may not escape this process. Its world
domination today is indisputable and will proba-
bly last for a while. But history shows that the
more a language spreads geographically, the more
variations it generates,so what happened to Latin
may happen to English.
This being the case, the world language map is
clearly going to change over the next few centuri e s.
M a ny languages currently spoken by only a few
people are dying out and new ones are appeari n g
or will appear.This means that in the gr av i t at i o n a l
model described above , languages and their func-
tions will evo l ve . The hypercentral and supercen-
tral languages may change, and some peri p h e r a l
languages may become central (and vice-ve rs a ) .
Like history itself, the history of languages does
not stand still. It moves on, constantly changi n g
and being shaped by the practices of users. ■
