In the Amazon Basin the greatest violence can
begin as a flicker of light beyond the horizon.
There, in the bowl of the night sky, an approa-
ching thunderstorm sends lightning bolts that
illuminate the wall of the rain forest. Spear-nosed
bats fly through the tree crowns, palm vipers coil
in the roots of orchids, jaguars walk the river’s
edge, and around them grow 800 species of trees,
more than are native to North America. A thou-
sand species of butterflies,six per cent of the enti-
re world fauna, wait for the dawn.
About the orchids, we know little. About the
fli e s , b e e t l e s , and fungi we know almost nothing.
Rainforests like the Amazon with their my t h - i n s p i-
ring plants and animals are still mostly unexplored.
B i o l o gists believe that they shelter more than half
of the wo r l d ’s plant and animal species. Tr a gi c a l l y,
they are being quickly torn down by human activi-
t y. It is difficult to assess quantitat i vely the loss of
species there and elsewhere because we do not
k n ow the precise number of species that exist on
e a rt h . Probably fewer than 10 per cent of them
h ave even been gi ven a  scientific name. A n d
extinction is hard to observe .We don’t see the last
bu t t e r fly of its species snatched from the air by a
bird or the last orchid of a certain kind killed by the
collapse of its supporting tree.
We know from the fossil record that six gr e at
extinction events have occurred in the past half bil-
lion ye a rs.The latest of these eve n t s , caused by a gi a n t
m e t e o rite strike near present-day Yu c atan (Mexico)
65 million ye a rs ago, ended the age of dinosaurs.
These catastrophes va riously obliterated 30 to 90 per
cent of the wo r l d ’s plant and animal species. A f t e r-
wa r d ,e volution replaced the biodive rsity ve ry slow l y,
d u ring periods of millions of ye a rs.
Equilibrium
B i o l o gists agree that we are now in the earliest
stages of a seventh mass extinction eve n t , c a u s e d
not by an act of nature but entirely by human acti-
v i t y.The current rate of extinction is generally esti-
m ated to be 100 to 1,000 times higher than it wa s
before the ori gin of modern humanity about half a
million ye a rs ago.Throughout most of the geologi-
cal past, individual species and their descendants
l i ved for an average of roughly one million ye a rs ,
and disappeared naturally at about one species per
million each ye a r. On a grand scale, new species
replaced vanishing ones at about the same rat e .N o



D o o m e d
to early d e m i s e
◗ E d ward O. W i l s o n
Many biologists believe we are in the midst of one of the great extinction spasms 
of geological history. This time however, human activity, not nature, is the culprit
◗ Professor of Science and Curator
in Entomology at Harvard
University and the winner of many
scientific awards in addition to two
Pulitzer prizes for his books, in
particular The Diversity of Life
(Harvard University Press, 1992),
which inspired this text.
In Sumatra,Indonesia,a Kubu tribesman contemplates a calcinated forest area,used by generations for hunting 
and gathering medicinal plants.


m o r e . Not only has the extinction rate soared, bu t
also the birth rate of new species is falling as the
natural environment is reduced by human action.
According to estimates by the World Conser-
vation Union (IU C N) , about one quarter of the wo r l-
d’s mammals and more than a tenth of its remai-
ning birds are at a high risk of extinction. O n e - fif t h
of all reptile species, a quarter of all amphibians
and as many as 34 per cent of all fishes (mostly fre-
shwater species) are in similar jeopardy.And these
p r o p o rtions only refer to species we know relat i-
vely we l l . In the less studied gr o u p s , more than 500
insect species, 400 crustaceans and 900 molluscs
are also threat e n e d , according to IU C N, figures that
are surely vast underestimat e s. F i n a l l y, about an
eighth of the wo r l d ’s flowe ring plants are edgi n g
toward extinction.
Human demographic success has brought the
world to this cri s i s. Human beings have become a
hundred times more numerous than any other
large land animal in the history of life. By eve ry
c o n c e i vable measure, humanity is ecologi c a l l y
a b n o rm a l . Our species appropri ates between 20
and 40 per cent of solar energy captured in organic
m at e rial by land plants. There is no way we can
d r aw upon the resources of the planet to this
d e gree without reducing many other species to
r a rity or extinction.
The leading cause of the decline is the des-
truction of natural habitats to make more room
for urban and farming areas and to extract tim-
ber, ore, and other natural resources. Not many
habitats in the world covering a square kilometre
contain fewer than a thousand species of plants
and animals. Patches of rainforest and coral reef
harbour tens of thousands of species, even after
they have been partly chipped away by human
intervention.
But when an entire habitat is destroye d ,a l m o s t
all of the species specialized to live in it are destroye d .
Not just eagles and pandas disappear but also the
s m a l l e s t , still uncensused inve rt e b r at e s , algae and
f u n gi , the invisible playe rs that make up the founda-
tion of the ecosystem.
Celebrity pandas
For ye a rs ,c o n s e rvationists often focused on sav i n g
“ s t a r ” species like pandas as opposed to the entire
ecosystem in which they live . N ow, with a better
u n d e rstanding of the extinction process, they have
switched gears by, for example, focusing on the need
to protect particularly rich environments that contain
numerous vulnerable species, r e f e rred to as biodi-
ve rsity “ h o t s p o t s ” (see page 21).
The second major cause of extinction is the
invasion of alien species. When Polynesian voya-
gers set shore in Hawaii around 400 A.D., the
islands were a special kind of paradise.Their lush
forests and fertile valleys contained no mosqui-
toes, ants, poisonous spiders nor snakes or plants
with thorns or poisons. All these are now abun-
dant. Human commerce introduced invasive spe-
cies, deliberately or by accident. As the natural
habitats were decimated and the alien invaders
pressed on, the original fauna and flora have
retracted. Most are now rare or extinct.
The third major cause of decline is pollution.
Freshwater faunas and floras, for example, are
especially vulnerable to the increasing flood of
industrial and agricultural pollution. The fourth
agent of destruction, destined to rise in impor-
tance in the future, is global warming, which itself
is the result of pollution by excess greenhouse
gases. Among the more fragile environments most
threatened are the arctic tundras and the unique
South African fynbos (scrubland) “trapped” on
the tip of the continent.
Shrinking rainforests 
Just how fast is dive rsity disappearing? We are fa r
from an exact answe r , except to say,“ c at a s t r o p h i c a l l y
fa s t ” .Yet it is possible to get a handle on the ri c h e s t
e nvironment of all, the tropical rainforests. By loo-
king at the rate of reduction of the forest area, we can
roughly estimate the extinction rates of species.F i rs t ,
we must dispel the myth of the regenerat i ve powe r
of rainforests, which are actually among the most fra-
gile habitat s. More than half of the area of the forest
s u r face worldwide consists of acidic and nutri e n t -
poor soil.When the forest is cut and bu rned by fa r-
m e rs , the ash and decomposing ve g e t ation flu s h
enough nutrients into the soil to support vigorous
new herbaceous and shrubby gr owth for two or three
ye a rs. But as the nutrient levels decline, the land can
no longer support healthy crops and forage. So the
fa rm e rs must add fertilizer or move on to slash-and-
bu rn the next patch of forest.
In prehistoric times, the great forests—the
greenhouses of planet Earth—covered 14 to 18
million square kilometres. Only about half of the
original area remains. Much of the destruction is
recent, with about one million square kilometres
cleared every five to ten years. If this destruction
rate continues, a quarter or more of the remai-
ning rainforest will be gone by 2025.
N ow let’s conservat i vely assume that the forests
presently shelter 10 million species and focus exclu-
s i vely on the impact of deforestat i o n .We wo n ’t eve n
consider species lost to over-hunting or those erased
by new diseases, alien weeds and animals such as rat s.
Within these cautious parameters , 27,000 species are
doomed each ye a r. In other wo r d s , 74 will disappear
or start their descent to endangered status eve ry day,
three each hour.
If rainforests are as rich in diversity as most
biologists think, their reduction alone will elimi-
nate at least five to ten per cent of all the species
on earth. I think that a far greater number of spe-
cies are on the edge, perhaps irreversibly so.
Clearly we are in the midst of one of the great
extinction spasms of geological history. Humanity
needs a moral awakening together with all of the
scientific and technological ingenuity it can bring
to bear, in order to avoid impoverishing the pla-
net for all generations to come. We can, we must
find the way. ■
