When Mexican teacher Jose A n t o n i o
Lopez Tercero was a student, h e
regarded as quite plausible the idea
t h at velocity and potential energy are like
t wo machines that can be stored in a cup-
b o a r d . Back in those day s , he was led to
b e l i e ve all kinds of outlandish things. H i s
innocence was caused not by reading
G a b riel Garcia Marquez’s magic realist
n ove l s , but by dozing through abstract
p hysics classes. “They were aw f u l ,” r e c a l l s
Lopez Te r c e r o, who now teaches chemistry
at the Escuela del Sur Institute, a seconda-
ry school in Mexico City.
Today he tries to teach science in the
way he would liked to have learnt it. As
often as possible, he uses everyday objects
to help his students grasp abstract
concepts. A washing machine can  illus-
t r ate dispersion by centrifugal force;
clothes show how to distinguish natural
and synthetic fibres; plastics aid the study
of oil derivatives; lemon juice and red
cabbage bring acids to life, while televi-
sion helps explain how electromagnetic
waves work.
This approach represents a huge qua-
litative change, at least in comparison to
what Lopez Tercero had to go through as
a pupil. Back at secondary school, he
remembers that “the teacher would arri-
ve, announce a concept, write down a for-
mula, and teach us how to solve problems
using the lat t e r. All I did was wo r k
through the formulas by replacing letters
with numbers.”
This traditional teaching method,
based on the transmission of a body of
knowledge and the study of problems
with little relevance to many students, is
still practiced, and not just in Mexico.
According to Jacob Bregman, a specialist
in science education at the World Bank,
“science education in developing coun-
tries often relies too much on memoriza-
tion of facts and not enough on learning
to understand the relevance of knowledge
and its application in the local context.”
In the industrialized countries there is
much greater emphasis on the problem-
solving approach, decision-making, and
developing the ability to analyze and work
in a team.
Failings in the educational systems of
Third World countries are particularly
alarming because economic development
is increasingly linked to scientific and
t e c h n o l o gical know l e d g e . But there is
n ow a widespread desire for change,
reflected in a wave of reforms in scientific
education that have taken place around
the world in the last few years.1 And
though the reforms differ from country
to country, they have certain common
features.
One of them is relating science to eve-
ry d ay life, as Lopez Tercero does in
Mexico. As well as improving the learning
p r o c e s s , this method makes students
more enthusiastic and genuinely interes-
ted in science. In recent years, half of the
gr a d u ates from the Escuela del Sur
Institute have embarked on scientific
c a r e e rs , 30 per cent more than the
Mexican school average.
Unearthing the practical end 
of knowledge
Relating science to everyday life also
means anchoring teaching more firmly in
the local context. Using problems that
affect the community, teachers endeavour
to show the practical value of scientific
knowledge in determining the causes of
specific phenomena.They encourage stu-
dents to come up with ways of possibly



SCIENCE TEACHING ’ S
QU A N T UM LEAP
◗ Asbel López
Teachers must prepare not only future scientists, but also citizens who will confront
unprecedented technological and ethical challenges in their lifetime
◗ UNESCO Courier journalist
1. Sylvia A.Ware (editor): Science and
Environment Education,Views from Developing
Countries,The World Bank, Washington D.C.,
1999.
Paul Black and Myron Atkin (editors):
Changing the Subject, London: Routledge with the
Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD),1996.
Hands-on learning: in Namibia, students test the resistance of mudbricks.

preventing environmental catastrophes.
Teachers are making “huge efforts in
their classes to treat problems which are
relevant to the students instead of using
abstract examples from textbooks,” says
Bettina Walther, the co-ordinator of a
science education project in Tanzania’s
secondary schools. Launched in 1997,the
project involves maths teachers from 27
schools, who focus lessons on develop-
ment projects in the towns where they
teach. For example, geometry courses
might be based on the practical case of
installing electricity and telephone lines
to explain concepts while applied maths
lessons look to using fertilizers and pesti-
cides for learning various operations.
Even while looking at the stars, these
teachers base their classes on widely held
local beliefs. Peter Lesala, a science edu-
c ation adviser to Lesotho’s secondary
schools, is writing a course on astronomy
that will feature in his country’s curricu-
lum. “The first thing I did,” he explains,
“was to do some research into Basotho
beliefs about the stars. My course will
start with a discussion of those beliefs.”
for the World Bank and director of
Education and International Activities at
the American Chemical Society believes
in science for all, not just for future scien-
tists. “Those involved in reforming scien-
ce education believe that science is too
important to be left up to scientists alone.
The general public must have a much
broader and more subtle understanding
of science than they have at the moment.
Problems of developing countries such as
water supply, health, industrial develop-
ment or land use have to be addressed by
people who understand the science and
technology involved.”
In other words, the goal is to provide
basic scientific literacy so that citizens can
take an active part in crucial debates on
issues ranging from environmental pro-
Some science education projects
might be inspired by a foreign model. In
this case, the key lies in adapting themes
to local conditions, as some teachers and
students have done in a highly creat i ve way
using “ C h e m C o m : C h e m i s t ry in the com-
m u n i t y ” , a secondary school course draw n
up by the Washington-based A m e ri c a n
Chemical Society, an organization dedica-
ted to advancing knowledge and research
in the field of chemistry and relat e d
sciences (see box ) .
Science for all
Underlying this reform trend is the
conviction that far more young people
should have access to scientific education.
Sylvia Ware, author of several reports on
science education in developing countries

During an in-service training workshop in the Philippines, teachers build a bridge model using local materials.

tection, to the use of genetically modified
organisms, to the new ethical dilemmas
posed by modern biological discoveries.
Through activities like sorting garbage,
protecting certain endangered animal and
plant species and conserving wat e r
r e s o u r c e s , science education can help train
citizens to be aware of their social respon-
s i b i l i t i e s. One example is the Globo project
in Costa Rica, whose goal is to make stu-
dents aware of environmental protection
by studying the El Niño climatic pheno-
m e n o n .Young Costa Ricans measure tem-
p e r atures and record rainfall levels in their
c o m m u n i t i e s.This dat a , g athered by relat i-
vely complex instru m e n t s , is then used in
m aths courses to draw gr a p h s , in the social
sciences to study the impact of floods on
communities and in biology classes to
explain life cy c l e s.
Ware says the issue of “science for all”
has been debated “from Argentina to
Zimbabwe”. The big question is how to
make scientific knowledge more acces-
sible to more students without lowering
standards in courses for those who will
become the scientists of tomorrow. The
answer is complex, requiring a system
that is flexible enough to offer more pre-
cise and in-depth knowledge to those
planning to follow a scientific career,
while at the same time giving everybody
else scientific training that allows them to
function in society.
Although developing countries are far
from having solved this issue, nations like
Argentina, Brazil and Chile have chosen
the route of specialization. In Chile, stu-
dents in the first ye a rs of secondary
school follow the same programme. The
aim is to give them a grounding for beco-
ming well-rounded, socially responsible
citizens. In the last two years, a streamed
system offers two specializations: a tech-
nical and professional kind, aimed at trai-
ning future employees able to compete in
the world market; and a more theoretical
scientific course that stimulates analytical
thought and strives to instil higher levels
of conceptual understanding.This stream
is more specifically geared at students
interested in pursuing a scientific career.
Using this mix,the Chilean model aims to
ensure the creation of a highly trained
workforce that can respond to rapid
changes in the labour market, while at the
same time establishing a scientific com-
munity which can carry out the technolo-
gical innovations needed to modernize
the country’s economy.
Investing
in teachers
These sorts of innovations may well
be major advances, but according to Ware
“you can’t just change the curriculum
and expect things to change in the class-
room.You have to work with teachers and
help them become familiar with the new
m at e rial and new ways of teaching.”
U n f o rt u n at e l y, t e a c h e rs in deve l o p i n g
countries are in a precarious position,and
are thus unable to assume natural leader-
ship in the reform process.
In Chile, teachers work between 33
and 44 hours a week in two or sometimes
three different schools. In Mexico, stu-
dents—numbering up to 60 per class—
are generally taught by dentists or doctors
retrained for the purpose, or by teachers
with more knowledge of classroom tech-
nique than the subject they are supposed
to be covering. Neither students nor tea-
chers stray far from the textbook. “The
main problem with science education in
Mexico is no longer the issue of pro-
grammes or of textbooks; the weak point
lies in teacher training, which is practical-
ly left up to fat e ,” declares V i c e n t e
Ta l a n q u e r , a chemistry professor at
Mexico’s Autonomous University. What
he qualifies as a “big gap” still divides
educational plans and study programmes
from the abiding reality of the classroom.
In Ware’s opinion, there is only one
way to fill this gap: “invest as much as
possible in teachers’ professional develop-
ment.” While adapting the ChemCom
course for use in Russia, the American
Chemical Society, supported by UNESCO,
has also offered training workshops for
teachers, even for those from the most
far-flung towns in Siberia.As a result, the
t e a c h e rs get to know the educat i o n a l
materials and methods, as well as new
evaluation tools that enable them to find
out whether a student has simply learnt
concepts by rote, or if on the other hand
he or she has understood the ideas and is
able to apply them in different situations.
E n o rmous public investment and
resolute political will are required to gua-
rantee this training in the long term.
Given that the reform of scientific educa-
tion in Mexico began only seven years
a g o, and invo l ves 200,000 secondary
school teachers and 600,000 teachers in
primary school, it is clear that the radical
changes everyone is seeking will not hap-
pen overnight. ■

Through activities like 
sorting garbage, protecting
c e r tain endangered animal 
and plant species and
c o n s e rving water resources,
science education can help
t rain citizens to be aware 
of their social responsibilities.
