LAURENCE W. SRESHTHAPUTRA
BANGKOK POST JOURNALIST

A THAI CRUSADE FOR CLEAN POLITICS
New watchdogs now have the teeth to fight corruption but old-style politics aren’t going to disappear
overnight. Some say this will take no less than a revolution in political culture 
Not a day goes by in Thailand without
some new tale of corruption being
aired in the press. Some see a revolution
underway while others question the use
of attacking such a long-accepted disease.
So what chances do the anti-corruption
crusaders have?
If events this year are anything to go by,
they might well be gaining the upper hand.
The first senatorial elections by popular
vote held in March turned into a veritable
soap opera with the newly established
Election Commission ordering more than
half the races to be run again because of
irregularities or vote-buying. In the end, i t
took five rounds of voting to fill all the
s e a t s.
Later in the month, S a n a n
K a c h o r n p r a s a r t , the all-powerful interior
minister and secretary-general of the
ruling Democrat Party, was forced to
resign after the National Counter-
Corruption Commission (NCCC)
accused him of falsifying documents
concerning a $1.2 million loan.Another
key event was the rioting in the southern
province of Nakhon Si Thammarat set
off in early September by police
corruption.
The crash that killed 
tolerance for bribes
The list of scandals gets longer each
day in a country where corruption drains
away 10 to 20 percent of the national
budget—about 2.25 to 4.5 billion dollars.
“There’s clearly a knock-on effect,”
says Pasuk Phongpaichit, an economics
professor at Bangkok’s Chulalongkorn
University and author of several books on
corruption.According to the drafters of
the NCCC programme, “there is broad
consensus in favour of a national crusade
against corruption aimed at reforming
the whole society.”A recent poll showed
that Thais saw government corruption as
the country’s third most serious problem,
behind the economic crisis and the rising
cost of living, and just ahead of drugs.
This great urge for change is the
culmination of a long process that began in
the late 1970s when the army agreed to a
p o w e r-sharing deal. Since then, Th a i l a n d
has seen civil society grow and become a

player on the political scene, notably by
taking a strong stand against an attempted
military coup in May 1992. What was
tolerated 30 years ago is no longer
a c c e p t a b l e.
Several political leaders have stood
out in this period of transformation. In
November 1985, Chamlong Srimuang,
an austere former army commander,
became the most popular mayor
Bangkok has ever had.A few years later,
police lieutenant Prathin Santiprapop,
known as “Mr Clean,” ran an effic i e n t
operation to stamp out a profitable
nationwide timber-smuggling scheme.
Then, in 1997, came two events that
hastened the course of Thai history:the
Asian financial crash and the enactment
of a new constitution.“People tolerated
the waste of money in bribes when things
were going well,but much less at a time of
economic crisis,” says Phongpaichit.
In July 1997,a 40 percent devaluation
of the national currency led to a slump
that immediately threw millions of people
out of work.But the crash also opened the
way to reform and restructuring,
especially in the financial sector, where
secrecy encouraged corruption.
People knew economic recovery could
only come through political reforms.Th e
drafting of a new constitution, the 16th in
the country’s history, switched into higher
g e a r. It introduced new checks and
b a l a n c e s, such as a constitutional court, t h e
N C C C, a national election commission
and a human rights commission.
Parliament followed up with a law
giving everyone access to administrative
d o c u m e n t s. “ The new constitution
provides the legal means to investigate
government officials after complaints
from citizens and organizations,” s a y s
Phongpaichit.The NCCC can prosecute
and punish deputies, senators and cabinet
ministers and has various legal weapons.
The most feared is the obligation to
disclose financial assets,which has already
caused a few heads to roll, and the so-
called “50,000 signatures law,” which can
force authorities to investigate someone
suspected of corruption.
But these weapons can be difficult to
handle. “Someone who wants to start a
petition first has to appear before the
Senate and then prove that the minimum
50,000 signatures collected are genuine,”
says Deunden Nikomborirak,of the Th a i
Research and Development Fo u n d a t i o n .
Beyond these practical considerations
is a sense that corruption is profoundly
rooted and all-pervasive—even among
doctors, teachers and monks. The latter
have been involved in many recent
s c a n d a l s, even though the law still forbids
looking into the assets of their temples.
“ I t ’s very hard to make people realize
that what they’ve done all their lives is in
fact illegal and can land them in court,”
says Abhisit Vejjajiva,head of the prime
m i n i s t e r ’s office. “ You really have to
change the political culture and that’s
not going to be easy.”
A daunting task awaits
corruption investigators
Many aspects of Thai culture and social
values—such as respect for hierarchies, a
distaste for confrontation and the belief
that wealth and a powerful job go hand in
hand—tend to encourage corruption.
The task ahead might seem daunting:
“ We haven’t done very much so far,”
admits Krirkiat Phipatseritham, a former
rector of Thammasat University and a
member of the NCCC, who reels off
figures to prove his point.Seventy percent
of cabinet ministers, 60 percent of
parliamentary deputies and 30 to 40
percent of senators are involved in
corruption,he asserts.“We have to keep
an eye on about 5,000 people,” he says.
“ We ’ve inherited 3,300 case fil e s,of which
only 700 have been dealt with so far.”
C l e a r l y, the anti-corruption crusaders are
not about to claim victory but the big
clean-up has well and truly begun. ■
A giant hand advertises the Democrat Party’s campaign for “Politics with Clean Hands.”
E T H I C S ◗
The obligation
to disclose
financial assets
has already
caused a few
heads to roll
