B ack in 1919, U. S . President Wo o d r ow
Wilson managed to have the Treaty of
Versailles,which ended the First World War
b e t ween Germ a ny and the A l l i e s , w ritten in
English as well as French. Since then,English has
taken root in diplomacy and gradually in econo-
mic relations and the media. The language now
seems set to have a monopoly as the worldwide
medium of communication.
As the 21st century begins, faster economic
globalization is going hand in hand with the gro-
wing use of English. More and more people are
being encouraged to use or send messages in
English rather than in their own language. Many
do not mind.They see this as part of the unavoi-
dable trend towards worldwide uniformity and a
means whereby a growing number of people can
communicate directly with each other.
From this point of view, the spread of English
m ay be seen as a positive development which save s
resources and makes cultural exchange easier.
After all, it might be said, the advance of English is
not aimed at killing off local languages but is sim-
ply a means of reaching a wider audience.
Perhaps. But accepting that as the last word
ignores the deep-rooted ties between individual
freedom and political power, between the linguis-
tic, social and economic mechanisms which in
every society underpin relations between people
and groups and between culture and communi-
ties. A person makes a mark through his or her
ability to use the most useful language or lan-
guages. And over several generations, the most
useful language eliminates the others.
Cultural imperialism is much more subtle
than economic imperialism, which is itself less
tangible and visible than political and military
imperialism, whose excesses are obvious and easy
to denounce. It would be wrong to say that the
world domination of English is something delibe-
rately organized and supported by the Anglo-
Saxon powers, hand in glove with political initia-
tives or the penetration of the world economy by
their transnational firms.The “language war” has
very seldom been regarded as a war and has
never, anywhere, been declared.
The military, diplomatic, political and econo-
mic strategies of the major powers can be studied
and criticized, but linguistic strategies seem to be
inconspicuous and tacit, even innocent or non-
existent.The history of the past century has obli-
ged many powers to take a more modest attitude
to language, but has it taught them to stand up to
domination by a single language?
M a ny ye a rs after the founding in 1945 of the
Arab League, whose current 22 member states have
250 million people, the countries which share a
French linguistic heritage broke new ground by
c r e ating a joint policy. In order to promote linguis-
t i c, e c o n o mic and political co-operat i o n , they set
up the Intern ational Organization of French-
Speaking Countri e s , which (like the
C o m m o n wealth) embraces more than 50 coun-
t ries with over 500 million inhabitants.
Since 1991, there have been conferences of
Dutch-speakers from eight or more communities



1 ❘ War of word s
Can E n g l i s h b e
d e t h ro n e d ?
◗ Roland J. - L . B r e t o n
Major languages other than English 
a re spoken by over half the people on the
p l a n e t . What can be done to give them more
clout 
◗ Geolinguist and emeritus
professor at the University of Paris
VIII

representing some 40 million people, as well as
Ibero-American summits, which every two years
bring together more than 20 countries (350 mil-
lion inhabitants). Turkish-speaking summits have
been held biennially since 1992, with delegates
from six independent countries (120 million
people) of Europe, Central Asia and small ethnic
communities elsewhere. Since 1996, t h e
Association of Portuguese-speaking countries has
brought together people from seven countries
(200 million people).
Pockets
of resistance
Will unco-ordinated resistance by the world’s
most widely-used languages be enough to cope
with the threat of cultural uniformity? Perhaps
not, since each language has its own geographical
sphere in which it is used with varying degrees of
competence. If you add up the number of spea-
kers of the world’s dozen most-used languages,
you come up with a figure of more than three bil-
lion—half of humanity—which easily surpasses
the two billion for whom English is more or less
the official language (the Commonwealth and the
United States). Backed by a concerted strategy,
these major languages would surely make head-
way in international institutions.
It is not just the future of the world’s major
languages that is at stake. Further down the scale
are 100 or so tongues officially recognized by
governments or sub-national regions, such as the
constitutional languages of India and the lan-
guages of the Russian nationalities. These lan-
guages have their place and a right to defend it.At
the bottom of the scale are thousands of some-
times struggling languages variously called native,
minority, communal or ethnic tongues. Most are
in danger of disappearing. They are spoken by
some 300 million people.
Will minor languages die out, as some pre-
dict? Yes, because the best way to kill off a lan-
guage is to teach another one.The monopoly that
about 100 national languages have on education
makes it inevitable that languages not taught in
schools will be confined to the home and to folk-
lore and eventually be pushed out of nurturing
cultural environments.
Language murder or “linguicide”, whether it
is carried out intentionally or not, is one of the
basic tools of ethnocide, of the deculturation of
peoples which has always been perpetrated by
colonization and is still the semi-official aim of
governments which do not recognize the rights of
their native ethnic minorities. As local languages
are increasingly excluded from education sys-
tems, “linguicide” is speeding up.
The language issue in the 21st century 
raises two questions. How can widely-used or
national languages resist the encroachment of
English? And how can minority languages in dan-
ger of extinction be saved and gain access to deve-
lopment? ð■
