Adopting children is legal, unlike in
other Muslim countries, but is not very
common, says Jabir Aboud Hamid, who
runs the centre. He sees only two ways of
getting the children back into society:
“Find the boys’ families and arrange mar-
riages for the girls.”The latter risk death if
they return home after living in “run-
down places” (the street). “But before I
start looking for something for them,”
says Hamid, “I’ve got to find a new bat-
tery for the centre’s car so I can go and
buy bread for the children.”
In Iraq today, e ve ry sector has urgent
n e e d s , s ays a UN I C E F o f ficial in Baghdad:
“ We ’re doing the work the gove rn m e n t
c a n ’t do any longer because of the embargo,
like building clinics, houses and schools,
r e p a i ring drains, water treatment plants,
p rinting presses and chalk fa c t o ri e s. I t ’s an
e n o rmous job and we have to work fast to
s ave the children. Most of all, we ’ ve got to
get them back into school so this ‘ e m b a r g o
g e n e r at i o n ’ i s n ’t lost to the country.”
O ver the past 10 ye a rs , the gove rn-
m e n t ’s education budget has shrunk by 90
per cent, from $230 million in 1991 to $23
million today. As many as 83 per cent of
p ri m a ry schools need to be repaired. S o m e
h ave been totally destroye d , while others
are working at “full capacity”. At Diala
s c h o o l , on the road between Baghdad and
B a s r a , the pupils take turns learning in
four-hour shifts in classrooms with broken
benches and desks, bare electrical wiri n g,
ceilings with holes and flo o rs under wat e r.
Despair reigns in the public health
department. “They say Iraq makes arms
using anti-cancer medicine and chlorine
needed for water purification,” exclaims
Abdul Amir El Thamery. “Do we have to
stand and watch people die? Must chil-
dren fall ill because the water is undrink-
able? And what’s going to happen in the
summer heat when illness,death and mal-
nutrition are already so common?” ■

EMBA RGO GENERAT ION
◗ Josette Tagher Roche
Children are the first victims of the international sanctions against Iraq. More and more 
of them are living on the street in a country that has reverted to under-development
◗ Editor of Enfants du monde, magazine of the French
section of UNICEF
1.The war with Iran between 1980 and 1988 and
the Gulf War in 1990-1991.
2. Jointly run by the Iraqi government and the
French NGO Enfants du monde.
According to UNICEF, 83 per cent of the country’s primary schools are in need of repair as a result of the embargo.
■
Two small children are standing hand
in hand on the main street of the
s o u t h e rn Iraqi port of Basra. E ve n i n g
is drawing in and the traders are starting to
pull down the metal screens in front of
their shops. The smiling yo u n g s t e rs , l e s s
than eight ye a rs old, are trying to sell to
p a s s e rsby their sole possessions—a couple
of red and white striped plastic bags. “ We
wo n ’t quit the street until we ’ ve earn e d
some money,” they say, as we are joined by
40-odd other street children who have no
wares left to sell.
They all talk at once.They left school,
they say, because they failed their studies.
They don’t live at home because their
parents are “divorced or out of work”and
“they have to live on their wits”. As the
last shopkeepers switch off their electrici-
ty generators, the street darkens. The
youngest of the group, a boy hardly six
ye a rs old, steps forward and says he
“wants to go to school”.
How long will it be before the world
realises the dramatic effects the interna-
tional embargo is having on the people of
Iraq and especially on their children? Iraq
and the Iraqis have been ruined by two
wars1, but damaged even more by the
international sanctions imposed nearly a
decade ago after Iraqi ruler Saddam
Hussein’s troops invaded Kuwait.
Every month, malnutrition kills more
than 4,500 Iraqi children under five ,
according to estimates of a UNICEF survey
released in August 1999.How many more
deaths must there be before people realise
what is going on? There were hardly any
street children a decade ago, when all
youngsters went to school. Today their
numbers are growing. In Iraq, it is illegal
to work or beg under the age of 15, and
street kids are punished for committing
these offences. When they are arrested,
they are usually sent to detention centres
where conditions are very harsh. Some
then manage to get to El Rahma
( “ M e r cy ” ) , B a g h d a d ’s only reception
centre for street children, where condi-
tions are better but carers are few.2
E v e ry month, malnutrition
kills more than 4,500 Ira q i
children under fiv e
