BRAZIL
24
2 . C ATERING TO DEMAND
Acommon assumption about the private
sector in education is that it caters only
to the élite,and that its promotion only
serves to exacerbate inequality. On the
contrary, recent research points in the
opposite direction.If we want to help some of the
most disadvantaged groups in society, then encou-
raging deeper private sector involvement is likely to
be the best way forward.
Several developments are underway  in India, a l l
of which involve the private education sector meeting
the needs of the poor in distinct ways. But India is not
unique in this respect—similar phenomena are hap-
pening all over the developing world.
As a point of departure, how do government
schools serve the poor? Usefully, the government-
sponsored Public Report on Basic Education in
India (PROBE) from 1999 paints a very bleak pic-
ture of the “ m a l f u n c t i o n i n g ”of government schools
for the poor.When researchers called unannounced
on their random sample of schools,only 53 percent
had any “teaching activity” going on. In  33 percent,
the headteacher was absent.Alarmingly, the team
noted that the deterioration of teaching standards
was not to do with disempowered teachers, but ins-
tead could be ascribed to “plain negligence.” They
Private education:
the poor’s best chance?
Across the developing world, private schools and education companies 
are not only flourishing, but reaching the poor. India is a case in point
JAMES TOOLEY
PROFESSOR OF EDUCATION POLICY, UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE (UNITED KINGDOM)


25
E D U C AT I O N : THE LAST FRONTIER FOR PROFIT
noted “several cases of irrespon-
sible teachers keeping a school
closed ... for months at a time,”
many cases of drunk teachers, a n d
headteachers who asked children
to do domestic chores. S i g n i f i-
c a n t l y, the low level of teaching
activity occurred even in those
schools with relatively good infra-
s t r u c t u r e, teaching aids and pupil-
teacher ratios.
But is there any alternative to
these schools? Surely no-one else
can do better than government
given the resources available? A s
it happens, the PROBE report
pointed to private schools that
were serving the poor and
c o n c e d e d—rather reluctantly—
that such problems were not found
in these schools. In the great majo-
rity of private schools—a g a i n
visited unannounced and at
r a n d o m—there “was feverish
classroom activity.”Most parents
would prefer to send their chil-
dren to private schools if they could afford them.P r i-
vate schools, they said,were successful because they
were more accountable: “the teachers are accoun-
table to the manager (who can fire them), a n d ,
through him or her, to the parents (who can with-
draw their children).” Such accountability was not
present in the government schools,and “this contrast
is perceived with crystal clarity by the vast majority
of parents.”
The way forward: loosen regulations
and set up voucher schemes
To many readers, the existence of these private
schools for the poor will come as a surprise. It was
to me too, until I had the privilege of conducting
fieldwork for the International Finance Corporation
(the private finance arm of the World Bank) on a
group of such schools operating under the banner
of the Federation of Private Schools’ Management
based in Hyderabad.The federation has 500 private
schools (from kindergarten to grade ten) serving
poor communities in slums and villages. I was
impressed by both the entrepreneurial spirit within
these schools —they were run on commercial prin-
c i p l e s, not dependent on hand-outs from state or phi-
l a n t h r o p y— but also by the spirit of dedication
within the schools for the poor communities served:
not for nothing were the leaders of the schools
known as “social workers.” But these schools suffer
under restrictive and inappropriate regulations.
One example will suffic e : to be recognized, a school
must deposit up to  50,000 rupees(about $1,200) in
a stipulated bank account, of which neither the
capital nor the interest can be touched.Given that
the fees charged in these schools ranged from 25 (60
cents) to Rs 150  per month (about $3.50), w i t h
most of the schools grouped near the lower end of
the range, such sums are completely prohibitive.
Fees of around $10 per year are not affordable
by everyone,but they are to a large number of poor
f a m i l i e s. F u r t h e r m o r e, the great majority of the
schools offer a significant number of free places —
up to 20 percent— for the poorest students,a l l o c a t e d
on the basis of claims of need checked informally in
the community.
All of this suggests that if one is interested in
serving the needs of the poor in India, then trying to
reform the totally inadequate, cumbersome and
unaccountable government system is unlikely to be
the best way. I n s t e a d , reform the regulatory envi-
ronment to make it suitable for the flourishing of pri-
vate schools for the poor,help build private fin a n c i n g
schemes using overseas and indigenous philanthropy,
and encourage public voucher schemes, so that
parents can use their allowance of funding where they
see the schools are performing well, rather than was-
ting them in unresponsive state schools.
Private education in developing countries isn’t
just about the poor, of course, and there are many
exciting examples of big education businesses. B u t
these too have implications for the ways in which the
private sector can reach the least advantaged. O n e
Indian company which embodies much of the exci-
tement and innovation in the education industry is the
National Institute for Information Te c h n o l o g y
( N I I T ) . With its competitor, A p t e c h , it shares just
over 70 percent of the information technology edu-
cation and training market in India, estimated at
roughly Rs. 1.1 billion ($24 million). NIIT has 40
wholly owned centres in the metropolitan areas,a n d
about 1,000 franchised centres across India. It also
has a global reach, with centres in the U. S. ,A s i a -
P a c i fic,E u r o p e,Ja p a n ,Central Asia and A f r i c a . A key
aspect of NIIT’s educational philosophy is that there
is a need to harness research to improve the effi-
c i e n cy of learning and to raise educational standards.
Because of its success in developing innovative
and cost-effective IT education and training,NIIT has

attracted the attention of several state governments.
First off the mark was Tamil Nadu,which wanted to
bring a computer curriculum to all of its high schools.
S i g n i fic a n t l y, although allocating about $22 million
over five years to this endeavour, it didn’t hand the
funds over to government schools,perhaps in light of
the PROBE report’s lessons. I n s t e a d , it developed a
model to contract out the service to private compa-
n i e s,which provide the software and hardware,w h i l e
the government supplies electricity and the class-
r o o m . For the first round of the Tamil Nadu process,
43 contracts were awarded for 666 schools,with NIIT
allotted 371 schools. Many of the classrooms have
become NIIT centres, open to school children and
teachers in daytime, then used by the franchise holder
in the evenings. The contracting out of curriculum
areas such as this represents an important step for-
ward in relationships between the public and pri-
vate sectors,and provides an interesting model worth
watching and emulating.
Most recently, NIIT has focused on reaching
largely illiterate and unschooled children through the
I n t e r n e t . Within weeks of having set up an “ I n t e r n e t
k i o s k ” in a slum area, the institute’s researchers
found that without any instruction, children could
achieve a remarkable level of computer literacy.
NIIT is exploring ways to roll out the idea com-
m e r c i a l l y,harnessing the power of the private sector
to reach the poorest through modern technology.
These initiatives all find echoes in other deve-
loping countries. In each case, the private, not the
public sector, is most responsive to the needs of
the poor, and is bringing innovation, e f fic i e n cy and
educational quality to the lives of the most disad-
v a n t a g e d .The private sector has the potential to pro-
mote greater equity and to influence education
policy, provided it is encouraged and viewed as a
p a r t n e r, not a threat to governments,whether in the
developing or the developed world. ■

