read nor write?  Of course we must teach
them how, which is a long-term underta-
king. We can also make use of technology.
N owa d ay s , vo i c e - a c t i vated computers and
Braille gi ve blind people access to the
I n t e rn e t . I t ’s easy to imagine similar devices
for illiterate people. The energy situation is
just as bad. Fe wer than 10 per cent of
Malians have access to electricity or tele-
phones. What can be done?  In the short
t e rm we must settle for equipment that
runs on batteries,for example.
Which medium encourages the broadest
possible participation in the democratic
process in Mali today?
T h e r e ’s no question it’s radio, w h i c h
overcomes the dual problems of illiteracy
and communication in the va rious nat i o n a l
l a n g u a g e s.Transistor radios are small, c h e a p
and battery-powered. What the transistor
radio is today, the mobile phone will be
t o m o rr ow. Soon the Internet will be acces-
sible by mobile phone, and I’m sure that will
help us take a big leap forward.
Mobile phones with Internet access will be
tremendously expensive.
True, but radios were also very expen-
s i ve when they first appeared. It might
seem illusory to picture the spread of mobile
phones in A f ri c a , but technology is deve l o-
ping ve ry quickly, which brings prices dow n
just as fa s t . Political determ i n ation and
the commitment of companies will be cru-
cial to the future of such technology in
Africa.
If the Internet was widespread in Mali today,
how would it affect democracy?
It would encourage more citizens to
take part in the democratic process. It
would probably be more effective than
radio in helping them to learn things and
to voice their opinions. At election time,
computerised voting would solve major
problems, such as the participation of
Malians living abroad (20-25 per cent of
the population) and of villagers who must
sometimes travel 20-30 kilometers to
reach the nearing polling station. But,
technical problems aside, Malians are not
exactly flocking to the voting booth. They
seem to have lost faith in the country’s
political leaders, and we mustn’t rely on
the Internet to make up for their lack of
motivation. ■
Interview by Jasmina Sopova, 
UNESCO Courier journalist
■
Do democra cy and the Internet go together i n
Africa?
They don’t, because the Internet has
only just started appearing on the continent.
To become a tool of democracy, the Intern e t
must become democratic itself!  The Web
has penetrated every country in the world,
but only two per cent of the globe’s popu-
lation have access to it. In most African
countries, the Internet is used only by an
elite living mostly in big cities. To make it
more widespread, we need support from the
wealthy countries.
What do you expect from them?
That they help us develop an infra-
structure as cheaply as possible while
taking local conditions into account.
We’re not asking for hand-outs. If they
decide to invest, they have everything to
gain, especially in economies of scale.
Ninety-eight per cent of the wo r l d ’s
population is not on line yet—that’s bil-
lions of people. However poor they are,
they represent an incredible market. The
countries of the South will gain too,
because new technology helps to spread
information, which is a tremendous asset
in promoting the growth of democracy.
Then there’s the issue of solidari t y. R i c h
countries invest a lot to foster democracy
around the wo r l d . If the Internet is a means
of helping to achieve that end, we ’d be baf-
fled if they didn’t help us overcome the
obstacles in our way.
What are those obstacles?
The first major stumbling block is illi-
t e r a cy, which concerns about half of Mali’s
population. What’s the point of giving all
citizens Internet access if they can neither




A FRICA: CELL PHONES 
F OR CI T IZ ENSHIP
Ibrahima N’Diaye, the mayor of Mali’s capital Bamako, is banking on the Internet to boost
democracy in Africa via specially-outfitted cell phones
