The wo r l d ’s biggest museum lies
under the sea. Over the centuries
h u n d r e d s , perhaps thousands of
ships—nobody has even a remote idea
how many—have sunk in storms or the
heat of battle, bringing Roman amphorae,
gold bars, cannons and crates of Chinese
porcelain with them.
Maritime trade began booming in the
sixteenth century : the ships of the Dutch
East India Company made 8,000 round-
t rip voyages to China in a 200-year peri o d .
But until the mid-twentieth century, there
was no way reach this underwater museum,
and the world’s oceans were like a gigantic
safe containing civilisation’s treasures.
Two of the oldest ships found recently
came to a grim end just over 2,700 ye a rs
a g o, when they were probably on their way
from Tyre to the Pharaohs’ Egypt laden
with wine-filled amphorae. A m e ri c a n
u n d e r water archaeologists Robert Ballard,
who discovered the wreck of the Ti t a n i c,
and Lawrence Stager, of Harva r d
U n i ve rs i t y, found the two Phoenician ve s-
s e l s , each less than 20 metres long, off the
Israeli coast in June 1999.
They had been asked to locate an
Israeli submarine, the Dakar, which sank
in 1969, taking its 69 crew members
d own with it. Two small underwat e r
robots, Jason and Medea, descended to
300 and 900 metres to film and inspect
the Phoenician vessels, which led to the
discovery that they were still in an excel-
lent state of preservation.
The deeper the water the less oxygen,
so wrecks there are much better preserved
than those closer to the surface, according
to Ballard. “The great depths, the absen-
ce of sunlight and the great pressures
seem to preserve history far more than we
thought,” he says. A 3,300-year-old ship
was found off Turkey in more shallow
waters, and two more Phoenician vessels,
dating from the seventh century BC, were
located near Murcia, Spain, but all were
in much worse condition.
The discovery of the two wrecks off
the coast of southern Israel came as a sur-
prise because historians were unaware
t h at the Phoenicians conducted trade◗ Journalist with the French daily newspaper Libération
DI V ING 
F OR DOL LA RS
◗ Vincent Noce
New technology means shipwrecks swallowed up by the deepest waters can now be reached.
But who owns the precious finds? Some countries allow a free-for-all of plundering
Underwater treasures: exploring the wreck of a 16th-century galleon that sank off the Philippine coast.

the divers realized they had been excava-
ting two wrecks that had sunk one on top
of the other.
At that time, no laws or official bodies
r e g u l ated underwater archaeologi c a l
exploration in France or anywhere else.In
1966 President Charles de Gaulle’s
minister of culture, André Malraux, set
up an underwater archaeological explora-
tion division and made it compulsory to
declare finds in French territorial waters.
In 1989, two years after a similar law
had been passed in the United States,
France adopted legi s l ation that gave 
the state sole ownership rights to all sun-
ken treasures found in its terri t o ri a l
waters. Until then, it had been possible to
share them. As a result, the number of
declarations plummeted from about 250
a year to under 50. Seven years later, the
g ove rnment tried to counter the 
drop by announcing rewards of up to
200,000 French francs (approx i m at e l y
$30,000) for discovering such treasures,
depending on its scientific value. But
those rewards are rarely paid: explorers
risk breaking the law since a single
amphora can fetch up to 10,000 French
francs ($1,500) on the market.
U n aware amateur dive rs think
amphorae do not “talk.”That is a big mis-
take, because they do. They can tell us
along that route. A wine decanter (sho-
wing that wine was decanted in those
days), stone anchors, food crockery and a
censer were found among Ty rr h e n i a n
amphorae typical of the period, which
allowed researchers to roughly determine
the date the ships went down as well as
where they sailed from.
“More important discoveries should
come in the near future that could signifi-
cantly alter our understanding of ancient
maritime trade,” predicts Ballard. The
discovery off Sicily of Roman ships dating
from between 100 BC and 400 AD has
already confirmed a long-disputed theory
according to which the Romans were
quite capable of sailing in deep water a
long way from the coast.
A question
of ownership
Yet until only half a century ago, when
the autonomous deep-sea diving suit was
invented, it was still impossible to go
anywhere near deep-sea wrecks. In 1952
Jacques Cousteau led the first underwater
archaeological expedition off Marseilles,
which was a very busy Mediterranean
port in Roman times. His team brought
up Greek and Roman amphorae, which
puzzled specialists at first because they
were at least a century apart in age.Then
when the wreck occurred, the nationality
of the crew and how the cargo was ship-
ped. And the discovery of amphorae is
what usually indicates that an ancient
wreck is nearby, concealed in the sand.
For the 14 centuries between 700 BC
and 700 AD, these large jars were used to
t r a n s p o rt wine, o i l , pickled products,
spices, tea and other goods. After that,
hundreds of years went by before vessels
once again began carrying items—can-
nons and porcelain this time—that future
archaeologists and treasure-hunters could
use as clues to detect the locations of
shipwrecks. The years in between are a
blank, either because wrecks disintegrated
or remain invisible, or because maritime
trade collapsed.
Site leasing
to private investors
For example, a barn a c l e - e n c ru s t e d
cannon tipped archaeologists off to the
presence of a wrecked French fleet off
Ve n e z u e l a ’s Las Aves islands. King 
Louis XIV had dispatched the warships to
drive the Dutch out of the Caribbean.
Commanded by Count Jean d’Estrées,
the French looted Tobago before heading
to Curaçao, where they would have defea-
ted the Dutch had not half the 13 war-
ships and 17 privateers sunk in a storm on
May 11, 1678. Five hundred of the 5,000
crewmen were drowned and 1,000 died
of starvation or disease after being stran-
ded on desert islands.The disaster put an
end to France’s dream of ruling unchal-
lenged in the Caribbean, which quickly
became a haven for pirates.
Though they no longer fly the skull
and crossbones, p i r ates are still there
today. About 15 years ago, a Venezuelan,
Charles Brewer-Carias, and an American,
Barry Clifford, one of the world’s best-
k n own shipwreck hunters , found the
French flagship Le Terrible, which had 70
cannon and a crew of 500, amid other
wrecks at the site.
Clifford says he was shocked by the
lease of the site to a private investor. “The
Venezuelan people will someday look
back in horror at what is being permitted
to happen to Las Ave s ,” he say s.
Venezuela, which does not have a public
archaeological body that could explore
the site,gave a construction company cal-
led Mespa exclusive permission to exca-
vate and sell whatever they could find.
“We had an archaeologist on board the
research ve s s e l ,” s ays the firm , w h i c h
admits it wants to make a profit by setting
up a discovery “industry”.
“In every single case where countries
Drawing up an inventory of Ming dynasty porcelain found in a 16th-century shipwreck.

have issued permits for treasure hunting,
they have always ended up the losers,”
says Florida archaeologist John de Bry.
“Piracy is alive and well.” Mespa thinks it
can find Count d’Estrées’ and his officers’
p e rsonal va l u a b l e s , but archaeologi s t s
doubt a war fleet would have been car-
rying much “treasure.” However, they
fear the historical and archaeologi c a l
value of items will be lost, as well as the
wreck’s position.
The wrecks also cast light on how
ships were designed and built in the days
French minister Colbert was creating a
royal navy and an entire industry around
it. Recording the exact position of the
various items on the sea’s floor before
bringing them up to the surface is an
extremely delicat e , costly and time-
consuming task. All underwater explora-
tion is very expensive and comes without
any guarantee of success.
Since profit is the treasure-hunters’
only motive, and every day of exploration
costs a small fortune, they are in a hurry
to bring up whatever can be sold, even if
it means destroying everything in their
way. Some even use explosives to reach
what they want.
They have no interest in items that
cannot be sold but which may be of ines-
timable value to historians, such as a pot-
tery shard bearing an inscription that may
provide clues about a ship’s route, a piece
of shoe that can tell much about how the
s a i l o rs dressed or a skeleton show i n g
wounds or nutritional deficiencies. The
hull of the Maurithuis, which sank off
Guinea on its way back from China in
1609, was still lined with nearly 20,000
plates of almost pure zinc, showing that
Chinese metallurgists were very far ahead
of their European counterparts.
The problem of granting exploration
permits is much greater in Portugal’s
Azores island chain, which has one of the
world’s biggest concentrations of wrecks
because it was a necessary stopover for
ships crossing the A t l a n t i c. Po rt u g a l ’s
museum of archaeology has listed 850
sunken Spanish and Po rtuguese ships
there, many loaded with gold.
Eighty-eight of them lie in the Bay of
Hangra de Heroismo, where the British
treasure-hunter John Grittan showed up
in 1972, eventually spending two months
in jail and being banned from exploring.
Nearly a quarter of a century later he
returned—after the law changed to allow
private firms to explore—as manager of
Arqueonauticas, chaired by Rear Admiral
Isaias Gomes Texeira, one of the first
companies to obtain an exploration and
excavation permit.
One of the most famous treasure-hun-
ters, Florida-based Bob Marx, joined the
undertaking, lured by a deal giving him
half of whatever was discovered at a depth
of up to 50 metres and 70 per cent of
what was found further down. “This law
has sacrificed our history to money,” says
Francisco Alves of the national archaeolo-
gy museum. Meanwhile, the Spanish are
frantically poring over legal documents to
see if they have a right to save galleons
that are their own heritage.

Sometimes treasure-hunters hit the
j a c k p o t . One of them, the impetuous
Michael Hatcher, netted about $15 mil-
lion from the piecemeal sale of Chinese
porcelain he found in the wreck of the
Dutch ship Geldermalsen, which sank in
the China Sea in 1752. Christie’s, the
world’s biggest auction house, sold the
pieces off for a while but then quietly
stopped, probably because of the contro-
versy and legal problems raised.
H atcher claims he found the wreck in
i n t e rn ational wat e rs , but researchers say it
was lying within Indonesia’s terri t o rial limits.
Ja k a rta opened an inve s t i g at i o n , and one of
the inve s t i g at o rs drowned in a diving acci-
dent at the site, adding to the detective nove l
aspect of the case. E ventually the Indone-
sians dropped the enquiry, but ru m o u rs tied
t h at move to the corruption of the Suhart o
family then ruling the country.
“All this money going around just
makes matters worse because it is recy-
cled to pay for new explorations,” says
Lyndel Prott,a legal expert on world heri-
tage matters with UNESCO. “Countries
allow the kind of pillage of their underwa-
ter treasures that they would never tolera-
te on land.” ■
Since profit is the treasure-
hunters’ only motive, 
and every day of explora t i o n
costs a small fortune, they are
in a hurry to bring up
whatever can be sold, even 
if it means destroying
e v e rything in their way.
