35
Betty Friedan: debunking 
the mystique of politics
◗ Judy Mann
Women account for just 13 per cent of the U. S. C o n g ress and 10 per cent of the Senate.
But a pioneer of the contemporary feminist movement keeps the faith 
◗ Columnist for The Washington
Post, author of The Difference:
Discovering the Hidden Ways We
Silence Girls – Finding alternatives
that can give them a voice (Warner
Books, 1996)
Betty Friedan burst onto the American scene
in 1963 with The Feminine Mystique, a book
that transformed the way women thought of
themselves not only in the U.S. but also around
the world. She gave voice to the silent malaise
gripping housewives as they tended chores and
wondered silently, ‘Is this all?’. Friedan called it
the problem that had no name, but one society
had to face.
Since then,Friedan,often called the mother of
the U.S. women’s movement, has published a
series of seminal works. Her most recent book is
a memoir, Life So Far, published this spring by
Simon & Schuster. I interviewed her just before
the start of her book tour. At the beginning of the
interview, she quipped:“The trouble is when you
write a memoir, you finish it, and now you think
‘I’m dead.’”
Given the historical strength of the U.S. women’s
movement, why are there still so few women in
politics?
It takes so much money to run for office in the
U.S. Women don’t make that much money and

they don’t have as easy access to it as men do. I
wouldn’t mind running for the Senate but I cer-
tainly would not want to have to raise the money.
In addition to the issue of money, women also
h ave the main responsibility for [raising their] kids.
T h at takes some ye a rs off most wo m e n ’s career life.
How has your work facilitated women’s entry into
politics? 
The things I wrote helped women break
through certain barriers in their own psyche—the
way they looked upon themselves and their possi-
bilities. The feminine mystique, that miasma of
influences, would keep women modest, shy, silent
and invisible. I told them to shout—don’t whis-
per. I organized women to break through the
feminine mystique, to run for office, to get wea-
pons against sex discrimination enforced.
You’ve worked hard for equal rights and affirmative
action. How effective do you think they’ve been
and how could they be strengthened?
Women today in the U.S. are getting the same
number of professional degrees as men.The dis-
c r e p a n cy lies in the childbearing ye a rs and
women never catch up.We are the only industria-
lized nation without a national programme of
childcare. It’s outrageous.
Tu rning to equal pay for equal wo r k , the pri n-
ciple is right but there are a lot of ways of sidelining
i t .Too many women are segr e g ated in jobs that may
be even more valuable than jobs men do, bu t
because women do them they are paid less. So we
began to say equal pay for work of equal va l u e .W hy
should janitors get more than a schoolteacher? Or
where would doctors be without nurs e s ?
Do you think women’s issues like economic equality
and reproductive rights are considered marginal
and difficult to construct a campaign on?
These issues affect 52 per cent of the popula-
t i o n . Women in this country have far more powe r
than they are using.They vote in higher proport i o n
than men do. The real question is why aren’t we
using our power to make the issues that are impor-
tant to us a higher pri o rity and get more wo m e n
elected to offic e . These issues are not as margi n a l
as they might once have been considered. I doubt
a nybody running for office in any metropolitan
area would dare to have as their slogan, “ Wo m e n
Go Back Home.” Although you never know what
would happen if there were an economic dow n-
t u rn .
What more could the women’s movement do to
support female candidates? 
It will be interesting to see what happens with
H i l l a ry (Rodham Clinton) in New Yo r k . Will there
be a big upsurge of support for her from wo m e n
crossing party lines? One thing didn’t really please
m e : when Hillary became visibly vulnerable to her
Monica [Lewinsky] problems, her ratings went
up. It was as if women couldn’t identify with her
superi o ri t y. They were more able to identify with
her when it became clear that eve rything wa s n ’t
easy than when she was so in control. I want to see
women really identifying with their own empowe r-
ment and getting out of the ‘ v i c t i m ’ s t at e .
What are some strategies that would facilitate
women’s entry into politics?
There are more and more women mayors—
women who are going through the ranks on their
way up. It used to be the only women you saw in
Congress were widows sitting in their husbands’
seats. That’s not the way it is anymore. Maybe for
me or for you the progress isn’t fast enough but
it’s fair and it will get better as more women study
political science and head student governments in
colleges and go to law schools. Up to now, law has
been the way into politics. More than 40 per cent
of law students are women. So in another genera-
tion, the talent pool will be nearly equal.
Any parting thoughts you’d like to share with
readers?
Women are not defined any longer as mothers
or housewives. To the degree I’ve had a hand in
making that happen, I feel very pleased and very
proud. I’m impatient for the next step. Now
women make up only 12 per cent of government.
What would it be like if they were 50 per cent? I
think politics would be different. Some research
done a few years ago found that by adding two
women to a state legislature the agenda changes.
And not just in the direction of women’s rights,
but in all directions having to do with life—chil-
dren, sickness, old people, health,quality of life—
and not just highways. ■
