I N D I A : C H E C K S  I N  T H E  S Y S T E M
When India liberalized its economy in 1991, the expertise and
research facilities of the country’s Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research (CSIR) came to be particularly coveted by
multinationals, especially in the drugs and chemicals sector.
Grouping 80 percent of the country’s national laboratories, the
c o u n c i l , which concentrates on industry-oriented research, f o u n d
itself before new dilemmas.
Already in 1986,a government review advised that the council
would have to earn a third of its funding from external and
p r i vate sources.To d a y, nearly 70 percent of the council’s external
earnings (Rs. 2550 million, or $55 million) comes from the
government sector and about 10 percent stems from contractual
research for multinationals. The rest comes from Indian industry.
As government funding becomes tighter, a new balance is
slowly being struck between companies and academic
institutions. “Academics are facing increasing competition from
the fast-growing consultancy research sector, which is less
constrained by traditions of independence and objectivity,”
observes Anil A g a r wa l , chairperson of the independent Centre for
Science and Environment in New Delhi.
But CSIR’s director-general, Dr. Mashelkar, argues that private
research—which only involves two percent of the council’s
scientists and seven labs—does not alter priorities. Critics within
the system, however, say that major changes in the research
culture are evident in the seven labs concerned, which include
the National Chemical Laboratory (NCL) in Pune and the Indian
Institute of Chemical Technology (IICT) in Hyderabad. A single
project for SmithKline Beecham at IICT, worth $100,000,is said
to have engaged eight PhDs, 12 postgraduates and several
technicians for a year. This diversion of high-calibre scientists
from serious research to routine testing and data gathering for
multinationals is a growing source of concern. The pressure to
earn money has led to a decline in new ideas within the
i n s t i t u t e, insiders say. The average earning from a contract
project today is about Rs 1.9 million ($42,000) as against Rs 0.5
million ($11,000) about five years ago. Dr. K. V. Raghavan,
director of IICT, however, believes that contract research has
exposed its researchers to new drug production methods that
could be relevant to India’s future needs.
While Dr. Mashelkar acknowledges the future risk of research
priorities being overturned by foreign contract research,he says
that there are sufficient checks in the system to ensure that it
does not dominate a lab’s agenda.
In a recent statement,Agarwal called upon institutional heads
like Mashelkar to “set up procedures to regulate their public-
funded scientists as they promote greater interactions with
i n d u s t r y.” He points out that a professor at the prestigious Indian
Institute of Technology in Delhi recently released a study, f u n d e d
by the Indian Oil Corporation,claiming that the introduction of
CNG (compressed natural gases) would increase pollution levels
in the city. The Delhi government has imposed use of CNG in
public transport.Agarwal,who has waged a long battle against
pollution in the capital, compares research to an iceberg.“The
public interest could just be the visible tip , with private interest
being the invisible bulk,” he warns. ■
R. Ramachandran, senior correspondent, Frontline magazine,
India
