LUCÍA IGLESIAS KUNTZ
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST


P i rates and the paper chase
Book piracy is a thriving trade in poor nations, sometimes raking in bigger profits
than the real thing. In Spanish-speaking countries, publishers and governments are
stepping up their campaign to stop the scourge
One of Lima’s largest bookshops is on
Amazonas Street. It sells books by
Nobel Prize winners such as Gunther
G r a s s, José Saramago and Gabriel
García Marquez, along with titles like
Guía Triste de Paris by Peruvian writer
Alfredo Bryce Echenique, Yo soy el
D i e g o, the autobiography of footballer
Diego Maradona and La fiesta del
Chivo by Mario Vargas Llosa.
This shop, h o w e v e r, gives no bills or
receipts. When there are no classes in
nearby schools, its vendors move to
some other busy part of the city—a
t r a f fic-light intersection or even a beach.
Its bookshelves are the pavement and
its shop-window the road, for all the
books on sale are pirated versions,
copied and printed secretly without the
permission of the author or publisher,
and of course without paying any royal-
ties or taxes.
Making a dent in
authors’ royalties
Usually the prices are three to five
times lower than for normal books,
although El misterio del capital, a
popular work by Peruvian economist
Hernando de Soto, which cost about $8
when it came out, was snapped up so
quickly that its “clone” now fetches a
higher price than the genuine version.
The business of plagiarizing CDs,
c a s s e t t e s, videos and computer software
is thriving everywhere, but pirated
books are found almost exclusively in
poor countries. It is a scourge that threa-
tens the whole Spanish-language publi-
shing industry.
According to estimates from the
Interamerican Publishers’ Group, a b o u t
50 billion book pages are illegally
reprinted every year in Latin A m e r i c a ,
ranging from photocopies to the repro-
duction of entire books.The annual tur-
nover of the legal publishing industry in
Latin America and Spain is about $5
billion a year, compared with the $8 bil-
lion of the pirate sector. This means a
loss of about $500 million in royalties
every year.
Carmen Barvo, a Colombian publi-
shing consultant and leading expert on
the subject, cites a particularly blatant
c a s e.“Even the book C h e ck m a t e w r i t t e n
by Rosso José Serrano, C o l o m b i a ’s
national police chief and a model offic e r
for the whole country, was pirated and
sold in the streets,proving that criminals
don’t care who the author is.”
Pirated books these days are such
good copies of the original that they
are sometimes hard to detect, even by
the authors and publishers themselves.
Not only is the text copied, but also the
d e s i g n , the cover, the colour and the
bar code. Pirated Argentine books made
in Colombia or Brazil are ironically
marked “printed in A r g e n t i n a ” w h i l e
those in Chile shamelessly carry the
warning that “reproduction is for-
bidden.” Loaded into trucks and vans,
they are exported from one country to
the next, even making it to the display
windows of genuine bookshops—per-
haps innocently, perhaps not.
New technologies 
speed up the task
Those who support book piracy, by
buying the forged copies for example,
argue that the original versions are too
e x p e n s i v e.As Barvo notes, the issue has
to be seen in a social context.“Selling a
pirated book is part of a vendor’s daily
b r e a d .Today he may be selling books at
traffic lights, but tomorrow it might be
c i g a r e t t e s, paper handkerchiefs or
Barbie dolls. I don’t regard him as the
guilty party—that honour belongs to
the person who produces the book and
violates the rights of the author and
Tight budgets:a university student checks out a street vendor’s offerings in Lima.

publisher.”
New technologies clearly make it
much easier—and much cheaper—to
pirate books.“ Technically speaking, y o u
can do it all these days,” says the owner
of a legal Paris printing works.“ To copy
a book, all you need is two copies of
the original, a scanner, a computer with
an optical recognition programme,s o m e
ink, paper, a small rotary press and a
binding machine.” With all this and a
place to operate the printing press, a
pirated book can be produced in two or
three days.
Resorting to police
raids and law suits
Attempts to fight book piracy
through technology appear to have
f a i l e d .All that is left are the weapons of
police raids and the law, both of which
are exploited to the full by bodies such
as the Regional Centre for Book Pro-
motion in Latin America and the Carib-
bean  in Bogota and the Spanish Centre
for Reproduction Rights in Madrid.
The strategy depends largely on
legal action, says Manuel José Sar-
m i e n t o,sub-director for anti-piracy and
illegal reproduction at the Colombian
Chamber of Books. “Since 1997, t h e
C h a m b e r, the publishers and the
ministry of culture have stepped up
their efforts, ranging from police raids
to publicity campaigns in the press and
on television.” By January 2001, a total
of 139 lawsuits had been successful in
Colombia’s courts, leading to the clo-
sure of places where pirated books
were being produced, distributed or
sold.
In Peru,on the other hand,pirated
books continue to flourish,and publi-
shers are denouncing the government’s
failure to act. Germán Coronado, h e a d
of the Peisa publishing house, says the
country has “quite progressive legisla-
tion protecting intellectual property in
accordance with international stan-
dards. Our 1996 intellectual property
law punishes illegal copying with up to
eight years’ imprisonment and clearly
supports authors by giving their heirs
the right to receive royalties for up to
70years after an author’s death.
“All this sounds wonderful and Per-
uvian technocrats turn up at interna-
tional meetings to boast about it. But
the law isn’t worth the paper it’s written
on. The pirates have a bigger turnover
now than the legal sector,and we reckon
they sell nearly three times more books
than we do.”
Calls for lower sales tax
and quality paperbacks
In A r g e n t i n a , which has a strong
publishing industry and the best book-
shops in the region, “it’s mainly tech-
nical and self-help books that are
pirated,” says Ana Cabanellas, head of
the Heliasta publishing house, some of
whose books have been copied. “ I t ’s
very painful, like being raped. Th e
pirates are very clever and however
much we try, they always manage to
make copies.Each year I publish a B a s i c
Legal Dictionary written by my father,
Guillermo Cabanellas, and we change
the colour of the cover each time. E v e n
that doesn’t stop them.”
As well as cracking down, p u b l i-
shers could make an effort to put out
high-quality works in pocket editions,
an area in which Spanish-language
publishers lag far behind.
Governments could also help to
boost the legal book sector by lowe-
ring the sales tax,which is one of the
highest in the world (18 percent in
C h i l e ) , or by building networks of
public libraries where all Latin Ame-
ricans can have free access to their
favourite authors.
The task is huge, but so is the deter-
mination of some. “ We ’re going to
stamp out book pirating,” says Sar-
m i e n t o. “ I t ’s almost a personal thing
for me. We’ll get there.” ■
