a b u l , the A f g h a n
c a p i t a l , is  now a
desolate and terro-
rized city. But you
knew it in better
times.
I was lucky
enough to live there
when my country was starting to
taste democracy, modernize, intro-
duce reforms across the board and
fight the feudal system that still pre-
vailed in some regions. In 1954,d r e s s
Spôjmaï Zariâb:
a pen against a nightmare
The Afghan writer Spôjmaï Zariâb is haunted by bitter memories and deeply
apprehensive about her people’s future. Exiled in France, she tirelessly
denounces the wars that have laid waste to her country, without ever losing
hope. Each of her short stories rings like a verdict against the regime of terror
imposed upon her compatriots, and against the humiliations inflicted upon
Afghan women
rules were abolished. It was rare to see
women wearing ch a d o r s (veils) in
t o w n s. Women quickly asserted them-
selves in all areas of life, becoming doc-
tors, members of parliament, soldiers,
parachutists and bus-drivers.They may
not have represented a big percentage,
but they were active in such a wide
range of activities.
The university was mixed and the
first primary schools teaching both
girls and boys sprang up. In Kabul, y o u
could find books of all kinds from
around the world, translated into Per-
sian. We lived free and fulfilling lives.
We could hold public meetings, speak
openly and set up political parties.
Afghanistan achieved a kind of poli-
tical and social stability after a long
and turbulent history.
But this short period of great hopes
came to a sudden end in 1973 with the
coup d’état of Mohammed Daoud,
which paved the way for communist
rule and later the arrival of the Red
Army.
A shrouded Afghan woman and her daughter make their way through a war-torn district of Kabul.

“I had to accept that I m i g h t
never see my country again”
A LITERARY JOURNEY
Born in Kabul in 1949, Spôjmaï Zariâb began publishing short stories
when she was 17. “My father gave me a love of literature,” she says. “He
was a exceptional man. He never made me feel I was just a girl and never
forbade me or forced me to do anything. There was no television when I
was a child, and in the evening he read us poems, which I came to know by
heart.  My father would recite the first part of a poem and I’d continue to
the end. I must have been about three or four years old. After that, Persian
classical poetry greatly helped me on my literary journey.  But the short
story, my favourite literary form, is a Western invention  I owe my love for
it to foreign writers, especially Europeans and Americans.”
After attending the Faculty of Literature and the Fine Arts School in
Kabul, Zariâb spent a year studying literature in France. When she retur-
ned home in 1973, a military coup by Mohammed Daoud, the king’s cou-
sin, ended the constitutional monarchy and a series of conflicts began.
Five years later, Daoud was murdered in another coup d’état, and in
September 1979, President Noor Mohammed Taraki was killed by his
deputy, Hafizullah Amin. Two months later, Amin was assassinated by
Soviet forces. They installed Babrak Karmal in power and invaded the
country in December 1979.
During the 10 years of Soviet rule, Zariâb continued to work as a trans-
lator at the French embassy in Kabul. She published her work in Iran and,
despite censorship, through Afghanistan’s only publisher and printer, the
Writers’ Union.
In 1991, when the situation was fast deteriorating, Zariâb moved to
Montpellier with her two daughters. When the Taliban seized Kabul in
1994, her husband Rahnaward Zariâb, himself an eminent Afghan writer,
joined his family in France.
Spôjmaï Zariâb’s short stories—written in Dari, a variation of Persian
which, with Pashtun, is the official language of Afghanistan—are crafted
in a harmonious blend of simplicity, sparseness and poetry. Humanism
and universalism are the two features of her work, which continues to
draw inspiration from her native land.
Her collection of short stories, “The Plain of Cain,” won her many readers,
as well as “Portrait of a City on a Purple Background,” a theatre adapta-
tion of her work presented at the Avignon Off festival in 1991.  In the
postscript of her book, “These Walls That Listen to Us,” Michael Barry, a French
expert on Persian literature, writes that “Spôjmaï, whose name means
‘full moon,’ is one of the three greatest Afghan writers of our time, along
with the two poets, Khalîlî, who died in exile, and Madjroûh, who was
assassinated.” ■
Your short story, “Boots of Delirium,”
describes the Soviet invasion.
The narrator is a dying woman who
witnesses Soviet tanks arriving in her
v i l l a g e. She has one obsession: to keep
the gate to her house firmly shut.But
the soldiers break it and come in. Th e
image represents the outright viola-
tion of a country.
The young woman,suffering from
head injuries, becomes delirious. She
wanders through the country in her
i m a g i n a t i o n . Instead of bunches of
grapes hanging from vines, she sees
a r m s, legs and heads. The cows no
longer give milk but blood. In the
town,she approaches a group of chil-
dren but sees they’re wearing huge
muddy boots like the soldiers. Th e i r
eyes have turned to stone pebbles,
expressionless and inhuman. Th e y
stand for the lost youth of my country,
young people turned into instruments
of war.
In another short story,“Identity Card,”
you describe a teenager whose mother
hides him for fear he’ll be drafted into
the army.
This story symbolizes the future of
the country, which was subjected to a
totally fabricated war. The two great
powers of the time [the Soviet Union
and the United States] made the
country a battleground for their Cold
Wa r. The Afghans were just cannon
fodder. Their trust was betrayed and
their rage against the invader cy n i c a l l y
m a n i p u l a t e d . They became tools of
ideologies that didn’t serve their coun-
t r y ’s interests.This fratricidal war conti-
nues today and has taken on wider
dimensions of ethnicity and language.
Did the Afghans have a choice other
than siding with one of these camps?
Unfortunately those extremes
were the only choice. But most
p e o p l e, the “silent majority,” d i d n ’t
join either camp.This was my family’s
case. For this majority, killing people
on either side was equally horren-
d o u s, because it was always an A f g h a n
who died. A nation is like a wall—
each brick that falls off makes it
weaker.
As a writer,what was your experience of
Soviet rule?
The new regime banned the import
and translation of all foreign books,
even censoring Persian classics. Only
Soviet books, translated into Persian by

Ta j i k s, were to be found in the foreign
literature shelves of bookshops. They
seemed to have been written  by
m a c h i n e s, not people.That being said,
there were also some very good books,
such as those by Chingiz Aytmatov. I
could never have imagined that deep in
K i r g h i z s t a n , under such a regime, a
writer of this stature could exist. His
short-story “The White Ship”
enchanted me. It said everything, i n d i-
r e c t l y.Aytmatov became a ray of hope
for me.
When writers find themselves in
this situation, they have to find lite-
rary techniques to convey their mes-
sage. Fortunately, the censors did not
quite measure up to their job. Th e y
d i d n ’t know much about literature and
a lot of poets and novelists were publi-
shed by the Afghan Writers’ Union,
which was very active and had a
sizeable budget.
When the Soviet troops left, what did
you think would happen to the country?
There are some historical moments
when you simply can’t predict any-
t h i n g. After all that had happened
since 1973, we were still in for some
s u r p r i s e s. Anything was possible.
Nothing could be forecast.We missed
opportunities to take quick and wise
decisions to head off disaster. N o w
w e ’ve ended up  with the Ta l i b a n ,w h o
know nothing about A f g h a n i s t a n .
They’re religious apprentices who’ve
I wanted to protect them for a while
and I went to live in Montpellier. But
I didn’t intend to stay. I couldn’t face
applying for the status of political
refugee and giving up my Afghan pas-
sport. Many times I went to the post
o f fice to send the application, but I
could never bring myself to post it.
But when my husband arrived in 1994,
I realised all the bridges had been
burned. I had to accept that I might
never again see my country, my home-
town and my house.
Do you have any contact with Afgha-
nistan these days?
been trained in Koranic schools in
Pakistan from the youngest age.They
arrived with a rage to destroy, to des-
troy everything.
I heard they burned all the
vineyards and pulled up the pistachio-
nut trees. Pistachios were one of
A f g h a n i s t a n ’s main exports. All the
Ta l i b a n ’s actions are guided by one
idea:to make the country completely
dependent – no more agriculture, no
more irrigation systems, no more eco-
n o m y, just a completly devastated
country. With the Russians, it was the
t a n k s. With the Ta l i b a n , i t ’s fir e. We
had political fanaticism
and now we’ve got reli-
gious fanaticism. A n d
fanaticism of any nature
leads to  a kind of blind-
ness.
You emigrated to France
in 1991 a few years
b e f o re the Taliban took
o v e r, having stayed right
t h rough Soviet rule.
Why?
I didn’t want to leave
but Kabul had become
too dangerous. Th e
schools had closed
because of repeated
bombings of the city.At
the time, my two daugh-
ters were seven and
e l e v e n . I have three now. A lost generation.

“ D i s p e rsing a country i s
the best way to wipe it out”
We had friends there, but they’ve
all left. So has my entire family. We
stayed for as long as we could in the
c o u n t r y. We always said that every-
thing could change but they couldn’t
take away the country.
A re there ties between Afghan com-
munities around the world?
There are some associations,
newspapers and magazines. But such
links are very hard to maintain. For
o n e, immigrants don’t have the
money to keep in touch all the time.
A l s o,Afghans don’t have a long expe-
rience of exile.There was no Afghan
emigration before the Russians came.
We’re a people very attached to the
l a n d , to our families. Now we’re scat-
tered all over the world—Europe, t h e
United States, C a n a d a ,Australia and
A s i a .Most of the refugees don’t know
the language of their host countries. I t
takes them five or six years to adapt.
I t ’s very tough being forced to look
for refuge somewhere else in the
world.The war’s been going on for 20
years now. It’s a lost generation. Six
million Afghan refugees — it’s a terri-
fying fig u r e. Dispersing a nation is the
best way to wipe it out.
How do you see the future of Afgha-
nistan?
As I say,after 1973 all bets were off.
This hasn’t changed. No prospect
seems more likely than another. But
there’s still hope.
One solution might come from
King Zahir Shah. H e ’s the only person
who all the tribes, all A f g h a n s, s t i l l
listen to. But we have to move quickly.
Time is running out. My country is
losing another generation because chil-
dren aren’t getting access to educa-
tion.And education is a basic right of
all the world’s children. Why should
it be an impossible dream for Afghan
girls?  They’re only allowed to go to
Koranic schools, until they’re about 10
or 12. And what do they learn? To
recite verses in A r a b i c,a language they
d o n ’t even understand. It isn’t any
better for boys. The lack of teachers,
administrators and equipment has
reduced schools to nurseries, without
the facilities.
But people are organizing to pro v i d e
minimal education services.
There are underground schools in
K a b u l . Mothers teach girls in their
homes. It’s a kind of resistance. You
have to be very brave to do that
because it’s illegal and the regime
cracks down hard on illegal activity.
For example, a woman just has to be
accused of adultery, by anyone, w i t h o u t
any proof, and she is stoned.
How do the men—their husbands and
their sons—react to this kind of punish-
ment?
The Taliban control nearly 90 per-
cent of the country. Read the latest
reports of Amnesty International and
the UN Human Rights Commissioner.
They describe these atrocities. Not only
have ethnic minorities been uprooted
and persecuted, the entire population
lives under the constant threat of sanc-
tions and all kinds of punishment and
humiliation.Most people who  stayed
in Kabul are those who could not
afford to escape. So they obey the
“ l a w s ” to survive, laws that are uni-
maginably absurd.
One example: I heard of one
Afghan living in Pakistan who died.
He wanted to be buried in Kabul, so
his family decided to take him there in
his coffin. When they reached Afgha-
nistan,the procession was stopped by
the Ta l i b a n .They wanted to check the
contents of the coffin , since smuggling
is common. They saw the corpse, but

noticed the dead man didn’t have a
b e a r d . It isn’t obligatory in Pakistan
like it is in Afghanistan. So the body
was given 80 lashes as punishment. I t ’s
madness.
T h e re ’s been an increase in re l i g i o u s
fanaticism in many countries. Why has
t h e re been this radicalization of Islam?
The two keys to the rise of Islamic
fundamentalism—whether in Afgha-
n i s t a n , I r a n , Algeria or other A r a b
countries—are illiteracy and ignorance.
They pave the way for a  “poor unders-
tanding” or rather a total misunders-
tanding of religion. To add to these
deficiencies, there’s the gap between
generations, and the deep divide bet-
ween rural and urban people. Don’t
forget most members of the  j i h a d
(holy war) movements come from the
c o u n t r y s i d e, where people generally
distrust modernization and freedom,
regarding them as a threat. In recent
y e a r s, globalization and other kinds of
progress that serve the political and
economic interests of large industria-
lized countries have been imposed on
these countries at a vertiginous pace.
Perhaps the fundamentalists are trying,
in their panic, to bolster their move-
ments by taking an increasingly hard
l i n e. In any case, the rise of funda-
mentalism harms Islam because it
makes it look like a fanatical religion,
devoid of spirituality.
The horrors of war have inspired most
of your short stories so far. What are you
focusing on today?
Before being a writer, I am an
Afghan, and I think that all Afghans
today share the same concern—that
the nightmare their country has
endured for the past 20 years come to
an end.That the country be saved from
the discriminatory rule of the Taliban
who are still backed by Pakistan, S a u d i
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.
That Afghan women be rescued from
the clutches of these religious luna-
tics. Before the Taliban,40 percent of
teachers were women, a clear proof
of their intellectual level. Now they
are excluded from society. Their phy-
s i c a l , intellectual and psychological
plight is alarming.Th e y ’re not allowed
to consult male doctors. Worse still,
many are being sold into sexual slavery
in Pakistan.
Never before have the women of
my country been subjected to such
h u m i l i a t i o n , and never has A f g h a n i s t a n
gone so far backwards.Wh a t ’s left of my
country? The land is destroyed and
strewn with landmines.There are many
thousands of widows, orphans and
maimed people.The country is ravaged
by war, c o l d , drought and famine. M i l-
lions of refugees live in camps,mostly in
Pakistan and Iran,without any means
of subsistence and in inhuman condi-
tions. What I write, and will write can
only be about these concerns.
INTERVIEW BY JASMINA SOPOVA
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST
Dispersed for the first time: an Afghan refugee camp in Iran.
