REINA MARÍA RODRÍGUEZ
CUBAN POET AND NOVELIST, AUTHOR OF LA FOTO DEL INVERNADERO
(CASA DE LAS AMERICAS PRIZE, 1998) AND TE DARÉ DE COMER COMO A LOS PÁJAROS
(LA HABANA, LETRAS CUBANAS 2000).



Lost in the smoke
of time
The Viñales Valley, near the western tip of Cuba, is a magical landscape of hills
and caves where life centres on growing tobacco. A Cuban writer recalls
discovering this World Heritage site through books well before setting foot there
n the west side of the Cordillera de Gua-
n i g u a n i c o, at the foot of the Sierra de
los Órganos, lies a region of limestone
outcrops known as m o g o t e s.These huge
round-topped hummocks rising out of
the ground emerged from the sea more
than two million years ago and were
formed during the Jurassic period.
B o r n in the vicissitudes of history,
the land still bears the marks of preci-
pices, chasms and seams carved out by
erosion.
Tobacco grows in the valley—strange
red leaves almost starved by the salty
soil but brought to life by permanent
sunshine.
I always dreamed of the Vi ñ a l e s
Valley but never ventured there. I n
school I could touch the lush tobacco
leaves pictured in textbooks and see the
Tobacco requires careful attention: some say the plants grow best when farmers talk to them.

The Viñales Valley has been
on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
since November 1999 as a cultural
landscape enriched by traditional farm
and village architecture. Old-fashioned
farming methods are still used
in Viñales, notably to grow tobacco. The
local population is an ethnic mix that
illustrates the cultural development of
the Caribbean and Cuba in particular.
Source:  Report of the 23rd session
of the World Heritage Committee,
in Marrakesh, Morocco,
4 December 1999.

caterpillars that live off them, slowly and
avidly taking on the aroma of tobacco
before devouring the plant.My life was
that of the concrete city, though the sen-
sation left by dew on my hand was so
strong that I still recall it as if it were
r e a l . The leaf, bright and green like a
c h i l d , turns a deep toasted brown before
it is smelt, chewed or burnt, becoming
like time itself and ending up, in old age,
as wisps of smoke.
Farmers, most of whom came from
the Canary Islands, arrived around 1800
and began cultivating tobacco across the
r e g i o n , which is commonly known as the
Vuelta Abajo.Two hundred years later,
tobacco is still the lifeblood of the
Viñales Valley, which produces 661,000
quintals of it every year. Only the best
leaves get sent to Havana, where hun-
dreds of workers called torcedores and
a n i l l a d o r e s handroll them into cigars.
Cuba produces 65 million cigars a year,
packed in cedarwood boxes and
exported to the entire world.
Growing tobacco calls for patience.
Some even say that the plant grows
better if you speak to it. Once the
seeds are sown (between October and
D e c e m b e r ) , the moment to reap and
pack is of critical importance,marking all
the difference between acidity, s o u r n e s s
or waste-product.
The valley is like its tobacco—dis-
creet, thrifty and tranquil, stuck in the
same serene pocket of time as its villa-
gers.
People who have never been to the
Viñales Va l l e y, in the Cuban province of
Piñar del Río, should know that it
boasts a unique variety of plant and
animal life, some of it in danger of
extinction, such as the cork palm, the
a g a b e, the macusey hembra, the alli-
gator oak and the dragon tree. Unac-
customed to the ways of civilization
and to music unlike their own songs, t h e
valley’s birds also come in a kaleido-
scope of species, with names as evoca-
tive as the pine-forest grass quit, t h e
mockingbird and the totí.
Exploring caves
to the tune of haunting tales
It was here that the Guanajatabey
Indians built their primitive homes in
caves hollowed out of the limestone
mogotes, where relics of this nomadic
people have been found along with fos-
sils of Pleistocene mammals embedded
in the rock. Deep inside the caves,
albino fish swim and butterfly
bats flit.
Some caverns, such as the
Cueva del Indio, r e d i s c o v e r e d
in 1920, have close to four
kilometres of underground
streams which can be
explored in a small dinghy so
long as you don’t mind liste-
ning to all the scary tales the
peasant guides love to
recount.
As the streams slowly
work through the limestone
and mix with the mogote clay
falling from above, t h e y
become solutions of minerals
and coppery earth, both of
which are then deposited on
the roofs and walls of the
c a v e s, turning the surfaces
ochre milky green,rendering
the scenery all the more mys-
terious.
We are only 150 kilo-
metres from Havana,but mil-
lions of years away.
Where Nature
invites painters
to take place
Returning to Viñales is a
bit like returning to a
m u s e u m .A silence hangs over
i t , a mysterious calm that
dwells in the early morning
m i s t . In Viñales village we visit
a church built in the last century with
sombre pews that have been repaired
countless times. The musty odour
mingles with the smell of warmed-up
food. Heavy rainfall in the wet season
has spoiled the splendid facades of the
h o u s e s, which now look like faded
mosaics.
And Cuban hands, always touching
and caressing things, cherishing the past,
have worn out the fine wooden railings
at the front of the houses.As in every vil-
lage in my country, Viñales also has a
central square—a byword for order amid
confusion.
Four kilometres from the village, on
one side of the Dos Hermanas ( Two Sis-
ters) mogote, stands the Mural of Pre-
h i s t o r y, a impressive 120-metre high
fresco painted by Cuban artist Leovi-
gildo González,disciple of the Mexican
muralist Diego Rivera. Depicted are the
animals and other creatures that lived in
the valley in prehistoric times.
People who have not read the poem
of José Lezama Lima (1912-76), Bajo el
arco de Vi ñ a l e s (Beneath the arch of
Viñales), or have never seen the pain-
tings of Cuban artist Domingo Ramos or
contemplated the Mural of Prehistory,
should know that this valley, which rose
from the bottom of the ocean near the
western tip of the island, is above all a
place of art, a site where Nature pro-
vides the frame and waits for the painter
to be seated.
But how does one take leave of the
valley? Through its cliffs, its hollows?
Through the passage in a mogote and its
columns of gentle stalagmites? Through
the long line of big-belly palm trees with
their fiery plumes lit by summer? Th r o u g h
its chattering streams full of blind fish?
Through the echoes of cockfights left in
an old sugar factory? Or through a cheap
painting on the yellow wall of a restaurant
somewhere in Havana’s tourist district?
Which path home is best? ■
The Mural of Prehistory by artist Leovigildo González.
