JAMES L.TURK
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OFTHE CANADIAN ASSOCIATION OF UNIVERSITY TEACHERS, EDITOR OF THE CORPORATE CAMPUS: COMMERCIALIZATIONAND THE DANGERS
TO CANADA’S COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES, JAMES LORIMER & CO., TORONTO, 1999.



Anatomy of
a c o rp o rate takeover
After scaling the ramparts of academic freedom through secretive
funding deals, corporations are gaining a new foothold in the ivory
towers by exporting a commercial culture of governance
1 . THE MONEY GAME
T
he basic role of the university in democratic
society is at risk.Alone among social institu-
t i o n s, the university’s mission is the unquali-
fied pursuit and public dissemination of truth
and knowledge. The university serves the
broad public interest to the extent it treasures informed
a n a l y s i s, critical inquiry and uncompromising stan-
dards of intellectual integrity.
When those who make up the university, t h r o u g h
their teaching, research and community service,
struggle to push beyond conventional wisdom,they
often threaten those in power with a vested interest
in the status quo.Throughout history, academic staff
who take their mission seriously have sometimes
found themselves at odds with dominant religious
g r o u p s, with governments and the state, and with the
corporate sector.
R e c e n t l y, corporate involvement in the university
has provoked the most concern.Strapped for funds
because of public sector cutbacks, universities have
turned increasingly to the private sector for support,
often considering corporate proposals that would
have been anathema previously. The very concept
of philanthropy has changed. Gone are the times
when donations were made without strings.To d a y, t h e
donor expects something in return.

A good deal of discussion has focused on purely
commercial deals which involve the adornment of
universities with corporate logos and advertising, or
provide suppliers, like soft drink companies, w i t h
exclusive rights on campus.While such deals raise legi-
timate concerns and have provoked student protest,
the bigger danger lies in relationships that threaten
university autonomy and academic freedom. Fo r
e x a m p l e, corporate donations to universities are often
made in utmost secrecy.The details of the deal remain
undisclosed to the university senate or the larger
university community. C a n a d a ’s largest and most
richly endowed university, the University of To r o n t o,
signed secret deals in 1997 with the Joseph Rotman
Foundation ($15 million for the Faculty of Manage-
ment Studies), CEO Peter Munk of Barrick Gold
and Horsham corporations ($6.4 million for the
Centre for International Studies) and Nortel ($8 m i l-
lion for the Nortel Institute for Te l e c o m m u n i c a t i o n s ) .
The deals allow the corporations unprecedented
influence over the academic direction of University
of Toronto programmes.
Mounting unease
For example, the Rotman agreement initially
called for “the unqualified support for and commit-
ment to the principles and values underlying the
[donors’] vision by members of the faculty of
m a n a g e m e n t .” The Munk donation obligated
the Center of International Studies to assure
that this project would “rank with the Uni-
v e r s i t y ’s highest priorities for the alloca-
tion of its other funding, including its own
internal resources.”
In the U.S.,the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology  (MIT) gained considerable notoriety in the
early 1990s, when for a fee of $10,000 to $50,000 per
y e a r, it provided corporations privileged access to
its faculty and to their research reports.The institute
advertised its readiness to place the expertise and
resources of all its schools, departments and labora-
tories at the disposal of industry.
The trend has been gradual,but unease is moun-
ting about overly close relations between corpora-
tions and university-based researchers. Several high-
profile cases have fuelled the debate. In the UK,the
editor of the British Medical Jo u r n a l resigned as a
professor at Nottingham University over its decision
to accept more than five million dollars from British
American Tobacco towards an international centre for
corporate responsibility. In the U.S. and Canada,the
cases of Drs. N a n cy Olivieri (see next page) and David
Ke r n ,among others, stand as blatant illustrations of the
corporate threat to academic freedom and integrity.
While serving as a consultant to a company producing
nylon flock,Kern,the director of occupational medi-
cine at Brown University’s Memorial Hospital (U. S. ) ,
found evidence of a serious new lung disease among
S C H O L A R S  A T  R I S K
the company’s employees.Going against the will of his
university and the company that threatened to sue,
Kern published his findings. His position at the uni-
versity was eliminated.In the same year, the U. S. C e n-
ters for Disease Control officially recognized the new
disease, flock worker’s lung.1
The fact that university administrations did not
side with their faculty in both these cases signals a pro-
found change at work within academic institutions.
Corporate-dominated university boards increasingly
choose top administrators who support a corporate
model of governance. And universities increasingly
operate in market-oriented cultures, in which social
value is measured by short-term market relevance.
There is money for computer science and business
a d m i n i s t r a t i o n , not for philosophy, h i s t o r y, t h e o r e t i c a l
physics or the arts.
The risk, h o w e v e r, is that universities may quickly
run up against the limits of their own game.We know
that public underfunding makes universities more
vulnerable to corporate enticements. But there is no
evidence to suggest that private corporate donations

can even begin to replace cuts in public funding. In
Canada alone, over two billion dollars would have to
be earmarked for universities to restore funding to its
level ten years ago. Proof that corporate funding is not
filling the gap is that many countries are dramati-
cally raising tuition fees, which undercuts wider acces-
sibility for students.
But there are powerful pockets of resistance. On
several occasions in recent years, students and faculty
have stood up against blatant commercialism on
campus. In Canada,the alarm was sounded two years
ago when an expert panel published a report recom-
mending that commercialization become the fourth
mission of the university, alongside research,teaching
and community service. It also recommended that
tenure and promotion be more closely tied to engaging
in commercial activities. In opposition, the Canadian
Association of University Teachers drafted a letter to
the prime minister that collected 1,500 prominent
signatures in three days. At stake are concerns about
corporate interests shaping the research agenda.The
issue gained renewed resonance this fall, when a dozen
of the world’s leading medical journal editors took
steps to better protect academic investigators (see
p. 23).
Without academic freedom and autonomy, uni-
versities cannot fulfill their public obligations. Aca-
demic staff have no choice but defend their right to
undertake critical analysis, publish their findings so the
public can decide,and encourage students to question
conventional wisdom. Upon these initiatives, t h e
future of universities depend. ■
1. Eyal Press and Jennifer Wa s h b u r n ,“The Kept Uni-
versity.” Atlantic Monthly, March 2000, p.42.
