Self-interest or goodwill?
From improving a CV to meeting kindred spirits, volunteers are driven by a
myriad of motives. For many, giving a hand is simply a moral obligation, says
Spanish social psychologist Fernando Chacón Fuentes*
INTERVIEW BY
LUCÍA IGLESIAS KUNTZ
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST
Why do people feel the need to volunteer?
It isn’t easy to figure out because the desire to
volunteer stems from many inner motives that are
very hard to discern.The only source of information
we have is the actual volunteer. But all the studies
that have been done—especially those by two
American professors,Allen M.Omoto (University
of Kansas) and Mark Snyder (University of Min-
nesota)—come up with two broad reasons. Th e
main one is a feeling of moral or religious obligation
to help solve a problem. These are the altruists. I
prefer to call them “ h e t e r o - c e n t r e d ,” or focused on
o t h e r s.The second group of volunteers are the ego-
tists or “ s e l f - c e n t r e d .”Th e y ’re out to get some ben-
efit for themselves.
But these motives aren’t exclusive of each other, are they?
N o. There aren’t any “ p u r e ”v o l u n t e e r s. N e a r l y
all of them are driven by a combination of motives,
though one will dominate the others.
Volunteers who hold out the longest in organi-
zations are those who are altruistic, but at the same
time recognize that they are benefiting from their
work.
What are these motives?
Omoto and Snyder have identified fiv e.The fir s t
is belief in a set of values. By volunteering, people
express their own personal principles.So if someone
thinks of him or herself as a humanitarian kind of
person and acts accordingly, they’ll feel at ease.
The second, quite broad motive is a quest for
k n o w l e d g e.Some people go to developing countries
to gain a different perspective on life, while others
merely do so to add to their CV.
The third reason is more utilitarian: v o l u n t e e r i n g
is a means to an end, often driven by the wish to
meet others, especially kindred spirits.
The fourth group of motives is what we call
i d e n t i fication with the community. This is when
someone identifies with a specific group or problem
and makes a commitment to it by becoming actively
i n v o l v e d . These are the volunteers you’ll find in
causes such as the mentally ill, cancer or A I D S.
Some people clearly join the fight against AIDS as
a way of acknowledging rights and above all iden-
tifying with those groups which are hardest hit by the
epidemic.
The last group of motives,much rarer and harder
to explain,is what psychologists call self-defence.
When someone is very afraid or anxious, they some-
times become a volunteer as a way of confronting
their fear. An example is the homosexual who gets
involved in the battle against AIDS. It can also be
a way to cope with more general fears and anxieties,
and some of my colleagues encourage their patients
to get involved in voluntary activity to take their
mind off their own problems. But I don’t really
approve of that.
Why not?
Because I think voluntary projects should help
the people targeted by such programmes. Th e y
aren’t there to help the volunteers themselves.
Who volunteers most,women or men?
Neither differ much in their reasons for volun-
teering, though more women volunteer than men,
especially in social work and health.Yo u ’ll also fin d
more men in civil protection organizations.Wh e t h e r
we like it or not, this has a lot to do with traditional
roles—women tend to be the carers while men put
out fires and deal with disasters.
Are volunteers different from place to place?
I don’t know of any transcultural study about
t h a t , but national surveys suggest a few differences.
In Eastern societies, such as Ja p a n , people work
more for groups and for the community. They talk
more about the interests of a group and having a
sense of duty. In Western societies,especially A n g l o -
Saxon ones, people act in more individualistic ways.
Societies have always had their own mecha-
nisms for dealing with social needs unmet by the
s t a t e. B e f o r e, families took care of their elders.
These natural networks are breaking down and
creating exclusion.In this sense, volunteering will
always have an important role to play.
* Professor of Social Psychology at Madrid’s A l c a l á
de Henares University and president of the Official
College of Psychologists in Madrid.
International Year
of Volunteers
2 . NEW BONDS
