B ra z i l : taking up the social slack
The crisis of the state and the limits of the free market have fuelled a boom in
voluntary work, in which business is taking a lead
JAYME BRENER
BRAZILIAN JOURNALIST
Reaching out to street children in Brazil.
2 . NEW BONDS
International Year
of Volunteers
28 The UNESCO Courier - June 2001
because our institutions are going through a serious
c r i s i s,” says the president of the São Paulo city council,
José Eduardo Cardozo, who was elected last year
with strong support from civic awareness groups.
Leilah Landim,a researcher from ISER, a r g u e s
that the growing number of volunteers in Brazil is
changing the nature of social work, which for the
first three centuries of European colonization was
the almost exclusive domain of the Catholic Church.
Social networks
instead of crime
But the triumph of free-market economics, the
decline of trade unions, the state’s faltering ability
to invest and the dizzying growth of problems such
as urban violence, drug trafficking, AIDS and
teenage pregnancies, have paved the way for the
construction of new social networks based on vol-
untary work and goodwill initiatives by business.
“Millions of people,many of them wealthy, h a v e
realized that poverty can lead to drug dealing that
could threaten their own children,” says Gilson
S c h w a r t z , of the University of São Paulo’s Insti-
tute of Advanced Studies. “Many business people
“D
o your bit” is the slogan of a major
radio campaign by the Brazilian
Organizing Committee for the
International Year of Vo l u n t e e r s
2 0 0 1 .The simple and blunt slogan
is emblematic of a trend that has been changing
Brazilian society in recent years—the boom in vol-
untary work.
A nationwide survey in 1998 by the Institute for
Studies in Religion (ISER) in Rio de Ja n e i r o
showed that 22.6 percent of Brazil’s adult popula-
tion—or 13.9 million people—did some kind of
unpaid social work,and that 13.9 percent of them
belonged to a community association. These fig-
ures are far behind the 49 percent of U.S. citizens
who do voluntary work,but they reflect a remark-
able development in Brazilian society, which has tra-
ditionally been polarized between the state and
the private sector, with little room in between for
community involvement.
“ The growth of voluntary activity is largely

now understand that supporting professional
training programmes is the way to get children off
the street,where they might otherwise fall into a life
of crime that could threaten their businesses.”
One of the features of this boom in voluntary
work in Brazil is the attempt to go beyond simple
h a n d o u t s.Ruth Cardoso, the anthropologist wife of
President Fernando Henrique Cardoso, is the dri-
ving force behind the Community Solidarity Pro-
g r a m m e.She launched the Volunteers’ Project at the
end of 1997 with the stated aim of improving on tra-
ditional populist schemes. The project’s charter
declares that it is urgent to “establish a modern
culture of voluntary work based on trained volun-
teers and making services work.”
Bankers on
the literacy trail
The charter also says,with a touch of irony, t h a t
“the new vision of voluntary work has nothing to do
with charity or providing bored people with things
to do.”
In the last five years, voluntary work has enabled
Community Solidarity to give vocational training to
87,000 young people between 16 and 21 reckoned
to be “at risk of social exclusion.”
But perhaps the most original feature of this
growth in voluntary work is occurring inside com-
p a n i e s.A recent survey among 100 of the 380 fir m s
a f filiated to the Ethos Institute, which promotes
business ethics, showed that 94 percent of them
had their own voluntary projects.
The state-owned Bank of Brazil’s “ R e a d ,W r i t e
and Liberate” p r o g r a m m e, for example, i n v o l v e s
more than 2,100 of its employees in voluntary efforts
to promote literacy and encourage people all over
the country to read. The programme has already
taught more than 31,000 people to read and write,
and one of its most recent successes was to teach
these skills to 220 inhabitants of a small A m a z o n i a n
village, Belém do Alto Solimões.
M e a n w h i l e, the Dutch multinational clothing
firm C & A says 20 percent of its Brazilian
employees—equivalent to 1,400 people—are doing
voluntary work. The cosmetics group Natura has
assembled a group of storytellers who go around the
country entertaining thousands of people in schools,
hospitals and other social institutions.Through the
“Children Are Life” p r o g r a m m e, 84 volunteers
from the Schering-Plough laboratory have taught
basic principles of health and hygiene to more than
25,000 children since 1998.
Non-toxic glue
At the Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing
plant at Sumaré, about 120 kilometres from São
P a u l o, 80 percent of the 2,600 employees take part in
voluntary work.Staff from the Brazilian subsidiary
of the U.S. security firm Chubb set aside one day a
year to teach children from poor areas about what
they do.The 95 branches of the local subsidiary of the
U. S. shoe firm Heel Sew Quick (HSQ) are helping to
fund a school for young shoemakers in São Paulo,a n d
have also developed a non-toxic glue that will be
used by HSQ in all its overseas factories. S h o e-
makers’ glue is widely used as a drug by street chil-
dren in Brazil’s major cities.
“The social awareness of Brazilians has clearly
grown,” says Dr Walmir Frare, who runs Bit Com-
p a n y, one of the country’s biggest networks of com-
puter training schools.“The idea that private firms
should help to reduce social inequalities has really
caught on,and a big part of that is supporting vol-
untary work by their employees.” Bit Company is
involved in training teachers and students,and has
an experimental project to teach elderly people
how to use computers.
Many voluntary programmes start out as fairly
personal or informal schemes. Human resources
expert Gilmar Bernardi, who works for the Fr e n c h
telecommunications giant Alcatel in São Paulo,
decided 10 years ago to fund the creation of a
nursery for working mothers in a church on the
edge of the city.Today there are three, one of them
in a favela, or slum area.
Powerful alliances
While social work spreads throughout Brazilian
civil society, it must still be stressed that religious
organizations continue to play a major part in vol-
untary action,particularly among the very poor.
Lastly, the rapid expansion of the Internet in
Brazil is giving a powerful boost to voluntary
a c t i v i t y. At fir s t , charities found it an excellent way
to raise money and disseminate their ideas. Nowa-
d a y s, its main contribution to voluntary social work
is perhaps through education. Many projects use it
to enable students and teachers to help deprived stu-
dents throughout the country.
Perhaps the most ambitious programme is the
City of Knowledge, run by São Paulo University’s
Institute for Advanced Studies and the Education
Faculty Fo u n d a t i o n , backed by the media (the news-
papers Gazeta Mercantil, Folha de São Paulo and
O Estado de São Pa u l o) , big companies such as
IBM,Banco Santander and Boston Bank,and the
publishing houses Moderna and Pangea.The project
involves permanent voluntary in-firm training of
instructors, teachers and students. ■
