CLAUDE GUIBAL
Cairo-based correspondent for the French daily LIBÉRATION



The sail of the felucca gently subsides. Its
hull bumps quietly against the old jetty
made out of bits of driftwood.A donkey
brays in greeting. With their sleeves and
skirts tucked up, women crouch at the
river’s edge washing kitchen utensils in the murky
waters of the Nile.
Embraced by the two arms of the river, Dahab
island is an odd place,where life still revolves around
the harvest.H e r e, the incessant bustle of Cairo, t h e
Egyptian capital less than a kilometre away,does not
intrude.
Iskandar Khalil was born on this fiv e - k i l o m e t r e
spit of land. For the last 50 years, he has remained
with his fields and his crops, carrying on the 5,000-
year tradition of the fellahin (peasants) of the Nile
who live in tune with the moods of the river in the
dry and rainy seasons. To get to his farm at the
southern end of the island,you have to follow dirt
paths alongside tiny plots of land, go through the
village where nobody has ever seen a car or a tractor
and pick your way through the mud.
The outline of a plane or the black hulk of the
Kabbah shrine in Mecca1 painted on the walls of
some houses recall pilgrimages to the holy city of
Islam,but the faded state of the drawings suggests
no-one here has been able to make the trip for
quite a while.
The last days of the fellahs
Iskandar works his farm on the outskirts of Cairo, earning enough to get
by but not enough to ensure that his children stay loyal to the land
1 . TWILIGHT FOR FA R M E R S ?
Hand-in-hand with his

Iskandar’s house has a white cross besides the
d o o r.The bell-tower of the imposing village church
dwarfs the nearby minaret as if to remind the visitor
that most of the islanders are Copts. “ When my
father died,” says Iskandar,“my three brothers and
I divided up his land between us. I got just over
three feddans (1.3 hectares) and half the house.
The other half went to my elder brother.Since then,
I haven’t been able to expand.”
Iskandar lives with his wife and children in three
r o o m s. A spotless white-tiled floor recently laid
over the bare earth stands out in the spartanly
furnished house, as does the television that takes
pride of place in the living-room, just as in nearly
every peasant home of the Nile valley.
The daughter of the family married at 14 and
went off with her fellah husband to his home village
on “the mainland,” near the Pyramids.Three other
c h i l d r e n , all boys between 17 and 21,are unmarried
and still at home, perhaps for a long time to come.
Getting married is expensive. The groom has to
provide a house for his bride and Iskandar has no
savings to help out his sons. “ The little money I
have goes on fertilizer or weedkiller,” he says.
In front of his house, in fields that are precisely
marked out and irrigated by canals leading from
the Nile, Iskandar grows fodder for his sheep and 10
cows along with enough maize to make bread for the
family all year round. On another plot, he grows
tomatoes and cucumbers he takes each week to sell
in Old Cairo’s market,where he pays a small tax for
a stand. He returns to the island with cooking oil,
sugar and an average of a kilo of meat per month.
“On the island the air is cleaner
and there’s no noise to bother us”
Every morning, his wife milks the cows,
Egyptian- bred creatures with high-ridged backs
and big udders.She takes the surplus of about 20 or
30 litres to the opposite bank of the river to a tanker
t r u c k , bringing back about 10 Egyptian pounds
( $ 3 . 5 0 ) .These are the only links the Khalil family has
with the world of money. Iskandar has never been
into a bank and knows nothing about credit. He
figures that his earnings average 150 Egyptian
pounds per month ($55). But saving is out of the
question:once he’s paid for fertilizers, weedkillers
and everyday goods, he has the equivalent of $6
l e f t , which he keeps carefully in a wardrobe.This is
money for special purposes, like buying a pair of
sandals or a piece of cloth,and for paying the annual
land tax of approximately $14. No wonder
expanding is just about impossible: besides the tax,
a feddan of land (0.42 hectares) costs nearly $5,700.
The Khalil family, like all Nile valley farmers, are
mainly self-suffic i e n t , eating what they produce and
keeping chickens and geese,who mingle freely with
the cows amid the heaps of manure.
In his field of maize,where the plants come up to
his shoulder,Iskandar gazes at the nearby skyscrapers

of Cairo’s wealthy Maadi neighbourhood.“ C a i r o ’s
very beautiful,” he says.“I like watching well-dressed
people go by. But here on the island,the air is cleaner
and there’s no noise to bother us.”
“We have to use chemicals to get the
earth to produce as much as
possible”
Like the other 200 islanders, Iskandar has never
lived anywhere else. He married a Dahab girl who
was a cousin. Tall and strong with a radiant look
and grey hair tucked under a black headscarf, she and
their three sons help him in the fields all day.But the
land is too small to be divided up between the sons.
“ I ’d like them to spend their lives here, close to me,
but when they get married they’ll have to go and
work in the city. Fa r m i n g ’s too hard now and you
d o n ’t earn enough.” S t i l l , his family count their
b l e s s i n g s : no one has ever been seriously ill and
t h e y ’ve rarely had to go to a healthcare centre,
generally financed by charitable or religious
o r g a n i z a t i o n s.
Sometimes Iskandar dreams of another life. If he
had been born elsewhere, he too would have
probably moved to Cairo, where he says, “life is
easier and much less tiring.” He does not understand
how city-dwellers can envy his life and smiles at
the thought. Manual labour and the heat of the sun
have dried up his skin. On market days, when he
loads heavy boxes of vegetables onto his cart, he
feels his thin, gnarled arms are not as strong as they
w e r e. In the evening, on his way back from the
fie l d s, he stops to chat with the menfolk of the
v i l l a g e.“Copts or Muslims, w e ’re all fellahin and we
help each other,” he says.
This is the hour when the wind carries the sounds
of the big city.The bridge built across the river a year
ago to link the two parts of the city on its south side
rumbles with the sound of traffic.But Dahab sleeps.
Here the day begins and ends with the sun. If he feels
like staying awake for a while, Iskandar turns on the
T V. “I like knowing what’s happening in other
p l a c e s,” he says.But he has never heard of genetically
m o d i fied food or angry European farmers.“ Wh a t ’s
the problem?” he says.“ We have to use chemicals to
get the earth to produce as much as possible. I use
t h e m . If I didn’t , what would I live on?”
He and his wife know they won’t starve.The soil
of Dahab has always fed the family. Last year’s
harvest wasn’t bad. But Iskandar also knows his
dream of building a “comfortable concrete house,
like in the city” where the whole family can live
together will never come true. He adjusts his blue
g a l l a b e y a r o b e s, strokes his chin and looks towards
the capital again.“I’ll be a bit ashamed when my
sons leave the island,” he says.“They’ll be the first
in our family not to be farmers.” ■
1.The Kaaba is a shrine within the Great Mosque of
Mecca towards which Muslims turn during prayer.
The Black Stone, an object of veneration, is built
into its eastern wall.
