Xc a l a k , on the Caribbean coast of
M e x i c o, is no less than a paradise,
blessed with 14,000 hectares of coastal
land and 3,000 more of offshore lagoons.
The area is part of the Meso-American
Barrier Reef, the second largest in the
world and home to a vast array of fish,
turtles, shellfish and manatees. Its ver-
dant expanses of tropical forest contain
spider and howler monkeys, j a g u a r s,
swamp crocodiles and 155 bird species.
Each morning, most of Xcalak’s 400
inhabitants make for the sea to catch
fish,lobster and conch, an activity that
now competes with the first stirrings of
t o u r i s m . Five years ago, the villagers
realized their catches were shrinking
due to the environmental damage
i n flicted by unauthorized fishermen and
tourist guides. In response, the locals
decided to look for ways to protect fis h
stocks and diversify their income
sources.
Helped by experts from Quintana
Roo University and the Rhode Island
University Coastal Resources Center
( C R C, see previous pages), the villa-
gers persuaded the federal government
to designate the area as a national
marine park on June 5, 2 0 0 0 .They were
also named responsible for its upkeep.
To protect the area and satisfy everyo-
n e ’s interests, the land was divided into
six zones. The first was reserved for
fis h i n g, the second for tourism, the third
for game fis h i n g, the fourth for fis h -
breeding, the fifth was closed in winter
and the sixth was set aside for conser-
vation of plant and animal life.
This is all and well, but a greater
danger seems to lie ahead.“ N o w, the vil-
lage is threatened by a government pro-
ject called the Ruta Costa Maya (Mayan
Coast Road), which aims to make
Xcalak part of a major tourist develop-
ment plan,” says biologist Marco Laz-
c a n o, executive director of Amigos de
Sian Ka’an, an NGO involved in several
programmes to protect the region.R u t a
M a y a ’s goal is to include Xcalak in a
massive tourist resort similar to the
sprawling one in Cancún, 300 kilometres
north which receives two million tou-
rists a year.Along with improving access
roads, Ruta Maya plans to build 14,000
hotel rooms.
“It would be unthinkable to stay
outside this development project when
y o u ’re a village whose only access road
has recently been repaired after Hurri-
cane Mitch devastated it in 1998.Wh a t ’s
more, we’re only served by one bus a
d a y,” says Lazcano. Xcalak has no elec-
tricity, but it hopes to be hooked up to
the grid in a couple of months.
The villagers, h o w e v e r, remain wary.
“ They don’t want huge steel and
concrete buildings going up along their
beaches, their wooden houses replaced
or their unsurfaced streets ripped up.
They want to have a say in the Ruta
Maya project to make sure the deve-
lopment is balanced,” Lazcano explains.
“The coastal area is protected, but the
rest of the village on dry land wants to be
part of the development that’s coming to
the whole region. Villagers are trying
to achieve that without giving up their
fishing—the heart of their identity—
and without harming the ecosystem.”
“ Th e y ’re worried about their future
and know that the only chance they
have of preventing a tourist invasion is
by getting together to preserve their
community and not let it be overw-
helmed by developers,” he adds
Xcalak is nevertheless adapting. It
can already boast a couple of small
h o t e l s, with capacity for between 12 and
30 people, and another five are planned
on the outskirts. To prove their good
faith, some villagers have even begun
learning English and taking courses on
customer satisfaction. ■

GERARDO TENA
MEXICAN JOURNALIST



Dilemmas in a tropical para d i s e
“We want tourists, but not too many,” say the 400 inhabitants of Xcalak, a village on Mexico’s
southeast coast. They’ve taken steps to protect the area, but that may not be enough to keep
developers at bay
A COA S TAL BALANCING AC T
A plan of Xcalak shows the marine protected area and other village sites.
