ANDREA ARAVENA REYES
ANTHROPOLOGISTAND SANTIAGO OFFICE CHIEFFORTHE NATIONAL CORPORATION
OF INDIGENOUS DEVELOPMENT (CONADI)



Shadows in the big city
Far from their native region of Araucanía, half a million Mapuche Indians
live in the Chilean capital Santiago—a place of stigma and segregation
1 . R O OT S
T
he Mapuche Indians make up 10 percent
of Chile’s adult population—almost a
million people in total, half of whom live
in and around the city of Santiago. In the
minds of most Chileans, h o w e v e r, t h e
Mapuche is still thought of as a person with an
indigenous surname, living in the southern region of
A r a u c a n í a ,belonging to an old-fashioned community
and fighting for rights to land.All the rest are ignored
and segregated.
As in most Latin American countries, Chile’s
Indigenous People’s Law  bans discrimination.
Victims of prejudice, h o w e v e r, argue that the law is
useless since not even Santiago’s police offic e r s
believe what an Indian says. “When you complain
to a military policemen and tell them that
discrimination is against the law, they don’t even
know what the law is,” says Elba Colicoi from the
district of Peñalolen.“ They look at us in amazement,
laugh and tell us to ‘calm down and go home.’ But
if one of us hits a naughty child, the neighbours say
Mapuches are violent people and the police believe
everything the Chileans say.”
In the Mapudungun language, “ m a p u c h e ”
means “people of the earth.” Until Chile gained
independence from Spain in the early 19th century,
the Mapuches lived in a 100,000 square kilometre
region in south-central Chile—an area as big as
Chile’s Mapuche Indians on the march for recognition.

Po r t u g a l . Between 1866 and 1927, they were forced
to live in settlements covering only 5,000 square
k i l o m e t r e s, barely five percent of the original area.
According to the last census in 1992, 9 2 8 , 0 0 0
Mapuches now live in Chile.
Restrictions on Mapuches’ property rights, l a c k
of resources and the impoverishment of rural
communities set off a huge migration from the land.
Following 135 years of exodus—most of it forced—
around half the country’s Mapuches live in and
around Santiago. If children are counted, one in 10
of Greater Santiago’s inhabitants are from this
c o m m u n i t y. Some indigenous intellectuals actually
refer to the Mapuche diaspora.
Traditional dress unwelcome
in the classroom
Although only 20 percent of Mapuches now live
in the countryside, people still tend to have a
stereotypical view of them as rural peasants which,
consciously or not,makes it hard for any of them to
feel like full-fledged citizens. The media compound
these prejudices with pictures of land occupations in
the south and armed battles with landowners near the
v i l l a g e s, conveying a negative image of “ p o v e r t y -
stricken”Indians.
Yet after a century of emigration, the Mapuche
urban diaspora is here to stay. Over 70 urban
organizations have been set up in recent years to
fight for their rights and end discrimination. In spite
of this,the image of them as a rural folk still prevails.
In the city, they are “invisible people”who, as they
themselves admit, bear the stigma imposed by a
society that regards them as lazy, drunk,culturally
backward and aggressive.
This hostility has made most Mapuches
renounce their identity, reject their language and
change their names,all of which has caused serious
psychological problems.To survive in the city, they
have to camouflage their origins and try to appear
like mere southerners or peasants.As a result, t h e y
are helping to make themselves invisible.
Both the discrimination suffered at the hands of
society and the difficulties incurred in overcoming
their marginal social status prevent Mapuches from
i n t e g r a t i n g.Victims of discrimination lose self-esteem
and marginalize themselves. Once they have thus
rejected their individual identity, they naturally
reject the customs of their own social group.

c l o t h e s, which is rather like turning the Mapuche into
a sort of “fancy dress.”
As for the typical urban Mapuche worker, he
or she is someone with few qualifications who
changes jobs often,works long hours for a pittance,
faces discrimination because of physical
appearance and is the target of ill-treatment and
excessive demands by employers.
“ The bosses and the companies don’t hire us
because they think we’re aggressive,” argues Juana
Coliqueo from the district of Quilieura.“When they
do hire us, they want us to work in the kitchen, up on
the scaffolding or in the storeroom, where nobody can
see us. Have you noticed that the bigger the fir m ,
the more blonde, blue-eyed secretaries there are?”
For women,the most common job is in domestic
service, which provides them with food and lodging,
but also conceals them from urban society. Men get
jobs in construction or in bakeries, which allow them
to sleep in the daytime and work at night.This enables
the urban Mapuche to stay “ h i d d e n ,” a v o i d
discrimination and become familiar with life in the
c i t y. Even though such jobs are seen as forced,
undesirable, degrading and lowly, they are still the
main source of income for Mapuches.
In line with legislation across the continent,
Chilean law strongly condemns discrimination.
Taking this law as a yardstick,Mapuches are quick
to point out that Chilean society clearly harbours
racist and xenophobic features, and practises
discrimination on the basis of racial, ethnic or social
origin. The main victims are half a million citizens
who, to be accepted by society, have to swallow the
humiliation of hiding their identity and passing
unnoticed. ■
Most urban Mapuches live in precariously built
shanty-towns that have sprung up around Santiago
in the past century. Besides poverty and other forms
of exclusion,life in the slums also means enduring
discrimination from their own neighbours.“ C h i l e a n s
look down on us in the settlement,” says Ju a n
Lemugnier, a Mapuche community leader. “They
say ‘here come the mini-Mapuches.’ When they get
a n n o y e d , they say ‘get over here, I n d i a n , or get lost,
I n d i a n .’ This changes when they get to know us,
but the problem is we always have to make more of
an effort than other people.”
The main hurdle for Mapuche children is language.
At home they speak Mapudungun,but most schools
only teach Spanish and foreign languages, w h i c h
means Mapuche children have a harder time
absorbing the mainstream culture. As a result,more
and more parents are deciding not to teach them the
Mapuche language in the hope that they will speak
better Spanish—a kind of linguistic demolition aimed
at achieving a sense of ethnic belonging.Families fear
in particular that children who do not speak Spanish
properly will be laughed at. One community leader
recalled that as a child he was called “chamaco,” the
Mexican word for a little boy, because people in
Santiago who did not know a word of Mapudungun
thought his accent was Mexican.
When community leaders take their children to
school in traditional Mapuche dress to assert their
identity and “ v i s i b i l i t y,”they run into opposition from
school inspectors, who refuse to let the children in
unless they are clothed like other pupils. Only during
folk festivals are they allowed to wear traditional
