Ithink that coverage of Africa has mostly been aimed at stereotypes, w h e-
reby the Western media go to countries but never take the time to go
deep into stories—they just come out with quick-fix stories that fail to
explore the context of why and how.With enough context,with enough
d e t a i l , people will understand Africa is not just a continent of killers, t h a t
there are causes and there is conflict much as there is in Kosovo and
Chechnya.
When I took the rushes and the script for my film Cry Freetown [about the
brutal rebel invasion of Freetown in 1999] to broadcasters, everybody
l o o ked at the footage and thought it was too shocking for viewers.But my
argument to Channel 4,ITN and CNN was that
this was reality. It happened.And bear one thing
in mind: much as you can say it was graphic,
there were children sitting there as it was hap-
pening and they didn’t have the opportunity
to switch off or look away.
In the images I shot of killing,raping and mai-
ming,I wanted to shock the world. Imagine a
war that had been going on for eight or nine
years, but which nobody in the outside world
had heard about because the media failed to
report it. So I thought: l e t ’s surprise the vie-
wers for a change by explaining the background,
then bringing in the graphic pictures. And I
think it worked.
But I strongly believe the watchword has to be context.When I saw the
news of what happened in the U.S. in September, I never for one minute
saw any of those kinds of graphic images, even though 6,000 people died.
Perhaps Western viewers have matured to such an extent that it’s not
necessary to shock them anymore.They will understand, they will imagine
those scenes. But in the case of A f r i c a ,Western viewers still don’t unders-
t a n d , and the reason why they sometimes think we’re barbaric is that they
see stories and stereotypes told without any context—they think it’s
Africa,another flood,another famine and so on.
The first aim in all my stories is to look at how business and partnership
in the past between Africa and the West have gone wrong.I try to find
something to prick the conscience of Western viewers. In the case of Cry
Freetown, it was easy to point to the diamond trade between Western
mining companies and rebels. My film E x o d u s [about migration from A f r i c a ]
reminded the West that it had been to Africa in the past, it had raped the
land,it had taken without permission.To get the West interested,I try to
get the Western taxpayer to understand that their governments and
money have been used to create confusion and corruption.
I would also like to tell stories that are positive
and work for A f r i c a . My recent documentary
about Uganda was an attempt to look for hope,
but sadly enough the same issues kept coming
back—lack of education,neglect of youth,cor-
r u p t i o n .This is the reality. I t ’s what I’ve got to talk
about.
In Africa, we don’t have the power to use the
media to change attitudes or perceptions. We
have the expertise, we have committed people
who are not in the pockets of politicians, but we
don’t have the money or resources. If we can get
the West to partner us and air those stories, t h a t
would help create this kind of change.” ■
*Born and raised in Sierra Leone, Sorious Samura received a UN I C E F g r a n t
12 years ago to study film-making in Britain. Since then, his documentaries
Cry Fr e e t o w n ,Exodus and Walking on A s h e s have been shown on Channel
4 (London) and CNN.



SORIOUS SAMURA*: CONTEXT IS THE WAT C H W O R D
“I wanted to shock the world.”
