Although the famous “article 15”does not appear in a
single law, it is the golden rule for survival in the former
Z a i r e.“Article 15” stands for four little words: “ Yo u ’re on your
own!”
In what was once the personal property of King Leopold II
a n d , from 1908, a Belgian possession, economic exploitation
was imposed on the “ n a t i v e s ” with a harshness unpara l l e l e d
in any other African colony. The relationship between the
indigenous population and the colonial power was based
on fear and reprisals.
After the Second World Wa r, half-hearted efforts to make up
for lost time fell short of offsetting the accumulated social
and administrative backwa r d n e s s. In 1960, the year of
i n d e p e n d e n c e, the country counted just one university
graduate. The lack of qualified personnel to manage the
s t a t e, combined with the Cold War and Belgium’s
manipulations of ethnic conflicts, were in large part
responsible for the Congo’s plummeting into chaos.
The first social services, which mainly appeared in education
and training,followed Mobutu’s seizure of power in 1965
and the country’s pacification.But the use of the state to
satisfy personal interests to the detriment of the common
interest emptied the government of its substance and threw
the country into a bottomless pit. Because of the lack of
s e p a ration between the single party and the state, t h e
nationalization of the economy and,especially, the spread
of corruption, government structures were moribund when
Laurent Kabila seized power in 1997.
Faced with a disintegrating state that nonetheless remained
a predator, the population gradually developed mechanisms
of self-regulation and self-defence to survive.They could be
seen everywhere. In the economy, everybody—especially
women—plied a petty trade or owned a small business off
the books. In the legal sphere, informal mechanisms steeped
in traditional practices made up for the vacuum left by the
s t a t e.They were also visible in the social arena—schools and
hospitals—even though the traditional domination of the
churches in this sector is on the wane. Lastly, in politics, a
myriad of farmers’, n e i g h b o u r h o o d , professional and
confessional (religious or secular) organizations has cropped
up since the late 1980s to promote common interests and
stand up for people’s rights against the appetites of what
remains of the state, or even against other groups. Their
leaders are members of the educated but financially bankrupt
middle-class, traditional chiefs or simply strong figures.
But self-organization also has its limits.At best, the informal
economy enables people to survive. Might makes right is
often the rule.Poor management, scheming of every kind and
cronyism are widespread. There is a blatant shortage of
financial and material resources; the only available aid,
which is difficult to obtain, comes from the west. L a s t l y, t h e
war that has been raging since 1998 has cut the country into
two more or less equal parts, one of which is occupied by
rebel factions under the control of Rwanda and Uganda.Th e
conflict has shattered the mechanisms of family solidarity,
which used to play a primordial role. ■
* Congolese researcher, author of “The Catholic Church
and Political Power in Congo-Zaire: the Democratic Quest”
(1997) and “From Mobutu to Kabila : the Avatars of an
Unexpected Handover” (1999), published in French by
L’Harmattan, Paris.

WAMU OYATA M B W E * : “ YOU’RE ON YOUR OWN!”
