SHIRAZ SIDHVA
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



Saving the planet:
imperialism in a green garb? 
Developing countries feel that protecting the world’s resources is just another
way for rich nations to retain the upper hand in the international trade game
or nearly a decade, international efforts to
address global environmental concerns
have been frustrated by a deep rift in
perceptions between rich and poor coun-
t r i e s. Economists and environmentalists
in developing nations argue that the
agenda for environmental negotiations
is almost exclusively driven by the North.
Under the pretext of saving the planet,
they say, the industrialized world is wiel-
ding a new brand of dominance, “ e c o -
imperialism.”
Developing countries like India and
China continue to resist global environ-
mental protocols, like the 1989 Montreal
Accord to cut the production of CFC
gases (used for example in refrigerators)
by 50 percent,or the Clean Development
Mechanism (CDM), part of the climate
change negotiations initiated under the
1997 Kyoto Protocol.“These are viewed
as instruments to make the Third World
pay for damages caused primarily by the
N o r t h ,” says Indian environmentalist Va n-
dana Shiva.India and China account for
two percent of CFC consumption,while
the United States consumes 29 percent.
“ This ‘eco-imperialism’ undermines
national sovereignty, while generating
new costs for those once marginalized
by colonialism,” claims Shiva.
The spectre of imperialism is likely
to vitiate the next round of climate change
talks in Bonn (Germany) this July, when
p o l i cymakers finalize the terms on which
the CDM will be implemented. N e g o-
tiated by industrialized countries to gain
some flexibility in meeting the emission
reduction targets pledged in Kyoto, few
issues in recent environmental diplomacy
are proving as contentious.
Critics say the mechanism is the latest
in a string of attempts to dominate poor
c o u n t r i e s, which are being virtually
“ b r i b e d ” so that rich nations can continue
business as usual. By financing forestry
schemes and other energy-efficient pro-
j e c t s, industrialized countries could exploit
the mechanism to avoid reducing their
own greenhouse gases. E n v i r o n m e n t a-
lists fear this could turn the Amazon and
other primeval forests into “carbon sinks”
to absorb pollution,but with side effects
which disregard the developmental needs
of southern countries.
Lopsided
negotiations
“ The Northern bias continues to
dominate discussion of the global cli-
matic crisis,” explains Shiva.“The threat
to the atmospheric commons has been
building over centuries,mainly because of
industrial activity in the North. Yet dis-
cussions seem to focus more on develo-
ping countries: the North refuses to
assume extra responsibility for cleaning
up the atmosphere. No wonder the Th i r d
World cries foul when it is asked to share
the costs.”
“ The whole effort to bring about eco-
logical change is very one-sided,” s a y s
Chow Kee, who represents Malaysia at
the climate negotiations.“ The developed
countries don’t want to give up their
extravagant lifestyles, but plan to curtail
our development.”
Beyond negotiations on climate,
efforts to link environmental concerns to
trade are sparking more allegations of
i m p e r i a l i s m .“ There is an attempt by rich
countries to stunt the growth of develo-
ping nations like India,and we are figh-
ting it tooth and nail,” says Pramod
Mahajan, India’s minister for informa-
tion technology. “ They are practising
protectionism under the garb of envi-
ronmental protection.” E c o n o m i s t s
argue that sanctions could spell further
economic marginalization for develo-
ping countries, which often lack the
means to set up expensive quality-
control systems.
The 1989 Basel Convention, for ins-
t a n c e, imposed restrictions on trade in
scrap metals and recyclable materials,
claiming they were hazardous to the envi-
r o n m e n t .Economists say it prohibits poor
countries from competing in the lucra-
tive world market for computer parts,
scrap metals, and recyclable products.
April 2001 - The UNESCO Courier 41

Other examples of trade restrictions
are cited. In the early 1990s, M a l a y s i a
and Indonesia fought to overturn an eco-
labelling law introduced by Austria osten-
sibly to safeguard the Asian rain forests.
Austria refused to import timber that was
not from sustainably managed forests,
but no such curbs existed for wood from
temperate areas. The protectionist fla-
vour of the measure was overt,and Aus-
tria eventually revoked it.
In other trade-environment disputes
over the last decade, the United States has
been accused of protectionism in ban-
ning the import of Mexican tuna because
dolphins were getting ensnared and killed
in nets meant for the fish. Shrimp from
India, Pakistan, Thailand and Malaysia,
which paid no heed to sea-turtle protec-
tion,were similarly banned in 1996. The
sanctions may have been motivated by a
desire to protect dolphins and turtles,b u t
the poorer countries claimed that they
were a pretext for suppressing competi-
tion in the global fish market.
A green agenda
to stop growth?
Deepak Lal, professor of interna-
tional development studies at the Uni-
versity of California, Los Angeles, cites
these examples when he describes the
green movement as “the new secular reli-
gion.” He says “green imperialists”are a
new avatar of the “white man’s burden,”
set to impose their values on the world.
According to Lal, rules restricting
trade through the Basel Convention or
attempts to ban genetically modified
foods are designed to exclude poorer
countries from world markets. “I look
upon the green agenda as ultimately
trying to stop growth in the Third Wo r l d .
And that means condemning three-quar-
ters of the world’s population to conti-
nuing poverty.”
Other voices in the South, however,
argue that environmental controls like
the CDM are not all bad. D e v e l o p i n g
countries, say experts, will receive $5 to
$17 billion to fund climate-friendly tech-
nologies. “The CDM gives us an oppor-
tunity to invest in projects that promote
sustainable development.If incidentally
they also reduce emissions, we shouldn’t
quarrel with the fact,” says Dr
R . K . P a c h a u r i , of the Tata Energy
Research Institute, New Delhi.“As sove-
reign nations, we should be confid e n t
about choosing projects, like renewable
energy projects, that we would in any
case want to invest in.”
The rules of the CDM have yet to be
established,and Pachauri urges develo-
ping countries not to squander the chance
to influence their formulation.
But Anil A g a r w a l , director of the
Delhi-based Centre for Science and Envi-
r o n m e n t , insists that the CDM has
neglected the concerns of poor countries.
“ The CDM still begs the long-term ques-
tion about when and how developing
countries will take on commitments of
their own to reduce emissions.”
Not all experts in developing coun-
t r i e s, h o w e v e r, shun global environ-
mental controls. Indian economist and
newspaper editor Swaminathan S.A i y a r
argues that there is “much to be learnt
from the rest of the world.”Like British
colonial rule, which brought with it some
desirable elements like democracy,c i v i l
and gender rights to India,the new cru-
saders could impart useful technologies,
he writes in the Times of India.“ I n s t e a d
of rejecting wholesale what green impe-
rialists say, we need to extract what is
of value, and reject the dross.”
Though the die are loaded against
developing countries during negotiations,
part of the fault lies with them, s a y
e x p e r t s. “ The North is aggressive and
assertive about what it wants, and comes
well-prepared to negotiations,” laments
A g a r w a l .“Developing countries are com-
paratively disorganized and unclear about
their objectives.”
The environment, Pachauri explains,
is a low priority for politicians in develo-
ping countries. Lack of cooperation bet-
ween these nations is another handicap.
A dearth of resources and language bar-
riers come in the way. But as developing
countries know, they will be hardest hit by
global warming. In the end, c o u n s e l s
Agarwal,it is up to them to devise ways
to protect our common future. ■


Ecuador has taken measures to protect its mangroves while not harming shrimp farm in
