All roads l
the fra n c hi
On a shopping spree in Kuwait City.

Fifty years ago, few Kuwaiti women received more than a basic religious education.Those from
wealthy households were confined to their courtyards, in a section of the house without win-
dows so their voices could not be heard from the outside. Women from more modest hou-
seholds fared slightly better:some worked as midwives, marriage brokers, dressmakers and
Koranic teachers who used their homes as schools,while others were peddlers or market tra-
d e r s. In public, h o w e v e r, all women had to cover themselves in long black cloaks (the
abbayat) and veil their faces with thick black cloths, the boshiat.
Change was prompted by Kuwait’s transformation from a small seafaring community
relying on maritime trade to a major oil producer after 1945.Such rapid economic expansion
created a demand for an educated workforce and the state made education available to all
Kuwaiti citizens.The educated woman became a symbol of modernity, an icon of the modern
s t a t e.The new generation removed the traditional black veil, enrolled in higher education and
competed with men in the labour market. By the 1990s, Kuwaiti women made up 35 percent
of the workforce,with a vast majority employed as teachers, doctors,engineers and lawyers.
Despite these strides, Kuwaiti women continue to be legally defined as family members,
whose rights and responsibilities are circumscribed by their roles as mothers, wives and
daughters. Although the constitution does not discriminate between women and men with
respect to their citizenship rights, a number of laws passed since its adoption are discriminatory.
The 1962 Election Law, for example, restricts the right to vote and run for office to Kuwaiti
men.
After the Gulf Wa r, the Kuwaiti women’s movement brought the voting issue to the fore-
f r o n t , providing the ground for an alliance between Islamist and liberal women activists. S u f-
fragists invoked the heroic roles of women under Iraqi occupation,the sacrifices of female
martyrs and wartime hardships as justifications for gaining political rights. Women inside
Kuwait had participated in armed resistance and risked their lives smuggling food, money and
medicine through military checkpoints. Many were caught,tortured,and killed.
PHOTOS BY ISABELLE ESHRAGHI, TEXT BY HAYA AL-MUGHNI
ISABELLE ESHRAGHI IS A FRENCH PHOTOGRAPHER.
HAYA AL-MUGHNI IS A KUWAITI SOCIOLOGIST AND AUTHOR OF
WOMEN IN KUWAIT: THE POLITICS OF GENDER (LONDON: SAQI BOOKS, 2001).
ead t o
s e

Since the end of the Gulf War, Kuwaiti women have
stepped up their campaign for the right to vote. Even the
most ardent Islamist activists espouse the cause, touting a
different vision of women’s role in Muslim society

All roads lead to the fra n c h i s e
Eye to eye:in other circles,women talk business.
The educated
woman became 
a symbol of
modernity, 
an icon of 
the modern 
state 
Bedouin women latch onto tradition.

But whatever the sacrifices made and stereotypes chal-
l e n g e d , the all-male parliament remained reluctant to extend to
women full citizenship rights, theoretically guaranteed by the
c o n s t i t u t i o n . In November 1999,an Islamist-tribalist coalition suc-
ceeded in defeating a decree issued by Kuwait’s ruler, Sheikh
Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah,which would have granted women the
right to run for office and vote in parliamentary and municipal
elections.
Opponents appeal to narrow interpretations of religious
law to justify the denial of citizenship rights to women.But the
real impetus for their actions is a deep anxiety over a sluggish
economy and changing gender roles. Climbing unemployment
among Kuwaiti youth has raised questions about male identity
as a breadwinner.Masculinity appears to be in crisis.Women are
not only beginning to dominate some sectors in the labour
m a r k e t , they are also moving into positions of power in govern-
ment and industry. The president of Kuwait University, t h e
u n d e r-secretary in the ministry of higher education, and the
managing director of the oil industry are all women.Female suf-
frage would not only undermine male supremacy, but also
strengthen women’s power in the public sphere. Hence, throu-
ghout the 1990s, Islamists and their Bedouin supporters used dif-
All eyes on the bride at the Crown Plaza hotel.
Mama Anessa, hostess of an educational TV show.

ferent rationales to confine women to their traditional identities.
They blamed rising divorce rates, child delinquency and decli-
ning family values on women’s departure from their traditional
r o l e s. This Islamist-tribalist coalition even managed to force
parliament to pass a law allowing working mothers early reti-
rement in an attempt to make  more public-sector jobs available
to Kuwaiti men.
N e v e r t h e l e s s, Kuwaiti women are not willing to give up
their gains, nor to end their movement for political rights. Fol-
lowing the defeat of the decree, female activists filed six court
cases against the ministry of interior for not allowing them to
register to vote, a move intended to force a ruling on the consti-
tutionality of the Election Law.
Education has changed women’s perceptions of themselves
and their role in society. Even the most ardent Islamist women
activists advocate the extension of the franchise to women and
their participation in the public domain.Unlike liberal women
activists who forged alliances with men’s democratic groups, I s l a-
mist women have opted  to work  from within religious move-
ments. For almost  two decades, they have played the role of
d ay ̀  a t ( p r e a c h e r s ) , converting young women to Islam and
extolling the virtues of a moral  society.They succeeded in chan-
ging Kuwaiti women and popularizing the wearing of the Islamic
veil.
Involvement in Islamist movements has actually given
women new forms of power and prominence.The idealization
All roads lead to the fra n c h i s e
Involvement in Islamist movements has actually 
given women new forms of power and prominence
Asserting themselves:calling for reforms at Kuwait University.

of the role of mothers as educators has increased their authority
in the home. At the same time, by elevating the importance of
female modesty, Islamist women have acquired a dignified and
respected position in the public arena.
Empowered Islamist women activists share with their male
counterparts the same dream of achieving an Islamic society
ruled by religious idioms and norms. H o w e v e r, their ideal
society appears to differ from the masculinist, h i e r a r c h i c a l ,
ethical order in which women are disenfranchised  and confin e d
to roles dictated by their biological constitution. Islamist women
activists are today embracing a more autonomous vision of an
Islamic society and gender roles.Working from within the reli-
gious movements has given them the chance to engage in a dia-
logue over women’s rights issues and create a new model of
Muslim womanhood.
Wo m e n ’s gender activism in Kuwait is as diverse as it is
c o m p l e x , and highlights the ambiguity of their social status in a
rapidly modernizing country. Most importantly, it reflects the
variety of women’s choices and aspirations in their struggle for
gender equity. ■
Despite setbacks,there’s no letting up on the right-to-vote campaign.
