A
AMY OTCHET
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST

Putting embryos
on the assembly line
By creating embryos through cloning, we may also find a treasure trove for
treating disease.
But in the rush to profit, we may sell short the very stuff that makes us human,
a sense of dignity.
theoretical speck in a Petri dish has a
veritable mob straining for a better view
across the industrialized world and
beyond:men and women in white coats
and religious robes jostle beside parlia-
mentary lords, scruffy environmentalists
and patients trembling with Parkinson’s
d i s e a s e.The mystery in question is none
other than the human embryo cloned à
la Dolly. The aim is not to produce
people. Through “therapeutic”cloning,
scientists would create  embryos to har-
vest stem cells, which may hold the key
to treating a wide range of disease. But
like most passionate debates, the real
issue—commercialization—sits quietly
in the background of the emotional din.
Human respect
or cellular sludge?
The debate erupted across the indus-
trially advanced world on January 22nd,
when Britain became the first European
country to legalize the creation of cloned
human embryos. Members of the Euro-
pean Parliament almost immediately
expressed their shock and condemned
the decision.Yet in many ways, the new
law is a logical extension of rules dating
back over a decade. Since 1990, U K
researchers could create and use
embryos for limited research purposes,
namely to treat infertility and detect
birth defects. The new law widens the
field of study to include stem cells,w h i c h
experts say could revolutionize medi-
c i n e, offering the possibility of trans-
plants to treat scores of illnesses from
P a r k i n s o n ’s disease to diabetes (see box).
No one has yet applied for a license to
perform such experiments, according to
the Human Fertilisation and Embryo-
logy Au t h o r i t y, which will carefully
screen each request. No other uses of
cloning would be allowed and a new law
has been promised to explicitly ban
reproductive cloning.
As expected,the most rigid opposi-
tion has come from the Catholic Church,
which considers the embryo to be a living
person from the moment of conception.
Cloning aside, even research involving
“spare”embryos (created for infertility
treatments but not used) is condemned
because it is morally wrong to use a
person for the benefit of someone else.
At the opposite end of the spectrum
lie the hardcore utilitarians of science
and business, who are generally astute
enough not to announce their politically
incorrect views: namely that the embryo
is just another batch of cellular sludge
that can and should be used like any
other biological resource in the pursuit
of medical research.
Somewhere between these two poles
lies the famous middle ground, for which
there is no clear road map but a general
p r i n c i p l e : respect for human dignity, a
touchstone of French and European law.
“The very fact of being human automa-
tically entails the right to a certain res-
pect or dignity. It is what separates us
from other animals,” says Noëlle Lenoir,
president of the European Group on
Ethics and justice on the French Consti-
tutional Court.The seeds of this notion
rest in the major monotheistic religions,
says Lenoir, but the principle effectively
took root in international law following
the Second World War and the eugenic
brutality of the Nazis.
Finding biological clues
The embryo is not legally considered
a person but rather “a human being in
the true sense of the word, meaning it
exists and its nature is human,” a c c o r d i n g

After removing the nucleus of the egg, scientists will insert a cell to clone an animal.
How long before they turn to humans?

to Bernard Mathieu, a French professor
at the Sorbonne. This protects the
embryo from being reduced to a com-
mercial resource without intruding upon
a woman’s right to protect her health
and control her fertility. Such an unders-
tanding of human dignity underlies the
decision by many European countries
to strictly limit or prohibit embryo
research in general.
But the UK’s green light to thera-
peutic cloning reflects a very different
interpretation of the same principle,
according to Alastair Campbell, a pro-
fessor and member of the UK expert
committee which recommended that
Parliament approve the research. Th e
traditional categories of vocabulary for
distinguishing between respect for
human life and that of persons are too
c l u m s y, says Campbell. I n s t e a d , he turns
to biology for clues in defining ethical
l i m i t s. B a s i c a l l y, the embryo is treated
with increasing moral seriousness or pro-
tection as it develops.This is why it is for-
bidden to experiment on any embryo—
cloned or not—after 14 days, when the
“primitive streak” or the first signs of
an emerging nervous system appear.
A lurking trade
in stem cells
Dr Donald Bruce of the Church of
Scotland reluctantly agrees that certain
forms of research may be justified on
“spare” embryos. However, the recent
UK decision crosses a major ethical thre-
shold,says the director of the Church’s
Society, Religion and Technology Pro-
ject. “Instead of treating embryos as a
w h o l e,” says Bruce,“we now see them as
a source of parts.” The UK has moved
from a policy of “no and less”—which
only permits the use of embryos when
there are no alternatives for understan-
ding very serious problems—to a “yes,
provided” approach—which opens the
floodgates provided that certain condi-
tions are met.
There is also a practical side to this
ethical dilemma. Imagine that we do
take the cloning route to harvest stem
cells:doctors would require at least one
egg, but probably a dozen or more, to
treat each patient.Hence Bruce’s recom-
mendation that research should  explore
all the options before embarking upon
therapeutic cloning (see box).
Not only is the recent UK decision
too wide for critics, but it could lead to
the slippery slope of reproductive clo-
ning—whereby people are created by
cloning. British law clearly forbids this
scientifically remote possibility, yet the
problem ultimately lies in the globalized
medical community, says Bruce. S e c t s,
businessmen and more recently a group
of maverick scientists have trumpeted
their intentions to clone people, d e s p i t e
the extraordinary risks of deformity.
What will prevent them from setting up
shop in a genetic safe haven, a country
where bioethical legislation doesn’t
apply or exist? 
But in the shadows of these theore-
tical discussions lurks the largest threat:
the future trade in embryos and stem
c e l l s. Every expert cited in this paper,
including Prof. Campbell who supports
the research,has joined a host of others
deeply concerned about commerciali-
zation.In particular, there appear to be
too many loopholes in patent rules,e s p e-
cially in the U.S. but also in Europe and
industrialized countries like Au s t r a l i a ,
Canada and Japan.
Consider the genesis of Dolly the
s h e e p,who was born in 1996 at the Roslin
Institute in Scotland. An A m e r i c a n
c o m p a n y,G e r o n , bought the commercial
arm of the institute and received a license
While it is politically
risky to claim
the embryo itself,
there are plenty
of backdoors to exert
control over it.

to two UK patents that shocked many in
Europe and the U. S.The first patent basi-
cally covered the cloning technique and
the second the covered “ p r o d u c t s ”of that
p r o c e s s. This can be read to mean that
Geron owns products like cloned human
embryos in the early stage of develop-
ment.
European
doublespeak
Geron then sent a similar set of appli-
cations to the European Patent Office
( E P O ) , which initially approved them
before striking off the right to human
embryos upon a second reading, accor-
ding to Christoph Th e n , a genetic
research expert for Greenpeace Ger-
many. The decision marks a step in the
right direction, says Th e n . But it also
r e flects the split personality of the Euro-
pean Union:while liberalizing trade rules
to compete with the U. S.biotech market,
it tries to squat the moral high ground of
genetic research to serve as a beacon
for the rest of the world.
So we find strong principled state-
ments ringing in the European Parlia-
ment and proud reminders of the
U n i o n ’s Charter, which prohibits
“making the human body and its parts
as such a source of financial gain.”Yet at
the same time, member states are sup-
posed to be integrating a very contro-
versial directive on genetic patenting,
which is meant to balance ethical and
commercial concerns. On the one hand,
“processes for human cloning”are not
considered patentable, nor are “uses of
human embryos for industrial or com-
mercial purposes.”N e v e r t h e l e s s, a com-
pany can control (receive a patent for)
“an element isolated from the human
body or otherwise produced by means
of a technical process.”This is a dazzling
bit of doublespeak, but don’t believe
anyone who tries to tell you exactly
what it means. Instead look to recent
trends in gene patenting for key clues as
to what we might expect in the near
future.
In theory, patents are supposed
t o reward inventions, not just the
discovery of elements already existing
in nature.You can, h o w e v e r, be awarded
a patent for developing a novel use for an
e l e m e n t , like a gene. But look at
t h e human genome—the genetic map
o f o u r species—and you’ll find a trail
of lawyers scurrying for a patent almost
every time a scientist, or rather a com-
p u t e r, suspects a gene may be lurking.
Th e y cannot even fully identify it,
l e t alone understand its function, y e t
theyclaim it as their own. This basically
means that anyone else who looks to use
that gene to develop a new drug or to
treat a related disease must pay for
the view.
This same commercial race is hea-
ding straight for the human embryo via
therapeutic cloning.According to Then
of Greenpeace, the number of patent
applications directed at human embryos
is dramatically increasing.Last year, t w o
biotech companies, from Australia and
the U. S. ,applied for and received a Euro-
pean patent on cloned human and
animal embryos as well as mixed spe-
cies embryos from pigs and humans.B u t
after a major public uproar stoked in
Germany by Greenpeace, the Munich-
based EPO said it was a “mistake” and
the companies admitted they had gone
too far and promised not to include
human embryos in their patents anyw-
here in the world.
While it is politically risky to claim
the embryo itself, there are plenty of
backdoors to exert control over it. A
company may receive broad powers over
simply retrieving embryonic stem cells or
culturing and guiding them in a parti-
cular direction. This is not to suggest
that such feats don’t require ingenuity.
Yet depending upon the scope of the
patent awarded,we could see a re-run of
the same abusive pay-per-view approach
taken with genes.
More than just a sum 
So far only four countries have
implemented the patent directive. Fr a n c e
and Germany have both expressed
opposition and the Netherlands, s u p-
ported by Italy and Norway, has chal-
lenged the directive in Europe’s Court of
Justice. Outside of officialdom, groups
like Greenpeace are turning on the pres-
sure to reopen the negotiations.
This is usually the point where jour-
nalists and experts sign off with a vague
but earnest call for public debate. B u t
the exchange is already underway—in
the media, religious halls, universities and
the corridors of hospitals,where doctors,
patients and the families speak and think
q u i e t l y.This appears to be a step forward,
yet there is a new trend among some
scientists and bioethicists to denigrate
this kind of discussion, especially if it
reaches an emotional timbre. O p p o s i t i o n
is ascribed to “ c o n f u s i o n ” over the issues
and to the damage done by the false but
pervasive belief that “we are the sum of
our genes.”Genes are just molecules and
early embryos are microscopic balls of
cells.Yet they both hold an iconic power
which stems not from confusion, but a
gut instinct to respect human dignity. ■

Wearing Tony Blair masks, activists protest cloning outside a European Union summit in December 2000.
