HIROKO TAKENISHI
Shinto and shoguns:
a return to Itsukushima
At first sight, Itsukushima appears to be one island among many dotting Japan’s
Seto Inland Sea. Yet a novelist returns to the cherished site of a venerated shrine
where Shinto rituals set the skies and waters ablaze with music and the echo of
bygone rulers
sea becomes an ink wash drawing with
infinite contrasts of light and shade. On
evenings when the skies are at their
c l e a r e s t , the reflections of sun rays sparkle
gold upon the sea, transforming the
landscape into a dazzling oil painting.
In this ocean landscape, I t s u k u s h i m a
is just one island among many. With a
circumference of about thirty kilometres,
it stands at the southwest end of the bay
of Hiroshima,in the district of Saeki.Its
culminating point is Mount Misen, r i s i n g
530 metres, and harbouring ancient
forests which belong to a protected
natural site. The island is also known as
Miyajima (the Sanctuary Island), b e c a u s e
several Shinto deities are worshipped
here.According to tradition,no one was
allowed to live on the island at one time,
for its entire surface was considered an
object of worship that could only be
venerated from afar. But Itsukushima is
also distinguished by its main shrine,b u i l t
on a sandbar at the foot of a small
m o u n t a i n , and its vermillion Otorii
gateway, standing directly in the sea.
This grand gate marks the entrance to
Itsukushima’s main shrine, designated a
national treasure in Japan and added to
the World Heritage List in December
1 9 9 6 . Pine trees and stone lanterns
Graceful roofed corridors link the shrine buildings,set between mountain and sea.
The silhouettes of a multitude of islands
follow one another in close succession
on the peaceful waves of this inland sea,
bordered by the coasts of Honshu,
Shikoku and Ky u s h u . From Honshu, t h e i r
jagged outlines could be mistaken for an
extension of the mainland. The horizon
line is barely perceptible. Fishing boats
and ocean vessels ply back and forth in an
incessant ballet. From an aircraft window,
the diversity of the islands’ shapes, s o
clearly cut upon the ocean’s surface, i s
even more startling.At times they appear
like a flock of animals lying on their
bellies with outstretched legs, at others,
like giant ink strokes etched by the
forceful hand of some bold calligrapher.
The colours of the sky, the shapes and
movements of the clouds, the shade of
the hills rising upon the islands: h e r e,
nothing remains the same for a single
moment,not least the tides of the inland
sea. The harmony of the sky, islands and
sea—forever shifting over the course of
the four seasons with the moods of dawn
and dusk,of night and day—creates vistas
which seemingly reflect the very mystery
of nature.On days of soft rain, the distant
About the author
Born in Hiroshima in 1929, the novelist
and sociologist Hiroko Takenishi has
published close to 70 books. She gained
recognition with her short story entitled
Gishiki (“The Rite”) in 1969. As a literary
c r i t i c , she is noted for her essays on
classical Japanese literature and her
studies of the country’s medieval women
p o e t s. Her selected works (T a k e n i s h i
Hiroko chosakushu ) were published in six
volumes in 1995 by Sinchosha (Tokyo).Her
short stories are included in Fire from the
Ashes, a prestigious anthology edited by
the Nobel laureate Kenzaburo Oe, as well
as in Western Literature in a World
Context, edited by Paul Davis et al (New
York,St. Martin’s Press, 1995). ■

According to tradition,
no one was allowed
to live on the island
at one time

alternate on both sides of the path leading
to the sanctuary. The island’s deer can
also be sighted on this walkway. Th e
temples, with their graceful roofs made
with several layers of cypress bark, s t a n d
out elegantly against the dark green of the
h i l l s.They are linked by vermillion roofed
corridors.When the tide rises, they look
like the pavillions of some lavish edifice
floating upon the sea.As it ebbs, they are
left to rest on the white sands.
The spectacle of tiny fish coming in
with the tide to frolic under the pathways
always warms the heart. The sun’s rays
streaming into crystal water fall upon the
e y e s, spines or viscera of these fish darting
in the waters, tracing straight lines and
c i r c l e s.And during the short ferry crossing
to Itsukushima, the shadows of
passengers are reflected on the white
sands of the shoals.
I was born in 1929 in Hiroshima,
where I lived until 1949.I cannot count
the number of times I boarded the ferry
to Itsukushima over the course of these
twenty years. The emotion I felt as we
approached the island which seemed to
greet me, the sadness that filled me when
we departed, varied with my age and
physical condition of the moment.But it
w a s n ’t until I became an adult and left my
birthplace that I realized on many
occasions that these feelings were far
from trivial.This experience of my youth
bore the seed of the exaltation or
despondence that would sometimes seize
me in adulthood. Still today, the whistle of
the day’s last ferry vibrates in the air and
the glow of lanterns suspended on the
roofed corridors quiver on the water’s
s u r f a c e. But thoughts of the island
awaken more than nostalgia.
In the summer of 1945, the atomic
bomb changed Hiroshima forever.
B e f o r e,elementary school teachers would
take their classes on outings to the ruins
of the city’s castle or to the island of
I t s u k u s h i m a . What I remember best is
the springtime beauty of the cherry
blossoms above the castle’s stone walls.
The cherry trees of Itsukushima also
come back to me, but less so than its
m a g n i ficent autumn leaves. Seen from
the sea, the island’s unique landscape
stands out with unparalleled majesty and
g r a c e. When you set foot there, t h e
delicate refinement of the trees’ shapes
and colours is equally moving.
The fiery glow of autumn leaves,
which is particularly striking at
Momijidani Park (Maple Va l l e y ) , is a
feast for the eyes across the island. The
colours are at once soft and vivid. Th e
play of light and shade, i n c e s s a n t l y
changing with the sun’s  strength and
p o s i t i o n , the rustling of wind in the pines,
the scent of the tide, the crows’ cry and the
wandering deer endow the island with a
charm found nowhere else. To prevent
the deer from nibbling on fresh shoots, a
growing number of trees are protected by
metallic hoops. It would be difficult to
forget the light green buds dotting the
branches of maple trees like the pearls of
the morning dew before the first heat of
s u m m e r. Even when the foliage thickens,
this fresh green loses none of its intensity.
The sun casts its light upon the veins of
the young leaves, giving them the sudden
appearance of a delicious summer treat.
A shogun’s fervent quest
for divine protection
There are a number of ways to reach
the top of Mount Misen, including a cable
car which offers a frightening glimpse at
the depths of the forests.Such a feeling of
fear is impossible to imagine from the
shore. I will always remember the thrill
with which I gazed at the tips of the young
maples when I was a child.Their beauty
is unmatched by all those I have since
seen throughout Japan.
Ituskushima Shrine is part of the city
of Miyajima. Six buildings form the
s h r i n e, all designated as national
t r e a s u r e s : the main sanctuary, the four
buildings of the adjoining Marôdo Shrine
(Sanctuary of the Visitor) as well as the
East and West stages.The main shrine is
dedicated to Ichikishima Hime-no-
M a k o t o, Tagori Hime-no-Makoto, a n d
Tagitsu Hime-no-Makoto, three female
deities who protect seamen and their
ships. According to temple records, the
main sanctuary was constructed in
5 9 3A D,but it was under the influence of
Taira-no-Kiyomori (1118-1181) that the
shrine underwent extensive renovation to
acquire its present dimensions and style.
Kiyomori was a shogun [military
leader] at the end of the Heian era. In
1 1 4 6 ,when he was appointed governor of
Aki province (the west of the current
department of Hiroshima), his faith in
the deities of Itsukushima gained
astonishing fervour. Seeking their
protection to give his clan lasting peace
and prosperity, he multiplied offerings to
the island’s sanctuary, going as far as
A beloved icon:the grand gateway marks the entrance to the shrine.

ordering the making of the Heike Sutra,
thirty-three ornamental scrolls.
Designated as national treasures, these
scrolls reflect the quality of artefacts kept
in the Itsukushima sanctuary. Due to
K i y o m o r i ’s influ e n c e, Itsukushima Shrine
became known to the Imperial Court.
After the emperor himself visited
I t s u k u s h i m a ,pilgrimages started to thrive
t h e r e. H o w e v e r, despite Kiyomori’s
w i s h e s, the glory of the Heike household
was short-lived and the clan’s line
extinguished.
The temple’s records make mention
of repeated fires and occasional repairs
after Kiyomori’s death. The last large-
scale works mentioned date back to 1571,
with the reconstruction of the main
sanctuary in the S h i n d e n z u k u r i
architectural style characterizing
aristocratic palaces of the Heian period
(794-1185).
Ancient music and Shinto priests
to accompany a ritual at sea
I mentioned earlier that I have
boarded the the ferry many times to
I t s u k u s h i m a . Not only because the island
is close to the city of Hiroshima,but also
because my family owned a small house
on the island where we regularly spent the
summer. Consequently, I have probably
seen the day rise and night fall upon the
island more often than most passersby.
The year is marked by several festivals:
the Seven Bay Temple Festival (Nana
Ura Jinja) in which a ritual is held
dedicated to crows, the Tamatori Fe s t i v a l
during which young men fight in high
tide to snatch a disc cut from a camphor
t r e e,or the Chinkasai Festival to prevent
fir e s. But I would like to evoke one of
the island’s most popular festivals, t h e
Kangensai (“the festival of wind and
string instruments”).
This ritual takes place at sea, once a
y e a r, beginning on the 17th day of the
lunar calendar’s sixth month and running
late into the night. How the festival
unfolds is closely tied to the moon’s rise
and the timing of the tides. The holiest
object from the Itsukushima shrine is
placed in an imperial palanquin which is
carried by boat to all the nearby shrines.
A Shinto priest accompanies this cortège.
The boat, decked with streamers and
d r a p e r y, is towed by another in which
athletic young men work the paddles and
o a r s.The priests charged with conducting
the ceremonies in each temple often take
on the role of performers at sea when
they interpret b u g a k u p i e c e s, a n c i e n t
music of the Imperial court.
Shrouded in smoke and a blinding
h a l o, the light of the torches sends
crackling sparkles raining into the waves
like the branches of a weeping willow on
f i r e. The sounds of the b u g a k u
instruments travel with the wind, l e a v i n g
a trail of bewitching echoes.This festival
is an uncanny blend of boldness and
g r a c e,nonchalance and rigour.At its heart
stands the image of a shogun at the height
of his power, faced with a fading destiny
and the yearning to perpetuate the golden
age of the Heian.
When the barge has finished its
rounds, it passes a last time through the
grand Otorii gateway at the cove’s
entrance to proceed towards the main
shrine of Itsukushima. In the background,
the moon is already high in the sky,a b o v e
Mount Misen. Long after I left my
birthplace, in 1978, I published a novel
called K a n g e n s a i. Once again, I
contemplated this island, its hills, t i d e s
and currents with trepidation,as if I had
been suddenly awakened from a deep
sleep. I gazed at the water, the fire, the
deceased.I lived through a moment that
I could not have envisioned in the days
when I still resided in Hiroshima. ■
Bringing out the shrine’s holiest object during the Kangensai festival.
Located in the western part
of the Seto Inland Sea,
the island of Itsukushima is home
to a magnificent 12th-century shrine,
although its existence
is thought to date back to 593 AD.
Poised between sea and mountain,
the architectural ensemble
of this Shinto sanctuary
is unique in Japan.
A reflection of the deeply rooted
spiritual culture of the Japanese
people, it is a perfect illustration
of the country’s concept
of scenic beauty.
Hiroshima
TOKYOITSUKUSHIMA

This festival
is an uncanny blend
of boldness
and grace,
nonchalance
and rigour
