“T
here were two ways of arriving at the
t r u t h . I decided to follow them both,”
declared Georges Lemaître, one of the
fathers of modern cosmology and also a
Catholic abbot1.“Nothing in my working
l i f e,nothing I ever learned in my studies of either science
or religion has ever caused me to change that opinion. I
have no conflict to reconcile. Science has not shaken
my faith in religion and religion has never caused me to
question the conclusions I reached by scientific methods.”
What relations are there between modern science
and theology, understood as a rational explanation of
a religious tradition? Are the two entirely separate,
do they overlap or are they just complementary?
L e m a î t r e,a defender of “ d i s s o n a n c e ” between the
disciplines, argued that the approaches of science and
DOMINIQUE LAMBERT
PROFESSOR AT THE UNIVERSITY OF NOTRE-DAME DE LA PAIX,
NAMUR (BELGIUM)



The highest summit:
G o d meets the big bang
Are science and religion inseparable twins or hostile strangers?
Could a third party—philosophy—act as a bridge between the two?
2 . C O S M O S, GOD AND US
Was this the beginning? An artist’s


Overlapping Magisteria) principle proposed by U.S.
palaeontologist Stephen Jay Gould2 a n do t h e r s, s c i e n c e
and religion supply m a g i s t e r i a— fields of knowledge—
that do not encroach on each other,but are not entirely
s e p a r a t e ; an intimate dialogue is possible between
them.Gould uses the metaphor of oil and water, two
elements that do not mix but can remain in very close
contact.The contours of their separation are complex
and flu i d , since both can move back and forth into
places occupied moments before by the other. S c i e n c e
and religion, in short, are inseparable but radically
different,friends but never partners.
Transcendental gaps
Not true say the supporters of “correspondence,”
who base their viewpoint on the notion that scientific
data can be directly useful to religion.According to this
approach,concepts in these two fields can link up or
even agree, so that theories of the big bang and Creation
may interact to their mutual advantage. But this
position raises a host of questions, particularly over the
nature of knowledge:is science not impoverished or
cheapened by confusing all or part of it with religion?
Does a concept such as Creation not mean very
different things in different religious traditions and in
the mouths of scientists, for whom it has a precise
technical significance?
The essential weakness with this approach is
evident in the concept of a “God particle.” S i n c e

religion were completely separate and insulated from
each other. Because they belong to totally different
areas of knowledge,he added,science and theology not
only do not overlap, but are so far apart they cannot
even influence one another.
This conclusion is not upheld by other supporters
of dissonance. According to the NOMA (Non-

scientists have no quantum theory of gravitation to
describe what happened in the first few moments after
the big bang—there is a scientific gap to be fil l e d — t h e
initial creative impulse is attributed to divine power. B u t
God provides no explanation at all. Reduced to a
simple physical cause within other physical causes,
God also loses his divinity to become just another
element in the material world.
Dissonance avoids this trap by allowing a calm
dialogue between scientists and theologians that
respects each other’s independence of thought: they
agree not to exploit bits of each other’s field of
knowledge to advance their own. But is this division
perhaps too radical,depriving each side of elements that
could be useful for their own thinking?
Thus the need for a third position that rejects all
blending of science and theology advocated by
supporters of correspondence, but establishes an
indirect dialogue between them via a go-between—
philosophy in the broadest sense.The dialogue is also
a s y m m e t r i c a l , since it encourages theological debate on
the basis of scientific knowledge rather than the other
way round.
This perspective begins by recognizing that science
inevitably raises philosophical questions which it cannot
a n s w e r, such as ones about meaning and ethics.
Philosophers can then draw on religious traditions
among other resources to search for answers. These
answers are of little use to scientists in their everyday
r e s e a r c h , but may help them deal with the kind of
questions every human being runs up against. A n d
theology in turn can benefit from philosophical work
inspired and fertilized by science. This pathway from
science towards religion is thus the fruit of work that has
to be carried out continually as scientific knowledge
a d v a n c e s : questions are raised, and philosophical
responses generated that must at some stage take
account of religion.
Unravelling
the beginnings
Let’s go back to the example of the big bang. A
scientist from the school of correspondence could
say it was equivalent to Creation in the theological
sense. But this assertion would not be scientifically
legitimate:physics is based on natural causes alone,
while Creation comes from divine and therefore
metaphysical intervention.As a result, the issue of the
purely physical origin of the universe “ r e m a i n s
entirely separate from any metaphysical or religious
question,” according to Lemaître. The theory of the
big bang hence does not presuppose any special
religious belief, contrary to what some scientists
thought in the 1950s.
Dissonance, which rules out all dialogue between
cosmology and theology, is no more satisfactory. But an

intermediate philosophical discussion about the
meaning of the big bang as the physical origin of the
cosmos can help theologians unravel the links and
differences between notions of physical beginning,
metaphysical beginning and divine Creation,and see
more clearly the purely theological meaning of the
latter.
Creation in the theological sense can mean the
sudden physical appearance of the world for divine
reasons, but it can also mean a relation that God uses
to keep the universe in existence by giving it physical
s h a p e.This “sudden appearance” cannot be regarded as
the start of a process in physical time because it is itself
the origin of space, time and matter.
F u r t h e r m o r e, this “Creation link” cannot be seen as
a physical cause because it is in fact the cause of all
physical causes. New theological ways of describing
the relations between time and eternity, between God
and the world, can flow from this philosophical
c l a r i fic a t i o n . It also makes for better understanding of
the range and limits of science.
For some, science and religion are inseparable but
very different friends. For others, they are friends only
linked by a third party. For get others, they are friends
that are in fact true twins.And finally, they are viewed
as two people who are not friends at all because they
never meet. In short, a set of bonds running all the
way from fusion to fission. ■
“God as an Architect”, by William Blake.
