◗ C U L T U R E
JENNY HOUSEGO
ART HISTORIANANDTEXTILES EXPERT



Indian textiles fin d
their patro n
High quality crafts can’t survive without skillful marketing, argues the author,
who has woven close ties with Indian craftspeople to build up a business. When will
aid agencies follow suit? 
s an art historian, I had long been
fascinated by the fragments of medieval
hand-painted and block-printed fabrics
excavated in the rubbish heaps of Fo s t a t ,
old Cairo. These were almost certainly
made in Gujarat in western India, a n d
attest to a flourishing trade with Egypt in
Indian textiles in the 13th and 14th
centuries.
Some years ago, I decided to see if I
could revive the patterns of these ancient
textiles with techniques still available
today.
I met Mohammad Bhai Siddiqui—a
famous master block-cutter and printer
from Kutch in Gujarat—and showed him
illustrations of some of these fragments,
now in museums in different parts of the
w o r l d .He was very excited,said he had no
blocks like this, but recognized them as
part of his tradition.He promised to see
what he could do.
Mohammad Bhai was as good as his
w o r d . From an illustration of a small
fragment,he had  worked out the repeat
in the design. He had created a superb
Fostat tablecloth, in rich,glowing colours,
made from the same natural ingredients
that had been used in the past.
We launched the tablecloths onto the
market,certain that buyers  would be as
excited as we were. A l a s, we were
d i s a p p o i n t e d . Long used to Indian block
prints being cheap, buyers found our
tablecloths too expensive. They were
unable to appreciate the centuries of
expertise that had gone into recreating
them.
Why should craft be cheap? Wh y
should beautiful, hand-made things be
expected to compete with mass
production? Why have the crafts of India,
once so highly renowned, b e c o m e
associated with bad quality, r u n n i n g
colours, boring designs?
Because the old traditions of
patronage have not been replaced by new
o n e s. Because craftsmen, no longer
working for their own communities, h a v e
great difficulty in finding new markets
and fall prey to filling orders where only
the price counts. Because the idea of high-
quality craft items aimed at discerning
markets is not yet fully understood in
this region. Because the importance of
aid in helping to improve quality and
identify market outlets has not been
addressed by governments and crafts
organizations.
Craft and commerce are inextricably
linked.Very early on,an embroiderer in
the first village centre established by my
company said to me,“How fortunate that
you are a commercial company, because
you have to make money and therefore so
will we!” She then told me about a
government agency and an NGO that
had set up training programmes in the
v i l l a g e, but as there was no instrument for
marketing or selling any of the products,
the projects had collapsed.
This is not a unique story. I hear the
same all over India.A friend in Delhi who
tirelessly promotes craft bewails that aid
is always available if she wants to build a
shed in a village,buy some looms or dig a
well,but not to help in marketing crafts.
16 The UNESCO Courier - July/August 2001
Without promotion or marketing,
crafts are perceived as charity. P e o p l e
buy them to “help the poor craftsmen”
rather than because they are well-made
and a delight to have.
From the village up
For the tradition of hand-made
textiles to survive,new patrons have to be
f o u n d . My long interest in textiles and in
craft convinced me that something could
be done to revive India’s fabled
reputation of producing the world’s fin e s t
fabrics.
For many years, my interest in the
field was academic, but I have always
enjoyed working in the field and learning
about the past from the present.When I
came to live in India almost 15 years ago,
the two began to merge; I found I wanted
to develop textile crafts myself.
This is why, together with my husband
David,we established Shades of India, a
company that makes high quality textiles
for the home.We do not believe that craft
should remain static, so we combine the
best of traditional techniques with
innovative designs, some ancient,others
contemporary. We have established our
markets ourselves, presenting our
collections to buyers, instead of them
telling us what they want.A buyer from a
famous London shop once told us:“ M a k e
me dream!”This is what we attempt to do.
And increasingly, international buyers
are coming to us because they recognize
that India is the only place left in the
world where such a variety of hand-made
textile techniques can still be found.
It is not an easy road.There is nothing
I enjoy more than sitting with a group of
craftspeople and working out ideas for a
new collection.We work with craftspeople
all over India,and at the centres we have
established not far from Delhi, in villages
where there had been no employment
for women before.
The same philosophy lies behind the
Why should craft be
cheap? Why should
beautiful, hand-made
things be expected to
compete with mass
production? 

Kashmir Loom Company, which I
established  a couple of years ago in
Srinagar with Kashmiri brothers A s a f
and Hamid A l i . Kashmir understands the
spinning and weaving of high quality
wools like nowhere else in the world.Th e
softest of these is Shahtoosh,now banned
because the wild Chiru antelope from
which it comes, faces extinction.
Pashmina is also timeless, w e i g h t l e s s,
and a delight to wear. It comes from the
Changra goat, that thrives in Ladakh and
Tibet at altitudes of over 4,000 metres.
This must not be confused with the poor-
quality fabric mixed with silk and other
fibres, from Nepal, marketed under the
same name.
In spring, nomad herders lovingly
comb out the fleece by hand.This is then
brought to Kashmir to be carded and
spun by hand and woven on traditional
hand-looms. This gossamer yarn is too
delicate to be treated by any machine.
No wonder, then,that it is so expensive.
What else could it be, when so much
skill and time have gone into making a
shawl?  
Team work
We work closely with our craftsmen.
At first hesitant to experiment,they are
now the creative force behind what we do.
They know their craft can survive only by
bringing new vitality into it, that the
market is demanding, and that we work
together as a team, respecting each
others’ talent and contribution. Th e y
make a good living, and their sons and
daughters often follow in their footsteps.
I feel deeply privileged to be a part of
their lives, their craft.As an art historian
I was an outsider, an onlooker into the art
of their ancestors.Now I am living it with
them.
If large agencies could add carefully
thought-out marketing and sales strategy
into their craft development projects, a n d
do on a larger scale what we attempt in
