The faculty at the University of
Hawaii went on strike on April 5, 2 0 0 1 . I
participated every day on the picket line
and in a demonstration at the state
Capitol Building. I sat with a sign on my
l e g s, tied to my wheelchair, saying “ U H PA
(University of Hawaii Professional
Assembly) on Strike.” I had a button
pinned to my shirt, reading “United We
Bargain,Divided We Beg.”
During the strike,many people often
told me or commented to friends within
e a r s h o t , “Britt is really a hero.” Th e r e
was also the constant question:“Are you
t i r e d ? ” . I was not tired. But I did feel as if
people were dismissing me, as if people
wanted me, along with my A L S
(amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) atrophied
body and wheelchair, to go away. (This
disease attacks motor neuron cells in the
b o d y, brain and spinal cord, leading to
varying amounts of paralysis and often
death.)
Another recurring question that
people asked my wife or accompanying
research assistant was,“How is he doing?”
That question was never directly
addressed to me. S t r a n g e r s, as well as
people who knew me well, applied the
stereotypes of the tired hero to me. No
one had evil or limiting intentions. Ye t
they rarely stayed long enough for any
form of interaction. I cannot speak and
have very limited movement of my head
and neck but, like anyone else, I enjoy and
require conversation. My wife and helpers
can read my lips, gaze and gestures. Yet
very few of my supposed admirers were
interested in a chat.
Being called a hero for participating
in everyday life events, like the strike, is
not limited to American culture. I was
recently invited to Japan to address
universities and communities. Th e
listeners would break into sobs and wind
up calling me a hero. My speeches were
videotaped and played over and over on
Japanese television. I could not go to a
restaurant without being noticed.
I do not want to leave the impression
that I did not enjoy the trip to Japan or the
participation in the faculty strike. I had
many authentic conversations in both
settings with people who knew my
sociological work. H o w e v e r, I did not
have the anonymity that most people
e n j o y. I find myself powerless in changing
newspaper accounts or television stories
about my so-called heroism.I cringe when
I read reviews of my sociological work,
typifying me as a hero.
If limiting references are contained in
languages and the implicit knowledge
accompanying ways of speaking, w h a t
can be done to free up the disabled?
There are two tasks. The first is to play
back the constricting language on those
who utter it. If I get the chance, I ask
those who ask me whether I’m  tired if
they are tired and in need of rest. This
provokes awareness. It also ruffles some
feathers.
The second task is to teach people
the awesome power in ways of speaking
and writing about disabled people.Po w e r
and the entirety of social institutions are
contained and continuously reproduced
in ways of talking, writing, reading, and
visually representing society. We are
agents in this reproducing society and
are capable of change in the way we
linguistically regard the disabled.
Although we have laws to protect their
civil rights, we need to go much further
and address the power of discourse.
By playing back the language on my
well-meaning friends and colleagues, I do
not want to impose a kind of sturm und
d r a n g discipline of a movement. M y
objective is to make people conscious of the
way words and phrases create,make things.
I really want to create the festivity of the
picket line, where middle-class professors
felt free to identify with, if only for a
m o m e n t , historical working-class labour
s t r i k e s.I want disabled people to experience
the same freedom,where their disability is
i g n o r e d . I am tired of being trapped in
c a t e g o r i e s ; I no longer want to be a hero.
I wish to thank Katherine Tr owell and
Shannon Gau for their assistance in
preparing this paper.
I AM NOT A H E R O
BY ALBERT BRITT ROBILLARD
SOCIOLOGY PROFESSORAND SENIOR RESEARCHER, UNIVERSITY OF HAWAII,
AND AUTHOROF MEANING OF A DISABILITY: THE LIVED EXPERIENCE OF PARALYSIS (TEMPLE, 1999)
