J A P A N : A M B I G U O U S  T E X T B O O K S
The committee charged with revising history textbooks meets in
To k y o ’s unsightly Mombusho building, which houses Ja p a n ’s
Education Ministry. Experts usually update textbooks every two years
to incorporate new information—archaeological discoveries and
decisive revelations—or make changes required by a modifie d
c u r r i c u l u m . This year, the routine task provoked an international
controversy.
The committee revised and approved nine high school history
textbooks.All of them had to be corrected.One, published by Fusosha,
which belongs to the conservative Fuji-Sankei press group, underwent
over 200 modifications.
Despite the requested corrections, the Fusosha textbook, written by a
group of nationalistic professors, continues to ignore the tragic plight
of  “comfort women,” the Imperial army’s former sex slaves, most of
whom were Ko r e a n . And it asserts that there is “no proof” t h e
Japanese slaughtered 300,000 people during a massacre in Nanjing,
China, in 1937.
The eight other books are less questionable but just as ambiguous. All
of them say that, despite its horrors, the Pacific war ended Western
colonialism in A s i a . For now, Japanese students grow up with a truncated
vision of history. N o n e t h e l e s s, the overwhelming majority of public school
teachers has rejected Fusosha’s book, and none of Japan’s prefectures
(each one chooses which books to include in the curriculum) has opted
for it.
But what can be done about revisionist mangas (comic books),which are
breaking sales records? The illustrator and polemicist Yoshinori Ko b a y a s h i
has sold several million copies of Senso Ron (“About the War”),a picture
book that glorifies the heroes of World War II. An organization of
revisionist teachers, Tsukuru Kai, has asked him to illustrate their future
works.
More alarming, polls show that Japanese teenagers, who have been
disoriented by the current economic crisis, say they “enjoy” books
boasting about the code of honour and the Japanese virtues of order and
discipline, without mentioning the atrocities that were committed.
Casting his eye over these various trends, Dr. Aruki Wada,a professor at
Tokyo University, says that “Japan still hasn’t cleaned up its past.” ■
Richard Werly, Tokyo-based journalist
