Can we educate for world 
peace?
____________W O R L D  O F  L E A R N I N G »
Extracts from the opening remarks by Archibald MacLeish 
during a radio discussion with Dr. F.L. Schlagle, President of 
the U.S. National Education Association, Mr. Herbert Emmer­
ich, Director o f the Public Administration Clearing House, and 
Dr. Francis Bacon, member o f the Educational Policies Com­
mission o f the National Education Association, broadcast on 12 
December 1945, one month after the establishment o f Unesco.
“Of course we can educate for world peace. 
I’d be willing to go a great deal farther than 
that, I’d be willing, for my own part, to say 
that there is no possible way of getting 
world peace except through education. 
Which means education of the peoples of 
the world. All you can do by arrangements 
between governments is to remove the 
causes of disagreement which may become, 
in time, causes of war. But peace, as we are 
all beginning to realize, is something a great 
deal more than the absence of war. Peace is 
positive and not negative. Peace is a way of 
living together which excludes war, rather 
than a period without war in which peoples 
try to live together.
“But the difficulty with this kind of dis­
cussion is not the answers. The difficulty is 
the questions. And the trouble with the 
questions is that they are put—have to be 
put—in words which have lost their fresh­
ness and their reality of meaning (...)
“The real problem (...) is one that goes a 
lot deeper. It has to do with the effect on the 
human mind of words like ‘international 
understanding’ and ‘education’ and ‘cul­
ture’ (...)
“Before we can talk intelligently and 
meaningfully, therefore, about questions 
like education for peace, or the creation of 
international understanding, we have got to 
find the abrasives which will scrape these 
words down to their living meanings again. 
For some reason which I have never been 
able to understand, people are quite willing 
to believe that anything you call ‘econo­
mics’ is real and that you call ‘politics’ is
exciting, but that anything you refer to 
under the general words which describe the 
life of the human mind is necessarily dull 
and stale and unrealistic and fuzzy (...) •
“Actually, in the world we live in, which 
is very different from the world we think we 
live in, the relations of peoples to each 
other in terms of the things they think and 
the things they believe and the things they 
hope, in terms, that is to say, of their mental 
processes, of the things that distinguish 
them as men, are far more vivid—make, to 
be brief, far more sense than the economic 
and political arrangements between gov­
ernments which capture the front pages of 
our minds as well as of our newspapers(...)
“I am not belittling the tremendous im­
portance of economic solutions for econo­
mic difficulties and political cures for poli­
tical mistakes. I am saying that these things, 
important as they are, are far less important 
than the creation of a world of words and 
images and mutual knowledge within which 
people may talk to each other.
“What we tried to do in London was to 
invent an international instrument which 
could help us all to create that world by the 
use of all the channels of communication— 
education and radio, press and scholarship, 
motion pictures and music, journalism in all 
its forms and living, enduring arts. If the 
question you are discussing is the question 
whether our international instrument will 
work, I am going to ask my colleagues 
Emmerich and Schlagle to put me down as 
voting Yes.” ■
m m’••• ' • S SSI
\
• • V
îS ÿ ^
US poet and Librarian of Congress Archi­
bald MacLeish (1892-1982) was Chairman 
of the Committee which drafted the Pre­
amble to Unesco’s Constitution.
Archibald MacLeish wrote the famous phrase in Unesco’s Constitution, “since wars begin in the minds of men, 
it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace must be constructed”.
