F
or centuries,the untouchables of Paliyad,a
nondescript village in western India’s
Ahmedabad district, have known their
p l a c e.Many of them are manual scavengers,
cleaning the toilets of upper-caste villagers
or toiling the land,sometimes for less than a handful
of rice a day.
“ We ’ve known that we must stay away from
them [upper-caste people] since the day we were
born,” says Rajesh,who is going on 19. “At the tea
s t a l l s, we have separate cups to drink from, c h i p p e d
and caked with dirt, and we’re expected to clean
them ourselves.We have to walk for 15 minutes to
carry water to our homes,because we’re not allowed
to use the taps in the village that the upper castes
u s e. We ’re not allowed into temples, and when I
attended school, my friends and I were forced to sit
just outside the classroom… the upper caste children
would not allow us even to touch the football they
played with… we played with stones instead.”
More than 160 million people, a sixth of India’s
p o p u l a t i o n , continue to bear the burden of a
2,000-year old caste system sanctioned by Hindu
t h e o l o g y, which locks people into a rigid role by
virtue of their birth.
Codes to suit
the upper class
Though the term “ u n t o u c h a b l e s ” was abolished
in 1950 under India’s constitution,the “oppressed
p e o p l e ” or Dalits as they are now referred to,
continue to be discriminated against. They are
denied access to land, forced to work in humiliating
and degrading conditions and are routinely abused
by the police and upper-caste groups, which enjoy
the state’s protection
Though India has sought to overcome the
inequities of caste and discrimination through
a f firmative action—reserving quotas in education,
government jobs and political bodies—these policies
have benefited only a few.The highest office in the
l a n d , that of the largely ceremonial President, i s
today held by a Dalit,K.R.Narayanan.But all the
horrors of India’s caste system persist at the
grassroots; attempts to defy this rigid social order
invariably result in violence or economic retaliation.
Perhaps the world’s longest surviving social
h i e r a r c h y, I n d i a ’s caste system entails a complex
ordering of social groups on the basis of ritual
p u r i t y.Attributed to the law-giver Manu, the system
was spelt out over 2,000 years ago in the Dharma
Shastra,the cornerstone of the Hindu religion.
According to Manu, every individual is born
into one of four principal v a r n a s, or large categories,
and must remain within that caste until death,
although the particular ranking of that caste may
vary among different regions in the country and
over time. In order of precedence, the Brahmins are
the priests and teachers,presiding over knowledge
and education; the Kshatriyas are the rulers and
s o l d i e r s ; the Va i s h y a s, merchants and traders;and the
Shudras, the peasants, labourers and artisans. The
untouchables fall into a fifth category outside the
varna system, and were often assigned tasks too
“ritually polluting” to merit inclusion within the
traditional varna system.
C l e a r l y, caste discrimination was an ideological
construct that was deployed by the upper castes to
create and maintain their monopoly over cultural
capital (knowledge and education), social capital
GOPAL GURU, WITH SHIRAZ SIDHVA
PROFESSOR OF POLITICAL STUDIES AT PUNE UNIVERSITY AND FELLOW, CENTRE
FORTHE STUDY OF DEVELOPING SOCIETIES (DELHI). SHIRAZ SIDHVA IS A
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST

I n d i a ’s “hidden apartheid”
India’s ancient caste system persists, subjecting millions to degrading
poverty and human rights abuses. Attitudes die hard, despite government
legislation to usher in change

Street sweepers in Bombay: a “ritually polluting” job.

(status and patriarchal domination), political capital
(power),and material capital (wealth).
The codes were often pernicious,and rules were
bent to suit the upper castes. In northern India,
for example,untouchables were forced to use drums
to announce their arrival,and even their shadows
were thought to be polluting. In the south, some
Brahmins stipulated that the lower castes would
have to maintain a distance of 65 feet (22 metres)
from them in order not to contaminate their betters.
Yet this caste-based discrimination also had a
pragmatic dimension. The untouchables, excluded
from the education and books of the Brahmins,
were nevertheless allowed to develop their own
stores of knowledge, in agriculture or midwifery
for example.But there was a catch—this knowledge
was only allowed because it benefited the upper
castes.
A case of
racism?
Caste is still frequently used as a cover for
exploitative economic arrangements. Even today,
most Dalits are not permitted to cross the invisible
“ p o l l u t i o n ” line that divides their part of the village
from that occupied by the higher castes. And yet
a Dalit woman,whose very shadow is polluting, i s
allowed to massage the body of the upper-caste
woman she serves. Upper caste men,meanwhile,
think nothing of raping Dalit women or consorting
with lower-caste prostitutes, even though touching
them by accident in the street is a sacrilege.
One of the main reasons why the caste system
has survived is because the hierarchical notion of
social good it perpetuates is legitimized by the
lower castes themselves. They replicate this
hierarchy by imitating the cultural values of the
upper castes, imposing discrimination on castes
even lower than their own.Sociologists claim there
are more than 2,000 castes and sub-castes within
the five categories. These are called j a t i s,
endogamous (inter-marrying) groups that are
divided along occupational, s e c t a r i a n , r e g i o n a l
and linguistic lines. Even as outcasts, the Dalits
divide themselves into further castes. Th i s
proliferation allows for discrimination both
horizontally and vertically, thus making social
relations all the more rigid and impermeable.
The plight of India’s untouchables and the
regular human rights abuses against them elicits
short-lived public outrage, leaving the state
u n d e r little pressure to engineer large-scale social
c h a n g e.This is why a coalition of Dalit groups and
activists have lobbied hard for their plight to be on
the agenda of the UN World Conference against
Racism.
“Caste is India’s hidden apartheid,” says Martin
M a c w a n ,4 1 ,convenor of the National Campaign on
Dalit Human Rights. He argues that like racism,
caste discrimination is “based on descent.”
Their demand has sparked off a national debate
about the nature of caste discrimination and
whether other countries should be allowed to
interfere in what the Indian government considers
There is only one
caste—humanity
Pampa, Indian poet and
writer, ninth century 
A woman defending India’s Untouchables garners support in the countryside.

“an internal matter.”
The government has opposed the inclusion of
caste on the UN conference’s agenda on the grounds
that caste and race are not synonymous.“Race and
caste are distinct,” insists Soli Sorabjee, I n d i a ’s
attorney general and a member of the UN
Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination.
I n d i a , a vigorous campaigner against apartheid,
claims that it has done everything possible to grant
equality to India’s lowest castes.A fifth of the seats
in parliament are reserved for members of the
scheduled castes (the official term for Dalits),and
some states are governed by powerful political
parties based on alliances with the lower castes.
Campaigns to
end the stigma
Quotas and job allocations, h o w e v e r, h a v e
n o t brought equality, d i g n i t y, or even safety for
I n d i a ’s “broken people.”In villages, the social stigma
remains too strong to obliterate by laws alone.
Official figures speak for themselves:recorded
crimes and atrocities against the lowest castes
averaged 26,000 a year between 1997 and 1999 (the
latest figures available).Considering the police are
often reluctant even to record claims against the
upper castes, these figures expose just the tip of the
iceberg.
About two-thirds of the Dalit population are
illiterate, and about half are landless agricultural
labourers. Only seven percent have access to safe
drinking water,electricity and toilets.And a majority
of the estimated 40 million bonded labourers (who
work as slaves to pay off debts), including 15 million
children,are Dalits.
A national campaign to highlight abuses against
Dalits was spearheaded by human rights groups in
eight Indian states in 1998,and caste has been taken
up as an issue internationally for the first time by
organizations including Human Rights Wa t c h .Wh i l e
some Dalits have resisted subjugation and
discrimination by armed struggle, these are
invariably quelled by more powerful upper-caste
private militia like the Ranbir Sena in Bihar,w h i c h
has been held responsible for a series of massacres
of poor Dalit peasants and landless labourers.
Macwan agrees that including caste
discrimination in the conference’s final resolutions
would be only a symbolic victory, changing nothing
in reality. “The only solution is to change people’s
minds,” he declares. ■
