R
ussian writer Viktor A s t a fiev is no stranger
to controversy.A war veteran, the 77-year-
old Siberian is renowned for his ruthlessly
truthful stories about the Great Patriotic
Wa r, as World War II is known in Russia.
But when his latest book, The Jolly Soldier was
published last year, even a writer of the stature of
Astafiev, regarded as one of Russia’s greatest living
a u t h o r s, was unprepared for the rabid reaction he
met.Astafiev, who lives in the Siberian city of Kras-
n o y a r s k , was pilloried in the press and vilified by
regional politicians for his uncompromising portrayal
of the horrors of the Soviet military. Upsetting some
of the holy cows of Russian wartime myth, notably on
how the nation united to throw off the fascists with
total resolve,A s t a fiev describes how ill-trained boys
were thrown into battle and Red Army soldiers used
as cannon fodder. He also dispels the myth that
peoples of the Soviet Union were unanimously
opposed to the German invaders, instead showing that
the latter were initially welcomed as liberators from
Stalin’s tyranny.
Return to old habits
Members of the city council,many of whom,like
A s t a fiev are a product of Soviet wartime Commu-
n i s m , voted to scrap a small local pension he was paid.
Distressed by the furor,Astafiev, 77,was admitted to
hospital with heart trouble.Now back at home, n e i t h e r
he nor his friends in the city will talk about an episode
that strikes at the core of a new phenomenon in post-
Communist Russia:historical denial.
The A s t a fiev incident is but one acute example of
a growing trend in Russia away from the academic
and intellectual openness that accompanied the fir s t
flush of freedom after the collapse of the Soviet
Union ten years ago.
The upheavals that followed the failed coup by
Politburo hardliners in August 1991 disrupted all the
norms of accepted Soviet-era secrecy. For two years,
researchers, both Russian and foreign,had a heyday
as archivists opened their doors in the heady atmos-
phere of freedom.Following the 1993 stand-off bet-
ween Boris Yeltsin and reactionary political forces, t h e
new power consolidated its position.The process of
forming a new Russian state called for a review of
security structures and secrecy rules.As a result,a new
law on state secrets was adopted, ruling that the
majority of documents must be declassified and made
public after 30 years.
While the Russian Academy of Sciences is wor-
king with history faculties around the country to
develop a new cadre of young historians, r e s e a r-
chers now investigating the grim world of the Soviet
past report an increasing reluctance of many archivists
to allow access to party, secret police and govern-
ment documents despite the 1993 law.
The retreat from the openness of the early post-
Communist years began towards the end of the Ye l t s i n
e r a .The work of the state body responsible for declas-
sifying secret documents ground to a halt two years
ago, and directors of once open and helpful archives
have returned to the old Soviet habit of saying “ n o ”t o
virtually all sensitive requests, academics say.
Nikita Petrov, a reputed scholar and expert on the
NKVD (Stalin’s secret police),who now works with
the Moscow-based human rights organization Memo-
r i a l , claims that “it is much more difficult to gain
access to archives. There is a growth both in the ten-
dency to keep documents secret and to commercia-
lize them—to charge for access.”
S C H O L A R S  A T  R I S K
NICK HOLDSWORTH
CONTRIBUTOR TO THE TIMES HIGHER EDUCATION SUPPLEMENT AND SEVERAL BRITISH NEWSPAPERS; AUTHOR OFTHE BOOK MOSCOW: THE BEAUTIFULAND THE
DAMNED, LIFE IN RUSSIA IN TRANSITION (ANDRE DEUTSCH, LONDON, 2000).



Bound by n o s t a l g i a
In Russia, a new generation of historians is in the making, but society
at large does not seem pressed to question the darker moments
of the Soviet era. For now, nostalgia holds the high ground
2 . POWER T R A P S
A 1993 law gives historians access to archives,a master key to the past.

Many archivists are from the old guard, and a
nostalgia for the past combined with growing use of
nationalist symbols to rally an economically and
socially troubled country allows them to slip back
into their old habits.
Petrov acknowledges that the 1993 law is remar-
kably democratic and workable, and that  Memorial
has relied upon the threat of using it to force a number
of archives to give access to specific documents.The
challenge to academic freedom is not yet a legal one,
he says, but a social and personal challenge that is
often harder to identify and combat.Th e r e ’s been no
change in the law, but the spirit of Russia has shifted
in the last couple of years, he suggests.
Petrov’s experience is not shared by all.Natalia
Ye g o r o v a , deputy director of the Institute of Uni-
versal History, which is part of the Russian A c a d e m y
of Sciences, scotches all talk of curbs to academic
f r e e d o m ,apart from the recurring and thorny issue of
poverty-level pay.
“Unfortunately it is true that the state commission
for declassifying documents has not been working for
the past two years, but access to archives very much
depends on which archive you go to.There are diffe-
rent rules in different places. Many archives, i n c l u d i n g
much of the higher (Communist) party archives, are
no longer secret.”
Working on Soviet foreign policy and the Cold
Wa r,Yegorova says the main forces limiting her work
are fin a n c i a l . The Academy of Sciences, h o w e v e r,
through its humanities and scientific foundation,
makes grants available to allow for an average $100
monthly top-up to normal salaries.
“ With the exception of a few difficulties acces-
sing  some archives or funding sources,we are working
now as we always have. In fact, at international confe-
rences our American colleagues are surprised at how
fierce and controversial the debates are between Rus-
sian researchers on historical issues,” she says.
A move by the Academy of Sciences earlier this
year to force all researchers to report
contacts with foreigners caused
many to fear the re-introduction of
Soviet-style controls, but nothing
came of it,she said.
Petrov believes the trend to
greater secrecy reflects a desire to
draw a comforting cloth of nostalgia
over current difficulties. “There’s an
inner unwillingness to understand the
criminal past of the country.Te a c h e r s,
doctors and other state workers are
paid little and struggle to make a
living. In these circumstances people
often seek mental comfort in the
past,” he says. The Astafiev case is a
sad illustration of this—someone does
not want the truth to be known.But
we must take courage from the fact
that A s t a fiev wasn’t imprisoned.E v e n
if his oppressors had this desire, t o d a y
they can’t do it.”
Teenage
truths
Others are taking courage from
what a new generation growing up in
Russia is making of the country’s
p a s t . Irina Scherbakov, a professor of
history at the Russian Humanitarian University in
M o s c o w, recently organized a nationwide contest
through Memorial encouraging schoolchildren bet-
ween 14 and 18 years old to send in essays and illus-
trations about Russia in the 20th century. She received
over 3,500 contributions: “ C h i l d r e n ’s entries drew
on interviews with their grandparents, S o v i e t - e r a
documents from archives, family diaries and photo-
g r a p h s.Although the sample is not scientific, their res-
ponses give confidence for a more frank appraisal of
our history,” Scherbakov said.“Many of them treated
the past critically. It really gave us a big dose of opti-
mism.”
It’s a bright beacon in an otherwise bleak land-
s c a p e, Scherbakov concedes:“People do not want to
analyze or argue about the Soviet period; they prefer
n o s t a l g i a . Life today is too hard and many, e s p e c i a l l y
older people, are loathe to face up to their own res-
ponsibilities for the part they played during those
times.” ■
A grim reminder of a Soviet gulag in Siberia.
