INTERVIEW BY AMY OTCHET
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



S a b re - ra t t l i n g
among thirsty nations
Aaron Wolf*, an American geographer, dispels the scare-mongering
of a looming war over water by sifting through just about every related
conflict and treaty in history
Just about every journalist writing about water
will evoke the spectre of past and impending
w a rs over the re s o u rc e. You have searc h e d
for and analyzed every international water
a g reement signed and “ i n c i d e n t ” re p o r t e d .
W h e n
was the last time two states formally went to war
over water? 
The only recorded incident of an outright war
over water was 4,500 years ago between two
Mesopotamian city-states over the Ti g r i s - E u p h r a t e s
in the region we now call southern Iraq. Since then,
you find water exacerbating relations at the
international scale. But you also regularly fin d
hostile states—such as India and Pakistan or the
Israelis and Palestinians—resolving water confli c t s
even while disputes rage over other issues.
We also analyzed every
reported water incident
between two states that we
could find anywhere in the
w o r l d ’s 261 international river
basins in the past 50 years.Tw o -
thirds of a total of 1,800 e v e n t s
involved cooperation, l i k e
conducting joint scientific
investigations or signing over 150 water treaties.
Turning to the negative events, we found that
8 0 percent consisted of verbal threats and posturing
by state leaders, which was probably aimed at their
own internal constituents. In 1979, E g y p t i a n
president Anwar Sadat said:“The only matter that
could take Egypt to war again is water,” in reference
to the Nile. King Hussein allegedly said the same
thing for Jordan in 1990.
Yet in the last 50 years, there have only been
3 7 events in which people actually shot at each
other over water. Of those, 27 were between Israel
and Syria over the Jordan and Yarmouk rivers.
But critics argue that you cannot look to history to
p redict the future because of unprecedented stress on
increasingly scarce water supplies.
I cannot think of a worse case than the Tigris-
Euphrates or the Jordan River.All of these countries
have run out of water. They have the means to
divert their neighbour’s water and the enmity
between them couldn’t get much worse. Yet they
have all come up with agreements.
States have gone to war over oil,why not water? 
S t r a t e g i c a l l y, water wars don’t make sense.Yo u
cannot increase your water resources by going to
war with a neighbour unless you are willing to
capture the entire watershed, depopulate it and
not expect a tremendous retaliation.
But water has been used as a weapon and target in war.
Th a t ’s a totally different issue,which happens all
the time.During the Gulf Wa r, Iraq destroyed most
of Ku w a i t ’s desalination plants and the A l l i e d
coalition intentionally targeted Baghdad’s water
supply and sanitation system. Serbian engineers
reportedly shut down Pristina’s water system in
Kosovo before NATO arrived in 1999.
Yet you must distinguish between water as a
source of conflict, as a resource and as a weapon.
We’ve gone to war over oil. Yet you wouldn’t put
that event in the same category
as the military use of a flame
thrower or even napalm.
So where does this water- w a r
talk come from? 
A lot came from the post-
Cold War period, when the
Western military asked,“what
do we do now?” That is when this whole
environmental security movement took off. B y
around 1992, a lot of political scientists began writing
that resource scarcity in general was going to lead to
w a r f a r e. I t ’s very tempting to see water as a source of
c o n flict once you begin to understand what it means
to society and ecosystems. But in emphasizing the
value of the resource, these analysts overlooked the
subtleties involved.
You argue that water by its very nature induces co-
o p e ration between states. Can you give an example? 
The Oslo Accord between Israelis and Palestinians
actually came out of backroom talks among water
people from the region who met in Zurich in 1990—
I believe.The water people introduced their political
counterparts to one another and actually hatched out
the process, which led to the accord.
This kind of scenario happens regularly because
* Director of the
T r a n s b o u n d a r y
Freshwater Dispute
Database project
( h t t p : / / t e r r a . g e o. o r s t . e d u )
and associate professor at
Oregon State University
You cannot increase
your water resources
by going to war
with a neighbour

water naturally flows into other realms. States along
the Nile began by talking about water and are now
working towards an agreement that includes roads,
electricity and other infrastructure (see pp. 30-31).
You maintain that the “red flag” for international
water is not water scarcity but one country’s attempt
to dominate an international river. Most of these
c o n flicts usually revolve around plans to build a
major dam. But this kind of project generally re q u i re s
assistance from organizations like the World Bank,
which evaluate proposals according to enviro n m e n t a l
and ethical criteria. By pulling the purse strings, c a n ’ t
these organizations prevent water conflicts fro m
arising? 
What you’re suggesting has been the case. But
as more private capital takes over investment in
these projects, the ethical and environmental
criteria of the development banks is no longer an
i s s u e. Tu r k e y, for example, is diverting private
a n d public capital to fund one of the most content-
ious projects, known as GAP, which envisages the
construction of 22 dams and 19 power plants on
the Tigris-Euphrates and its tributaries.The same is
true for the Narmada dam in India and China’s
Three Gorges project.
The T i g r i s - E u p h rates is regularly cited as a fla s h p o i n t
for a possible war. How can anyone induce Turkey,
probably the most powerful state in the region,not
to pursue its own interests to the detriment of its
downstream neighbours, Iraq and Syria? 
Everybody keeps talking about the Ti g r i s -
Euphrates as a potential fla s h p o i n t ,but what’s really
interesting is that in 1991, NATO actually asked
Turkey to shut the flow of the Euphrates towards
I r a q . But the government refused and basically
s a i d ,“ You can use our air space and bases to bomb
Iraq,but we won’t cut off their water.”
Since the 1970s, Tu r k e y, Syria and Iraq have
had an implicit agreement,which Turkey continued
to respect even while building the dams.And despite
the rhetoric, Syria and Iraq both recognize that
they benefit from those dams because they even out
the river’s flow and extend their farmers’ growing
s e a s o n . Turkey wants to be seen as a fair, g o o d
neighbour for several reasons, including NATO
pressure as an ally, internal politics and attempts to
join the European Union. The difficulty lies in
making the implicit agreements explicit.
Water professionals maintain that you have to
manage a river basin as a whole. But multilatera l
water treaties must be a nightmare to negotiate.
Which are more effective—multilateral or bilateral
agreements? 
The more people in the room, the more diffic u l t
it is to reach an agreement, especially when you
are dealing with a country’s sovereignty. Take the
Jordan River as an example:Syria and Jordan have
an agreement, Jordan and Israel have an agreement,
Israel and Palestinians have an agreement—several
sets of bilateral agreements for a multilateral basin
which is managed fairly effic i e n t l y, although the
Palestinians will eventually claim and probably get
greater water rights.
A new way of solving water confli c t s, some economists
argue, is to set up an international water market.But
then again, we can look to the recent conflict in which
the U.S. has argued that Canada must sell its water
re s o u rces under the terms of the North American Fre e
Trade A g reement—a proposition that Canada re j e c t s.
What is the value of treating water as an economic
resource when trying to resolve a conflict?
Economists can highlight and quantify the
benefits flowing from water, like hydroelectricity,
and help build what we call a “baskets of benefit s.”
For example, the U. S. and Canada have an
agreement in which the U. S. has flood control dams
within Canadian territory. The U. S. pays Canada
for that benefit . It is generally easier and more
equitable to allocate the benefits than the water
itself.
Economists also remind us of the need to recover
the cost of water delivery, treatment,storage and so
o n .But we’re often pushed to think in terms of water
markets—buying and selling water as a commodity
even though this has never happened internationally
in a practical sense.As someone who is committed to
water emotionally, aesthetically, religiously and for
ecosystems, I am reluctant to think of water as just
another economic good. ■

A potential flashpoint? Turkey’s GAP dam project.
