©  Festsp.îelleitung, Bayreuth
by Aldous Huxley
ln 1947 w h ile  the U . N . Com m ission on H um an Rights w as w orking out an in ternational bill o f rights, 
U n es c o  carried out a broad enquiry into th e  philosophic bases of th e  rights w hich could be inclu­
ded in such a declaration . It consulted leading philosophers and w riters of m any countries and 
obtained th e ir personal v iew s on the question . Th is  sym posium  served as the basis for th e  final 
conclusions which Un e s c o  drew  and w hich were forwarded to  the U . N . H um an R ights C om ­
mission to  help to  c la rify  its discussions and to  help explore th e  ground fo r constructive agree­
m ent. Later th e  m ost significant te x ts  o f th is  sym posium  w ere edited by U n e s c o  and published  
under th e  t it le  Human Rights : Comments and Interpretations (P ub lisher, A llan  W in g a te , London, 
1949). On the occasion of th e  10th anniversary o f the adoption o f the Universal D eclaration of 
H um an R ights, T he  U n es c o  C o u r ie r  reproduces below  A ldous H ux ley 's  contribution. Though  
it  was w ritten ten  years ago it is just as tim e ly  and provocative to day  as it was th en .
T he increasing pressure of population upon resources 
and the waging, threat of, and unremitting preparation 
for total war—these are, at the present time, the most 
formidable enemies to liberty.
About three-quarters of the 2.2 billion inhabitants of our 
planet do not have enough to eat. By the end of the present 
century world population will have increased (if we manage 
to avoid catastrophe in the interval) to about 3.3 thousand 
millions (1). Meanwhile, over vast areas of the earth’s 
surface, soil erosion is rapidly diminishing the fertility of 
mankind’s four billion acres of productive land. Moreover, 
in those countries where industrialism is most highly developed, 
mineral resources are running low, or have been completely 
exhausted—and this at a time when a rising population 
demands an ever increasing quantity of consumer goods and 
when improved technology is in a  position to supply that 
demand.
Heavy pressure of population upon resources threatens 
liberty in several ways. Individuals have to work harder and 
longer to earn a poorer living. At the same time the economic 
situation, of the community as a whole is so precarious that 
small mishaps, such as untoward weather conditions, may 
result in serious breakdowns. There can be little or no
(1) A c c o r d i n g  t o  t h e  l a t e s t  p o p u l a t i o n  s t a t i s t i c s  p u b l i s h e d  
b y  t h e  U n i t e d  N a t i o n s  t h e  w o r l d ' s  p o p u l a t i o n  i s  n o w  i n c r e a s i n g  
a t  t h e  r a t e  o f  5,400 i n d i v i d u a l s  p e r  h o u r  (47,000,000 e a c h  y e a r ) .  
A t  t h i s  r a t e  t h e  p r e s e n t  t o t a l  o f  2,737,000,000 w i l l  'b e  d o u b l e d  b y  
t h e  e n d  o f  t h e  c e n t u r y .— E d i t o r
personal liberty in the midst of social chaos; and where 
social chaos is reduced to order by the intervention of a 
powerful contralized executive, there is a  grave risk of 
totalitarianism. Because of the mounting pressure of popula­
tion upon resources, the twentieth century has become the 
golden age of centralized government and dictatorship, and 
has witnessed the wholesale revival of slavery, which has 
been imposed upon political heretics, conquered populations 
and prisoners of war.
Throughout the nineteenth century the New World provided 
cheap food for the teeming masses of the Old World and 
free land for the victims of oppression. Today the New 
World holds a large and growing population, there is no free 
land and over the vast areas, the much abused soil is losing 
its fertility. The New World still produces a large exportable 
surplus. Whether, fifty years from now, it will still have 
a surplus, with which to feed the three billions inhabiting the 
Old World, seems doubtful.
By destroying accumulated wealth and the sources of future 
production, total war has sharply increased the pressure of 
existing populations upon their resources and has thereby 
sharply curtailed the liberties of vast numbers of men and 
women, belonging not only to the Vanquished nations, but 
also to those which were supposed to be victorious. At the 
same time the fear of, and busy preparation for, another 
total war in the near future is everywhere resulting in an 
ever greater concentration of political and economic power.
Bitter experience has proved that no individual or »group
Aldous Huxley (1894-1963) was the author of the famous novel Brave Mew World (1932). His brother,

THE GREATEST ENEMIES 
TÒ LIBERTY I

of individuals is fit to be entrusted with great powers for 
long periods of time. The socialist rulers of welfare states 
may imagine that they and their successors will be immune 
to the corrupting influence of the enormous powers which 
total war and mounting population pressure', have forced 
upon them; but there is, unfortunately, no reason to suppose 
that they will prove: to be exceptions to the general rule, 
th e  abuse of power can be avoided only by limiting the 
amount and duration of the authority entrusted to any person, 
group or class.
But so long as we are menaced by total war and mounting 
population pressures, it seems very unlikely that we shall get 
anything but a steadily increasing concentration of power in 
the hands of the ruling political bosses and their bureaucratic 
managers. Meanwhile conscription, or military servitude, is 
almost everywhere imposed upon the masses. This means 
in practice that, at any moment, a man may be deprived of his 
constitutional liberties and subjected to martial law. Recent 
history has shown that even socialist rulers are ready to resort 
to this device for coercing persons engaged in inconvenient 
strikes.
It is virtually certain that, at the present time, no govern­
ment actually desires war. But it is also probable that many 
governments would be reluctant' to give up all preparations 
for war; for such preparations justify them in maintaining 
conscription as an instrument of control and coercion. And 
we may add that universal disarmament, if it should ever 
be achieved, would not necessarily mean the end of con­
scription. Compulsory service to the States will probably 
persist in some other than military form—as a scheme for 
the “training of youth,” for example, or as a “labour draft.”
A constitutional bill of rights, whose principles are applied 
in specific legislation, can certainly do'som ething to protect 
the masses of ordinary, unprivileged mien and women against 
the few who, through wealth or hierarchical position, effec­
tively wield power over the majority. But prevention is 
always better than cure. Mere paper restrictions, designed 
to curb the abuse of a power already concentrated in a few 
hands, are but the mitigations of an existing evil. Personal 
liberty can be made secure only by abolishing the evil 
altogether.
U n e s c o  is engaged at present in facilitating the task of 
mitigation; but it is in the fortunate position of being able 
to proceed, if it so desires, to the incomparably more important 
task of prevention, of the radical removal of the present 
impediments to liberty. This is primarily an affair for the 
scientific section of the Organization. For the problem 
of relieving the pressure of population upon resources is 
primarily a  problem in pure and applied science, while the 
problem of total war is (among other things, of course) a 
problem in ethics for scientific workers as individuals and as 
members of professional organisations.
Mill ions for destruction
T o provide all of the 2.2 thousand million persons at present 
inhabiting the planet with a nutritionally adequate diet, 
it would be necessary to double the existing food supply. 
It will take years, b y  conventional methods, to achieve this 
goal and by that time the population will be, not two billions, 
but more than three— and malnutrition will be very nearly 
as serious and as widespread as it is today.
Every industrial nation spends huge sums on research into 
the techniques of mass destruction. Thus, two thousand 
million dollars went into the production of the atomic bomb 
and many hundreds of millions more are at present being 
spent upon research into rockets, jet planes, the dissemination 
of pneumonic plague and the wholesale destruction of food 
plants. If comparable amounts of money and scientific 
ability could be devoted to the problem of producing food­
stuffs artificially, it seems likely enough that methods would 
quickly be found for providing the half-starved millions of 
Europe and Asia with an adequate diet. The synthesis of 
chlorophyll, for example, might be, for the later twentieth 
century, the equivalent of what the exploitation of the empty 
lands of the New World was for the nineteenth.. It would 
reduce the pressure of population upon resources and thereby
- The Unesco Courier. —  October 1958
remove one of the principal reasons for highly centralized, 
totalitarian control of individual lives.
The prosperity of an industrialized society is proportionate 
to the rapidity with which it squanders its irreplaceable 
natural capital. Over large areas of the earth’s surface, 
easily available deposits of useful minerals have already 
been exhausted, or are running low; with the increase in 
population and the progressive improvement in industrial 
techniques, the drain upon the planet’s remaining resources 
is bound to be accelerated.
Useful minerals are very unevenly distributed. Some 
countries are exceedingly rich in these natural resources, 
others lack them completely. When a powerful nation 
possesses a natural monopoly in some indispensable mineral, 
it ■ is > thereby enabled to increase its already formidable 
influence over its less fortunate neighbours. Where a weak 
nation finds itself blessed, or cursed, with a natural monopoly, 
its stronger neighbours are tempted to acts of aggression 
or “peaceful penetration.”
Science at the crossroads
S c i e n t i f i c  workers have it in their power to postpone the 
day of planetary bankruptcy and to mitigate the political 
dangers inherent in the existence of natural monopolies. 
What is needed is a new Manhattan Project, under interna­
tional auspices, for the development of universally available 
surrogates for the unevenly distributed and soon-to-be- 
exhausted minerals, on which our industrial civilization 
depends for its very existence—e.g. wind power to take the 
place of power produced by coal, petroleum and that most 
dangerous of all fuels, uranium; glass and plastics as 
substitutes, wherever possible, for such metals as copper, tin, 
nickel and zinc.
A project of this kind would be valuable in several ways. 
It would shift our industrial civilization on to a foundation 
more permanent than that accelerating exploitation of 
wasting assets, on which it rests at present; it would break 
those natural monopolies which are a standing temptation to 
war; and finally .it would make possible an extension of per­
sonal liberty and a reduction of the powers wielded by the 
ruling minority.
We now come to ■ the ethical problems confronting 
scientific workers as individuals and as members of pro­
fessional organizations. Whatever may have been the wishes 
of the inventors and technicians involved, applied science has 
in fact resulted in the creation of monopolistic industries, 
controlled by private capitalists or centralized national 
governments. It has led to the concentration of economic 
power, strengthened the hands of the few against the many 
and increased the destructiveness of war. Applied science 
in the service, first, of big business and then of government 
has made possible the modem totalitarian state.
The time has surely come when scientific workers must 
consider, individually and collectively, the ethical problem of 
“right livelihood” . How far is a man justified in following 
a course of professional action which, though involving no 
immediate wrong-doing, results in social consequences which 
are manifestly undesirable or downright evil? Specifically, 
how far is it right for the scientist or technologist to 
participate in work, the outcome of which will be to increase 
the concentration of power in the hands of the ruling 
minority and to provide soldiers with the means for the 
wholesale extermination of civilians?
Up to the present applied science has been, to a great 
extent, at the service of monopoly, oligarchy and nationalism. 
But there is, nothing in the nature of science or technology 
which makes it inevitable that this should be so. Pro­
fessionally speaking, it would be just as easy for the scientific 
worker to serve the cause of peace as of war, of personal 
liberty, voluntary co-operation and self-government, as of 
monopolistic statism or capitalism, universal regimentation 
and dictatorship. The difficulties are not technical; they lie 
in the realms of philosophy and morals, of value judgments 
and the will that acts upon those judgments.
First published in 1949 by Allan Wingate (Publishers) Ltd., 
London. A ll rights reserved.
Julian Huxley (1887-1975), was a biologist and the first director-general of Unesco (1946-1948).
