A
mong the most important questions still
facing human enquiry are those about
the mind and its place in nature.What is
m i n d , and what is it relation to body?
How should we best understand our
common sense concepts of such mental phenomena
as belief, d e s i r e, i n t e n t i o n , e m o t i o n , reason and
memory? How does the grey matter of the brain
give rise to our rich and vivid experiences of colour,
s o u n d ,t e x t u r e, taste and smell?
Discussion of the mind-body problem was given
an especially sharp form by Descartes. He argued
that everything that exists falls under the heading
either of material substance or mental substance,
where “ s u b s t a n c e ” is a technical term denoting the
most basic kind of existing stuff. He defined the
essence of matter as occupancy of space, and the
essence of mind as thought. But by thus making
matter and mind so different, he raised the
seemingly insuperable problem of how they interact.
How does a bodily event like pricking oneself result
in the mental event of feeling pain? How does the
mental event of thinking “ i t ’s time to get up” c a u s e
the bodily event of rising from bed? 
Descartes himself did not have an answer, and
his successors had to resort to heroic solutions to the
problem his theory had bequeathed.Their strategy
was to accept dualism but to argue that mind and
matter do not in fact interact,their appearance of
doing so being the result of the hidden action of
G o d .Thus for Leibniz,God acted like a clockmaker,
setting the mental and material realms going in
exact unison at the universe’s beginning so that
they thereafter act in parallel.
A much more plausible alternative, h o w e v e r, i s
m o n i s m : n a m e l y, the view that there is only one
s u b s t a n c e.Three possibilities rise to the fore. One is
that there is only matter.The second is that there is
only mind. The third is that there is a neutral
substance which gives rise to mind and matter.Each 
of the three has had proponents but it is the first
option—the reduction or annexation of all mental
phenomena to matter—which has been most 
influential.
One materialist approach is the “ i d e n t i t y
t h e o r y,”which asserts that mental states are literally
identical with states or processes in the brain. In its
earliest form, it asserted that types of mental
phenomena are nothing other than types of brain
o c c u r r e n c e s, but this was quickly seen to be too
s w e e p i n g,for a particular mental event (e. g.a mental
image of the Eiffel tower) might in my brain activate
one set of cells, while in yours another.
A football match between
sociologists and physicists
On the basis of this theory, a number of
philosophers currently maintain that as
neuroscience advances, we will be able to eliminate
the old-fashioned and imprecise mental vocabulary
we standardly use. Research in neurology and
cognitive science have built an overwhelming case
for accepting a very intimate relation between
mental and neurological phenomena.
Neuroscientists now have highly detailed empirical
knowledge of brain function and its relation to
mental activity, and are able to locate the seat of
many conscious processes in precisely defined brain
structures.
But these advances only serve to correlate brain
activity with mental occurences; they do not explain
how the former actually produces the latter. Given
the persistent difficulties in identifying that relation
precisely, various strategies are proposed.One is to
accept that our ways of talking about mental and
physical phenomena are irreducibly different,even
A.C. GRAYLING
READER IN PHILOSOPHY, BIRKBECK COLLEGE,
UNIVERSITY OF LONDON
The k n o t
in the b ra i n
Philosophers since Descartes have
striven to understand the
connections between the material
world, the body and the mind.
Have brain scans brought us to the
verge of an answer?
3 . ESCAPING DESTINY
Science is piercing the mystery of the brain,but consciousness remains an enigma.

though they are about the same thing. Imagine, for
e x a m p l e, how sociologists and physicists would
respectively describe a football match, each focusing
upon features which his particular science can address
to describe the same thing.
The film inside the mind
Consciousness, on the other hand,can appear
much easier to understand than the relation
between mind and body: anyone capable of
thinking is after all intimately conscious of being
c o n s c i o u s. But consciousness is by far the most
perplexing mystery facing philosophy and the
neurological sciences. Some philosophers, in the
tradition of Descartes, think that it is too hard for
human intelligence to understand. Others even
claim that there is no such thing as consciousness;
we are actually zombies, just very complicated
o n e s. In defiance of these views, enquirers have
p r o fited from powerful new investigative tools,
especially brain scanning devices, to watch brains at
work.One result is a great increase in knowledge
of brain function and a refined understanding of the
correlation between specific brain areas and specific
mental capacities.
The central problem remains, however, of how
coloured pictures,evocative smells and sounds arise
in the head as if it were an inner cinema-show. One
recent theory offered by neurophysiologist A n t o n i o
Damasio is that consciousness begins as self-refle x i v e
awareness constituting a primitive level of selfhood,
a powerful but vague awareness of being “ I .”
Emotional relations to an evolving self and external
objects then construct a model of the world,a feeling
of knowing, giving each of us the sense that we are
the owner and viewer of a movie-within-the-brain.
Consciousness has arisen amongst higher
m a m m a l s, according to these theories,because of its
survival advantage—an organism’s appropriate use
of energy and protection from harm are much
enhanced when it is able to place itself in a map of
the environment and make plans about the best
courses of action in it.Creatures which are merely
biological automata,even if highly sensitive to their
s u r r o u n d i n g s, would not be as adaptive as creatures
that are genuinely conscious
Debate about the mind has certainly resulted in
a widespread consensus that mind is part of nature
and amenable to investigation by scientific means,
but there are still fundamental mysteries about
what it is and how it relates to the rest of nature.Th e
next great leap in understanding the mind will
doubtless involve a conceptual and scientific
revolution of such magnitude that we cannot at
present envisage it. ■
