A
quiet revolution is creeping through
human rights groups around the world.
D o n ’t expect to see noisy marches
through the streets of Guatemala or
angry protests in Ko s o v o, though both
places are hotspots in the transformation.The revo-
lution is running through electronic ether and human
grey matter.
Computer technology, and particularly crypto-
graphy software (which uses secret codes to trans-
form data into a stream of seemingly random cha-
racters), is subtly changing the balance of power
between repressive governments and the human
rights groups that watch them.From Cambodia to
El Salvador, grassroots human rights organizations
are embracing software that allows them to track
government abuses and then hide their data in
order to protect sources.
A driving force in this revolution is Dr. Patrick
B a l l , deputy director of the science and human rights
program at the American Association for the A d v a n-
cement of Science (AAAS).For the past nine years,
Ball has been discreetly travelling in the wake of wars
and insurrections to train human rights workers in
the science of information gathering.He has shaped
and protected databases in places such as El Sal-
v a d o r, G u a t e m a l a ,H a i t i ,E t h i o p i a ,A l b a n i a , Ko s o v o
and South Africa,among others.
Crucial testimony 
under lock and key
When Ball first began this training in the early
1 9 9 0 s, most human rights workers were techno-
phobes. Technology, used for so long as a tool of
spying by repressive governments, was clearly the
e n e m y. Every project was tough work, as Ball tried
to convince people in the field to adopt increasingly
cheap computer software as a means of deftly tur-
ning the tables on governments.About three years
ago however, the climate began to change.
“Human rights groups are beginning to reco-
gnize the tremendous analytic power large-scale
data brings to us and you simply cannot do that
without technology,” says Ball.While visiting groups
in Cambodia who were learning to use this tech-
n o l o g y, I was struck by the enormous piles of paper
on every desk. It could take two weeks to extract one
simple fig u r e, such as how many rapes were reported
in Cambodia in a month.
Cheap computers and, more importantly,e a s y -
to-use software programmes are changing that, s a y s
Ball. Database, spreadsheet, word processing and
communications programmes have made it pos-
sible for even small organizations to track abuses
with scientific rigour.
This analytic precision makes a powerful
weapon.It also makes a logical target for political
o p p o n e n t s.Witnesses often risk life and limb when
they come forward to report an abuse committed by
SUELETTE DREYFUS
AUSTRALIAN JOURNALISTAND AUTHOR OF
UNDERGROUND—TALES OFHACKING ,
MADNESS AND OBSESSION ON THE ELECTRONIC FRONTIER (RANDOM
HOUSE, 1997)
The quiet
re v o l u t i o n
From Guatemala to Kosovo,
human rights groups
have taken a page out
of a spy thriller by learning
the art of encryption
K E E P I N G  P R I V A T E  I N  A  W I R E D  W O R L D
Encryption helped break the silence over Guatemala’s “vanished”children.

the government.As a result,“human rights groups
are using cryptography in the field to secure data-
b a s e s, i n v e s t i g a t i o n s,field reports and witness iden-
tities—all data that might put somebody’s security
or liberty at risk,” Ball says.
In fact,encryption played a key role in breaking
the silence born from 36 years of terror and civil war
in Guatemala, which killed more than 100,000
p e o p l e, most of them Mayan Indians.Until recently,
most Guatemalans would have been shocked by the
fact that the following testimony was publicly docu-
mented:“My sister went shopping in Rabinal,but
when she got to the hamlet of Plan de Sanchez the
army was already there. There they grabbed her
and raped her in a house. There were fifteen girls
raped and then they were riddled with bullets.A f t e r-
wards, they were buried by the people in a clan-
destine cemetery.”
New flashpoints in 
the crypto-wars
This personal account, from a report by A A A S
and the International Center for Human Rights
Research (CIIDH) in Guatemala City, was one of
many given by witnesses who wanted their names
kept secret for fear of retribution.The CIIDH and
several partner organizations gathered more than
5,000 testimonies between 1994 and 1995.
CIIDH was one of the first human rights groups
in the world to secure its database by using PGP,
now the most popular cryptography software in
the field.Workers smuggled laptop computers and
solar panels into remote mountain areas where
they spent months scouring the region by foot and
mule to gather testimony from people forced to
hide from the military. They systematically burnt
every paper trace of their work and encrypted the
data before sending it back to the capital for analysis.
They later emailed PGP-encrypted copies of the
material overseas to a safe back-up site.
Guatemala remains one of the best examples of
how a human rights community embraced techno-
logy, according to Ball.They continue to use secu-
rity software to protect the identities of witnesses as
well as the integrity of the data—to ensure that
political opponents don’t sneak into databases to
corrupt the information and discredit the group’s
work.
Nevertheless, “some groups choose not to use
cryptography because hiding their work would
make the government consider them a national
security threat,” says Ball.“I don’t really think that
any of the human rights groups is a security threat.
They may embarrass certain military or police offi-
cials who have committed atrocities, but all the
groups I know are dedicated to their country’s
democratization and civil liberties.”
Throughout the 1990s, the U. S. government and
activists fought a political war over the right to use
and to share strong cryptography with the rest of the
world—a war that Ball says has now finished in the
U. S. “At the end of the day,” he says, “the U. S.
government decided the economic and civil liberty
costs of regulating crypto were greater than the
rather shrill claims made by law enforcement and
national security offic i a l s,” who maintained that
the tools would assist criminals and terrorists.
While he has not seen any crypto-wars waged in
the countries where he has worked, there are still
places that either control the use of cryptography or
are hoping to do so in the future.According to Ball,
“the war front in the fight for widespread human
rights access to crypto is currently in North Korea,
Iran, Vietnam—and the UK.” To avoid this battle,
many groups don’t admit to using encryption.Wh y
advertise the fact that a computer screen of see-
mingly random characters can be transformed into
witness reports of killing and torture? ■
