JENNY DOOLE
BRITISH ARCHAEOLOGIST, RESEARCH ASSOCIATE AT THE
MCDONALD INSTITUTE FOR ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCH



Stealing the past fro m
under our feet
Driven by an insatiable demand for artefacts, looters are all too often
beating archaeologists to ancient sites and snatching our only chance
to understand bygone cultures
1 . THE COST OF LOOT I N G
B
ecause archaeologists don’t know where it
l i e s, a major Mayan city in the jungle of
Guatemala has simply been nicknamed
“Site Q.” The site obviously exists, s i n c e
sections of wall carvings from its temple
pyramids have been recognized in private collections
and museums around the world. But such pieces are
not enough to reconstruct a culture. In those that left
no written traces, like the trading society that flo u r i s h e d
in Mali some 1,000 years ago, the loss is all the more
a c u t e, since archaeology offers our only chance to
understand the past (see p. 2 6 ) . According to esti-
m a t e s, nearly half of Mali’s ancient sites have been
looted for their beautiful terracotta statues: history is
literally disappearing from beneath the people’s feet.
Since ancient times, tombs have been robbed
and cultural heritage destroyed by treasure hunters.
In recent decades, however, demand for collectable
and saleable artefacts has become insatiable, a n d
looting of the world’s archaeological record has rea-
ched epidemic proportions. Developments in tech-
nology and communication,combined with sophis-
ticated smuggling networks, have made modern loo-
ting an awesomely efficient,global industry. Whole
sites are destroyed to recover select items that fetch
vast sums in the West,where they may be valued as
objects of art, financial investments or interior design.
But antiquities are worth more than this:when
properly excavated they offer a window on history.
Archaeological sites are a non-renewable resource:
they can only be dug once, and the opportunity must
be wisely used. When an object is looted, i r r e p l a-
ceable details of its provenance (where it was found)
and context (what it was found with) are lost.Such
details are crucial if we are to glean information
about times past. Looters in South America have
described throwing dozens of ancient mummies over
cliffs when cutting them open reveals no silver or
gold.In doing so, they discard important sources of
historical information, like q u i p u, the knotted strings
which the Inca used to record official accounts. M a n y
other materials deemed worthless by looters, such as
bones, broken pottery, perishable organic remains
and the soil itself, offer invaluable clues on entire cul-
In Colombia,students glean clues on their heritage during a visit to the Cucuta archaeological museum.

t u r e s. Constantly improving scientific techniques are
further enhancing our understanding. Analysis of
ancient teeth,for instance, can tell us where indivi-
duals spent their childhood, while other human
remains can reveal the ingredients of their diets.
Shattered skulls can be reconstructed so that we can
look into the faces of our ancestors, while DNA stu-
dies can establish their relationships with each other
and ourselves. Analysis of residues on apparently
unremarkable pots proves what and how people
were cooking, brewing or manufacturing.With access
to undisturbed contexts, archaeologists also gain
insights into broader questions relevant to our past,
such as when humans first settled down to cultivate
the land.Shadows of shard marks have been unco-
vered in carefully excavated soils from very early
contexts, complemented by studies of ancient plant
remains. Such details might also be relevant to our
future:in England,studies of marine remains in the
River Ouse, for instance, have tracked pollution
levels over the past 1,900 years.
When we only have unprovenanced material to
s t u d y, our understanding of ancient peoples is limited
and distorted: P e r u ’s pre-Inca Moche culture is a
case in point. For decades, scholars struggled to com-
prehend this advanced civilization on the basis of
“ a r t ” objects which appeared on the market,
orphaned from their past. Th e n , in 1987, l o o t e r s
broke into a tomb in a massive mud-brick pyramid
at Sipán.Archaeologists were alerted and, for the fir s t
t i m e, were able to examine an undisturbed royal
Moche burial site.This single excavation transformed
our entire understanding of the culture. F u r t h e r-
m o r e, contextual evidence proved that previously
k n o w n , but unprovenanced, objects had been misun-
derstood and could now be re-interpreted, e v e n
identified as fakes.
When looters swipe
an entire site
Similar problems face scholars studying the dis-
tinctive white marble figurines found in bronze age
graves in the Cyclades Islands, Greece. Some 1,600
figurines are known, but only about 150 have a secure
archaeological provenance. Since it is impossible to
date marble by scientific means, experts are unable
to rule out the possibility that a considerable number
may be fakes, produced in the last 30 years to feed
booming demand.This further obscures attempts to
make sense of these extraordinary objects.
It is impossible to tell how much information is
being lost.One study suggests that Italian tombaroli
must loot nine tombs to recover one Apulian vase
(more than 4,000 have surfaced, u n p r o v e n a n c e d ,
since 1980).At Wanborough (England), looters came
at night with metal detectors and trucks and removed
much of the site of a Roman temple—soil and all—
to excavate at their leisure. In some cases, whole cul-
tures are only known to looters.G u a t e m a l a ’s “Site Q”
is one example. S i m i l a r l y,outstanding formative pots
from an unknown culture in the mountainous
Marañon River region of Peru are today offered for
sale in Europe.They are beautiful, but we have no idea
of their true historic signific a n c e,or of the information
lost during their retrieval.Th i s, rather than ownership
issues, is the archaeologists’ main concern.
Attracting tourist dollars
with buried riches
Ownership issues, however, are of prime impor-
tance to governments, most of whom impose some
form of sovereign claim over archaeological material,
making illegal excavation, or removal abroad, a
c r i m e. Many archaeologically rich countries are eco-
nomically poor. Expending valuable resources to
police cultural heritage is impossible, but they often
recognize archaeology, and the understanding of the
past it can provide, as a source of national identity and
pride, as well as a much-needed economic resource.
Lebanon recently inventoried vast numbers of anti-
quities and sites looted during years of civil war,
noting that its rich archaeological heritage is com-
parable to other Arab nations’ oil resources in terms
of potential tourist income.
In rare cases where recently looted material is
r e p a t r i a t e d , authorities are increasingly aware of
the value of returning it to regional museums, pre-
ferably created with local people, for whom looting
is often a way of life and essential source of family
income. At Sipán, for instance, a new museum has
been built quite near the site, which has now become
a tourist attraction (see p. 30). Cafés and souvenir
shops have sprung up. More money is generated in
tourist dollars, for whole communities, than the indi-
vidual looters could have dreamt of. Museums like
this are more than sources of pride and revenue:
they are crucial educational tools for both locals and
t o u r i s t s. At the opening of the European Union-
assisted museum at Cambodia’s Angkor Borei, l o c a l
people reacted with awe, fascination and sometimes
devotion.Younger people said they had never seen
such sculptures (antiquities in war-torn Cambodia
have been thoroughly ransacked in recent years and
local museums are uncommon), nor realized their
town’s importance.
Therein lies our most powerful weapon against
modern looting: increased awareness that people’s
cultural heritage is worth more, in every sense,
than the usually paltry sums it fetches when sold to
local middlemen, or huge amounts it raises in auc-
tion rooms in the West.The monetary value of the
illicit trade in art and antiquities—including other
categories of badly looted material like religious art
( f r e s c o e s, mosaics and icons from orthodox
churches and sacred statues from oriental temples
and shrines),ethnographic and tribal objects, and
fine art—is estimated at billions of dollars. B u t
when an object is looted,almost everyone is poorer
for it. ■
S TO P T H E  A R T  T H I E V E S !
Fo rever gone from A n g ko r.
