I
t all began with one woman’s dream to help those
in the same situation as herself:p o o r, u n e d u c a t e d
and in urgent need of a safe haven.
In 1975,Susheelamma found herself with two
children to support and a broken marriage. The
daughter of a weaver, her education was cut short
because her family couldn’t afford secondary school
fees. Today, she is at the head of the Sumangali Seva
Ashram in Bangalore, staffed by a dedicated team of
450 full-time volunteers. Day after day, the ashram
offers destitute women who come knocking at its
door a roof over their heads and a chance to get a new
start in life by learning a skill. Once they can stand on
their own feet, the women are free to look for jobs out-
side the ashram,or to work with its myriad projects for
a small stipend and two square meals a day. Many of
them have never forgotten the hope it provided,and
continue to contribute to the ashram’s smooth running
in some form or other.
It is a gaping vacuum in social services that
prompted Susheelamma and a group of friends to
found the ashram in 1975.At the time, they managed
to convince the state government to allot them a plot
of land to build a small shelter and a school to educate
destitute women. But the land had a deep open pit on
i t ,and filling it was beyond their financial reach. S l o w l y
but surely, Susheelamma and her friends convinced
people to donate to their cause, and eventually a
school shed was built.
“ We did not have the money to buy books for
children or to feed the women who had arrived at the
ashram to stay,” says Susheelamma,a petite and frail
65 year-old who continues to preside tirelessly over the
a s h r a m ’s activities.She and the other volunteers would
work all night to make little trinkets, which they sold
to raise meagre sums of money.When she started the
ashram,she was earning a mere 170 rupees a month
(around $4) from her work as a warden and a nursery
SUDHA RAMACHANDRAN
ASSISTANT EDITOR, DECCAN HERALD, BANGALORE



Starting over at the ashra m
In southern India, women who once fled their homes with nothing in hand are
now helping others to earn a living and playing a role in health and education
programmes

school teacher. Of this, she used Rs100 to maintain her
f a m i l y, and the rest to launch the ashram’s pro-
g r a m m e s.“Some volunteers, like Parvatamma [who is
a member of the ashram’s core committee, and more
f o r t u n a t e ] , would hand over their entire monthly
salary cheques to us,” recalls Susheelamma.
The ashram’s first income-generation scheme
involved cutting and twisting wires into a U-shape to be
sold as metal poultry feeders. One kilogram of these
would fetch 40 paise (less than a cent),but drop by drop,
they had enough to make ends meet. Then they made
garlands of silk cocoons.Volunteers would carry sacks
of them on their backs in the overcrowded state trans-
port buses to deliver them to stores across the city.
Lifelong loyalty
Today, the ashram receives grants from the gov-
ernment as well as financial and material assistance
from international aid agencies,along with individual
d o n a t i o n s. Its real asset, h o w e v e r, are the volunteers:
from the outset, the ashram was based on the principle
of recruiting those who once benefited from its ser-
vices. Committed to improving the lives of their less
fortunate sisters, the volunteers run education and
training programmes, provide counselling to women
in distress (who may not need shelter) and conduct
regular adult literacy programmes, health check-ups
and immunization campaigns. The ashram also runs
two primary schools, 130 a n g a n w a d i (or childcare)
c e n t r e s, which provide supplementary nutrition to
c h i l d r e n , pregnant women and breastfeeding mothers
in slums,2 5c r è c h e s, and 19 non-formal schools, also in
slums.
People like Shantamma make this whole
endeavour possible. One of the pillars of the ashram,
she trains volunteers and is a source of strength and
guidance to all those around her. The unassuming
lady vividly recalls the day, 25 years ago, when she and
her two infant children came here,seeking shelter. H e r
eyes still moisten as she recounts how uncertain the
future seemed after walking away from an alcoholic
husband who beat her in front of the children and
brought another woman to live with them. Unedu-
cated and unemployed, she had no idea how she
would fend for herself and the children.Then someone
told her about the ashram,which willingly accepted
h e r. I n i t i a l l y, Shantamma worked only in the kitchen;
then she took care of the children in the ashram’s
c r è c h e. M e a n w h i l e, she followed a literacy course
offered by the ashram.Then she was trained by other
volunteers to become a health worker, a d v i s i n g
women in villages on nutrition and immunisation.
Adopting a shanty town
To d a y, Shantamma lives in her own house but
comes to the ashram every day to help in the kitchen
and train other women to participate in income-
generation projects.“I lived in the ashram for seven
y e a r s,” Shantamma says.“It gave me a s h r e y a ( s h e l t e r )
when nobody else wanted me. I can never forget
that.… I will help others who come here as long as
I can.”
The atmosphere at the ashram is tranquil, if busi-
ness-like. Residents rise before dawn and after med-
itation and a spartan breakfast,they set out to work.
Although they are not obliged to, just about all of
them, including those with mental and physical dis-
abilities, volunteer to help. This willingness has been
the mainstay of the ashram from the outset.
In addition to full-time volunteers, many others
from the community at large give some of their time.
S h a k u n t a l a , an engineer in a government department,
spends a few hours each weekend helping with odd
j o b s, a f firming that it makes her feel more worthwhile.
Some contribute through active service, others through
financial donations.Philanthropy is well-entrenched in
Indian philosophy; volunteers are convinced that they
must help others in order to enjoy prosperity and
peace of mind.
Many of the ashram’s women now volunteer in the
nearby Kuprajbande slum, which was so run-down
that the ashram decided to “ a d o p t ” it and improve the
lives of its inhabitants. Fifty-six shanty dwellings were
rebuilt by volunteers, and awareness campaigns
launched on health sanitation and against alcoholism.
To d a y, the slum has been renamed Shaktinagar—the
City of Strength.Volunteers claim their drive against
alcoholism has been so effective that almost 80 percent
of the men (the women rarely drink) have become tee-
totallers.
Susheelamma’s story is proof of how individuals
with no means, but plenty of courage and determina-
t i o n , can bring about lasting change.“ Th e r e ’s still a lot
to be achieved,”she muses.“ What we have done is but
a drop in a vast ocean of need.” ■
An ashram volunteer advising a woman about health issues in Shaktinagar.
