An armed revolt led by emancipated slaves won independence for Haiti in
1 8 0 4 , at a time when it was considered the world’s richest colony. Half the
country’s 400,000 slaves had been born in Africa,so they had to fashion an
entirely new country, building a nation and a state structure at the same time.
H a i t i ’s history since then has, u n d e r s t a n d a b l y, been neither easy nor conventional.
The former slaves quickly fled the old plantations and in time became owners
of small plots of land.The rural population dispersed as far as they could go,
into remote mountain areas, forming a very small number of villages. Most towns
were established along the coast and continued to be trading posts, as in colonial
t i m e s. Only now, they were dominated by the new local ruling class, which quickly
took the place of the departed slave-owners by restoring colonial institutions
and practices.
Th u s, from the outset, the new state locked itself into the role of a violent and
a r b i t rary predator. The rural population chose to ignore it or find ways to
circumvent its authority. The state seemed to offer the people nothing of
value, and it was shunned to the largest extent possible.
But as dictatorships and strong-arm regimes succeeded one another throughout
the 19th and 20th centuries, Haitians tried to find waysto provide themselves
the basic community services that thestate failed to deliver.A local grassroots
autonomy was born,and it functioned and coexisted alongside authoritarian
r e g i m e s. Th e state in fact saw this as a convenient escape from their
responsibilities, including funding for education,health and infrastructure.
The strength of this phenomenon was illustrated in 1986 when the Duvalier
dictatorship was overthrown, revealing the existence of an impressive number
of spontaneous social networks. Hitherto very informal, the structures comprised
about 30,000 community groups and grassroots organizations of all kinds. O n l y
a few of these groups were openly political.Nearly all of them were set up to
take charge of the most basic aspects of urban and rural life by trying to meet
the needs of the community, albeit with scant resources.
But history still weighs heavily on Haiti.The old fear of state power, h e i g h t e n e d
by the military coup in 1991, remains very strong. Local structures remain semi-
clandestine in order to protect their participants when necessary. A l s o, t h e
historic fragmentation of Haitian society, which is reflected in its  physical
d i s p e r s i o n , has left a dearth of bodies able to bridge the gap between the
people and the state.
It is still very hard today to bring together the multitude of groups that have
sprung up in Haiti to defend people against the state or compensate for its
failings. And thus it is hard to lay the foundations of a modern, democratic
dialogue between the government and the people. ■
* Author of several books on Haitian society, including the recent Créoles-
Bossales:le conflit haïtien, (Ibis Rouge, 2000, Paris).
GÉRARD BA R T H É L E M Y * : “A PROFOUND MISTRUST OF THE STAT E ”
