I N T E R V I E W
VANDANA SHIVA
talks to Judithe Bizot
Vandana Shiva is an Indian physicist and feminist militant 
who works with many community action groups fighting against 
environmental destruction. In this interview she examines the links 
between the ecological crisis, the marginalization of women 
and the dominant model of economic development.
■ You are a physicist who abandoned your 
country’s nuclear energy programme to 
devote yourself to nature and to halting its 
destruction. How did you reach your present 
position?
E- Ever since I was a chilfflove and knowledge’̂  
of nature 'have given me my deepest satisfac- . 
tion. I was very .lucky to have the.
daughter of a forester in India and to have 
■grown up in the Himalayan forest. Then I 
studied physics. The real basics of nature as 
defined in the reductionist scheme of things 
are understood through physics, the foundar 
tion of all the sciences. I had the opportunity ; 
to study biology and chemistry too, but real, 
profound understanding of nature was sup­
posed to be reached through physics. Then I 
went into nuclear physics, where I experienced 
massive disappointments. It was only when I 
was doing my master’s degree that I realized 
how unthinking nuclear scientists were about 
the question of radiation hazards. We were 
taught how to create chain reactions in nuclfear';* 
material and we knew all about energy translg 
formations, and so on, but nothing about the 
interaction of radiation with living systems!» 
I learned about radiation impacts from my s 
sister, who is a dosfer. When I was working 
in a nuclear reactor in India she kept saying: 
“Promise me you’re never going to go back 
there!” “But why?” I’d say and,she; would 
reply, “but you could have babies with muta­
tions. You don’t know what’s going to happen 
to you.”
When I was. groping my way and 
exploring these issues, senior physicists would 
say, “You don’t need to know these things.” 
Again this was an exclusion and a violation 
of my search for knowledge. If science means 
to know, then Ijhad no scientific training. So 
I went to Canada and enrolled on a Founda- 
tiljis of Physics programme, where some of 
the basic questions about science that were 
troubling me were being asked.
I knew that if I continued studying the 
foundations of quantum theory I should be 
marginal to my situation and I decided that
Vandana Shiva, a leading figure in the “anti-globalization” movement, created the

I  must do something to relate myself to tie 
Indian context. I shifted to science and tech- 
nology policy issues, in the meantime, the 
Chipko movement had been created and 
. because this had happened where I was from, 
I feept going back and doing, volunteer work 
and writing for them. Before I knew where 
I was, ecology had become my primary
■ What is the Chipko movement? In your 
book Staying Alive you talk of the forest, for 
instance, not as a product for the market but 
as prakiti—a life-giving force. You talk of the 
importance of women in the struggle against 
the massive consumption of natural resources.
— I responded to the destruction of the forest 
first because I was a child, of the Himalayan 
forests. They were my identity and my sense 
of being. The erosion of the forests' hit me very ' 
hard. Just before I left for Canada, I wanted 
to go back and visit a favourite spot of mine, 
a place where the British had built lovely rest 
houses from which the foresters managed the 
forests. There was one I particularly loved, 
near a stream in the beautiful oak forest. I 
went back there, and the oak forest had 
become a mere sprinkling of trees, and the 
stream was no longer gushing with water. 
When I talked to the people in the area I found 
that the stream had disappeared because they 
had cut the oak forest down to plant applei; 
Orchards, an enterprise which had never really 
been successful. (Apple trees need very fertile 
soil and virgin forest is usually cut down for 
this purpose.)
As for my involvement with Chipko;ia 
movement of Himalayan women dedicatedto 
the protection of the environment, I nrstgot 
to know a leading figure in the movement 
named Sundarlal Batingujia, who was a great 
inspiration to people like myself. But at a 
second and more lasting level my involvement 
was with the ordinary women who form the 
bedrock of Chipko. It was their perceptions 
and their beliefs that were the really rich foun­
dations of'my knowledge of ecology. They
offered me a new sensibility about relation­
ships. Ordinary jpople don’t theorize. They 
'Stave visions and beliefs. The germ of an idea 
| r  insight that I have developed has always 
been a phrase or an action from a person com­
mitted to act in a concrete situation. All my . 
theory-building has come out of this nature  ̂
centred and woman-olltred action. The spe­
cial relationships women have with the 
environment are due to this. In my hfifi 
Staying Alive I attempted to explain why my 
insights came from women who were consi­
dered ignorant and marginal, who were not ■ 
given a platform of any kind by society.
Why .is it that women sense destruction-: 
faster and are more persevering in the struggles 
against'.destruction? Why do they carry on 
when ev.eryone else is cynical and hopeless? 
The reason is that women have :a distinctive 
perception of what life is, a sense of what is 
really vital, which colours their view of what 
is at stake in the world,
■  Can women lead the way in the new con­
cern for the environment?
— I think women are taking the lead today. 
The important thing is that their leadership 
should be taken seriously. For ns in India 
.¡Chipko marked the reawakening, of an eco­
logical ndhsciousness, ■ in a movement 
stretching from the villages of central India to 
the western Ghats. This new ecological cons­
ciousness is as old as our civilization, but what 
is new is its re-emergence as a political force 
in response to destruction, a force like Chipko 
in which ordinary women define the issues.
It doesn’t take much effort to say, let’s 
bring women in. The crucial issue is let’s not 
. push women out. Because of its very specific 
nature, the relationship between women and 
the environment differs from one place to 
another.Hhe movements that have led me 
towards my own commitments and decisions 
originate in the most marginal sectors of our 
"society, in the so-called backward communi­
ties and specifically among the women of 
those communities.
[ hese oak trees 
save. and. worship them, 
because their roots store water, 
their leaves have milk and fodder, 
the breeze blows cool 
over the beautiful rhododendron flower.
A song of the Chipko movement
If societies have succeeded in reproducing 
themselves for centuries, they are examples of 
sustainability. Today, unfortunately, these are 
the societies that are labelled backward, 
whereas the societies that give up too quickly 
traditional ways of doing things are called 
progressive. That definition, of course, is 
biased. It is in countries like India that you 
find groups of women who are embedded 
-poth in nature and in sustainable cultures. 
Perennial civilizations, not ones that burst into 
growth and collapse, have something very spe­
cial to offer. They enshrine the capacity to 
regenerate, the capacity to heal, the capacity 
to give and take, to build and create.
But I believe that women in the North are 
also: intimately linked to the environment. 
Even in the most advanced societies women 
have been left to care for children, homes and 
health. A wonderful study was carried out in 
Helsinki which showed that, whatever yard­
stick you take—time, energy, work—women 
are running Finnish society and the Finnish 
economy. It’s wrong to say that women are
—
Navdanya association to preserve biodiversity and defend the rights of small farmers.

Water-bearers in Rajasthan (India).
unproductive, that they don’t work. It is often 
said that women who stay at home do not 
work, but in fact they work harder than 
anyone else.
Nature for me comprises the life-giving 
forces, the life:support systems, the ecological 
systems that make life possible. These things 
are violated in the cities and in the Country 
through nuclear hazards, toxic wastes, con­
taminated water and polluted air. We need 
those life-giving sources of pure air, pure 
water, pure food, no matter where we are.
■ Are we not in the process of amputating 
something from ourselves by rapidly 
diminishing our powers of regeneration?
— The term “feminine principle” is basically 
just an English translation of p rakiti, a force 
in nature.and life which exists all round us, 
in women and in men. To me, the r||| of 
modern patriarchy tended to kill the feminine 
principle in all its fullness, and in particular 
to annihilate it totally in man. In a sense, the 
rise of the masculine mode of knowledge, 
production and governance was. i s  way of 
crushing something essential tc||s!§§iety as a 
whole—to males and to females. Fortunately, 
however, whereas the patriarchs considered 
that they were ruling over-passive creatures 
(women and nature), they could never fully 
take that life away. They could distort and 
stifle it but they couldn’t destroy it entirely.
I can’t imagine any recovery or flowering 
of these creative forces of nature, of women 
coming into their own, that would leave men 
untouched. Men will do one of two things. 
Either they will react violently because this 
flowering creates a new kind of insecurity and 
inadequacy. Or, hopefully, more men will 
sense that they have impoverished themselves, 
and the feminine principle will emerge as a
creative fo^ce which values nurture above, 
domination, sustaining above destruction, 
rooted and experiencedfencrete knowledge 
above abstract, irrelevant knowledge. Surely 
these values are important: enough for men to 
recognize and support them.
■ Are you saying that male-dominated 
knowledge should be thrown out?
— Every sSeiety except contemporary indus­
trial society has had criteria, as to what it 
should say “no” to. Industrial society is the 
only one which believes that if you have the 
power to do something you must do it. Indian 
philosophy febuilt on the concept that “yes, 
you might have the power, but;it is impor­
tant that you use your discrimination in the 
exercise-of that power”. A society should be 
able to make choices and judgements about 
means, to have values as ends.
I feel that plurality of choice creates an 
opportunity to decide what is needed and 
desirable, and what is nqt-, and what is good 
and what is not. If that kind of opportunity 
is honestly and scientifically made available to 
society, with the idea of maintaining quality 
of life, with participation by people, then it 
will undoubtedly be taken. It should also be 
recognized that scientists are as fallible as 
anyone else and that science and its institutions 
are more often than not prostituted to eco­
nomic interests, since the structure of power 
is so closely married . g  the. structure of 
knowledge. Many technologies are used to 
serve the economic interests of the powerful! 
not choices based on ecology and ethics. 
Women have already made their choices on 
these issues.,
■ Does the exploration of other planets have 
a place in a world-view which is concerned
with improving the quality of life, joy, 
sharing, and meeting basic needs?
— It’s all right to explore. What is wrong is 
to justify the exploration of outer space, in 
terms of solving thé problems of this planet. 
I believe it is immoral to use people and their' 
needs as the reasons for outer-spacfi 
programmes, which should be seen as what 
they are: the indulgence of a group of very 
privileged people and countries. Everyone has- 
a right to explore, but to use that right as an 
imperative into which everyone must fit is 
another matter. It’s hiding the other agendas 
which go along with space programmes,,: 
which are not simply pursued for their own 
sake but for military and other ends.
■ What is your attitude to global, planetary 
management and the question of local versus 
global ecologies?
— So-callM“primitive” peoples have always, 
had a planetary cosinology, and for them the 
planet has existed in every action they have 
taken. The most isolated communities have 
had a view not just of this planet but of how 
it relates to others and of how balance must 
be maintained. The planetary has always 
existed in the local. Any attempt to disenfran­
chise local communities of their planetary 
consciousness is unethical.
■ In what specific ways do local communi­
ties understand or use planetary knowledge?
— Traditional systems of agriculture in every 
society have been based on the relationships 
between planets, which have provided the 
basis for deciding which is the right time to 
sow,.and which crops should be grown 
together. For example, many peasants possess 
a kind of scientific knowledge which enablés 
them to recognize certain types of insect

behaviour which indicate impending floods, 
so that they move out in time. But all this is 
a thing of the past because pesticides have 
killed these living indicators. We create 
systems which seem more reliable than tradi­
tional systems but are actually more, vul­
nerable.
.1 see two ways in which industrial .society 
has been impoverished. Ethically, it is the only 
society which cannot distinguish between 
good and bad, which does not provide a 
chance to say no, which has no restraining 
criteria, values or limits to action. Secondly, 
it seems to lack any realization that its systems 
are increasingly based on highly vulnerable 
forms of organization. There is no compre­
hension of how these systems, break down 
when most needed. If my relationship to 
nature provides me with knowledge and a 
feeling for what’s happening to the world and 
what changes are coming, it helps me guide
and protect; my animals, myself and others. 
I have certain indicators available to me 
without risk of breakdown by which I can act 
in informed ways. Satellites, computer net­
works and so oil are made to replace what is 
considered unreliable, but they are actually 
more vulnerable.
■  What influence can women have? How 
can they make a difference? How can they 
improve their lives and their environment?
— The first thing is that they should not lose 
faith in the knowledge they have and that they 
should trust in themselves. I also believe that 
when those Himalayan streams were disap­
pearing women knew that deforestation is 
linked to desertificalgn - and stood their 
ground, even though -the foresters said that 
forests have no link with watershed manage­
ment. Women’s instruments of resistance are 
standing their ground, believing in their
knowledge, having faith in their values, not 
losing confidence, not feeling inferior. The 
dominating system imposes its choice on 
people by transforming every multiple choice 
into a tragic last possible one. Things are not 
black or white. I think that in our time it is 
very important to be able to turn around and 
say, no matter how powerless one is, well 
things could be different, could they not? I 
don't think that merely increasing the number 
of choices necessarily enriches people’s lives. 
The criteria of choice are what really count. 
Merely to increase the number of choices is 
to adopt a supermarket mentality of consumer 
\®|oice. It is essential to know when a choice 
is not a real choice, and that is impossible 
unless people have a sense of discrimination 
within them. Relating to nature, being 
embedded in it, provides the ethical frame­
work for choice between different scientific 
and technological options. ■
