FILIPPO SALVATORE
COMMUNICATIONS PROFESSOR AT CONCORDIA UNIVERSITY, FORMER MEMBER OF QUEBEC’S FRENCH LANGUAGE COUNCIL
AND A FORMER MONTREAL CITYCOUNCILLOR



Vi v e
a trilingual Quebec!
The laws that forced French into the schools and workplace of Quebec have worked far better than
anyone imagined. Trilingualism is gaining ground in the province, much to the chagrin of hard-line
nationalists
ith her rugged natural beauty and charming
a c c e n t , Quebec shines as an emblem of
cultural resolve in countries with strong
minorities, ranging from Spain to Nigeria.
The little francophone island thrives in a sea
of English-speakers*, thanks to its carefully
constructed rampart of laws and
educational policies promoting Fr e n c h .B u t
C a n a d a ’s “Belle Province” is set to change
c o u r s e : a new government inquiry has
found that it’s time to roll back the legal
l o c o m o t i v e, Bill 101, which has forced
French into the school system and
workplace for the past 30 years.
All children must attend Fr e n c h
elementary or high schools, according to
Bill 101 (also known as the Fr e n c h
Language Charter), with one exception:
old-time Quebeckers who attended the
province’s English elementary schools can
choose their children’s language of
i n s t r u c t i o n . French is the rule, h o w e v e r, f o r
all newcomers, from Canada or beyond,
until the college or university level.
Born in 1977,Bill 101 is the brainchild of
Q u e b e c ’s nationalist movement whose
ultimate goal has been to separate from
the rest of Canada,or at least seek greater
autonomy within the federation (see box).
The law stems back to the heady days of the
Quiet Revolution, when Fr e n c h
Quebeckers (the “Québécois”) wrested
control of the province from a powerful
English elite, who controlled its huge
natural wealth. Then they turned to the
cultural landscape, using laws like Bill 101
to “Frenchify” (or “francify”) the schools

“All Quebec on the march to live in French”in 1989.

and workplace as well as the commercial
environment through rules restricting the
use of English on public signs or even on
the beer coasters of a neighbourhood bar.
Language police still roam the streets,
measuring the letters of billboards to ensure
that “Poulet-frit”dominates the fast-food
world of “fried chicken,” for example. The
provincial government regularly adds a
fresh coat of legislative paint to reinforce
the spirit of 101. With each major
brushstroke another wave of English
Quebeckers migrates to other parts of
Canada or the U.S.
When the “natives”
feel outnumbered
Today the old-stock of English
Quebeckers accounts for just 8.5 percent of
the population, down from 13 percent in
1971. Yet according to the nationalists, the
anglophone threat has not faded but taken
on new dimensions, thanks to the
“ a l l o p h o n e s,” a nice way of referring to
immigrants whose first language is not
Fr e n c h . Every year, about 25,000 to 35,000
immigrants arrive mostly from Latin
A m e r i c a , the Middle and Far East.To g e t h e r
the two minorities—anglophone and
allophone—comprise 18 percent of the
provincial population. The pure wool
Québécois still make up about 82 percent
of the population, despite having one of
the lowest birth rates in the world. B u t
many of these “ n a t i v e s ” are convinced that
they will soon become a minority in their
financial capital, M o n t r e a l , where most
minority communities settle.According to
a survey conducted last year by the daily L e
Devoir, 55 percent of all Quebeckers are
convinced that French is in danger
throughout the province.
So with alarm bells ringing, t h e
provincial government launched an inquiry
last year asking “what should Quebec do to
ensure the future of the French language?”
This kind of inquiry, known as the language
e s t a t e s - g e n e r a l , is somewhat of a ritual.
Each time the provincial government
pushes for a referendum on separating
from the rest of Canada (see box), t h e y
turn up the heat on the language debate by
pointing to the lamentable state of Fr e n c h .
But after spending more than two million
Canadian dollars on a string of public
hearings across the province, t h e
nationalists got far more than they
bargained for.According to the preliminary
report released on June 5, French has never
been healthier in the “Belle Province.”
“ The French language is no longer the
property of the majority. It has become the
language of everyone,”announced the head
of the estates-general, Gérald Larose, a
former union leader and long-time Quebec
s e p a r a t i s t . Almost 95 percent of Quebec
residents know and use French in their
daily activities, up seven percent in just
over a decade.
More than 90 percent of the province’s
newly arriving pupils are heading straight
for French schools, according to Quebec’s
education ministry. Then again,their only
alternative is to enroll in the private sector.
But Bill 101 cannot force these kids to
speak French outside of the classroom, y e t
many continue to babble and scream the
language in the school-yards and
playgrounds even in Montreal, w h e r e
immigrants make up almost half of the
French school population.
Even the old-time minorities—anglo-
and allophones born and bred in Quebec—
have adopted the spirit of 101. Th e s e
parents could legally send their kids to
English schools, yet about 75 percent opt
for the French sector.There is one notable
exception: the Italians, one of the largest
and most established of Quebec’s cultural
communities. The majority continue with
English schools. Instead of rejecting
bilingualism,these families are embracing
three languages at once. Fr a n c o - I t a l i a n

The birth of 101
Before Bill 101, Quebec residents had the right to send their children to either French or
English-speaking public schools, which owing to a twist in history were generally
organized along religious lines. Back in 1867 when the Canadian confederation first emerged,
Quebec had two major ethnic groups: French Catholics and British Protestants. Each group
formed their own set of schools within the public system.But by the end of the 19th century,
a new immigrant group settled in Montreal and confounded the clean division: the Irish
Catholics. The compromise permitting the Irish to attend English schools set an important
precedent.Since then,nearly every immigrant group, from Catholic Poles to Italians, has gone
through English schools. Even francophone groups, like Moroccan Jews, were sent (by
officials) to English classrooms to avoid the Catechism of the French system.
This arrangement suited French Canadians, who didn’t want non-native French-speakers
enrolling in their schools. But this tolerance lasted only so long as the French-Canadian birth
rate remained high. It quickly faded during the Quiet Revolution when French Quebeckers
began breaking free from the strict confines of traditional Catholic society. The new
generation moved into the cities, focusing on improving their financial lot rather than settling
down to raise large families in the countryside. At precisely the time when French family-size
declined,immigration surged,particularly among Italians.
As English schools mushroomed in Montreal, the nationalist movement calling for Quebec
independence emerged as a credible and powerful political force. These nationalists
demanded measures to “correct” the linguistic and demographic imbalance reflected in the
school system. A compromise was sought in 1968 with a law favouring French language
instruction.But the nationalists were not satisfied. They wanted all children to attend French
schools.
Two years later, French became the official language of Quebec but tensions continued to
simmer until a full-fledged language war erupted in 1976, when the new separatist Parti
Québécois, founded and led by the charismatic leader René Lévesque, won the provincial
election. A year later, the nationalists passed Bill 101, a milestone in Quebec’s language
debate. ■
“I remember”on every numberplate.

marriage rates increase each year. L o v e,
n o t
c o e r c i o n , is winning this community over to
French.
The trilingual allure has also won over
hearts in the estates-general. While the
final recommendations aren’t expected
before Au g u s t , the Larose commission
dropped a bombshell on June 5: the anglo-
and allophone communities are no longer
enemies but role models.“ The old English-
French antagonism in Quebec has been at
least a little bit blurred and softened. A n d
maybe a lot,” announced Larose, before
laying out a plan to not only promote
French but English. Instead of reinforcing
Bill 101, as many hard-liners expected, t h e
commission suggested partially dismantling
it by, for example, abolishing the language
police.
Time to learn 
English?
According to the Larose commission,
Quebec needs a new charter or constitution
to officially recognize French as the
province’s language of citizenship. Yet, it
c o n t i n u e d ,English also merits respect as the
language of Quebec’s official “ n a t i o n a l
m i n o r i t y.” Anglophones would have
guaranteed access to judicial services, h e a l t h
c a r e, social assistance programmes and
e d u c a t i o n . “ We ’re trying to say to the
anglophone community that your place in
this society is recognized,that your future
is assured,” said one of the 11 commission
members, Dermod Travis, president of the
non-governmental Forum Action Quebec,
which aims to promote dialogue among all
Quebeckers.
Perhaps the ultimate irony lies in the
recommendation that French pupils
improve their English.As it stands now,
children attending English schools must
learn French from the first grade. Ye t
francophone pupils wait until the fif t h
grade before taking English classes,w h i c h
tend to be of rather poor quality. As a
r e s u l t , only about 38 percent of Fr e n c h
Quebeckers are bilingual. I t ’s as if they
have been lulled into complacency,
convinced that in the land of 101,English
i s n ’t necessary to earn a living. But not
only do their job prospects plummet the
moment they step outside of Quebec, b u t
the competition is already heating up
within as bilingual and trilingual
allophones grow in number.
“ B l a s p h e m y ! ” cry the hard-liners of
the nationalist Parti Québécois. The state
of French remains “precarious” because
there are still too many people who speak
English in the privacy of their homes.
Immigrants may use French in the
workplace or at school but, say the hawks,
switch immediately into English at home
or when socializing. For these hard-liners,
integration amounts to assimilation and
anything less than that is treason.
If the father of Bill 101,Camille Laurin,
wanted to mould newcomers into good neo-
Québécois, the result is disappointing.The
Bill 101 generation learns to speak Fr e n c h ,
but still keeps an open mind towards North
American culture, while holding on to its
own maternal language and values. These
young people and their parents generally
accept the principle of French dominance in
Q u e b e c. It is now time for the Québécois to
assume their role as a well-established and
respected majority, not a threatened
m i n o r i t y.The white, Fr e n c h - s t o c k ,C a t h o l i c
paradigm has been shattered and replaced
by a multiracial, multireligious and
multilingual one.It is time for less coercion
and more incentives.
* Q u e b e ckers represent a quarter of the
Canadian population (29.5 million).
66 The UNESCO Courier - July/August 2001
The Canadian divide
Quebec’s language debate stretches beyond its provincial boundaries to touch the core of
Canadian identity and unity. For the past 30 years, Canada’s ten provinces have tried to amend
their constitution to resolve the conflict between a federalist vision of the country and
Quebec’s demands for greater sovereignty.
The debate stems back to 1971, when the Québécois nationalist movement first threatened
to separate from the rest of Canada,leaving a gaping hole in the middle of the confederation.
Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau,(a French Quebecker),proposed the vision of an officially
bilingual and multicultural country, with a strong federal government and ten equal provinces.
Separatists like René Lévesque rejected the concept and launched the notion of a political
sovereign Quebec,economically “associated” with the rest of Canada.
Lévesque presented this proposition in a referendum that the people of Quebec rejected in
1980.A second referendum was organized in 1995 by Jacques Parizeau,the provincial premier
and leader of the Parti Québécois (PQ). Once again, the proposal was rejected but this time
by a slim one percent margin. Parizeau attributed the loss to “money and the ethnic vote,” a
comment widely interpreted as a xenophobic and anti-Semitic allusion to Montreal’s minority
communities. The scandal forced Parizeau to resign.
In 1996, a more conciliatory leader, Lucien Bouchard, took control of the PQ and the seat of
the premier. While open to negotiations with the federal government, Bouchard still tried to
satisfy the hard-liners of his party by organizing the estates-general on the future of the
French language in Quebec. For some of the hawks, the inquiry marked a first step towards
another referendum on sovereignty. Once again, a nationalist, Yves Michaud, evoked the
spectre of “the Jewish ethnic vote.” Stunned by this anti-Semitism and the deep divisions it
caused within the PQ, Bouchard resigned last December. Yet his moderate voice continues to
echo in the conciliatory stance of the estates-general. ■
