AMY OTCHET
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



The Kalahari’s
u n d e rg round secre t s
Namibia almost came to blows with Botswana over plans to divert
a river, but the answer may lie just beneath the surface of the driest
country south of the Sahara
J
ust nod with a smile and maybe your companion
from the Water Affairs Department won’t notice
the confusion. Driving north into the vast spaces
of Namibia,you keep missing the rivers he spots.
“And this is the Okahanja River,” he says.
Another blank nod.“And here we have the famous
O m a t a k o. It may look small but this river can be very
p o w e r f u l .”Look small? Look where? The patient Greg
Christelis is gushing with tales of flash flo o d s,yet all you
see is a cracked and sandy track in the bush, w h e n
s u d d e n l y, what used to be dry facts and figures about
erratic rainfall and aridity come rushing back—Namibia
d o e s n ’t have any regular or perennial rivers to call its
own.* 
This is a land of ephemeral rivers, which arrive
with near violence and disappear
without warning, flowing for a
few hours, days or even weeks
after a good hard rain before
fading into the red desert sand
or the tall grass of the savannah.
But when they do run, t h e y
represent events in people’s lives.
Men will still swap stories about
a river that hasn’t flowed for 30
years. The old-school Afrikaner
farmer will religiously plot
rainfall levels on a graph, while in black communal
a r e a s, the same information is embedded in lessons that
a father recounts to his children.
A dehydrated capital
In Namibia—the driest country south of the
Sahara—water scarcity and unpredictability form a
constant constraint on national development.Av e r a g e
annual rainfall is 250 mm compared to 1,400 mm in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example. A
corner of the country can receive double the average
rainfall one season and nothing for years after.And the
little that does fall doesn’t stay for long:83 percent is
lost to evaporation, plants soak up and then sweat
another 14 percent back into the atmosphere, l e a v i n g
just two percent to run off those mysteriously
ephemeral rivers and one percent to infiltrate rock
underground.
That single digit, h o w e v e r, may transform the
Namibian landscape. Groundwater is already providing
for about half of the country’s needs and its role will
increase as the population grows and droughts hit
harder and more frequently with predicted climate
c h a n g e.Yet this invisible resource is just breaking the
surface of the country’s national and regional priorities.
“ For the past ten years, w e ’ve focused on
negotiating protocols [agreements] for international
rivers like the Zambezi,which involved eight states.B u t
we ignored groundwater, even through we have
aquifers running across national boundaries,” says Dr.
Serge Puyoo,a French geohydrologist working with the
Southern African Development Community (SADC).
Think of aquifers as a lattice of rock, whose cracks,
crooks and crannies are filled with water. Sometimes
the water is from recent rain which seeped down
through the soil. Other aquifers only contain fossil
w a t e r, rain of bygone geological eras.Depending upon
various factors—from the type of rock to the pull of
gravity—the water can slowly
flow within the aquifer and
b e y o n d . Like rivers,aquifers pay
no heed to national borders.
As Puyoo explains,“not only
has there been a general lack of
knowledge in monitoring and
mapping these aquifers, but a
cultural and historical blockage
to recognizing them. M a n y
countries relegate groundwater
to the geology departments of
government or universities. So politicians and water
managers are unaware of the potential and limits of the
resource, until they are faced with a crisis.”
That is exactly what happened in 1996-97, when
severe drought brought Namibia’s capital,Wi n d h o e k ,
to its knees and the country close to the brink of war
with neighbouring Botswana, according to sensational
media reports. Simmering tensions over disputed
borders added fuel to the fire surrounding Namibia’s
plan to divert part of the Okavango River, w h i c h
originates in Angola before carving the border with
Namibia and then snaking into Botswana to feed the
“jewel of the Kalahari.”In this vast wetland, t r a d i t i o n a l
communities weave around a wealth of biodiversity
and wildlife that tourist operators milk for foreign
currency, amounting to ten percent of the country’s
gross domestic product.
For ecologists in Botswana, the river was sacred.
But in Namibia, those shining waters appeared as a
This is a land
of ephemeral rivers,
which arrive with
near violence
and disappear
without warning.

saviour, prompting civil engineers like Piet Heyns to
update an old scheme to pipe about one or two percent
of the average flow to dehydrated Wi n d h o e k . Th e
capital was in crisis—ordinarily three dams would
store enough water to keep the city running for a few
y e a r s. Two were almost empty and the third was
collecting dust. Officials were digging holes in a
desperate search for more groundwater, w h i l e
municipal authorities set up an electric sign to count
down the days remaining of supply in the dams. By the
time it hit 30,the government prepared to divert the
Okavango. Then,without warning, it rained…
Rolling back
apartheid’s legacy
To d a y, the plans for the pipeline still sit within
reach of Piet Heyns, who is now director of Wa t e r
Affairs and Namibia’s representative to the Permanent
Okavango River Basin Water Commission, which is
supposed to resolve the dispute over the river. Heyns
and his counterpart in Botswana, Balisi Khupe,s p e a k
of glowing plans for joint studies and monitoring.Yet
according to some experts involved, the commission is
mired in bureaucratic gridlock. The delay may prove
b e n e f i c i a l , h o w e v e r, as Namibia moves with the
international current running against building new
dams and their hefty price-tags.
Instead of grabbing for rivers, the government is
looking underground to economize its reserves,n o t a b l y
by building the largest water bank on the continent.Th e
aim is to plug the holes in the three dams, p a r t l y
connected by an open canal running more than
2 5 0 kilometres in the bushy savannah, w h e r e
substantial amounts literally vanish as vapour. In 1997,
for example, the three dams supplied Windhoek with
about 15.7 million cubic metres (Mm3) of water.Yet the
system lost 33.5 Mm3 to evaporation. Instead of letting
that precious river and rain water bake in the sun,
plans are underway to inject it into an aquifer under the
c i t y.The next phase will lie in opening two “ b r a n c h e s ”
of the bank at nearby dams.
Through investment schemes like the bank,
Namibia is removing the vestiges of apartheid’s control
over its natural resources 11 years after independence
from South A f r i c a .“ There was so much money flo w i n g
in from South Africa that we did major infrastructure
projects without proper study,” says Greg Christelis,
chief geohydrologist at Water A f f a i r s. The problem
may not have been the quantity of money flowing in,
but the direction it took: straight to wealthy white
folk in Windhoek and the surrounding cattle country,
where the average livestock farm,fattened by subsidies,
covers at least 5,000 hectares.
Namibia is not alone in trying to roll back the
hydrological legacy of apartheid. South Africa is in
the lead, passing the world’s most progressive water law
to ensure fair and sustainable use of the resource at
home and abroad.With 80 percent of its river (surface)
water originating in Lesotho, the government is keenly
aware of the need for hydro-diplomacy among its
neighbours, notably Namibia and Botswana.“We’re

trying to move from the Okavango to something more
positive,” says Christine Colvin of the International
Association of Hydrogeologists in South A f r i c a .
Through SADC,
representatives from the
three countries (and others)
have crafted a set of soon-
to-be legally binding rules
on jointly monitoring and
managing groundwater,
especially transboundary
aquifers. Bear in mind that
this is probably the one
natural resource that has
managed to avoid
international regulation.
Countries spent decades
hammering out a UN
convention on international
r i v e r s, yet they barely
discussed deep aquifers.
Instead of trying to forge
formal agreements,
international organizations
like UNESCO are promoting data exchange and joint
monitoring between countries (see box). N a m i b i a ,
Botswana and South Africa are now mapping an
enormous sequence of aquifers, known as the Karoo,
which spreads across the Kalahari into all three
countries.The initial hope was that the investigations
would uncover phenomenal supplies of water in
Namibia that could serve as an alternative to the
controversial Okavango scheme. On the contrary, t h e
Namibian side appears to be on the decline, a c c o r d i n g
to Jurgen Kirchner, who is helping to coordinate a
major study financed and led by the Japan International
Cooperation A g e n cy that focused on the country’s
most important swathe of Karoo,known as Stampriet
and covering an area of 65,000 kilometres2. The two
ephemeral rivers which most experts used to believe
fed the aquifer seem to dead-end in sand dunes. The
only apparent source of recharge is rainfall collecting
in sinkholes, or indents in the topography, according to
recent satellite images.
Trouble in cattle country
The bad news is more destabilizing within the
country than across the borders. In South Africa,the
aquifer sits beneath a national park, which requires
little water.Demand is also low in Botswana,where few
people are willing to brave the remote Kalahari,
although this may eventually change as traffic increases
along a new highway crossing the desert.
The real conflict is brewing in Stampriet,w h i c h ,s a y s
K i r c h n e r, must reduce its water use by 30 percent.
This prognosis will ricochet like a bullet in this rolling
land,with crests of red sand.This isn’t just any stretch
of cattle country,but a bastion of wealthy white farmers
who believe that they are the backbone of a land they
love but a country they seem to fear and even hate.
Stampriet is the home of a “tough breed,” s a y s
Willie Prinsloo, a legendary driller who dug for water
and minerals across southern Africa before retiring to
his farm,Donnersberg or Thunder Mountain,where he
raises livestock and wildlife for trophy hunting on
7,500 hectares.The one-eyed Willie runs the farm like
a ship, overseeing every watering hole for cattle and
vegetable planted in the plot he shares with his four
l a b o u r e r s, who live in tidy cottages behind his own
h o m e. Banish the thought that he and his brethren
are depleting the aquifer, says Prinsloo. Fault lies with
the government—for it refuses to replace the farmers’
boreholes, the old rusty metal pipes installed decades
ago to bring up the groundwater.To reach the Karoo,
the boreholes must first pass through another aquifer
which tends to have very salty water. Holes in the
pipes enable this saline stuff to sink down and pollute
the clean Karoo.
Communal wisdom
The government, h o w e v e r, has a new policy in
which people pay for the water services and
i n f r a s t r u c t u r e. In the north, nomadic herding
communities are helping to install new pumps and
should one day pay for the water they use. Might the
same apply to Stampriet? 
The question provokes a torrent of what many
would consider racism, as Prinsloo expounds on the
benefits of colonialism.Beneath the old hatred lies a
new fear:government plans to spread the wealth by
land taxes and water metres. Here in the Kalahari,
you can still feel the heat from Robert Mugabe’s
Z i m b a b w e, so few dare to place the word “ l a n d ”b e f o r e
“ r e d i s t r i b u t i o n .” But the government is slowly buying
commercial (generally white) farms from willing sellers
to ease pressure in the northern communal areas,
which are in many ways like a separate country,d i v i d e d
by a three-metre-high fence from the commercial
cattle farms of men like Prinsloo.
According to the Japanese study, about five percent
of Stampriet’s 1,500 farms are now government-owned.
So not only must the Afrikaner brethren cut down on
their water consumption,but they can also prepare for
more and new neighbours. Yet Stampriet’s farmers
are probably the only ones in the country to use half
their expensive groundwater to grow commercial
c r o p s.For economists, this is like throwing gold away—
every cubic metre of water invested in irrigation
brought in just half a Namibian dollar (U. S. $ 0 . 0 6 ) .
For the sake of the  Karoo, Stampriet’s newcomers
hopefully won’t follow the “commercial”ways of the
“tough breed”next door. ■
* Four perennial rivers form part of Namibia’s national
borders.
