Biodiversity: a friend for life
Towards a world 
conservation ethics
t M. S. Swaminathan
The Rio convention marked the first major international step towards 
the sharing of biodiversity based on the principle of social fairness
It has become commonplace to say that the 
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) adopted 
during the Rio Summit in June 1992 is an important 
landmark in integrating the principles of ethics and equi­
ty in the use of biodiversity. To stem the increasingly 
rapid decline of biodiversity, it was necessary to take 
action, and quickly, without waiting for the scientific 
community to gather further knowledge. First and fore­
most, the CBD was an acknowledgment of this urgent 
need.
It entered into force in December 1993 and so far has 
been ratified by 177 States—but not by the United States. 
This agreement, the only one of its kind, sets up a frame­
work for worldwide action aimed at ensuring the conserva­
tion, the sustainable use and—a noteworthy develop­
ment—the fair sharing of biodiversity’s benefits. More 
specifically, the CBD focuses on the definition and the 
financing of conservation policies, access to genetic 
resources, North-South technology transfers stemming 
from the use of those resources, and trade in genetically 
modified organisms (GMOs). In particular, it acknowl­
edges that poor countries cannot meet their commitments 
to preserve biodiversity unless the developed nations pro­
vide them with access to biotechnologies and the related 
financing. Biodiversity will unavoidably be depleted 
through overuse if the current co-existence of unsustainable 
lifestyles and unacceptable poverty continues, and if the 
means of subsistence of families putting strains on 
resources are not strengthened.
The CBD has first and foremost been an effective 
awareness-raising tool. Political leaders, the media and 
the general public now know that taking from nature 
without restraint jeopardizes humanity’s security. Many 
states have changed their national laws to create or 
strengthen mechanisms to manage biodiversity. The con­
vention has also lent support to the idea that preserving 
species with their natural habitats and enlisting the local 
people’s support in managing them are vital priorities.
The convention has also prompted oyer 130 States to 
adopt a protocol last January 29, 2000 in-Montreal 
(Canada) on biosafety in order to regulate international 
trade in GMOs. The negotiations led to a stand-off between
P Holder of the UNEseo-Cousteau chair in Ecotechnology, 
chairman of the M. S. Swaminathan Research Foundation 
(Chennai, India), author o f I Predict: A Century o f 
Hope-Harmony with Nature and Freedom from Hunger, 
la s t  West Books Pv.t. Ltd, Chennai, 1999.
the European Union and the “Miami Group”, consisting of 
the leading GMO producing countries led by the United 
States, Argentina and Canada. According to the text even­
tually adopted, countries may oppose GMO imports 
deemed hazardous for the environment or health by invok­
ing the principle of precaution—in other words, without 
necessarily having irrefutable scientific proof that they are 
dangerous. However, the issue of whether the protocol 
overrides the rules of the World Trade Organization (the 
WTO, which so far has not recognized the principle of pre­
caution) remains to be settled. Only a specific dispute 
brought before the WTO will show whether the protocol 
has any teeth.
The CBD has certainly enabled progress, but the 
funding of conservation projects is far from guaranteed. 
Development aid has been steadily declining since 1992. 
The Global Environment Facility in charge of, among 
other things, managing international financing for biodi­
versity, has received and distributed about $2 billion in 
10 years.
Protecting traditional knowledge
Lastly and, most importantly, scant political effort 
has been focused on guaranteeing a fair share of biodi­
versity’s benefits. Many developing countries continue to 
denounce what they call “biopiracy” by the governments 
and companies of the North, which collect their biologi­
cal resources for commercial purposes. There is an 
urgent need to take steps that would acknowledge and 
compensate the inestimable contribution of indigenous 
rural families to the conservation and improvement of 
•the planet’s genetic resources.
That task requires changing intellectual property 
rules. They are currently being revised in the framework of 
the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property 
(TRIPS) agreement, which regulates biotechnology 
patents and new varieties of crops. The system in force, 
based on individually-owned private property, is unsuit­
able for protecting indigenous people’s collective tradi­
tional knowledge. The World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WTPO), which has launched a study on the 
need to recognize their rights, is likely to help identify 
alternative solutions. Next, the international community 
must carry out a crucial task: drafting and adopting a pro­
tocol on agrobiodiversity that would protect traditional 
knowledge and farmers’ rights over plant genomes. ■
