International Year
of Volunteers
JUSTIN DAVIS SMITH
DIRECTOR OFTHE LONDON-BASED
INSTITUTE FOR VOLUNTEERING RESEARCH
(WWW.IVR.ORG.UK)



Vo l u n t e e r i n g ,
capital of the f u t u r e?
Governments are waking up to the economic and social benefits
of volunteering, but should not rely on it as a stopgap for solving society’s ills
1 . A GLOBAL FORCE
full circle to economics again) higher levels of eco-
nomic growth.
While this capital has a role to play in building
strong and active communities, it can only be
maximized in certain conditions.Volunteering works
best in the context of a healthy and well-resourced
public sector. It is not a substitute for government
services but rather an essential complement—adding
value to the services provided by paid professionals.
As an essential ingredient of a healthy, democratic
s o c i e t y, governments have a vested interest in its
p r o m o t i o n , even when volunteers are involved in
campaigning activities and speak out against public
policies.
The benefits to the volunteers themselves should
not be underestimated.It used to be said that vol-
unteering was based on the idea of a gift relation-
s h i p.N o w, most people see it as an exchange, w h e r e
both giver and receiver benefit in equal measure.
Volunteers are quick to cite a rich list of benefits,
I
n a telling recognition of volunteering’s place in
s o c i e t y, the United Nations General A s s e m b l y
will meet this December to debate how gov-
ernments can do a better job of supporting those
who contribute to their communities without
any financial return. It is an apt culmination to the
International Year of Volunteers that has mobilized
people in 130 countries.
It is hardly surprising that governments around
the world are waking up to volunteering’s eco-
nomic and social benefit s. In the United Kingdom,
for example, volunteering contributes an esti-
mated £40 billion ($64 billion) to the economy,
whilst in Canada its economic value has been put
at $16 billion. A recent comparative study in
2 2 countries estimated that volunteers put in hours
equivalent to the work of 10.5 million full-time
employees! 
But there are dangers in solely drawing attention
to these economic justifications, even though they
can raise the status of volunteering, in much the
same way as the women’s movement has long
argued in relation to household work.
Governments might be tempted to replace paid
workers with volunteers to save money. For one,
this overlooks the fact that volunteering requires
investment and training to yield a return: a
r e c e n t study in Europe estimated that every
d o l l a r invested in volunteering brought eight in
return.
From gift
to exchange
More importantly, growing evidence supports
what volunteers throughout the world have long
k n o w n ,namely that it is good for society.A c a d e m i c s
have developed the notion of social capital to
describe the links and connections made by indi-
viduals through volunteering. Some studies have
suggested that a society rich in social capital will tend
to have lower rates of crime, lower levels of school
absenteeism and inter-racial conflict,and (coming

A volunteer doctor from the NGOCasa Al

from meeting friends to learning new skills and
gaining a different perspective on life.
Those suffering from social exclusion are
particularly likely to benefit . Disabled people taking
part in volunteering can aid social integration and
challenge the negative stereotypes of themselves
aspassive recipients of care. For the young, volun-
teering offers opportunities for self-development
and risk-taking,and provides a valuable grounding
in citizenship.
For senior citizens, it could help the process of
’active ageing’—some research has even suggested
that volunteering is good for health! In short,vol-
unteering provides a classic win/win situation, b e n-
efiting both the volunteer and society.
Removing barriers
Still, barriers to participation remain: in some
countries there is no freedom of association,while
in others, legislation may work against involving
certain groups, such as the unemployed. O r g a n i z a-
tions may be unable to pay travel expenses for vol-
u n t e e r s, thus penalising those with the lowest
incomes. There may also be attitudinal barriers —
some people may reject volunteering as old-fash-
ioned and outmoded — or institutional ones: o r g a-
nizations may be reluctant to develop opportunities
for volunteers to get involved.
Governments have a role to play in removing
these barriers, by creating an environment — legal,
fiscal and institutional — in which people are able
to volunteer.The Dutch government, for example,
has decided to scrutinize or “proof” all new legis-
lation to maximise its impact on volunteering.
Employees on 
the go in Japan
Governments also have a key role to play in
funding the organization or information technology
infrastructure at the national and local levels, t o
enable volunteering to flo u r i s h .As major employers,
they can encourage staff to play an active role in
their local communities.Taking on board emerging
evidence of the benefits of volunteering on staff
morale, team-building and business profile, more
and more employers—in the public and private
sectors—are encouraging their staff to get involved
in volunteer activity.
Ja p a n ’s Osaka Gas Company, for example,
launched a scheme called “Chiisa na To m o s h i b i ”o r
“ Tiny Lamplight” in 1981. By 1994, a staggering
13,500 staff were involved in the volunteer scheme,
which entailed employees participating in a range
of community services. The company promoted
volunteerism by allowing staff to take leave ranging
from 10 days to 12 months. Retired staff and the
families of employees were also encouraged to par-
ticipate in social welfare activities.
Though governments have their role to play in
endorsing pro-volunteer policies, they must also
recognize their limitations.The volunteering move-
ment rightly cherishes its independence, and any
attempt by the state to control its agenda must be
fiercely resisted. ■

Alianza treating a street child in Guatemala.
