O
n a cold afternoon a little more than a
year ago, members of several T l i n g i t
Indian clans in southeastern A l a s k a
gathered for an emotional ceremony that
few of them had ever dared to imagine.
An intricately carved wooden beaver that plays a cen-
tral role in their history and culture was coming home
after an absence of nearly a century.
This carving once graced the prow of a war canoe
that ferried supplies to these clans in the wake of a
bombardment of their communities by the United
States Navy in 1881.One clan member, acting on his
o w n , later sold it to a travelling collector, and it disap-
peared.
In 1998,a clan elder was visiting a storeroom at the
American Museum of Natural History in New York
w h e n , he later recalled, he heard an “inner voice”
calling him to one shelf.When he
found the shelf, he was astoni-
shed to see the wooden beaver
staring out at him.
Under the provisions of a
sweeping law enacted 10 years
a g o, Tlingit clans asked the
museum to return the carving,
and museum officials complied.
“ The day it came back, t h e
whole village was at the dock,” said Leonard John,a
clan member who helped arrange the return.“ P e o p l e
were crying and weeping. This is not just art to us,”
John continued. “ I t ’s something far deeper, s o m e-
thing with a healing and spiritual aspect. When our
artefacts were scattered across America, they left a
void. We lost our honour and our value system. We
were overwhelmed by social problems like suicide
and alcoholism. Now that they’re coming back, p e o p l e
look at them and feel their honour and their self-res-
pect returning as well.There are still a lot of festering
wounds, but the process of healing has begun.”
The law under which the beaver prow was repa-
triated,the Native American Graves Protection and
Repatriation A c t , was signed by President George
Bush in November 1990 after years of discussion
among scientists, museum curators and Indian groups.
It seeks to reconcile two profoundly different value
s y s t e m s, one based on the primacy of reason and
science and the other revolving around spiritual and
religious values.
Under the law, every museum and federal agency
that owns Native American artefacts or remains must
compile an inventory of its holdings, identify them by
tribal origin,and notify existing tribes of objects that
appear to come from that tribe’s tradition. U. S.
museums hold the remains of an estimated 500,000
Indians as well as millions of artefacts.Since the repa-
triation law was enacted, according to the National
Park Service, they have returned about 20,000 sets of
human remains and more than 385,000 objects.
Specialists say this number is misleadingly high
because it includes every bead and pottery shard
found in an Indian grave. But among them are also
hundreds of important and beautiful artefacts that
have been prizes in museum col-
lections.
“Some people argue that this
is religion trying to assert itself
over science, but we don’t see it
that way,” said Keith Kintigh,
president of the Society for A m e-
rican A r c h a e o l o g y. “Our posi-
tion is that there are Native
American rights,but that science
and research are also legitimate. They have to be
balanced.That’s exactly what the law tries to do, and
I think it’s been pretty successful.
“Take these beautiful pottery vessels that were
interred with Indians a thousand years ago,” Kintigh
said.“On the one hand,there are people who think
those objects should be underground beside the
people they were buried with. But most museums
with Indian collections display funerary objects.
They’re enormous cultural achievements and have a
lot to tell us. In many cases, t h e y ’ve even been used as
models for the revival and continuation of traditional
artistic styles.”
Since the law was passed, tribal officials have held
countless meetings with curators, who have generally
learned to view objects in their collections in a new
way. Indians have also conceded that it is sometimes
best to leave their artefacts in collections where they
STEPHEN KINZER
JOURNALIST FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
H o m e c o m i n g
for the t o t e m p o l e s
A spirit of mutual respect has grown between Native Americans and U.S.
museums thanks to a law enabling tribes to repatriate the artefacts
and remains of their distant ancestors
2 . S AVING OUR T R E A S U R E S
“The day the carving
came back, people were
crying and weeping.
This is not just 
art to us.”

can be seen and appreciated. In a few cases, they have
allowed museums to keep sacred objects on the condi-
tion that they be handled in special ways. Some must
be kept out of public view, others must only be dis-
played facing in a particular direction, and still others
must be sprinkled regularly with substances like
chopped tobacco or corn pollen.
The Field Museum in Chicago,which has one of the
c o u n t r y ’s richest collections of Indian artefacts, h a s
returned about a dozen in recent years. It is now pre-
paring to repatriate one of its prizes, a towering totem
pole depicting an eagle,a thunderbird and a bear, to the
Cape Fox tribe in A l a s k a .The pole was taken from an
abandoned village in 1899.“It was never the intent of
the legislation to bring in trucks and haul away museum
c o l l e c t i o n s,”said Jonathan Haas, a curator at the Fi e l d
M u s e u m .“It was intended to provide a mechanism for
the return of a very small number of very important
pieces that never should have been taken from their
place of origin in the first place.”
The repatriation process has not proceeded
without problems. Many Indian tribes do not have the
financial resources to organize claims for sacred
o b j e c t s. Others are so preoccupied with protecting
Indian cemeteries that are uncovered during floods or
road-building that they do not have enough energy left
to deal with objects that are safe in museum vaults.
Some objects that tribes would like to claim have
been treated with chemical preservatives, including
a r s e n i c, that make them toxic and unsuitable for cere-
monial use.
Another problem has been raised by some Indian
leaders who maintain that all objects from non-Euro-
pean cultures in North America belong in the hands
of Indians. The 1990 law, h o w e v e r, rejects that so-
called “ p a n - I n d i a n ” a r g u m e n t . It requires that the
claimant tribe prove it is a “lineal descen-
d a n t ” of the tribe from which the artefacts or
remains came.
As a result of this provision,the law has
served some tribes better than others. Sou-
thwestern tribes like the Hopi and Navajo, f o r
e x a m p l e, have maintained cultural continuity
over centuries and therefore have strong
claims to objects in museum collections.
O t h e r s, including many in the eastern U. S.
that were decimated by waves of European
settlement,have more trouble proving their
descent from tribes that existed long ago.
Another major conflict remains over
efforts by some tribes to recover remains that
are many thousands of years old and that
scientists say should be studied for vital clues
about the history of human migration to the
American continent.But many curators have
come to agree that Indians have a right to
recover their sacred artefacts and the bones of
those they can legitimately claim as ancestors.
This kind of change in perception repre-
sents the law’s greatest contribution,accor-
ding to experts like Rick West, a Cheyenne
Indian and curator of the Smithsonian Insti-
t u t e ’s National Museum of the A m e r i c a n
Indian in New York City, widely considered to
be the finest in the world. The museum has
returned about 2,000 objects to Indian tribes
across the U. S. , in Canada and in several Latin
American countries.
“As institutions of culture, museums that
house these materials have a vital interest in
buttressing those cultures and supporting them
into the future,” West said, adding that “this
process has directly benefited museums them-
s e l v e s.Even a collection as great as ours is very spottily
documented,and through this process of repatriation
w e ’ve had people from native communities visiting
our collection who can inevitably tell us a great deal
about objects that are not subject to repatriation.
“ When the law was first enacted in 1990 there was
practically hysteria in some parts of the museum com-
munity about what was going to happen,”West conti-
nued.“Now most of that has faded away. Both sides
have been deliberate and thoughtful, and it has ended
up benefiting both the native and museum communi-
ties.This is not just words. It has real impact.” ■
The Smithsonian’s exemplary Museum of the American Indian.
