
DIANE KUPERMAN
BRAZILIAN JOURNALISTANDWRITER


Stuck at the gates
of para d i s e
Brazil enjoys a reputation as a multiracial haven, but prejudice 
still has a stranglehold on society and slavery remains far 
from a distant memory 
2 . THE EXCLUDED
I
n a very short time—what is 501 years on the
scale of human history?—immigrants from
around the world have streamed to Brazil.
The mixture of colours and peoples along
with the joys of living in tropical latitudes
soon gave rise to the myth that Brazil is a “ r a c i a l
d e m o c r a cy.”This stereotyped image,so well spread
by the media, proclaims that Brazil is a socially
harmonious country where people of different
colours always get along.
But behind the smiles that light up in black,w h i t e,
b r o w n , red and yellow faces when the first drum is
struck in the samba schools, the truth is hidden:
r a c i a l , social and economic prejudices exist, a n d
must be denounced.
After Portuguese explorers discovered Brazil
in 1500, slavery existed on its soil for over three
c e n t u r i e s. On May 13, 1 8 8 8 , it became the last
western country to abolish the practice. B r a z i l
was also the biggest importer of slaves in modern
history: 40 percent of the blacks exported from
Africa to the New World ended up there.
As a result, Rio de Janeiro became the world’s
largest African city and slave port, and the
Mercado do Valongo the biggest slave market.
Today Nigeria is the only country to have a larger
black population.
Bleaching 
the society
Sexual relations between whites and their
slaves—especially white sons having sex for the
first time with black women—gave rise to a large
mixed-race population that today outnumbers
blacks. Sometimes freed slaves were “adopted,”
which eased their plight by sparing them the
struggle with a world for which they were
A vicious circle:poorly educated,Afro-Brazilians are often restricted to low-paid jobs.

u n p r e p a r e d , but kept them in their erstwhile
menial jobs and perpetuated the apparent (and
sometimes genuine) affectionate relations with
the “masters in the big house.”
The expression “racial democracy ”a p p e a r e d
in the 1930s and was intended to mask the
intentions of the government, which wanted to
“ b l e a c h ” society by encouraging the “ m o s t
advanced races”—in other words, w h i t e
Europeans—to migrate to Brazil. The country
had accepted the myth of black racial and
intellectual inferiority, and urgently wanted to
take action to change the racial make-up of the
Brazilian population, where descendants of
Africans were in the majority.
The immigrants’ arrival only worsened the
plight of blacks: the few jobs they could aspire to
fill became even scarcer. Forty years after
e m a n c i p a t i o n , former slaves and their descendants
swelled the ranks of street people and beggars.
Those who did have a place to live dwelled in
shantytowns, and when they had jobs, their skills
and wages were low.
Skewed job
applications
Statistics today point to
glaring inequality, s t a r t i n g
with child mortality: out of
every thousand children,
6 2 blacks and 37 whites die at
an early age (76 blacks and
45 whites among children
under fiv e ) . Life expectancy
for adult Afro-Brazilians is
six years shorter than it is for
whites: 62 years for men and
68 for women.
The illiteracy rate among blacks is 22 percent,
the average length of time they spend in school
six years. When they reach the labour market,
most are still children or have a teenager’s
s c h o o l i n g. Barely 18 percent have access to higher
education, and among that 18 percent, just 2.3
percent graduate from university.The inadequacy
of their training is reflected in professional life,
where blacks are restricted to low-paid menial
jobs.
When looking for work, they know beforehand
that if a white person with the same qualific a t i o n s
is applying for the same position, the odds are
hopelessly stacked against them.And when they do
find work, they are often the victims of unfair wage
policies that favour whites in identical jobs. Th i s
vicious circle is visible in statistics on unemployment
(the jobless rate is 11 percent for black men and 16.5
percent for black women) and poverty (34 percent
of blacks live below the poverty line and 14 percent
are classified as destitute).
Five years ago, O Dia, R i o ’s best-selling
newspaper, carried out a survey of the bars and
restaurants along the beaches of Copacabana
and Ipanema.The findings revealed that just one
of the 318 employees working in these businesses
was black. Hotels, restaurants, banks and shops
seldom hire blacks, arguing that customers do
not like people of colour to wait on them.
Discrimination is blatant in the classified ads of
n e w s p a p e r s, where “neat appearance” is actually
code for “blacks need not apply.” Code Four of
B r a z i l ’s National Employment System is even
more perverse: it requires job-seekers to mention
their skin colour, enabling employers to turn
down applications on the pretext that the position
has already been filled.
In recent years, racial hatred, which is blatant
in big cities such as São Paulo and Rio de Ja n e i r o,
has unfortunately spread to Je w s,I n d i a n s, g y p s i e s,
gays and even Nordestins (white Brazilians from
the country’s north-eastern region in search of
better living conditions).
The significance of racist
activities can no longer be
downplayed by calling them
s c a t t e r e d . Though offic i a l l y
p r o h i b i t e d , anti-Semitic and
revisionist publications are
l e g i o n . The Internet distills
hatred of blacks, Jews and
g a y s. Desecration of Je w i s h
cemeteries and spray-painted
swastikas or insults on walls
have become everyday
occurrences.
Things are getting out of
h a n d , and tomorrow
xenophobes may target any
group, regardless of colour, origins or religion.
M e a n w h i l e, the white population turns a deaf
e a r.A recent survey by the University of Brasilia
reveals that 35 percent of those polled reluctantly
admitted to being racist, while 65 percent denied
it. The insidiousness of invisible racial prejudice
was compared to a B-2 Stealth bomber, w h i c h
radars cannot detect.
Working against
the grain
In the 1980s, black community leaders decided
it was time to react and began organizing efforts
to combat prejudice, fear and resistance.
Overcoming their political and religious
d i f f e r e n c e s, they joined forces to create non-
governmental organizations that defend the rights
of blacks and commissioned studies to gain a
truthful assessment of the situation.At the same
t i m e, they started working to preserve their
African ancestors’ cultural and religious values.
Hotels, restaurants,
banks and shops
seldom hire blacks,
arguing that
customers do not like
people of colour
to wait on them.

The goal was to strengthen black identity and
make Afro-Brazilians feel proud of their colour
and traditions. Publications of the highest quality
sought to create and extol black role models that
might replace white ones.
P u b l i s h e r s, including children’s book
p u b l i s h e r s, started singing the praises of real and
fictional black heroes. Even cosmetics companies
hopped on the bandwagon, selling beauty
products for every skin tone, type of hair and
style of dress.
A government
stand
The government, which until now was
concerned by poverty but never by racism, has
even started to address the issue. It must be
acknowledged that Brazil has signed the main
international human rights conventions and is
on the cutting edge of anti-racist legislation.Th e
constitution prohibits all forms of prejudice and
considers racism “a crime without statutory
l i m i t s.” Last year, the state of Rio took a new
initiative by creating “SOS Racism and anti-
Semitism,” a hotline set up by the secretariat of
public safety to receive complaints from victims
of racism.
But outlawing racism is not enough.
Regardless of their colour, Brazilians must take
action to raise each individual’s awareness of
social injustice, and incite everyone to help wipe
out inequality. ■
Benedita da Silva,the first black woman elected to the Brazilian Congress.
