JAKOB FINCI
PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TRUTH
AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION IN BOSNIA HERZEGOVINA



Revenge in the making
Children in Bosnia are growing up learning that their neighbours are enemies. Civic groups say that a
truth commission is the only way to defuse brewing ethnic hatred
MORE THAN JUST THE T R U T H
hen truth commissions were set up in
Latin American countries such as
Argentina, Chile, and El Salvador, they
were justified because the systems of
abuse there had been designed to hide the
f a c t s. Torture and related abuses were
committed largely in secret; crimes like
“ d i s a p p e a r a n c e s ” were intended to erase
any trace of the victim or the crime.
Hence the compelling need to uncover
and acknowledge the truth.
In Bosnia, such a commission is not
needed because of a hidden truth, b u t
because of multiple “truths,” each with a
distinct ethnic vein.Nationalists from the
three ethnic communities involved in the
recent war propagate a history that
portrays their group as the one and only
victim of mass abuses,depicting the other
two as evil perpetrators and monsters.
Three separate war crimes commissions,
dominated respectively by Bosnian,C r o a t
and Serb perspectives, have focused on
the victimization of their own group.
Owing in no small part to the legacy
of communism, people in Bosnia
Herzegovina have long been accustomed
to a “ t o p - d o w n ”a p p r o a c h , by which they
passively let leadership determine their
fate. Shedding this mentality has been a
slow process,but citizens are sending out
a clear signal that they are ready to
confront the past with an eye to shaping
a better future. On no other issue is this
more obvious than the current effort to
establish a Truth and Reconciliation
Commission (TRC).
In January 2000, an extraordinary
conference in Sarajevo on the proposed
TRC brought together a diverse group of

8 0 civil society leaders from both the
Moslem-Croat Federation and the Serb
Republic. Representatives from human
rights groups, victims’ associations,
religious orders, political parties,
a c a d e m i a , youth groups and others
explained why they thought the TRC was
vital to reaching durable peace.
Independent media re-broadcast the
entire eight-hour discussion.This broad-
based grassroots citizens’ coalition has
now established a National Coordinating
Committee for Establishment of the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
This is an important step in the processes
of both democratization and
reconciliation in Bosnia. To date, o v e r
100 NGOs, political, religious and civic
leaders have signed a petition calling for
such a Commission.
One of its main goals is to enable
historians to write one history of the
c o u n t r y.For now,we have three different
h i s t o r i e s, each teaching our children that
our neighbours are our enemies.
Continuing like this, we cannot expect
anything more than a new war in 20 or 30
years.
Finally, some have suggested that the
TRC should not be established until the
War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague
finishes its work.This would only postpone
for at least another five years a process
that many believe is essential to
r e c o n c i l i a t i o n . Five years for the three
competing nationalistic versions of history
to become further embedded in the
collective psyche of each group. A boy
who was ten years old when the recent
c o n flict began has already reached the
age of military service. With every year
that children are raised on accounts of
recent history that demonize other ethnic
groups and refuse to acknowledge their
s u f f e r i n g, it becomes more likely that this
young generation will grow up to fight.It
is a common belief that if NATO
peacekeeping troops withdrew tomorrow,
the country would likely descend anew
into bloodshed and division.To make the
departure of these troops possible, it is
imperative that Bosnia take the T R C
route.
To prevent a new cycle of violence
and abuse, our society urgently needs to
confront the legacy of evil committed by
neighbour against neighbour, to identify
the shortcomings in its political, legal
and social institutions which render
such abuses possible, and to begin the
extraordinarily difficult and slow work
of re-stitching the social fabric.D e l a y i n g
such a process by several years would be
both tactically mistaken and morally
wrong. ■
