AMADÉ BADINI
SENIOR LECTURER IN EDUCATIONAL SCIENCES AT
OUAGADOUGOU UNIVERSITY, BURKINA FASO



Blame the system
Violence in schools of Francophone Africa doesn’t come from the pupils, but from
the system itself, says a Burkinabé expert
VIOLENCE IN SCHOOLS: A WO R L DWIDE A F FA I R
o rd , I don’t want to go to school any
more.
P l e a s e, I beg you, take me away from
it.”
This “Prayer of a Small Black Child,”
written in the 1950s by the Guadelou-
pean author Guy Ti r o l i e n , remains sadly
relevant in black Africa,where schools
heap violence upon children from day
one.
In Burkina Faso, for example, chil-
dren have to switch from their mother
tongue to a foreign one—Fr e n c h—
without the slightest psychological
a d j u s t m e n t . From October 1 in the year
they turn seven,children are forbidden
from speaking vernacular languages—
such as Mooré, Peuhl or Dioula—a t
s c h o o l .They learn how to read and write
in a foreign tongue, through stories
about French villages with their church
bells and lessons that will teach them
more about Paris than Ouagadougou,
their country’s capital. H u m i l i a t i n g
p u n i s h m e n t , such as being forced to
wear a donkey’s skull around one’s neck
with a sign reading “ D o n k e y, s p e a k
French!”only reinforces the sense that
school is a place rife with conflict.
The school timetable is another
source of stress. The few teachers who
have the intelligence and courage to
allow a break at nine in the morning—
so that children who take animals out to
pasture at 5am can rest and have a
snack—are criticized for not respecting
the official 10:30 pause.
For the African child, society as a
whole—including the village and the
fie l d s, especially during the harvest
season—are invaluable occasions for
socialization and non-formal educa-
tion.But as soon as they enter a class-
r o o m , learning from one’s peers in the
village is over. There is no reward or
value attached to helping one another,
respecting one’s elders or the pride of
belonging to a family or clan for whose
well-being no sacrifice is too great. I n s-
tead the child is encouraged to adopt a
competitive attitude and a brazen indi-
vidualism that leads to de-personali-
zation,sometimes even to alienation.
Passive
resistance
For the moment, we only see school
violence on television. Here in Africa,
the issue is the other way round. Th e
classic school, created by the Fr e n c h
colonial rulers, is an act of violence
against the child, and against Burkinabé
society itself. Our society did not pro-
duce this school: it was imposed on us
with the clear intention of conquering
our people.
Mission accomplished? The classic
school system that has become entren-
ched in Africa has fashioned a new kind
of person, the “ t o w n i e.”This new breed
lives alongside those shaped by tradi-
tional value-systems, those who refuse to
be won over. Schools are the first to


blame for this rift. In this conflict bet-
ween two approaches, the traditional
education system still holds sway.
Of course, there are not enough
schools to serve all the
c o u n t r y ’s children.
Nearly two-thirds of
Burkinabé children
have no access to
modern schools and 80
percent of adults can’t
read or write. But even
when children do go to
s c h o o l , passive resis-
tance is apparent, with
some parents in the
north and north-east of
the country pulling
them out. For rural
people, sending a child
to school entails a cul-
tural and economic
sacrifice for the family.
Relevance and
respect
Those chil-
dren who are out of the reach of modern
schools survive by the strength of their
numbers and the traditional structures
that continue to govern all aspects of
most people’s lives in Burkina Faso.
We should not indulge in nostalgia,
but confront the situation head on,
before the violence that schools inflict on
children spurs pupils to resort to vio-
l e n c e.All the seeds of violence are in the
system — discrimination, c o r p o r a l
punishment,humiliation and sexist cli-
chés in textbooks.
Introducing vernacular languages
at school and using them to teach
various subjects is one way forward.
Another is to revise curricula regularly
so that it remains relevant,and to adapt
the school calendar to the needs of
daily life. Why not, for example, plan
holidays to accommodate a child’s
initiation rituals, the passage into adul-
thood? 
The classic school is not the fin a l
w o r d . Alternatives exist. By critically
taking into account, at every level of
s c h o o l i n g, a child’s traditional and family
e d u c a t i o n , we will help to establish a
non-violent school system in Burkina
Faso and elsewhere in Africa. ■
