T
SALLY WYATT
LECTURER IN COMMUNICATIONS STUDIES AT THE UNIVERSITY OF AMSTERDAMAND MEMBEROF THE BRITISH “VIRTUAL SOCIETY?”
PROGRAMME ANDAN EDITOR OF “TECHNOLOGY AND IN/EQUALITY, QUESTIONING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY” (ROUTLEDGE, 2000)



Fleeing the dot.com era
The Internet has been proclaimed as the supreme network, the place where one
day all human beings will communicate. So who are these strange people
switching off in droves?
wo years ago,one of the scientists behind
the original computer language that
gave birth to the Internet announced a
daring new plan. Work would begin,
Vinton Cerf declared, to spread the
network beyond the boundaries of Earth:
the InterPlaNet, as it has been baptized,
would bring online computing to outer
space.
Outlandish as it may at first seem, t h e
plan is consistent with the hype and breezy
forecasting all too often surrounding
discussion of the Internet.Even though
mounting evidence points to a stubborn
“digital divide”separating not just poor
and rich countries but also groups within
n a t i o n s, p o l i cy m a k e r s, business and
computer scientists downplay the fig u r e s
as brief blips in the unstoppable onward
advance of the network.
“A figure of a hundred computers per
human is not entirely unreasonable,
leading to a thousand billion computers
in the Internet in 2020,”argued Christian
H u i t e m a , a scientist involved in the
creation of the latest Internet protocol,
IPv6.“Some have observed that such a
target was a bit narrow.”
This technological optimism has come
under increasing scrutiny over the past
y e a r. The “Digital Divide,” a UN
Development Programme report from
1 9 9 9 , revealed that less than 15 percent of
the world’s population accounted for
more than 88 percent of the Internet’s
u s e r s. The financial failure of multiple
dot.com firms and a sense that the
technology is still too slow and unreliable
have dented some grander hopes for an
An uprising against the digital age? No, a protest in Munich to promote the recycling of old PCs.

“information superhighway.” Yet it is a
little known and barely noticed trend that
may perhaps prove the most troubling: f o r
the first time, evidence has emerged of a
widespread tendency to abandon the
Internet.
No forecasting has yet taken account
of this. A cast-iron premise in all
extrapolations of the Internet’s future is
that once the network is available,
prolonged use necessarily follows.
Recent empirical work has suggested
otherwise. Cyber Dialogue, an Internet
research consultancy based in the U.S.,
has uncovered evidence of a slowdown in
Internet growth based on interviews with
1,000 users and 1,000 non-users. Th e y
argue that the rate of growth is
decelerating overall, and that an absolute
decline in the number of users aged 18 to
29 is underway. An interesting claim is
that approximately one third of U. S.
adults simply do not believe they need the
Internet and what it offers.
The first signs of a rebellion
against commercialization?
Similarly, a 2000 survey in the U.K.
found that 40 percent of the adult
population had no intention of going
o n l i n e, while most of them put their
reluctance down either to cost or to the
belief that the Internet was irrelevant to
their lives.Only a third of those who had
stopped using the Internet expected to
reconnect in the future. In early 1997,
Cyber Dialogue estimated there were
9.4 million former users in the U. S. , a
figure that had jumped to 27.7 m i l l i o n
by September 1999.
According to U. S. researchers Ja m e s
Katz and Philip Apsden,the number of
ex-users jumped in the 1990s, albeit by a
smaller margin. Their national,random
telephone surveys sketch some features
of this apparent anomaly. People who
stop using the Internet, they argue, are
poorer and less well-educated. Th o s e
who are introduced to it via family and
friends are more likely to drop out than
those who are self-taught or receive
formal training. Most surprisingly,
teenagers are more likely to give up than
people over 20.
These results must be treated with
considerable caution,since former users
can easily become active ones at a later
date. But the sheer existence of Internet
malcontents—and in such numbers if
Cyber Dialogue is to believed—raises
critical challenges to the entire online
i n d u s t r y. Why the decision to abandon
use just at the time of giant Internet
expansion prompted by the introduction
of the World Wide Web?
Possibly the most salient feature in
the trend is how it has coincided with a
revolution in the network’s character.
Though there is as yet no concrete
evidence of a link between the two, the
suspicion is that the Internet’s first users
have been alienated by the rampant
commercialization of the network over
the past five years. Perhaps these figures
point to the first signs of rebellion against
the transformation of a computer- l i n k e d
community into a marketplace.
During its first 20 years, the network
was the preserve of computer science
p r o f e s s i o n a l s, students and academics
resourceful enough to negotiate its
complicated protocols (see box). But in
1 9 9 1 , the U. S. National Science
Foundation decided to allow commercial
t r a f fic, heralding the Internet’s switch
from academic forum to virtual bazaar.
The foundation’s decision was followed
by the creation of the Commercial
Internet Exchange, designed to regulate
the exchange of traffic between newly
emerging and profit-oriented Internet
service providers (ISPs).
From four computers connected in
1969, the number grew to 188 by 1979,
159,000 by 1989, and over 56 million
worldwide by mid-1999.But the decisions
of the early 1990s and the emergence of
the Web—allowing user- f r i e n d l y
multimedia features and full integration
of the Internet’s previously dispersed
elements (e-mail, file transfer and
information access)—also marked a
change in style. The temptations of
advertising on and profiting from this
unique interface soon proved
o v e r w h e l m i n g.The proportion of Internet
computer addresses ending with .com or
.net, and thus in the private sector, has
risen steeply as a result. By 1999, these
addresses formed 79 percent of the
Internet, up from 47 percent four years
earlier.Over the same period,the public
sector share, represented by addresses
ending with .edu, .mil, .gov and .int, fell
from 48 to 17 p e r c e n t . N o n - p r o f i t
organizations also dropped in their share,
from five to two percent.From their very
low base at the end of the 1980s, b u s i n e s s
shot to a position of dominance within a
decade.
There is no doubting that the Internet
remains an incredibly diverse collection
of resources. Much of the original public
sector ethos has also remained:most sites
are free, and a slew of databases or
archives held by companies (particularly
the press) are open to whoever wishes
to access them.
But it does seem highly probable, if
a s yet empirically unproven, that the
Internet’s mutation has driven away its
first zealots. Back in the 1980s, there was

relatively little distinction between the
producers of what was on offer on the
network and the consumers. If you had
the skills and resources needed to access
the Internet,it was more than likely that
you would be able to produce content
and even services for it. The ethos was
“give some, take some.”
A string of mergers
in the scramble
for supremacy
In the first few years of the web, this
interactive culture continued, a l l o w i n g
anyone with a small amount of technical
knowledge to become an “ I n t e r n e t
p u b l i s h e r.” The change since then has
been profound. Increased emphasis on
scripting languages,multimedia and links
from the web to databases held by
organizations has handed power to
skilled,professional programmers. Now,
the medium that was initially conceived as
an opportunity for smaller organizations
and individuals to create and prosper on
a “level playing fie l d ” has bifurcated into
an industry of producers and a mass of
consumers.
This trend was reinforced by the
spread of search engines such as Yahoo!
and A l t a Vi s t a , both of which aimed to
help the user navigate through the surfeit
of Internet resources. C o m m e r c i a l
extension of this concept has given rise to
the “portal”—one of most important
elements in the current web industry.
While offering traditional search features,
these portals also try to maximize revenue
by “click-through”advertising and deals
with electronic commerce firms. Th e
result of the scramble for portal
supremacy has been a string of mergers
and takeovers aimed at securing a top
spot in Internet rankings, with leading
contenders like AO L , Yahoo! and
Microsoft acquiring other fir m s,b o o s t i n g
c o n t e n t , and linking up to media
companies such as Disney and A B C
network.As the era of digital television
d a w n s, this convergence of access and
content is certain to accelerate.
There are definitely many users who
would not object.Even in its mid-1990s
i n c a r n a t i o n , use of the Internet was
plagued by problems of connection, s l o w
movement of data, excesses of
information and the off-loading of “ j u n k
mail.” It seems likely that some of those
who abandoned the Internet did so out of
disappointment with the sluggish and
haphazard service they received once
they had signed up for the promised
information revolution.
Such former users could well be
tempted back by the latest Internet
d e v e l o p m e n t s.A stress on “ p u s h i n g ”p r e -
defined content through portals,
sophisticated encryption schemes, secure
payment systems and faster connections all
promise to make the network easier to
use and navigate, while simultaneously
reducing variety. Add to this the
fragmentation of the Internet through its
introduction in mobile phones, i n t e r a c t i v e
television and palmtops, and it is clear that
the marriage between access and
content—between the device that leads
the user into the network and what the
user sees—may well become much tighter.
The result could be absolute
commercialization.
The symbolic value of joining
the information highway
This goes to show that the
requirements of different groups of users,
and particularly groups of former users,
are not necessarily the same. The more
commercial the network becomes, t h e
more it strays from its free and interactive
origins, the more likely certain users will
be turned off.A different group of users,
on the other hand, might switch off were
it to remain chaotic and technical.
Certain trends may help to bridge this
g a p.The number and breadth of Internet
resources is still growing,as is the quantity
of local content made outside the United
S t a t e s.Simple text message services sent
via low-speed telecoms—the so-called
“information dirt track”—could also
speed the take-up of the Internet
throughout the developing world,e v a d i n g
the costly trap of commercial,h i g h - s p e e d
service providers.
But a whole set of premises about the
exponential increase in use of the Internet
and the loyalty of Internet users are under
threat.At present,the symbolic value of
having Internet access is mainly perceived
as a sign of inclusion in an unspecified,
high-technology future. Its rejection can
be seen to imply a refusal of the
i n t i m i d a t i n g, exhausting pace of
technological and social innovation.The
Internet may travel to space,but it still has
convincing to do on Earth. ■
Internet users in the world (millions), 1990-2000
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
2.6 4.4 6.9 9.4 16 34
56
92
145
257
385
Some may be switching off, but the Internet is attracting steadily growing numbers.
