I
n 1998,the University of California at Berkeley
concluded a $25 million, five-year agreement
with the Swiss company Novartis that has come
to be regarded as a watershed in the relationship
of industry with higher education.
For the first time, the work of an entire univer-
sity department,not just that of its individual mem-
bers contracting independently, was to be under-
written by a multinational company, with  interests
in health care, agribusiness and nutrition.
The corporation, through the Novartis A g r i-
cultural Discovery Institute, newly set up in La
Jolla,California,was to provide roughly one-third
of the budget of the university’s Department of
Plant and Microbial Biology for five years. In return,
the Swiss company won an unprecedented privilege:
the first right to negotiate a license to one-third of
the patentable discoveries made in any of the
department’s laboratories.
Was this a sellout or an inspired coup? Industrial
sponsorship of academic research was nothing new;
by 1998, nine percent of all research at American
universities was sponsored by corporations, a total
of $2 billion as compared with the $13 billion spent
by the federal government that year. But where
faculty members or research teams had made grant
proposals individually for funding to underwrite
their work,this agreement appeared to constitute
the plundering of public resources by a private cor-
poration.
Shopping around for
optimal conditions
The university’s need to reassess its sources of
revenue was recognized in 1993,when Chancellor
Chang-Ling Tien set up a Biotechnology Planning
Board to look into long-term relationships with
industry. The idea was to tap into the universities’
right to license their inventions, first granted by the
Bayh-Dole Act of 1980.
According to Gordon Rausser, an agricultural
economist who was dean of the College of Natural
Resources during the negotiations, the panel,w h i c h
brought members of the university together with
more than a dozen representatives from private
industry, spun its wheels for a few years, failing to
attract sponsors. Since the 1960s, federal funding for
the agricultural sciences remained essentially flat,
while medical and engineering schools have taken
an increasing proportion of the spoils nationally.
“The question we faced was: How do you go
about positioning yourself to advance your inter-
e s t s ? ” Rausser says.Rather than go out begging, t h e
university set out what it considered its optimal
conditions for a partnership. Several companies
expressed interest, some of which wanted to be
able to cherry-pick scientists whose work might be
ripe for commercial application. Only Novartis was
willing to allow the faculty the degree of intellectual
freedom it was looking for, or as the agreement
puts it, “unrestricted funds to support general,n o n -
targeted research.”
In return, the Agricultural Discovery Institute
was granted a 30-day review period to take a first
look at research coming out of the department
before it was published, and a further 90 days to
decide whether to request that the university pursue
a patent protection on it.Brian Wright,a Berkeley
agricultural economist who has worked on intellec-
tual property, points out that the rights to first nego-
tiation under the agreement does not give the com-
pany the right to buy,“only the right to pay enough
so that the university’s willing not to offer it to any-
body else.”This was hardly giving up the store.
S C H O L A R S  A T  R I S K
VICKY ELLIOTT
JOURNALIST BASED IN SAN FRANCISCO



Who calls the tune?
A landmark “strategic alliance” clinched by the University of California
caused an uproar in the academic world, but for a rising generation
of scientists, the deal probably contains what the future will be made of
1 . THE MONEY GAME
Bioengineered crops: a windfall for agricultural faculties?

Such distinctions were lost in the furor following
the announcement of the agreement,given the cli-
mate of public resistance to bioengineered crops.
Advocates of ecologically sustainable agriculture in
particular were outraged by what they felt to be an
institutional endorsement of biotechnology.
Pies were thrown at two of the principals and the
Students for Responsible Research coalition
denounced the agreement’s “narrow focus on profit -
oriented and controversial biotechnological
r e s e a r c h .” B e r k e l e y ’s Academic Senate fie r c e l y
debated whether the agreement had been too hur-
riedly pushed through and how it might compromise
academic integrity.
One of the agreement’s features that most
rankled in Berkeley was that two Novartis repre-
sentatives would sit on a five-person committee
that would decide how to allocate the funds for
research every year. But Steven Briggs, who heads
the La Jolla Institute, since renamed the To r r e y
Mesa Research Institute, notes that this provision
was included at the request of the faculty, not the
c o m p a n y.Rausser argues that it
was conceived as a way to gain
industry intelligence into whe-
ther comparable research
might already be under way in
the private sector.
Funding the
unexpected
According to department
chair Andrew Ja c k s o n , the two
Novartis representatives essen-
tially concurred in the first years of the agreement
with decisions reached by the faculty. “I don’t feel
t h e r e ’s any problem with academic freedom at all,”
he says. Paradoxically, the Novartis deal gave the
faculty leeway to pursue imaginative projects in
basic science for which they might not otherwise
have been able to secure fin a n c i n g. Little room
now remains in the allocation of federal revenue for
“funding the unexpected,” as one emeritus pro-
fessor put it. Given the intense competition for
f u n d s,a conservatism prevails on the national review
boards that favours experiments that are not likely
to fail.
The members of the department were at liberty
not to take part in the agreement:of 30,one opted
out and two abstained on principle. Many faculty
members are grateful for the chance to pursue work
that federal agencies might not have funded. “ Th i s
is a godsend,” says Loy Volkman,an insect virolo-
g i s t . “ We have poor funding from the state, a n d
have to find up to 70 percent elsewhere.And usually,
the payer gets to call the tune.”
The agreement allows the university unusual
freedom in negotiating the patents it would retain.
The University of Washington’s arrangement with
M o n s a n t o, by comparison,allows the company both
to file the patent and to see it through to publication,
an abdication of control that Berkeley would never
assent to, according to Carol Mimura,of its Office
of Technology Licensing.
A mousetrap or
sign of the times?
Since the agreement was reached, Syngenta (as
this branch of Novartis was renamed) has optioned
the rights to seven patent applications, of which
four arose from projects funded in part by the La
Jolla Institute, and three were solely funded by it.
A younger generation of scientists, aware that
their working lives will call upon them to operate
both in and out of the ivory tower, appears to have
made peace with the deal.“ I t ’s a sign of the times,”
says Michael Goodin,a post-doctoral student.“ Th i s
is the environment we will be operating in. Th e
only other resource is public funding, and it’s not
there.”
At the annual retreats held by the institute,
both faculty and graduate stu-
dents report that they have
been surprised by how freely
ideas can be exchanged with
outside scientists.N e v e r t h e l e s s,
at hearings in California’s state
capitol last year, D e m o c r a t i c
Senator Tom Hayden charac-
terized the agreement as “ u s u r-
pation of democracy by the bio-
tech industry,” and Senator
Steven Peace, chairman of the
budget committee, raised the issue of accountability,
denouncing the reporting requirements built into
the agreement as “a mousetrap that nobody from a
distance can ever audit.”
An internal university committee was to have
filed a report on the agreement halfway through its
c o u r s e ; it is unlikely to be completed before the
fourth year.
Meanwhile, because Syngenta is in theory free
to revoke its funding at a year’s notice, the faculty
have continued to apply for other funding.The jury
is still out on whether Syngenta is likely to have
gained much more from the agreement than an
observation post from which to keep abreast of the
latest developments in a world-class university.
With the shrinking of the economy and the com-
p a n y ’s investment in transgenic crops now in ques-
tion, it seems unlikely that the agreement will be
renewed.
The hopes of generous financing for universities
from biotech companies that seemed likely a few
years ago now appear misplaced. The Novartis
agreement may itself go down as yet another
inconclusive “ e x p e r i m e n t ” in the university’s 
history. ■

Paradoxically,
the deal gave
the faculty
leeway to pursue
imaginative projects
in basic science.
