LESTER M. SALAMON
DIRECTOR OFTHE CENTERFOR CIVIL SOCIETY STUDIES AT JOHNS HOPKINS
UNIVERSITY, UNITED STATES



An “a s s o c i a t i o n a l” r e v o l u t i o n
The powers of free markets and states are often said to have spelt the end for
civil society. Not so, argues the author: the non-profit sector is booming,
alongside voluntary action
T
he new spectre which is haunting the devel-
oped world is not that of the proletariat,
which Karl Marx called to our attention some
150 years ago.R a t h e r, it is the lonely bowler,
as described by Robert D. Putnam in his
book B owling alone:The collapse and revival of A m e r-
ican community—the alienated individual cut off from
his or her social roots, lacking bonds of trust and rec-
i p r o c i t y, and forced to function in a universe of all
against all without those “habits of the heart,”as A l e x i s
de Tocqueville called them, which make human exis-
tence tolerable.
Accusing the welfare state
This situation has been traced in some accounts to
the rise of the state and the more formal parts of the
voluntary sector, which have supposedly crowded out
informal voluntary activity and left it without a clear
social function.A struggle is said to be raging between
two epic foes: on one side the organized structures of
social existence, c h i e fly the state and formal social
organizations;and on the other the self-organization
of individuals, with the former emerging victorious in
the world’s more developed regions, while true citizen
self-organization holds its own,mainly in less devel-
oped regions.
In reality, we seem to be in the midst of a “global
associational revolution”—a massive upsurge of orga-
nized private voluntary activity, of structured citizen
action outside the boundaries of the market and the
s t a t e. It may well prove to be as momentous a feature
of the late 20th century as the rise of the nation-state
was in the late 19th century.
Why is it happening now? The answer lies in four
crises and two revolutions.
The first of these impulses is the perceived crisis
of the modern welfare state, the growing sense that in
Western Europe and North America,it has become
o v e r l o a d e d , and expectations have outrun the
capacity of state-delivered welfare to deliver. Fa r
from simply protecting individuals against unrea-
sonable risk,the welfare state stands accused of sti-
fling initiative, absolving people of personal respon-
sibility and encouraging dependence.
A crisis of development has arisen alongside this.
The oil shocks of the 1970s and the recession of the
early 1980s dramatically changed the outlook for
developing countries.In sub-Saharan A f r i c a ,We s t e r n
Asia and parts of Latin America,average per capita
incomes began to fall. One result has been a growing
consensus about the limitations of the state as an
agent of development, and a new-found interest in
“assisted self-reliance” or “participatory develop-
m e n t ,” an aid strategy that stresses the engagement of
grassroots energies through NGOs.
A worsening global environmental crisis—fuelled
partly by the continuing poverty of developing coun-
t r i e s, and partly by the wasteful practices of the
wealthy—has also stimulated citizens into taking
action on their own.
Fi n a l l y, the collapse of the socialist experiments in
Central and Eastern Europe has deepened scepticism
about the abilities of government to satisfy the full
range of human needs.While the promise of socialism
had long been suspect, the economic regression of the
mid-1970s helped destroy what limited legitimacy
the communist system had retained.This failure ush-
ered in a search for new ways to satisfy unmet needs,
leading not only to the formation of market-oriented
cooperative enterprises, but also experimentation
with a host of NGOs.
International Year
of Volunteers
In Lucknow, India,embroiderers belonging to the Self-

Beyond these four crises, two further develop-
ments also explain the recent surge of third-sector
organizations.
The first is the dramatic revolution in communi-
cations that took place during the 1970s and 1980s.Th e
widespread dissemination of the computer, fib r e -
optic cable, fax,television and satellites opened the
world’s most remote areas to the communications
links required for mass organization and concerted
action.This development was accompanied by a sig-
nificant increase in education and literacy. Between
1970 and 1985,adult literacy rates in the developing
world rose from 43 to 60 percent.
Awakening the global bourgeoisie
The combined expansion of literacy and com-
munications has made it far easier for people to orga-
nize and mobilize. Authoritarian regimes that had
successfully controlled their own communications
networks have grown powerless to stop the flow of
information through satellite dishes and faxes. I s o l a t e d
activists can more easily strengthen their resolve,
exchange experiences, and maintain links with sym-
pathetic colleagues at home or abroad.
Fi n a l l y, the economic expansion of the 1960s and
early 1970s produced a new global bourgeoisie which
has helped promote third-sector growth. During this
period the world economy grew five percent per year,
with all regions sharing in the expansion—in fact the
growth rate of the USSR, East European and devel-
oping countries exceeded that of industrial market
economies. In Latin America,Asia and Africa, this
growth helped create a sizeable urban middle class
frustrated by the lack of real economic opportunity
and often, real political participation. When eco-
nomic conditions deteriorated after the 1970s oil
shock,these new elites turned to NGOs in response,
providing much of the leadership that has fuelled
third-sector growth.
A wish-list
for the non-profit sector
The result has been the emergence of an orga-
n i z e d ,p r i v a t e, n o n - p r o fit sector that has quietly taken
its place as a major economic, social and political
force in nations around the world. Work done in 22
countries for the Johns Hopkins Comparative Non-
p r o fit Sector Project has revealed that non-profit
organizations accounted for five percent of the work-
f o r c e, not including the involvement of an estimated
11 million full-time unpaid volunteers.It also revealed
t h a t , as a general rule, the larger the non-profit sector,
the more extensive the level of volunteering, under-
lining the fact that voluntarism is in some sense a
social and not just an individual act.
What all of this suggests is the need for a new
approach to address public problems.Two paradigms
have dominated our thinking up to now. The fir s t
stresses sole reliance on the market,and the other sole
reliance on the state. But the market model, though it
has recently staged a remarkable recovery,e s s e n t i a l l y
collapsed in the Great Depression of 1929.The public
sector model fell with the Berlin Wa l l .The temptation
will be strong among third sector activists to advance
the “non-profit sector” as the panacea, and to urge
complete reliance upon it.
Without denying the vital contribution that non-
p r o fit institutions can make, we should be wary of
claiming more for the sector than it can deliver. We
have learned over the past 100 years that today’s
problems are too complex for any one sector to handle.
What this suggests is that the appropriate para-
digm for the 21st century is one of partnership and a
politics of collaboration—i.e. a “new governance”
that emphasizes collaboration, not separate action, b y
the different sectors as the best hope for achieving
meaningful progress.This is the true meaning of the
“civil society” about which we hear so much today—
not a sector, but a relationship among sectors, and
between them and citizens, in which all are actively
engaged in addressing public problems.
Voluntarism has an important part to play in
achieving such civic engagement.It can propel insti-
tutions into engaging in such collaborative efforts
and can serve as the social grease to lubricate the
resulting cooperation. Given the suspicions that often
exist on all sides, this will not be an easy future to
achieve or to manage. But it is the one that seems to
me to offer the greatest prospects. ■
