T
FRANCISCA PETROVICH
CHILEAN JOURNALIST



C h i l e : a judge steps in
Are illegally copied books like forged banknotes and should they be destroyed?
Judges, authors and publishers in Chile are all taking a stand in a heated debate
he basketball court in a Santiago police
station was piled high a few months ago
with over 150,000 books, galley-proofs
and printing materials—all of them
illegal.Seized in a series of police raids
in three Chilean cities ordered by Carlos
Escobar, a deputy judge of the Second
Criminal Court, the collection marked
the biggest defeat yet for the country’s
pirate book industry.
But these impounded books only
created a new problem: what should be
done with them? Judge Escobar took
the initiative, ordering that they be dis-
tributed to the city’s poorest neighbou-
rhoods and other parts of the country.
“I did so because a judge is free to
decide what happens to seized items,
and if they’d stayed under court control,
their condition could have deteriorated,”
he explained.“Our country is poor and
there’s an urgent need for our children
to read. Th a t ’s why I think burning
books is an outrage.”
Just a bargain or the only
road to reading?
The judge’s decision sparked very
different reactions. Most people thought
it was a good idea. Some authors, such as
journalist Patricia Ve r d u g o — w h o s e
many books investigating the Pinochet
dictatorship have been widely pirated—
thought the judge was wrong. “ Wh a t
right does he have to give away things
that don’t belong to him?”she asked in
an interview with the daily newspaper
La Te r c e r a.“ These books should be des-
t r o y e d , just like confiscated drugs are
destroyed.”
Her colleague Hernán Rivera Lete-
l i e r, a popular Chilean author translated
into several languages, does not agree.
Pirated books, he argues, are a way to
reach more readers.“I’m not siding with
the pirates but with the readers,”he says.
“The people who buy one of my books
in the street aren’t the same as those
w h o ’d buy it in a bookshop.Th e y ’re less
well-off and can’t afford the official
prices.” Not true, replies Bartolo Ortiz,
general manager of the Planeta en Chile
publishing house. “ I ’ve seen very ele-
gant-looking people buying books on
the street. I think reading is just less
important for them compared to other
things.”
Whichever stance is adopted, o n e
fact is certain: the publishers are going to
appeal Escobar’s decision.
During the year 2000, a total of
308,000 pirated copies of 400 books put
out by various publishers were seized in
Chile. “We reckon we lost $25 million
last year,” says Eduardo Castillo, presi-
dent of the Chilean Book Association.
“ This country is top of the league in
terms of pirated books.”
The publication of pirated books in
Chile grew out of the need for under-
cover political activity. During the 1973-
89 military dictatorship, for example,
the Chilean Communist Party publi-
shed Che Guevara’s diaries and other
banned material. Various people
recently interviewed in the book
industry insist that certain unnamed
employees of lawful publishing fir m s
themselves deal out original copies of
books to the forgers, obviously in return
for money.
Bringing the government
to heel
Castillo disagrees, noting that publi-
shers have joined together to investi-
g a t e, file lawsuits and gather evidence in
an effort to punish the guilty. P e d r o
B o s c h , a lawyer who works for Editorial
S u d a m e r i c a n a , says that in two years of
i n v e s t i g a t i o n s, the firm has filed 60 com-
plaints resulting in charges against
200 people, 50 trials and the seizure of
over 30,000 books. “In this way we’ve
been able to find out who the pirates
a r e, build a database and curb the
damage being done,” he says. “But the
market isn’t going to go away.”
Au t h o r s, p u b l i s h e r s, booksellers and
judges at least agree that the govern-
ment has so far paid little interest in
taking a firm stand against book piracy.
They nevertheless hope an imminent
report commissioned by Chilean Presi-
dent Ricardo Lagos from the Book
Association may change all that.
M e a n w h i l e,on a corner of Santiago’s
busy Avenida Providencia, a street
vendor asks his assistant to fetch some
more Harry Potter books.She goes off to
get them from her makeshift storeroom,
hidden behind an ice-cream cart.I was
interested in one book and asked the
price. It was $6, less than a third of the
price in a bookshop. She said she sold
between $35 and $55 worth of books
each day.
The average monthly salary of most
Chileans is about $625. I told the vendor
it was a pirated version of the book. S h e
nodded and asked me:“Are you going to
buy it?” ■
P I R AT E S AND THE PAPER CHASE
The book was a third
of the store price.
I told the vendor it 
was a pirated version
of Harry Potter.
She nodded and 
asked me,
“Are you going 
to buy it?”
