For a long time, Belgium has had everything it takes to suc-
ceed in the highly lucrative African art trade. Dealers like
the country’s ideal location in the middle of Europe, long-
standing links with Africa, first-rate specialists, smooth-run-
ning distribution channels—and inefficient police controls due
to a legal vacuum.
Nigeria and Mali are unsuccessfully trying to protect their ter-
racotta sculptures, Burkina Faso its stone statuettes, the
people living on the shores of Lake Chad their miniatures.
O d d l y, although it is illegal to export these works fro m
Africa, it is lawful to import them into Belgium, which has no
laws against the practice.
Brussels used to boast about this outstanding situation.
Until very re c e n t l y, speculation on the finest examples of Nok
statuary was in full swing in the city, and well-informed
collectors on a narrow downtown street examined rare
pieces stolen from the Kinshasa Museum after the fall of the
Mobutu regime.
H o w e v e r, a story that never should have affected Belgium sent
shock waves through the little kingdom. In April 2000, the Paris
daily newspaper L i b é r a t i o n disclosed that the new museum
of first arts at the Louvre had acquired two Nok statuettes
f rom Nigeria with an illicit provenance. At first, this was an aff a i r
between France and Africa. But soon it was learned that the sta-
tuettes had transited through Brussels. At the end of the same
y e a r, a report by RT B F, Belgium’s public television network,
showed the workings of the Brussels market, sparking a public
outcry. A senator, François Roelants du Vivier, questioned the
g o v e rnment. After 30 years of indiff e rence, which encouraged
unbridled trade, officials finally decided to ratify the UNESCO
Convention.
In explaining why it had taken so long to do so, the ministry
of foreign affairs pointed to institutional complexities. First,
he explained, the federal system has to decide which autho-
rity has competence in this area. “I wouldn’t say,” the minister
replied to the senator, “that [this wait-and-see attitude] was
the best decision our country ever made.” ■
* Director of the “Nok in stock” TV documentary made for
RTBF



MICHEL HUCORNE*: BELGIUM’S WAKE-UP CALL
