P. SAINATH
INDIANJOURNALISTAND AUTHOR



None so blind as those
who will not see
Why don’t stories on starvation and clean drinking water make it onto the front page of South Asian
newspapers? An Indian journalist rails against the growing rift in his country between mass media
and mass reality, a trend driven by increasing corporate control 
t took the Supreme Court of the land to put
hunger back on the front pages of the
Indian press in early May this year.Which
is surprising.Wh o ’d have thought any pub-
lication needs to be told that hunger is still
a story in this country and the rest of South
Asia?
I n d i a , Pakistan and Bangladesh have all
declared food surpluses in the past two or
three years. Between them,the neighbours
have a surplus of 50 million tonnes of
food—but they are home to half the world’s
hungry. Unemployment and hunger have
increased in the same decade that regis-
tered the surpluses.
Yet few in the media thought the
paradox worth pursuing. I n d i a , with 45 mil-
lions tonnes of unsold excess stock of grain,
was bursting with stories waiting to be told.
Most of them are still waiting. From the
m i d - 1 9 9 0 s, evidence of farmers commit-
ting suicide in large numbers began to pour
in from several states, particularly A n d h r a
Pradesh in the south. In 1996-97, f o r
example, over 400 farmers in a handful of
districts in Andhra Pradesh killed them-
selves, mainly because they were too bur-
dened by debt and unable to feed their
f a m i l i e s.A few stray reports acknowledged
t h i s, but no national newspaper actually
put it on the front page. Recent govern-
ment figures show that in Anantapur, just
one district of A n d h r a , 1,826 people, m a i n l y
farmers with very small holdings of two
acres or less, committed suicide between
1997 and 2000.A g a i n , the media has chosen
to look the other way,allowing the author-
ities to manipulate records of what caused
the deaths.
By the end of 2000, it was clear India
was facing its most serious agricultural crisis
in over two decades. Not a single national
newspaper assigned a full-time correspon-
dent to report on this crucial development.
Never mind that hundreds of millions in
India still depend on agriculture for a living.
Fi n a l l y, the Peoples’ Union for Civil
Liberties (PUCL) of Rajasthan state
resorted to a public interest litigation in
the Supreme Court of India on the issue of
h u n g e r, drawing attention to the paradox of
bursting granaries and empty stomachs. I n
early May, the Court served notices to six
state governments, directing them to
explain why things were going so
w r o n g. Th a t , fin a l l y, made it to the front
p a g e s. But nobody wrote about the crisis, o r
went into the field to talk to the poor about
their misery. They concentrated only on
the fact that the court had asked the states
to explain themselves.
Glaring
contradictions
Over the last decade, the Indian press
has been obsessed with the most trivial
topics. Journalists are more interested in
telling the world that India’s burgeoning
new middle class finally has access to
McDonald’s burgers and the latest inter-
national designer labels. Or writing about
the proliferation of weight-loss clinics and
beauty contests. These are the topics that
generate advertising revenue, not un-
pleasant stories about starvation deaths
and the lack of clean drinking water, even
in the heart of large cities. India’s contra-
dictions are well-reflected in the press. On
the one hand, you have overweight urban-
ites paying thousands of rupees to shed
weight at clinics, while on the other, thou-
sands starve to death. The media got the
first story.They missed the second.
Examples of the short-sightedness that
a f flicts much of South Asian journalism
a b o u n d .Dozens of cover stories appeared
on the automobile revolution, as India lib-
eralized the automobile industry in 1991.
More and more rich people bought cars to
add to those they already owned.In 1998,
there were still just five million registered

Picking the leaves that make beedis for a pittance:does anyone care?

vehicles in a nation of one billion.The real
s t o r i e s,on growing pollution and the lack of
mass rapid transit systems which India
direly needs to transport those who will
never be able to afford cars, were rarely
told.And there were no stories about the
fact that bicycle sales, a reliable indicator of
rural well-being, fell sharply.
There are occasional bleeding-heart
stories on the sorrows of the poor, but the
newspapers fail to make the connection
between poverty and the policies driving
it—what I call “market fundamentalism”
and its attendant structural adjustment pro-
grammes.
Why is there such a lack of interest in
crucial issues like poverty? What accounts
for the disconnection between mass media
and mass reality, and why do the largest
sections of the Indian press  fail to cover the
most important stories? 
The grip of press barons
The 1990s have witnessed the decline
of the press as a public forum.This can be
attributed largely to the relentless corpo-
rate takeover of the Indian press and the
concentration of ownership in a few
h a n d s. Around seven major companies
account for the bulk of circulation in the
powerful English language press. In the
giant city of Bombay,with over 14 m i l l i o n
people, The Times of India has a stran-
glehold on the English readership. It also
dominates the Hindi and Marathi lan-
guage press.
The Ti m e s is clear and unequivocal in its
June 2001 -The UNESCO Courier 45
Journalist and author P. Sainath won Amnesty International’s first-ever Global Human Rights
Journalism prize in June 2000. This follows a dozen other prestigious awards, including the
European Commission’s Lorenzo Natali Journalism Award in 1994.
Sainath received international recognition after he spent two and a half years bicycling through
India’s poorest districts, filing reports about a class of people the press seldom deigns to write
about. That work formed the basis of his landmark book, Everybody Loves a Good Drought
(Penguin Books, 1996), a devastating portrait of how the Indian government’s development
policies have gone awry.
The book, which has been translated into three Indian languages as well as Swedish and
Finnish, is now in its eighth printing. It remained the number one non-fiction bestseller by an
Indian author for over two years.
Covering India’s ten poorest districts, Sainath traversed close to a 100,000 kilometres—includ-
ing 5,000 on foot—lugging a heavy typewriter (there was never enough electricity around to
recharge a laptop battery).
Despite their extremely critical content,several stories from his journey have been used as case
studies for trainees in India’s elite administrative service, the IAS. Other project landmarks
include an oral archive of taped interviews with people from the bottom one percent of society
talking about themselves and a unique visual archive of thousands of photographs of the Indi-
an poor at work.
Sainath is currently writing a series of reports on the Dalits, formerly called untouchables, who
remain India’s most marginalized and discriminated-against people.
When not on the road,Sainath teaches at Bombay’s Sophia Polytechnic.He has been a visiting
professor at universities in Australia,Canada and the U.S. ■
ABOUT THE AU T H O R
In the state of Orissa,two men carry their severely injured brother on a bamboo bed to the nearest hospital, 40 kms away.

priorities. Beauty contests make the front
page. Farmers’ suicides don’t. Sometimes
reality forces changes, but this is the excep-
tion,not the rule. Most other large Indian
newspapers are eagerly following T h e
Ti m e s ’ p h i l o s o p h y, inspired by the press
baron Rupert Murdoch:a newspaper is a
business like any other, not a public forum.
Monopoly ownership has imposed a set of
values entirely at odds with the traditional
role of the Indian press.
An illustrious record
H i s t o r i c a l l y, the press in India has been
very strong at covering the issues it today
tends to ignore. Indian journalism was a
child of the nation’s freedom struggle.
Mahatma Gandhi,Jawaharlal Nehru and a
host of other freedom fighters doubled up
as journalists and publishers, bringing out
their own newspapers. These and many
others plied a radical journalism that con-
stantly put the British Raj on the defensive.
The journalists of the 1920s, 1930s and 1940s
may have been very ill-equipped, and some
would call them pamphleteers. Yet, from
within a very narrow press, they reflected
much wider concerns than journalists do
today.
Now, with rare exceptions, the greatest
Indian papers are run increasingly on cor-
porate lines. Profits and advertising do not
rhyme with socially-relevant news. This is
r e flected in the “ b e a t s ” (or portfolios) of
journalists within newspapers. The Indian
press covers far more than the basic poli-
tics, sports and commerce stories it concen-
trated on a decade ago. We now have full-
time correspondents for fashion, g l a m o u r,
design,even eating out! One non-financial
daily has 11 correspondents covering busi-
ness in a society where less than two percent
of the population have investments of any
kind.Beats related to covering the lives of
ordinary people, h o w e v e r, are vanishing at a
rapid rate. Correspondents covering educa-
tion are often loaded with several other unre-
lated beats because education is not consid-
ered a weighty enough topic.And no paper
has a full-time poverty, unemployment, or
housing correspondent.
Not surprisingly, the media has proved
increasingly inept at covering development
i s s u e s. The more elitist it gets, the less it
will be able to achieve this.The equation is
s i m p l e : the more corporate a newspaper
becomes in its ownership and culture, the
less space there is for public interest in it.
This is explained cogently in Ben
Bagdikian’s book, The Media Monopoly,
which shows the incredible power of media
conglomerates across the globe.A handful
of them, like Rupert Murdoch’s Newscorp
and AO L - Time Warner decide much of
what most nations see, hear or read.
When the media is driven by no higher
cause than maximization of profit, it can
seldom serve the public interest.When cor-
ralled by corporate interest, journalism gets
d e v a s t a t e d . And in the world order of
market fundamentalism, the suggestion
that anything could be fundamentally
wrong with neo-liberal economics, w i t h
globalization or privatization,is heresy. If
Gandhi were alive today, he would be
quickly denounced as a dangerous left-
wing loony.
The 1990s have witnessed a rapid
growth of inequality the world over, as suc-
cessive UN Human Development Reports
have shown us. This may occasionally be
reported in the press. But questioning the
social and economic philosophies and
frameworks that generate this inequality is
just not done.
Signalling society’s weakness
Ye t , even allowing for the limits
imposed by corporatization, the Indian
press can do much more.
Journalists must place people and their
needs at the centre of stories, and accord
better coverage to the rural political
p r o c e s s.They should discuss political action
and class confli c t , not the politicking. Q u i t e
a few good journalists hold back from this
t e r r i t o r y, f e a r i n g, perhaps justifia b l y, b e i n g
branded as “ p o l i t i c a l ” (read leftist). Ye t ,
evading reality (the largest number of
absolute poor live in India) helps no one.A
society that does not know itself cannot
cope.
More stories on the rights and entitle-
ments of the poor could help. The press
can and does make a difference when it
f u n c t i o n s. Governments do react and
respond to the press, if the press tries hard
enough to be heard. Take the example of
the stories on starvation deaths in Kala-
h a n d i ,B i h a r, in the 1980s, which forced two
prime ministers to visit the place.
Decades ago, commenting on the
dismal role of the American press in a mis-
carriage of justice,an attorney in the United
States said they failed “to signal the weak-
ness in society.”That remains a fine defin-
ition of the minimum duty of a decent press:
to signal the weaknesses in society. It is a
duty the Indian press increasingly fails to
p e r f o r m ,but must try to.At least there are
some journalists who believe they should,
and they must push harder to signal these
w e a k n e s s e s. Only then can we hope for
meaningful development. ■
