THE ELECTRONIC CAP
Paul Kennedy
British historian Paul Kennedy 
is the J. Richardson Dilworth 
Professor of History at Yale 
University (U.S.A.). He is the 
author of a widely acclaimed 
work, The Rise and Fall o f the 
Great Powers: Economic 
Change and M ilita ry Conflict 
from 1500-2000 (Random 
House, 1987), in which he 
analysed the factors 
underlying the rise and fall of 
empires over the past five 
centuries. In the final chapter 
he evoked the coming collapse 
of the USSR, and also 
speculated about the decline 
of the United States as a great 
power and the rise of Japan 
and China. Notable among his 
other works are Preparing fo r 
the Twenty-first Century (1993) 
and Strategy and Diplomacy, 
1870-1945 (1983).
The present text has been 
extracted from Prof. Kennedy's 
contribution to a series of 
"21st Century Talks" held at 
Unesco  Headquarters in Paris 
on November 6,1999.
■ In the United States, business journals, market gurus, economics professors and highly
I  paid consultants talk incessantly about the coming global boom, the transformation 
|  of the workplace, the technology revolution and the knowledge explosion. It is 
implied that the world is slowly becoming a reproduction of Silicon Valley. It is asserted 
that this is the future. But instead of swallowing this hype, perhaps we should pull 'back 
and look at the globe as a. Whole.
The pessimistic view would be to point out what is currently occurring in Kosovo, West 
Africa, Rwanda, Chechnya, Kashmir and elsewhere. We might also follow Robert Kaplan 
in the trips he describes in  To the Ends o f the Earth1, only to discover that m uch of 
humanity is headed for disaster and self-destruction. I  do not wish to be as negative as that. 
However, I would like to offer a caution to those who portray globalization in an uncrit­
ical and overly enthusiastic manner.
Each day I send and receive up to 40 messages on the Internet. From  my home I can 
search the web sites of the World Bank and the U nited Nations to find new data, read the 
NmYork Times and check the 9 million book titles in the Yale University Library. The Internet 
gives me, my students and my children immediate access to knowledge, and the knowl­
edge explosion is at the heart of the modernization and globalization of world society.
One in three Americans are regular, daily In ternet users. Even within American 
society, the computer and e-mail have widened the gap between educated people (chiefly 
whites and Asians) and the less educated (chiefly black Americans). This gap will be felt 
in every aspect o f  life; whether it is in opportunities, potential, education or job-hunting. 
The United States will be divided into two groups, one which is computer-literate and the 
other which is not.
This phenom enon has been replicated at the international level. T he m ost im portant* 
fact is that we are in the midst of a technology revolution that seems less likely to close the 
gap between rich and poor Countries than to widen the gap even further.
The technology revolution and the communications revolution still bypass billions of 
hum an beings. From  UNESCO’S standpoint, the Internet may have more influence than any 
single medium upon global educational and cultural developments in the coming century. 
Yet only 2.4 per cent of the world’s population is .on the Internet, or one person out of 40. 
In Southeast Asia, only one person in 200 is linked to the Internet. In the Arab states, only 
one person in 500 has Internet access, while in Africa only one person in a 1,000 K |an 
Internet user. This situation will not change as long as those lands lack electricity, telephone 
wires and infrastructure. They cannot afford either computers or the expensive software 
they require. I f  knowledge indeed equals power, the developing world may have less real 
power nowadays than it did 30 years ago, before the Internet was developed.
If  we want to work toward a knowledge-based society in the coming century, over at 
least the next 10 years we need to make.fl jconcerted effort to bring poorer societies into 
the system of electronic communications. This effort will need to be coordinated by the 
World Bank, the U N  Development Programme, UNESCO, the N G O  community and the 
global business community.
The alternative is to perpetuate a world which is fundamentally undemocratic and struc­
turally unsound. If we do nothing, if we let the knowledge explosion intensify in technology- 
rich societies while poorer societies fall further and further behind, the growing gap 
between haves and have-nots will lead ^w idesp read  discontent and threaten any prospect 
of global harmony and international understanding. This is the most significant challenge 
we face. We have no time to waste in responding. ■
1. Robert Kaplan’s book suggests that in most of the Third World conditions will get worse, largely 
because of the effects of overpopulation, environmental deterioration and social breakdown.
