A radical change is underway in North Africa and the Middle East:fer-
tility rates may still be just above three children per woman, but they
are falling rapidly. In Lebanon, Tunisia and Iran, the rate has already
dropped below the reproductive level of 2.1 children per woman.A l g e r i a ,
Morocco, Libya and Egypt follow close behind.
A major divide no longer separates both shores of the Mediterranean.In
Tu n i s, the figure stands at 1.55 children per woman, the same as in many
European cities. Muslim culture can no longer be called an obstacle to
modern demographic behaviour. I r a n , under an Islamic regime, w i t n e s s e d
the most dramatic change of all—a drop from 6.4 children per woman in
1986 to 2.06 in 1998.In 12 years, the country travelled the distance the
West took more than a century to cover.
Special circumstances such as civil confli c t , wa r s, embargoes and the
economic crisis have certainly contributed to reducing fertility rates. But
the decline has more to do with irreversible worldwide trends—the
growth of towns and cities, more children (especially girls) in school and
the increase in service sector jobs.
The trend is undermining the patriarchal order that has governed family
structures since time immemorial and left its mark on political allegiances.
It rests on two pillars—obedience of the younger to the older and of women
to men. Lower fertility rates challenge the fir s t : an only child has no
younger sibling to watch over.
The second, still part of legislation based on the s h a r i a l a w, is threatened
by changes in society. Girls have better access to education and are mar-
rying later.Through work, they’re entering a world of men outside their own
f a m i l y.And there are more single women—something hitherto unknown.
The advent of the two-child family does not mean that the days of zero
population growth are here. Birth rates were at their height between
1980 and 1990 and their spectacular fall since then will not be felt on the
labour market until between 2005 and 2015.
But there is cause for optimism. For a very brief moment in history, 2 5 - y e a r-
old adults are in an exceptionally privileged position. They are more
numerous than ever to share the burden of caring for their elders. Given
their low fertility rates, they can count on their savings and investments
going towards improving their living standards, rather than being absorbed
by population growth as in the past.
But to convert this theoretical advantage into something concrete, this
generation must have a chance to put savings aside, which implies having
w o r k . In most countries of the region, tremendous improvements in edu-
cation and an increase in the number of graduates have fuelled ambitions.
But all too often,youth find themselves confronted with unemployment,
or forced to opt for jobs that are below their qualifications. ■
* Senior researcher at the French National Institute for Demographic
Research in Paris, author of a recent work on demography in the Arab
world.



PHILIPPE FARGUES*:THE END OF PAT R I A R C H Y ?
TUNE INTO THE “NEW CONSCIENCE OF ISLAM”
