
What happens when you live in a city that’s a travel agent’s dream? You start seeing yourself through
tourist eyes, unless you open your umbrella and follow one of the locals around. Then, the mood shifts,
but the city loses none of its magnetic power
PHOTOS BY TRENT PARKE;TEXT BY DAVID MARR
TRENT PARKE ISAN AUSTRALIAN PHOTOGRAPHERWHOSPENT FIVEYEARS DOCUMENTING SYDNEY STREET LIFE, WHICHRESULTED INHIS BOOK “DREAM LIFE.” DAVID MARR IS A JOURNALISTWITH THE
SYDNEY MORNING HERALD AND AUTHOR OF A BIOGRAPHY OFTHE AUSTRALIANWRITER PATRICK WHITE.



S y d n e y : the beauty
and the vice

Sydney is not the city of sunshine the world imagines it to be.I t ’s a dark town.
A port town.A damp city of heavy downpours and morning fog.Whole sum-
mers can be lost under wet grey skies.Winters are brief but uncomfortable.
Everything travel brochures say about blazing skies and summer heat
is true, of course, but like an aunt with a nasty temper, S y d n e y ’s character
is marked by grim shifts of mood. Winter westerlies cut like a knife. The
sun isn’t seen for days. Rain buckets down.
Stepping into a quasi-divine light upon leaving the Opera House.
Shadows advancing on Eddy Avenue.

Then the umbrellas appear. Even more than London,
Sydney is an umbrella town because it’s all we need against the
w e a t h e r. Overcoats would be wonderful in those few cold
weeks, but in Sydney a good coat is a luxury. Even raincoats
aren’t strictly necessary. You can live and die without one. In
the city we shelter under that most Australian urban detail:
shop awnings. But we all have umbrellas.
Those who have grown up here are not surprised by the
dark, contradictory moods of the place. But something has
changed since the tourists arrived.At first we wondered what
they had come to see. Now, more and more, we see ourselves
through their commercial eyes. Downpours are a breach of
promise. Cold is a civic embarrassment.Poverty and corrup-
tion must be hidden from the outside world here on a few
days’visit.
Sydney has been a corrupt town since the 1790s when sol-
diers guarding the convicts brought rum ships down from
C a l c u t t a . Booze was the currency of the first years of the
c o l o n y.Human failings have been a source of corruption ever
s i n c e :d r i n k ,g a m b l i n g, d r u g s, p r o s t i t u t i o n . . . .Vice has fuelled
both the commerce and religions of the town.
One of the strangest contradictions of this almost-Eden is
the power of preachers and their talk of damnation and the
a p o c a l y p s e.They fear the beauty of the place will corrupt our
souls. Odd prophets appear out of the dark with messages of
fear and hope.They paint their slogans on the walls. Heaven
and hell are just around the corner.S y d n e y ’s light collaborates
in this Old Testament mood: the sun blazing under storm
c l o u d s, or laying gold over asphalt in the early evenings. C o n-
gregations aren’t dwindling here.
Beauty can corrupt. Nothing is more characteristic of
Sydney than the endless commercial pressure to have a slice of
the harbour: a commercial wharf, a beach or a million-dollar
view of the water. From the earliest days of white settlement,
governments have been selling off the harbour. Sydney has per-
fected every way known of turning beauty into cash.
For the citizens of this town, the Bridge and Opera House
have a special meaning.They are known all over the world:
S y d n e y : the beauty and the vice
6 The UNESCO Courier - June 2001
Unfazed,bowlers huddle under their umbrella.
Founded in 1788 when 11 convict-bearing ships of Britain’s first fleet
arrived from England to establish the colony of New South Wa l e s,
Sydney officially became a city in 1842. To d a y, it is a vibrant, m u l t i c u l t u r a l
metropolis, which is home to four million people and over 200 national-
i t i e s. More than a quarter of its residential population was born overseas—
about 28% hail from Asia, 16.5% from Britain and Ireland,16% from
southern Europe and 8.5% from the Middle East, while a further 20% are
children of migrants.
During the 2000 Olympics, held from September 15 to October1,Sydney
and its iconic Harbour seized the world stage, attracting nearly four mil-
lion visitors and 11,000 athletes.A further 3.5 billion television viewers fol-
lowed the Games, dubbed the “best ever”by the president of the Inter-
national Olympic Committee. ■
O LYMPIC CITY
Everything travel brochures
say about blazing skies and
summer heat is true, of
course, but like an aunt with
a nasty temper, Sydney’s
character is marked by grim
shifts of mood.

The silhouette of an ocean liner echoes the profile of the Opera House, whose roof was designed to evoke a ship at full sail.
A solitary couple dwarfed by the Harbour Bridge, an early 1930s construction.

a British steel bridge from the 1930s and a Scandinavian fantasy
conceived in the early 1950s that have become the symbols of
a South Pacific city. But for Sydney people these two are spec-
t a c u l a r, reassuring exceptions to the rule that almost everything
built on the harbour is shabby, done for the worst motives,a n d
fails to live up to what might be the most beautiful port in the
world.
Not that we spend our lives gawping at them.Just as Parisians
live with the Louvre and Cape Towners with Table Mountain,
we live with the Bridge and the Opera House with easy pride.
We put our heads under umbrellas and slosh past in the rain,
aware but not giving them a thought. We ’re happy—even
proud—to leave gawping to the tourists. But then on a winter
day of strong sun we drive across the Bridge, or we arrive at the
Opera House on an autumn evening when the moon is coming
up over the water, and the beauty of the place seems brand new.
But trust Sydney:the mood will change. Thank God. Who
would want to live in the city of travel agents’ dreams? But the
real Sydney is irresistible:dark,shabby and contradictory, full
of strange sights and strange voices. As I write these notes
onan early winter morning, the rain is pouring down.It’s time
to leave for work. I ’ve left my umbrella somewhere—who
knows where? I’m going to get soaked. ■


S y d n e y : the beauty and the vice

When summer storms hit,up go the ubiquitous umbrellas.

Learning to manoeuvre on slippery ground.
