The online wa y
Surfing the United Nations web site one
n i g h t , Nigeria Adedoyin Onasanya ’s
attention was drawn to the slogan of
N e t a i d . o r g : online action against
absolute poverty. “There was a list of projects in
which interested people could work, and with-
out ever having to leave home!,” he recalls.
After enrolling and answering some basic ques-
tions about his skills, experience and areas of
interest, Onasanya became an online volunteer.
Among his most noteworthy achievements has
been the creation of an e-discussion group for
Nigerian development practitioners. He has also
worked for the Horizon Communication project,
which investigates, documents and catalogues
succesful initiatives aimed at combating poverty
and under-development.
Netaid.org was born two years ago through
the joint effort of the United Nations Develop-
ment Programme (UNDP) and Cisco Systems, a
world leader in Internet technology. Its novelty
rests in the way it has exploited information
technology by tailoring it to the limitations as
much as to the wishes of all those people who
want to join in “voluntary work that is not phys-
ical, but online,” as the Filipino Chere Castane-
da puts it. Though financial donations are will-
ingly accepted in a click of the mouse, the most
novel feature of the organization is the way it
joins together people willing to offer their time
and talents with those who need specific help in
developing a project. And it doesn’t matter
where in the world the sides are living.
To take one example, Joanne K. Morse—a
professor at the University of Hampton, Virginia,
and author of science fiction novels—wrote a
bilingual dictionary for children in rural areas of
Ghana. Designing web pages is another activity:
Jade O’Hanlon, from Britain, created a pro-
gramme to assist children in Sri Lanka called
Help for the Children, while Ana Carvalho from
Portugal did the same for an urban project in the
Philippines, the Rejoice Urban Development Pro-
ject. Peter van der Zee from Holland, meanwhile,
helped translate documents from English into
German.
Most volunteers will never meet face-to-face
the people with whom they exchange e-mails,
but some enthusiasts have planned trips to do
just that. Working from Arizona,Terry Rosenlund
has collaborated with an AIDS prevention pro-
ject in Kenya, the Kenyan AIDS Intervention Pre-
vention Project Group (KAIPPG). His work
involves securing resources in the United States
for the treatment of AIDS victims and orphaned
children. This year he’s planning to travel to
Africa to “get to know the KAIPGG family.” Lau-
rie Moy, another online volunteer from the
States, will soon visit the Ugandan handicapped
people’s project with which she has worked
from Dallas. Judyth Sassoon,a British scientist at
the University of Bern, also plans to visit that
country to get a better idea of what help is
required in the field of child health. She is
already working with the Uganda Children’s
Fund in an effort to create a mobile health unit
for children in remote rural areas.
Netaid.org is based on the principle that
there are many initiatives, small or large, which
can bring about major changes in the fight
against poverty. All that is needed are a screen,
a keyboard, and the will to help. ■

Would you like to be an international volun-
teer?
The Co-ordinating Committee for International
Voluntary Service (CCIVS), created in 1948 and
o p e rating under the auspices of UNESCO, c u r-
rently works with 140 NGOs in 100 countries,
which take on unspecialized volunteers to work in
development projects alongside the local popu-
l a t i o n . Its role is to put potential volunteers in
contact with organizations that can decide what
they should do.
The service encourages volunteering as a means
to work for peace, international understanding,
s o l i d a r i t y, c o o p e ration and reconciliation between
the different peoples of the world. CCIVS’ main
fields of action are informal education,preserva-
tion of cultural heritage and the environment,
and emergency aid and reconstruction.
Are you involved in volunteering research?
CCIVS is currently co-ordinating a joint campaign
for the International Year of Volunteers that will
end in 2002 with a four-day conference whose
main areas of debate are:access to volunteering
for under-privileged people, volunteering and
peace work, i n t e r-regional exchange, and the
legal rights and mobility of volunteers.
To find out more, contact:
The Co-ordinating Committee for International
Voluntary Service
UNESCO
1 rue Miollis
75732 Paris Cedex 15
France
Tel:(00 33) 1 45 68 49 36
e-mail:ccivs@unesco.org
Internet:http://www.unesco.org/cciv
What are the aims of the International Year of
Volunteers 2001?
The aims are increasing volunteering’s profil e,
promoting it as activity, making it easier to
become a volunteer and improving the exchange
of knowledge and experience between volunteers
from around the world. The year also offers a
unique opportunity to pay homage to the millions
of volunteers who each day provide essential help
to those who most need it.
For more information,see www.iyv.org
A few tips
