DAVID BANISAR
U.S. ATTORNEY AND DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF PRIVACY INTERNATIONAL, A UK-BASED HUMAN RIGHTS GROUP



Labour pains:
the birth of a movement
Cyber-rights and business groups are fighting a proposed cybercrime
treaty. While there is strength in numbers, the groups’ diversity may
prove too much for the coalition to bear
A
s you flip through the pages of this
March issue,members of the Council of
Europe will be poring over a blueprint
to force its countries and others around
the world to dramatically increase sur-
veillance and invade your privacy in the name of
preventing cybercrime (see box).An eclectic coalition
of civil rights and corporate groups however, h a s
launched an offensive against the proposed cy b e r-
crime treaty as well as a battery of controversial
national laws and international standards.
Not surprisingly, the first privacy campaign
emerged in the U. S. , an Internet stronghold, a g a i n s t
the infamous Clipper Chip.According to the govern-
m e n t , this cryptographic device would have offered
a standard for securing private voice communication.
Two government agencies would have held the
“keys,” to be handed out only with “legal authori-
z a t i o n .” P r i v a cy-minded citizens quickly saw the
dangers of this in light of the federal government’s
history of illegal domestic surveillance. In 1994,
50,000 people—a hefty chunk of the cybernaut popu-
lation—signed the largest Internet petition of its
time against the proposal,which died soon after.
Perhaps the most striking feature in the battle to
protect privacy has been the diversity of groups
i n v o l v e d .The year 1996 saw a motley crew of immi-
gration groups, gun-owners, liberals and conserva-
tives band together to oppose legislation that would
notably have extended wiretapping and allowed
for more investigations of political groups. I r i s h -
American and Arab-American associations joined
out of concern that they would be more aggressively
targeted in the “war on terrorism.” M e a n w h i l e, t h e
fear of a more invasive government rallied gun-
owners alongside groups from across the ideological
s p e c t r u m . Once again, by tapping the Internet’s
power to organize and disseminate information,
they shelved the legislation.
But this ad hoc co-operation is based on shaky
ground. There was considerable coordination, for
e x a m p l e, between civil liberties groups and the
industry to oppose the 1994 Communications A s s i s-
tance for Law Enforcement A c t , which requires

telecommunications carriers to modify their equip-
m e n t , facilities and services in order to comply with
authorized electronic surveillance. Yet once the
industry received a promise of government fun-
ding to implement the law, it quickly abandoned the
coalition.Corporate representatives then jumped
sides again and sued the government over imple-
mentation rules in a controversy that is still brewing.
Old enemies
become new allies
With the Internet’s growth, the privacy battle is
becoming increasingly international.Most We s t e r n
European countries have at least one cyber-rights
g r o u p,a trend that is spreading across the continent
and Asia, particularly in Japan.At the same time,
existing human rights groups have also started to
focus on the Internet. All it takes is for a single
national government to ban free speech on the We b
and the issue instantly takes on a global character.
For decades, international bodies like the Orga-
nisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment (OECD), the Council of Europe and the
European Union (EU) have been developing inter-
national standards relating to privacy, free speech
and other civil liberties issues. Their work has
included brokering common rules on data protec-
tion and encryption policy to promote e-commerce.
While some government representatives have put
a stronger emphasis on protecting human rights,
economic interests have clearly dominated the
d e b a t e, strongly influenced by the International
Chamber of Commerce, a powerful lobby of
industry groups.To d a y,by pressuring governments
bilaterally and multilaterally, the U. S. is leading the
efforts to expand surveillance worldwide.This pres-
sure amounts to what privacy advocates call “ p o l i cy
l a u n d e r i n g ” : by pushing other governments into
accepting controversial plans like the Clipper Chip,
international standards will be developed which
will in turn force the U.S. Congress to accept pro-
posals it had originally rejected.
To respond with more muscle to these trends,a
new opposition front emerged in 1996:the Global
Internet Liberty Campaign (GILC), started by the
Electronic Privacy Information Center, H u m a n
Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties
A s s o c i a t i o n . The group now represents over 50
NGOs from some 30 countries. GILC operates by
c o n s e n s u s. Member organizations propose specific
actions such as drafting letters to world leaders,
releasing reports and holding conferences.M e m b e r
groups then agree to join in the action.
GILC and groups like the Tr a n s - A t l a n t i c
Consumer Dialogue (TACD) are making inroads
into the policy processes. Perhaps the most tan-
gible signs of their success are the frequent invita-
tions to participate in OECD meetings. But the
movement has just one foot in the door: the next
step lies in strengthening the role of NGOs out-
side the U. S.Th e problem lies in the old Achilles heel
of international movements:a lack of funding. ■
