In the early 1970s, there were approximately 700,000 refugees in black
A f r i c a ;20 years later, that figure had soared to over six million1.Today nearly
one in every three Africans is a refugee on the African continent. Forced
displacements and the destabilization of populations have rocked Africa more
than any other part of the world in recent years. Around seven million
Africans are internally displaced (within their own country), while traditional
or new economic immigration flows have further swollen the number of
refugees.
Waves of xenophobia in several black African countries must be understood
in this context (see box).Periodic droughts drive hundreds of thousands of
people from their homes, but geopolitical changes within and between
states do even more to bring about these population transfers and the
human rights violations underpinning them.
O b v i o u s l y, the sudden,massive arrival of hundreds of thousands of foreigners
in a neighbouring African country already struggling to feed its own
population can be source of tension and rejection.However, the generosity
of the African countries that offer first asylum is striking. For example, in the
1 9 9 0 s, Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire welcomed over a million people fleeing the
civil wars in Liberia and Sierra Leone.Ten years later, most of them have still
neither gone back home nor found a permanent place to live.
The wars in Liberia and Sierra Leone were emblematic in many ways. They
have often been portrayed as having an “ e t h n i c ”c o m p o n e n t , but the desire
to control economic resources—wood smuggling in Liberia and diamond
t r a f ficking in Sierra Leone, with the active complicity of multinational
corporations—is also a cause of these conflicts and a means to finance them.
In both cases, the protagonists, b a c ked by foreign parties and neighbouring
or even geographically distant countries, took the war outside national
b o r d e r s : refugee camps were used as bases for revenge. The climate of
insecurity that often prevails in them, the remote prospects of settling
permanently in a wealthier country, the international community’s indifference
and even disengagement, in contrast, for example, to what happened in
Kosovo and East Ti m o r, fuel the flames of revenge. Recruits are easier to enlist
for the next round of violence, sparking a new exodus.
The widespread destabilization of populations is more to blame for African
xenophobia than “ethnic hatred.” States that have been frail since their
c r e a t i o n , because their national borders seldom match historical and cultural
realities, are further weakened by corruption and their inability to ensure
d e v e l o p m e n t . The Cold Wa r ’s “ c o n flicts by proxy” have been replaced by new
c o n fli c t s, used by the more powerful African states, that play the ethnic card
and give that dimension a charge of hatred and rejection that is far from
s p o n t a n e o u s. In the final analysis, the “struggle for power” over which
“groups, movements and clans fight,often ruthlessly,” is the driving force
behind ethnic conflict.
Cast as “tribal wa r s,” these conflicts and their attendant human rights
violations and hatred might last unless the world’s conscience feels moved
or responsible.The genocide in Rwanda was the cruellest proof of this. ■
* Secretary general of the International Federation for Human Rights
(IFHR).
1. Refugees by numbers 2000 edition, UNHCR, 2000
2. Gildas Simon, Géodynamique des migrations internationales, PUF,
Paris, 1995



DRISS EL YA Z A M I * :
B L ACK A F R I C A : “ETHNIC HAT R E D ” IS NOT INEVITA B L E
