Since it began in 1991, Sierra Leone’s conflict between
rebels and the government has claimed close to 30,000
lives while mutilating 120,000. Outside the warring fac-
tions, no group has been more targeted than journalists.
Reporting involves a constant face-to-face meeting with
death, kidnappings, torture and even long detention
without trial.
Every Sierra Leonean journalist has a horror tale to tell of
his or her experience in the field. I received my war bap-
tism in 1995 while heading for the southern town of Bo to
investigate alleged collaboration between government
forces and Revolutionary United Front rebels. Barely an
hour into the journey the convoy of more than 100 vehicles
ran into an ambush. That was the closest call to death I
have ever had. More than 75 vehicles lay in ruins and 36
people were killed. Those of us who survived were forc e d
to tote the rebels’ loot back to their base.
Many have not gotten off so lightly. Mustapha Sesay, who
used to work for the Standard Times, had his left eye perma-
nently damaged by a machete while trying to flee the
rebel invasion of the capital, Freetown, in 1999. The inva-
ding troops killed Sesay’s deputy editor, Paul Mansaray, and
his entire family in front of their home. Rebels went on to
set the paper’s offices ablaze and destroy five other news-
paper offices. Both parties to the conflict, meanwhile,
conducted house-to-house searches for blacklisted jour-
nalists, raising the question of whether it is necessary to
prostrate one’s life at the abattoir table for an objective
report in a war like ours.
Objective reporting was constantly on the mind of Corinne
Dufka, a researcher with Human Rights Watch, during a
visit to Freetown last year. “Don’t the authorities know
that you journalists are re q u i red to have every side of the
story including that of the rebels?” Ms. Dufka asked while
discussing the fate of a local journalist, Abdoul Kouyateh,
who was detained for six months for having links with the
rebels.
T h e re is no official rebel-run newspaper in the country, and
a balanced or critical article written about either of the two
stakeholders (government and rebels) in the peace pro c e s s
is invariably interpreted as partisan reporting. Write an opi-
nion piece or editorial lampooning the government for not
honouring its side of the 1999 Lome peace deal and people
will brand you a rebel. Give me a local newspaper, and I
will tell you which government minister or official fin a n c e d
its publication.
In times of “peace,” what you write and say in your re p o r t
will be the bullet that kills you when the war intensifies.
Most local journalists, especially those in the print media,
have unfortunately contributed to this deplorable state of
affairs.
In October last year, the pro - g o v e rnment Kamajor militia
abducted and tortured me for three days. The whole epi-
sode was the machination of the country’s defence chief
and militia head, Sam Hinga Norman, who four days
before my abduction had tried to bribe us into dropping
a story of a clash between his militia and the army. A col-
league of mine, who doubled as a militia informer, had
leaked the story to his patrons.
We are now fearing a possible attack from the Kamajors,
whose head we recently lambasted for alleged corruption.
I have yet to see a local court which could pass a guilty ver-
dict on the militia or security apparatus.
The few journalists who dare to file stories from this death ro w
should be encouraged and highly appreciated. But they need
to understand that no matter how important a story is, it is use-
less to risk their lives for it: war reporting is for the living, not
for the dead. ■
* Editor of The Standard Times, Freetown

JIA KANGBA I * : REPORTING FROM DEATH ROW
