t may not be everyone’s idea of a perfect holiday,
but France Montwedi had the adventure of his
l i f e.From South A f r i c a , the student of natural sci-
ences took a bus to Maputo, capital of Mozam-
b i q u e.With 11 other volunteers,he was then led
to a nearby village, deserted since last year’s flo o d s,
and given his tasks: mixing mortar, l e a r n i n g
Po r t u g u e s e, swatting mosquitoes and reconstructing
the community’s school building.
Set up in 1993 under the auspices of the Centre
for Human Rights at the University of Pretoria, t h e
Southern African Student Volunteers Organization
( SA S VO) has become a pioneering body for com-
munity action across the region.Working in poverty-
stricken areas, the organization has sent out groups
of students to spend part of their vacations on pro-
jects and fill some of the gaps left by under- r e s o u r c e d
governments.
But the organization is not just about good
w o r k s, as Montwedi’s experience goes to prove.“ We
get a lot of students participating—mainly black
students who’d otherwise have to stay at home over
the summer because they are not so wealthy. For
them it’s an enormously beneficial experience to
go and work in rural areas of southern A f r i c a ,”
explains Jan Bezuidenhout,SA S VO’s deputy co-ordi-
nator.
For Christoff Heyns, a founding member and
director of the Centre for Human Rights, the ini-
tiative is a crucial step towards reaffirming young
p e o p l e ’s African identity and sense of belonging.“ I
believe that if you mix sweat with earth, you get
ownership of that land.And if you mix sweat with the
sweat of others, you get joint ownership.”
His hope is that SA S VO may one day lay the
groundwork for a pan-continental volunteering
body. “If there is a problem in Rwanda or Mozam-
bique, the first people to arrive to offer assistance
should be Africans,” he says.
From building
to counselling
So far, however, SASVO is the only indigenous
South African organization promoting voluntary
action among university students and young
p e o p l e in rural and disadvantaged communities.
To date, more than 6,000 student volunteers from
4 0 academic institutions in 10 African countries
have undertaken participatory community
development projects in South Africa, Swaziland,
M o z a m b i q u e, B o t s w a n a , Ta n z a n i a , Uganda and
Namibia.
Although South African youth have a proud his-
tory of activism—
they were at the fore-
front of the struggle
against apartheid—
Heyns says voluntary
action is a different
c h a l l e n g e. “A c t i v i s m
is primarily focused
on political issues.
While voluntarism
d o e s n ’t exclude this, i t
includes non-political
activities like working
in a hospice or e d u-
cating people about
issues like AIDS.”
Since 1996, t h e
o r g a n i z a t i o n ’s pri-
mary focus has been
on  schools: t h e y
have renovated over
4 0 , built some
214 classrooms, and
painted more than
800 others as well as
four children’s hos-
pital wards. But stu-
dent volunteers have
also built houses,
community centres
and sports fie l d s, a n d
planted vegetable
gardens and trees.
They have done dis-
aster relief work, r u n
human rights educa-
tion workshops,
assisted with the
general elections in
South Africa and taken statements for the Tr u t h
and Reconciliation Commission. Future projects
are expected to focus more on HIV/AIDS aware-
ness, counselling and agricultural projects
In the opinion of its organizers,SA S VO’s greatest
accomplishment has been to instil in volunteers and
REHANA ROSSOUW
JOURNALIST AT THE MAIL AND GUARDIAN, JOHANNESBURG
Mixing s w e a t with e a r t h
South African university students are flocking to the country’s main volunteering
organization with the promise of fun, manual labour
and a radical change in African politics
2 . NEW BONDS
SASVO volunteers repair a school in Mozambique damaged by floods.

about human rights issues or about gender issues. I t
creates links between illiterate and semi-literate
p e o p l e, and university students who might them-
selves have grown up in such villages.”
In 1997, SASVO made its first move towards col-
laborative ventures and piloted its Operation Zenzele
(“Do it yourself”) Project.This focused more specif-
ically on upgrading, renovation and repair of the
socio-economic infrastructure (particularly of schools)
in disadvantaged communities in conjunction with
township youth and secondary school learners.A d v i c e
on which communities to target within South Africa
often comes from the government,whose ministries
work closely with the organization.
In addition, SASVO offers longer-term opportu-
nities for graduates to work in development projects
where they can gain experience and practical skills
in their field of study or interest. Volunteers also
have the option of working for NGOs and interna-
tional agencies.More than 19 long-term placements
have been made.
With branches at seven universities in southern
Africa, there is no shortage of students waiting to
enrol.“We have so many people applying for our
projects that we do not see the necessity of building
a large infrastructure,” says SASVO project coordi-
nator Belinda Mogashwa.“We would prefer not to
spend money on management and offic e s ; instead we
want to plough in money and resources where they
are needed most:in destitute communities.” ■

community members alike ideals of self-reliance,
s e l f - h e l p, voluntarism and love of Africa through
projects that help to secure access to education and
services for all—access that would otherwise be
impossible to guarantee.As Bezuidenhout sees it, t h e
volunteers’ experiences may as a result prove critical
in beginning to bridge the divide that has tradition-
ally separated A f r i c a ’s political elite from those who
are ruled.
“The problem in Africa had always been that
once people get to power, they loose contact with
those they were meant to serve.But volunteers will
always remember their time working in a rural com-
munity,” he explains.
Bridging the
class divide
Projects have indeed been marked by stronger
links between the organizers and the communities
they are seeking to serve. “At fir s t , our volunteers
would arrive in communities and commence with
the work that needed doing. Nowadays, by the time
our volunteers arrive, the community already has
the materials and the plans.They have ownership of
their projects and we provide the sweat,” Heyns says.
Meanwhile, adds Bezuidenhout,village people
and volunteers—some of whom are likely to become
political and business leaders in the decades to
come—have time and the opportunity during their
work to debate issues of pressing concern.“ They talk
