Somalia is the archetypal  “failed state”in UN speak.Not without reason:
it’s the only country in the world where there has been no national state,
even on paper, since 1991.No national government,no civil servants, central
bank or public services—starting with a police force and a judiciary. Not even
nationality in the legal sense, since a Somali passport,which anyone can buy
for $30,isn’t recognized anywhere in the world.
W h a t ’s more, the country is divided into three areas—Somaliland in the
northwest,Puntland in the northeast,and the southern zone, which is still at
wa r. In Mogadishu, or rather in the part of the city it controls—the new
t ransitional national government operates from a few hotel rooms paid for by
local businessmen. Born in August 2000 at a peace conference in Arta, in
neighbouring Djibouti, the government isn’t recognized by any We s t e r n
powers, even though many of them have given it “encouragement.” It’s also
opposed by the rulers of Somaliland and Puntland and resisted by those who
have plunged the country into chaos—the warlords and their militias.
Armed battles take a daily toll of victims. Despite recent improvements in the
s i t u a t i o n , 400,000 Somalis don’t have enough to eat.About 150,000 have been
forced from their homes by floods and a cholera epidemic has broken out.
Yet relative peace and stability have reigned for several years in Somaliland and
P u n t l a n d . Mogadishu is also returning to normal. A nation seems to be
rebuilding itself and a new kind of state emerging through a unique process:
i n d i g e n o u s, s e l f - s u f fic i e n t , from the bottom up, from the local to the national.
A dozen attempts by the A rab League, Egypt and Ethiopia failed to bring
reconciliation and reunification to Somalia because they sought to reimpose
a classic state [from top down] and to reach an agreement between the
warlords.
The building blocks of Somali society are clans, divided up into a multitude of
s u b - c l a n s. The key institution is the s h i r, a meeting of clan chiefs, w h o
sometimes have to confer for months before reaching agreement. It was a series
of s h i r s, g radually extended to include clan families, that produced an
independent authority in Somaliland,with its own police, army, courts, civil
servants, currency and free press.
The economy functions there, with minimal foreign aid, and is buoyed by a new
generation of businessmen that the tiny state relies upon to provide public
services. The shirs managed to neutralize, indeed eliminate the warlords by
playing “ c i v i l i a n s ” off against “ m i l i t a r y ” p e o p l e. Most importantly, t h e
government authorities have won acceptance because their laws are based on
common law, and increasingly on Ko ranic law. They also never imposed
themselves on the clans. I n s t e a d , the government stems from them and strictly
respects their power balance.
This approach has been followed elsewhere, notably in Puntland. It was a driving
force at the recent Arta conference, which unlike most international gatherings
on the issue resembled a modernized version of a giant traditional s h i r. It lasted
more than six months. For the first time, intellectuals, NGO officials and even
women—a first in Somali history—turned up to speak for the “ m o d e r n ”
sector of civil society. Then the elders, the businessmen, religious leaders,
traditional chiefs and finally the warlords joined in.The whole driving force of
the conference—which brought together about 2,800 people—and the
elections held during it rested upon balancing the clans.
Does this first attempt at giving Somalia a national government based on the
country’s social structures and,in a broad sense, its culture, have a chance?
Haven’t its sponsors – mainly Djibouti – tried to go too fast, turning their backs
on a more gradual approach that would have involved slowly bringing together
or federating self-governed areas until the whole country was covered, in a type
of building-block process?
It is safe to conclude that the Arta talks will stand as a decisive turning point,
because representatives from across Somali society had a say in the process.
The post-Arta era has begun,and it lies in their hands. ■
*Anthropologist at the Paris-based Institute for Development Research (IRD).



MOHAMED A B D I * : “A UNIQUE INDIGENOUS PROCESS IS AT W O R K ”
