Race, history and culture
by Claude Lévi-Strauss
One of the world’s 
leading
anthropologists, Claude 
Lévi-Strauss twice set 
forth his ideas on 
racism for Unesco, first 
in Race and History 
(1952) and later in 
Race and Culture 
(1971). On the 
following pages we 
publish long extracts 
from these two 
Important studies.
The development of human life is not everywhere 
the same but rather takes form in an extraordinary 
diversity of societies and civilizations. This intel­
lectual^-aesthetic and sociologie|l diversity is in no 
way the outcome of the biological differences, in 
certain observable features, between different 
groups of men; it is simply a parallel phenomenon 
in a different sphere. But, at the same time, we 
must note two important respects in which there 
is a sharp distinction. First, the order of magnitude 
is different. There are many more human cultures 
than human races, since the first are to be counted 
in thousands and the second in single units. . . . 
Second, in contrast to the diversity of races, where 
interest is confined to their historical origin or their 
distribution over the face of the world, the diver­
sity of cultures gives rise to many problems; it may 
be wondered whether it is an advantage or a disad­
vantage for human kind.. . .
Last and most important, the nature of the 
diversity must be investigated even at the risk of 
allowing the racial prejudices whose biological 
foundation has so lately been destroyed to 
develop again on new grounds. . . .  We cannot 
therefore claim to have formulated a convincing 
denial of the inequality of the human races, so 
long as we fail to consider the problem of the 
inequality—or diversiigrHtof human cultures, 
which is in fact—however unjustifiably-Jffdosely 
associated with it in the public mind.. . .
Collaboration between cultures
. . .  A culture’s chance of uniting the complex 
body of inventions of all sorts which we describe 
as a civilization depends on the number and 
diversity of the other cultures with which it is 
working out, generally involuntarily, a common
4 culture’s chance of uniting the complex body of inventions of all 
sorts which we describe as a civilization depends on the number 
and diversity of the other cultures with which it is working out a 
common strategy.
strategy. Number and diversity: a comparison off 
the Old World with the New on the eve. of the 
latter’s discoveryjin 1492] provides a good illus.-:J 
tration of the need for these two factors. :
Europe at the beginning of the Renaissance! 
was the meeting-place and melting-pot of th f | 
most diverse influences: the Greek, Romaiijl 
Germanic and Anglo-Saxon traditions combined! 
with the influences of Arabia and China. Pr<5$ | 
Columbian America enjoyed no fewer cu ltu ral 
contacts, quantitatively speaking, as the various! 
American cultures maintained relations with one ( 
another and the two Americas together represent.;; 
a whole hemisphere. But, while the cultures! 
which were cross-fertilizing each other in Europe'! 
had resulted from differentiation dating back sev-| 
eral tens of thousands of years, those on the mor;e| 
recently occupied American continent had had| 
less time to develop divergencies; the pictur®! 
they offered was relatively homogeneous. Thus, 5 
although it would not be true to say that the cul- .; 
tural standard of Mexico or Peru was [in 14?;2|| 
inferior to that of Europe at the time of the: disS 
coyery (we have in fact seen that, in sometj 
respects, it was superior), the various aspects of 
culture were possibly less well organized in reHfa 
tion to each other. . . . Their organization, lesisj 
flexible and diversified, probably explains their'* 
collapse before a handful of conquerors. And the 
underlying reason for this may be sought in the 
fact that the partners to the American cultural ’ 
“coalition” were less dissimilar from one another j 
than their counterparts in the Old World. | |
No society is therefore essentially and intrin­
sically cumulative. Cumulative history is not the 
prerogative of certain races or certain cultures, 
marking them off from the rest. It is the result of 
their conduct rather than their nature, f t  repre^i 
sents a certain “way of life” of cultures which.j 
depends on their capacity to “go along together”, i 
In this sense, it may be said that cumulative'.hisil 
tory is the type of history characteristic of. ‘ 
grouped societies—social super-organisms—-; 
while stationary history (supposing it to exist)• 
would be the distinguishing feature of an inferior 
form of social life, the isolated society.
The one real calamity, the one fatal flaw which j 
can afflict a human group and prevent it fro m l 
achieving fulfilment is to' be alone.
We can thus see how clumsy and intellectual 
ally unsatisfactory the generally accepted efforts! 
to defend the contributions of various human J
Claude Lévi-Strauss was born in 1908.

The one flaw which can afflict a human 
group and prevent it from achieving 
fulfilment is to be alone.
races and cultures to civilization often are. We list 
features, we sift questions of origin; we allot first 
places. However well-intentioned they may be, 
these efforts serve no purpose for, in three 
respects, they miss their aim.
In the first place, there can never.be any cer­
tainty about a particular culture’s credit for an 
invention or discovery.. . .  In the second place, all 
cultural contributions can be divided into two 
groups. O n the one hand we have isolated acqui­
sitions or features, whose importance is evident 
but which are also somewhat lim ited .. . .  A t the 
other end of the scale (with a whole series of 
intermediates, of course), there are systematized 
contributions, representing the peculiar form in 
which each society has chosen to express and sat­
isfy the generality of human aspirations. There is 
no denying the originality and particularity of 
these patterns, but, as they all represent the exclu­
sive choice of a single group, it is difficult to see 
how one civilization can hope to benefit from the 
way of life of another, unless it is prepared to 
renounce its own individuality. A ttem pted com­
promises are, in fact, likely to produce only two
C laud e Lévi-Strauss in 1971, 
lecturing on “Race and 
Culture" at U nesco’s  Paris 
headquarters.
CLAUDE LÉVI-STRAUSS 
;is a French social anthropologist 
and university teacher whose work 
has exerted considerable influence 
on the development of the 
. contemporary social sciences. His 
works published in English ' 
include: The Savage Mind (1968), 
Elementary Structures of Kinship 
(1969), Structural Anthropology. I 
and //(1974 and 1981), and Myth 
and Meaning.{19ST)i '
results: either the disorganization and collapse of 
the pattern of one of the groups; or a new combi­
nation, which then, however, represents the 
emergence of a third pattern, and cannot be 
assimilated to either of the others. The question 
w ith which we are concerned, indeed, is not to 
discover whether or not a society can derive ben­
efit from the way of life of its neighbours, but 
whether, and if so to what extent, it can succeed in 
understanding or even in knowing them___
World civilization
Finally, wherever a contribution is made, there 
must be a recipient. But, while there are in fact 
real cultures which can be localized in time and 
space, and which may be said to have “con­
tributed” and to  be continuing their contribu­
tions, what can this “world civilization” be, which 
is supposed to be the recipient of all these contri­
butions? It is not a civilization distinct from all the 
others, and yet real in the same sense that they 
are .. . .  [It is] an abstract conception, to which we 
attribute a moral or logical significance—moral, if 
we are thinking of an aim to be pursued by 
existing societies; logical, if we are using the one 
term to cover the common features which 
analysis may reveal in the different cultures. In 
both cases, we must not shut our eyes to the fact 
that the concept of world civilization is very 
sketchy and imperfect, and that its intellectual and 
emotional content is tenuous. To attempt to 
assess cultural contributions with all the weight 
of countless centuries behind them . . .  by refer­
ence to the sole yardstick of a world civilization 
which is still a hollow shell, would be greatly to 
impoverish them, draining away their life-blood 
and leaving nothing but the bare bones behind.
. . .  The true contribution of a culture consists, 
not in the list of inventions which it has personally 
produced, but in its difference from others. The 
sense of gratitude and respect which each single 
member of a given culture can and should feel 
towards all others can only be based on the con­
viction that the other cultures differ from his own 
in countless ways___
We have taken the notion of world civilization 
as a sort of limiting concept or as an epitome of a 
highly complex process. If our arguments are 
valid, there is not, and never can be, a world civi­
lization in the absolute sense in which that term is 
often used, since civilization implies, and indeed 
consists in, the coexistence of cultures exhibiting 
the maximum possible diversities. A world civi­
lization could, in fact, represent no more than a 
worldwide coalition of cultures, each of which 
would preserve its own originality.

[In 1952,] in a booklet written for UNESCO, I  sug­
gested the concept of ‘fcoalition” to explain why 
isolated cultures could not hope to create single- 
handed the conditions necessary fo r a truly 
cumulative history. To. achieve this, I said, dif­
ferent cultures must, voluntarily or involuntarily, 
com bine their respective stakes in the great game 
of history, to increase their chances o f making 
that-long run o f winning plays by which history 
progresses. G eneticists are at present [1971] 
putting forward very similar views on  bi&lpgical 
evolution, in pointing out that a genome is in 
reality a system within which certain g e n itfu n c- 
tion as regulators and others act in concert on a 
single characteristic (or the contrary, if  ¡several 
characteristics depend on a single gene). W hat is 
true o f the individual genome is also true of a 
population, in w hich the com bination of a 
num ber of genetic inheritances-^in w hich until 
recently a “racial type” would have.ibfen identi- 
f iM g m u st always be such as to allow the estab­
lish m ent of an optim um  equilibrium  and 
improve the group’s chances of survival. In  this 
sense, it might be said that in the history of popu­
lations, genetic recom bination plays a part com-1 
parable to that played by cultural .recombination 
in the evolution of the ways o f life, techniques, 
knowledge and beliefs by  w hich different soci- 
eties are distinguished.. . .
The nature-culture debate
[But] one fact cannot be too strongly emphasized: 
whiielselection makes it possible for living species 
to adapt to their natural environment or to resist 
its changes more effectively, in the case of man 
this environment ceases to be natural in  any resit 
sense. Its characteristics arise from  technical, eco­
nom ic, social and psychological conditions 
which, through the operation o f culture, create a 
particular environm ent for eacfihu m an group. 
W e can go a step further, and consider whether 
the relation between organic evolution and cul­
tural evolution is not merely analogical, but also 
com plem entary.. . .
In  the dawn of humanity, biological evolution 
perhaps selected such pre-cultural traits as 
upright posture, manual dexterity, sociability, the 
capacity to think in sym bols, speech and the 
ability^W S'eommunicate. B u t once a culture
A world civilization could represent no more than a 
worldwide coalition of cultures, each of which would preserve its 
own originality.
existed, these traits were consolidated and prop­
agated by cultural factors. W hen cultures became 
specialized, it was again cultural factors which 
consolidated and encouraged other traits, such as 
resistance to heat o f« fg ld  fo r thosie s a fe t ie s  
which had w illy-n illy  to adapt themselves to 
extreme clim atic conditions;, aggressive or con­
templative dispositions;, technical ingenuity etc. 
N one o f these traits, as perceived at a cultura§| 
level, can clearly be attributed to a genetic basis, 
Although we cannot exclude the possibility that 
Such a- connexion— even if partial, rem ote and 
indirect'— may sometimes exist. In  that case, it 
would be true to. say that every culture selects 
genetic aptitudes w hich then, by  re flex, action, 
influence those cultures by  w hich they w ere.at' 
first stimulated.
An ideological cover
B y  pushing back the earliest beginnings of 
hum anity to an ever m ore rem ote p’a l j^ S  
according to recent estimates, some millioiiSriof 
years ago— physical anthropology has under­
mined one o f the principal bases for racialist; 
theory, since the num ber of unknowable factors 
concerned  thus increases m uch m ore rapidly 
than the number of landmarks available to stake 
out the paths followed by our earliest ancestors 
in the course of their evolution.
Geneticists delivered even more decisive^fews 
to these theories when they replaced the concept., 
of type by that of population and the concept of 
race by that of the genetic stock, and again when 
they demonstrated that there is a gulf between 
hereditary differences attributable to a single gene-iii 
which are of little significance from  the point of 
view of race,, since they probably always have an 
adaptive value— and those attributable to the com­
bined action of several, which makes it virtually 
impossible to determine t hem. . , .
O nly in the last ten years have we begun tor. 
understand that we were discussing the problem  
of the relation between organic and cultural evolu­
tion in terms w hich Auguste. Com te would have 
d escrib ed  as metaphysical. Human evolution, is.' 
not a by-product of biological evolution, but nei-. 
ther is it completely distinct from  it. A synthesis 
of these two traditional points of view is now pos- ■ 
sible, provided that biologists are not content with 
answers not based on fact, or with dogmatic expla­
nations, and realize both the help they can give 
each other and their respective limitations.
The unsatisfactory nature of the traditional 
solutions to the problem  perhaps explains why 
the ideological struggle ¡against racialism has 
proved so ineffective on a practical level. There 
is nothing to indicate that racial prejudice is 
:declining and plenty of evidence to suggest that, 
after brief periods of localized quiescence, it is 
reappearing everywhere with increased intensity 
It is for this reason that UNESCO feels called upon

All true creation implies a certain 
deafness to outside values, even to the 
extent of rejecting them.
to renew from time to  tim ea battle whose out­
come appears uncertain, to s'ay the least.
But can we be so sure that the racial form 
taken by intolerance results primarily from false 
beliefs held by this or that people about the 
dependence of culture on organic evolution? Are 
these ideas not simply an ideological cover for ̂ i 
more real form of antagonism, based on the will 
to subjugate and on relations of power? This was 
certainly the case in the past, but, even supposing 
that these relations of pow er become less 
marked, will not racial differentiation continue to 
serve as a pretext for the growing difficulty of 
living together, unconsciously felt by mankind, 
which is undergoing a demographic explosion 
and which . . .  is beginning to hate itself, warned 
by a mysterious prescience that its numbers are 
becoming too great for all its members to enjoy 
freely open space and pure, non-polluted air?
Racial prejudice is at its most inten'se^hen it 
concerns human groups confined to a territory so 
cramped and share of natural resources so 
meagre that these peoples lack dignity in their own 
eyes as well as in those of their more powerful 
neighbours. But does not humanity today,-on the 
whole, tend to expropriate itself and, on a planet 
that has grown too small, reconstitute, to its own 
cost, a situation comparable to that inflicted by 
some of its representatives on the Unfortunate. 
American or Oceanic tribes? Finally, what would 
happen to  the ideological struggle against racial 
prejudice, if it were shown to be universally true— 
as some experiments conducted by psychologists 
suggest—that if subjects of any origin whatever are 
divided into groups, which are placed in a com­
petitive situation, each group will develop feelings 
of bias and injustice towards its rivals?
M inority groups appearing in various parts of 
the world today, such as the hippies, are not dis­
tinguished from the bulk of the population by 
race, but only by their way of life, morality, hair 
style and dress; are the feelings of repugnance and 
sometimes hostility they inspire in most of their 
fellows substantially different from racial hatred ? 
Would we therefore be making genuine progress 
if we confined ourselves to dissipating the partic­
ular prejudices on which racial hatred—in the 
^ t r ic t  sense of the term—can be said to be based?
The mirage of universal entente
In any case, the contribution ethnologists can 
make to the solution of the race problem would 
be derisory; nor is it certain that psychologists 
and educators could do any better, so strong is 
the evidence—as we see from the evidence of the
December 200 1-The Unesco Courier ^
so-called primitive peoples'—that mutual toler­
ance presupposes two conditions which in con­
tem porary society are further than ever from  
being realized: one is relative equality; the other is 
adequate physical separation.
. . .  N o doubt we cherish the hope that one day 
equality and fraternity will reign among men 
without impairing their diversity. But if humanity 
is not to resign itself to becoming a sterile con­
sumer of the values it created in the past and of 
those alone. . . ,  it will have to relearn the fact that 
all true creation implies a certain deafness to out­
side values, even to the extent of rejecting or 
denying them. For one individual cannot at the 
same time merge into the spirit of another, iden­
tify with another and still maintain his own iden­
tity. Integral communication with another, if fully 
realized, sooner or later dooms the creative origi­
nality of both. The great creative epochs in history 
were those in which communication had become 
adequate for distant individuals to stimulate each 
other, but not frequent or rapid enough for those 
obstacles, indispensable between individuals as 
they are between groups, to be reduced to the 
point at which diversity becomes levelled out and 
nullified by excessively facile interchange.
. . .  Convinced that cultural and organic evolu­
tion are inextricably linked, [biologists and ethnol­
ogists] know, of course, that a return to the past is 
impossible, but they know, too, that the course 
humanity is at present following is building up ten­
sions to such a degree that racial hatred is a mere 
foretaste of the greater intolerance that may hold 
sway tomorrow, w ithout even the pretext of 
ethnic differences. To forestall the dangers threat­
ening us today and those, still more -formidable, 
that we shall have to face tomorrow, we must 
accept the fact that their causes are much deeper 
than mere ignorance or prejudice: we can only 
hope for a change in the course of history, which is 
even more difficult to bring about than progress 
in the march of ideas./ ■
C la u d e  Lévi-Strauss 
in 1988.
1. Extract from Race and His­
tory, first published in The 
Race Question in Modem Sci­
ence, Paris, UNESCO, 1952.
2. Extractfrom “Race and 
Culture”, published in 
UNESCO’s International 
S.ocial Science Journal, Vol. 
XXIII, No. 4,1971.
