The rice harvest.

The tar, t h e
f ra c t u re and
the bond
The paved road now runs across Ndioum from one 
end to the other. But the “avenue,” as it is called, 
has stirred up many controversies…
January 2001 - The Unesco Courier 5
Ireturned to Ndioum early one morning when a chill was
carried into town by the harmattan, the wind of the
Moors that raises a golden-yellow dust in the rising
s u n , shrouding houses, wheelbarrows and animals in the
m i s t , and making silhouettes appear to emerge as if
they were stepping out from behind a curtain. Even the
tar seemed to be born with each step I took.
The paved road now runs across Ndioum from one end
to the other.But the “ a v e n u e,”as it is called,has stirred up
many controversies… The thoroughfare has enabled
motorists to drive across the Fouta region in any season.
It has also brought large machines that have dug holes in
the forest separating the great river from the d i é r y, the dry
s a v a n n a h .Their work has dried up the water’s ceaseless
rise and fall that fertilized the land,making sure everybody
had enough to eat, and set the pace for the season’s
l a b o u r s. And now the river opens out onto wide areas
developed by Italians, broad stretches of treeless land
where Sérères, Diolas and Wolofs dwell alongside the
indigenous people—their cousins, the To r o b é s. It is a
The development of irrigated areas along the Senegal river has changed the nature
of both the town of Ndioum and its people
PHOTOS BY ANDRÉ LEJARRE,TEXT BY KACHA
André Lejarre is a French photographer, Kacha is a retired senior civil servant from Senegal.

A tomato plantation.


The tar, the fra c t u re and the bond
Where are the large concessions surrounded by 
medium-high stockade fences through which you could 
catch glimpses of life’s dramas?
6 The Unesco Courier - January 2001
place where cultures and many peoples have mingled.
Tar has turned Ndioum into a crossroads of commerce.
Tradespeople from Mauritania and former military staff and civil
servants have built all the shops, lined up next to each other like
a row of boxes, jam-packed with all kinds of goods.The entrances
are encumbered by wheelbarrows and the small stalls of vendors
selling fritters who rush up to travellers when they stop their cars.
I walked across the village looking for my neighbourhood.
Everyone has brought their own style to this land.The regional
h o s p i t a l , the pride of Ndioum, the “ s e m i - s t o r i e s ” with their
wide colour strips of emigrants belonging to France, the cushy,
gated villas of executives from Dakar that are as uncomfortable
as they are ill-suited to the climate; the large mosque on the hill;
the small farmers’ bank and its grain storehouse; the two service
stations at the beginning and end of the avenue. The space
between the avenue and the houses shrinks; the windows looking
out onto the road are still shuttered when the shops begin to
t h r i v e.At the end of the month, the post office is always crowded
with parents picking up money orders sent by their children who
have emigrated abroad.
Where are the buildings made of stuccoed earth with their
d a r k , cool inner verandahs that protected the occupants from the
windblown ochre dust? Where are the large concessions
surrounded by medium-high stockade fences through which
you could catch glimpses of life’s dramas—the letter announcing
a daughter’s engagement to an expatriate; the neighbour who
brought back a disease from central Africa that is taking a
terrible toll? But the tiny El Hadj Oumar Tal mosque is still
s t a n d i n g, with its roof tiles from Marseilles, its palm trees and
around it, the lush gardens of the former chief of police, w h i c h
look like an oasis in this huge plain turned upside-down by
construction work.
Ndioum and the myth that followed the taming of the river
captured the imaginations of only those who came from far
away to answer the call of its endless spaces, criss-crossed by a
grid of irrigation canals.The villagers received their plots, lost in
Returning from the fields, along a branch of the Senegal River.

the immensity of the big development
p r o j e c t s, on which the women persist in
digging furrows with their hoes, planting rice
by hand, shunning modern paddies with a
self-confident gesture. They, and the young
p e o p l e, are the ones who spurred on the
c h a n g e s.They are moving forward gradually,
occupying the places left behind, the fields
that are too hard to work, which belonged to
the heads of households who have left for
distant countries.The impatient young people,
whether or not they have gone to school or
have paying jobs, are bursting into the
traditional hierarchical circles.They are in a
strong position because they have banded together, c h a l l e n g i n g
the old order, c o n fis c a t i n g, taking action when the elders hesitate
and endlessly drag out the negotiations.
I greeted the nostalgic, retired old men conversing beneath
a tree, hashing over their memories.Th e y ’re talking about their
monthly trip to Dakar to pick up their pensions and see their
grown children. Politics works its way into the conversation.
“ The government doesn’t give our children jobs, the schools no
longer train them, and anybody can get away with anything.
Th e r e ’s a fine hospital, but I’d rather go to Dakar because here
Balancing laundry, young girls return from the river.
At Salamata’s.

Electricity has become expensive; water used to be free but now 
it must be paid for; the mayor is selfish. He built a town hall but lives
in Dakar and never keeps his promises

The tar, the fra c t u re and the bond
they send us students who change so often that we don’t have the
time to get to know them.The Diola doctor from Kédougou was
the best, but he left. Th e y ’ve developed 2,000 hectares and
already had six harvests in two years.”
“ N o b o d y ’s happy with these projects,” they say.“ They give us
b i l h a r z i a s i s, people go blind from planting seeds in the water
under the blazing sun. The development company takes nine-
tenths of our harvests away from us to pay for the water, t h e
pumps and the equipment.They come and tell us that in their air-
conditioned cars,while it’s 35° celcius in the shade.We would have
cultivated millet and rice for more than a hundred years with the
money they take away from us… There are no more fish in the
river and the animals cannot graze any longer.Our daughters and
nieces marry Wo l o f s,Diolas and Sérères, if not foreign Catholics.”
I tried changing the subject and started talking about the local
e l e c t i o n s.The last ones were hard-fought.The current mayor, a n
administrative and financial officer elected to the national
assembly, is running against a teacher, the son of a great family
of marabouts (Muslim holy men). Electricity has become
e x p e n s i v e ; water used to be free but now it must be paid for; t h e
mayor is selfis h . He built a town hall but lives in Dakar and never
keeps his promises.
But soon the 72 hours of Ndioum, a major annual cultural
e v e n t , will be here, luring all the errant sons and daughters back
h o m e.The festival is three days of indescribable chaos,an exuberant
celebration of Fo u t a ’s culture with traditional wrestling matches,
fantasias on horseback, ballah rock and its most accomplished
a m b a s s a d o r s, Youssou N’Dour and Baba Maal. Tar has worked
wonders here, if only by bonding Ndioum to the world. ■
A peanut oil pump stands in front of Adana Sabou’s store.

DEVELOPING THE SENEGAL RIVER
The three countries past which the Senegal River
flows—Mali, Mauritania and Senegal—began work to
open the river up for trade at the start of the 1970s,
leading to the inauguration of dams at Diama and
Manantali in 1985 and 1987 respectively. Primary
goals of the development project were to regulate
the river flow to improve its accessibility to river
traffic,supply urban centres with clean drinking
water, stop saltwater reaching beyond the mouth of
the river, and above all protect the region from its
fickle climate by ensuring regular irrigation. The total
irrigated area is due to reach 375,000 hectares,
190,000 of which will be in Senegal. Some 30,000
hectares in that country are already being irrigated.
The scheme’s main funding bodies, including the
European Union and various national development
agencies, have so far lent over $500 million, while 60
percent of Senegal’s agricultural investment is
thought to have been devoted to implementing the
plan.Crop yields, however, remain low, at four tonnes
per hectare of paddy field twice a year. The soil is
getting saline. A lack of interest from the state, neo-
liberal policies,the devaluation of the African franc,
rising prices for materials, water bills and a string of
poor yields have only served to make peasant
Sacks of rice piled up in one of Ndioum’s general stores.
Class time in the local Koranic school.
