PHOTOS BY TIM HETHERINGTON, TEXT BY LUCÍA IGLESIAS KUNTZ
TIM HETHERINGTON IS A BRITISH PHOTOGRAPHER. LUCÍA IGLESIAS KUNTZ IS A UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



To youngsters in Liberia, football isn’t just a game. It’s the chance to forget a
murderous civil war and dream of a better life, symbolized by the revered homeboy,
“Mister George” 
Healing on the
playing fie l d
The only way is up.

All that football needs—a ball, a bit of space and children.



Far from the bright lights of the stadium, people kick
balls around on waste ground, in village squares and on
beaches where rusting warships are relics of a not so
distant past
George Weah has come a long way: from Monrovia, w h e r e
he and his 13 brothers and sisters were brought up by
their grandmother, to the World Player of the Ye a r
award and the big European leagues of Fr a n c e, Italy and
E n g l a n d ,where he has scored 150 goals in more than 300
m a t c h e s. It has been a spectacular journey.As a boy, h e
dreamed of becoming another Pele. N o w, 15 years after
he left his country, thousands of Liberian youngsters
dream of becoming another George Weah.
But it was tough at fir s t .“Every day we’d play from
morning ’til night,” he says.“ We didn’t have a coach, s o
we made it up as we went along, warming up and run-
ning around together. We all chipped in what we could
to buy kit and footballs.”
These days, George has a gold watch and drives a
M e r c e d e s.H e ’s also very generous.More than once,he has
dipped in his pocket to bail out the indebted Liberian foot-
ball federation or pay for equipment.As well as playing,
he is also the national team’s coach and sponsor. H e
knows he is an icon in A f r i c a , but that does not bother him.
“It’s normal for kids to have heroes,” he says.
L i b e r i a ’s passion for football returned only recently.
Until four years ago, the country was engulfed in a mur-
derous civil war—one of Africa’s bloodiest conflicts—
that between 1990 and 1997 killed 150,000 people and
forced nearly half the population either to flee or
become refugees in their own country (see box).
During those years, young Liberians had other
battles to wage, not with footballs but with guns, a v e n-
ging their parents or siblings and fighting as child-sol-
diers. Today, erstwhile factional rivals wear the same
team shirts,are equal before the ball and equally fervent
about the game.Thanks to television, they follow every
detail of championships in Europe and Latin A m e-
r i c a . Everybody knows who Brazilian striker Ronaldo
is and how many goals “Mister George” has scored
for Olympique de Marseilles this season.
Every game involving the national team is a big
e v e n t . Sometimes there are 20,000 more people watching
the match than the Monrovia stadium officially has
room for.“ Women and children come too,” says We a h .
“They make up about half the crowd.” Sometimes the

Healing on the playing fie l d
Fans crowd the net at half-time during a local match.

police have to intervene. But when Liberia wins—and they have,
r e c e n t l y, notched up surprising victories against Nigeria, Ghana and
Sierra Leone—people take to the streets to celebrate and children
wait hours at the players’ entrance in search of autographs.
But Liberians’ love affair with football is not just fan worship.
Everyone plays the game. Far from the bright lights of the stadium
and the world of million-dollar contracts,people kick balls around
on waste ground, in village squares and on beaches where rusting
warships are relics of a not so distant past. Few of these amateurs
have runners or money to buy a decent ball.They just want to play.
In a poor country without jobs or basic facilities, football may
not be the best or only cure but it’s one way forward.Weah fir m l y
believes it can make a difference: “I’m no politician,” he says,
“but when people have problems, even in countries at war, their
quarrels can be solved on the playing fie l d .We ’ve seen that a lot.”
One of football’s countless legends is that years ago, warring
Nigeria and Biafra called a truce one day just so they could see Pele
p l a y.And someone as unconventional as the French writer A l b e r t
C a m u s, who was once goalkeeper for the Algiers University team,
wrote that “everything I know about morality I owe to football.”
We a h , A f r i c a ’s all-time greatest footballer, puts it this way:
“ To achieve something,y o u ’ve got to want it.You mustn’t take drugs
and you’ve got to work hard and concentrate.” Perhaps some of
these children, fans of teams with names like Invincible Eleven and
Young Survivors, have what it takes.But with their youthful energy
and sturdy legs, what they certainly have is a thirst for a better life,
just like the boy from Monrovia who dreamt of being Pele. ■

Tickets can be expensive. Some make do with a view through the bamboo.
Players from the Millennium Stars youth team file onto the pitch.

Huge crowds flock to every game in Monrovia,if only to watch amateur under-13s.

War over—play resumes.
Liberia factfil e :
Population: 3 million
Surface area: 111,400 sq. km 
Life expectancy: 47 years
Adult illiteracy rate: 49%  
GNP per capita: $150-200
Sources: World Bank and The Economist
Intelligence Unit
Key dates:
1847: Foundation of the Free and Inde-
pendent Republic of Liberia.
1980: President William Tolbert assassi-
nated in a military coup headed by
Samuel Doe, who becomes the coun-
try’s president and military chief.
1990: Rebel forces from Charles Taylor’s
National Patriotic Front of Liberia and
the Independent Patriotic Front headed by Prince
Johnson begin an armed revolt in the north of the coun-
try and advance towards the south, where they engage
in battle in Monrovia against the forces of President Doe.
Doe is killed in September.
In November, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) secures a ceasefire between the two
rebel factions and the government, dispatches a peace-
keeping force to the country and appoints a provisional
government headed by Amos Sawyer. Charles Taylor
declares himself president, as does Harry Moniba, second
in command in Doe’s defunct government.
1991: Taylor, Johnson and the commander in chief of
Liberia’s armed forces sign the terms of a second ceasefi-
re. In October, Taylor agrees to a deal that would enable
ECOWAS forces to disarm his troops
and call a general election. In spite of
this, new armed groups emerge and
conflict continues.
1992: The UN Security Council decrees
an arms embargo and pledges its sup-
port for ECOWAS.
July 1993: Peace talks begin in Geneva.
Despite the signature of a fresh peace
accord, the war continues.
August 1995: The eleventh peace accord
is signed, to no avail.
1996: All factions agree to an uncondi-
tional ceasefire, which is followed by a peace treaty.
1997: The war finishes. A total of 150,000 people have
been killed and a million displaced since the start of the
conflict. Disarmament begins and refugees return. ECO-
WAS peacekeepers in the ECOMOG force remain in the
c o u n t r y. Charles Taylor is elected president by a landslide.
2001: As yet unscheduled presidential elections due to
take place.
L I B E R I A
MONROVIA
S I E R R A
L E O N E
G U I N E A
Atlantic
Ocean
