T
INTERVIEW BY SHIRAZ SIDHVA
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



Getting the spin right
on history
Over the past decade, profound historical changes have led many countries to revise how they teach
history in school. Falk Pingel* looks at the pitfalls of the exercise
o what extent do authors who revise school
textbooks tread the fine line between his-
torical truth and distortion for political or
other purposes? 
Careful analysis is required to ensure
that biases do not creep into texts, and
there are several criteria for judging accu-
r a cy. The bottom line is that different
perspectives must be mentioned,other-
wise you’re likely to get a biased presen-
tation of history.This tends to be the case
with how religious issues are treated,or
how the so-called underdeveloped coun-
tries are presented.This can be very dif-
ferent from how the people concerned
actually view their own culture or religion.
We have found biased interpretations of
the two World Wars in European text-
b o o k s,when they dealt with borders, p r o-
blems with minorities or victims of per-
secution,for example.
What guidelines exist for avoiding bias?  
The Institute for International Text-
book Research,with UNESCO, has deve-
loped guidelines for textbook revision.
There are methods on how to do a lin-
guistic analysis of a text to gauge whether
it is biased.The deeper structure of a text
is analyzed to assess whether cultural
diversity is respected, or whether there
are racial and ethnic stereotypes.
What about the choice of authors?
The way textbooks are written varies
across different regions. In We s t e r n
Europe or the U. S. , a team of three or
more scholars is involved in writing a
single text. An open textbook market
exists so that schools have a choice.This
in itself is usually a guarantee that diffe-
rent views are expressed. But in other
regions (including some countries of East
and Southeast Europe, as well as many
African and Asian countries),textbooks
are often written by a single author who
is commissioned by the state to write
according to a narrow set of guidelines.
Is this problem more acute in certain
regions? 
Ye s, in former Soviet countries, b u t
there has been a change for the better in
the last decade. We ’ve organized semi-
nars with textbook authors from Eastern

* Deputy Director of the Georg-Eck e r t
Institute for International Te x t b o o k
Research, Germany, and author of the
UN E S C O Guidebook on Te x t b o o k
R e s e a r ch and Textbook Revision, 1 9 9 9 .

Europe to teach them new methods of
writing and discussing the different inter-
pretations possible in history.This is par-
ticularly difficult when we are dealing
with the Balkan wars or with the dissolu-
tion of Socialist Yu g o s l a v i a , where memo-
ries of suffering are still fresh.
What do you see as the most serious bias
in history textbooks? 
The tendency to construct a conti-
nuity in time,whether of one culture, o n e
nation and even of nation states, i n v e s t i n g
this culture, people or nation with a
dignity superior to others. Some Euro-
pean countries, for example, say their
nations were born in the 9t h or 10t hc e n-
t u r y, when the nation state has only
existed for 200 years.
How can this be prevented? 
Sometimes discussions are useful to
deconstruct this notion of continuity over
centuries. Of course, most nations trace
back roots to ancient or medieval times,
when social or religious patterns of
dependency were much more important
than ethnic or “national”groupings.The
term “people” or “nation” did not have
the same meaning as today. Often,text-
book authors tend to put their own
people or nation in the centre and dimi-
nish or exclude others believed to have
less “ h i s t o r i c a l ” r i g h t s. Our message is:
d o n ’t dehumanize what is different from
you.
Germany over the last 20 years has deve-
loped an excellent resource for teachers
on the Nazi period. Do textbooks get more
accurate with the passage of time? 
Yes, time does help. It is much harder
to have accurate textbooks for countries
still at war. The latest Palestinian texts
developed by the Palestinian National
Authority don’t deal with the present
dimension of the Israeli-Palestinian confli c t
at all. In contrast, Israel has an open private
textbook market. Different versions are
now available, but none that acknowledge
Palestinian culture or history. ■
