KINTTO LUCAS
Uruguayan writer and journalist, currently teaching at Simon Bolivar University in Quito, Ecuador

And the meek shall
occupy the earth
Brazil’s landless peasants are fighting for more than just agrarian
reform—their goal is to build a new social order based on 
solidarity and mutual aid
2 . H OT SPOT S
A red banner flutters at the entrance to
the August 8 camp, a town of black
tent-houses and narrow alleys located
eight kilometres from Bagé and 120
kms from the border with Uruguay, i n
the Brazilian state of Rio Grande do Sul. It features
two peasants striding forth from a green map of
Brazil and the words “Landless Wo r k e r s ’
M o v e m e n t .”
Founded in the 1980s in southern Brazil to fig h t
for agrarian reform and land redistribution, t h e
Sem Terra movement operates in an unusual but
effective way: peaceful occupation of under-used
land belonging to transnational companies and big
landowners.
Brazil has plenty of such land. A f t e r
neighbouring Paraguay, it has the world’s highest
concentration of land ownership.About one percent
of landowners are thought to possess 46 percent of
the land,while 90 percent have less than 20 percent.
According to the National Institute for Land
Settlement and Reform (INCRA), the state body in
charge of agrarian reform, there are some 100
million hectares of idle land that could be farmed.
In the last 20 years, five million peasants and their
families have fled the countryside, largely because
of this unequal land distribution, and proceeded
to swell the ranks of the unemployed in already
overcrowded cities such as São Paulo and Rio de
Janeiro.
I t ’s an hour after dawn. Clouds and rain are
giving way to the sun, which finally emerges. A
strong wind whips through the streets of the little
t o w n , although a nearby thicket of eucalyptus trees
affords some protection.On one side of the tents,
men and women wash clothes in a stream. Th e
different teams in the camp are starting their daily
c h o r e s : some look for firewood, the only fuel
available, others cook food and clean,while others
meet to discuss the next steps in the fight for land.
Eight hundred farming families live in the town’s
200 various-sized dwellings made of wooden frames
and black nylon walls and roofs. On both sides,
behind wire fences, are 2,700 hectares of idle land
belonging to the Brazilian Agricultural Research
C o r p o r a t i o n .By the fir e,while the ch i m a r r ã o1 of tea
is passed around, C é s a r, the leader of the camp,
and Gilberto, his deputy, talk about the occupation
of the São Pedro estate a few kilometres away.
It began at 9pm when more than 3,000 people set
out for the estate.When they reached the entrance,
soldiers opened fire from a car. Realizing the size of
the advancing crowd, the troops retreated to the
safety of a building and continued fir i n g. Th e
peasants surrounded the house and pleaded with
them to stop. One marcher was killed and two
w o u n d e d . An hour later, the landowners and the
soldiers surrendered and São Pedro was occupied.
“ We stayed there for a few days,”says Gilberto,
“but then we decided to leave because the
government promised to give land to all the families
within 10 days.”
When black-tented camps 
grow into agro-towns
A few months later, the families still had no
l a n d , so new protests were mounted including a
450-km march to Porto A l e g r e, the state capital,
and further occupations. More than 30 children and
adults died during the struggle. Today, nine years
later, most of the families from the August 8 camp
have received land, but across Brazil there are
hundreds more black-tented camps.
Since 1984, landless peasants in Brazil have
occupied more than 3,900 estates and their campaign
has become one of the largest protest movements in
Latin A m e r i c a .After each occupation, they ask the
government to expropriate and redistribute the
land—as required by the 1988 Constitution—and
when the state does their bidding,the camp turns into
a settlement with more permanent structures.A b o u t
22 million hectares are thought to have been handed
over in this way to 618,000 families, many of whom
eat what they grow and sell what is left over through
a network of cooperatives.
The 8,000 settlements scattered through 24 of
Brazil’s 27 states are not just rice, bean and potato
plantations. There are kindergartens, schools and
c l i n i c s, meeting halls and churches. The most
d e v e l o p e d , called “ a g r o - t o w n s,” boast farm
industries providing steady jobs for peasants and
their families.As in other “ m i n i - s o c i e t i e s,” teams of
farmers are placed in charge of essential tasks such
as planning, food supply, h u t - b u i l d i n g, internal and

external security,fir e w o o d ,h y g i e n e, r e l i g i o n ,l e i s u r e,
education and sport.
“Our battle isn’t just to get land,” says economist
João Pedro Stédile, the movement’s national
c o o r d i n a t o r. “ We ’re building a new way of life,
s o c i a l l y, culturally and politically. Land is just a
stepping stone towards this new society, and each
occupation is a chance to start building our future.”
The movement, he says, “is changing the life of
peasants who were once marginalized and had no
f u t u r e. To d a y, they are working the land with dignity
and earning each month about the equivalent of
three times the minimum wage,which is more than
the average person living in the countryside.”
Fierce resistance from the 
country’s big landowners
During the first government of President
Fernando Henrique Cardoso (1994-98), a g r a r i a n
reform was presented as vital for the growth of family
f a r m i n g, a solution to food shortages and the way to
reduce rural confli c t .But Stédile argues that the new
p o l i cy followed the agricultural development model
promulgated by previous military regimes.
“ That economically-driven policy failed to
recognize the importance and potential of small-
scale farming in the production process. Fa m i l y
plots are still seen as backward in the capitalist
scheme of things. Governments seem to have
ignored the fact that over the past 36 years, since
January 2001 - The Unesco Courier 2525
T H E N E W P E A S A N T S ’  R E V O LT
Sowing the seeds for a new society at an occupied estate in northeastern Brazil.
agrarian reform began under President Jo ã o
Goulart in 1964, rural conflicts have continued and
are growing.Over the same period, food production
has risen but so has the number of hungry
Brazilians.”
In Stédile’s opinion, family plots are under siege
from a single model of agricultural development that
encourages growing cereals (especially soy) for
e x p o r t , and which requires huge investment in
transport infrastructure.
“Each occupation opens up a new area of
political and social formation, of struggle and
r e s i s t a n c e,” he says.“By occupying land, the peasants
are constantly recreating their own history and
winning a chance to negotiate.Th e y ’re also winning
a chance to get a new kind of education for their
children in the settlement and the right to a bigger
say in decisions about their future.”
The road has been far from easy. As expected,
the occupations prompted fierce resistance from
the big landowners, who ruthlessly worked to stamp
them out—persecuting and physically attacking
peasants and their leaders through gunmen and
paramilitary forces employed to drive protestors off
the land.According to the Catholic Church’s Land
C o m m i s s i o n ,which backs the Sem Terra movement,
1,169 violent deaths have occurred in rural Brazil
since 1985, including those of trade unionists,
p e a s a n t s, lawyers and priests. Only 16 culprits have
been tried and jailed.

In an effort to end these confli c t s, H e n r i q u e
Cardoso decided during his second term to ban the
expropriation of occupied estates. Stédile views
this as contradictory.“ The government wanted the
landless to stop occupying the estates by warning
them that occupied land would not be expropriated,
but the fact is that land is only handed over after
occupation and struggle.”
Violence against peasants has diminished in
recent years though Brazil is still lumbered with
the problem of how to redistribute its surfeit of
l a n d . The landless have opened up a breach and
have won property to farm alongside rewards such
as the Alternative Nobel Prize2.
Despite this, the current minister of agricultural
development,Raul Jungmann, recently suggested
that the  Sem Te r r a has strayed. “I think it’s
important to have mediators leading the protestors.
But the landless movement no longer plays this
role. It hasn’t been able to adapt to changes in the
world and to agrarian issues in Brazil.”
The minister pointed out that since he took
o f fice in 1996, the average annual number of newly
settled families has grown tenfold.The government’s
action,he stated,has two clear objectives: “reduce
the number of conflicts in the countryside and make
land reform more efficient.”
The movement contests this analysis and
remains well aware that the future of their struggle
will largely depend on not forgetting its original
aims. ■
1. A metal recipient used by Brazilian peasants to
drink a local blend of herbal tea.
2 . Created in 1980 and given on the eve of the Nobel
Prizes in the Swedish Parliament to reward actions
in favour of the environment and human rights.
A FINE RECORD ON SCHOOLING
