In the USSR, the state has always had its nose in citizens’ pri-
vate business. Ten years after the fall of the Soviet empire,
how closely are the Russians watched?
Of course, the communist party is no longer the almighty
power it used to be. But old habits die hard. In 1998, the
g o v e rnment decided to take a close
i n t e rest in Russia’s three million Intern e t
users. By passing a resolution setting up
SORM 2, (an acronym for a system of
operative investigation measures), the
s e c ret services and the State Te l e c o m-
munications Committee extended SORM
1 to the Internet. Since 1995, that system
has allowed the Federal Security Bure a u ,
the KGB’s successor, to eavesdrop on tra-
ditional communications (telephones,
telex, fax and so on), as long as it had a
warrant.
So far, a single man has dared to challenge SORM 2. Naïl Mur-
zakhanov, 34, is the chairman of Bayard-Slaviya Communi-
cations (BSK), an Internet access provider based in Vo l g o g r a d
(1,500 kilometres south of Moscow). “When the FSB agents
came to have me sign their co-operation plan, I refused,” he
says. “My team and I went through the document with a fin e -
toothed comb and we came to the conclusion that it was
illegal.” Murzakhanov, who has a degree in robotics, explains
that “we’re not against all forms of co-operation. We’d be
willing to go along in specific cases, but not systematically.
For example, if the FSB brought us court documents pro-
ving that an individual is suspected of tax
evasion or pedophilia, we could coope-
rate. But that has never happened.”
Cut to the quick, the ministry of com-
munications threatened to take away
the rebellious provider’s license. But in
January 2000, Murzakhanov sued. The
court has met three times. Each time the
session was adjourned because the
m i n i s t r y ’s re p resentatives failed to show
up. The case dragged on. Then, in
August, Murzakhanov received a letter
f rom the minister himself, who with-
drew his threat to take away BSK’s license. “There was no
longer a need to maintain our lawsuit,” the young busi-
nessman says, frustrated at seeing the Russian government
get off the hook so easily. ■
Anne Nivat, Moscow correspondent for the French daily Libération.



B S K , THE PROVIDER T H AT SAYS N I E T
