10–43 seconds (i.e. 0.0000000000000000000000000000000000000000001 seconds)
10–35 to 10–12 seconds
10–6 seconds
300,000 years
Between 5.5 and
10.5 billion years
(precise date unknown)
10 (to 15) billion years



The story
of everything
B Space and time as defined by
Einstein’s basic laws of physics have
as yet no meaning.
D “ I n fla t i o n ” has stopped. The primitive force which drives it leaves behind a series of
elementary particles—electrons, q u a r k s, gluons and neutrinos—existing in an environment
of inconceivably high temperatures (102 7 degrees centigrade). E x h a u s t e d , the universal
early force breaks up into gravity and other forces operating at the nuclear level.Einstein’s
laws now apply.The universe continues to expand and cool.
F Quarks begin to stick to one another in threes, forming the first protons and neutrons—
the building blocks of atoms.Anti-matter and matter meet and engage in mutual destruction,
leaving for some unspecified reason a remainder of pure matter.The universe has chilled to
a billion degrees centigrade.
H No light has been able to pass through the early universe due to its soup-like mixture of
electrons and photons (carriers of light and other energy wa v e s ) . Upon reaching 3,000
degrees centigrade, the electrons are finally able to cling to the basic atomic nuclei: the
photons are thus set free, making up the universe’s first ever electromagnetic signal.We can
still hear its remnants today. Space is now transparent.
J Our Sun is formed along with the planets of the solar system, possibly due to a cataclysmic
s u p e r n o va blast followed by the gradual accumulation into spherical bodies of dust, rock and
gas. On those planets closest to the sun—Mercury,Venus, Earth and Mars—most light gas
is burnt off, leaving in the case of Earth a mix composed largely of iron, n i c ke l , c a r b o n ,
oxygen and magnesium. Distant planets, such as Jupiter and Saturn, remain gigantic globes
of light gas.
L Multi-cellular organisms flo u r i s h , aided by the onset of sexual reproduction. The fir s t
vertebrates emerge in the Ordovician era.Plants, dinosaurs, reptiles, and mammals follow.
Some five million years ago, various species of hominids begin to inhabit A f r i c a . H o m o
s a p i e n s steps forth over 100,000 years ago.L a n g u a g e,culture and human society are created.
The UNESCO Courier - May 200126
© David A.Hardy/Science Photo Library, Cosmos, Paris

0
10–43 to 10–35 seconds
10–11 seconds
100 seconds
2 or 3 billion years



A The universe is born in unknown, possibly unknowable circumstances. Traditional Big
Bang science suggested it emerged from a “singularity”—a point of infinite density at which
all known laws of space and time break down. S p e c u l a t i o n ,h o w e v e r, has not abated: o p t i o n s
for the first cause include a fluctuation in a field of quantum “foam,” a growth inside a Black
Hole or the bounce from a self-annihilating parent universe. Theists prefer the hand of God.
C Current theories point to an era of rapid “ i n flation”—an expansion so fast that it
outstripped the speed of light. From a tiny ball less than a millimetre in size, the universe
may have ballooned far beyond the distances our most advanced telescopes can currently
observe. The force behind this expansion is unknown.
E The temperature drops to a million billion degrees centigrade. Electromagnetism is born.
All four fundamental forces of physics—gravity, the strong nuclear force, the weak nuclear
force and electromagnetism—are now in place. Time is ripe for the creation of more complex
particles.
G Neutrons and protons combine to form the most basic atomic nuclei—those of hydrogen,
helium and lithium.The universe cools at extraordinary speed,so fast that there is no longer
enough heat to form other, heavier elements.
I The cosmic dark age ends with the formation of the universe’s first ever stars at the heart
of dense gas clouds. Compacted by gravity, hydrogen in these stars fuses into helium, p o u r i n g
heat and light into space. Hot and violent nuclear reactions clamber up the ladder of the
e l e m e n t s. C a r b o n , oxygen and magnesium are formed. Giant stars—called supernova e —
expire in tremendous explosions, ejecting heavy matter across the evolving galaxies.
Time
© B. Tucker/International St/Cosmos, Paris
K Emergence of life.The very first cells begin to populate the earth. Early theories suggested
the fundamental components for life, such as amino acids, were generated by the action of
lightning on a primal stew of wa t e r, methane and hydrogen. Contemporary accounts
postulate that asteroids impacting on Earth may have instead carried the seeds of organic
life.
6.2 (to 11.2) billion years
