SOUMAYA NAAMANE GUESSOUS
MOROCCANSOCIOLOGIST, UNIVERSITYPROFESSOR , AUTHOR OF PRINTEMPSET AUTOMNE SEXUELS (EDDIF, 2000)
AND AU-DELÀ DE TOUTEPUDEUR, EDDIF, 1988.



The passing of bodily seasons
For Moroccan young women, sexual awakening rhymes with danger. In the
countryside, girls are often married off at 14 and deemed old by 30. But in
cities, the young are starting to hold their ground
2 . PASSING RITES
D
uring recent fieldwork in Bni Meskine, i n
southern Morocco,I felt disarmed,w o r t h l e s s
and at a loss before the cruelty of what
turned out to be a veritable slave market.
For the first time in my life, I lied to conduct
my study.My ploy: S a n a a ,one of my students, is seeking
to marry off her two brothers with 13- or 14-year-old girls.
As for myself,I’m supposedly looking for a spouse for my
u n c l e,widowed at 70.My goal: to prove that this market
indeed exists,and that parents in the countryside pay little
heed to the legal age of 15 for marrying their daughters.
In this region and many others, the s m a s y r a ,
brokers who supply city dwellers with child labour,a r e
also sought out to find potential brides. From one
home to the next,we witnessed scenes like these…
We are greeted by three women belonging to
different generations:the matriarch,her daughter-in-
law and her 14-year-old granddaughter. The young
girl busily skirts around us, wiping the table, putting
away our shoes, shaking the cushions. I observe her, a
budding beauty, her body charged with promise. I s
her father prepared to betroth her without a marriage
license? “Yes, he married the eldest when she was 14.
The girls have nothing to do. As soon as their zmane
(destiny) arrives, we marry them.” Then the paternal
uncle greets us.“ I ’ll give you 15 girls if you want.Th e y
are educated, never lift their eyes from the ground
nor raise a voice of complaint. Th e y ’ll put up with
anything without a whimper.”
Another home: the wife of the household greets us.
She is pregnant with her seventh child.“Choose the one
you like.They’ve all had the same education.All they
do is work. They never go out of the house. They get
pregnant on their wedding night.”
I felt like screaming at the thought that these girls
would be married so young, savagely deflowered and
left disgusted by the sexuality forced upon them. M e n
keep a close watch on their daughters.Their honour lies
in controlling the female body. Women uphold this
tradition by muzzling their own bodies which they
learn to do from puberty on. Female sexuality is
channeled by marrying off young nubile bodies. Such
dramatic practices are part and parcel of everyday
life in a countryside mired by poverty and isolation,
where nine out of ten women are illiterate.
Our research in Casablanca found that in cities,
puberty is no less of a painful experience. Young girls
are taught by their mothers,aunts and grandmothers an
outdated sex education revolving around taboos. Th e
young woman’s body beholds danger. Her sexuality
does not belong to her. She cannot be entrusted with
something so fragile yet potentially explosive, for it
can lead to her loss and that of her whole family. S o
every sexual drive must be stifle d .As one young woman
e x p l a i n e d ,“My mother controlled my movements. I was
told not to jump or to spread my legs for fear of losing
my virginity. I was terrified by my sexuality.”
Double
standards
While older women once went into shock when
they started bleeding unknowingly, the younger
generation is better informed about menstruation.
Yet they still suffer from a pervasive sense of anguish.
From the outset,teenagers live in
conflict with their bodies.
Menstrual blood is impure, d i r t y,
s h a m e f u l . “I learned that it was
h a r a m [a sin] to let anyone see the
blood because God punishes this
s e v e r e l y.” Menstruation provokes a
feeling of rejection of the body:“I
feel dirty, I no longer take care of
myself, I hate myself.”
There has been some progress
in the cities where the age of
marriage has been pushed back to
about 26 years old. S t i l l , s o c i e t y
strictly condemns extra-marital sex,
a taboo that in practice,only applies
to women. When one student told
me that girls who made love before
marriage were prostitutes, I asked,
“So are you a virgin?”I reminded
him that the proscription applied to
both sexes. D i s a r m e d , he replied,
“No! Religion applies to girls,
tradition to boys!”
Even though a Moroccan
woman can expect to live longer
than her husband to the ripe age of
7 0 , her femininity is ephemeral.
Society kills her sexuality
prematurely by imposing a “ s o c i a l A young bride in traditional dress.
© Sabine Weiss/Rapho, Paris 

a g e ” after which she is no longer considered seductive.
At 31,according to men,she is past the age of getting
married.At 40,she is old.A blossom barely in flower,
she becomes an elder in a body without promise.By the
time she reaches 47—the average age of menopause—
she no longer exists as a woman.She is banished to live
roughly 23 years within an asexual body.Amputated of
her femininity, she must grieve her feelings of desire
and seduction.
She renounces her sexual role and devotes herself
to playing mother and grandmother. Having put her
body at the service of her husband and procreation, s h e
can now only exist through a soul that has to be
p u r i fie d . Religion becomes her refuge, as if Islam
s t i fled desire. Illiterate older women may renounce
their bodies in this way,but young women are reacting
o t h e r w i s e. Even mothers are now denouncing
p r o c r e a t i o n .“I refuse to see my daughter live like me.
So many pregnancies take their toll. She has to
maintain her figure and stay beautiful,” says a woman
of 65. “I refuse to be like my mother,” chants the
younger generation. Indeed women today have an
average of three children,down from seven 40 years
ago.
Could this break the vicious circle? Yo u n g
women—48 percent of the Moroccan population is
under 20—are becoming emancipated,playing more
sport and keeping an eye on their figure. B e a u t y
cannons have changed, despite the pressure and
expectations of older generations.“A beautiful woman
must be well-endowed. To d a y, girls have no more
charm, they’re as thin as reeds,” laments an elderly
p e a s a n t .“ You can see their bones—they must prick in
bed.”
The divorce rate is rising among the young. It’s a
sad reality, but one which proves that this population
“is standing up for itself.” Traditions may still be
e n t r e n c h e d , but young women are cultivating body
and mind. Through education and work, they are
gaining their independence.“I’m not afraid of old age.
Unlike my mother I won’t let myself be treated like a
useless old thing.I earn a living and have interests,”s a y s
one young woman.“I don’t only exist as a wife and
mother. My life is in my hands.” ■
