ou must have been
quite intrigued by the
descriptions of the
September 11 terro-
rists in the media.
These young men had
fairly balanced child-
hoods and were quite
e d u c a t e d .Yet they turned into violent fana-
tics. How do you explain that?
By their total lack of empathy. Ger-
mans became Nazis in exactly the same
w a y,by not being able to imagine someone
e l s e ’s world. For them, you had to be
b l o n d e, dolichocephalic (having a long
head) and not Je w i s h . All other people
were inferior beings.The terrorists in the
U. S. attacks had good upbringing and edu-
cation but they never learned to accept
forms of human existence other than their
own.
Why not?
In some Muslim countries, fanaticism
is manufactured. Just like in Fr a n c e,w h e r e
people were taught to hate Germans after
the 1870 Franco-German war. Te a c h e r s
were actually paid to tell children they
would be glorified if one day they went
off to “smash”the Germans. I’ve seen the
same thing in the Middle East. I’ve seen
books that told little boys that if they died
for religion, t h e y ’d go straight to heaven to
live with Allah. These schools that teach
there is only one truth, are schools of
hatred.
But some of the terrorists were children of
i m m i g rants who adjusted well in Euro p e …
These individuals never made it
through adolescence into adulthood.Th e r e
are more and more young people in
Boris Cyrulnik
Surviving the trauma of life
Y
Trauma and anxiety are the lot of a growing number of young people, as violence holds sway and
traditional notions of the family disintegrate. But there are roads to recovery, says French
globetrotting psychologist, Boris Cyrulnik 

“When you don’t know who you are, you
love it when a dictatorship takes charge”
Europe who fail on that score, about a
third of the total,because we don’t know
how to help and support them properly.
They drift and become perfect targets for
sects and extremist movements.When you
d o n ’t know who you are, you love it when
a dictatorship takes charge of you. Th e
moment you submit to a master, to a single
m e s s a g e, you become a fanatic. M a n y
people are also suffering from a growing
sense of anxiety over globalization. They
feel depersonalized and disconnected from
their feelings. Disturbed people feel secure
obeying someone who tells them what to
do. Submission is a good way for them to
get rid of their anxiety.
So you don’t think economic globalization
induces a kind of “collective global sub-
conscious” that helps us to come to grips
with all the ideas and information coming
at us from all sides?
N o.On the contrary, if I want to see the
w o r l d ,I have to accept that I won’t unders-
tand everything. Identity is like speech.
When a baby is born, it has the capacity to
make several thousand different sounds.
But to speak,it has to whittle them down
to between 100 and 300,according to the
l a n g u a g e. The same principle applies to
forging an identity. I must give up a thou-
sand elements or dimensions which cannot
be integrated into the person I want to
b e. To d a y, with globalization, a lot of
people are looking to their roots to
“whittle themselves down” in order to
forge an identity.
So people return to their roots because the
Western “model”is spreading too fast?
Some people are fanatically seeking
refuge in their roots. But this approach
leads to alienation.Since it’s the West that
has the weapons, the money and the tech-
n o l o g y, t h e r e ’s a very good chance We s t e r n
attitudes will become globalized and
spread across the world.Either you unhap-
pily submit to this trend or your hatred
of the West increases, which is what is
happening today. Imaginary identities,
many hundreds or even thousands of years
o l d , will continue to resurface. I t ’s as if the
only choice is between “ d e - i d e n t i fic a t i o n ”
and alienation.
Is there a compromise solution?
Ye s.To avoid feeling alienated, p e o p l e
must recognize that an identity is like a
patchwork of different elements.All iden-
tities are the product of a father’s and
mother’s past and of a religion everyone
interprets according to their cultural sur-
r o u n d i n g s. In Fr a n c e, for example, B r e-
tons are very proud of the painted croc-
kery made in Quimper but not many know
that the style was invented by an Italian
who emigrated to Brittany a century ago.
You’ve talked about the serious problems of
t o d a y ’s teenagers, who are “ d r i f t i n g ”m o re
and more. Yet children have never been
better understood by society than today, s o
why are so many youngsters becoming neu-
ro t i c, committing suicide and taking to
crime?
That isn’t a contradiction. P r o g r e s s
always has a price.The price of freedom is
a n x i e t y.Today children get help to develop
their personalities and become aware of all
kinds of things. They’re more intelligent
and more lively, but also more worried.
We look after them very well when they’r e
young and then we abandon them as soon
as they’re teenagers. Society doesn’t take
over where parents leave off. So a third of
all teenagers fall apart,usually after leaving
high school. To avoid that,we need more
social and cultural structures that will help
them give meaning to their lives by encou-
raging them to be creative, to speak openly,
to reach out to each other. But we don’t do
that.
A teenager’s problem lies in the ques-
tion:“What am I going to do about what
I ’ve been made into?” To answer that,
they must be surrounded by the warmth of
feeling that comes from a group, f r o m
f r i e n d s, from the confidence of being able
to find a job. But the technological revo-
lution has been so massive that schools
now have a monopoly on social selec-
tion—they determine the possibilities
open to an individual. If a boy or girl blos-
soms, they do well in school and learn a
skill. They’ll be among the two-thirds of
teenagers who benefit from the improved
facilities and support available in early
THE UNCLASSIFIABLE CYRULNIK
Boris Cyulnik is, beyond a doubt, resilient.Despite a war-wracked childhood and the deporta-
tion of his parents, he still managed to become a distinguished scholar and well-balanced
individual:happy with his family, respected by his peers and famous for his many books.
Born in Bordeaux, France, in 1937,Cyrulnik only refers to his personal wounds in “third person,”
while writing about children.Clearly, this is a man who has learned to transform weakness into
strength. “I was never put on the ‘conveyor belt’ of life—I’ve always made my own path,” he
says. “I do only what is absolutely required to be considered ‘normal.’”
Instead of distancing himself from people, his personal trauma drove him to try to understand
what it means to be human.After studying medicine, he followed diverse branches of psycholo-
gy, such as neuropsychiatry and psychoanalysis, before breaking the sacrosanct barriers between
academic disciplines. Yet by moving into fields like ethology (which focuses on animal behaviour),
the maverick scholar made considerable enemies in the scientific community.
This anti-specialist,globetrotter and incurably curious academic has never hesitated to question
some of the dogma of psychoanalysis. While Freud holds guilt responsible for neurosis and social
discontent,Cyrulnik feels that there is a “good”kind of guilt,through which “we try to avoid cau-
sing harm because we can empathize with others. This is probably the basis of morality.” ■

childhood.But the other third don’t like
s c h o o l , feel humiliated and don’t get a
chance to shine elsewhere.They find them-
selves at a loose end on the street, w i t h o u t
a job and often without any family. How
do kids like this recover their self-esteem?
They indulge in “ t o u g h ”a c t i v i t i e s, t e s t i n g
themselves and proving their existence
by adopting primitive social rituals such as
violence, fighting and drugs.
You say,“ t h e re is no family.” But isn’t it just
that the family is changing?
Th e r e ’s no family and it’s changing,a s
expectancy of about 10 days. He’s elimi-
nated if he doesn’t join a gang. D e l i n-
q u e n cy is a way of adapting to a crazy
society.
But what should be done?  Make women
stay at home?
N o, but there has to be someone there,
man or woman.In some cultures that still
have extended families, there’s always a
grown-up at home. E l s e w h e r e, we have to
i n n o v a t e. In Brazil, for example, p e o p l e
construct families that have nothing to do
with blood or biology.An old man says to
an old lady:“I’m sick of going down the
steep slopes in the slums, I’m going to take
care of the house.”And the old lady says:
“Well,I’m going to look after the kids in
the neighbourhood.” And then another,
a bit younger, says:“I’ll chip in with some
money because I’ve got an odd job.”Th e s e
are verbal families, people who’ve made
understandings to protect each other, to be
f r i e n d s, to celebrate and fight together,
like all families. D e l i n q u e n cy vanishes
immediately in these households as soon
as this kind of family develops.
In the We s t , the family has changed dra-
matically, yet laws and attitudes haven’t.
That is because we often make the
mistake of talking about the “traditional
f a m i l y.”Yet this structure only emerged in
the West in the 19th century, at the same
time as the factories.It was a way of adap-
ting to industrial society. A man was an
appendage of a machine and a woman an
it always has. When kids get home, t h e-
re’s no one there. No father, no mother.
Why should they shut themselves up in
an empty house when there are pals out in
the street?  I’ve worked in some Latin
American countries where kids say they
had a row with their mother or stepfather
and just left. Life is physically very hard in
the street but there’s always something
going on—a celebration, a theft, s o m e-
thing to share.You talk and you live.Th e s e
children get used to not having a family by
turning to petty crime. A street boy in
Colombia who isn’t a delinquent has a life
In the Mongolian capital of Ulan Bator, street children in the midst of winter look for
warmth underground,near hot water pipes.

“In most culture s , victims are 
re g a rded as guilty of something”
appendage of a man. There was order in
every facet of life. Individuals—just about
all women and most men—were psycho-
logically crushed.Only a minority, about
two percent of the population, was able to
develop healthily. And so they married
to pass on their property and other goods.
But this version of a traditional family
wasn’t very common at the time because
most workers didn’t get married, s i n c e
they had no property to pass on.
That society has disappeared and there
are fewer and fewer traditional families,
but the model is still in people’s minds.
And the laws are only just starting to
c h a n g e. When there’s just one concept
a r o u n d , it takes a long while for people to
change their attitudes.You have to wage “ a
war of words,” writing and debating, t o
drive things forward. You can invent a
thousand different variations of the family
as long as children still have a place where
they’re protected,where there’s love and
growth and where some things, like incest
are absolutely forbidden,while other rules
can be negotiated.
The idea of resilience you discuss in your
recent books1 is becoming very popular.
Why?
Epidemiological research by the Wo r l d
Health Organization shows that one out of
two people has been or will be seriously
traumatized at some time during their life
(by war, v i o l e n c e, r a p e,c r u e l t y, i n c e s t ,e t c. ) .
One in four will experience at least two
serious traumas.The rest are also bound to
fall on some hard times.Yet the notion of
r e s i l i e n c e, which is a person’s ability to
grow in the face of terrible problems, had
not been scientifically studied until
recently. Today, it’s all the rage in many
c o u n t r i e s. In Latin A m e r i c a , they have
resilience institutes, in Holland and Ger-
many they have resilience universities. In
the United States,you hear the word all the
t i m e.The World Trade Center towers have
even been nicknamed “the twin resilient
t o w e r s ” by those who want to rebuild
them.
So why wasn’t this idea investigated earlier?
Because for a long time people have
despised victims. In most cultures, t h e y ’r e
regarded as guilty of something.A woman
w h o ’s been raped, for example, is often
condemned as much as her attacker
because “she must have provoked him,”i t
is said. Sometimes a victim is punished
even more than an aggressor is. Not so
long ago in Europe, an unmarried woman
who had a baby was thrown out on the
street while the father risked virtually
nothing.
This disdain or hatred has also been
directed against the survivors of war. The
families and villages of these victims are
suspicious and say: “He’s coming home.
That means he must have hidden somew-
here or collaborated with the enemy.”
After the Second World Wa r, the most
deadly in human history, things swung to
the other extreme. The victims became
heroes. By pushing these individuals into
making careers as victims, societies found
a convenient way of downplaying the
crimes of the Nazis. The fact that these
victims survived was used to downplay
the savagery.
At the time, René Spitz and A n n a
Freud2 described children whose parents
had been killed in the wartime bombing of
L o n d o n . They were all profoundly
impaired and shut-off people, suicidal and
unable to relax their bodies. When Spitz
and Freud saw them again a few years
l a t e r, they were amazed at how well they’d
recovered and wrote that these abandoned
children had gone through four stages:
p r o t e s t ,d e s p a i r, indifference—all students
learned about those three—and then reco-
very, which nobody was interested in stu-

dying.
How did resilience become accepted among
psychologists?
The word,which comes from the Latin
“ r e s a l i r e ” (to jump up again), a p p e a r e d
in the English language and passed into
psychological parlance in the 1960s thanks
to an American psychologist, E m m y
We r n e r. She had gone to Hawaii to assess
the development of children who had no
family, didn’t go to school, lived in great
poverty and were exposed to disease and
violence. She followed them for 30 years
and found that in the end, a third had
learned how to read and write, acquired a
skill and started a family. Two-thirds of
them were still in a bad way. But if people
were just machines,all of them would have
failed.
What’s a typical resilient child like, socially
and culturally?
There is no typical profil e. But a trau-
matized child can still be resilient if she or
he has acquired a gut or primitive confi-
dence in the first year of life. Such children
take the attitude that “ I ’ve been loved
therefore I’m worth loving, so I live in
hope of meeting someone who’ll help me
resume my development.”These children
feel a lot of grief  but still relate to other
people, give them gifts of food and look
for an adult they can turn into one of
their  parents.Then they give themselves
a narrative identity – “I’m the one who
was… sent to the camps, r a p e d , forced to
become a child soldier”and so on.
If you give them a chance to make up
for lost time and to express themselves,
nearly all—90 to 95 per cent—become
r e s i l i e n t .They have to be given a chance to
be creative, to test and prove themselves as
k i d s, through things like joining the scouts,
studying for an exam, organizing a trip
and learning to be useful.Problem young-
sters feel humiliated when they’re given
something, especially if there’s a lecture
along with it. But they regain their balance
when asked to give something themselves.
When they grow up, such children are
drawn to selfless professions. They want
others to learn from what they’ve gone
t h r o u g h . They often become teachers,
social workers, psychiatrists or psycholo-
g i s t s. Having been problem children them-
selves helps them to identify with and res-
pect those who have been psychologically
hurt. ■
INTERVIEW BY SOPHIE BOUKHARI
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST
1. Boris Cyrulnik is the author of over a
d o zen works. The Dawn of Meaning
was published by McGraw-Hill in 1992.
2. Both are psychoanalysts, one American
(1887-1974) and the other the daughter of
Sigmund Freud (1895-1982).
In a rehabilitation centre for former child soldiers, in Sierra Leone.
