SAMUEL SIDIBE
DIRECTOR OF THE MALI’S NATIONAL MUSEUM



Mali: when f a r m e rs
become c u ra t o rs
For 20 years, Mali has been waging a war on the archaeological
plundering that plagues the country. Everyone has followed the president
to the front lines
T
o d a y,the archaeological site of Je n n é - Je n o
is no longer looted. Not far from there,
the villagers of Nombori have even
founded their own museum.And they’r e
not alone. In the Mopti region, the inha-
bitants of Fombori have taken the same initiative.
People who could have been tempted by looting to
improve their difficult lot have become curators!
These few startling examples go to show that Mali’s
efforts over the past two decades have paid off, e v e n
though looting is a long way from being wiped out.
The story goes back to the 1970s. Before that,
most of the trade in art works involved wooden
statuettes and masks, which were the only items
with an aesthetic and commercial value in the west.
Then, looting started to grow at a dramatic pace.
M a l i , with Nigeria and Niger,has become one of the
West African countries whose archaeological heri-
tage has been hardest hit by illicit traffic k i n g. A
1989 study by the Bamako Institute of Social
Sciences says that 17 percent of the 834 sites listed
in Mali’s Dogon country have been targets of large-
scale looting, of which two percent have been lost
forever for research.
Ancient cultures shrouded 
in mystery
In the inner Niger delta, hundreds of “ D j e n n é ”
terracotta statuettes,named after a city1 near Je n n é -
Je n o, have been scattered among private collec-
tions and museums around the world.The famous
“Bankoni”statuettes, which are named after a vil-
lage in Bamako’s suburbs, share the same fate.Th e
priceless bronze figurines from the Méma sites, in
the Ségou region,have fared no better.
The genius of Mali’s ancient oral civilizations
was chiefly expressed in statuary, one of our most
precious sources of information about the past. Fo r
example, one of the few statuettes found during a
scientific archaeological excavation of the Jenné-
Jeno site has revealed that earlier inhabitants buried
their dead in large earthenware jars and practised
other animist traditions. But we still know little
about the Bankoni, except that their civilization
flourished in the 14th and 15th centuries. Looters
were the first to discover all these sites.As a result,
the ancient art-producing cultures remain shrouded
in mystery, despite the high number of pieces sold
on the art market.
This market is basically supplied by so-called
antique dealers who in turn are supplied by their
own networks of looters: farmers or organized
g a n g s. The antiques are exported to Fr a n c e, t h e
United States and above all Belgium,a hub of illicit
trade.
Early on,M a l i ’s officials realized how serious the
situation was. Under the impetus of the country’s
current president,Alpha Oumar Konaré (head of
the national historic and ethnographic heritage
An archaeologist explaining to villagers the importance of protecting sites.

division from 1976 to 1978, minister of culture from
1978 to 1980),a legal framework was set up allowing
for an effective campaign against looting and traf-
fic k i n g.A series of laws was passed, starting in 1985.
Two years later, Mali ratified the 1970 UN E S C O
Convention (see p. 21).
International co-operation:
the missing link?
The next step lay in raising  public awareness.
Several meetings bringing together 50 to 100
people from all walks of life were held,especially
in areas most beset by the problem. These gathe-
rings provided an opportunity to explain the new
laws and how important archaeological sites are to
our national history and cultural identity. It was not
always easy. The rural population, victims of
repeated droughts since 1974, sometimes turned to
looting as a way to survive and did not always
accept or understand our approach. But we per-
severed.In 1993,we took a new step by setting up
cultural missions in Bandiagara, Djenné and Ti m-
b u k t u . Their purpose: to continue raising  peo-
p l e ’s awareness and encourage them to get
involved in protecting their heritage. Near Djenné
and Te n e n k o u , for example, villagers recently
staged a play and held a temporary exhibition
about heritage. Some have even volunteered with
the police to guard archaeological sites.
In cities, the media helped the campaign along
by running many articles on the subject. During a
1994 exhibition on the “Niger Valleys” held at the
National Museum, many visitors discovered the
extraordinary richness of our archaeological heri-
tage and the dangers that threaten it.Mali has not
hesitated to arrest, prosecute and imprison some
l a w b r e a k e r s, which also sends out a message to our
citizens on how serious the scourge of looting and
trafficking is.
But the nationwide campaign has its limits, so
long as foreign demand remains strong. I n t e r n a-
tional co-operation is a must.In the framework of
the 1970 UN E S C O C o n v e n t i o n , Mali and the United
States signed an agreement in 1997 restricting the
illicit import of the Niger Valley’s archaeological
heritage and of items from the t e l l e m caves of Ban-
d i a g a r a2.This accord is the only one of its kind in all
of Africa.Mali would like to establish bilateral co-
operation with other importer countries, such as
Fr a n c e, which has already joined the UN E S C O
Convention, and Switzerland and Belgium, when
they ratify it.
As far as professional co-operation goes, M a l i
took part in the regional workshops held by the
International Council of Museums (IC O M) in
Arusha in 1993,Bamako in 1994 and Kinshasa in
1 9 9 5 , which brought together museum professio-
n a l s, law enforcement agents and customs offi-
cers. In 1997,we also participated in the interna-
tional workshop in A m s t e r d a m , aimed at
strengthening solidarity between source and
importer countries. The IC O M’s Red List was
drafted during that meeting (see box).
International solidarity is more than critical to
curb illicit trade, develop archaeological research
and set up education programmes.The weakness of
financial and human resources in a country like
o u r s, which is confronted with tremendous chal-
lenges such as poverty,prevent us from implemen-
ting all the programmes necessary to stop the loo-
ting. Rich nations must say no to selfishness. The
heritage of poor countries deserves as much respect
as that of the wealthy ones. The battle is far from
won. ■
1. Inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List in
1988.
2. The cliffs of Bandiagara (Dogon country) were
inscribed on the World Heritage List in 1989.
