6There is on ly  
one action over 
which indiffer­
ent stars and un­
changing rivers 
have no sway: it 
is th e  a c t io n  
o f  a m an who  
snatches som e­
thing from deathi
Writer André Malraux (1901-1976) served as the French minister of cultural affairs between 1958 and 1969. He delivered this speech at the
U nesco-Berretty .
André 
M alraux :

the  following is the full text of an address delivered in 
Vnesco’s Headquarters on March 8 by André Malraux, 
French Minister of State for Cultural Affairs. M. Malraux 
was presiding at the ceremony which marked the launching 
of the International Campaign for the Preservation of the 
Monuments of Nubia.
★
n  March 8 1960, for the first time, the nations, 
though many of them even now are engaged in 
overt or open conflict, have been summoned to 
save by a united effort the fruits of a civilization on which 
none has a pre-emptive claim.
Such an appeal, in the last century, would have seemed 
fanciful. Not that Egypt was unknown then. Her 
spiritual greatness was surmised, her majestic monuments 
were admired. But if the !West knew Egypt better than 
it knew India or China, this was because it saw in her a 
province of the Bible. Through the Bible, Egypt, like 
Chaldaea, belonged to the dawn of our own history. Of 
the forty centuries Napoleon evoked as he stood before 
the Pyramids, the supreme moment was that in which 
they were beheld by Moses.
Temples have power to speak 
and statues acquire a soul
i t '  h e n ,  gradually, Egypt came into her own, though still 
J- within narrower -limits than one would imagine. The 
-pre-eminence of Graeco-Roman architecture and sculp­
ture was -never called in question; Baudelaire could speak 
of Egyptian “ naïveté.” These tremendous temples, these 
rapt masterpieces which for three thousand years 
had seemed to commune with each other in the 
same unchanging dream, were above all prized as 
records, the only ones bequeathed to us by the ancient 
East. Th;y fell within the domain of history rather than 
of art. In 1890 as in 1820, though the West was moved 
to study Egypt, it was not moved to safeguard her works.
With our own century, however, has come one of the 
greatest developments in man’s spiritual history. These
launching of the International Campaign for the Preservation of the
/ W A Y  a  S> <S O
The Unesco Courier. — May 1960
temples which had been looked on only as records 
have again become living witnesses; these statues have 
acquired a soul. Not, to be sure, the spirit which first 
informed them; but one which is their own, which we 
find nowhere else but in them, and which nobody before 
us has found there.
We talk of this art as a witness to a civilization, just 
as we say that Romanesque art bears witness to the 
Christianity of its time. Yet in fact we can only really 
comprehend a culture that .still survives. Egyptologists 
have done noble work: but the faith of a priest of Amon, 
the basic attitude of an Egyptian to the world around him, 
are beyond our grasp. The humour of the ostraca, the 
homely figurines, the text where a soldier calls Rameses II 
by his nickname as familiarly as his veterans used 
Napoleon, the worldly wisdom of the legal texts-—how 
are we to relate these to the Book of the Dead, to the 
funereal majesty of the great statues, to a civilization which 
for three thousand years seemed dedicated only to the 
celebration of the after-life?
Nefertiti haunts our painters 
Cleopatra Inspires our poets
T h e  only ancient Egypt which can come alive for us is 
the one conveyed toy its art—and this is an Egypt 
that never existed at all, any more than the kind of 
Christianity which would be inferred from Romanesque 
art if that were our only witness to it. Yet Egypt has 
survived in her art, not through famous names or lists of 
victories... Despite Kadesh, one of history’s decisive 
battles, despite the cartouches carved and recarved at the 
behest of the bold pharaoh seeking to force his lineage 
upon the gods, Sesostris has less meaning for us than the 
unfortunate Akhnaton. The face of Queen Nefertiti 
haunts our painters as Cleopatra has inspired our poets; 
but whereas Cleopatra is a queen without a face, Nefertiti, 
for us, is a face without a kingdom.
Egypt, then, survives by virtue of certain forms. And 
today we know that these forms, like those of all religious 
cultures, are not to be interpreted in terms of the living 
people they profess to portray but in terms of the 
conventions which raise these people to the other world.
At their highest expression, Egyptian conventions were 
designed to mediate between ephemeral men and the 
controlling stars. It is an art that consecrates night.
That is what we all must feel before the Sphinx at 
Gizefa, as I  remember doing last time I saw it at twilight.
I thought then, “ How the second, furthermost pyramid 
enfolds the view, and how it makes this colossal death- 
mask seem like the guardian of some trap set to lure the 
heaving desert and the darkness. This is the hour when 
the oldest fashioned forms recapture the soft murmur with 
which the desert echoes the timeless devotions of the East; 
the hour when they restore to life these places where the 
gods were heard; when they banish the immensity of 
chaos and order the stars which seemingly emerge from 
night simply to gravitate round them.”
CO NT'D  ON N EXT PAGE
Nubià, which introduced the concept of world heritage.

In such a way, during three thousand years, Egyptian 
art translated the temporal into the eternal.
Let there be no misapprehension about this today: it 
is not as a  witness to the past that it moves us, nor as 
wihat used to be called beauty. "Beauty” has become one 
of our age’s most potent mysteries, the inexplicable quality 
which brings the Egyptian, masterpieces into communion 
with1 the statues of our own cathedrals, or the Aztec 
temples, or the Indian and Chinese grottoes; with the 
paintings of Cézanne and Van Gogih, with the greatest 
dead and the greatest living artists; with, in short, the 
whole treasury of the first world civilization.
This is an immense regeneration, of which our own 
Renaissance will soon seem a diffident prefiguring. For 
the first time, men have discovered a universal language 
of art. We feel its influence acutely, even if we only 
partly understand its nature. This tremendous store­
house of art, of which we are ¡now becoming 'conscious, 
draws its force no doubt from its being the most signal 
victory of human effort over death. To the impregnable 
“nevermore” that governs the history of civilizations, this 
art opposes its own mysterious grandeur.
Of the force that brought Egypt into being out of 
prehistoric night, nothing now remains; but the impulse
which engendered these giants which are threatened today 
still speaks to us as clearly as the genius of the master- 
craftsmen of Chartres, or the genius of Rembrandt. The 
emotion we share with file creators of these granite statues 
is not even one of love, nor a  common feeling for death— 
nor even, perhaps, a  similar way of looking at their work; 
yet before their work, the accents of anonymous sculptors 
forgotten during two thousand years seem to us as much 
untouched by the succession of empires as the accents of 
mother love.
This is what brings throngs of Europeans to exhibitions 
of Mexican art; of Japanese to exhibitions of French art; 
and millions of Americans to see Van Gogh. This is 
why the commemorative ceremonies of Rembrandt’s death 
were inaugurated by the last kings of Europe, and the 
exhibition of our own stained glass by the brother of the 
last Asian emperor. This is why, Mr. Director-General, 
so many sovereign names are associated with the appeal 
you are launching today.
One could not too highly praise your having conceived 
a plan so magnificent and so precise in its boldness—one 
might say, a  kind of Tennessee Valley Authority of 
archaeology. It is the antithesis of the kind of gigantic 
exhibitionism by which great modem states try to outbid 
each other. Nor should the well-defined object of your
ANDRÉ M ALRAUX (Continued)
T.V.A. OF 
ARCHAELOGY
ANCIENT POTTERS’ KILNS 
and pottery remains (photos 
centre and far right) were 
among the important discoveries 
made during recent excavations 
at Faras carried out by the 
Sudan Antiquities Service. 
Dr. Wiliiam Adams (in fore­
ground), an American archaeolo­
gist who was sent to  the Sudan 
by Unesco, collaborated in this 
work. Right, the Nile as seen 
from one of two fortresses on 
granite cliffs at Semna in the 
threatened area of the Sudan.
Photos ©  Almasy, Paris

scheme conceal its profound significane. If U n e s c o  is 



trying to rescue the monuments of Nubia, it is because 
these are in imminent danger; it goes without saying that 
it would try to save other great ruins—Angkor or Nara, 
for instance—if they were similarly threatened.
On behalf of man’s artistic heritage, you are appealing 
to the world’s conscience as others have been doing, this 
week, for the victims of the Agadir earthquake. “ May we 
never have to choose,” you said just now, “between 
porphyry statues and living men!” Yours is the first 
attempt to deploy, in a rescue operation, on behalf of 
statues, the immense resources usually harnessed for the 
service of men. And this is perhaps because for us the 
survival of statues has become an expression of life.
At the moment when our civilization divines a mysterious 
transcendence in art and one of the still obscure sources 
of its unity, at the moment when we are bringing into a 
single, family relationship the masterpieces of so many 
civilizations which knew nothing of or even hated each 
other, you are proposing an action which brings all men 
together to defy the forces of dissolution. Your appeal is 
historic, not because it proposes to save the temples of 
Nubia, but because through it the first world civilization 
publicly proclaims the world’s art as its indivisible heritage. 
In days when the West believed its cultural heritage had
its source in Athens, it could nonetheless look on with 
equanimity while the Acropolis crumbled away.
The slow flood of the Nile has reflected the melancholy 
caravans of the Bible, the armies of Cambyses and 
Alexander, the knights of Byzantium and Islam, the soldiers 
of Napoleon. No doubt when the sand-storm blows 
across it, its ancient memory no longer distinguishes the 
brilliant notes of Rameses’s triumph from the pathetic 
dust that settles again in the wake of defeated armies. 
And when the sand is scattered again, the Nile is once 
more alone with its sculpted mountains, its colossal effigies 
whose motionless reflection has for so long been part of 
its echo of eternity.
But see, old river, whose floods allowed astrologers to 
fix the most ancient date in history, men are coming now, 
from all parts of the world, who will carry these giants 
far away from your life-giving, destructive waters. Let 
the night fell, and you will reflect again the stars under 
which Isis accomplished her funeral rites, the star of 
Rameses. But the humblest worker come to rescue the 
statues of Isis and Rameses will tell you something you 
have always known but never heard from men before: 
that there is only one action over which indifferent stars 
and unchanging, murmurous rivers have no sway: it is 
the action of a man who snatches something from death.
