Since coming to power three years ago, I n d i a ’s ruling Bharatiya Ja n a t a
Party (BJP) has actively sought to impose a new history curriculum.Th i s
attempt has nothing to do with new trends or methodology within the dis-
cipline. By restructuring educational institutions, rewriting curricula and
t e x t b o o k s, and making major personnel changes, the government is
attempting to recast the past by giving it a strongly Hindu religious
orientation.
The right-wing party now controls the
Ministry of Human Resource Development
(which includes Education) and the
National Council for Educational Research
and Training (NCERT) which produces most
school texts.Th e s e, along with other public
institutions like the Indian Council for His-
torical Research, are rapidly losing their
academic freedom, as renowned historians
are replaced by bureaucrats and acade-
mics willing to toe the political line.
The current rewriting of Indian history is
part of a larger long-term political plan
aimed at reordering the secular character
that has informed the educational and cul-
tural policies of the country since its inde-
pendence. The BJP seeks to redefine the
character of the nation as Hindu, and to
lend legitimacy to the politics of cultural
n a t i o n a l i s m .To inculcate a sense of national
pride, Indian history is seen through ste-
reotypes rooted in religious identity. N o
aspect of history has been spared, be it
social tensions, political battles or cultural
differences. The achievements of ancient
Indian civilization are identified only with
Hinduism and are grossly exaggerated.
The BJP would have us believe that human-
kind and all scientific discovery, from bronze-casting to printing and
a e r o n a u t i c s, originated in northern India, the original home of the A r y a n s.
The period of the Rig Veda (a religious treatise) has been pushed back to
5000 B.C.against the general scholarly consensus of 1500 B.C.in order to
associate the Aryans with the Indus Valley civilization which flourished in
Harappa and Mohenjodaro, now in Pakistan.
These distortions are not limited to the past. The more recent history of the
national movement has been altered to glorify leaders of staunch Hindu
organizations, even if they were collaborators of colonial rule.
The Hindu view attempts to exclude all those who migrated to India and
their descendants as foreigners or the enemy. In reality, I n d i a ’s demography
r e flects the coming together of a variety of groups—racial, l i n g u i s t i c
and ethnic—during the course of the last
two millennia and raises the question of
who the “outsider”really is.
Fo r t u n a t e l y, there is a strong resistance
from academics and historians against this
trend. They are doing all they can to fight
the gradual introduction of new textbooks
and to uphold the country’s long tradition
of “scientific”history.
Ed. note: The government has defended
its recently introduced National Curricular
Framework for School Education which
suggests that textbooks be revised.D e n y i n g
that “any religious bias” had been intro-
duced into history textbooks, the Human
Resources Development minister, M u r l i
Manohar Joshi, insisted that his govern-
ment was “merely following the changes
recommended by the NCERT. . . We have
prepared the frame in the most democratic
manner,” he said. ■
* Former professor at Jawaharlal Nehru
University in New Delhi. One of several
eminent historians whose two-volume trea -
tise on Modern Indian history, “Towards
Freedom”, was summarily withdrawn by
the Indian Council of Historical Research. 


K . N . PA N I K K A R * : RECASTING THE PAST IN INDIA 
Mohenjodaro, now in Pakistan.
