^ North-South: beyond 
the great divide
In a world divideihetw em  haves am have-nots domination 
the hidden face o f progress? O r should we see progress within the context 
o f a single world facing the same problem, albeit to different degrees? 
How far is it possible to imagine a definition o f progress that would be 
universally applicable?
The universal and 
the particular
IS by Joseph Ki-Zerbo I
F
O R  some time, I have been arguing that the 
idea of universality is p u t forw ard by 
people in centres of power and places that 1 
dominate the rest of the world. The spectacle of 
the chaos reigning in the modern world impels 
us to  f^l| back on this idea as though  on a 
fortress. W hen danger threatens we use it like a 
lifebuoy, clinging to it because we feel that it can 
save the world.-
N ow  terms such as the universal, progress 
and development need to be approached with 
great vigilance and in a critical spirit. I agree 
that we should talk about the universal, but 
w ithout overlooking its counterpart, the par­
ticular; and we should relate them to each other 
dialectically rather than as a pair of opposites. 
The universal feeds on particular cases, and par­
ticular cases must make use of the universiM jl 
This dialectical approach seems to  me tci;: 
revalidate the idea of the universal, providing it 
is agreed from the outset that there is a piece of 
the universal in every individual. As regards 
democracy, for instance, either we say that the 
dem ocracy the w orld  needs is b f the type 
designed in the West—which is liable to be met 
with counter-arguments or even fierce objections 
to any such intrusion—or we seek to  find in 
every culture some starting point or predispo­
sition towards democracy.
To take the case of Africa, that continent’s
Joseph Ki-Zerbo, who is now 80, was president of the Association of African Historians from 1975 to August 2001.

C U  L T  U R E
Above, Jour de fête 
(1984), acrylic on canvas 
( 100 x 300 cm), by the 
Moroccan-born artist 
Fatima Hassan.
Below left, Germination 
(1992), by the Brazilian 
painter Kinkas.
JOSEPH KI-ZERBO, 
of Burkina Faso, is a noted 
historian who was general 
editor of the first volume o f 
UNESCO's eight-voiume General 
History of Africa. He :is the 
author of a history of black 
Africa (Histoire de I’Afrique 
noire, 1978).
llis to ry  obviously contains advance pointers to 
the state as an institution based on the rule of law. 
Africans have a sayin|j;“The king does not have 
royalty, royalty has the king”, meaning that even 
a king is subjeci to a higher authority. This idea 
suggests that of the rule of law. I have confirmed 
this mysdfpin the case of the emperor of the 
Mossi, who remained seated while people around 
him continually made suggestions as to what he 
should do. H e was literally the first slave of law 
and custom.
This gives the lie to our modern African dic­
tators, w ho claim that democracy has never 
existed in Africa and is an idea alien to our culture. 
Africans who think this ignore the reality of their 
culture and history. This type of particularism is 
to be avoided.
O r again, consider man’s relationship with 
nature, with health, with life and death. In this area 
every culture has good and bad, positive and neg­
a tiv e  aspects. The universal must operate on the 
basis of positive particulars. N one of us, I think, 
defends a “tribalization” of principles. The uni­
versality of human rights is a just idea for the 
simple reason that we all have a human identity. It 
is as human beings that we all claim the applica­
tion of these rights.
O n the subject of progress, I recently wrote, 
“It’s all very well to  move fast as long as you 
know where you’re going”. We cannot speak of
progress solely in relation to means: the direction 
and purpose must be defined from the outset. In 
short, we cannot speak of progress without raising 
the question of erids: and this raises an ethical 
problem, since we have to choose a modelibr a 
plan for society. This aspect of the matter is often 
left out of the discussion. What kind of society do 
we want to  build? In this context development 
has tended to mask—-and even to prom ote— 
dom ination. Some W estern leaders—I am 
thinking of Ronald Reagan in particularSlfave 
said, “They sfiould do as we do! ” O n that basis, 
development becomes ,a way of imposing a pre­
determined model.
It is important to realize that the human and 
social sciences are lagging behind the other sci­
ences. In my opinion no development is pos­
sible w ithout the development of the former. In 
the last ten years the world has witnessed a mul­
titude of events that no-one foresaw because far 
too much priority has been given to the sciences 
that contribute to material development. People 
have devoted themselves to the accessories of 
intelligence, to the detriment of the brainwork 
that is the prime mover of human progress.
We have reached the point where people’s 
individuality has been dismembered, split into 
fragments. They have lost touch w ith certain 
transcendent values and they have lost their 
sense of community. By way of illustration of

O n/O ff ( 1991), 
a mixed-media work 
measuring 48 x 39 x 25 cm 
by Romuald Hazoumé, an 
artist from Benin.
this process ano ther p icture  comes to  m y 
mind—that of the god-king Osiris, whose body 
was chopped up in to  pieces by his b ro ther 
before being pu t back together again. I believe 
that this Egyptian m yth is relevant today to 
human society as a whole: it is time to recon­
s t r u c t  man and pu t him together again.
Intellectuals can plky a crucial part in this 
respect, no t only by weaving the dreams and 
myths that hum an beings need to give them a 
reason for living, bu t also by blazing the trail 
towards solidarity and mutual recognition on 
the basis o f universal values. A  Senegalese, stu­
dent recently said to me, “Professor, what we are 
interested in today is not development, bu t hap­
piness.” I was impressed by his remark. A t a time 
w hen everyone is talking about progress and 
development, this young man brings us back to 
the essentials. N o  doubt people wilF’Say that 
happiness is as hard to define as progress. All the 
same, it is w hat we should be aiming for.
U niversality as the West understands it is a 
truncated  concept. I t  is based only  on  one 
sequence of history. I have often rebuked my 
Western colleagues for their lack of receptiveness 
to  other histories, their hermetic approach, and 
their tendency to think that things have only 
been happening in  the last four centuries. If 
they do go further back, it is to  make ancient 
Greece the absolute starting point, forgetting 
that Greece was itself influenced by other his­
tories, especially that of Egypt, which in tu rn j 
owes much to Africg.'r
But let us go back to  Ronald Reagan’s posi­
tion. It does not hold water. Take the question 
of energy consumption. If the world’s per capita 
energy consum ption  was as high as tha t o f l  
N o rth  America, the consequences w ould be 
devastating. I t is no t enough to say that this;3 
model is undesirable; it is impossible. Wanting 'i 
everyone to adopt it is a tragic mistake. Western 
thought, by persisting on this ecumenical path, 
actually tends towards exclusiveness.
C ould we no t get intellectuals to tu rn  their 
attention seriously to  this dialectic between the 
universal and the particular? This w ould lead to 
agreement on some intangible principles which a 
hold good for all hum an beings, such as respect j 
for life and m an’s relationship w ith nature and 
knowledge. W hat’s the point of advocating uni­
versality w hen in my country 70 to 75 per cent ., 
of the population can neither read nor write? In 
Africa we are moving directly, from  an oral tra­
dition to  the post-industrial era of the audiovi­
sual, skipping the crucial stage of writing.
It is utopian to  propose the application of ! 
universal values to  peoples in situations where . 
the conditions for this do not exist. The principle 
of intercom m unication, w hereby individuals 
get to  know  themselves and communities get to  Í 
know  each other, is essential. I have already : 
suggested that the right to  know  oneself and to 
be know n should be added to  the list o f basic 
hum an rights. M any people, especially in the 
developed countries, think nowadays that there 
is nothing interesting to  be learned in the coun­
tries of the South. People w ho go there as j 
tourists do no t really enter into their histories, 
their cultures o r their civilizations. This makes 
it impossible to  achieve the “co-responsibility” ! 
we sometimes hear about.
The foundations of universality need to  be 
strengthened and another organization of peo­
ples established. People say that the U nited 
N ations O rganization represents the peoples 
of the w orld, bu t today this is no longer true. 
States have gained the upper hand. They have 
been described as cold monsters, bu t I wonder 
w hether they are no t deep-frozen monsters.
Transcending the paradigm of the national 
state, a legacy of nineteenth-century Europe, seems 
to me one possible route to the universal. Modern 
man’s technological achievements are creating 
new patterns, a new image of the world which 
makes this framework obsolete. We must tran­
scend the nation-state and move towards the estab­
lishment of livelier and more receptive communi- i 
ties. Movement in that direction will bring us 
closer to the universal, and to  progress. ■
