A lunchbox
for l o n g e v i t y
Thirsting for the fountain of youth? 
There is  no shortage of tactics to live longer,
or perhaps forever.
Step number one: starve yourself…
3 . ESCAPING DESTINY
A d d i t i v e s
“Oxidative damage” is caused when cells in the body fail to process
food efficiently and instead churn out molecules that oxidize the
body—much as metal rusts, the flesh sags and genetic material
withers. Vitamins A, C and E come highly recommended,as does beta
carotene. Gingko, Ginseng,Bilberry, Soy Lecithin and Hawthorn leaves
each have their supporters. Similar miraculous claims have been made
for onions and garlic,which can either be taken raw, crushed into oils,
served in juices or soaked in alcohol for over a week to produce an
aromatic tincture. Taken together, this course of curative infusions is
guaranteed to keep the doctor away.
E a t i n g
“One must eat to live, and not live to eat,” wrote Molière, and the
world of dieticians would tend to agree. Five to nine plates of fresh
fruit and vegetables a day just about encapsulate the recommended
diet for a lengthy life. Out go pizza,pastries, fried breakfasts and juicy
steaks—all guilty of high cholesterol and “oxidative damage” to the
body. Instead,bid welcome to broccoli (rich in antioxidants),bran (rich
in fibres), steamed spinach and skinned chicken, rotated at one’s
pleasure and served with skimmed milk. Of course there have been
notable dissenters. David Henderson,a Scottish farmer who died aged
109 in 1998, swore by a diet of porridge, prunes and a mixture of
cattle salts and gin. Other suggested elixirs include champagne and
vintage port. Scientists, on the other hand, insist that all laboratory
tests point to the same conclusion: the best way to live longer is just
to eat less, much less. Undernourished, cold and terminally bad
tempered animals, they say, generally live to a ripe old age.
Going genetic
But why stop there? Who says evolution and its army of tight-fisted
genes should get in the way of immortal gratification? Now that the
human genome has been plotted, numerous scientists believe the
average life span can be stretched to 100 or 120.
Tissue engineering, laboratory generated organs and therapeutic
cloning have all been proclaimed as the next great breakthrough. In
particular, much is expected of stem cells that can fill in for wasted
neurons, bone marrow and tissue. And if that doesn’t do the job, there
are always alternatives.
How about freezing your brain upon death and waiting around for a
lucky break? Or what about porting into a computer or well-oiled
robot? But if neither the vat nor the android tempts you, there is still
some consolation: as Jorge Luis Borges wrote, the immortals lead
numbingly empty lives, for like animals they have no consciousness of
death. “It is divine, terrible and incomprehensible to know one is
immortal,” he wrote.
P i l l - p o p p i n g
Enough of raw cauliflower and Chinese leaf treatments—the busy
Western consumer wants long life, and wants it before breakfast.
Acutely aware of the market interest in user-friendly longevity
treatments, researchers have been sifting through the potions. Top of
the list at the moment is Dehydroepiandrosterone, or DHEA for short,
a hormone produced naturally in the body by the adrenal glands, and
that later transforms into oestrogen and testosterone. According to its
disciples—and there are many—use of this drug can tighten skin, firm
up bones and transform sex without a murmur of complaint.
Unfortunately the evidence is limited, the influence on the liver and
other organs unknown, and the usual perverse effects of hormone
replacement (breasts for men,beards for women) as present as ever.
Compiled by Ivan Briscoe, UNESCO Courier journalist
