Towards 
a 'new world order 
of information'
by Ridha Najar '
RIDHA NAJAR, Tunisian journalist and sociologist specializing in 
the field o f information, is attached to the Institut de Presse et des 
Sciences de Tinformation (Press and Information Sciences institute) 
in Tunis. He has been technical adviser to the Director-General of 
the Tunisian Radio and Television Service and editor-in-chief of 
Tunisia's television news.
■  NCONTESTABLY, 1976 w as the 
I  year in w hich the problem s of
■  in form ation and com m unication 
became w orld -w ide  issues. A  w hole  
series o f conferences, symposia and 
m eetings on these subjects launched 
a m ajor debate and the issues were 
fu lly  aired a t the 19 th  session o f 
Unesco's General Conference last 
November In Nairobi, Kenya.
Today the countries o f the Third 
W orld  are demanding a "new  world 
order o f In form ation". W ha t does 
th is  expression mean? W ha t are 
the immense stakes in th is  debate, 
w h ich poses questions th a t are at 
one and the same tim e  cultural, eco­
nom ic and po litica l?
How  can the countries o f the Third 
W orld  take the firs t urgent steps to  
im prove com m unication between 
themselves? H ow  can they help to  
lim it the quantity o f "one-w ay in for­
m ation" w h ich  fo r years has relegated 
them  to  the role o f consumers w ith o u t 
calling in question the very principle 
o f a free, balanced (and thereby fru it­
fu l) exchange o f in form ation between 
nations?
H ow  w ill it  be possible progressi­
vely" to  achieve the "balanced flo w  
o f in fo rm ation" o f w h ich  so much is »
The debate over “NWOi” sparked the most serious crisis ever to confront Unesco. As a result, the United States left the Organization 
in December 1984, followed by Great Britain and Singapore in December 1985. Great Britain rejoined in July 1997.

t  heard today, as a means of achieving 
better communication between peoples, 
and hence promoting greater inter­
national understanding and world 
peace, which is so often jeopardized 
by major historical and cultural mis­
understandings?
The preamble to the resolution sub­
mitted by Tunisia on behalf of the 
non-aligned countries at the General 
Conference in Nairobi points out that 
Unesco has a contribution to make in 
"liberating the developing countries 
from the state of dependence result­
ing from specific historical circum­
stances which still characterizes 
their communication and information 
systemsilpS
Just as people once referred to 
"political and economic decoloniza- 
tion", they now speak of the "deco­
lonization of information" which is 
inseparable from the achievement of 
a new universal humanism founded 
on dialogue and mutual respect.
The developing countries continue 
to "consume" world information as 
it is conceived in the main by the 
industrialized nations.
t
This information tends to maintain 
the people of the Third World in a 
state of alienation. It also keeps 
the peoples of the Western countries 
in a dangerous state of ignorance 
regarding the realities of the Third 
World countries, lulling them w ith the 
complacent assumption that Western 
industry, technology and culture, in 
short, Western civilization as a whole, 
are superior.
A serious matter, and one which 
lends itself to all kinds of misunder­
standings, is that in the name of a 
certain concept of the "freedom" and 
"free flow " of information, most of the 
large Western news agencies cons­
ciously or unconsciously disseminate
Detail from a poster by the Japanese artist Shigeo Fukuda
information which is fragmentary, 
schematic and frequently distorted 
concerning the complex realities of 
the developing countries.
Conversely, the information which 
they distribute in the Third World 
countries is sometimes dangerously 
loaded w ith the overtones of alien 
cultures.
The Report of the Symposium of 
Non-Aligned Countries on Communi­
cation, held in Tunis in March 1976, 
goes as far as considering that, for 
these international agencies, infor­
mation is "a commodity... in whose 
processing and transmission inter­
vene considerations which tend to 
perpetuate a system of domination 
in which the authentic interests of 
the developing countries are consis­
tently ignored or misinterpreted".
Is it surprising therefore that the 
citizen of the Third World ends up 
by accepting the vision of himself 
presented by the mass media ?
The technological superiority of 
the industrially developed countries 
is constantly growing as a result of 
modern progress, and their media 
networks deluge the Third World 
countries, which are far less well- 
endowed w ith technical equipment 
and trained personnel, w ith their 
own brand of information.
There is no point in even men­
tioning communication satellites. 
Their "use by developing countries 
is subject to the w ill o f those who 
possess the advanced technology, 
and by it can decisively influence 
the economic, political and social 
reality of the developing countries" ( 1 ).
(1) Report o f the Symposium o f Non- 
Aligned Countries on Communication, Tunis, 
March 1976.
This, then, is the state of the world 
as far as information is concerned. 
In the 1970s it has forced the Third 
World countries to make a harsh 
appraisal of their position.
The newly-independent countries, 
believing that they had defeated 
direct colonialization, realized that 
their development remained in jeo­
pardy, that their demands for a new 
economic order could not make them­
selves heard, and that their cultural 
identity could never be achieved 
w ithout a substantial change in the 
world system of disseminating infor­
mation.
What is the solution to this prob­
lem ? How can better communi­
cation between the countries of the 
Third World be established? What 
measures w ill help to achieve a more 
balanced flow  of information between 
North and South, and vice versa?
In an attempt to find an answer 
to these interrelated questions, let 
us consider the action taken by the 
non-aligned countries (see also article 
page 18).
Meeting in Algiers, in September 
1973, thé Fourth Summit Conference 
of Non-Aligned Countries recommen­
ded that a jo in t plan of action should 
be worked out in the field of commu­
nications.
An international symposium concer­
ned w ith ways and means of deve­
loping the flow  of information be­
tween the non-aligned countries was 
held in Tunis in March 1976. The 
recommendations adopted at the 
symposium lay in tw o main direc­
tions:
•  the consolidation (or creation) of 
telecommunication networks, ini­
tially at the national and later at 
the regional and continental levels;

Bertolt Brecht and Unesco . 
on communication
Bertolt Brecht (1 898 -195 6 ), the world-famous German playwright and 
poet, wrote in his. Theory o f  R ad io  (1 927-193 2) :
"Here is a proposal designed to transform the way radio is used, 
and thus to reveal itsj constructive aspects: it must be transformed 
from an instrument of distribution into an instrument of communication 
Radio could be the most remarkable instrument of communication 
imaginable in public life* a vast network of communication-chanpels. 
Or rather, it could be such an instrument if it w ere capable not only of. 
sending out but also of receiving; not only of getting its audience to listen 
but also of getting them  to speak; not of isolating them  but of bringing 
them  into contact w ith their fellows. If this is to come about, radio 
must cease to be simply a provider and organize a supply furnished 
by listeners themselves".
B e rto lt B rech t, Schriften 2  (Zur Literatur und Kunst, Politik und 
Geselbchaft) (W ritin g s  2, On L ite ra tu re  and  A r t , . P o litic s  and  S ocie ty)..
It  is interesting to compare Brecht's ideas w ith  those set out in Unesco's 
M e d ium -T erm  P lan (1 9 7 7 -1 9 8 2 ):
"Although the notion o f  'the free flow  of information' goes back 
some 50 years, it has been invoked as a concept... only since the end 
o i  the Second W orld W ar... Although the, word 'communication' was 
already current at that tim e in English-language texts, w hat was meant, 
in fact, was a rather one-sided dissemination of information. It was 
only much later that there emerged the concept of communication in 
its true sense (from the Latin co m m un ica re : to make common, to share) 
no longer implying merely an active transm itter and a passive receiver, 
but allowing for feedback from the latter of a kind to modify the behaviour 
of the form er or, better still, requiring the active participation of all 
concerned in the communication process, which thus becomes a pluri- 
dimensional flow  of information w ith multiple feedback.".
•  the developm ent o f co-operation 
and exchanges between the non- 
aligned countries in all branches 
o f com m unication: news agencies, 
the press, radio and television, 
news film s, the cinema, exhibitions, 
festivals, tourism , research, the 
tra in ing o f personnel and so on.
Im plem entation o f the  firs t set of 
recom m endations w ou ld  help to  bridge 
the technological gap between the 
industrialized countries and those o f 
the Third W orld.
The second group o f directives 
invites the non-aligned countries to  
produce the ir ow n in form ation and 
circulate it  am ongst themselves in 
order to  counter-balance the essen­
tia lly  one-way flo w  o f in form ation 
orig inating in the developed countries.
Far from  w ish ing  to  supplant or 
short-c ircu it the  transnational news 
agencies—even if th is  were possible— 
intercom m unication between the 
Third W orld  countries should seek 
to  f ill the gaps w h ich  those agencies 
leave (whether in tentiona lly  or other­
wise), to  compensate fo r the ir om ­
issions and above all to  provide more 
regular inform ation gathered in the 
countries w h ich  it  concerns.
Nothing w ould  appear more ju s ti­
fiab le than the demand o f peoples fo r
the fundam ental right to  voice the ir 
ow n preoccupations, and to  te ll the 
w orld  about the ir life, the ir culture 
and the ir e fforts to  achieve deve­
lopment.
The m ost im portant po in t o f all is 
not merely th a t th is  in tercom m unica­
tion  should be established, but tha t 
in form ation should reach as w ide a 
public as possible.
This w ill be a long-term  task, fo r it 
w ill be necessary to  stim ulate fresh 
pockets o f interest in a public long 
accustomed to  "consum ing" infor­
mation originating in one part o f the 
w orld  alone. National news agen­
cies, cinema, press, and particularly 
radio and te levision w ill have an 
im portant role to  play in th is  respect.
This m ulti-d irectiona l co-operation 
calls fo r both adequate equipm ent 
and trained personnel, and, together 
w ith  a general awareness o f the 
situation, a realization o f the under­
lying moral obligations.
Such an awareness now  exists. 
The problem s o f equipm ent and 
personnel were indeed examined 
at Nairobi by Unesco’s General 
Conference. W ha t remains to  be 
achieved is agreement concerning an 
international code o f ethics in the fie ld 
o f in form ation. Here there w ill be
many d ifficu lties, because points of 
v iew  still d iffe r greatly, but there are, 
nevertheless, certain grounds fo r 
hope.
A t Nairobi, the non-aligned coun­
tries tabled a proposal w h ich had 
the m erit o f setting the debate 
w ith in  a practical fram ework. This 
proposal recommended th a t efforts 
be made to  create an improved ba­
lance in the w orld  flo w  o f inform ation, 
w ith  the establishm ent o f a vast 
programme o f aid designed to  assist 
the  developing countries in extending 
the ir in form ation systems.
The proposal w as adopted unani­
mously. It advocated in particular 
measures to  counteract disparities 
in news transm ission rates, and to 
support regional groupings, news 
agency pools and national and inter­
national unions o f journalists.
This programme o f technical and 
financial aid to  the developing coun­
tries, together w ith  the international 
research programme fo r com m uni­
cation w hich has been recommended 
by Unesco since 1970, should lead 
to  a reduction o f the technological 
gap be tw e en . the Third W orld and 
the industrialized countries.
If  in form ation is no longer to  be 
treated as a "com m od ity", and 
become instead a "service" at the 
disposal o f all mankind, and if a new 
w orld  order in the fie ld  of in form ation 
is to  be established, the Third W orld 
countries m ust consolidate the ir 
in form ation media.
Here again, the problem s should be 
posed in the context o f m utually 
beneficial international co-operation, 
rather than in a context o f sterile 
confrontation and pointless verbal 
arguments.
■  Ridha Najar
