The only university open to Afghan women is located in Faizabad in northern Afghanistan, an area not
under Taliban control.Antoinette de Jong photographed students there
in April 2001. In this first-hand account, NGO director Chekeba Hachemi speaks
of the suffering of her people, but also of their spirit of resistance. She appeals to the world community
not to let Afghanistan become “an inconsolable country.”
PHOTOGRAPHS BY ANTOINETTE DE JONG,TEXT BY CHEKEBA HACHEMI
ANTOINETTE DE JONGIS A DUTCH PHOTOGRAPHER; CHEKEBA HACHEMI IS PRESIDENT OFTHE NGO AFGHANISTAN LIBRE*



Afghan women:
knowledge and
The majority of these students fled Kabul after Taliban forces captured the city and banned education for women.“In the Koran, it is stated that every Muslim
has to acquire as much knowledge as possible. Men and women alike,” says one student.

It took the international community a long time,a very long time,
to grasp what a tremendous danger the Taliban regime in A f g h a-
nistan posed. Dangerous for Afghans—their freedoms, their
hopes for peace and their ancient culture—and for all the
w o r l d ’s peoples.The hallucinating pictures of the September 11
events ended up convincing us that Evil was at work in Kabul.
Ye t , we had been warned.A few months earlier, other pictures
had sparked indignation around the world:women trapped in
fabric dungeons, peering at us from behind narrow bars:A f g h a n s
in chadris. And from behind those bars, inside those moving,
ghostly dungeons, frail, angry voices spoke to us. For Afghan
women are like Afghan men:courageous. Bravery is an ances-
tral virtue in Afghanistan.They spoke to journalists about the
hell in which they were imprisoned, their dark solitude and
the dark future of their people, their children and their betro-
thed.
They resisted. True to their reputation of pride and dignity,
women living in areas under Taliban control set up underground
s c h o o l s, held secret press conferences and organized mutual
assistance networks to defend themselves against ignorance
hunger and terror.Women who had managed to take refuge in
free areas begged Western journalists to tell the whole world that
Kabul had turned into a prison that would some day become a
cemetery.
Why didn’t we pay more attention to these women? We
believed they were the latest in an endless string of misogyny’s
v i c t i m s,one that has plagued so many places for so long. In a way,
we trivialized their agony by likening it to comparable pain
that others have suffered. That was a huge mistake, for the
Taliban regime resembles nothing that we have ever seen,and
the women of Afghanistan have been at the heart of an incom-
parable tragedy.Aw a r e, c o n c e r n e d , empathetic women on the fiv e
continents listened,mobilized and demanded that their govern-
ments do something. But their appeals fell on deaf ears.
Ye s, the officials said,Afghan women are suffering, but it’s not
our fault and besides, what can we do about it? Yet everything
was still possible at the time. Governments could have put pres-
sure on the Taliban and heeded General Massoud,who so feared
the day when they would carry the fires of war to our own coun-
tries.That day is here.We have reacted too late, when violence
We trivialized the agony of
Afghan women by likening 
it to comparable pain that
others have suffered.
That was a huge mistake.
A F G H A N I S T A N
Mazar-i-Sharif
KABUL
P A K I S T A N
T U R K M E N I S T A N UZBTN. T A J I -
K I S T A N
Faizabad
n :
re v o l t
Professor Ali Yussuf Pur, former head of the Kabul medical faculty,
teaching in the university’s only classroom.

Afghan women:
knowledge and re v o l t
This time, if we fail to hear this
brilliant, exhausted nation’s
appeal, nothing will be left of it.
The Afghans’ legendary laughter
will die out. And tears that no
one sees will flow beneath the
chadris.

Since the Taliban came to power, photographs, television and movie images have been banned. Tapes of Titanic, one of the most
coveted films,circulate underground at great risk.

Since the Taliban seized power in Kabul, Faizabad’s population has doubled with an influx of refugees from the Afghan capital as well as
from Mazar-i-Charif, where the Taliban systematically slaughtered civilians, according to student accounts.
According to Mari,the deputy director of the Pedagogical Institute, which shares quarters with the medical faculty,
professors earn $1.50 per month, a sum often paid with a three to six month delay.

is the only possible response.And we have added a new burden
to the already crushed silhouette of Afghan women.
Now they are wandering through the streets to the sounds of
explosions beneath a sky that is raining bombs. I believe the time
has come to ask Afghan women for forgiveness. Why do I say
“ w e,” when I myself was born in Afghanistan and head a huma-
nitarian organization that has been campaigning for years to free
Afghan women? Because there are two kinds of women:those
condemned to wear the ch a d r i—under pain of death—and
those who are free not to.
I fall into the latter category.And I want to say it again:we
have not done enough.The time has come.Afghanistan is on the
brink of an abyss. This time, if we fail to hear this brilliant,
exhausted nation’s appeal,nothing will be left of it.The A f g h a n s ’
legendary laughter will die out.And tears that no one sees will
flow beneath the chadris. Let’s make our own the destiny of
these people whom blind History seems determined to abolish,
to annihilate. Let’s not turn Afghanistan into an inconsolable
country. ■



Afghan women: knowledge and re v o l t
* Afghanistan Libre (“For a free Afghanistan”) is an organiza-
tion that was created to help Afghans living outside Ta l i b a n -
controlled areas to start rebuilding the country.The group focuses
on education,training and micro-economic projects.
It is currently building a high school for 1,000 girls in the Pa n s h i r
Valley, and has opened a workshop for 300 women,who attend
classes in the morning and work in the afternoon.
+ …
For more information on the plight of Afghan women,please refer to
the UNESCO Courier issues dated October 1998 and March 2001.
Students may wear lipstick,but even in this region,they shroud themselves in their chadris before heading out for the day.
They live in permanent fear of the Taliban arriving in this last bulwark of freedom.
