O
n the day that the blue ones stopped
transmitting, the caretaker was doing its
rounds of the Eye, humming and pottering
among the other, duller maintenance
robots.
Th e n ,when the news came in, it stopped humming.
Near the heart of the Eye—the vast radio telescope
floating beyond the orbit of Jupiter—was a gigantic
spherical tank which had once been used to store the
water the humans had needed during the construction.
They had lived in it, too—dwelling in pressurized
cabins surrounded by water, shielded from radiation.
Now they were gone—long gone—but the
midnight blue tank remained.
Like, the caretaker had thought one day, a huge
blank canvas.
✩✩✩
Until the coming of the Eye, no radio telescope
had been sensitive enough to pick out signals of
intelligent origin from the mush of cosmic background
n o i s e. But then the feast had begun: a tsunami of
knowledge almost beyond human comprehension.Ye t
the messages showed that humanity was still
fundamentally alone.All the signals had originated in
other galaxies, often at distances that bordered on the
c o s m o l o g i c a l .They had been sent hundreds of millions
of years ago, when the dinosaurs were still evolution’s
cool new idea.
But there was a more disturbing thing even than
the loneliness.
At any one time the Eye was picking up the
messages from about a hundred civilizations, but each
only stayed active for a few centuries before falling
s i l e n t .The net number stayed roughly constant because
new species were always popping up and discovering
radio astronomy, but they too would be doomed to
spend only a relatively short amount of time among the
h u n d r e d . For a few glorious centuries they would
broadcast their cultural legacy into the sky;enriching
the knowledge of the other listening cultures.
But then—it was often around the time they started
discovering some of the more interesting things that
could be done with subatomic particles—they would
stop sending.
Usually without much warning.
✩✩✩
It shouldn’t have
bothered the
caretaker.
But in tending
the Eye it found that
it became quite attached to some of those transmitting
c u l t u r e s. It became absorbed in their histories;
fascinated by their biologies and outlooks.
It hummed their music and pondered their art.
And waited with deep, mounting sadness for the
day it always knew would come; the sudden,roaring
silence from that part of the sky.
✩✩✩
It moved to the part of the Fresco which recorded
the senders in a distant galaxy in the constellation
Sculptor.
The caretaker had marked the tank with faint lines
of celestial latitude and longitude. At the precise co-
ordinates of the transmitting civilization, it had painted
a spiral galaxy much like our own;an impressionistic
swirl of white and ochre. It was one of the first galaxies
that the caretaker had painted,and while it had gained
proficiency since—there were better ones dotted all
around the Fresco—there was a certain charm to this
effort which appealed to it.
Two thirds out from the core, the caretaker had
marked the location of the transmitting culture’s solar
system.
It thought of them:blue, tentacled aquatic beings
with a reproductive system so intricate it had taken the
caretaker decades to work out how many sexes they
had. Their music had been even trickier;sounding at
first pass like synchronized drowning. But the caretaker
had persisted, and after a while it had even caught
itself humming some of the more accessible bits.
But they were gone now.
Silent.
✩✩✩
Nothing for it,then.
With sadness in its heart—but at the same time
emboldened by the execution of a solemn task it
knew must be done—the caretaker prepared the
precise shade of midnight blue it needed. When it
was ready, it carefully stippled the galaxy into oblivion,
like a master picture restorer removing a blemish.
The caretaker was very good at its work,and when it
was done there was no sign that the galaxy had ever
existed.
The Fresco was up-to-date, but it would not be
long before it had to be changed again.
Art is long, it thought. And life short. ■
A SHORT TALE BY ALASTAIR REYNOLDS
AUTHOR OF REVELATION SPACE (VICTOR GOLLANCZ,2000) AND A
SCIENTIST WORKING WITHIN THE ASTROPHYSICS DIVISION OF THE
EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY
F re s c o
