INTERVIEW BY ASBEL LÓPEZ
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



The proud descendants 
of the L o rd of Sipán
As the current guardian of the tomb of the Lord of Sipán—the biggest
a rchaeological find in Latin America in recent decades—Peruvian arc h a e o l o g i s t
Walter Alva explains how the village of Lambayeque has pro fited from a tre a s u re
m i raculously saved from looters and international smugglers
2 . S AVING OUR T R E A S U R E S
H
ow was the Lord of Sipán discove re d ?
When our team reached the site on
February 25, 1 9 8 7 , it was already being
extensively pillaged by grave-robbers,
who had stripped pieces of gold from
one tomb. Local people had taken control of the
m o n u m e n t , and in the grip of a kind of gold-fever,
were trying to break into other tombs in search of
more precious metals. If we hadn’t done anything,
the site would have very quickly been totally des-
t r o y e d , as has already occurred in many other sites
like Vi c u s, L o m a n e g r a , Frías and the Valley of
Je q u e t e p e q u e.Peru was then in a serious economic
and moral crisis.People thought it was crazy for the
police to protect an archaeological treasure that
they believed was their rightful property.The situa-
tion was very tense, and the only way to save the
monument was either to mount a heavy police
guard or turn it into an archaeological site,which is
what we eventually did.
What financial backing did you have at the
start?
Very little.Three hundred dollars from a local
f o u n d a t i o n , government assistance to hire 20
labourers and,somewhat later, money from a bre-
w e r y. Hiring the labourers not only meant the site
could be cleaned up, but also eased the tension
with local people by giving them work.One grave-
robber died in a clash with police as the monument
was being repossessed.
Was there any help from abroad?
We received aid from the Heinz Foundation
and from National Geographic in mid-1987 when
we were certain that it was a very important find.
The main tomb of the Lord of Sipán contained a
body wrapped in hundreds of copper, gold and
silver objects that were part of the funeral hoard.
But the copper items were disturbingly corroded
and needed urgent restoration. Fortunately the
Roman-Germanic Museum in Mainz (Germany)
offered to restore about 560 pieces and train tech-
nicians to run a small workshop funded by
German aid money which we established in Lam-
bayeque after 1990.
Why was this necessary?
We needed it to restore fresh finds. When we
discovered a new tomb in 1989 belonging to the
Old Lord of Sipán that was just as opulent and
important as the first one, the pieces were res-
tored by Peruvian technicians to exactly the same
effect as the earlier ones had been in Germany.
This laboratory, which has been partly funded
since 1992 by the Spanish government,has also res-
tored artefacts from other digs. Our curators, f o u r
of whom were trained in Madrid,have also taught
Walter Alva:cultivating local pride.

a course in metal conservation to Latin A m e r i c a n
technicians. We have been entirely self-sufficient
since 1998, which goes to show how international
aid creates a lasting momentum.
The United States has managed to re c ove r
and return to Peru various items stolen prev i o u s l y
from a tomb in Sipán. H ow important is that help?
It’s crucial.In 1987,a gang of smugglers tried
to sell one of the ornaments for $1.6 million in a
scandal involving several diplomats. Luckily, the
United States restricted the import of pieces from
the Lord of Sipán’s tomb in 1990.This law could
only be extended once, but after it finally expired
a memorandum of understanding was signed in
1998 covering not only items from Sipán, but also
almost all the Peruvian heritage currently held
in the United States. I think all countries should
have agreements like that: i t ’s the only way to
close ranks against these crimes, which affect so
many countries with an extraordinary past but a
troubled present.I t ’s also a matter of respect. Ju s t
as we respect human rights, self-determination,
sovereignty and the environment, so we should
place the protection of people’s heritage on the
world’s list of priorities.
Has the hostility of the village changed?
A lot. Right from the start we tried hard to
regain their trust.We allowed about 6,000 people
in the region to visit the site, for example. They
could witness the public and national importance
of the dig, which was carried out exclusively by
Peruvians and whose discoveries belonged to the
Peruvian nation—and not to a bunch of grave-
robbers.
Are the local people happy with its effect on
their lives?
Th e r e ’s no way of course that the discovery will
solve the economic crisis,but we have managed to
get the Lambayeque region on the tourist circuit.
Local people are getting their self-respect back and
now feel proud of being descendants of the Moche
c u l t u r e, which has generated such admiration
around the world. National Geographic h a s
devoted reports to the site and foreign television
stations from Japan, Australia,the United States
and Chile have filmed it.There are now colleges,
u n i v e r s i t i e s, restaurants and shops named after
the Lord of Sipán.The name has entered the lan-
guage and enhanced the region’s identity. P e o p l e
have been able to see for themselves the very
positive effects of the discovery and the archaeo-
logical project to save it.
How is work going on the new museum?
It’s more than a museum. We want to make
i t into a centre that can act as a magnet for
c u l t u r a l , tourist and scientific development in the
region.It should be open by the end of this year.
Th e r e ’ll be 3,000 square metres of exhibits, i n c o r-
porating the latest innovations in museum pre-
sentation and situated on seven hectares of land
alongside laboratories and botanical gardens.We
want it to be “the”Peruvian museum of the mil-
lennium. ■
