15
Mariano Herrera*: “ Teachers at a loss”
What is the state of education in Venezuela?
Very poor. For instance, 40 percent of youth between 15 and 24
dropped out of school even before reaching high school.There are two
million young people between 10 and 24 years old who don’t go to
school or have a job. But it’s not only the fault of the education sys-
tem. Extreme poverty, which affects more than half the Venezuelan
population, is an important factor of exclusion from school. It’s a
vicious circle that has to be broken.
Many observers claim that teachers are poorly trained.
They’re not trained enough to teach the basics, namely reading and
writing.In 1980, there was teacher-training reform. From a two-year
course centred on practical problems such as working with a class of
young children,we’ve shifted to a five-year university training which
is much more theoretical. University mainly trains English, biology or
literature teachers and plenty of civil servants specialized in planning,
statistics and the economics of education. But when it comes to
teaching children how to read and write, young teachers are at a loss.
And students only study 900 hours a year…
That’s the way it is in most Latin American countries. There are not
enough schools for everyone. With the return to democracy in 1961,
there was a sense of urgency and a “massive literacy plan” was
launched.“Temporary”schools were built because we were lagging so
far behind and had to move fast. The problem is that the provisional
slowly became permanent, and now we have schools with zinc roofs
in 60°C heat that are falling into ruin. To make up for the lack of
schools, we invented the double-shift,whereby each school welcomes
two different sets of students every day. Teachers are obliged to run
from one school to another, sometimes up to three in a day, just to
make a half-decent living.
Why didn’t Venezuela invest more in education at the time of the oil
boom?
Many underdeveloped countries did the same, especially in South
America. Oil suddenly made Venezuela a rich country in terms of per
capita income but it stayed underdeveloped in terms of the money
allocated to education.An elitist system was set up that favoured the
development of universities to the detriment of primary and secondary
schools. Today, the country’s universities absorb nearly half the total
education budget.
* General coordinator of the Centre for Cultural and Educational
Investigations (Caracas).
