What do you believe are the fundamental sources of
racism in the world?
The first thing we must be clear about is that racism
as an ideology is a product of the modern world.
Obviously history has given us many examples of
violence between different human groups, but not
until the modern era was this violence justified by
reference to racist thinking. In my opinion,the link is
the following: modernity is characterized by forces
that are inclusive and universal,while in practice—in
p o l i t i c a l , social and military affairs—it is discriminatory.
This contradiction is partly resolved by a racist ideology
which excludes groups of peoples who are defined as
essentially different.
In your opinion, has globalization accentuated racism or
reduced it?
I t ’s difficult to give a very general answer,but I have
the impression that at the moment the main effect of
the process is to increase racism.The reason for this is
fairly simple: globalization is a classic example of
m o d e r n i t y. I t ’s clearly unifying the world, but on a
hierarchical and exclusive basis. Remember that when
we talk about globalization we are talking largely
about the unification of money markets, speculative
financial flows, information and the organization of
p r o d u c t i o n .But the same definitely does not go for the
movement of people. Somehow this contradiction
between the free movement of money and the
segmentation of the world must be justifie d , and this is
done by reference to supposed natural differences.
Do you believe that the outbreaks of racism observed in
Africa,Asia and Europe all stem from the same causes?
No two examples of racism are the same since
their historical contexts are always different.Having
said that, I believe it is possible to say how racism
functions in general: n a m e l y, as a naturalization of
identity that aims to legitimate the discriminatory
treatment of different groups, leading in extreme cases
to those groups’ destruction or genocide. But though
we can make such a generalization, we are still obliged
to study each case for its particular historical origins.
I t ’s clear that in Asia and Africa there are racist
phenomena that are strongly influenced by
g l o b a l i z a t i o n , and are thus similar to the racism
characteristic of Europe and the Americas. But there
are also violent ethnic conflicts that stem from the
specific histories of those continents.
You have stressed the ro l e, especially in Euro p e a n
p o l i t i c s, of the “ d e m o g raphic factor.”What exactly do you
mean by this?
Racism can’t be understood as the simple
consequences of demographic pressure—it’s not a
mechanical phenomenon. Large migratory fluxes have
become a real problem for the first time in 50 years.
And though “south to south” migration barely makes
the news—being seen as a minor aspect of the “new
world order”—the dismemberment of Yu g o s l a v i a
drew attention to supposed masses of refugees.This has
transformed demographics into a critical element on
European governments’ political agendas.
In my recent work,I develop an analogy between
Europe today and in the1930s. It’s clear that we have
been pushed back to one of the principle historical
features of that time,when the idea of mass deportation
or social engineering was considered a fundamental
part of geopolitics.
Some experts would arg u e, h o w e v e r, that unlike the
INTERVIEW BY IVAN BRISCOE
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



A re t u r n to nature
Is it possible to gauge the influence of globalization and mass migration
on the future of racist thought? Alberto Burgio*, a leading Italian analyst
of racism, examines the ethnic panorama
2 . THE EXCLUDED
* Professor of the history of
ideas at the University of
B o l o g n a , author of
L’Invenzione delle Razze
[The Invention of Races],
I volumi (1998) and L a
Guerra delle Razze [The
Race Wars],(2001)
Illegal asylum seekers from the

1930s extremist parties in Europe are on the decline:
F ra n c e ’s National Fro n t , for instance, is no longer so
strong.
When you make a historical analogy, you obviously
have to be aware that history does not repeat itself. I t ’s
a question instead of asking if there is a set of shared
phenomena which can help us find our way around
contemporary politics. I point to three such
p h e n o m e n a ,which I believe were extremely important
in the 1930s and continue to be very heavily present in
the first years of the new century.
Firstly, war has returned to the heart of Europe
through the Balkans, and is once again seen as a real
political option by European and We s t e r n
g o v e r n m e n t s. S e c o n d l y, as I mentioned earlier,
demographics and frontier protection have become key
parts of government policy,especially for the European
Union since the implementation of the Schengen
accords in 1995.Th i r d l y, racism has become once again
an ideological weapon,and the representation of social
and political relations in ethnic terms has become an
ideological means of producing consensus in We s t e r n
democratic societies. Not only in Au s t r i a ,S w i t z e r l a n d
or Belgium,but also in Britain,Germany and France:
in March 2000, over 60 percent of Fr e n c h p e o p l e
admitted in a survey to holding racist opinions.
In Italy and other countries there has been earnest
debate over the issue of national culture and its
protection.Is this is just a cover for racist prejudices or
a reflection of wider concerns?
If an Italian like me compares myself with a Fr e n c h
c i t i z e n , I can obviously talk about my eating habits, m y
l i f e s t y l e, my tastes, indeed everything which
distinguishes an Italian from another nationality,
without necessarily being racist.But there is a point
when the discussion becomes racist,and that is when
one says these differences are too large to be
eliminated,they are too large to allow people to live
together as equals.
Turning to the Muslims and Arab peoples in Italy,
it’s said that the culture of these people is not only
different from our own,but also prevents them from
i n t e g r a t i n g. Therefore assimilation in a democratic
country where everyone is equal before the law
becomes impossible.The ambiguity of the racist stance
is that it acknowledges essential human
characteristics—it talks of culture,of religion, of history,
of traditions—yet treats all of these as if they were only
aspects of nature. It translates what is historical into
what is natural,and thus impossible to change.
Giacomo Biffi, the Archbishop of Bologna, h a s
clearly stated that we must welcome only immigrants
who come from Christian countries, starting with
Filipinos since they are Catholics. And it’s not just
B i f fi.An important writer and political scientist called
Giovanni Sartori, who lived for several years in the
United States and taught at Columbia University, h a s
written a book saying exactly the same thing.
Do you believe the coming years will see incre a s e d
exploitation of racism at the political level?
It’s difficult to make predictions. If the hawkish
approach to governing globalization wins—by which
I mean that of a confrontation between poor and
rich—I believe we will see years of hard conflict,and
amid this conflict there is sure to be a violent rejection
of the continuous flow of people coming to the richer
parts of the world. These conflicts will also be
interpreted politically by the right, namely by the
political entrepreneurs of spontaneous racism.
But there is also the possibility, or rather the hope,
that leaders of the richest and most powerful countries
try to govern these differences between the rich and
poor parts of the world in a less violent and more
reasonable way.This is unfortunately less likely than the
first option,but if it occurs, we may see a progressive
reduction in the problem of racism.
Can anything be done to combat racism in individual
countries rather than at the global level?
Anti-racist campaigns must be rooted in the
concrete reality of different countries or regions,
otherwise you can make only moral platitudes—and
no-one needs those. Instead we need to be able to
make practical interventions in real situations. Th e
United Nations and other large organizations must
continue to make governments aware of this problem,
as must world public opinion. ■
W H Y  R A C I S M ?
Balkans under arrest in Greece.
