Everyone in Cambodia is aware that
the country’s national heritage must be
s a f e g u a r d e d . Financial and human
r e s o u r c e s, h o w e v e r, are sorely lacking, a n d
achievements fall far short of intentions.
To date, the greatest progress has been
made in protecting the site of Angkor and
the heritage of Siem Reap province. Since
UNESCO put Angkor on the World Heri-
tage List in 1992 and Cambodia passed a
heritage protection act in 1996, s e v e r a l
steps have been taken.These include divi-
ding the area into five protection zones,
creating a special agency for the protec-
tion of heritage and setting up a govern-
mental authority (Apsara) to manage heri-
tage throughout the province. In theory at
least,we have legal instruments to help us
manage the site.
But we must not delude ourselves. L o o-
ting and pillaging have not been completely
wiped out in the Angkor archaeological
park. In the rest of Siem Reap province,
plundering sometimes takes on dramatic
p r o p o r t i o n s. Public opinion focuses only
on major sites. But how many small brick
and sandstone temples are being damaged
forever!  A case in point is the Roluos
region,15 kilometres from Angkor:all the
“minor”sites have been looted.
Besides vandalism, another kind of
damage is threatening the site’s sacred
value. Recently, UNESCO’s World Heri-
tage Committee sounded the alarm when
karaoke bars were built in an area that
theoretically enjoys the highest degree of
p r o t e c t i o n . This phenomenon is directly
linked to the growing number of visitors,
which is increasing much faster than the
development of tourist infrastructures. N e w
buildings must not only meet visitors’ needs,
but also respect the nature of this site,
where the sacred character of the monu-
ments and village life are one and the same.
And what about the rest of Cambodia,
which is not lucky enough to receive sup-
port, like Angkor, from an international
co-ordination committee (ICC) or benefit
from the same protection measures?  Here
again,attention is focused only on major
s i t e s. But Cambodia is strewn with
archaeological remains, and few have
escaped illegal excavations. I ’ll mention
just one case, the necropolis in the village
of Snay, which was openly and publicly
plundered.
Fine crafts and the know-how they
require are not safe either. There is a thri-
ving market for antique silks, l o o m s,
tobacco-cutting boards, traditional lutes
and old copper utensils. Even more serious
is the fate of manuscripts made of wads of
latania trees, which some antique dealers
cut up to maximize their profits. Antique
ceramics are openly sold in shops in Phnom
Penh and along the Thai border. It is true
that many Cambodian antique dealers sin-
cerely believe that only stone items are
protected by the law.
Does this mean that the royal govern-
ment is looking the other way? Of course
n o t . But Cambodia,which has been devas-
tated by a long period of war and revolu-
tion,needs time to re-establish the rule of
l a w. A n d , without seeming overly pessi-
mistic, it must be acknowledged that the
country has been overwhelmed by the pro-
blem.
In short, there is a long way to go.C a m-
bodia cannot cope with the plundering of its
art and artefacts without international
c o o p e r a t i o n .The problem’s source lies ups-
t r e a m , in the demand from Japan and above
all,western countries. Pieces of Khmer art
taken out of the country illegally have been
known to surface in prestigious museums
around the world. The agreement signed
two years ago by the United States and the
royal government to limit imports of
Khmer art works is important.It is a step
forward that should be emulated by other
countries. ■
A S K E W E D B AT T L E
BY ANG CHOULEAN
DIRECTOR OF THE CAMBODIAN AUTHORITY FOR THE PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT OF ANGKOR AND THE REGION OF SIEM REAP
