Choi Yu l
the gre e n i n g
of Ko re a
zones. Our major water reservoirs have
become acidified,making them unfit for
human consumption. The government
has been taking measures1 to control
industrial pollution but automobile
emissions have become another major
source of contamination. For example,
in the capital Seoul, 60 percent of air
pollutants come from motor vehicle
emissions.
Then there is the issue of nuclear
power: to meet the industry’s growing
energy demands, the government plans
to build more nuclear power plants in
the coming years.This is a major concern
because we already have 16 nuclear
reactors generating over 40 percent of
the country’s electricity, and some of
them have a very poor safety record.
Any mishap could spell a disaster not
only for South Korea but for the whole
region.
In July 2000,a choreographed campaign to save the wetlands.
Choi Yul spent his prison
years strengthening his
grasp of environmental
problems. Today, the
country’s leading green
activist is rallying the
South Korean people
against polluting
industries. Together, they
have scored victories
against both national
and foreign
governments
outh Ko rea has
witnessed im-
p ressive industrial
and economic
g rowth in the last
two decades. What
impact has this
h a d on the envi-
ronment? 
There is no doubt that the economic
boom turned South Korea into one of
A s i a ’s fastest-growing economies,
bringing people prosperity. But little
attention was paid to the damaging
effects of rapid industrialization on the
environment because people were
desperate to fill their stomachs. Today,
the country is paying a heavy price for
this.
Harmful emissions from industries
have created high air pollution levels,
resulting in acid rain in our industrial
S A re Ko reans ready for a more
environmentally friendly lifestyle?
There has definitely been a shift.
Twenty years ago,people were not aware
of environmental problems.Raising the
subject of pollution in public was
considered as an anti-government, a n t i -
development attitude. The military
regime of the time suppressed all forms
of civil society activities.H o w e v e r, a f t e r
the success of the 1987 June democracy
s t r u g g l e, the influence of environmental
groups has increased significantly.
We should be clear about what kind
of prosperity we want—a healthy lifestyle
with modest resources or polluted
surroundings with more wealth. O u r
current way of life is influenced by
western culture with its wasteful habits. I
am confident that if people realize the
damages they are causing to their
e n v i r o n m e n t , they will be willing to

“If the present trend continues, the goverment
will be forced to pump in billions of dollars
to clean up the environmental mess”
change their attitude and the government
will follow
suit.
Also, if South Korea does not meet
global environmental regulations, it will
lose its economic competitiveness.
Foreign investors will shy away if the
country gets increasingly polluted. If the
present trend continues, the government
will be forced to pump in billions of
dollars to clean up the environmental
mess. Korea has gone beyond the stage
when it could achieve growth only by
sacrificing environmental quality.
Protecting the environment is the most
economically efficient way of achieving
social well-being, far more than building
more polluting industries to generate
wealth.
How did you get involved in
e n v i ronmental activism and what kinds of
difficulties have you run into?
In the 1970s, we were living under a
repressive military government and I
was organizing democratic movements
with other students in my university. I
was imprisoned in 1975 for my activism
and spent a total of six years in prison
(see box).While in solitary confin e m e n t ,
I asked Amnesty International and other
civic groups to send me environmental
books from overseas because such texts
were not viewed as “ p o l i t i c a l ” by prison
a u t h o r i t i e s. I ended up reading more
than 250 books on global environmental
issues and I realized that South Ko r e a ’s
rapid industrialization process would
soon lead the country towards an
ecological disaster.
After my release, with support from
several youth and pro-democracy
a c t i v i s t s, I founded the country’s fir s t
environmental NGO, the Ko r e a n
Research Institute of Environmental
P r o b l e m s, in 1982. The government
regarded it as an illegal entity and
demanded that the association be
disbanded. But I was not deterred. We
fought against the government’s
attempts to construct nuclear waste
storage sites, the dust contamination
from coal briquette plants, the spoiling
of mountains to make golf courses, and
the reclamation of coastal tidal-flats.
One of our first campaigns was to
highlight environmental hazards in the
Onsan industrial complex, known for
its non-ferrous metals industry, in 1984.
Our investigations revealed that levels of
heavy metals like copper, zinc and
cadmium in water and other living
beings were between 10 and 100 times
higher than in other areas. Nearly 10
percent of the local people had severe
pollution-related health problems like
sore limbs, sore eyes and serious skin
d i s e a s e s. But when we launched the
campaign,it was very hard to convince
people about the problems while local
doctors and biochemists rejected my
requests to scientifically prove them. I
then invited the Japanese doctor Harada
Masazumi—who had previously
i d e n t i fied industrial pollution as the
cause of Minamata disease2—to visit
Onsan.He described the disease in the
region as a complicated pollution-
related illness far worse than Minamata.
His findings were given wide media
coverage in South Ko r e a , turning the
subject into a major social issue. Th e
government belatedly organized an
investigation team and implemented
m e a s u r e s, including moving residents
of the area to safer regions.
The Ko rean Fe d e ration for Enviro n m e n t a l
M o v e m e n t , which you lead, a l s o
campaigns against nuclear power plants.
Why?
When nuclear power plants started
spreading in the 1950s, the nuclear
industry argued that they were safe and
clean. I also believed this propaganda.
After looking at the disastrous accidents
in Chernobyl,it is clear that there is no
remedy for nuclear radiation. S c i e n t i s t s
say people will continue to be affected
for generations.
Then there is the problem of safe
disposal of nuclear waste for which
South Ko r e a , like other countries, i s
struggling to find a solution. There is
currently no plan for long-term storage
or reprocessing of the spent nuclear fuel.
Also, the risk of a nuclear fallout is
Widespread protests led to the cancellation of a dam project on the Dong River in

greater in a country where there is a
repressive or authoritarian government
in power. If you look at global trends,
more and more nuclear reactors are
cropping up in developing countries
with authoritarian regimes. I am worried
that the possibility of a catastrophe is
greater in these nations.
In South Ko r e a , we are more
concerned about nuclear- r e l a t e d
problems because all our neighbours—
C h i n a ,North Ko r e a ,Taiwan and Ja p a n —
operate nuclear power plants. If an
accident happens in any of these
c o u n t r i e s, all of them will face the
c o n s e q u e n c e s. F u r t h e r m o r e, Russia has
been using its Far Eastern coast to dump
its radioactive material. So the threat of
a nuclear mishap is much higher in the
Far East than in other regions.The 1999
nuclear accident in the Tokaimura plant
in Ja p a n , which killed two workers and
exposed hundreds of local residents, is a
stark reminder that even rich countries
cannot vouch for the safety of their
nuclear reactors.
What is the situation of nuclear power
plants in South Korea?
The safety system is not satisfactory.
Though there are no reports of major
a c c i d e n t s, almost all 16 of them have
faced technical problems leading to
radioactive leakage, which the nuclear
industry tried to cover up. Some of the
power stations operate the old model
CANDU reactors. In October 1999,
there was a heavy water leakage in the
Wolsong nuclear plant:it was reported
that 22 workers were exposed to
radiation when 12 gallons of radioactive
water leaked from a reactor. Some of the
workers involved in salvage operations
were also exposed to radiation.
KFEM organized a team to
investigate this affair.When we entered
the nuclear plant, officials gave us
protective clothing before going near
the accident site. When we came out of
the area, detection equipment showed
that we had received radiation.Th o u g h
it was not life-threatening, the fact is
that even an outside inspection team
was given faulty protective gear. Th i s
allows you to imagine the condition of
workers inside the plant.
While developed countries show a
trend towards reduced dependence on
nuclear energy, South Korea is taking
the opposite course. The government
plans to increase the number of nuclear
plants to 35 by the year 2030.It has no
major plans to develop renewable
e n e r g y, which accounts for less than one
CHOI Y U L : N E RVES OF STEEL
His colleagues call him “a man of steel,” an apt description for a 51-year-old activist who has
gone through many a battle for his ideals. During his university days, Choi Yul strongly opposed
the military regime and was eventually thrown into prison,where he suffered repeated torture and
beatings. Even after his release, he was kept under house arrest and all his activities were closely
monitored. “In fact, the government did not allow me to travel abroad to participate in any
environmental conference until 1987,” recalls Yul.
Yul’s talent lies in convincing his countrymen to join the struggle against pollution. In 1993 his
movement merged with seven other similar organizations from different parts of the country to form
the Korean Federation for Environmental Movement (KFEM), which has grown into one of Asia’s
largest environmental organizations, with 47 regional branches and 85,000 individual
memberships. Yul is one of the most decorated environmentalists in the region. He was the 1994
laureate of UNEP’s Global Environmental Award and of the prestigious Goldman Environmental
Award the following year. Despite his many breakthroughs, Yul’s mission is far from accomplished.
“Since Koreans have been addicted to economic prosperity for years, creating an environmental
consciousness still remains a major challenge for activists,” says Yul,described by the Korean media
as one of the country’s most influential opinion-makers. If this is the case, then a change of mind
may well be in the making. ■

“M o re and more nuclear re a c t o rs are cropping up
in developing countries with authoritarian
re g i m e s”
percent of energy produced in the
country.
South Korea cannot shut down all its
nuclear reactors immediately.But KFEM
is firmly against building new reactors
and we insist on stringent safety measures
for the existing stations.At the same time,
the key to phasing out nuclear power
plants is to change our industrial structure
towards less energy consuming industries.
It also means making people aware that
alternatives exist. K F E M , for example,
recently showed off a housing model
using solar and wind energy, and received
positive public feedback. I am confid e n t
that once people become convinced of
the potential of alternative energy
s o u r c e s, they will agree to the idea of
closing down nuclear power plants.
K F E M ’s successful campaigns against
p roposals to build a nuclear waste dump
on Gulup Island in South Ko rea and
Ta i w a n ’s plans to transport nuclear waste
to North Ko rea hit international headlines
a few years ago.
The campaign against the
construction of a nuclear waste dump on
Gulup Island began in 1994,after it was
disclosed that the government had
secretly started work on it. During the
demonstrations, one resident died and
many activists were arrested.Once the
campaign grew into a national protest
and the geological instability of the area
became widely publicized, t h e
government cancelled the construction
p l a n .This campaign is remembered as a
landmark in Ko r e a ’s anti-nuclear
movement.
Regarding Taiwan, plans to export
nuclear waste to North Korea were
made public in January 1997. We were
determined to stop this because we were
sure that ultimately, the North Korean
people would suffer,as the regime there
would never disclose the details of this
contract to its citizens. Secondly, North
Korea does not have the resources or the
technology to safely store this nuclear
waste forever. KFEM organized for a
team of  activists and congress members
to visit the nuclear depository site in
Taiwan. We told the authorities that if
North Korea is starving,you should send
food,not nuclear waste.
We received support from
environmental NGOs around the world,
sent petitions to the UN and worked
closely with dozens of other civic groups.
The project was finally cancelled in
December 1997. It was a great morale
booster for environmental movements in
South Korea and throughout the region.
In a historic meeting last year, l e a d e rs
f rom the two Ko reas revived hopes of
re u n i f i c a t i o n . What role could the
environment play in this process?
Without a doubt,environment could
be a cornerstone for beginning
negotiations between the two Ko r e a s.
Protecting the environment and
biodiversity is a prerequisite for
sustainable development. Though we
have no first hand knowledge of existing
environmental conditions in North
Ko r e a , some residents there have told us
that industrial pollution across the
border is not as bad as in the South.But
the country faces problems of famine as

Environment could be
a cornerstone
for beginning
negotiations between
the two Koreas

well as flooding and soil erosion.
President Kim Dae-Jung made a good
start by discussing environmental
problems in the Korean peninsula during
the summit meeting in June 2000. I hope
the momentum continues in future talks.
Since North Ko r e a ’s energy
consumption is lower than the South’s,
launching an alternative energy
programme would be easier and perhaps
more effective there. R e f o r e s t a t i o n
programmes in the North could be
another joint project. Both sides could
also explore the possibility of co-
management of water resources, e c o-
systems and wildlife preservation in the
sensitive demilitarized zone at the border
between the two countries.We learnt that
North Koreans are also favourable to the
idea of keeping this zone. Since South
Korea has a stronger economy, it should
fin a n c i a l l y support North Korea in solving
its environmental problems. But we have
to be cautious not to allow an onslaught
by polluting industries from the South in
the name of economic co-operation and
assistance.
As a pioneering enviro n m e n t a l
m o v e m e n t , what kind of co-operation do
you have with other groups and what
are some of your plans for the future?
KFEM was accredited to the United
Nations Economic and Social Council
with Special Consultative status in Ju n e
1 9 9 8 .This recognition allows us to carry
out environmental protection activities
through various UN programmes.
Though we can highlight environmental
problems within South Korea,we need
support from like-minded groups to take
these issues onto the global stage. We
have also developed various
programmes to share the experience of
Korean environmental movements with
other Asian nations.
Among other activities, we started
an Environmental Education Centre  in
1999 to develop programmes for
s t u d e n t s, leaders and field activists, and to
encourage citizens to participate in
environmental campaigns. We can no
longer work effectively by just raising
awareness. We need to bring people to
the sites where the damage is being done.
KFEM is also involved in the Ko r e a n
Eco-centre in Seoul, which will be an
education space for citizens and a home
for the environmental movement. The
government and other donor agencies
are helping with this project.We are also
working with 60 experts from various
fields to prepare a blueprint for an
environmentally friendly society, p a r t l y
subsidized by the government and donor
a g e n c i e s.We will be working out how to
build a society that is geared toward
using less energy and water, f e w e r
a u t o m o b i l e s, and generating greater tax
dividends for the environment. ■
INTERVIEW BY
ETHIRAJAN ANBARASAN
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST
1. South Korea is not a party to the Ky o t o
Protocol on climate ch a n g e, w h i ch sets
limits on greenhouse gas emissions.
Since 1990, however, the government
has passed several environmental
regulations to limit harmful emissions
by industries. Also, in February 2000,
environment ministers from Ja p a n ,
China and South Korea agreed to
conduct a joint study on acid rain and
air pollution, and to establish an
environmental data centre to promote
regional co-operation in tack l i n g
pollution issues.
2. A neurological disorder caused by
water contaminated with industrial
waste.
Totem poles to protect coastal tidal flats.
