R
acism exists when one ethnic group or
historical collectivity dominates,e x c l u d e s,o r
seeks to eliminate another on the basis of
differences that it believes are hereditary
and unalterable. An ideological basis for
explicit racism, in this sense, came to a unique fruition
in the West during the modern period: no clear and
unequivocal evidence of racism beyond discrimination
or rivalry between communities has been found in
other cultures or in Europe before the Middle A g e s.
Perhaps the first sign of this racist view of the
world appeared in the identification of the Jews with
the devil and witchcraft in the popular mind of the 13th
and 14th centuries. O f ficial sanction for such attitudes
came in 16th-century Spain, when Jews who had
converted to Christianity and their descendants b e c a m e
the victims of a pattern of discrimination and
exclusion.
The period of the Renaissance and Reformation
was also a time when Europeans were coming into
increasing contact with people of darker pigmentation
in A f r i c a , Asia and the A m e r i c a s, and were thus
making judgements about them. The motive for
enslaving Africans was primarily economic—their
labour was needed on the plantations of the New
World—but the official rationale was that they were
heathens. Slave traders and slave owners sometimes
interpreted a passage in the book of Genesis as their
GEORGE M. FREDRICKSON
PROFESSOR OF HISTORY AT STANFORD UNIVERSITY, AUTHOROF THE COMPARATIVE IMAGINATION: ONTHE HISTORY OF RACISM, NATIONALISM AND SOCIAL
MOVEMENTS (UNIVERSITY OF CALFORNIA PRESS, 1997)



The rise and fall
of the laboratory ra c i s t
Until the Middle Ages, communities discriminated against each other and
vied for power. In the following centuries, the Bible, economics and
science gave birth to a new phenomenon: the hierarchy of race

The Inquisition strikes:a 15th-century engraving depicts the fate of Jews who refused to renounce their

justification.Ham,they maintained,committed a sin
against his father Noah that condemned his
supposedly black descendants to be “servants unto
s e r v a n t s.” When Virginia decreed in 1667 that
converted slaves could be kept in bondage,not because
they were actual heathens but because they had
heathen ancestry, the justification for black servitude
was thus changed from their religious status to
something approaching race. Beginning in the late
17th century, laws were also passed in British North
America forbidding marriage between whites and
blacks and discriminating against the mixed offspring
of informal liaisons. Without clearly stating so, such
laws implied that blacks were unalterably alien and
inferior.
During the Enlightenment,a secular or scientific
theory of race moved the subject away from the
B i b l e ’s teachings,with their insistence on the essential
unity of the human race. E i g h t e e n t h - c e n t u r y
ethnologists such as Linnaeus, Buffon and
Blumenbach began to think of human beings as part
of the natural world,and subdivided them into three
to five races, usually considered as varieties of a single
human species. In the late 18th and early 19th
centuries, however, an increasing number of writers,
especially those committed to the defence of slavery,
maintained that the races in fact constituted separate
species.
The 19th century was an age of emancipation,
n a t i o n a l i s m ,and imperialism—all of which contributed
to the growth and intensification of ideological racism
in Europe and the United States. Although the
emancipation of blacks from slavery and Jews from the
ghettoes received most of its support from religious or
secular believers in fundamental human equality, t h e
consequence of these reforms was to intensify rather
than diminish racism. Race relations became less
rigidly hierarchical and more competitive. Th e
insecurities of a burgeoning industrial capitalism
created a need for scapegoats. The Darwinian
emphasis on “the struggle for existence” and concern
for “the survival of the fittest”was conducive to the
development of a new and more credible scientific
racism in an era that increasingly viewed race relations
as an arena for conflict rather than the outcome of a
stable ranking.
Moral 
revulsion
It was nationalism,especially a type of romantic
cultural nationalism marrying ethnic heritage (thought
of in terms of blood) to a sense of collective identity,
that marked the growth of a new variant of racist
t h o u g h t , especially in Germany. Beginning in the late
1870s and early 1880s, the coiners of the term “anti-
S e m i t i s m ” made explicit what some cultural
nationalists had previously implied: that to be Je w i s h
in Germany was not simply to adhere to a set of
religious beliefs or cultural practices, but meant
belonging to a race that was the antithesis of the race
to which true Germans belonged.
Western imperialism in the late 19th century,
m e a n w h i l e, was reaching a climax.The “scramble for
Africa”and forays into parts of Asia and the Pacific
represented an assertion of the competitive ethnic
nationalism believed to exist between European
nations (and which, as a result of the Spanish-
American War came to include the United States). I t
also constituted a claim, allegedly based on science,
that Europeans had a natural-born right to rule over
Africans and Asians.
It was nevertheless only in the 20th century that
the history of racism reached its zenith: the rise and fall
of overtly racist regimes. In the American South,
segregation laws and restrictions on black voting
rights reduced African Americans to lower caste
s t a t u s.A key feature of this regime was fear of sexual
contamination through rape or intermarriage, which
led to efforts to prevent the conjugal union of whites
with those that had any known or discernible A f r i c a n
ancestry.
Racist ideology was of course carried to its extreme
in Nazi Germany through the attempted extermination
of an entire ethnic group. H i t l e r, it has been said, g a v e
racism a bad name. The moral revulsion of people
throughout the world against what the Nazis did,
reinforced by scientific studies undermining racist
genetics (or eugenics), served to discredit the scientific
racism that had been respectable and influential in
the United States and Europe before World War II.
Explicit racism also came under devastating attack
from the new nations created in the wake of the
decolonization of Africa and Asia. The Civil Rights
The way it was:a slave market in Virginia, circa 1861.

movement in the United States, which succeeded in
outlawing legalized racial segregation and
discrimination in the 1960s, drew crucial support from
the growing sense that national interests were
threatened when blacks in the United States were
mistreated and abused. In the competition with the
Soviet Union for “the hearts and minds” o f
independent Africans and Asians, racial segregation
became a national embarrassment with possible
strategic consequences.
“Cultural racism”
The one racist regime that survived World War II
and the Cold War was the South A f r i c a n .Laws passed
in 1948 banning all marriage and sexual relations
between different “population groups,”and requiring
separate residential areas for people of mixed race and
Africans, demonstrated a clear obsession with “race
purity.” But the climate of world opinion in the wake
of the Holocaust induced apologists for apartheid to
rest their case for “separate development” mainly on
cultural rather than physical differences.
The defeat of Nazi Germany, the desegregation of
the American South and the establishment of majority
rule in South Africa suggest that regimes based on
biological racism or cultural purity are a thing of the
p a s t .But racism does not require the full and explicit
support of the state and the law. Nor does it require an
ideology centred on the concept of biological
i n e q u a l i t y. Discrimination by institutions and
individuals against those perceived as racially different
can long persist and even flourish under the illusion of
n o n - r a c i s m , as historians of Brazil have recently
d i s c o v e r e d .The use of allegedly deep-seated cultural
differences as a justification for hostility and
discrimination against newcomers from the developing
world—whether they be Algerians in Fr a n c e,Turks in
G e r m a n y,Pakistanis in Britain,Mexicans in the United
States—have evoked charges of a new “ c u l t u r a l
r a c i s m ” despite the dominant group’s explicit
disavowal of any kind of biological superiority.
Such recent examples of racism are not
unprecedented.They rather represent a reversion to
the way that the differences between groups could be
readily made to seem indelible and unbridgeable
before the articulation of a scientific or naturalistic
