F
GREG PHILO
PROFESSOR OF COMMUNICATIONS AT THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOWAND RESEARCH DIRECTOR
OFTHE GLASGOW UNIVERSITY MEDIA GROUP



An unseen world: h o w
the media portrays the
p o o r
Following the attacks on the United States, many commentators have pondered
the Western public’s ignorance of life and issues in the developing world. The author
of a major study discusses why this is so, and what can be done
or over 30 years,numerous academic stu-
dies of how news flows between the deve-
loping and the developed world have rea-
ched the same conclusion: far from being
t w o - w a y, news circulates in a deeply
uneven and distorted manner.“Not only
is there a quantitative imbalance in news
flow, with the Third World receiving far
more material about the First World than
vice versa,” says media theorist A n n a-
belle Sreberny, “but the continual cove-
rage of the global centres of the industrial
world contrasts with the intermittent
images of the south in crisis.”
One frequent criticism has been that
news focuses on disasters and confli c t s
without explaining the complex social
and political histories behind them. The
role of the West also tends to be
ignored—notably when African coun-
tries were deployed as pawns in the Cold
War.
Major news services such as BBC,
ITV,Agence France-Presse and Reuters
have all been accused of offering very
limited accounts of the developing world.
In the U.S., journalist Mort Rosenblum
has attacked the obsession of media
controllers with ratings and their pro-
motion of what they see as entertainment
rather than reliable information.A study
by Steve Askin found that in 1992, the
story of hunger in Africa was only
deemed suitable for U.S. coverage when
it was discovered that elephants were
also dying in the drought.
But are TV audiences really this
shallow? It is a critical question that very
few studies have tackled. One survey in
Scandinavia found that press coverage
of the developing world was dominated

Not just an “African”issue:a miner in Angola.

by war and conflict, but that readers
actually said they wanted more on local
culture and “ n o r m a l ” l i f e. In Britain,
meanwhile, a major project was recently
commissioned by the Government’s
Department for International Develop-
ment out of concern over how T V ’s depic-
tions of the developing world could affect
public attitudes.*
A companion study by the Th i r d
World and Environment Broadcasting
Trust (3WE) interviewed 38 senior broad-
casters and programme makers, helping
bring to light the assumptions made about
reports from poor countries. As the
Director of Programmes at Carlton Te l e-
vision in London commented: “I know
from past experience that programmes
about the developing world don’t bring in
the audiences.They’re not about us, and
t h e y ’re not usually about things we can do
anything about.”
A negative diet
of images
It is not hard to see the effects of such
assumptions on coverage. A report for
3WE concluded that the total output of
factual programmes on developing coun-
tries by the four terrestrial channels in
Britain dropped by 50 percent in the 10
years after 1989.Our own study showed
that when the developing world is fea-
tured on British news, a high proportion
of the coverage is related to war, c o n fli c t ,
terrorism and disasters.This is especially
so for the main television channels, with
over a third of coverage on BBC and
Independent Television News (ITN)
devoted to such issues.
Much of the remaining coverage is
given over either to sport or to visits by
w e s t e r n e r s. For example, in our sample
the Bahamas were in the news because
Mick Jagger and Jerry Hall had paid a
visit there, and some countries were fea-
tured simply because the balloon belon-
ging to Vi r g i n ’s boss Richard Branson had
floated over them.
One reason for these changes has
been the greatly increased competition
for audiences following the rise of satellite
and cable channels. Combined with the
onset of a free market from the 1980s and
general television “ d e - r e g u l a t i o n ,” t h i s
has led to a commercial obsession with
grabbing viewers’ attention—a kind of
“watch me and buy something culture.”
Yet this is not necessarily what tele-
vision viewers want. When we actually
interviewed audience groups, we found
that people’s attitudes were rather dif-
ferent from what the broadcasters had
a s s u m e d . Some people w e r e c o m p l e t e l y
“turned off” from the developing world
(about 25 percent of the sample), b u t
the reason was in part the constant nega-
tive diet of images they were given.As
one interviewee put it:“ Well every time
you turn on the TV or pick up a paper,
t h e r e ’s another (war) starting or there is
more poverty or destruction. It is all too
much.”
Nearly all the
people interviewed
recalled negative
images since that was
largely what they had
been exposed to on
t e l e v i s i o n . Levels of
i n t e r e s t , h o w e v e r,
were not nearly so
u n i f o r m . Wh a t
actually bothered a
majority of viewers
was that they simply
did not understand the images they were
being shown. As one put it: “I have a
constant sense of not being properly
informed about background to issues and
things like that.”
A frequent complaint was that jour-
nalists merely took for granted that the
audience knew what the story was about.
In the course of this study, we worked
very closely with journalists and some
c o n firmed what the viewers were saying.
One commented to us that news reporters
were effectively told not to focus on
explanation, but to go for eye-catching
events like fighting, shooting or riots.As
he put it, they had been stopped from
doing “explainers”—now it was “all bang,
bang stuff.”
As a result of this work,we began to
discuss with journalists how TV coverage
might be improved. We agreed that we
would conduct a new pilot study in which
BBC journalists joined a focus group of
“ o r d i n a r y ”TV watchers.The purpose was
to examine what these viewers unders-
tood (or didn’t) from a TV news report,
and then to discuss this with the journa-
lists who had actually
made the news item.
We also wanted to
find out how much
the viewers’ unders-
tanding of the story
affected their level of
interest in it. D a v i d
Shukman from the
BBC was one of the
journalists present,
and we began by
watching two news
reports that he had
presented on the continuing war in
Angola and the terrible effects which
land mines had on the local population.
His report contained very distressing
images and had a strong impact, produ-
cing great sympathy from the viewers.
Yet it also had the normal negative effect
of being interpreted as one more set of
war images from A f r i c a .The viewers’ res-
ponse was that it was sad, but nothing
really to do with them since nothing could
be done.The news report had noted that
the oil and diamond trades financed the
c r i s i s, and that because of corruption
within A n g o l a , people in that country

The illicit trade in “blood diamonds” has supported wars across Africa.
I asked the group
how they thought
weapons were paid
for... I proceeded
to ask them if
anyone
was wearing
a diamond.

p r o fited from the war.This fitted the vie-
wers’ notions that it was basically an
“A f r i c a n ”p r o b l e m , because as they saw it,
African people were simply not very good
at governing themselves.
At this point I intervened in the dis-
cussion and introduced some new infor-
m a t i o n . I asked the group where the
mines and munitions had come from.Th e
group reasoned that they came from
industrialized countries,and that Britain,
America and Eastern Europe sold arma-
m e n t s. I then asked how they thought the
weapons were paid for. The answer was
through the sale of diamonds, oil and by
money laundering, all of which had been
mentioned in the news item. I drew their
attention to suggestions that the City of
London was involved in the illicit transfer
of large sums of money from Africa (e.g.
London Evening Standard 2 0 / 1 0 / 0 0 ) . I
proceeded to ask them if anyone was
wearing a diamond.
We eventually did this exercise with
three different groups and in each of
them there was a very surprised reaction
to this question and great shock at the
implication that if they purchased a dia-
mond in Britain, it could be paying for
l a n d m i n e s. I then pointed out to them
the illicit trade in “blood diamonds”and
how this supported wars across A f r i c a .I n
all of the groups, the new information
provoked a very animated discussion and
led the viewers to ask why such back-
ground was not given on television. The
journalists were grilled on this by group
m e m b e r s, who believed that the news
was being censored, though the journalists
denied that this was the case.
Enlightening viewers
The important point to emerge from
this study was that the interest of the vie-
wers in the group increased greatly once
they understood the political and eco-
nomic links underpinning the confli c t s
witnessed on television. Most crucially,
they realized that they were involved
themselves and no longer saw the pro-
blem as just an “African”issue. If people
understand that global political and eco-
nomic relationships are fostering pro-
blems, then they can also see that these
relationships can be changed.The sense
that “nothing can be done” is altered,
and audiences start to see the world quite
differently.
Our research was significant in that it
enabled journalists and academic spe-
cialists to work together to improve the
quality of news and its capacity to explain.
If this collective work is now pursued,it
may be possible to develop new struc-
tures and practices for reporting on the
developing world. ■
* The study was undertaken by the
Glasgow Media Group and examined
both television news content and the
reaction of audience groups A fuller ver-
sion of the results of the Glasgow Media
Group studies is available as “Au d i e n c e
Interest and Understanding of News
P r o g r a m m e s,” w w w. g l a . a c. u k / A c a d /
Sociology/media.html.
