T
CHRISTL DENECKE
PROGRAMME FELLOW AT THE CORAL REEF ALLIANCE
(BERKELEY, CALIFORNIA)

C o rals under siege
Threatened by pollution, overfishing and global warming, coral reefs— a lifeline
for millions of people—are dying off at an alarming rate 
he vibrantly coloured rainforests of the
sea received a disturbing bill of health
during a recent gathering of marine bio-
logists in Bali: in the past few decades,
more than one quarter of the world’s
coral reefs have been destroyed by
human activity. At the present rate, a t
least 57 percent will
be lost within our
lifetime.
This destruction
threatens not only
coral reefs, but also
the lives of some
5 0 0 million or so
people in southeast
and southern Asia,
eastern Africa and
the Caribbean. For
many of these
coastal communi-
t i e s, corals are the
largest source of
p r o t e i n : a healthy
reef can provide
more than 15
tonnes of fish and
seafood per square
kilometre each
y e a r, enough food
for 2,500 people.And often they are the
only source of income, employment and
foreign exchange.
Coastal communities depend on their
reefs to attract tourists,develop the capa-
city for commercial fis h i n g, and protect
shorelines from erosion and storm
d a m a g e. In the British Virgin Islands, f o r
e x a m p l e, 45 percent of revenue comes
from tourism, which provides more than
half of the territory’s employment.A loss
of reefs would probably cause the water
to cloud with algae and the beaches to
erode under the pressure of waves,l e a d i n g
to an estimated  $130 million loss in
i n c o m e.
Created by more than 50 million
yearsof evolution,coral reefs are one of
the most complex and fragile webs of
biodiversity on earth. Naturalists have
catalogued more than 800 species of
r e e f-building coral and 4,000 species
o f reef-dwelling fish. In total, c o r a l
r e e f s may shelter as many as one quarter
of all marine species, and are especially
important as nurseries for young fish.
So why are these lifelines disappea-
ring faster than ever? On a local level,
overfishing has decimated many indivi-
dual reefs,notably in Malaysia,Vi e t n a m ,
Indonesia and the Philippines. Th e
removal of too many plant-eating fis h
allows algae to overgrow and kill the
c o r a l , beginning a chain reaction of local
extinctions that quickly grows beyond
the reef’s natural ability to recover.
Several fishing techniques are particu-
larly lethal.
Blast fis h i n g, when fishers explode
homemade devices over reefs to kill fis h ,
has severely damaged corals in eastern
A f r i c a . Fishing with sodium cyanide is
no better: exposure to this chemical
makes tropical fish slow and clumsy, and
therefore much easier to catch,while at
the same time killing off corals and many
other reef animals.
Cyanide-fished reefs are often
stripped of their marine life and over-
grown by algae. Despite efforts to halt
cyanide fishing, its frequency has
increased in the past few years,driven by
the high prices paid for live fish at tropical
fish restaurants in Asia and aquariums
in North A m e r i c a . Since this form of
fishing began in the 1960s, the amount of
cyanide dumped on coral reefs in the Phi-
lippines alone has exceeded one million
kilograms.
But fishing is
just one chapter of
the story. R e e f s
are  also being
killed by indus-
trial pollution,
sediments running
down rivers from
deforested land
and run-off from
a g r i c u l t u r a l
f e r t i l i z e r s .
Activities such as
coral mining,
d r e d g i n g, s h i p -
grounding and
c o n s t r u c t i o n
break apart large
coral strips and
shatter delicate
b r a n c h e s. S i n c e
r e e f - b u i l d i n g
corals only grow at a rate of  1.3 to 10.2
centimetres per year, each blast-fis h i n g
explosion and dragged object can destroy
a century of reef development.
To make matters worse, global war-
ming is adding to the plight of the reefs.
Not only are corals fragile, but they are
highly sensitive to temperature change.S o
when the 1998 El Niño winds warmed
tropical waters from Africa through Indo-
nesia and the Philippines and out into
the Pacific, reefs in the region turned pale
and quickly faded to an eerie shade of
bone white, a phenomenon known as
b l e a c h i n g. Many bleached corals are
finally killed by algae.The Global Coral
No more shelter for fish: a diver explores a blasted reef.

Reef Monitoring Network estimates that
bleaching in 1998 destroyed 16 percent of
the earth’s reefs. In the Indian Ocean,
the Maldives, Sri Lanka and western
I n d i a , bleaching had a devastating effect
on reefs already damaged by sedimenta-
tion and pollution from onshore industry
and land-clearing. Those that continue
to be exposed to harmful human impacts
are unlikely to ever recover. Above and
beyond all other destructive pressures,
there’s a good chance that coral reefs as
we know them will be gone in 30 to 50
years if global warming continues as
expected.
While communities cannot do much
about global warming, they can find ways
to ally protection with economic growth.
For example, tourism development and
coral protection go hand-in-hand at the
Bonaire Marine Park in the Dutch
A n t i l l e s. The park, established in 1979,
employs rangers to enforce bans on the
collection of coral, s p e a r fishing and com-
mercial fishing in park areas. To make
the park self-sustaining, managers began
charging a user fee to all visitors in 1992.
Bonaire was one of the first marine parks
to fund itself, instead of relying on money
from foundations or local taxes.
N o w, the degradation of unprotected
reefs elsewhere in the Caribbean has left
Bonaire with some of the healthiest coral
in the area.Almost 30,000 visitors flock to
the park each year,which has fed Bonai-
r e ’s tourism industry. The continuing
efforts of park rangers to protect their
reefs indicate that the island is set to
maintain healthy coral and increase its
revenue from tourism.
Bonaire is just one example of about
400 marine parks designed to protect
reefs. Unfortunately, many of these are
“ p a p e r ” p a r k s, lacking the funding or
community support to enforce protec-
tion laws. Many are geographically iso-
lated and,more often than not,near coast-
lines that are not managed properly,
allowing erosion and chemicals from
areas outside the park to flow in and
damage coral.
With financial resources in develo-
ping countries stretched thin, the most
effective path to protection lies in part-
nerships between local governments,
international aid groups, NGOs and
national foundations.The goal: to design
effectively managed marine parks where
communities maintain control over their
resources with help from more expe-
rienced and better funded national or
international organizations. We a l t h y
nations have an added stake in these bio-
diversity havens: they could well harbour
precious chemicals for developing medi-
c i n e.The most notable is azidothymidine
(AZT), a drug widely used in industria-
lized countries to treat people with A I D S.
AZT was created from a chemical pro-
duced by a Caribbean sea sponge that
slows the growth of viruses. It is unknown
how many more chemicals derived from
coral reef animals may become the basis
for similar life-saving drugs, but that is
just one more good reason for speeding
up the protection of our imperilled reefs.
