My mother,
my mirro r

Eugenia,age 32, lives alone with her three-year-old daughter Violeta.

I“Once upon a time,” or so fairy tales begin. “ M a - m a ! ” is but a mere syllable,
r e p e a t e d .And rooted in my memory is the first sentence of my school textbook:
“My mama loves me.”Th a t ’s how you learned to read when I was a child.We were
brought up to believe that a mother’s love was special, different from other
k i n d s.That it can’t err,d o e s n ’t hesitate, is never ambivalent or contradictory like
other loves. But that’s just an illusion, like most strongly held beliefs.
The subject, long silenced, is starting to crop up at conferences and to appear
in articles, films and anthologies. I remember how I felt at an exhibition a few years
ago where 80 women photographers from all over the world had been invited to
show pictures of mothers as they saw them.It was a parade of complex and multi-
dimensional portraits of mothers: combative or emotional, young or ageing,
enticing or gentle.
But distress about resemblance—that “my mother = myself”—was a recurrent
t h e m e.The phrase proclaims it and psychoanalysis pretty much confirms it: l i k e
m o t h e r, like daughter.The myths of the perfect mother and the “good daughter”
collapse to reveal what they truly are: a house of cards blown down by a mere
b r e e z e.
It so happens that the captions of the exhibition’s photos carried no date,n o r
do those in this reportage by the Argentine photographer Adriana Lestido.A r e
they trying to tell us that ties between mothers and daughters are timeless?
Ties created by a whole kaleidoscope of distorting mirrors, r e flections and
boomerang-type occurrences.What about the physical gestures and mannerisms
of speech we repress deep within ourselves just because they’re copied from her,
she who is watching us from the other side of the mirror? Love and rebellion seem
inseparable from this primal, fundamental relationship always so marked by
intensity and guilt.And such anguish as well.
I’m tempted to think mother-daughter relationships in Argentina can’t be
all that different from what they are in Belgium,Transylvania or Canada.Yet
they probably are. My country was unified by the Spanish language, which we
Through a kaleidoscope of memories and
feelings, the author probes one of our most
intense and primal relationships—that
between mothers and daughters—and the
dimensions it has taken in Argentina’s recent
traumatic history
PHOTOS BY ADRIANA LESTIDO, TEXT BY LUISA FUTORANSKY
ADRIANA LESTIDO IS A PHOTOGRAPHER. LUISA FUTORANSKY IS A WRITERAND POET.
HERTRANSLATEDWORK INCLUDES A POETRY SELECTION, THE DURATION OF THE VOYAGE (JUNCTION PRESS,
1998). BOTH ARE FROM ARGENTINA.
Marta,32,a single mother, with her 11-year-old daughter Nana.

s u r v i v o r s, so they had to use all their skill to deal with the here and
n o w.They had no keys to enter the New World so they picked the
lock with skeleton keys, or failing that, h a i r p i n s, all fashioned into
tools of their future. This is how they filled their lives with new
words and gestures.It was easier for the men to make the transition.
Military service, farm work and trading helped them adapt much
more quickly to the ways, the feel and the customs of the country.
I belong to a generation of children of Jews who came to
A r g e n t i n a , disappearing off the map as they fled in boats from
repeated wars and pogroms. Just like A l b a n i a n s, Cubans and
Haitians do today, and before them Vietnamese and Ko r e a n s — t h e
latest of history’s never-ending castaways. People with one hand
outstretched and the other reaching behind—but grateful
t h e y h a v e hands at all. E x i l e, long before Babel, was and still
i s p u n i s h m e n t .
I’m the product of a world which had only just discovered
e l e c t r i c i t y, a world without television, with dirt roads and
impenetrable barriers, where you were invariably told:“ We don’t
talk about such things, young lady.” And what a range of “ s u c h
t h i n g s ” there were, including all forms of love and, n a t u r a l l y, a
taboo on sexuality.
Where women gathered in my childhood, serials on the radio
reigned amid the whirr of Singer sewing machines. During the
excessively long periods of mourning, they drank bitter maté tea and
My mother, my mirro r
called Castilian when I was growing up, and its people are mainly
immigrants.
From generation to generation, away from their country of
b i r t h ,women have steadily handed down the extraordinary strength
of their culture of origin and through it, the not-always-silent presence
of an absent language. You can detect it in the uneven, e n e r g e t i c
cradlesongs whose words and rhymes are unintelligible but can still
lay nightmares to rest.The uprooted, the immigrant arrives with very
few fixed images; the scarf she sometimes wears on her head perhaps
sums them all up.She clutches her bundle of belongings, the trunk of
the castaways.The treasure she brings is buried deep in her memory,
but the locks have been broken or the keys lost amid a primeval pain.
At the next level, the most powerful one, lies a whole collection
of feelings, memories and melodies. For example, I can see my own
mother nearly a teenager scattering corn to feed the chickens,
combing her hair or untangling my long braids. “My poor darling
m o t h e r,” went the chorus of the most popular song of the time, s u n g
by Alfredo Castillo. Then there was the almost-daily ritual of
meticulously ironing —with a fire-heated iron—the pleats of my
white starched smock. The stricter she got, the more rebellious I
b e c a m e.And her victory was more emphatic each time, because she
never dies, that mother we knew when we were children.
The women I’m talking about—mothers, g r a n d m o t h e r s, g r e a t -
g r a n d m o t h e r s — d i d n ’t fit a preset image of urban dwellers.They were
From the youngest age, Violeta has been protective of her mother.

dyed their clothes black all year round, dipping them in big zinc tubs,
so as to strictly observe the rituals.You had to wear black for three
long years before you could dress in the range of greys of the semi-
mourning period. My fellow Argentine women, unable to bear so
many deaths in one lifetime, hid a deep melancholy and rage under
a facade of moral strength.
A quarter of a century after the tragedy that convulsed the
whole of Argentine society, the wounds of the descendants have not
yet healed. The 1976-83 military dictatorship and its dreadful cull
of tens of thousands of dead or disappeared sent a whole generation
of traumatised and terrified young people fleeing back to Europe,
the land of their ancestors.
This dagger still cuts as sharp as ever in the memories of the
victims of this calamity. Its cruel traces continue to befoul our air,
as in Europe do the ugly wounds left by the ravages of World Wa r
II and, more recently, in A s i a , by the Cambodian genocide, and in
A f r i c a , by the Rwandan one.
Latin America is brimming with tragedies that can’t be erased.
The model behaviour of the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo is a
source of consolation.Their dignity,anger and courage is an example
of how the ferocity of dictatorships can be confronted with justice
and love—weapons that are considered ineffective.
As for our own mothers, they who have set up shop forever
within us and outside us, I think we have to take a step back
from them to see their true value.There is nothing more diffic u l t
than drawing what is closest to us, the lines of our own hand. For
them as for us, it is difficult to break these blood ties made of so
much likeness and difference. But nobody ever promised us that
reaching true independence in our lives would be a path strewn
with roses. ■
After several break-ups, Maura,22, returned to live with her mother.

My mother, my mirro r
Maria, 54,had her daughter Stella when she was 18.Their relationship is marked by dependence.
Maura finds peace alongside her mother Alma (standing).Marta and Nana:close, even in sleep.

Marta and her daughter Nana strolling on the beach.
