ANNE LOUSSOUARN
Beijing-based journalist

Rage against the ex o d u s :
the crisis in China’s land reform
Punitive tax rates and falling revenues have combined to drive around
100 million Chinese peasants to the towns even as the spirit of protest
sweeps through the countryside
The village of Yuandu,70 kilometres from
the provincial capital of Nanchang, s e e m s
a quiet enough place. Elderly peasants in
threadbare Mao tunics lead their oxen
through the streets.Women attend to the
stalks of rice they have scattered over the road so the
occasional passage of a vehicle can help separate the
grain from the chaff.
The harvest is over. Everyone is preparing for a
quiet winter,or going off to work for a few months in
N a n c h a n g, a nearby town, or for their wealthy
neighbours in Fujian, Zhejiang or Guangdong
p r o v i n c e s. Just a few months ago on August 17,
h o w e v e r, the people of Yu a n d u , joined days later
by the inhabitants of nearby villages, staged violent
d e m o n s t r a t i o n s.
“ There are 300 officials in this village and we only
need 30,” shouts a woman in her 50s as she does her
laundry in a murky-looking pond.“ We have to get
rid of this huge burden.”She tills five m u (a third of
a hectare) of land—quite a big plot given that the
average population density in rural China is nearly
700 people per square kilometre.
She eats most of what she grows.
Chinese peasants only sell 20 to 30 per
cent of their yield. What she sells earns
her about 3,000 yuan (less than $300).
But she has to pay more than $100 in
land tax, a smaller amount for fertilizer
and pesticide and about $30 to a fund
for irrigation.Her annual net income as
a result comes to a little over $40. N o t
enough to pay for her children’s
schooling and certainly not enough to
buy meat,which she only eats three times
a year.“I borrow money from my sisters
who are laundresses in a hotel in
N a n c h a n g,” she says.
The youngsters have already left the village.“A lot
of people are trying to get rid of their land,”says one old
m a n . “But who’s going to want it?” The small rural
f a c t o r i e s,which have a hard time competing with those
in towns or abroad, are a shadow of what they once
w e r e.“ They can’t even pay their workers’ wages,”s a y s
a driver in the next town,Fe n g c h e n g.“Mostly it’s just the
managers who get paid.”
This over-taxing of the peasantry is seen as the
direct result of pressure on the local authorities to
e x c e e d , sometimes by a big margin, the tax ceiling of
five percent set by Beijing. In a letter in the
newspaper Nanfang Zhumo, Li Changping,the party
secretary of Qipan village in Hubei, says 80 percent
of peasants have gone into debt to pay their taxes.
But the local authorities have no alternative if
they are to make up the deficit in their budgets,
which are increasing by between 100,000 to 150,000
yuan (roughly $15,243) a year.The local bureaucracy
has nearly tripled from 120 to 340 people in the
past 10 years. The new leaders admit they cannot
stand up to the pressure of friends and family and
have no choice but to give them jobs as officials.
F u r t h e r m o r e,the costs of economic development
and running the village—including the maintenance
of infrastructure and irrigation, subsidies for schools,
support for local industry,upkeep of local militias,n o t
to mention embezzlement by bureaucrats, which is
constantly being denounced by press and party leaders
alike—have rocketed since the early 1990s.
Though heavy taxation triggered the unrest,
villagers’ discontent can be traced back to the
economic stagnation of the past decade, w h i c h
followed on from the euphoria that greeted the
end of collective farming in the 1980s.
A short-lasted
burst of prosperity 
Land is still collectively owned, but leased to
families for 30-year periods. In exchange, t h e
peasants must hand over a fixed part of their
production to the state at set prices before being
able to sell the rest on the free market. Since this
gives peasants more of a stake in the system, per-
hectare cereal production shot up by over 50 percent
between 1975 and 1985,according to the UN Food
and Agriculture Organization (FAO).
Meanwhile, the number of people working on
the land has dropped sharply, boosting production
by nearly 20 percent a year at village factories set up
in the wake of decollectivization to employ surplus
l a b o u r. Nearly 120 million people work in these
factories today.Estimates suggest that around 50 to
60 million peasants left the land at the end of the
1980s to look for better paid work in the towns,
mainly in construction, restaurants and domestic
service. Even in those jobs, an urban standard of
living is still higher than the hard life in the
countryside and better reflects the aspirations of
modern Chinese youth. For the villagers who stayed
b e h i n d , these far-reaching changes led to quite
unexpected profits and a sudden burst of prosperity.
But productivity gains also led to over-
p r o d u c t i o n ,which set off a disastrous price collapse
J I A N X I
G UA N G X I
South China Sea
Nanchang
Shanghai
Hong Kong

at the very same instant that the cost of farm supplies,
including fertilizers and pesticides,was steadily rising
(at nearly 15 percent a year between 1984 and 1996).
Families were thus trapped between rising tax
demands and stagnant incomes, or even, a c c o r d i n g
to some Chinese experts, incomes that have fallen
over the past three years. The exodus from the
countryside is increasing and now totals between 80
and 100 million men and women. And there is no
sign that this rural depopulation is going to stop,e v e n
though moving to the towns has been made more
d i f ficult through the introduction of the h u k o u o r
place of origin system, a kind of internal passport that
nails the Chinese to their place of birth.
The oncoming shock of the
World Trade Organization
Chinese experts believe that the farm crisis
stems from an incomplete liberalization,which they
note has been less sweeping than in the towns:this
would account for very low productivity rates caused
by tiny plots of land, a labour force that is still too
big and a crippling lack of bank loans needed for
capital investment.Cereal production in China, f o r
instance, is currently half what it is in France.
All of which adds up to a peasantry stripped of
power over their land.“Some local authorities often
force the villagers to plant what produces the best
tax revenues.But since everybody does the same, t h e
prices collapse within two years and the villager is
the loser,” explains Dang Guoying, a researcher at
the Academy of Social Sciences.
China is about to sign up to the rules governing
the global marketplace by joining the World Tr a d e

The rice harvest in the province of Guizhou won’t cushion the coming blow of lower market prices with China’s entry into the W TO.
Organization (WTO ) .Villagers are mostly unaware
of this, but they are almost certain to bear the brunt
of the change. How are they going to cope with
probable imports of much cheaper farm produce
given that some Chinese prices are far above world
market levels? In April 1999, for example, C h i n e s e
wheat was 44 percent higher, maize 67 percent, r i c e
26 percent and cotton 17 percent higher, a c c o r d i n g
to official Chinese statistics from 1999. Some experts
say China can use its comparative advantage in the
long-term by exporting labour-intensive items such
as fruit, vegetables and fis h . But according to
forecasting by the FAO,C h i n a ’s farming population
will still have to fall by 60 million over the coming
d e c a d e.
Will farmers have enough power to cushion the
shock? Since 1988, villagers have been able to elect
their own committees outside the framework of the
party and have thus won the right to a greater say in
economic management,whereas industrial workers
remain under tighter party control. “ What we’r e
seeing are more discussion groups at the village
l e v e l ,” says Jean-Louis Rocca, an expert on social
t r e n d s. Another specialist, Liu Ya w e i , e m p h a s i z e s
that “villagers have learned how to obstruct moves
by local officials and take matters up at a higher
o f ficial level, even by inviting journalists from the
well-known national television programme Fo c u s
(Jiaodian Fa n g t a n) to come and investigate suspected
corruption and blatant injustice.” And no one has
forgotten that over the course of China’s 3,000-year
h i s t o r y, it was often the nongmin qiyi— p e a s a n t
uprisings—that toppled the great dynasties. ■
