Quantum fluctuations in
an inflationary univers e
sometimes create re g i o n s
with very large density
(the peaks) and divide the
u n i v e rse into regions with
different laws of physics
(shown by differe n t
c o l o u rs ) . We live in a
l o w-density re g i o n .H i g h
density regions ex p a n d
ex t remely fast and
p roduce more areas of
even higher density. This
starts an eternal chain
reaction of self-
reproducing universes.
May 2001 - The UNESCO Courier 21
Why do we need a period of inflation in the
universe’s early history?
I n flation explains several different things: w h y
the universe is large, why it is homogeneous, why
it looks approximately the same in all directions,
why it started expanding simultaneously. It also
explains how galaxies have been formed out of
quantum fluctuations.
Above all, we need to explain why different
parts of the universe look approximately the same.
Imagine that the universe just started.At the very
earliest time we can consider [10-43 seconds after
c r e a t i o n , called the Planck time],our universe was
a fraction of a centimetre. In this time, light and
radiation could only have travelled a tiny part of
this space.So the left side of the universe could not
know about the right, and the middle about neither
of them:there was no time for such contact.Then
all of a sudden we have a universe where
everything is exactly the same. This looks like a
miracle—something physicists do not expect.
This is where inflation comes to the rescue. In
the simplest version of the theory, inflation starts
at the Planck time.Until 10- 3 5 s e c o n d s, space would
blow up by the power of 10 to the thousand billion,
rather like an elastic membrane stretching in all
possible directions at a speed faster than light to a
size much larger than the universe you now see.
Our universe would then be a tiny spot on a huge
cosmic balloon.
Is there any matter inside this expanding space?
Usually people understand by matter particles
that move,collide and build solid things that we can
s e e. But there are also fie l d s — e l e c t r o m a g n e t i c
fields for example. We do not see the magnetic
field of the Earth, but we know that it is there.
This field is also a kind of matter.
Our assumption is that in the early universe,
matter was in a very specific form called a scalar
fie l d . We do not see this field—it looks like a
vacuum—but if it exists it may have a lot of
e n e r g y. In a normal expanding universe the
density of matter decreases,but the scalar field and
its energy do not decrease, meaning space expands
faster and for a much longer time. This leads to
inflation.
G r a d u a l l y, h o w e v e r, the scalar field loses
energy. It decays and produces normal particles,
and the universe becomes hot as in conventional
big bang theory.
But where did these scalar fields come from?
They could exist in the universe from the very
beginning, just like any other matter.Those parts
of the universe where these fields were small did
not experience inflation and therefore remained
very small.But regions of the universe with large
scalar fields have grown up enormously.We live in
one such region now.
You have used the expression “cosmic tre e ” t o
describe the true universe. What does this mean?
Small fluctuations in the field are necessary for
the later formation of galaxies. But if the
fluctuations in this field are large, they could lead
to the creation of new parts of the universe—not
just galaxies, but places where the fields have
different values, particles are lighter or heavier,
and space and time different as compared to our
part of the universe.These are so far away from us,
h o w e v e r, that you will never have a chance of
seeing them.
You also call this inflation eternal. Does this mean it
can happen again?
It may happen at some distance from us now.
It might also happen here, though you are not
going to see it because inflation occurs when space
is expanding from its own resources. If inflation
happens near you,don’t worry—it’s not going to
crush you. I t ’s just going to create a baby universe
that you will not see.
Twenty years ago,when inflation was invented,
it looked like a piece of science fiction.Gradually
it has become the standard cosmological theory,
solving many problems and making important
predictions that can be experimentally confir m e d .
We ’ve tried hard doing something without
inflation,but so far nothing else has worked. ■
INTERVIEW BY IVAN BRISCOE
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



And then there was i n fla t i o n
The hottest theory of cosmology in the last 20 years is that of cosmic
“inflation”—a burst of force in the very early universe that expanded a
dot into almost boundless space. Professor Andrei Linde of Stanford
University, one of the theory’s chief exponents, explains
1 . SCIENCE AT THE LIMITS
T H E  R I D D L E  I N  T H E  S K I E S
