Over the past decade, the talk,and to
some extent the practice, of privacy in rich
countries has undergone a sea change. P r i-
vacy, once seen as a minority concern of
paranoid activists, is today at the centre
of e-commerce and information society
discussions.
Is this concern limited to rich coun-
tries? Is Internet and telecom privacy not
a policy issue or a public concern in coun-
tries on the bleak side of the digital divide?
Is privacy a non-universal human right? I
address these questions from the dual pers-
pectives of a student of privacy and of a
former privacy policy-maker.
There is little, if any, evidence on the
level of public concern about privacy in
poor countries. But it is a fact that the issue
does not figure large in the policy agendas
of these countries. For example in Sri
L a n k a , the civil war and its attendant pro-
blems of security, the cost of living and
unemployment are likely to be listed as
priority issues, not privacy. Even if the
focus were to be narrowed to Internet and
t e l e c o m , it is likely that access to voice
telephones would be given more weight.
Attitudes toward telephone numbers
can indicate the intensity of telecom pri-
v a cy concerns.In parts of the United States
such as Nevada well over 50 per cent of
residential telephone numbers are unpu-
b l i s h e d . Home telephone numbers are
usually not printed on U. S. business cards.
By contrast, it is a rare Sri Lankan business
card that does not flaunt one. The street
sign of the Coroner’s Court of Sri Lanka’s
capital city displays the Coroner’s home
number.
In 1998-99,I chaired a public hearing
on the improvement of telephone billing
that addressed the making available of
hitherto undisclosed and uncollected call
d e t a i l s. I was surprised that only one of
the over 400 public submissions mentioned
p r i v a cy—an objection to the distribution of
telephone bills unprotected by envelopes.
Until the hearing, the major operator did
not collect or provide call details.This was
good for privacy but cause for much
consumer unhappiness and billing disputes.
The hearing had to decide on the form of
disclosing more information.
Do these facts not reinforce the claim
that privacy is not universal? A c a d e m i c
research suggests otherwise. Irwin A l t m a n
of the U.S. has shown that the essence of
p r i v a cy—the ability, explicitly or impli-
citly, to negotiate boundary conditions of
social relations—is transcultural.What dif-
fers among cultures is the concrete form of
p r i v a cy concern.It is natural to see a heigh-
tened awareness of Internet privacy in the
U. S.The same form will not be found in Sri
L a n k a ,where there are less than four tele-
phones per one hundred people.
When privacy was given concrete form,
such as indiscriminate access to the details
about telephone calls, people understood
and cared. That enabled the crafting of a
final order of the public hearing that safe-
guarded privacy while improving the trans-
parency of the billing process.
Policy discourses in digitally deprived
countries have emphasized external forces
as drivers of privacy policies. In develo-
ping elements of the legal information-
communications infrastructure for the Sri
Lankan government in the late 1980s, I
found most persuasive the claim that our
p r i v a cy policies must meet European
Union standards for the sake of our trading
r e l a t i o n s h i p s. But the external rationale
alone is a weak foundation.Effective poli-
cies need public support. P r i v a cy advo-
cates within and outside government must
rethink their missions as including a strong
component of public education. What I
learned in the public hearing was the need
to translate abstract privacy concerns into
stories that relate to the everyday lives of
c i t i z e n s. This is the key to bridging the
privacy divide. ■
A PRIVA C Y D I V I D E?
BY ROHAN SAMARAJIVA
VISITING PROFESSOR AT DELFT UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY, NETHERLANDS; DIRECTOR OF EXTERNAL PROGRAMS, LIRNE.NET [LEARNING INITIATIVE FOR REFORMS IN NETWORK
ECONOMIES]; AND FORMER DIRECTOR GENERAL OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS OF SRI LANKA.
