INTERVIEW BY MICHEL BESSIÈRES
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



“ We have to change the
b u y e r ’s attitude”
Turkish investigative journalist Özgen Acar has spent thirty years trailing
art smugglers. His findings have brought prestigious foreign museums to
court and treasures back home 
2 . S AVING OUR T R E A S U R E S
A
s a journalist,
you have un-
c ove red seve r a l
art smuggling
a f f a i r s. H ow did
you first get involved?
I studied economics and
political science at univer-
s i t y.Archaeology is a hobby.
In July 1970, Peter Hopkirk,
the S u n d ay Ti m e s c o r r e s-
p o n d e n t , came to Tu r k e y. H e
was investigating a lead
about the smuggling of an
important treasure dating
back to the sixth century BC,
from the reign of the last
Lydian king, C r o e s u s. We
worked together on this
i s s u e.The treasure had been
purchased by the New York
Metropolitan Museum of
Art (Met), then hidden in
steel safes in the museum’s
b a s e m e n t . If an internatio-
nally famous institution such
as the Met was working in
tandem with smugglers, this deserved media attention.
As a result,I began more detailed investigations.
The Lydian hoard was returned to Tu r key in 1993.
What took so long? 
Fi r s t , the secrecy surrounding the Met intensi-
fied. Meanwhile, I continued to meet with villagers
and local officials in the region of the former Lydian
k i n g d o m . I didn’t spend 16 years reporting on it, I just
investigated and collected evidence. If I had written
on the topic, the Met would have postponed putting
the treasure on show. But they had to exhibit it sooner
or later because some wealthy people had paid
around $1.7 million between 1966 and 1968 to secure
the purchase of these pieces.The Met finally exhibited
50 of the 350 pieces in the summer of 1984. I saw
them myself and having determined that they mat-
ched my rough descriptions, I continued my investi-
gations until 1986, when I published my findings in the
Turkish newspaper I work for . The Turkish govern-
ment brought a suit against the museum in the New
York Federal Court. Six years later, the Met was
forced to return the treasure.
Your investigations shed light on the inner wor-
kings of a smuggling network.
Four farmers had found the treasure in a tumulus
[a tomb in a mound] in the province of Usak. They
sold it in Izmir to Ali Bayırlar,a prominent smuggler,
who later sold it to the owner of a New York antique
g a l l e r y, John J. K l e j m a n . Learning that these villagers
had made money from the treasure, n e i g h b o u r i n g
villagers decided to try their luck.Around this time,
two tumuli were stripped of their frescoes and these
were also sent to New York.I should stress that I’m
still angry with the curator of the Greek and Roman
D e p a r t m e n t , Dietrich von Bothmer, who bought the
treasure for the Met.But if he hadn’t purchased the
entire collection, it would have proved impossible
to bring the pieces together again.
H ave Western museums and private collectors
generally been as reluctant as the Met to return stolen
artefacts?
In the 1980s, the Antalya police caught a ring of
smugglers. They had dug up a hoard of Greek coins
from the fifth century BC in Elmali.The Elmali hoard
was so important that it was later called the “ Tr e a s u r e
of the Century.”There were 1,900 silver coins missing.
I traced them to Edip Telli and Fuat Üzülmez,two res-
pected art dealers in Munich until my stories broke.
They had links to Nevzat Telli in London, who was
involved in drug and antiquity smuggling beside his
textile business.The police and public prosecutors in
these countries, h o w e v e r, made no arrests, s t a t i n g
that “trading in antiquities was not a crime in their
c o u n t r i e s.” I concluded that the hoard was in the pos-
session of William Koch, one of the wealthiest 400
people in the U.S.Again,legal action went on for 10
Digging for the truth.

years, until Koch, realizing he would lose the case,
returned the hoard to Turkey.
You have wo r ked on many other cases since
then...
Ye s, and I won’t be out of business any time soon.
Tu r k e y ’s heritage is under threat, just as it is in Greece,
Cyprus, Iraq,Syria,Iran,India,Cambodia or China.
There are more ancient Greek cities in Turkey than
in Greece, and more Roman ones than in Rome.Th e
country has 50,000 villages, but 70,000 pre-Islamic
s i t e s. It is very diffic u l t , if not impossible, to assess accu-
rately the monetary value of illegal art trade.A major
cultural foundation in New York calculated that in
1989,Americans spent approximately $5 billion on
works of art the previous year.Two billion dollars of
this was spent on smuggled,stolen or fake works of
a r t .The total value of artefacts smuggled from Tu r k e y
was estimated to run between $300 and 400 million.
Only two or three million, not even one percent,
went to the Turkish looters.
From your ex p e r i e n c e, what are the most effective
ways to prevent smuggling?
First of all, we have to change the buyer’s attitude.
Court cases won by Turkey have discouraged
museums and collectors from buying smuggled works.
They don’t want the inconvenience of a court case,
having their names in the newspapers and loosing
m o n e y. The Met paid $1.7 million for their collec-
tion and Koch $3.5 million for his.They spent at least
twice as much as this on legal expenses. S e c o n d l y,
Turkey should make agreements with museums in the
purchasing countries.“ D o n ’t buy smuggled works—
I’ll send you exhibitions on loan every three or four
y e a r s.”As a matter of fact,Turkey has sent as many as
35 exhibitions abroad in the last 15 years. The third
step is to expose the smuggling mafia with their inter-
national connections, and put them out of business.
Edip Te l l i , for example, has had to quit the smug-
gling business. His brother in London was impri-
soned for heroin smuggling. Several respected anti-
quity dealers in the U. S. lost confidence in their
business partners when they realized that they were,
in fact,dealing with smugglers.
Some of the artefacts you helped return to Tu r key
are Lydian,Greek and Roman.Are they really part
of Turkey’s heritage? 
All those artefacts were made in Anatolia.Does
the Euphronios Vase in the Met belong to the Italians
or the Greeks? It certainly doesn’t belong to the
A m e r i c a n s.The craftsmen who made it were Greek,
but it’s part of Italian history. Instead of thinking
about national ownership,we need to consider owner-
ship and protection in the name of all humanity.A r t e-
facts taken from Troy are now found in 42 different
museums all over the world. I don’t know how many
are held in private collections. How is it possible for
a scholar to travel to all those 42 museums? If they
were exhibited in a museum near the ancient city of
Troy, everyone would benefit from it.
You have also done some work in Cyprus.
I helped to uncover the smuggling of frescoes and
mosaics from Byzantine churches.Once again, t h e y
are the common property of mankind.My articles
about a Turkish smuggler helped the Greek Cypriot
Administration to secure the return of artefacts
from Indianapolis to Southern Cyprus. In London,
I found two Korans that had been stolen from a
Turkish foundation on the Greek island of Rhodes.
They were sent back.I also came across Mycenean
gold treasure in a New York gallery. I talked to
diplomats from the Greek embassy in Washington
and advised them on the best way to secure their
return without incurring legal expenses.
What are you currently investigating?
I ’ve been working on the “ Weary Hercules”
s t a t u e, half of which is in the Antalya Museum
[ Turkey] while the other half is in the hands of private
c o l l e c t o r s. U n f o r t u n a t e l y, Bill Clinton, before lea-
ving offic e, made Ms Shelby Wh i t e, a co-owner of
the statue,a member of the official advisory group on
preventing plundering. I’m also covering the efforts
of Turkish authorities to ensure the return of six gold
pieces from the Croesus treasure, now held by a gal-
lery in France.
Have you ever been threatened?
Ye s, I ’ve received many threats by telephone.
Once they even tried to kidnap me when I was on
summer holiday. I ’ve been thrown out of many
New York galleries because they thought I was an
undercover agent of the Turkish government. I
have also been taken to court on several occasions
in Turkey. ■

A reformed smuggler in the Aktepe tomb mound, from which 350 pieces were stolen.
