INTERVIEW BY MICHEL BESSIÈRES
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



“Indiana Jo n e s
has no future ”
Even though the plundering goes on, a collector who purchases a piece
with dubious provenance can no longer live with a clear conscience, says
Lyndel Prott, director of Unesco’s Cultural Heritage Division
1 . THE COST OF LOOT I N G
O
wning stolen works will soon be as
o b j e c t i o n able as wearing fur or smo-
king in public,” the American magazine
Art & Auction wrote recently. Do you
agree?
I t ’s true that the climate is changing. M o r e o v e r, i t ’s
not just a simple matter of saying the right thing.
More and more, looting is seen as morally indefensible.
And yet,the plundering goes on.
Sometimes it’s even getting worse.This is the case
in countries destabilized by war, such as A f g h a n i s t a n ,
of course—where pillaging takes place on a massive
scale in addition to destruction— but also in Cambodia
and Iraq. Bas-reliefs from Sennacherib’s palace in
Nineveh have been turning up in western countries for
several years.
What’s more, looters are acting on a large scale
because of the technical means they’re using.The t o m-
b a r o l i of southern Italy are ransacking archaeological
sites with earth-moving equipment.Treasure hunters
equipped with metal detectors in Icklingham, Great
Britain,have unearthed Roman bronzes, which were
sold to a private collector in the United States. In Cen-
tral A m e r i c a , they have electric generators and circular
saws to steal Mayan stele. In China,underwater sites
off the Xisha islands are attacked with dynamite.
Devastated cemeteries in Jordan, mutilated idols in
Nepal and wrecked Buddhist stupas in Pakistan attest
to the scope of demand in the northern countries.
H ow would you explain the growth of the art
market in the northern countries?
I t ’s a combination of factors. In the United States,
nearly a decade of steady growth has given a new
impetus to speculation on art. F u r t h e r m o r e, m a j o r
museum exhibitions have introduced long-overlooked
cultures to the public: collectors are increasingly
numerous and their interest is diversifying. M o r e
generally, cultural consumption occupies a prepon-
derant place in the economy.
Would you like to see this market regulated?
U N E S C O encourages the movement of art works
provided they have a determined provenance. What
w e ’re fighting against is the illicit trade,which requires
calling certain traditions into question. If you sell a
piece of land or a car, the buyer asks you for a deed or
registration papers. That’s not the case with cultural
property. It’s an exception.
Where does that come from? 
An aura of prestige surrounds the art market,
where people think it would be unseemly to ques-
tion collectors’ integrity. The confidentiality of tran-
sactions is still the rule. For generations up to the
1990s, diplomats acquired and unlawfully exported
important works.That kind of behaviour supposedly
reflected their interest in culture. At the same time,
INTERPOL has told us that operations against drug
t r a f ficking have led to the seizure of several hundred
p a i n t i n g s. In criminal circles, art is a nameless, r e l i a b l e
means of payment which keeps its value over long per-
iods.
Despite all that, you say mentalities are changing.
Up for grabs:in Bogota,a public sale of looted pre-Colombian ceramics.

Today, this reality no longer goes unnoticed.The
media report on looting and illicit trade.And rightly
s o, because these deeds fill us with outrage. A col-
lector who purchases a piece with a questionable pro-
venance can no longer live with a really clear
conscience. What’s more, a series of steps has been
taken to curtail trafficking. Individuals, institutions,
national minorities and States are the driving forces
behind these initiatives. At this level, the main ins-
trument in the fight against looting is the 1970 Conven-
tion drafted by UNESCO(see box).
Is the Convention enough to cope with the pro-
blem? 
It has gone a long way to help change mentalities.
In the early 1970s, museum curators would say,“Our
job consists of putting together the most beautiful
collections possible. UNESCO should be helping us
instead of putting obstacles in our way.” Today, very
few curators see things that way. Most museums have
adopted the code of conduct drafted by the Interna-
tional Council of Museums (I C O M) , which cooperates
closely with U N E S C O.It requires the museum not to
acquire, or display pieces without good provenance.
Sometimes, museums also ask us for information
on the provenance of a certain piece they would like
to acquire. This notably happened when we sent out
s p e c i fic warnings with regard to pieces from Cam-
bodia,Iraq and Afghanistan.
Has public opinion also changed?
Ye s. In the 1980s, the media challenged the
“Indiana Jones”mentality, unscrupulous hunting for
treasures of all kinds, by explaining the problems loo-
ting creates for the countries concerned.At the same
time, non-governmental organizations have decided
to react.I’m especially thinking of the Berne Decla-
ration, a Swiss NGO that manages educational and
economic projects in the southern countries. Th i s
group saw the extent to which looting has become a
cause of cultural alienation for people living in the
countries where it is ongoing.So it published fir s t - h a n d
accounts of the human consequences of cultural heri-
tage loss. In Switzerland, a major art-market country,
a change in attitude has been observed since these
steps were taken.We ’re still in this stage; many coun-
tries are acknowledging that looting is not just some-
body else’s problem.
H ave opinion campaigns linked to the re s t i t u t i o n
of property looted by the Nazis helped raise people’s
awareness?
Ye s,of course. In the 1980s,public opinion realized

1 . THE COST OF LOOT I N G
the scope of the looting. It resulted from a huge injus-
tice and could no longer go unnoticed.This has worked
in our favour: if art dealers and museums had adopted
the principles set down by the U N E S C O C o n v e n-
t i o n , they never would have reached that point,
because the illegal origin of many of the works
concerned was known. From that point on, if the rules
of restitution must be applied to Europe, they are
good for the rest of the world as well.
Do art dealers agree to these principles? 
Some professionals are changing.In Great Britain,
art dealers have taken part in an interministerial com-
mittee which recommended, after completing its work,
that the United Kingdom join the 1970 Convention.
In Switzerland, the market’s reputation has been
marred by the retention of cultural—or other—pro-
perty looted during the Second World Wa r. Fa c e d
with the rise of public awareness, dealers have seen
where their interests lie.And they don’t rule out that
the country will join the UNESCOConvention.
H i s t o r i c a l l y, the creation of collections responds to
a desire for knowledge of past civilizations. In your
eyes, is this concern still legitimate?
Ye s, but today we have greater respect for cultural

d i v e r s i t y.Aside from items produced by other cultures,
we’re also interested in their approach,their percep-
tion of the world.The United States, New Zealand and
Au s t r a l i a , which share a colonial past, have ended up
understanding that they must involve ethnic minori-
ties in the management of their collections, by not
exhibiting certain sacred pieces or by respecting cus-
t o m s.Acquisitions linked to colonialism, based on an
aesthetic appreciation, but which ignore the damage,
the uprooting caused to the other culture, are being
questioned.
What can the source countries do to curb traffic-
king? 
Estimates put the share of looted pieces that are
recovered at five to ten percent. Not more. I t ’s obvious

that those countries bear the main responsibility for
p r o t e c t i o n . Around the world, we bring countries
together in regional workshops, first of all to help
them set up networks between law enforcement
agents, customs officers and museum curators.When
they don’t work together, their efforts are less effec-
t i v e.We also turn to consultants who help to improve
national laws. And we help these countries draw up
i n v e n t o r i e s. Recently we held a workshop in Vi e t
N a m .The city of Hanoi alone boasts over 700 pagodas
and temples housing thousands of valuable pieces.
Most of them have not been inventoried.A Chinese
expert gave a talk that got the undivided attention of
l i s t e n e r s. Viet Nam is opening up to tourism, h e
e x p l a i n e d . You should adopt methods of control
before it’s too late. China went through the same
experience and, in a few years, looting reached a scale
that nobody could have foretold.
But can looting be stopped? People living in impo-
verished rural areas have an immediate economic
interest in excavating.
Ye s, they do. But once again, the trend can be
reversed. In Peru, for example, where tomb-raiding
was rampant, Walter A l v a ’s initiative has changed
things (see p. 30).He sat down with the Indians and
e x p l a i n e d ,“ These are your ancestors.”We ’re doing all
we can to help raise awareness. As soon as the local
population is convinced of the importance of cultural
heritage, they become a site’s best curators. ■
In May 1945, American GIs seized Old Master paintings from Hermann Goering’s loot.
