Is your country self-reliant in food?
Since colonization, Philippine agriculture has
been export-oriented, and this is one of its
w e a k n e s s e s. From 1995 to 1999, it exported 8.25
million tonnes of banana, pineapple and mango,
but had to import 4.74 million tonnes of rice and 1.18
million tonnes of corn.
Our country doesn’t have basic industries.
Therefore agriculture has to import most farm
i n p u t s, tools and machines. Nine out of 13 big
pesticide companies in the Philippines are foreign.
They control 85 percent of the market. C o m p a n i e s
like Nestlé, Dole and Del Monte dominate the
processing and trade of food and agricultural
p r o d u c t s.Some of them also engage in agricultural
production and own or control vast tracts of land.
How has the situation evolved since the World
Trade Organization came into being in 1995?

INTERVIEW BY MICHEL BESSIÈRES
UNESCO COURIER journalist



Can you briefly describe the situation of
a g r i c u l t u re in the Philippines? 
Agriculture is still the cornerstone of the
Philippine economy: it employs 40
percent of the active population (11.6
million in 1999). A majority of farmers use only
simple tools and draught animals. Most farms are
very small:only 2.1 hectares on average.
Landlessness is a major problem:seven out of ten
farmers do not own the land they till.They are bound
by feudal and semi-feudal relations of exploitation as
t e n a n t s,farm workers or lease-holders.A few families
control vast tracts of land: 60 percent of the
agricultural lands are in the hands of 13 percent of the
l a n d o w n e r s.The biggest landlords own more than 20
percent of all agricultural land.
“ G M O s : the wrong answer
to the wrong pro b l e m”
At the head of the influential Peasant Movement of the Philippines, rice
farmer Rafael Mariano explains why people from across the region are
on the march against pesticides and genetically modified seeds
2 . H OT SPOT S

The Philippines has gone through a spectacular
shift from food exporter to food importer.In the fir s t
five years after the Agriculture Agreement came into
effect in January 1995,the Philippines incurred a total
agricultural trade deficit of $3.5 billion in contrast to
a $1.69 billion surplus in the previous five-year period.
Rice is not only the country’s most important
c r o p,providing a source of income to 3.2 million rice
f a r m e r s, it also provides 35 percent of the average
Filipino diet.Ye t , rice imports peaked at 2.2 million
tonnes in 1998, more than a quarter of local
c o n s u m p t i o n . Unstable prices can lead to large and
abrupt swings in purchasing power for poor
c o n s u m e r s.Such uncertainty contradicts the notion of
food security.
H ow does the use of agrochemicals affect
Filipino farmers? 
It started with the Green Revolution in the 70s
which farmers were almost forced to join as the
use of “high yielding varieties” was then part and
parcel of the bogus land reform programme of the
Marcos dictatorship. I remember that before we
always brought something home from our farms
even between harvesting seasons. There were
mudfish,snails and frogs. In this respect,our farms
were much more productive then. It was only after
the introduction of the so-called miracle rice that we
started to incur debts because we always had to
buy new pesticides every time there was a new pest
ravaging the fie l d s. Because of their debts, m a n y
farmers were driven from their land.
It is often argued that GMOs are the only way
to boost food production and meet the demand of
a rising population.Why do you refute this?
GMOs are the wrong answer to the wrong
p r o b l e m .The problem is not that there is not enough
f o o d , but that too many people have no access to
adequate food. Four out of five hungry people live in
countries that are exporting food,while Europe and
North America are facing a food surplus problem.
That is why they want to break open the markets of
poor countries for their agricultural products.
B e s i d e s, GMOs will increase the stranglehold of
transnational corporations. The top five
agrochemical companies also dominate the
transgenic seed business.They will dictate the terms.
The farmers will be at the losing end. So what’s the
use of increasing yields when you’re pushing
millions of small farmers deeper into perennial
poverty?
And then there’s the question of whether GMOs
will actually increase productivity. I doubt it. Fa r m s
that produce an adequate and diversified food
supply for the local market are much more
productive than those that produce only one crop
destined for cities or export.
Is organic farming an alternative, and is KMP
involved in any such experiments? 
KMP is first and foremost a campaign centre.We
encourage members to engage in organic farming
and to develop alternatives to destructive chemical-
intensive farming. We maintain close ties with a
range of Philippine NGOs that are experts in that
January 2001 - The Unesco Courier 31
???????????? : ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
31
T H E N E W P E A S A N T S ’  R E V O LT
fie l d .With one of them,MA S I PAG,we are engaged in
the conservation,dissemination and development of
154 traditional rice varieties.
To be honest, organic farming is still quite
marginal in the Philippines because of the influ e n c e
of agro-chemical corporations. This is why it’s so
important to combine actual implementation of
organic agriculture with nationwide campaigns.
Sooner or later, we will be able to turn the tide.
The agriculture of the future will be much more
productive and beneficial for people and the
environment because it will be developed by the
farmers themselves.
Has KMP won many battles on the land re f o r m
front? 
Although it’s easy to focus on the problems,w e
s h o u l d n ’t forget the many victories.Thanks to their
campaigns, farmers have been able to reduce land
rents for instance,curb interest rates on farm capital
and increase the wages of farm workers.
There have also been cases of heroic resistance
to land grabbing.The farmers of Hacienda Looc in
the province of Batangas, for instance,were awarded
C e r t i ficates of Land Ownership Awards by the
Department of Agrarian Reform in 1991.Two years
l a t e r, the government-
controlled A s s e t
Privatization Trust sold the
same land to a company
that wanted to convert it
into a tourist spot with a
golf course. Although the
mighty real estate company
Fil-Estate Land Inc. a n d
local politicians are
applying every possible
tactic to drive the farmers
a w a y, they are still there.
Hacienda Looc has become a symbol of peasant
pride and resistance to landlords and big business.
■
