A
few statistics are sometimes more telling
than heavyweight sociological analysis.
Venezuela has won more international
beauty contests than any other country
in the past 50 years, including five Miss
World titles, four Miss Universes and countless other
crowns and prizes. This is no accident: the record is
proof in Venezuela and elsewhere in Latin A m e r i c a
of some very deep social trends. Like in Brazil,the
o f ficial line is that Venezuela is a tolerant multiracial
country. But under the surface lies a subtle racism
against the descendants of black slaves. It is
expressed by an ideal of beauty which vaunts white
skin,blonde hair and light-coloured eyes.
“ They come to my clinic wanting thinner noses,
slightly fuller lips, big breasts, firm bottoms and
above all slimness—they all want to be slimmer,”
says Dr Pedro Meneses, a member of the
Venezuelan Plastic Surgery Association.
Beauty in Venezuela has become a social value
that often defines success or failure, personally and
professionally. It is a value that sits atop the many
other conventions demarcating the role of the
woman in a society that has yet to accept various key
feminist principles.
Torn between racism and machismo, m a n y
women regard beauty as an efficient way to leap
upwards through the social ranks and often the
only way to live.
The cult of beauty in Venezuela explains the
country’s huge boom in cosmetic surgery over the
past decade. There are no official figures, but the
reality is probably similar to that described by the
American Association of Plastic and Reconstructive
Surgery (AAPRS),which reports that the number
of people seeking cosmetic surgery has risen by
6 0 percent in the past two years. Between 1992 and
1 9 9 8 , the association says, the most popular
operations were liposculpture (up 264 percent),
breast enlargement through implants (up 306
percent),face lifts and nose jobs.
Beauty budgets
Notions of beauty, h o w e v e r, are constantly
changing. “The ideal for the last decade has come
from the United States, which is only two hours by
plane from Ve n e z u e l a ,” says Meneses. “ Th e
difference is that our women are not blonde and
b l u e - e y e d ,yet they struggle to make their bodies and
features resemble this white ideal. I ’ve never
operated on a white woman who wanted a broader
nose so she could look more like a black woman. I t
always goes in the other direction.”
Despite the country’s vast oil wealth,70 percent
of Venezuelans live in poverty. But when it’s a
matter of looking good, no expense is spared. A
1999 study by the U.S. market research firm Roper
Starch Worldwide showed that Venezuelans spend
a fifth of their income on personal grooming and
beauty products.
Breast surgery, one of the most common
o p e r a t i o n s, costs between $1,000 and $3,500 for
each implant.Given the overriding importance of
appearing and feeling attractive, even women from
the poorer end of society manage to find the money
needed.
RAKEL SOSA
VENEZUELAN JOURNALIST



Under the sun,
under the knife
Venezuela may be in the economic doldrums, but cosmetic surgery
is booming, highlighting the power of hidden racial discrimination and
the ever-present North American concept of beauty

More and more women between 17 and 35 are
seeking not only slimmer noses and bigger breasts,
but also different shaped bodies. “They resort to
surgery because they feel socially rejected or aren’t
s a t i s fied with their image,”says Dr Alberto Salinas,
who has been operating on stomachs for more than
15 years and is one of the country’s few experts in
the field. He reduces the size of a stomach so the
patient eats less and gets thinner.“Half my patients
d o n ’t want to feel better, they just want to look
better,” he says.
Images of success
Although they are not fat,many teenage girls are
referred to his surgery for psychological reasons.
“ The social pressure is so strong that these kids
swallow a box of diuretic pills and a box of laxatives
every day,” says Salinas. “When they’re doing this
and risking addiction to medication, I prefer to
operate.”
Many professional people, m e a n w h i l e, turn to
the operating table in the hope of improving their
social image and self-esteem. Morelia Pelayo, a
successful dentist, says the breast operation she had
a few years ago changed her life: “ I ’ve always
regarded myself as a successful woman personally
and professionally. But I had a complex about the
size of my breasts. Since the operation, I ’ve dressed
d i f f e r e n t l y. Because this is a Caribbean country
with a lot of sunshine, I can now show off my fig u r e
to more effect and wear dresses with a lower
neckline.”
She nevertheless admits to being pushed to the
big decision by the subliminal effects of television
a d v e r t i s i n g.“All the women you see there have big
breasts and bottoms, spectacular bodies and look
beautiful and successful.It’s natural to want to be
like them,” she says.
Amid this confusion between being and
appearing, the fascination of Venezuelans for the
quick and drastic changes the surgeon’s knife can
bring is starting to become a cultural trait—
imported from abroad,yet strong enough to change
the very nature of Venezuelan society. ■
