UNESCO in action culture
The World Heritage Convention is celebrating 30 years of uncontested success. But
there is still much to be done to make the World Heritage List truly representative of
global cultural diversity, and to reinforce protection of heritage sites 
Feast and famine for world  
Above: The Ifugao rice terraces
have graced these mountain
slopes in the Philippines for over
2,000 years. Included on the World
Heritage List in 1995, they also
joined the list of endangered sites
in 2001.
Top right: the ruins of the Abomey
Palace, built in Benin between
the 17th and 19th centuries - also
on both lists.
Birthday bash
There will be a smart crowd around the
birthday cake when, from November 14-
16 2002, some 600 heritage experts,
artists, businessmen and politicians
meet in Venice (Italy) to blow out the 30
candles celebrating the Convention
Concerning the Protection of the World
Cultural and Natural Heritage.
During this international conference on
“Shared Legacy, Common
Responsibility” participants will debate
various key questions such as: how to
increase the scope of the convention,
how to involve NGOs and the private
sector in the sustainable management of
cultural properties? What future is there
for world heritage?
On November 11 and 12, some other
Italian towns will host a series of
seminar-workshops on various related
themes. The conclusions will be
presented at the Venice meeting.

When UNESCO’s General
Conference adopted the
Convention Concerning the Protection of the
World Cultural and Natural Heritage on
November 16, 1972, the event went largely
unnoticed. Rather, interest in UNESCO that
year was focused on the spectacular salvaging
of the Philae temples in Egypt. Yet, 30 years
on, the Convention stands as one of the
Organization’s greatest achievements: it has
been ratified by 175 states, of which
125 boast properties on the World Heritage
List. Tourists flock to these star destinations,
comprising 730 sites “of outstanding universal
value.” 
“It’s an unquestionable success,” says Léon
Pressouyre, a cultural advisor to UNESCO who
has followed world heritage protection for 25
years. He points to the “important evolution in
the philosophy of the Convention, which at
first, merely took up the old idea of ‘the



heritage
wonders of the world’.” For a long time, this
meant that a “monumental” vision of sites
prevailed, in line with the aesthetics of western
art.
It is hardly surprising then, that historic city
centres and religious buildings, especially
Christian ones, are over-represented. A revision
of criteria in 1994 led to the recognition of new
types of properties, more attuned to the cultures
of developing countries. Cultural landscapes
and non-built sacred sites are prime examples,
such as the rice terraces of the Philippines or
the Maoris’ sacred volcanoes in New Zealand.
Despite these adjustments, Africa, Oceania
and to a lesser extent Asia and Latin America
are given short shrift by the List (see table). Of
the 175 State Parties to the Convention, 50 still
have no properties on the List. Furthermore, in
some States, heritage that is not considered
“culturally correct” is ignored: sites of
marginalized minorities or monuments
testifying to periods deemed inglorious like the
12th century Castle of the Knights in Syria are
not given adequate recognition. “The current
list is not yet representative of the heritage of
humanity,” says Pressouyre, who considers that
the 1972 Convention has widened the gap
between North and South. “The problem is very
difficult to resolve,” admits Francesco Bandarin,
the director of the World Heritage Centre,
“because there is no self-regulation.” Tempted
by the tourism windfall, states compete to
Regional distribution of the 730 world heritage sites
Africa  (57) 25 30 2
Arab States  (54) 50 3 1
Asia/Pacific  (140) 95 36 9
Europe/North America  (375) 322 45 8
Latin America/Caribbean  (104) 71 30 3
Total  (730) 563 144 23
Cultural sites
Natural sites
Mixed sites
©
U
N
ES
C
O
/B
. 
M
on
di
ch
ao

nominate as many sites as possible, which has
led to inflation in the number of properties
inscribed over the past decade. But poor
countries are severely handicapped by the lack
the funds and expertise needed to put together
their applications for nominations and to
safeguard their heritage. To limit the lead taken
by heritage “champions” such as Spain (36
sites), Italy (35 sites) and China (28), the World
Heritage Committee, an inter-governmental
body that meets annually to approve new
additions to the List, decided that only one site
per country and year would be accepted from
2003.
A LACK OF RESOURCES 
AND SANCTIONS
Lack of resources also looms when it comes to
protecting sites endangered by war, natural
catastrophes, pollution, urbanization, pillaging,
tourism and other threats. With a budget of four
million dollars per year and five million in extra-
budgetary resources, the Centre cannot be
present on all fronts. Recent initiatives to
mobilize funds from non-governmental partners
and to encourage twinning projects between sites
in the North and South attempt to bridge the gap.
Lack of money, however, cannot be invoked
every time states fail to fulfil their obligations.
Tourists clambering
over the Bayon
Temple on the
Angkor site in
Cambodia

A view of islamic Cairo. 
In the background stands the 
Ibn Tulun mosque (11th century). 
Its recent restoration has been
roundly criticized.

“The Convention does not really foresee
sanctioning mechanisms when the integrity of
properties is not respected,” explains Henry
Cleere, of the International Council on
Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS). The only
available option is to remove them from the
List, a measure the World Heritage Committee
has never taken. Attempts at reform are met
with iron resistance. “States parties have
actually taken a step backwards since 1992,”
regrets Minja Yang, the deputy director of the
World Heritage Centre. Back then, they accepted
that in cases of emergency, a threatened site
could be declared “in danger” without the
consent of the state concerned. Today, more
than ever bound to their “sovereignty,” states
oppose this measure, which would authorize
the international community to attempt to save
what can be. As a result, the List of World
Heritage in Danger counts only 33 sites, even
though dozens of other highly threatened ones
continue to be damaged without any action  to
safeguard them. “I have in mind a black list of
some 20 sites that are in very poor condition
and should be removed from the list,” affirms
Cleere.
“In 1979, when Kathmandu (Nepal) was
inscribed on the World Heritage List, it was a
small paradise,” recalls Bandarin. “Twenty years
later, two million people have crowded into the
valley and an anarchic conurbation has
destroyed this paradise. What can we do in
such cases?”
Sophie Boukhari
