Alexandria’s library
rises again
UNESCO and communication Promoting dialogue
Sixteen centuries after it disappeared, the
biggest library of ancient times is
coming back to life in the Egyptian city of Alexandria. The
library where the Bible’s Old Testament was first translated
from Hebrew into Greek and where Euclid invented
geometry.
“It’s wonderful that amid so many wars around the
world, and when people are talking about the ’clash of
civilisations,’ that a few metres from where the old library
was, a new and wonderful institution is rising that’s also
dedicated to universal knowledge, understanding and
tolerance,” says its director, Ismail Serageldin.
The official opening of the new library had been
scheduled for April 23, World Book and Copyright Day.
However, events in the Middle East forced a postponement.
The library is noetheless ready to go. It is the biggest such
institution in the Middle East and Africa, with room for
eight million books and equipped with state-of-the-art
information technology, including a section for digitally
scanning manuscripts. Its physical design is also unique.
“The building is conceived as a solar disc rising out of the
ground and looking towards the sea, symbolising the
openness and vastness of knowledge,” says Serageldin.
“Like the Sydney Opera House or the Guggenheim
Museum, it has its own very distinct character.”
A new, hi-tech temple of knowledge 
for the city founded by Alexander the Great 
on the shores of the Mediterranean   
One of the world’s biggest and most modern libraries opens its doors
in Alexandria, close to the site of its renowned ancestor, 
on the Mediterranean shore of the city founded by Alexander the Great
Library director
Ismaïl Serageldin.
©

“Our primary vocation is the Mediterranean and then
the Arab World and Africa,” he says. “We’re going to
develop close ties with institutions such as the University
of Alexandria, Senghor University, the Arab Academy
of Science and Technology and the Egyptian Centre
for Creativity. We will focus on researching the history
of the old library, the ethics of science and technology
and studying water as a development issue.”
As a trained architect, Serageldin is keen to talk about
the building itself: “It was designed by a group of very
talented young Norwegian architects (from the firm
Snohetta) and construction was supervised by an
outstanding Egyptian engineer, Mamdouh Hamza, who
faced the challenge of building part of it 18 metres below
sea-level. You can approach the building without feeling
crushed and you don’t realise it’s 160 metres across and
11 storeys high. It’s surrounded by a wall in the shape of a
half-moon, on which are carved letters from the alphabets
of 120 languages. The overall effect is sedate, human,
open and elegant.”
Serageldin, a Moroccan academic, is most proud of the
great reading hall, “one of the most beautiful in the world,”
he says. “The soft mellow daylight reaches everywhere and
the ceiling elevated on very elegant columns creates an
atmosphere of a ’cathedral of learning,’ as someone put it.”
Looking down on the reading hall from the Callimachus
Triangle, a vantage point from where you can see the
building’s seven levels, he adds confidently that “in future,
people won’t come to Egypt to see the Pyramids. They’ll
come to see this library.”
He firmly rejects criticism of the project’s cost: “The final
cost was US$220 million, US$97.6 million of which was
provided by the outside world and the remainder by the
Egyptian government. For a country of 67 million people,
US$120 million over a 10 years isn’t an unreasonable
investment for a centre of excellence.”
The Ptolemies were also criticised in their time, says
Serageldin, but history proved them right. “The
contribution of the Ancient Library of Alexandria to the
knowledge of the world, to the patrimony of the whole
human race, continues to this day to inspire us as one the
greatest adventures of the human mind.”
Restoring a link with that noble tradition is what gives
the project its universal character. “It’s wonderful to see
the excitement of thousands of people all over the world
at the inauguration of the library, which they feel belongs
to them as much as to Egypt,” says Serageldin.
Asbel Lopez
As well as the library itself and a spectacular reading hall
for 1,700 people, there is a conference centre that can hold
3,500 people, a planetarium, five research institutions, an
Internet centre, three museums and four art galleries. For
Serageldin, it’s much more than a library, rather “a vast
international cultural centre,” comparable to the Museion –
part of the ancient library and the University of Alexandria
and the gathering place for poets, scientists and artists.
Founded by Ptolemy I Soter in 288 BC, the ancient library
contained nearly 700,000 manuscripts. It was there that
Aristarchus suggested for the first time that the Earth
revolved round the Sun, where Eratosthenes calculated the
circumference of the Earth and Herophilus discovered that
the brain controlled the body. After 450 years, the library
disappeare, the victim of attacks and fires - the first of them
in 48 BC, when Caesar backed Cleopatra against her
brother Ptolemy XIII.
But this glorious past doesn’t intimidate Serageldin. “I
want to make the new library into a meeting-place where
thinkers, artists and scientists from all over the world can
lay the foundation of mutual understanding through
dialogue,” he says. 
“It’s much more than a library”©

rt At the Egyptian government’s request in 1986,
UNESCO helped give an international dimension to
the scheme to build the Alexandria Library.
“UNESCO’s international backing was crucial to this
project going forward,” says, Ismail Serageldin, the
library’s director.
In 1987, UNESCO launched an international appeal
to support “the revival of the Ancient Library of
Alexandria” and paid for a feasibility study that said
a big library should supply the needs of the
Mediterranean region. A year later, together with the
International Union of Architects (IUA) and the UN
Development Programme (UNDP), UNESCO
announced an international competition to design the
library. It also organised the Aswan Meeting in 1990,
where it got the first international funding for the
project – US$65 million, mainly from Arab countries.
UNESCO has provided an Internet server and money
to set up the library’s website. It has also funded an
electronic library for blind people and the training of
librarians, as well as providing technical documents
and guidelines for designing the library’s information
systems and buying equipment. In addition, it has
put together a curriculum for the International School
for Information Studies, based at the library, and set
up a restoration laboratory.
The access stairway
to the disk shaped
roof that evokes the
sunrise (right).
Below, characters
from the alphabets of
120 languages have
been sculpted into
the wall of the
building
