UNESCO and science Man and nature together again
Urban Greens
Cities are not just asphalt deserts, they are also complex ecosystems with their own rules 
and dominant species, man. There’s more in the melting pot than meets the eye
Here’sa surprise - there are more 
plant species in a fifty
kilometre radius around New York City than an
area of Nebraska farmland the same size. And
here’s an irony - New Yorkers eat the equivalent
of Nebraska’s entire wheat production in bread
and pasta every year. These topsy-turvy
statistics are only a taster of what is emerging
as scientists turn their attention to cities, no
longer viewing them as asphalt deserts, but as
complex ecological systems in their own right -
including their dominant species, man.
And this interest also parallels a change
in the way scientists are thinking about
environmental conservation today. They are
progressively abandoning the ideal of pristine
wilderness sites, moving towards goals
of sustainable development, that includes
A Peregrine falcon
watches over its
chick, hatched on
a Manhattan rooftop.
Since they were
reintroduced in
New York in 1983,
they have colonised
the city, under
the watchful eye
of the Environmental
Protection
Department.
The 145 chicks
hatched in 20 years
have enabled
the species to be
reintroduced in
other parts
of the country
local stakeholders and their economic and
cultural needs.
Commissioned by Congress to study
the effects of climate change on Metropolitan
New York, William Solecki of Montclair
State University and Cynthia Rosenzweig,
of Columbia University’s Earth Institute, have
been taking a look “under the hood”
of New York City, from an ecological point
of view. In their Metro East Coast Assessment
report, which has just been published
(http://metroeast_climate.ciesin.columbia.edu/)
they emphasise the role of the City’s biological
diversity in reducing negative impacts of global
warming. And over the past two years, these
scientists have also teamed up with UNESCO’s
Man and Biosphere programme, to see if it can
provide useful research and planning tools.
©

“The biosphere reserve concept (see box)
and the world network of biosphere reserves
have usually been associated with more
pristine, scarcely populated environments,”
says Christine Alfsen-Norodom, of UNESCO’s
Man and Biosphere Programme, who is
coordinating the project in New York.
“Never before has the biosphere reserve
concept been examined in terms of its direct
relevance or usefulness to a mega-city,
like New York.”
But for Pietro Garau, Director of the UN
Center for Human Settlements (Habitat)
European Office, it’s not necessarily a city’s
green spaces that make it ecologically
interesting. Speaking at a conference last year
in New York on “Biodiversity and Society”,
Garau pointed out that “a ‘passenger’ in the city
uses less land and energy than a rural
‘passenger’. In a ’no-city’ planet, if we divided
all available land by the number of inhabitants,
each ‘passenger’ would be using 2.16 hectares
in 2001. But with population growth, this would
become 1.4 hectares by 2050. So the ‘no-city’
model is not sustainable.” And, he added,
provocatively, “cities may be the best we have
for saving the planet’s environment.”
In fact, urban environments can provide a
variety of habitats for plants and animals,
sometimes mimicking natural conditions. Tall
stone buildings can resemble cliffs, while lawns
are like savanna. And there are some unique
inner-city places, not often frequented by
people, where even rare animals and plants can
thrive, such as ancient churchyards, or disused
railway lines, as well as abandoned factories
and other brownfield sites. 
ON THE WATERFRONT
New York City’s waterfront geography also gives
it some unique natural features. Much of the
city, for example, is built on prehistoric swamp
and salt marsh, similar to that still found in
Jamaica Bay, within sight of Wall Street (see
map). “Traditionally,” says Bill Solecki,
“wetlands have been used as sacrifice areas to
build airports, waste dumps, or whatever.” But,
he warns, “the greatest biodiversity in the city
is found at the water’s edge. And it is also the
area most vulnerable to climate change.”
Shortly after UNESCO set up the Man and Biosphere
Programme in 1968 it invited member states to submit
proposals for the first biosphere reserves. These were to be
experimental sites, attempting to strike a balance between
the apparently conflicting goals of conserving biological
diversity, promoting sustainable economic and social
development and maintaining associated cultural values.
Since then, a network of some 409 reserves has grown up
in 94 countries. 
Traditionally, biosphere reserves are organised
geographically into three separate zones - core, buffer and
transition. In the core area, critical habitats and biodiversity
are protected. The buffer zone is there to protect the core,
while the transition area serves as an intermediate zone
between the buffer and the surrounding region.
In the past, nearly all biosphere reserves have been in
relatively remote, natural areas. But since the late 1990’s
MAB has been looking at ways to extend the biosphere
reserve concept to urban areas. One of the difficulties is to
know where to locate the “core” area in a city reserve.
Some argue it could even lie outside the city, in the more
pristine hinterland. But researchers running a case study in
New York (see main article) have suggested the waterfront
area; it is the most fragile and active in terms of biodiversity,
but, historically, also the most important economically.
Member states themselves have to nominate areas as
biosphere reserves and there are no official plans for New
York at present. The concept could be a useful toolkit for
discussion and research, though.
See www.unesco.org/mab/urban/urbanhome.htm.
A
n 
U
rb
an
 B
io
sp
he
re
 R
es
er
ve
?
Biosphere reserve management
Scientific Management Legislation
Institutions authorities
Conservation
Research & Local
Monitoring Development
Core
area Buffer
zone Transition
area

into the hinterland, there is a move to “green”
downtown areas. Since 1978 community
gardening associations, like Green Thumb, have
planted some 700 productive vegetable and flower
gardens on over 60 hectares of vacant lots,
according to its founder, Jane Weissman. And
heated discussions are going on about what to do
with the “Ground Zero” site left by the World
Trade Center disaster last September. “Developers
in NYC are stating that rebuilding commercial
developments at Ground Zero is a national duty,”
says Alfsen-Norodom. “But their haste shows their
fear that, in a wounded city, people may aspire
to alternative uses of a space made highly
symbolic by its very destruction.” 
Popular support seems to be moving towards a
cultural use of the space, which cuts across the
“nature” versus “concrete” divide. And the
cultural diversity of New York is going to need to
find its place in any biosphere model of the city
alongside biological diversity. This could be what
will set the New York case study apart from other
studies of urban ecology going on in the USA at
the moment, such as those in Baltimore and
Phoenix, Arizona funded by the US National
Science Foundation (see: www.lternet.edu/sites/).
Meanwhile, armed with the Metro East Coast
Report, city planners have realised that what is left
of the City’s nature is not just pretty. It could help
save New Yorkers from going to work in a rowing
boat, if, as predicted, the threat of floods will
increase with global warming. Christopher Zeppie,
of the Port Authority, at a launch for the report,
called for planners to be more proactive: “The
stone age did not end because the human race ran
out of stone.”
Peter Coles
28
U N E S C O
sc ience
UNESCO | the new Courier | May 2002
Salt marshes naturally act as a buffer against
sea level rise, one of the most immediate threats
to New York City with global warming. But when
Ellen Hartig, a wetlands consultant, compared
archive and recent photos of Jamaica Bay, she
found the marshes had shrunk by 12 percent
since 1959 – and up to 60 percent in some small
island areas. “In one Long Island bay, there were
13 islands at one point,” she says. “Now there
are only seven. Six are submerged.” The marshes,
she explains, would usually compensate for sea
level rise by “retreating” inland. But since the
waterfront has been built upon, the marshes can
no longer adapt, making the developed areas
prone to flooding, while killing species of salt-
marsh grasses that cannot survive in deep water.
AS THE CITY SPRAWLS 
ITS CENTRE GETS GREENER
The complex interactions between man and
environment in an urban setting like New York,
argues Solecki, can only be understood – and
therefore mastered – if the city is viewed as 
a complete ecological system. From this
perspective, then, the flood protection offered by
salt marshes is one of the natural “goods and
services” for which New Yorkers will have to pay
if the marshes disappear. To compensate for the
loss of this protection, city planners are already
having to think about artificial flood barriers,
while the Port Authority of New York and
New Jersey has elevated JFK’s main runway
once and may have to do so again. Similarly,
the trees and green spaces of Central Park reduce
air pollution levels, as well as the “heat island
effect”, where the combination of heat-absorbing
concrete and human activity causes temperatures
in the city to rise. 
And as the city sprawls, the natural goods and
services upon which residents depend are coming
from increasingly far away. In 1992 the Canadian
economist, William Rees coined the term
“ecological footprint”, to refer to the amount of
productive land needed to sustain a city’s
population and its levels of consumption. This is
usually found in the local hinterland. But in a city
like New York, the “footprint” might include parts
of Nebraska, where acres of prairie are turned into
wheat and potato fields, or even South American
coffee plantations. Ironically, as the city chomps
Canada geese
in Jamaica Bay
watch the New York
subway cross
the wetlands.
A nature reserve
in the bay is home
to over 300 species
of birds
M
an
ha
tt
an
New Jersey
Staten
Island
Jamaica
Bay
Bronx
Queens
Brooklyn
Atlantic Ocean
©
D
on
R
ie
pe
, 
N
ew
 Y
or
k

On a bright May morning in the
Ramble, a wooded area of New
York’s Central Park, birdwatchers can
almost outnumber the birds. This is
the time of year that hundreds of
tiny, colourful warblers from as far
away as Mexico and Bolivia, stop off
in Manhattan to feed, on their long
migration to the forests of Canada.
And if the whole park suddenly
comes alive with the din of birds’
alarm calls, one of the city’s resident
Peregrine falcons is probably
overhead.
By the 1960’s peregrine falcons had
disappeared from the state of New
York – victims of the pesticide, DDT –
until a project to reintroduce them in
the 1980’s. But no-one expected
these mountain birds to move into
the city, building their nests on
Brooklyn Bridge. Now as many as
14 pairs nest in other unlikely spots,
like Riverside Church on the sedate
L
ul
la
by
 o
f 
B
ir
dl
an
d
John F. Kennedy airport’s
main runway is built on salt
marsh. One of the richest
ecosystems in the area,
it is home to the Fiddler
crab that emerges from
its burrow at low tide,
giant egrets (inset)
and hundreds of other
species
Upper West Side, dive-bombing
pigeons at 240 kilometres per hour
for lunch. Meanwhile a pair of red-
tailed hawks has been nesting on the
window ledge of a chic 5th Avenue
apartment for several years running. 
And really wild nature is only a
few miles away from the Empire
State Building. Just outside the lazy
town of Broad Channel on the “A”
train line, at the very foot of JFK
airport’s main runway, is the
Gateway Wildlife Refuge in Jamaica
Bay. Here, salt marsh, beach,
mudflats, thicket and trees provide 
a habitat for over 325 bird species,
along with horseshoe crabs, 
tree frogs and diamond-beaked
terrapins – as well as butterflies,
mosquitoes and tics.
Meanwhile, a recent survey by
Brooklyn Botanical Gardens found
3000 species of woody plant in the
city’s five boroughs. 
©
