Bioethics:
The ethics of genetics
Much hope has been placed in genetic science. But along with the promise
of miracles come serious ethical questions that need some answers. Just how far
should we let the scientists go?
UNESCO and the social sciences   Whither biotechnology?
Gene therapy may 
hold the promise 
of miracles, but it is 
still in its infancy

Usinghuman embryos as a source
of spare body parts is an
idea that both fascinates and terrifies. We are
drawn by its promise. We are also frightened,
because it has changed too quickly from
science fiction to being real science and
because we feel those involved in it have new
and fearsome powers through their knowledge
of how to alter living organisms.
The idea of beating an illness such as
Parkinson’s disease by replacing old or
damaged cells with new and efficient ones
taken from an embryo is by no means the only
one that life sciences offer us these days.
Other possibilities, on the contrary, are
downright alarming. They include, for
example, reproductive cloning of human
beings, which some scientists and doctors say
they are determined to press ahead with
despite its prohibition by both UNESCO’s 1997
Universal Declaration on the Human Genome
and Human Rights – which calls it “contrary
to human dignity” (article 11) – and the laws
of many countries.
To the already tough question posed by life
sciences of “how far shall we go?” we must
add another: “how far do we have the right to
go?” This is the extremely broad domain of
bioethics. So what are the ajor problems it
faces today?
Embryonic stem cell research could allow
production of what we desperately lack –
organs, tissue and cells for transplants – that
give hope of spectacular progress in the battle
against ailments that are difficult or currently
impossible to cure, such as Parkinson’s,
Alzheimer’s disease and Multiple Sclerosis.
The legitimacy of such research – which
countries either ban, permit or simply tolerate
– depends first of all on the status given to the
embryo. If considered to be already a human
being, its use obviously cannot be envisaged,
even for respectable medical treatment. But
the debate goes further than this. Though not
against the idea of using human embryos as a
source of ESC, some people object to it in
practice because of the danger of abuses and
misuse of the embryo in the course of such
research. Even those who consider it ethically
acceptable are often concerned to establish
safeguards and conditions about using them
for medical purposes..
Other questions arise about the source of
ESC. Is it right to create human embryos just
for research purposes? And if the only
embryos used are those no longer intended to
grow into children (such as embryos frozen
after in vitro fertilisation), how should the
acceptability of the research be judged and
how can the rights of the donor parents be
respected? Ultimately, other questions must be
asked. Do these cells, with their great
potential for replication, risk becoming
cancerous? If so, how can this be dealt with?
Several countries that banned ESC research
(Germany and France, for example) have or
appear to be switching to a more liberal
position. Also, while the most promising cells
seem to be ESC (totipotent ones), cells taken
from adults (ASC –only multipotent but raising
fewer ethical issues) are making a come-back
after discoveries in Canada and Sweden.
The prospect of human cloning has also set
off intense debate. Although the international
community has already rejected the idea as an
unacceptable misuse of human beings, the
threat remains. Certain scientists and doctors
have dismissed the widespread objections and
Each of our cells contains
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid),
the main constituent of the
chromosomes of all
organisms, except some
viruses. It is self-replicating
and is responsible for the
transmission of hereditary
characteristics

Genetic data:
gathering,
processing,
storing
and use 
The collection, treatment, storage
and use of genetic material raise a host
of ethical problems. They include the
purpose of gathering it, informing
sample donors, obtaining their free
and informed consent, regard for the
sensitivity of some social, religious or
ethnic groups about genetic testing
(for such things as parentage),
confidentiality and what happens 
to the samples gathered.
The spread of genetic
“fingerprinting” could lead to all kinds
of discrimination. First against people
whose genes showed an anomaly
indicating an existing disease or the
predisposition for one. This could put
them at risk of being barred from jobs,
being refused or charged more for
insurance, and blacklisted by credit
organizations. There might be more
general discrimination if a genetic
survey of a given population led to
stigmatisation of entire groups.
As data banks spring up all over the
place and genetic and medical data
about whole populations passes into
the hands of private firms with
exclusive rights, the issue of genetic
data needs to be urgently tackled.
UNESCO’s International Bioethics
Committee is working on this and has
produced a report.* An international
instrument is being prepared and a
first meeting about it was held at
UNESCO headquarters in Paris on
11-12 February this year. The IBC’s
drafting committee will work over the
next few months on a proposal to
present to the IBC before the end of
the year.
1. This report – Genetic Data; preliminary 
report of the IBC on the collection, processing ,
storage and use – will be available shortly 
on the internet at: http://www.unesco.org/ibc
Icelander Jon Valur Jensson
observes a genealogical chart
dating back 1,100 years. 
In Iceland, a ground-breaking
and highly controversial project
is underway to compare
genealogical, genetic and
medical data

fœtus so as to eliminate those that are female.
Technological advances have brought a new
kind of diagnosis that has its own dangers:
pre-implantation genetic diagnosis, which not
only detects gender but countless other
characteristics. The fear is that this technology
– currently limited to spotting serious diseases
– will be used for eugenic purposes, for
“selecting” human beings. 
The status of the human genome is at the
root of another big question: who owns
genetic data? The person who provides parts
of hisor her genetic material? The scientist
who identifies its characteristics? The scientist
who devises a use for it? The company that
paid for the research? And the problem is no
easier if the organism supplying genetic data is
a plant rather than a person. Should scientists
and laboratories who reap benefits from plant
life reward the local witch doctor, or his
community, who led them to the plant?
RESERVED FOR THE RICH
In theory, only genuine inventions that have a
purpose or might have industrial uses can be
patented, but in fact there is an upsurge in
patent applications for genomes and their
uses, including gene sequences, whose future
usefulness is unclear. According to the draft
report on the follow-up to the international
symposium on Ethics, Intellectual Property
and Genomics the rocketing number of patents
being granted means that “the costs of future
therapies and genetic tests will become
prohibitive for most human beings and
nations.”
Should these “discoveries” be protected, thus
depriving some people of their possible
benefits? Or should intellectual property
protection in this area be reduced, at the risk of
deterring corporate investment because of
diminishing profitability? Although genetic
discoveries compound this problem, it is not a
new one, as shown by the debate over the cost
of AIDS drugs, which are protected by patents
and therefore too expensive for some countries.
The question of equity also arises in the area
of donating human organs and tissue. Scientific
advances, such as xenotransplantation (trans-
plants of genetically-altered animal organs into
say they are determined to go ahead with
cloning. The prospect looms of “cloning
havens,” not unlike today’s “tax havens.” If this
situation were ever to result in the birth of a
human clone that survived, another grave
question would arise: what would be the legal
position of a cloned human being “conceived”
or “born” in a country where such a practice
was banned?
There are also questions about therapeutic
cloning, which involves transferring a nucleus
to create an embryo simply to provide stem
cells. Is this acceptable if it can vanquish
incurable or crippling diseases? Does accepting
human cloning for these purposes (and
developing the necessary techniques) leave the
way wide open for reproductive cloning of
human beings? Here we come up against the
problem already mentioned: when does
human life start? .
Less-frequently posed questions such as
diagnosis (the core of medical practice) are
just as ethically important. Bioethics has
already been confronted with the question or
pre-natal diagnosis, and how to prevent it
from being used to determine the sex of a

a human body), and genetic engineering in
animals as a potential source of organs
compatible with the human body may mean
the imbalance between supply and demand can
be restored. But this will be at a heavy price
mostly for poor countries. This takes us to the
broader ethical problem of solidarity. Since the
human genome is, according to the first article
of the Universal Declaration on the Human
Genome and Human Rights, part of the
“heritage of humanity,” should not the benefits
of this research – mainly done in rich countries
often using material from elsewhere – be better
shared?
Finally, there is the problem of what to do
with all the genetic data gathered in the
course of all the discoveries that promise both
remedies and future dangers. Such material
ranges from initial biological samples, the
isolated DNA, records of DNA sequences,
genetic profiles and information about the
state of the chromosomes. It can also include
written family medical records. The collection,
treatment, storage and use of this genetic
material – which determines a person’s
genetic identity and is passed down through
generations – also raises very many ethical
problems (see box p.21). The International
Bioethics Committee (IBC) has published
several reports on this and UNESCO has begun
work this year on drawing up international
guidelines in the field.
Pierre Gaillard
The DNA of suspects in sex crimes 
is decoded at the Codgene laboratories
in Strasbourg (France)
