Our hidden
A
According to legend, the pharaohs of
Egypt used to send gifts up the Blue
Nile to the Kingdom of Ethiopia,
where 86 percent of the river water originates.
The gifts were intended to curry favour with the
king, lest he forget the hydrological needs of his
downstream neighbours when praying to the
gods for rain. 
In modern times, the gift giving has given
way to sabre-rattling. “The only matter that
could take Egypt to war again is water,”
announced the country’s president, Anwar
Phenomenal
amounts of water
lie hidden
underground in
layers of rock that
pay no heed to
national borders.
UNESCO is
drawing up the
world’s first map
and inventory 
of these shared
resources
Children playing in the
Jordan Valley (top).
Carrying a precious load
in the Sudan (left). 
“We can’t help being
thirsty, moving toward
the voice of water”
wrote 13th century Sufi
poet, Jeladuddin Rumi. 
© C. Sappa/Rapho, Paris

hydro-capital
increasingly common for international rivers the
world over. Yet the negotiations never get below
the surface to reach another resource that
thirsty nations increasingly compete for:
groundwater. 
More than half the world’s population
depends on water that is pumped from the pore
spaces of rock formations, known as aquifers,
which lie hidden beneath the Earth’s crust.
These formations can span thousands of
kilometers and contain enough water to satisfy
all of humanity’s demands for many decades.
Imagine filling a pool the size of Germany,
several hundred metres deep with some of the
purest water in the world, to grasp the
dimensions of the Nubian Sandstone Aquifer
(see box), for example, which lies under the
desert sand of Libya, Egypt, Chad and Sudan.
Despite its phenomenal supplies of water, you
won’t find a trace of this aquifer’s existence on
a standard map. Aquifers of all shapes and sizes
are zigzagging across borders around the world,
often unbeknown to the national leaders on the
ground.  
To better understand this mysterious global
capital, geohydrologists from every country in
the world are starting to draw up the first global
inventory and map of transboundary aquifers,
through a UNESCO project entitled
Internationally Shared Aquifer Resources
(ISARM), which involves several organizations,
notably the International Association of
Hydrologists, the Food and Agricultural
Organization and the United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe. Within six years, the
project will map and assess the water quantity
and quality of every aquifer shared by two or
more countries in the world. The database will
also provide detailed case studies and a
“toolbox” of innovative techniques for
managing these precious resources from a
technical, socio-economic and legal perspective. 
Like rivers, aquifers pay no heed to national
borders. Unlike rivers, little is known about the
water they contain. Substantial investment and
Sadat, in 1979, in response to plans to build
dams by drought-stricken Ethiopia. Despite the
fact that no military force in the world has ever
managed to “capture” a river basin and that the
only full-fledged “war over water” dates back
4,500 years ago in Mesopotamia, the threat still
echoes today. Indeed Ethiopia is preparing to
tap the Nile, thanks largely to the World Bank,
which is dangling packages of financial
assistance to lure the riparian states, especially
Egypt, to the negotiating table. This kind of
high-powered diplomatic operation is
© Ed Kashi/Rapho, Paris

scientific expertise is required just to map the
boundaries of an aquifer before beginning to
accurately assess the quantity and quality of
water it contains. Sometimes the aquifer is fed
or “recharged” by recent rains seeping down
through the soil. Others, like the Nubian,
contain the rain of bygone geological eras,
known as “fossil water”, which can be
thousands and even millions of years old. 
THE RACE
TO THE PUMP HOUSE
Aquifers can be political dynamite. States are
already reluctant to admit that they must share
the waters of international rivers. But even the
most recalcitrant government finds it difficult to
deny the existence of a river flowing across its
border. But when that water is invisible,
percolating slowly deep underground, there is
an undeniable temptation to put one’s ’head in
the sand’ and pump the shared resource
without consulting a neighbour. The growing
body of international rules and conventions
concerning rivers don’t apply to aquifers,
prompting experts like UNESCO’s Alice Aureli to
fear a “race to the pump house” in which
countries scramble to use as much water as
possible out of fear that a more powerful
neighbour will dominate an aquifer by virtue of
its financial and technical strength.
For example, in the dusty borderland between
Mexico and the US, both governments were
simmering this summer, threatening and
accusing one another over the dwindling
supplies of the Columbia River. Yet neither side
could simply do as it liked because of a formal
treaty to share the river. Aquifers straddle that
very same stretch of border, yet not a single
agreement is in place to share them. So
communities like Columbus (New Mexico, US)
and Puerto Palomas (Chihuahua, Mexico) rely
exclusively on the same aquifer system, known
as the Mimbres. By pumping more and more
water - 95 percent of which is used for
agriculture - both communities risk their future.  
To defuse this potential for conflict, ISARM
brings together geohydrologists from the major
regions to jointly study their shared resources.
The survey of Africa, now being finalized, has
revealed several major discoveries. Prior to this
project, there was practically no documentation
of transboundary aquifers in the continent.
Groundwater studies  are sorely lacking, despite
the fact that some countries, like Mauritania,
rely upon the resource for 80 percent of their
needs. Even in  humid countries, like Nigeria,
many communities have no choice but to pump
underground because of terrible pollution of
rivers or surface waters. And when drought
hits, a properly managed aquifer can serve as a
kind of water bank, tiding over communities
until rains return. Yet there is one major
problem: pollution. It is extremely difficult, if
not impossible, to clean an aquifer once it has
been contaminated by sewage or chemicals
seeping down from communities, factories and
farms. 
The African survey has mapped about 20
transboundary aquifers, five of which had never
been identified before. For example,
The inauguration of the
Great Man Made River in
Libya, 1996 (top). 
A village pump in Ghana

geohydrologists from Benin learned that the
aquifer providing water for the capital city,
Cotonou, extends across the border into Togo.
Both countries now plan to jointly manage the
aquifer, which will come under increasing strain
because of predicted climate change. Rainfall in
the region is already declining at a rate of two
millimeters per year, according to Félix V.
Azonsi, director of the Water Resources
Department of Benin. In another surprise
development, geohydrologists from Ghana
discovered that their country shares a major
aquifer with Côte D’Ivoire. 
Similar surveys have already been completed
for South America, Western Europe and the
Euro-Mediterranean region, where water
conflicts can be explosive. The Mountain
Aquifer, for example, which straddles the West
Bank and Israel, lies at the heart of the water
dispute between the Palestinian Authority and
the Israeli government. In a nutshell, Israel

consumes about 85 percent of the yield even
though most of the rain and surface water
replenishing it originates in Palestinian territory.
However, geological conditions make it
extremely difficult and expensive to tap into this
water on the Palestinian side. In fact, most of
the good quality water naturally flows into
Israel, where it is relatively easy to access. The
Mountain Aquifer had been the subject of
intense negotiations, which collapsed after the
outbreak of the current intifadah.  Despite the
violence, geohydrologists from both sides met
earlier this year and exchanged water-related
data through ISARM. The meeting was in many
ways symbolic—both sides are fully aware of
the pressures straining the Mountain Aquifer.
But by taking part in ISARM, they sent a critical
message: the goal is not just to study a
transboundary aquifer, but to share and protect
a resource no-one can live without.
Amy Otchet
