Drugs: societies under  
Guajara Mirim! Until the 1970s, it
was the end of the line for
a train (powered by a wood-burning engine)
known as the “Devil’s Railway”, an Amazon
line that could have rivalled the tragically
famous Congo-Ocean line for the number of
workers killed per number of sleepers or ties
put down. The train, which was never linked to
the rest of Brazil’s rail network nor to that of
Bolivia  (on the other side of the Mamore river),
was ordered out of service by the military,
which preferred roads and independent truck
drivers to the rails and unionized railway
workers.
Guajara Mirim and its only hotel, The
Jamaica, are not on the edge of the world but
are nearly on the edge of Brazil, in the state of
Rondônia. From there, you can take a boat –
called a voadeira – to go to its equally rundown
sister city of Guayaramerim in Bolivia. You can
also – if you bring everything with you,
including the 300 litres of petrol you’ll need –
go as far as Costa Marques, a Brazilian village
that is just as remote but not without a certain
charm, with its ancient Portuguese fort on
guard high above the dangerous rapids in low-
water periods. During the two-day journey (220
kilometers), you will travel alongside an Indian
A new UNESCO
report examines
the economic and
social impact
of drug trafficking,
an activity that has
exploded around
the world over the
last two decades

the influence
The river is sole
means of
communication in
Amazonia. It’s also
the main route for
trafficking of all
types
reservation and see hundreds of jacarés, local
alligators, but practically no inhabitants. The
ribereños, traditional inhabitants of the Amazon
river banks, have moved to the cities,
abandoning the area to drug traffickers and
police officers who, with binoculars glued to
their eyes, try to keep watch over the river, a
river that forms a border but which is also the
sole means of communication in the region.
It was in Guajara Mirim that the Machado
family arrived from Lima in the 1970s. One of
the Machado brothers, Nereu, started off as a
simple worker on the struggling barge that
carried goods from one side of the river to the
other. Five or six years later, the same man
owned not only the barge but a shipping
company, a naval shipyard, the dredging
company that had a stranglehold on the local
market for sand and gravel used in
construction, as well as the supermarket and
the petrol pump in Guajara Mirim, four planes
and dozens of farms – with runways – in the
region and elsewhere. Building his networks on
both sides of the river by currying favors,
feeding corruption and sparking terror, Nereu
became a major drug trafficker as well as a
local force.
A “MIRACLE” STATE
Another trafficker in Rondônia, Jabes Rabelo,
climbed even higher up the social ladder, getting
himself elected to the federal parliament. From
humble beginnings as a mere official for INCRA,
the body tasked with managing settlement
projects, Rabelo became a coffee buyer in Cacoal
and in the 1980s launched the “coffee miracle”.
Rabelo bought coffee bean harvests at a better
price than his competitors and then resold them
at a loss in other Brazilian states. His local
competitors ended up either going out of
business or becoming part of Rabelo’s operation.
In reality, the “miracle” should have been called
money laundering: Rabelo’s bad business deals
allowed him to “clean” the money he earned
from cocaine trafficking and another illegal
activity, a vast car and truck theft network
(vehicles were traded in Bolivia for drugs).
Rondônia state was also witness to other
“miracles”, like the “toilet paper boom”: this
precious household necessity flew off store
shelves in Guajana Mirim by the cubic metre
and ended up in secret laboratories, which use s
lots of filters. In Costa Marques, rice was the
hot commodity, filling entire warehouses – and
the pockets of  local shopkeepers – before sales
fell off, ruining those who had been made rich.
Money laundering was hidden in the sales of
coffee, precious wood and gold extracted from
local rivers.

same causes do not produce the same effects in
Mumbai (Bombay), India, where local
trafficking is “better organized”, meaning it is
better controlled by organized crime groups
who reach agreements on sharing markets and
turf. Another observation: “Everywhere, young
people, and, more and more, very young people
are the first victims, in a general context of
poverty, unemployment and social
marginalisation where …  young people are
tempted to get to money to buy consumer
goods by engaging in illegal activities.” 
Part of the report is devoted to the cultural
and social aspects of drug trafficking. The
reader can learn, among other things, how in
India, traditional use of some drugs (opium
and cannabis), as well as religious, social and
medical use, was once controlled by the local
community, but those controls have now
disappeared since all drug use has been made
illegal. Or how in Mexico, the drug trafficker
has been incorporated into local folklore,
becoming a character in the corridos, popular
traditional oral history, as well as being used in
idiomatic expressions and local symbols.
The example of Rondônia state says a lot
about the interconnectedness of the drug
economy with other sectors, about the links
between several forms of criminal activity (in
this case, drugs and car theft) as well as about
the power of drug traffickers and their ability to
infiltrate the ranks of those tasked with making
laws. This is only one of numerous cases
analyzed in the report published by UNESCO in
August, entitled The Economic and Social
Transformations Connected to the International
Drug Problem (see box).
Until now, research conducted on the drug
phenomenon has been mainly devoted to the
problems caused by consumption, as well as
prevention and treatment policies. Moreover,
drug trafficking, as impenetrable as it is
dangerous, was a subject that seemed destined
to remain outside research circles. However, it is
now much more important to have a better
understanding of the profound effects trafficking
had on economies and societies when it shot
through the roof in the 1980s and 1990s, and of
the involvement of huge criminal organizations
now active in all corners of the globe.
CORRUPTION IS EVERYWHERE
One of the most serious problems posed by drug
trafficking, and illustrated by states’ lack of
ability and/or willingness to apply laws to
crackdown on the situation, is the problem of
governance, as the report clearly shows.
Impunity through corruption exists everywhere,
in various guises, according to the authors, who
write: “The form of corruption prevailing in a
given country is strictly dependent upon the
nature of the State and the balance of power
that holds between State institutions and drug
trafficking networks. In this regard, the case of
Mexico, where the civil service remained for a
long time under the de facto tutelage of a single
party, may show a greater similarity to the case
of China, than, for example, to that of Brazil or
Colombia.”
The existence of drug markets creates other
serious problems, like the violent crime that is
plaguing some large cities. In Rio de Janeiro,
“One cannot understand the tremendous
increase in violent crimes, especially homicide,
without linking it to drug trafficking.” But the
The scale of
laundering the
profits of illegal
activities is such
that the experts
believe it has an
impact on global
financial markets
and even played 
a role in some 
of the big financial
crises experienced
in recent years

Everything goes when it
comes to laundering drug
profits - the coffee trade,
gold or exotic timbers.

The research goes beyond this local level to
unveil the less obvious consequences of drug
trafficking -- and the money laundering that
comes along with it. It clearly establishes a link
with other criminal activities, from São Paulo
through Mumbai (Bombay) to China.
In a final observation and confirmation of the
importance of the problem, the report notes
that: “If the illegal traffic of drugs represents
only a small percentage of economic activity in
comparison to the formal legal economy,
nevertheless the money laundering of the profits
from the totality of the illegal activities
controlled by the criminal networks can have an
effect on financial crises. This theory was
proved by the Mexican financial crisis (1994-
1995), and also in Thailand (1997) and Japan
(since 1990)”
Future studies will perhaps show that this
theory applied to countries like Turkey,
Argentina or Nigeria in 2000-01.
Pierre Gaillard
