part of the common
heritage of Serbs,
Croats and Muslims that disappeared during the
war in Bosnia could help to start the long
process of healing the wounds opened by the
conflict. To this end, UNESCO is helping to
rebuild Mostar’s Old Bridge, a jewel of Ottoman
architecture, to make it once more a symbol of
that heritage of peaceful coexistence.
But reconciliation is no easy task in a city that
lost more than 2,000 of its inhabitants in fighting
between the three communities from 1992 to
1995. The traces of war are still very visible.
Near what used to be the front line, many
bombed buildings are still derelict and bear signs
warning of the danger of going near them. Holes
in the roads and pavements made by shells and
houses pock-marked with bullets are a reminder
everywhere of the bloody conflict.
Soldiers of the SFOR international peace force
still patrol the town daily, along with Italian
carabinieri, French gendarmes and Spanish civil
guards. But those who knew the city during the
fighting say things have much improved. 
Although the divide between the Croatian
part of the town (along the west bank of the
Neretva river) and the neighbourhood of the
majority Bosnian-Muslim population (on the
other side of the river) is still clear, three of the
nine bridges destroyed in the area during the
war are back in operation. But the most famous
one, that gave the city its name (Mostar means
“keeper of the bridge”), is still a makeshift foot
crossing.
The Stari Most (Old Bridge), built in 1566 by
the Ottoman architect Mimar Hayreddin, was
destroyed by Croatian artillery on 9 November
1993. But the bridge lives on in the old part of
the town, where artists paint it and craft
workers make miniature copies of it in metal,
ceramics and leather. Restaurants and radio
stations are named after it and you can see it on
postcards all over the town.

Mostar, a bridge 
to peace
But the memory of it burns brightest in
people’s hearts. “When I dream about the war, I
never see my father or my brother, I always see
the bridge,” says Selma, a 27-year-old widow.
“When I used to go out with friends, we’d
always arrange to meet up at the bridge. We
just called it ‘Stari’ (the Old Man),” says
Snjezana Hadzic, a civil engineer who is a
consultant with the reconstruction project.
Every August, the town’s youngsters would
dive off the top of the bridge’s 20-metre-high
single arch into the Neretva in a contest that
was shown on nationwide Yugoslav television.
“When it was destroyed, I was the mayor, and
we all wept,” says Cisic Rusmir, head of the Old
Bridge Project Coordination Unit, which is
funded by the World Bank and brings together
international, Croatian and Bosnian experts.
“But I was also there a week later when it was
decided to rebuild it. The aim of the agreement
we’ve signed with the World Bank and UNESCO
is to build a new bridge just like the old one,
using exactly the same kind of stone, but on

condition that members of both rival commu-
nities work together on the project.
“We have only one bank account and one set
of documents. I have complete confidence in
my Croatian architect opposite number, Tihomir
Rosic. If only all the institutions in Bosnia-
Herzegovina showed the same degree of
cooperation.”
SIDE BY SIDE
Members of both communities have worked
side by side for more than two years in quarries
and excavation sites. Sharing the goal of
completing such a highly symbolic project for
the town, drinking coffee and taking work-
breaks together is all helping them to stop
seeing each other as enemies.
This is no small achievement in a town where
SFOR soldiers say Bosnian-Muslim and Croatian
police patrol side by side in the same uniform
sometimes without exchanging a word for
weeks and where the hatred simmering just
below the surface means proceeding very
carefully because so many families who lost
loved ones know the names of those who
killed them.
Italy, Turkey, France, the Netherlands and
other foreign donors have provided the US $15
million needed to rebuild the bridge and its two
towers and also restore 11 buildings in the old
part of town that were badly damaged in the
fighting. Of the total, US $2 million is coming
from the Mostar town council and recently the
Croatian government said it would give
US $660,000 for the new bridge.
“This is a remarkable gesture from a country
with economic problems, especially since the
local Bosnia-Herzegovina press has kept quiet
about it,” says Colin Kaiser, head of UNESCO’s
office in Sarajevo.
Ivo Andric, the only Nobel Prizewinner for
Literature that former Yugoslavia produced,
wrote in 1945 that “bridges are more important
than houses and more sacred than temples,
because everyone uses them and they belong to
everyone.”
It is up to the different communities in
Mostar to make sure that when the new bridge
opens in 2004, it fulfils Andric’s description.
Lucía Iglesias Kuntz
