talking to 
Sweeping our 
own backyard 
  
  
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
N
i
a
m
h
 
Bu
rk
e  
The Tunisian writer and poet 
examines the genealogy of Islamic 
The fundamentalist movement is fed in two ways. 
fundamentalism. In the current It is an insurrectionary, revolutionary movement and a 
climat e, he believes that se If- criticism phenomenon that draws on elements of history and the 
Islamic tradition. However, one cannot say that the attacks 
is the surest way to lift the Muslim are a religious phenomenon. The use of suicide in the 
world out of the moral and DO litical name of politics or religion to 13 blindly has never ovsie 
in Islam, never. Some people claim the contrary, referring 
CTISIS it 1S plunging into to the attacks perpetrated by the Ismaelians in the Middle 
Ages. But that was a very specific phenomenon. These 
were attacks by the thousand-year-old Shi’ite movement 
against the Sunni authorities. And the Ismaelians carried 
out political assassinations in a highly targeted way, without 
ever harming civilians. They targeted their enemies, the 
theologians or representatives of authority. No, what is 
happening today has a lot more to do with the Western 
nihilist movement. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003 
E==SSSS=_—_l.l--.-—_SS...-—-—-—-—-—-=--.......TT _L_M___a_ aa Le ne SA Nt A

  
This movement began with the 
anarchists in the 19th century. It 
was described by Dostoyevsky in 
The Possessed. It drew its followers 
from the ranks of the frustrated. 
The Italian writer Solmi showed 
that the typical revolutionary comes 
from semi-intellectual circles, often 
school teachers, in other words 
aspiring intellectuals, who lack what it takes to be recognised 
as such. In the same way, the Muslim terrorists recruit semi- 
literate people. Given the demographic circumstances and the 
spread of mediocre education, these semi-literates constitute 
an immense mass of people gnawed away by resentment. 
Many Muslims cannot bear the position of weakness that 
they have occupied since Bonaparte. Since the end of the 18th 
century, Islam has not found ways to face up to the Western 
hegemony. Many people currently feel so powerless in the 
face of the American hyper-power that sacrificial violence 
seems to them to be the only response. 
It is true that the form of radicalism that preaches takfir 
(excommunication) sprang from the first sect of Islam, 
the kharijites, beginning in the 7th century. It is also true that 
a debate began raging with the second generation of Muslims, 
often ending in armed clashes between literalists and 
allegorists, in other words those who held that the Koran has 
only one meaning and those who believed its message was 
ambivalent and therefore open to interpretation. However this 
debate is not unique to Islam, it runs through all religions. 
All systems generate a sickness, a malady. If Christians are 
doing better than others these days, it is because they have 
spent centuries denouncing the malady of Christianity. 
All that is new in the Western tradition after the Middle 
Ages has been built on the criticism of religion, against 
itself. Thinkers from Erasmus to Schopenhauer, including 
Voltaire, Nietzsche and Kierkegaard, have all denounced 
the evils of Christianity. They attacked both its driving force 
and its illusions. 
The problem is that in Islam, this kind of criticism has hardly 
even begun. Even enlightened Muslims cannot bear to have 
 
the metaphor of a malady applied to their beliefs, which is 9 
— 
why the title of my book in Arabic had to be changed (see 
box). However, since the terrorist attacks in Riyadh and 
Casablanca, this metaphor has started to appear, even among 
theologians. Of course, I am not saying that other religions 
do not also need to examine their conscience. But it is not 
my job to write about the malady of Judaism or Protestant 
Puritanism. I prefer to sweep my own backyard. 
This ideology originates from a combination of three 
things. For the first, you have to look at the text of the 
Koran itself. There is, for example, the infamous “verse 
of the sword” which gives the order to pursue and kill 
all polytheists. The fundamentalists argue that this verse 
cancels out all the nuances of tolerance found in the Koran. 
The second element refers to the literalist thinking that 
developed over the centuries, and which found a spectacular 
incarnation in Ibn Hanbal (780-855), the founder of one 
of the four schools of orthodox Islam. This theologian 
fought against the mu’tazilites, the rationalist current 
supported by the Baghdad authorities in the 9th century. 
He was imprisoned and persecuted for his hard-line beliefs. 
After his death, his disciples radicalized his thinking. For 
example, fundamentalists today, who claim to have their 
roots in Hanbalism, often evoke takfir, even though Ibn 
Hanbal challenged this notion.The second key figure in this 
traditionalist trend is the Hanbalist thinker Ibn Taymiyya 
(1263-1328). Within his monumental body of work is a little 
book entitled As-siyassa ash-Shar’ia (“Politics in the name 
of divine law”), which is like a bible for the fundamentalist. 
In his time, Ibn Taymiyya was criticized, even from within 
the Hanbalist school, and spent part of his life in prison. But 
today, he is a central reference point for fundamentalists. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003 
A Rt TH ml) En EE NRE BY,

  
16 
      
The third pillar of fundamentalist ideology is a figure called 
Ibn Abd Al Wahhab, who called for a radical return to the 
most literal interpretation. Taking up the theory of Ibn 
Taymiyya, he refused any form of intercession between God 
and man. He was responsible for the disappearance of all the 
tombs of saints on the Arabian Peninsula and the destruction 
of the rites of popular Sufism, which were very rich from an 
anthropological point of view. The ideas of Abd Al Wahhab 
(1703-1792) were decried while he was alive, but later 
became the official doctrine of Saudi Arabia. 
They go back to Bonaparte’s expedition to Egypt, and 
the momentous encounter with the West. The people of 
the Middle East discovered that Europe was powerful and 
that henceforth they themselves would occupy a position of 
weakness. The first reaction, around 1830, was Muhammad 
Ali’s plan to modernize Egypt. The intellectual Rifaa Al- 
Tahtawi (1801-1874) represented this school of thought. He 
undertook the huge job of translating scientific manuals. In 
the politico-theological sphere, sheikhs Al-Afghani (1838- 
1897) and Muhammad Abduh (1849-1905) then created 
what we call the salafiyya, a form of fundamentalism, not to 
be confused with Muslim fundamentalism. 
Afghani and Abduh were defeated historically but their 
approach was wider. What were they searching for? They 
wanted to return to the foundations of Islam and adapt them 
so that Muslim societies could rebuild themselves, taking 
Western contributions into account, particularly democracy 
and parliamentary government. Their plan was to use these 
concepts to fight against the hold of colonialism and local 
despotism. In fact, they used to meet in a cafe in Cairo called 
Al-Barlaman (the Parliament). 
It was a gradual process. Rashid Ridha (1865-1935) 
served as an intermediary link in the ancestry of this form of 
fundamentalism. He began by taking up the ideas of Abduh 
and criticising Wahhabism, making a name for himself in 
the early 20th century, and eventually taking power on the 
Arabian Peninsula in 1932. But towards the end of his life, 
Ridha changed his opinions and wrote a text supporting 
Wahhabism, which was not as opportunist as it sounds. 
He pointed to the evolution of man at a time of colonial 
conquest which sparked the rise of anti-Western feeling. 
Yes, with Rashid Ridha’s pupil, Hassan Al-Banna 
(1906-1949), who remains famous for creating the Muslim 
Brotherhood (Al-Ikhwan Al-Muslimun) in Egypt in 1928. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003 
b Born in Tunisia in 1976 (republished 
1946, Abdelwahab by Sindbad, 1987); 
Meddeb moved to Phantasia, Sindbad, 
Paris as a student, Paris, 1989; Aya 
dans les villes, Fata 
Morgana, Saint- 
Clément, 1999, 
Matiere des oiseaux, 
Fata Morgana, 
Saint-Clément, 2001. 
His latest work, La 
Maladie de l'islam, 
Seuil, Paris, 2002, 
{published in English 
under the title, Malady 
journal, Déedale and is of Islam, Basic Books, 
currently Professor of New York, 2003) has 
Comparative Literature attracted considerable 
at the University of international interest. 
Paris X in Nanterre. So far it has also been 
He has published a translated into Arabic, 
dozen books in French, Bosnian, German, 
including 7alismano, Italian, Portuguese, 
Bourgois, Paris, Spanish, and Turkish. 
where he studied 
literature and 
art history. Poet, 
novelist, essayist, and 
translator, he has a 
deep understanding 
of both Western 
and Arab culture. 
He is editor of the 
international French- 
language literary 
Next came a virulent wave of anti-Western sentiment, 
with democracy portrayed as trickery and an ideology of 
domination. If democracy existed, Hassan Al-Banna asked, 
how could there be colonialism? He concluded that Muslim 
countries do not need the West but instead need to renew 
their political systems in their own way. You could say that 
there was a move from a watchword of modernizing Islam 
to another, which preaches an Islamization of modernity. 
For example, instead of defending the parliamentary system, 
we turn to the Koran and substitute the word choura for 
the word barlaman. But choura has nothing to do with 
parliamentarianism. It is not founded on elections or 
equality, but is simply a matter of consultation, to guide the 
prince in making decisions. 
At first, the Muslim Brotherhood experienced repression, 
nationalist tyranny and the emergence of the post-colonial 
totalitarian State. Despotism has traditionally taken place 
where there is little State intervention. But in an age of 
technical progress, all Arab countries have moved towards 
maximum state intervention. The model of the party-State 
has triumphed. And the fundamentalists have gained ground 
as this model has reached its limits. They benefited from 
r Tl Ee NRE BR =

   
  
  
© Stephan Gladieu/Gamma, Paris 
the failure of Arab nationalism, the defeat by Israel in 1967, 
the failure to develop and from the elimination of any form 
of political expression. The rise in power of the Saudi rulers 
after the 1973 oil crisis added a new element. Petrodollars 
helped the spectacular spread of a hard-line form of Islam, 
founded on a single orthopraxy: the strict observance of 
prayer became the basis of social censure and wiped out 
local practices in favour of a uniform Islam. 
The end of Nasserism and the arrival in power of Sadat 
in Egypt saw a migration of semi-literate Egyptians to Saudi 
Arabia, where the Muslim Brotherhood had married their 
ideas with those of Wahhabism. Then there was a second, 
explosive, encounter in Afghanistan. Egyptians, Saudis and 
Pakistanis joined together in the jihad, orchestrated and 
supervised by the United States to fight against the Soviet 
invasion. You know what happened next. 
Today, the Muslim world is in a state of civil war. But 
internal criticism is growing. The French revolution of 1789 
was preceded by two centuries of intellectual effort. Faced 
with violence, critical thought is spreading, particularly in the 
N 
. 
TAT IT 
LO TL 
mi : TIT ATH 
FA A A \ A \ “ . . «! 
Lo Sp TW an 
NEARLY yin 
SL LLC 
ROAR 
\ : F] MIA 
{ gl 
“wn Hann iv 
CRNA ~ 
ir 
CUTAN 
Shi’ite world. In Iran, the concept of vilayat e-fagih introduced 
by Khomenei has been criticised by theologians. In Iraq, the 
idea of spiritual caliphate, which presupposes a separation of 
religion from politics, seems to be gaining ground among the 
Shi’ite majority. As for Saudi Arabia, if it does not want to 
implode it must resolve the contradiction between its religious 
discourse, which leads to anti-Western sentiment, and its geo- 
political alliance with the United States. 
Since the 1970s, a diffuse fundamentalism has developed 
in Arab-Muslim societies. But that may be beginning to ebb 
away. The terrorist attacks in several Muslim countries have 
shocked the public. The challenge now is to separate Islam 
from Islamism. We must make sure that Islam plays a role in 
the war against fundamentalism. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003 
= SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS---;;SSSSlSAAAAAAle sss ade he he MA 1, 
    
  
 
