Slum haven
Schools for communities where 
children work can succeed if they adapt 
to the needs of the parents
More than 150,000 migrants live in the 
Govinpuri slums in south Delhi. 
Their homes are mainly windowless concrete 
rooms boxed on top of each other with no toilets 
or running water. They move into the city from the 
desert villages of Rajasthan and other nearby states 
to escape drought, and survive on about US$80 per 
family a month.
Government schools have not adapted to the 
needs of children in this transient community. Many 
of them work in day time - in makeshift shops, 
collecting public lavatory fees, or delivering patties 
– and may disappear when the rains return. But if 
literacy is to spread in this giant of a country, where, 
in New Delhi alone, 4.5m children live on the street 
or in slums, these problems have to be tackled.
Govinpuri’s Katha public school, set in former 
block of one-room dwellings,  is showing how 
it can be done. Walk through the school’s iron 
gates and you can see a giant children’s mobile of 
planets overhanging a narrow courtyard, night blue 
skies glistening with gold paper stars on the tiny 
classroom walls, pre-school children testing an iron 
rocking machine to its limits in a play corner, and 
a harmonium and tabla drums being squeezed and 
patted in the theatre room while students act out a 
satirical play.
The school is a haven of creativity and child 
friendly learning. It was set up by Katha, an NGO 
dedicated to promoting Hindu and tribal literature, 
and wherever possible subjects are taught through 
stories. The natural curiosity of children is what we 
encourage and the learning grows from that,” Katha 
founder Geeta Dhamarajan said.
Yet when it first opened, parents were reluctant to 
send their children to school, because they needed 
them to work or help at home. Dhamarajan coaxed 
them in by setting up parent forums, so that local 
people feel the school is really theirs, can use the 

facilities and see just how good the school is. There 
is a creche so children don’t have to stay at home to 
mind their siblings while their parents work. There 
is skills training in baking, packaging and marketing 
food. Health and sanitation awareness campaigns 
help to reduce days lost through illness. And the 
school operates a shift system so children can fit in 
lessons around work if they need to.
Poor children don’t have to buy textbooks to go 
to this 1300-pupil school, because instead they use 
activity guides, peer group research and a reference 
library. Younger pupils use flashcards, games, 
singing and miming, and a colourful cartoon story 
book called Tamasha.
Having started 12 years ago, Katha is about 
to see just how good it is at competing with 
government schools. Last year, ten pupils passed 
the government’s class 12 school leaving certificate 
and six went to college. This year, 150 are sitting 
the class 10 leaving certificate and 30 are sitting the 
class 12 exam. Next year the school has asked for 
100 seats in the class 12 exam.
One award this slum school has won already, 
however, is a global laureate for information 
technology for humanity from California’s Tech 
Museum. Through a partnership with British 
Telecom and Intel and donations, Dhamarajan 
Above: At Katha 
school older pupils 
use information 
technology  to 
investigate and 
map the sanitation 
and water supply 
problems of the 
Govinpuri slums 
where they live. 
Right: With young 
pupils there is a 
strong emphasis on 
hands-on learning 
and encouraging 
children’s natural 
curiosity 

Parents 
feel the 
school 
is really 
theirs, 
can 
use the 
facilities 
and see 
just how 
good 
it is
secured 50 computers and designed two child 
friendly computer labs where children investigate in 
clusters. They learn to use all kinds of software as a 
by-product of mapping, surveying and investigating 
the sanitation and water supply problems of their 
own community - and designing ways to solve them. 
“The secret to achievement here is learning 
by doing, by exploring, by investigating,” said 
headteacher Parvinder Kaur.
So the school has gone full circle, having first 
worked hard to draw in parents, it is now sending 
out the pupils to help them solve the problems of 
their daily lives and the statistics they gather can 
be used to put the case for improvements to city 
authorities.
Brendan O’Malley
