The pleasure factor
Raising literacy levels at school is not just about investing money, 
it means changing the way children are taught so that they enjoy learning.
natural creativity and curiosity about the world as a 
route to learning. 
This has made many schools a place to fear 
rather than a joyful learning experience, providing 
an additional reason, beyond poverty, why children 
should drop out of school.
A number of education programmes have shown 
how governments can improve learning among 
the rural poor without a significant spending hike, 
giving them the realistic prospect of being able to 
scale up the improvements across the country.
One of the biggest and longest lasting examples is 
the Escuela Nueva (new school) model that began in 
Colombia in 1975. It was eventually scaled up across 
more than 20,000 schools, and its creator, Vicky 
Colbert de Arboleda, was appointed education vice 
minister. 
The model has since been replicated in a host of 
countries – including Brazil, Guatemala, Nicaragua, 
Chile, Uganda, Guyana and the Philippines – with 
varying degrees of success. 
Similarly, Save the Children, an NGO, has been 
working for ten years with the Chinese provincial 
government in Tibetan Autonomous Region to 
raise standards in marginal populations by bringing 
in child-centred learning techniques. So far the 
Chinese authorities like what they see and a 
second programme has been established in Yunnan 
province.  
KEEPING KIDS IN SCHOOL
The Escuela Nueva programme was designed for 
multigrade rural schools with just one or two 
teachers – which account for four out five schools 
in rural Colombia and are common in the least 
developed or most isolated communities of many 
developing countries. 
Previously the children were learning so little and 
the system of evaluation was so rigid that many 
pupils who had to take time off, for instance to 
help with the harvest, would repeat and repeat and 
eventually drop out.
“We started with demonstrative schools that 
The high number of illiterate adults 
worldwide stems in the first instance 
from the failure of societies to 
make their children literate even when they sit in 
school for four or five years. So even if governments 
do abolish school fees and make the massive 
investment in teachers, classrooms and books 
required to shore up the quality of education as 
pupil numbers soar, it may not be enough to ensure 
that every pupil learns to read and write.
This is because state education systems in many 
developing countries have scarcely developed 
pedagogically from those established by former 
colonial powers. They are invariably geared to the 
needs of the ruling (male) urban elite, rather than 
the very different lives of the masses of rural poor; 
and teaching often has more in common with army 
discipline, with rows of pupils silently copying notes 
from the board, than an attempt to exploit a child’s 
Escuela Nueva pupils in 
Colombia

gave teachers a new role and materials designed 
for this type of learning,” said Vicky Colbert. “We 
brought in flexible promotion, active participatory 
and co-operative learning with children working 
in small groups. We spent time building skills 
of citizenship and democracy. We had strong 
community participation and we made sure the 
schools respected the different learning rhythms of 
the children.”
The pupils study independently or in groups 
using self-learning and co-operative group-learning 
guides. These combine a core national curriculum 
with regional and local adaptations made by the 
teachers. Evolved from activity cards, they are a 
textbook, active learning exercise book and teachers’ 
guide rolled into one. Teachers are initially trained 
at the demonstration schools and build on their 
techniques once employed by attending practical 
workshops and sharing ideas with their peers at 
monthly meetings at local centres where they collect 
their pay. “Self learning is the key,” said Colbert. 
“The teacher’s role is to help those who are not 
understanding.”
In tests after the model  had  been extended to 
more than 8,000 schools,  Escuela Nueva pupils 
outperformed control group pupils in Spanish, the 
official national language, at grades three and five 
by 19 and 8.5 percent respectively. 
At the same time the number of pupils dropping 
out or repeating years was significantly reduced. By 
1993 this was a $3.5 billion a year problem in Latin 
America and the Caribbean, where nearly one in 
three primary pupils were repeaters and only half 
the fourth grade pupils taking state tests were able 
to understand what they read. 
The Save the Children methods have a lot in 
common with those promoted by Escuela Nueva.
“In most schools in the world you see children 
sitting passively, brain dead, never moving, never 
asking questions,” said Marion Moreno, a global 
education advisor for Save the Children-UK. “In a 
Save the Children class you will see them actively 
engaged, playing games to learn things, talking, 
moving about - and their learning shoots ahead.”
In Tibet, in partnership with provincial govern-
ments and the British Department for International 
Development, Save the Children introduced child-
centred learning methods in municipality schools in 
the snow-blown mountain valleys north of Lhasa, 
where previously two out of three children dropped 
out before completing nine years of education.
Teachers are given 16 days’ training in 
questioning, group work, using games in the 

Moreno: 
“Training 
teachers in being 
affectionate and 
child friendly costs 
just a short training 
course and it keeps 
children in school”

classroom and using real local objects as teaching 
aids. Children are encouraged to learn, investigate, 
experiment and articulate their discoveries.
Save the Children evaluations in Tibet show 
the approach can markedly improve exam results 
without requiring investment in vast numbers of 
extra teachers.
“Training teachers in being affectionate and 
child friendly costs just a short training course 
and it keeps children in school,“ Moreno said. “So 
there is a big untapped potential for working with 
governments to change the system.”
However, the attempt to scale up the Escuela 
Nueva innovations across rural schools in Colombia 
shows how difficult this can be.
The 500-school pilot project was extended to 
3,000 schools between 1978 and 1986. Then, 
following the landmark decision by the government 
to make primary education compulsory and free, 
the target was raised to cover all 27,000 rural 
schools by 1992. But, during the upheaval caused 
by a concurrent national decision to federalize 
government, teachers were transferred on a massive 
scale and in many areas training slipped back into 
the traditional model, or the new learning materials 
did not arrive.
Colbert left the ministry to set about reviving the 
model through the Volvamos a la Gente (Back to 
the People) foundation, this time using partnerships 
between people, government and businesses. With 
coffee grower associations funding innovations 
including in information technology, and the state 
paying for materials, she focused on five regions to 
form a centre of excellence backed by these alliances.
Since then the recovery has gone from strength to 
strength. An international comparative study of 11 
Latin American countries carried out by UNESCO 
in 1998 found Colombia was the only one in which 
results in rural state schools were better than their 
urban counterparts. The World Bank selected 
Escuela Nueva as one of three education reforms in 
the world that had demonstrated success on a large 
scale. And Vicky Colbert was named as one of Latin 
America’s top 20 social entrepreneurs in 2002 by the 
Schwab Foundation.
“If you change the method and have the right 
materials, teachers can tackle a larger number of 
pupils,” Colbert said, “and with the money saved 
you could even pay them more.” 
Brendan O’Malley
