Water A flood of 
a trickle 
  
© Jim Holmes/Panos Pictures, London 
  
WM Privatizing the tap p.40 
Putting human rights first 
2003, International 
Year of Freshwater WM Argentine model falters p.a6 
Crisis hits privatisation plan 
 Averting conflict over the Nile p.4s 
Nations turn to co-operation 
Save that swamp! p.52 
Wetlands play vital role 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003

@ 
This report was planned 
ro m IS es and prepared by Barry James, 
p 9 a journalist in Paris who 
f has specialized in covering 
environmental issues. 
providing wat 
illlons in developing ratio 
foeus      
intervals, political leaders get together and make promises 
t they know they cannot possibly keep. The UN Millennium 
summit meeting in New York, in September 2000, aimed 
to halve the proportion of people without access to safe water by 2015. 
Last year’s World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) in 
Johannesburg (South Africa) added a similar target for sewers. 
To meet those targets would mean connecting nearly 300,000 people 
every day to a supply of clean water and 500,000 to a sanitation system. 
“This is simply not going to happen under anything remotely like 
current conditions,” says Margaret Catley-Carlson, chairwoman of the 
Global Water Partnership, a body set up in 1996 by the World Bank, the 
UN Development Programme and the Swedish International Development 
Agency. 
By 2015, nearly three billion people — 40 percent of the projected world 
population — are expected to live in countries that find it difficult or 
impossible to mobilize enough water to satisfy the food, industrial and 
domestic needs of their citizens. 
And by then, tens of millions of people will have died from water-borne 
diseases, including an average of 6,000 children every day, according to 
the inter-agency working group set up by the UN to prepare for last year’s 
summit in Johannesburg, at which water was defined as a priority field 
for action. 
© Chris Stowers/Panos Pictures, London The leaders of the G8 industrialized nations who met in the French 
spa town of Evian-les-Bains in June put water at the top of their agenda. 
HA dry country p.54 Unfortunately, at the current rate of investment, the sanitation target 
Qil, but no water in Kazakhstan will not be met in Africa and it will take more than 100 years to reach the 
BH Europe’s desert D.57 water target, according to the British charity, Water Aid. It estimates that 
Spain’s plan to water the south the G8 countries dedicate only about five percent of their total overseas 
. aid budgets to water projects, which is somewhat less than they spend on 
Pollutant time bomb p.59 
. i f . 
A threat to aquifers jcecréam or pst food 
Worse, the depletion and contamination of underground resources 
The mysteries of water p.cl : 250 because of inefficient irrigation and drainage will mean a loss of up to 
Facts, figures and curiosities 
10 percent of the world’s cereal production by 2025, according to a joint > 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003

foeus 
46 
> report by the International Food Policy Research Institute 
and the International Water Management Institute. That 
is the equivalent of annually losing the entire cereal crop 
of India, or the combined annual harvest of sub-Saharan 
Africa, West Asia and North Africa. 
It is not that governments do not know about these 
dangers. A string of international conferences over the 
past 25 years has focused on water issues and set targets 
but “hardly any” have been met, according to the recently 
published United Nations World Water Development Report 
- Water for People, Water for Life. 
“Attitude and behaviour problems lie at the heart of the 
crisis,” says the report, published as a key contribution to 
the International Year of Freshwater, which is being led by 
UNESCO and the UN Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs. 
Following the publication of the report, an initiative of the 
UN'’s World Water Assessment Programme, no government 
leader should be able to claim ignorance of the crisis. 
Twenty-three UN agencies contributed to the report, which 
is packed with sobering statistics and is full of suggestions 
about how to deal with the crisis. 
Lack of access to clean water and sanitation are widely 
seen as a violation of human rights and an affront to human 
dignity. The report emphasises the tragic impact the crisis 
has on “the everyday lives of poor people, who are blighted 
by the burden of water-related disease, living in degraded 
and often dangerous environments, struggling to get an 
education for their children and to earn a living, and get 
enough to eat.” It is also a question of equity. A child born 
in the developed world consumes 30 to 50 times the water 
resources consumed by a child in the poor countries. 
“The crisis is experienced also by the natural 
environment,” it says, “which is groaning under the 
mountain of wastes dumped on it daily, and from overuse 
and misuse, with seemingly little care for the future 
consequences and future generations.” 
This special feature examines some of the key issues related 
to the crisis. 
BH Who should control the tap - public authorities or private 
corporations? Plus, a look at Argentina’s showcase water 
privatization programme. 
Bl Can conflict over water be avoided? Experience in the 
Nile river basin suggests it can. 
BH The realization, perhaps too late to save many of them, 
that wetlands are an important environmental asset. 
HB A case of misplaced priorities? The Republic of 
Kazakhstan enjoys an oil bonanza but has one of the 
worst freshwater crises in the world. 
HB Spain's controversial project to divert resources from 
the Ebro river basin. 
BH How concerned should we be about the contamination 
of our ground water? 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003 
 
yi
 $Y 
Ay
 \ 
£23 
dg > | 
wr 
» 5 » 
. 


p> unlikely that the situation can be reversed. 
5 
Versions of Kazakhstan’s water problems are 
replicated throughout the former Soviet states. 
The Aral Sea disaster is affecting neighbouring 
Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan and 
Krygyzstan, which are all linked to it by the rivers 
Amu Darya and Syr Darya. 
In Russia, recent studies have shown that 
around one in three drinking water samples fail 
statutory tests for pollution, while there are frequent 
outbreaks of hepatitis and tuberculosis (TB). In 
Uzbekistan the water has a high lead content and, 
as in Russia, TB is common. 
In Siberia, it is the oil exploitation itself that is 
polluting the water. Although production levels 
are declining, the region is still the major source 
of Russia’s oil output. An Alaska-sized region 
in western Siberia, called the Tyumen oblast, 
or district, produces nearly two-thirds of the 
country’s oil. 
Bad practice and the mis-management of 
infrastructure - it is difficult and expensive to 
maintain pipelines in Siberia’s harsh climatic 
conditions - have led to severe contamination 
of surface and ground water supplies. Spills are 
frequent and the shiny gleam of oil can be seen 
on rivers and lakes. But, as production declines, it 
becomes less likely that there will be any tightening 
of environmental standards. 
As with Kazakhstan, clean drinking water may 
come only after a long wait, and even then, the 
worst of the environmental damage inflicted on the 
sources of that water may be irredeemable. 
Elizabeth Stuart, in Kazakhstan 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003 
Top: Plenty of oil, 
not enough water. 
An Uzbek family 
collects fresh water 
at Muniak on the 
Above: Aral Sea 
Workers fitting 
pipes on an oil 
rig at Kyzylorda 
(Kazakhstan) 
© John McDermott/Panos Pictures, London
