An 18 year-old Swede from 
Lapland, fights to save her culture 
and her language, one of 
the most threatened in Europe
ensjon, a village lying under the snow 
in the region of Kiruna, northern 
Sweden: a television crew from Discovery Channel 
is filming a short documentary about the Saami 
(see box p. 20). Outside, the temperature is –33°C, 
freezing both people and movie cameras. Only 
Anna, 18 years old, is in her element.  Pouring all 
her teenage energy into defending her “difference,” 
this young Swedish woman is the star of the hour.
“The first thing I’ll pass on to my children? 
The Saami language.” Anna doesn’t bat an 
eyelid before answering. On the surface, she is a 
teenager like any other: her life revolves around 
snowboarding, her boyfriend and the American 
pop-rock group Foo Fighters. But deep down, she 
feels that she has something else, that many of 
her school friends don’t. 
“It’s a feeling that grows with time. The more 
the years go by, the more I feel like speaking 
Saami and following my uncle and his reindeer 
into the mountains. Living close to nature gives 
you incredible strength.” For Anna, being Saami is 
a bonus, a passport for a life that breaks with the 
ordinary. “I have my Swedish life, like everyone 
else, and an extra life as well.”
Anna lives with her parents in Gällivare, a 
mining town located north of the Arctic circle. 
“I’m lucky, because my parents always told 
me where I came from and sent me to a Saami 
school.” Along with Swedish and English, she 
learnt to read and write in her mother tongue, 
which her mother and grandmother only know 
how to speak. She also discovered how to yoik, 
the art of singing traditional melodies with 
modulations evoking the wind, which once 
carried performers into a trance. For several years 
now, she has sung in public at Saami festivals.
PROUD OF HER HERITAGE
Often, on weekends, Anna travels 80 kilometres 
to visit her maternal grandmother Ellen Maria, 
who lives in Rensjon. With this feisty 77-year 
old, Anna learns how to make traditional objects 
in reindeer skin or multicoloured threads. She 
loves listening to her grandmother’s stories about 
the past, recounted without nostalgia but with 
a definite sense of pride: a nomadic childhood 
governed by the rhythm of reindeer herding, 
the death of her own mother when she was 
barely three, her role as the family head that she 
assumed early on to support her father, brother 
and little sister, the harsh winter of 1935-36 when 
all the reindeer starved to death, the trading of 
“milk against meat” with Finns settled in the 
region, and finally, the move to a more sedentary 
lifestyle, access to modernity and basic comforts. 
“Saami life has changed so much,” says Anna, 
“I don’t want this memory to die.” 
Not that the two women would ever turn the 
clock back. Like her friends, Anna is not attracted 
to traditional occupations such as reindeer 
breeding, which employs less than 15 percent of 

the Saami in Sweden: too tough and not lucrative 
enough, she says. Unless they own more than 
400 animals, reindeer herders have a below 
average living standard and must round off their 
months by working in the mining industry or in 
the tourism business.
But Anna is sure of one thing. She will continue 
living in Sápmi (previously known as Lapland) 
and defend her language and the rights of her 
small minority. Today, Sweden counts some 
15,000 to 20,000 Saami, accounting for less than 
0.25 per cent of the country’s population. Even in 
their own region, where temperatures can drop to 
–50°C, they only represent between five to ten per 
cent of inhabitants. The others are mostly miners 
from the southern part of the country lured by 
opportunities in important iron ore deposits. 
Traditionally a people of hunters and fishermen, 
the Saami became nomadic herdsman towards 
the end of the Middle Ages. They lived through 
dark hours from the 16th to the mid-20th century: 
their lifestyle and customs came under attack and 
their traditional territory split between several 
States (see box below). Colonization, taxes, 
Christian missionaries and the persecution of 
traditional Shamans, forced labour in the mines, 
the prohibition to use their language and express 
Some 60,000 to 
100,000 Saami 
(also written Sámi), 
an indigenous people 
formerly known as Lapps, 
live dispersed across 
four countries: Finland, 
Norway, Sweden and 
Russia. Their territory 
came under the Swedish 
crown in the early 16th 
century before being 
divided between Sweden, 
Russia and Denmark a 
century later. In 1996, part 
of Sweden’s Laponian 
area, where a nomadic 
lifestyle marked by 
the seasonal rhythm 
of reindeer herding 
prevails, was inscribed on 
UNESCO’s World Heritage 
List.
“We are the only 
wild white people in 
the world,” jokes an 
ironic Lars Anders Baer, 
president of Sweden’s 
Saami Parliament, 
underlining that “the 
majority, 40,000 to 70,000 
people, live on Norwegian 
territory.” It is estimated 
that 15,000 to 20,000 
Saami live in Sweden, 
around 5,000 in Finland 
and 2,000 in the Kola 
Peninsula (Russia).
The Saami language 
is generally classified in 
the Finno-Ugrian family, 
bearing similarities to 
the languages of the 
Baltic Sea like Finnish 
and Estonian. But there 
are in fact several Saami 
tongues, often bearing no 
resemblance with each 
other. Spelling can also 
vary from one language to 
the other.
The UNESCO Atlas 
of Languages in 
Danger lists 11 Saami 
languages, of which 
one is “extinct” (Kemi 
Saami), four are “nearly 
extinct” (Pite Saami, Ume 
Saami, Ter Saami and 
Akkala Saami), five are 
“seriously endangered” 
(Inari Saami, Skolt Saami, 
Kildin Saami, Lule Saami 
and South Saami). Only 
one is listed in the simply 
“endangered” category: 
North Saami, spoken by 
80 to 90 percent of the 
Saami who still speak their 
language – about 30,000 
people – living in the four 
countries concerned.
Lars Anders Baer 
asserts that an effort 
“to harmonize linguistic 
policies adopted in the 
four concerned countries” 
is necessary to save the 
Saami language. But in 
doing so, there is a risk 
of killing variants that are 
currently spoken by no 
more than a few hundred, 
or even a few dozen 
people.
Straddling borders

their culture, racism and economic decline pushed 
the majority to assimilate into the dominant and 
prosperous Swedish society. 
According to estimates, more than half the 
Saami in Sweden cannot speak their own 
language and 90 percent can’t write it. Many 
young people know nothing about their past or 
are ashamed of it, says Anna. “Some don’t even 
know they are Saami or hide it. My boyfriend, for 
example. When I met him five years ago, no one 
had ever told him that he had Saami ancestors.” 
Today, however, a growing number of his friends 
are starting to accept their origins.
Anna will continue speaking up for her culture 
and “rights.” “As soon as I’m allowed, I will vote 
A wedding at Kautokeino in 
Norwegian Sápmi (right). The 
bridal couple have just said 
“jua” (yes). For the past 20 years 
or so, reindeer breeders have 
traded the traditional sled for a 
motor-powered varity. Some even 
use helicopters to keep an eye on 
their herds

in the Sametinget (Sweden’s Saami parliament),” 
she asserts, regretting that two thirds of the Saami 
don’t take this opportunity. This parliament, 
which has an advisory capacity to the government 
according to its president Lars Anders Baer, 
was set up in Kiruna in 1993, several years after 
those in Norway and Finland. It is the result 
of the birth, after World War Two, of a Saami 
movement, which gained strength in the 1970s, 
echoing the affirmation of other indigenous 
peoples around the world.
In recent years, Mr Baer admits, Sweden’s 
Saami people have scored points on the cultural 
front, even if he feels the government does not 
invest enough money in promoting the language. 
Today, Saami children have the right to be 
educated in their mother tongue, although few 
follow this route. The most motivated attend the 
six bilingual schools in Sápmi’s cities. According 
to the European research network Mercator, the 
number of students in these schools rose from 115 
in 1994/95 to 170 in 2000/01. Some 180 children 
spread across other schools in the country benefit 
from an “integrated Saami education” as part of 

the general curriculum. Other children take Saami 
as an option. If they wish, they can continue in 
high school and university.
LAND RIGHTS
The environment is slowly changing. National 
school curricula are starting to speak about the 
history of minorities in the country. Some media 
are introducing Saami programmes, albeit in small 
doses. On the legislative front, Stockholm ratified 
the European Charter for Regional or Minority 
Languages in February 2000. At the same time, a 
new law was adopted on the right to use Saami 
before administrative authorities and in court, 
a decisive step in the recognition of the Saami 
minority.
The looming question of land rights remains. 
Unlike Norway, Sweden has not ratified the 
International Labour Organisation’s Convention 
169 concerning indigenous and tribal peoples. 
According to this text, these people must have 
the “rights of ownership and possession” of their 
traditional lands and be able to “participate in 
the benefits” of activities stemming from the 
exploitation of natural resources. For Anna’s 
father, Anders, survival depends on this: without 
economic autonomy that would notably enable 
his people to develop and modernize reindeer 
husbandry, Saami culture is condemned to 
disappear. “If you no longer need 400 words 
to describe the quality of snow or hundreds of 
others to designate different parts of the reindeer, 
you no longer need the language,” he says. “If our 
traditions die, our language will die.”
Meanwhile, his daughter continues to sing. And 
the future will tell whether her yoik is a swan’s 
song to Saami culture or an ode to the Sun god of 
a reborn people.
Sophie Boukhari
Anna, 18, her grandmother 
Ellen Maria, 77, and her 
mother Irénée, 48 (above): 
Saami and proud to be. 
reindeer skins piled in an 
abattoir near Kiruna in the 
north of sweden (above left)
