    
omise: 
 
uman genetic data, degrees, they also answer medical 
gathered through questions. Genetic tests can detect 
biological samples such illnesses as Huntington’s 
(blood, tissue, saliva, disease; other tests, indicating only 
sperm, etc.) play an increasingly a predisposition, provide invaluable 
important role in our lives. They information for prevention. Research 
are already providing answers to based on human genetic data 
questions asked by judges and promises more tests of increasing 
police, such as proving paternity reliability as well as new approaches 
or identifying sex offenders and for understanding and treating 
accident victims. In varying many diseases. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003

Because one of her parents died of Huntington’s 
Y Lh An kre A723 A A Rov wi disease, a North American woman decides to 
take a genetic test to find out if she too will 
- _— - develop the neurodegenerative disorder. The 
probability is 50 percent. A genetic counsellor 
- advises her to take out life and health insurance 
- before taking the test. Should the test results 
be positive, he explains, not only will she be 
-~ condemned to illness, she will also no longer 
be eligible for insurance, as no company will 
-~e accept her if she discloses her status. And if she 
conceals a positive test, she is committing fraud, 
0] and the company can cancel her policies. Shortly 
thereafter, she finds out that the test results are 
positive. Knowing she will develop the disease, 
.. she tells a certain number of people. She is 
soon fired, despite having received praise and a 
promotion in the previous eight months for her 
Se work. Seeing all this, her relatives — especially 
her sisters — decide not to take the same test. 
  
PREDICTIVE TESTS 
An estimated three to four thousand diseases 
| (Huntington’s disease, cystic fibrosis, 
neurofibromatosis, Duchenne dystrophy, etc.) are 
; directly related to hereditary genetic alterations. 
More complex hereditary genetic alterations 
can increase an individual's risk of developing 
common diseases (cancer, cardiovascular disease, 
diabetes, etc). 
Many genetic tests exist that can identify these 
aaa alterations or mutations. Kits usually costing 
© Patrick Landmann/ Gamma, Paris between US$100 and US$200 are available for more 
than 400 diseases and hundreds of others will arrive 
gradually on the market. Some tests, such as the 
one for Huntington's disease, have the particularity 
  
  
Human genetic data already 
tell us much, and promuse to tell us of being categorical: if the test is positive, the 
much more. But there are fears that person is certain to develop the disease. But the 
they will lend themselves to uses great majority of tests, such as those for certain 
cancers, only indicate that you may be predisposed 
to a certain disease, which does not mean you are 
definitely going to develop it. 
that are contrary to justice and civil 
liberties, and will open the door to 
discrimination. To better understand 
the complexity of these problems, 
it is useful to examine concrete 
situations. Some examples follow 
DISCRIMINATION FOR INSURANCE 
The economic mechanism of insurance is based 
on the fact that it is not individuals who are being 
insured but groups. For each accident or illness, 
there is a given statistical risk (which may have 
to be adjusted according to the person’s age or 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003

UNESCO in action social sciences 
AY 
    
» . 
- 
- 
© Patrick Aventurier/Gamma, Paris 
environment). The whole system depends on the 
good faith of the contracting parties. If a large 
number of people ask for life insurance because 
they have found out that they have a higher 
than normal risk of getting cancer, it skews the 
mechanism. Insurance companies fear these 
‘fraudulent’ clients, but they are not at their 
mercy. They can try to prove that the insured 
person cheated by neglecting to inform them of 
his or her condition. 
The balance can also be tilted in the other 
direction, posing a different threat. Insurance 
companies can be tempted to use the increase in 
genetic testing to their own advantage. Without 
going as far as to impose the tests on their clients, 
they can persuade them to get tested by offering 
lower rates. We could then end up with two-or 
even three-speed insurance: clients at risk (those 
with a known predisposition to a serious disease 
or refusing to take the test) who would pay the 
highest premium, and clients lucky enough to 
draw a winning number in the genetic lottery who 
would get the best rates. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003 
Crime investigators 
routinely use genetic 
DISCRIMINATION BY THE EMPLOYER data derived from 
traces of blood, etc. 
It seems evident in our example. But it could But what happens 
have taken another more insidious form, with the to these data 
employer waiting a little longer to get rid of the afterwards? 
“problem” employee so that no one would suspect 
the real reason for firing him or her. 
Discrimination can also take a more active 
form. In our example, the employer merely 
reacts to a test that the employee has freely 
chosen to take. But an employer can initiate 
genetic screening. For example, employees of 
the Ernesto Orlando Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory discovered by chance that they were 
being screened: women were tested for pregnancy, 
Afro-Americans and Latin-Americans for syphilis 
and Afro-Americans for the genetic trait for sickle 
cell disease. Railroad workers employed by the 
Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad discovered 
that the company had used blood samples from 
at least 18 of them to screen them covertly for a 
predisposition to carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS), a 
musculoskeletal disorder impairing manual ability, 
which can be costly to employers. What was the

Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad planning to The normal conditions for consent are that it 
do with the results of this illicit test? has to be prior, freely given, and informed. In 
Discrimination, furthermore, is not always easy other words, the person must know in advance 
to prove. Where does one draw the line? Not that his sample will be used to produce human 
assigning a worker with a predisposition for CTS genetic data; he or she must be under no physical 
to a job where he/she will have to operate a or psychological pressure; and he or she must 
jackhammer can be interpreted as a preventive understand to what end the human genetic data 
measure, taken in the employee’s best interest. are being produced (possible advantages and 
disadvantages, guarantees stipulated). Sometimes, 
in addition, consent must also be explicit, i.e. the 
REFUSING TESTS purpose of the sampling must be clearly defined. 
Such discrimination obviously discourages 
potential candidates from getting tested, depriving 
them of the advantages that early diagnosis can CHANGING THE OBJECTIVE 
entail. And because of such reticence, scientists As far as the patient is concerned, the samples 
risk being deprived of valuable information. were taken with a therapeutic aim: in other 
  
words, as part of his care. At the beginning of 
the treatment, the doctor had the same objective. 
But he added another when he realized that 1 5 
In the 1980s, a resident of Seattle(Washington) his patient’s blood contained an interesting 
suffering from leukaemia was admitted to a substance. This resulted in taking samples that 
renowned university hospital in California. were useful for research but perhaps not to the 
He underwent a splenectomy (removal of the patient. It also explained why the sampling had 
spleen). Without asking the patient’s consent, to be done in the doctor’s California hospital, to 
a researcher examined the tissue taken and ensure he could work on the samples exclusively. 
discovered an interesting substance. A patent was Changes of objective are sometimes even more 
taken out which benefits five parties — the doctor, clear-cut. Imagine that a country has decided 
the hospital, a researcher, a genetic institute and to create a genetic data bank including all of 
a pharmaceutical company — but not the man its citizens, with the aim of using research to 
whose cells contained the substance. He sued in improve health care — but that the collected data 
a California court. The court upheld his claim were then made available to the police to hunt 
on one count — the lack of consent — but denied down criminals. Ethically, the change in purpose 
him a property right, as such a right would block is unacceptable. For politicians seeking popularity, 
scientists’ access to the cells they need. What however, it might be tempting. 
would be the outcome of a similar trial today, 
given the continual evolution of jurisprudence? 
All would depend on where the trial was held, PROPERTY 
as certain states such as Georgia and Oregon are Who owns what? Marie Curie never patented 
more protective of the biological “owner”. radium. She discovered it but did not invent it. 
One could say the same of genes - scientists 
discover them or one of their functions but they 
CONSENT do not invent them. This has not prevented 
The patient consented to have his spleen removed thousands of patent applications from being filed. 
as part of his treatment for leukaemia - but not More pertinently, to whom does a sample 
to have it used for research. Only much later, in containing genetic data belong? Common sense 
1983, when the patient began to wonder why says it is the property of the person who supplied 
he had to go to California to give samples which it. But does it no longer belong to him once it is 
could have been taken in his home town, was he extracted from his body? Without claiming an 
asked to sign a waiver, giving up his rights to any absolute property right, does the person not at 
product that could be derived from his blood. He least have a say in what use is made of his cells or 
refused to sign and sued when he discovered that a product derived from his cells? 
the doctor and other parties had filed a patent A few years ago, scientists gave little thought to 
application in 1981. these issues. As long as the patient had consented 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003

UNESCO in action social sciences 
— 
Jopavds 4 Tnivevsal Declaration 
Human genetic data will which aims to provide 
soon have an international preliminary solutions 
declaration that sets out the to extremely complex 
ethical principles that should issues, will be submitted 
    
govern their collection, to UNESCO's September- 
processing, storage and October 2003 General 
use. This draft declaration, Conference. 
CO Rl 
to giving cells or tissues, they considered 
themselves free to use them in their research. But 
the problem is more crucial today. Using human 
cells or tissues, or by analysing data derived from 
them, hundreds of biotechnological companies 
are competing in the race to produce all kinds of 
  
tests or treatments. Millions of dollars are at stake, 
which explains the multiplication of the number 
of genetic data banks. This is a market that can 
only expand so it would be advisable to establish 
more precise rules. 
Send us some of your saliva, you’ll be helping 
science and we’ll give you shares in our 
company! This intriguing message circulated 
on the internet. A company based in Brussels 
“(Belgium ), called Spitters, planned to create a 
genetic data bank available to both state and 
private researchers. Its earnings would come 
from the pharmaceutical industry that would 
have to pay for access to the data collected. 
The DNA would come from millions of samples 
of saliva the company hoped to stock. The 
“donors” who wanted to receive shares in 
the company also had to fill out a medical 
questionnaire via the internet. The company 
guaranteed anonymity. The start-up failed, as 
did the corporation behind it, Starlab NV/SA. 
After it filed for bankruptcy, 500 saliva samples 
were put up for auction, along with the office 
furniture, although the sale never took place. 
SAMPLES 
They are often insignificant: a drop of blood, a 
smear on a coffee cup, a paper napkin left on a 
table, a cigarette butt, wax scraped from a hearing 
aid etc. But in the hands of a laboratory, these 
little scraps are sufficient to draw up a DNA code. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003 
Police searching for evidence obviously appreciate 
the benefits. The situation is more troubling, 
however, when you can find ads on the internet 
for genetic tests, notably paternity tests, which are 
carried out in dubious conditions. When certain 
laboratories guarantee anonymity, they mean for 
the person who supplied the sample, but not the 
person from whom the sample was actually taken. 
That person has not given his consent, and his 
anonymity is at risk. The problem is serious when 
we consider that when someone is trying to find 
their biological father, their real aim is often a 
legal one. 
CONSENT 
Spitter and Starlab had everything going for 
them. Well-known scientists were involved and 
the companies, though unusual, could prove 
their reliability. Yet people who gave samples 
of saliva thinking they were contributing to 
scientific research came close to seeing their 
‘donation’ sold at auction, possibly to be used to 
a completely different end. The case illustrates the 
problem concerning the link between consent and 
ultimate objectives. 
If someone agrees that genetic data from his or 
her sample can be used for a certain purpose, it 
is disturbing to see the data being put to another 
use unless he or she has again been asked for 
consent. The issue is rarely raised, but a lot of 
genetic data collected for a specific temporary 
use are later ‘recycled’ for other purposes. 
When a husband gives a sperm sample to help 
police investigate his wife’s rape, he believes that 
the sample, once it has been used in a process 
of elimination in order to isolate the sperm of 
the rapist, will be destroyed, along with the 
genetic data extracted from it. In many cases, 
he is wrong: the data end up in police files 
where samples from suspects, innocent people 
and even victims, are stored together, if only 
for simplicity’s sake. To take another example, 
when a fireman, knowing he could die in the line 
of duty, gives a blood sample to help with the 
identification of his remains and spare his family 
further suffering, he does not know that the 
companies running the DNA banks sometimes 
sell data to laboratories. 
Pierre Gaillard
