Averting conflict in 
the Nile basin 
After living with tensions and the threat of war for many years, the countries 
of the Nile Basin are talking around the table - with help from UNESCO 
foeus 
18 
  
is — apart from any 
Al 0 differences caused by 
climate change - not a 
drop more water in the Nile River basin today than 
there was when Moses was found in the bulrushes. 
And there will not be a drop more in 25 years’ time, 
when the population living along the banks of the 
world’s longest river system is expected to have 
doubled to more than 300 million people. 
But population and economic pressures are 
mounting faster than the Nile’s capacity to sustain 
civilization, and as a result the choice is becoming 
more and more stark between conflict over an 
© Raid Planete Poussiere/Gamma, Paris 
The Blue Nile 
waterfalls in 
Ethiopia 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003 
increasingly scarce resource or co-operation to 
manage that resource more equitably. 
Fortunately, it seems that at last the ten nations 
that share the Nile basin are turning to co-operation. 
This could be an encouraging example for dozens 
of countries that face conflict unless they can reach 
agreement on how to share rivers that flow across 
international boundaries. 
“Water has been a major factor in the rise and fall 
of civilizations,” says Kofi Annan, Secretary General 
of the United Nations, in the foreword to the UN 
World Water Development Report. Nowhere is this 
more true than in the Nile Delta, where the water 
and silt washed down from the heart of Africa has 
formed the matrix of organized farming for 5,000 
years. Yet, adds Annan, water “has been a source 
of tensions and fierce competition between nations 
that could become even worse if present trends 
continue.” 
As the example of the Nile basin illustrates, the 
tendency among nations has been to seek means of 
co-operating rather than fighting over water. Sharp 
and often historically irreconcilable differences 
divide many of the countries sharing 261 river 
basins around the world. But “the number of cases 
where there has been co-operation related to water 
is much greater than the number of cases where 
there was conflict related to water,” says Léna 
Salamé of UNESCO’s World Water Assessment 
Programme. 
“I think human-kind has come to respect water as 
something culturally very important,” says Joaquim 
von Braun, director-general of the International 
Food Policy Research Institute in Washington. 
“The poisoned well is something that is perceived 
as disgusting in any society and there is a lot of 
tradition and culture against taking away someone

else’s source of water, especially in water-scarce 
regions.” 
In fact, Aaron Wolf and Sandra Postel, two 
American academics who have studied this issue in 
great detail, have found only one outright war over 
water in the past 4,500 years. That was between 
two city states, Lagash and Umma, in the region 
now called southern Iraq. There have been many 
skirmishes and conflicts in which water was a factor, 
but the authors have identified more than 3,600 
water treaties signed in the past 12 centuries, many 
of which have survived wars over other issues. 
In other words, water is a vexing and potentially 
dangerous problem in many areas, but not yet a 
murderous one. Will this continue to hold true in 
future as the pressure on finite water resources 
increases and nations come to fear that their vital 
interests or their survival are at stake? 
In the past, Egypt has not hesitated to threaten 
the use of force to keep its overwhelming share 
of the Nile’s waters. Some of its armed forces are 
trained in jungle warfare, clearly intended for action 
in countries far to the south, where the White Nile 
originates. 
Pointing at a map of the Ethiopian highlands, 
from which 85 percent of the water flowing to Egypt 
comes via the Blue Nile, Jan Luijendijk, a Dutch 
water engineer and expert on knowledge systems 
at the UNESCO-IHE Institute for Water Education 
at Delft (Netherlands), says, “if Ethiopia decided to 
build a dam on one of these river branches, then 
that would mean war with Egypt immediately. There 
is no other choice for Egypt.” He says an attempt 
by any of the nine countries in the Nile basin to 
use water in a way that would reduce the flow into 
Egypt could precipitate war. 
To avert that possibility, the nations living along 
the river have established what is known as the 
Nile Basin Initiative (see box), which is designed 
to replace the threat of conflict with the spirit of 
co-operation. Professor Luijendijk has been helping 
to bring together engineers from all ten Nile basin 
countries, under the assumption that the experts 
are more capable of solving water problems than 
politicians. 
At the same time, UNESCO, the lead UN agency 
on freshwater issues, has established a global 
programme called PC-CP - “From Potential Conflict 
to Co-operation Potential” - in collaboration with 
the non-profit environmental organization Green 
Cross International to examine “the potential for 
shared water resources to become a catalyst for 
regional peace and development through dialogue, 
od 
Mediterranean Sea 
Alexandria 
SUDAN 
DEM. REP. 
OF CONGO 
  
    
  
a a a 
RC
ISRAEL 
JORDAN 
SAUDI 
ARABIA 
Aswan 
% 
So 
(oY 
ERITREA | 
W
h
i
t
e
 
Ni
le
 
foeus 
49 
BB Asmara IVEY 
Lake Tana 
8 
Tug n\® BB Addis Ababa 
ETHIOPIA | 
LW 
J 


GANDA KENYA 
The Nile Basin 
In 1999 six nations 
of the Great Lakes 
-- Burundi, the 
Democratic Republic 
of the Congo, 
Kenya, Rwanda, 
Tanzania and 
Uganda -- as well as 
Egypt, Sudan and 
Ethiopia, formed the 
Nile Basin Initiative. 
Eritrea joined later. 
The aim: to resolve 
peacefully some of 
the big questions 
over shared water 
resources facing 
these countries. 
The most 
compelling issues: 
Would Egypt be 
willing to accept a 
lesser flow of the 
Nile in favour of 
economic projects 
upstream? And 
would Ethiopia be 
allowed to use part 
of the resources 
of the Blue Nile to 
develop its own 
agriculture? 
[nitintive 
Through this 
Initiative, the 
Nile nations have 
embarked on a 
process that may 
lead to a revision 
of the inequitable 
1959 agreement that 
gives nearly all the 
waters of the Nile 
to Egypt and, to a 
lesser extent, to 
Sudan. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003

foeus 
56 
p> co-operation and participative management of river 
basins.” 
This is still largely uncharted territory, since 
there is no international law on the management 
of water systems, apart from three non-enforceable 
framework documents that provide guidance for 
states in drawing up water agreements. Nor is there 
any mechanism to monitor or enforce the numerous 
bilateral water treaties between states. 
In the 1950s, Egypt took advantage of its status 
as the regional military and political power to 
reinforce a colonial era agreement that gave it 
almost complete control of the rivers snaking 6,700 
kilometres south into the heart of Africa and into the 
highlands of Ethiopia and Eritrea. 
In 1959, Egypt signed a complex agreement with 
the military rulers of newly independent Sudan for 
“the full utilisation of the Nile waters” -- and it 
meant full! 
Of the average yearly annual flow of 84 billion 
cubic metres passing through Khartoum, Egypt has 
been receiving 55.5 billion and Sudan 18.5 million 
cubic metres since the 1959 agreement came into 
force, with the remaining 10 billion cubic metres 
draining away as seepage or evaporating from Lake 
Nasser. Given Ethiopia’s importance as the source of 
most of this water, it is curious that the agreement 
was only bilateral and excluded all the other riparian 
states. 
However, the end of Communism and of the 
civil war in Ethiopia, a nation of more than 60 
million people, has opened the way to economic 
development and rapid population growth. And 
a series of devastating droughts has underlined 
the need to achieve food security, which could be 
achieved by irrigating the Ethiopian highlands and 
preventing millions of tons of topsoil being carried 
off by heavy rains every year. 
Ethiopia insists that it has every right to develop 
its natural resources. It has bitterly reproached Egypt 
for building the Aswan dam without even consulting 
it, as well as for appropriating the lion’s share of the 
river resources. An Ethiopian policy paper in 1997 
stated, “the stark inequality prevailing in the Nile 
basin cannot remain.” The one thing holding back 
Ethiopia from developing irrigated agriculture on 
a large scale is the threat of military action, which 
Egypt would regard as an act of self-defence. When 
Ethiopia brought in Israeli water engineers in 1989 
to survey its water resources, it received a stern 
warning from Cairo. 
Ethiopia’s claim to use the water arising in its 
territory has historical and international precedents. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003   
During the dispute over water that sprang up 
between the United States and Mexico at the end 
of the 19th century, U.S. Attorney General Judson 
Harmon stated that his country had absolute 
sovereignty over that part of the Rio Grande river 
that flowed within its territory and had no obligation 
to share it. 
More recently, Turkey has used a variation of the 
so-called Harmon Doctrine to justify damming the 
Euphrates River to the detriment of its downstream 
neighbours, Syria and Iraq. The former Turkish 
president, Suleyman Demirel, said those countries 
had no more right to claim Turkey’s water than 
Turkey had to claim their oil. 
But if this law of finders-keepers were applied to 
the Nile basin, “you would have to ask, why did 
God create Egypt?” says Prof. Luijendijk. “It cannot 
have more water unless it takes it from somewhere 
else, and there is nowhere else.” 
NEW DESERT COLONIES 
With the exception of a small amount of rainfall 
and ground water, Egypt gets all of its fresh water 
supplies for agriculture, industry and domestic use 
from the Nile. It uses its entire allocation of 55.5 
billion cubic meters and frequently dips into Sudan’s 
share as well. By diverting part of its supplies 
and by recycling waste water more efficiently, it is 
building new desert colonies to house people for 
whom there is diminishing room along the Nile. 
One Egyptian idea to capture more water was to 
help Sudan build the 360-kilometre Jonglei canal 
through the southern Sudd region, the largest area 
of wetlands in the world. The White Nile meanders 
for about a year through the Sudd, losing half its 
flow through evaporation. Egyptian engineers say 
that creating the Canal would recuperate much of 
the evaporated water and liberate nearly five billion 
cubic metres that would be shared equally between 
Sudan and Egypt. 
That was before much was understood about the 
environmental value of wetlands (see following 
© 
Cr
is
pi
n 
H
u
g
h
e
s
/
P
a
n
o
s
 
Pi
ct
ir
es
, 
L
o
n
d
o
n
 
Construction of the 
Jonglei Canal in 
southern Sudan was 
stopped by war 
Right: The Nile River 
at Aswan in Egypt

  
page). The canal project, originally designed by the 
British colonial rulers, has been halted since 1983 
as a result of the Sudanese civil war, itself partly 
caused by the population upheavals needed to build 
the canal. The secession of the south would create 
another state with claims on the Nile’s resources, 
something that Egypt does not want to happen. 
Cairo has therefore strongly supported the Sudanese 
government’s efforts to preserve national unity. 
The Jonglei Canal project emerges from the 
same kind of hegemonic thinking that produced 
the Aswan High Dam, which has brought mixed 
blessings to Egypt since it began operating in 1970. 
On the one hand, it has increased the amount of 
cultivable land and improved navigation in the Nile. 
On the other, it traps the millions of tons of silt 
washed down from the Ethiopian highlands every 
year. This used to enrich the Nile delta, but is now 
increasingly clogging the dam. As a result, the delta 
is sinking and becoming more saline because of the 
intrusion of sea water. Egypt has to compensate the 
loss of silt with heavy use of fertilisers. The dam has 
made Egypt even more dependent on the countries 
upstream, since any major shortfall into Lake Nasser 
would mean an interruption of half its electric power 
generation. 
Professor Luijendijk remembers a tense meeting in 
Addis Ababa a few years ago at which an Ethiopian 
delegate accused the Egyptians of stealing not only 
his country’s water but also its soil. “An Egyptian 
professor stood up,” he recalls, “and said, ‘thank 
you so much for the water. But keep the soil, please’. 
That is when I started to realize these people were 
talking nonsense. They were talking like politicians. 
If you put two Egyptian and two Ethiopian water 
engineers in a room for a week and told them to 
come up with a solution satisfactory to both sides, I 
am sure they could do it.” 
Even Egypt is starting to realize the instability of 
a situation in which five of the Nile river nations 
count among the poorest in the world, and in 
which a large nation subject to repeated droughts is 
expected to stand by, while the Egyptians and the 
Sudanese undertake massive irrigation. 
Egypt is making a big effort to optimize the use of 
its limited resources by improving the efficiency of 
irrigation, changing crop patterns, lining irrigation 
canals and reusing drainage water. Despite all these 
measures, it still imports about seven million tons of 
wheat a year. 
For Professor Luijendijk, it might also make 
more sense for Egypt to import some of its water 
“virtually” by letting Ethiopia grow some of its food. 
According to the Worldwatch Institute, importing 
one ton of grain is equivalent to importing 1,000 
tons of water. 
This would be an interesting reversal of history, 
since Egypt was once the granary of the Roman 
Empire. 
The UNESCO-IHE Institute is contributing to the 
Nile Basin Initiative by supporting a regional course 
in river engineering in Egypt, and building up an 

foeus 
52 
  
p> internet-based network to enable water experts to 
share information and construct the intellectual 
framework to solve the problems. The countries 
are still essentially in a confidence-building phase 
-- helped by the fact that the availability of satellite 
pictures makes it difficult for them to have secrets 
from one another. 
Some of the countries in the basin have very 
few trained engineers, but the network means that 
they can be part of a large circle of like-minded 
colleagues. At the same time, the ten nations are 
developing regional centres that specialize in various 
aspects of research. 
Professor Luijendijk recalls that his own country, 
the Netherlands, is in a similar position to Egypt, 
at the end of a long river system, and took decades 
to overcome suspicion of its neighbours. This 
was achieved by exchanging data, working with 
other countries to resolve problems and building 
confidence little by little. He thinks the Nile 
countries can achieve the same degree of co- 
operation. 
“The whole environment is changing, and I don’t 
believe any more in the scenario of war,” he says. “I 
think that the work that has been done by the Nile 
Basin Initiative in creating the right environment, 
and maybe by us in introducing knowledge, is 
enabling people to talk about the problems. Once 
you have reached that stage, nobody is talking 
about conflicts, but about how to achieve the best 
solutions.” 
Barry James 
© Mark Henley/Panos Pictures, London 
A father and son 
work in vegetable 
fields near the 
pyramids closse to 
Cairo (Egypt) 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003 

