A leap of faith
Back in the mid-1990s people 
 were fleeing the centre of 
 Frankston, a suburb 
of Melbourne on Australia’s southern coast. The 
city centre had been taken over by drug-dealers, 
addicts and beggars and was seen as a violent 
and dangerous place. The whole city, where 
nearly two-thirds of the residents are under 40, 
had a bad reputation.
Last December, Frankston staged a grand 
opening of its new Safer City Centre, a joint 
town and police effort that broke new ground in 
Australia. The scheme, which made headlines in 
the national press and received the full backing 
of the local people, was the most visible example 
The Growing Up In Cities (GUIC) 
project aims to get young people involved 
in running their neighbourhoods. 
No easy task, especially for adults…
UNESCO in action social sciences 
© David Driskell

of the hard work by the city’s leaders to fight the 
lawlessness and insecurity. 
It was achieved with the help of a team from 
Growing Up In Cities (GUIC), a UNESCO project 
aimed at getting youngsters involved in improving 
their environment (see box).
VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE 
AND BOREDOM
GUIC came to Frankston in 1998. What it 
found were young people who said drugs and 
violence were the main problem, restricting their 
movements and the time they spent in the streets.  
They also said they were very bored.
At the urging of GUIC, the city council set up 
a Youth Safety Management Team in 1999 as 
one of four elements of an overall security plan. 
Its 15 or so members, aged between 16 and 19, 
asked for, and got, more police patrols to chase 
away the drug-dealers.  They also saw that public 
toilets were equipped with special bins for used 
syringes and the annoyingly dim ultra-violet 
lighting (to discourage the addicts) changed. They 
got classical music piped in the streets and the 
railway station was painted and better lit.
At their skateboard park, they had a fountain 
repaired and a hole in the fence mended, to 
stop skateboards shooting out onto the road by 
accident. The municipality has also set up a Drug 
and Alcohol Action Plan, with a section for youth. 
Bit by bit, the town centre has been revived and 
the spirit of regeneration has spread to the rest of 
the town.
Above: In Frankston, 
the police and the 
Council share a 
shopfront, the Safer 
City Centre -a first 
in Australia.
Left: GUIC in 
Bangalore (India). 
The ability to listen 
is one of the most 
critical skills 
for a successful 
participation 
programme
The city council said it was pleased with the 
scheme. “We often refer to the GUIC report and 
it’s still important for finding out about growing 
up in Frankston. It’s given us a very solid 
foundation to work from,” says Geoff Cumming, 
53, the city’s amenity services manager, who has 
pitched in to help the young citizens.
The youngsters themselves are less sure, 
and say the experience has sometimes been 
frustrating. Amy Lee, 21, who used to chair the 
Youth Safety Management Team, says one of the 
biggest challenges is changing adult perceptions 
and stereotyping of young people.
Last year, the council disbanded the team, 
saying it had become hard to “recruit and 
maintain a connection with young people.”  Scott 
Duncan, 20, who joined it when he was 17, 
said youngsters had been discouraged because 
“decisions were not being acted upon.”
But youth participation has taken root and 
young people are on the new Community Safety 
Management Team.  They include Scott and Amy, 
as well as Helen, 19, who has been helping to run 
her city for the past four years and says she has 
gained a lot from the experience, especially “more 
maturity than many of my friends.  I’ve seen the 
political side of things, I’ve learned how to run 
meetings and I’ve learned from working with 
people older than me.”
Scott attends the new Team’s weekly 7.30 
a.m. meeting and is cautiously optimistic.  “The 
process might be flawed but we can make it better 
and already have,” he says.
YOUNG PEOPLE EXPERT ADULTS 
TO KEEP THEIR WORD
GUIC launched another such project in the 
South African suburb of Canaansland, near 
Johannesburg, in 1996 and children and young 
people enthusiastically took part in the survey to 
find out what they most needed, such as running 
water, toilets, better health-care, a study centre 
and an enclosed sports field.  The town hall 
backed the scheme and projects for youngsters 
began to be drawn up.
But one bright morning, the slum’s 10,000 
inhabitants were brutally evicted by property 
developers and transferred to Thula Mntwana, 
a settlement 40 kms from Johannesburg, where 
they had to build new shacks. The change was 
dramatic. Many adults lost their jobs because they 
now lived too far away, water came in trucks at 
unpredictable times, and sanitation hardly existed.
© UNESCO/Jan Parker

However in 1999, with help from supporters 
from the North, GUIC managed to build a 
children’s centre and playground. A video was 
also made about the settlement’s children 
(see box).
Today, Thula Mntwana’s youngsters are 
despondent and dream of having a library and 
computers. The playground needs repairing, 
though that does not prevent the youngest born 
happily playing there. The only organizations 
that use the youth centre are two church 
congregations.  The local authorities have not 
followed up the scheme.  The only thing planned 
at the moment is the surfacing of the road.
But things are moving forward on another 
level. At the town council’s request, GUIC’s 
representative in South Africa, Jill Kruger, has 
just done a report on living 
conditions for children in four 
depressed neighbourhoods of the 
town. And last December, she 
organised workshops to find out 
what children thought for the 
Gauteng provincial government’s 
Programme of Action for Children.
“The children explained their 
problems and made suggestions 
about how they could take part,” 
she said, “and provincial officials 
 have promised this will happen.”
DIFFERENT TIME-SCALES
But the children of Thula Mntwana may not 
know that and, anyway, they don’t function on 
the same time-scale as the town’s officials.  This 
gap is one of the major obstacles to genuine youth 
participation in local development.
The project worked in Frankston, says Karen 
Malone, its coordinator and director of GUIC for 
the Asia-Pacific region, because its leaders were 
really committed to the scheme and immediately 
agreed to the teenagers’ request to set up a special 
Youth Committee. 
David Driskell, who heads GUIC in India, says 
the focus must be on modest material goals, 
such as the study centre set up for children in 
Bangalore, and on teaching decision-makers to 
genuinely listen to the young.
This is not something you can tke for granted,” 
he says. “Knowing how to listen is something that 
must be learnt, and to this end, GUIC has given 
us some valuable lessons.”
Monique Perrot-Lanaud
with Tracie Winch in Melbourne
and Edward Tsumele
and Eddie Mokoena
in Johannesburg
© Melinda Swift
© Jill Swart-Kruger
