New tracks where 
the rhinos tread
South Africa’s Waterberg Biosphere Reserve aims to bridge the 
divide between two communities in which the historical privileges 
of a minority impoverished the majority. 
Drivethree hours north of Johannesburg 
 to the Waterberg Mountains and 
discover “The Wild Heart of Africa, Malaria-Free”, 
as advertised by a string of private game reserves 
offering tourists an idealized bush life. Bounce 
in the back of a jeep, hot on the trail of the “Big 
Five” - lions, leopards, elephants, buffalos and 
rhinoceroses – before dining under the stars, 
sipping South Africa’s fine wines, proffered by 
smiling servants who disappear into the polished 
woodwork. It is the old colonial fantasy served on 
a silver platter, wiped clean of any threat. 
Yet 20 kilometers further into the mountains in 
the Bakenberg district, a killer stalks, shrouded 
in witchcraft in black villages, where people 
whisper about a “slow puncture” sapping the life 
of about 22% of the population instead of openly 
speaking about HIV and AIDS. One hundred and 
sixty-five thousand souls live in the district, where 
more than half the men in their early 20s are 
unemployed. Most leave to find work in towns, 
but some are employed by the game lodges, 
ringing up bills for tourists paying 1000 rand 
(US$117) a day, double the monthly income of a 
Bakenberg household. 
REVERSING 
APARTHEID’S LEGACY
Two separate universes of privilege and poverty 
coexist in Waterberg – the legacy of colonialism 
and apartheid, bequeathing huge tracts of land to 
a wealthy minority, while the majority don’t own 
the shacks they live in. Yet both communities are 
now working to bridge the divide through the 
Waterberg Biosphere Reserve, which was created 
in 2001. For Bakenberg, the biosphere reserve 
offers hope for jobs and its own brand of cultural 
ecotourism through investment plans involving 
While creating 
a sanctuary to  
reintroduce the 
rare black rhino in 
Waterberg, Clive 
and Conita Walker 
started adopting 
white rhino orphans. 
Munyane, a female, 
refuses to cut the s 
strings, dividing her 
time between her 
wild boyfriend in 
the woods and the 
Walker’s garden

public and private organizations. For wealthy 
landowners, the biosphere reserve label serves as 
a certificate of excellence to attract tourists. 
It also represents a life-insurance policy for 
both sides. Just a few hours north, Zimbabwe 
reels as misery and political manipulation fuel 
violent land seizures. At Waterberg, there is no 
trace of aggression or threat. And the residual 
mistrust that remains is starting to fade as the two 
communities work to improve livelihoods, thanks 
in large part to the energy and vision of a few 
individuals. Of diverse origins and outlooks, they 
represent the essential components required for a 
successful biosphere reserve: conservation, socio-
economic development and cultural heritage.
OUT OF AFRICA
“Just 12 or 15 years ago, people in Bakenberg 
would flee when I arrived wearing a ranger 
uniform,” recalls Clive Walker, one of South 
Africa’s most famous conservationists, who 
spearheaded the biosphere reserve’s creation. 
Instead of avoiding the district, Walker returned, 
which isn’t altogether surprising. He is not your 
average white landowner but a man with a rhino 
parked in his garden, an orphan he raised with 
his wife at their home in Lapalala Wilderness, 
a private game reserve unlike the others in 
Waterberg. 
Instead of stepping ‘Out of Africa’, visitors dive 
in at Lapalala, where environmental preservation 
and education are the main attractions. For 
years, Walker has been working with landowners 
to reintroduce rhino species into the area, 
while directing a nature school for mostly poor 
pupils. But at Bakenberg, Walker realized that 
conservation had to go beyond the pristine areas 
of private lands. Rivers were running dry because 
of soil erosion through overgrazing. It was just 
a matter of time before these problems spilled 
across the entire watershed. 
Thanks to Walker, conservation has become 
a cornerstone at Waterberg. Now the biosphere 
reserve’s new chairman, Rupert Baber, is adding 
his own expertise in economic development. 
After completing a doctoral dissertation on South 
Africa’s poverty at Oxford, Baber returned to the 
farm his family has worked in Waterberg, since 
1886. This is a place where children are born and 
grandparents retire through an old-fashioned, 
paternalistic system providing healthcare, 
education and a decent salary for more than 100 
families. While maintaining the security, Baber 
and his employees are modernizing the farm, 
switching to high-value organic crops while 
developing micro-credit schemes and cooperatives 
to increase the income and independence of the 
staff. They are also shaping a role model for the 
biosphere reserve. 
“Our challenge is to bring benefits not just to 
a select few but to everyone,” says Baber. 
“We must set up an incentive structure to not 
only reward environmental conservation but 
job creation. People will have to earn the 
biosphere reserve label.” Baber is setting up a 
system in which landowners would preserve the 
environment while helping to develop Bakenberg, 
whose residents are looking for opportunities, 
not handouts.
Giraffes, impalas 
and other wild 
animals roam where 
cattle once grazed, 
as landowners 
transform ranches 
into game lodges fot 
tourists

Wide smiles and 
lunch for school 
children and foreign 
visitors alike at 
Bakenberg festival
in the area. Various organizations will participate 
in this pilot project along with individuals like 
Elias Mangwani, a guide at Lapalala. 
Tread softly with Mangwani in Lapalala’s 
rhino territory, marveling at the animal tracks 
in the sandy soil but mindful of his warning 
to climb the nearest tree should one of these 
unpredictable beasts approach. Hiking to see 
ancient San rock art, he points to the berries his 
grandmother, a traditional healer, would boil 
to kill the hunger of a three-day trek. A small 
cut in the trunk of a latex tree and he offers 
“chewing gum” with the bittersweet taste of his 
childhood. Every Christmas, he would indulge 
in the “real thing”, a present from his parents 
who returned from the mines for a visit. Like so 
many Waterberg children, Mangwani’s family was 
forced to leave a farm. But under the watchful 
eye of his grandmother, he learned the ways of 
his land and ancestors, knowledge with which 
he forged his career. Now instead of just leading 
tourists, boasting of their ability to identify zebra 
dung, Mangwani will guide Waterberg’s youth, 
determined to regain their heritage after more 
than a century of dispossession. 
Amy Otchet 
“We don’t want to create another project, but 
a business,” says Lesiba Masebe, the grandson 
of a legendary chief, who is a now a respected 
teacher in Bakenberg. Walking through the dirt 
lanes of his village, he proudly points to the 
new hall for local craft production built by the 
biosphere reserve committee before outlining 
plans to set up cultural visits, including bush 
walks with local guides, consultations with 
traditional healers as well as banquets and dance 
performances organized by local troupes. With 
pride, Masebe dreams of creating a ‘traditional 
African village’ not just to amuse foreigners but to 
teach children about their cultural heritage. As the 
local mayor, Godfrey Molekwa, half-jokes, “sex is 
the only cultural activity for youth.” Many are just 
awaiting the day they will leave to work in distant 
towns.
DISPOSSESSION
To help break this cycle, the national government 
and the biosphere reserve committee are starting 
a new eco-tourism school, under the guidance of 
Clive Walker at Lapalala. The aim is to train local 
staff to work as guides, administrators, mechanics 
and managers while developing investment plans 
