Borderless Education
New technology, spiralling demand and economic 
liberalization are profoundly changing education. 
“McDonaldizing” it say the critics. Making it accessible 
to vast new numbers of students, say others 
Is education a commercial service that can 
  be traded like any other?  Yes, says the 
 World Trade Organization, which, through 
its General Agreement on Trade and Services 
(GATS), recognized education as a tradeable 
commodity in 1995. No, say angry academics and 
student groups around the world, who, fearing 
the “McDonaldization” of education, are radically 
opposed to the idea.
Fuelling this passionate debate has been the 
explosive growth witnessed in the international 
trade of education services over the last decade. 
Higher education and specialized training, 
especially have become big profit-spinners for 
private or corporate providers, and a much 
needed source of income for cash-strapped 
public universities and institutions suffering 
from declining state-budgets and ever-increasing 
numbers of students. 
According to the OECD, the higher education 
market in its member countries is conservatively 
worth some $30 billion annually. In 1999 there 
were 1.47 million foreign students studying in 
tertiary education in OECD countries, an increase 
of more than 100,000 over 1998. Education 
accounts for 3.5 percent of service exports in 
the United States, earning more than US$10 
billion annually, and two of the biggest firms 
selling higher education there, Apollo and Sylvan 
Learning, are now quoted on the stock-exchange. 
In Australia, which with the United Kingdom 
dominates the world market, education has 
become the third largest service export:  since 
1980 the number of foreign students enrolled at 
Australian institutions has multiplied more than 
13-fold.
The range of providers has also dramatically 
evolved, from traditional universities and 
institutes of higher learning to virtual 
British students 
protest against 
a government loan 
scheme for students, 
and demand grants, 
not fees.
© Ray Tang/Rex Features/Sipa, Paris

organizations specialized in e-learning, and from 
private companies and international corporations 
to partnerships between private and public 
groups, not-for-profit organizations and media 
groups. News Corporation, for example, through 
its subsidiary Worldwide Learning Ltd., has 
teamed up with a consortium of 15 Scottish 
Universities and 20 commercial companies to 
market Scottish higher education programmes 
globally, particularly in North America, the Middle 
East, Malaysia and China. The African Virtual 
University, which was initially established as a 
World Bank project, is now an independent non-
profit organization serving 18 countries in sub-

Saharan Africa. Since its inception in 1997, more 
than 24,000 students have completed courses in 
techology, engineering, business and sciences 
and more than 3,500 professionals have attended 
executive and management seminars. 
160 MILLION BY 2025
The globalizing economy and job market, with its 
need for increasingly skilled workers, and the rise 
of information and communication technologies 
that have made “borderless education” a reality, 
are driving private sector growth, which is set to 
continue at breakneck pace. According to Merrill 
Lynch, a US-based investment bank, today’s 80 
million students will have doubled by 2025.
Developing countries or countries in transition, 
are keen supporters of these developments. The 
latest EFA Global Monitoring Report, clearly 
showed that the costs of achieving education 
for all by the deadline of 2015 (set at the World 
Education Forum in Dakar, Senegal, 2000) had 
been seriously underestimated and that national 
budgets and international aid would have to 
be dramatically increased. However, many 
governments argue they simply don’t have the 
resources, and see foreign or private services 

as a means of filling the gap, and accelerating 
the development of national university systems. 
In China, for example, 36 percent of higher 
education students are enrolled in private 
institutions. In Poland, which had almost no 
private institutions in 1989, there are now more 
than 180, providing courses for third of the 
country’s student body. According to a series 
of case studies prepared by UNESCO, such new 
providers account for 55 percent of all “new” and 
“very new” universities in Jordan, Sudan, Tunisia 
and Yemen, while in Kazakhstan 70 percent of all 
universities are private. 
HORSE-TRADING
While few would criticize the vastly increased 
access to education that such developments seem 
to offer, many consider that “horse-trading” 
education will have disastrous consequences. 
They want it withdrawn from the list of 12 
services covered by the GATS. Iberian and Latin 
American academics, who signed the Porto Alegre 
Declaration of 2002, maintain that it will lead 
to “deregulation of the education sector with 
the removal of legal, political and fiscal quality 
controls”, and fear “drastic public financial 
support cutbacks.”  The British Association of 
University Teachers adds that it will also threaten 
job security, professional autonomy and status, 
academic quality, and will have a negative impact 
on academic freedom, intellectual property rights 
and access to education. The National Union of  
Students in Europe believes that “the concept 
of the student as a consumer and education as 
a product fails to acknowledge the importance 
of education as a social tool and runs counter to 
the creation of a knowledge-based society, with 
democratic, tolerant and active citizens.” Their 
Canadian counterparts argue that “it is time to 
protect the essential role of this public service, 
not to subordinate education to market forces, 
undermine its accessibility, and exacerbate social 
inequalities.”
Other GATS observers dismiss these claims 
as unfounded. Pierre Sauvé of the OECD 
describes the agreement as “arguably the most 
development-friendly of all Uruguay-Round pacts” 
and believes that “it is not likely to be a driving 
force or even a major consideration behind 
changes” already occurring in the education 
sector. “Governments,” he says, “can use the 
GATS selectively to encourage investment in 
sectors of their choice, subject to the conditions 
they wish to impose or retain […] the agreement 
also permits governments to maintain foreign 
ownership restrictions in sectors where they 
have made commitments (and) promotes a 



UNESCO in action education
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
 Australia UK New Germany Austria OECD Japan USA Canada France
   Zeeland
1980
1990
1999
Increase of foreign tertiary 
students in OECD countries
1980 - 1999 (1990 = 100)
New education 
providers are gaining 
ground everywhere 
offering services to 
people of all ages, 
from basic education 
to tailor-made 
courses for career 
advancements

greater predictability (but not irreversibility) of 
commitments, a potentially important element in 
attracting investment in developing countries.”
UNESCO’s main concern is to ensure that global 
higher education standards do not fall victim 
to the rigours of the market.  “Quality is the 
issue,” says Stamenka Uvalic-Trumbic, the head 
of UNESCO’s Section for Access, Mobility and 
Quality Assurance. “The Organization has long 
encouraged the internationalization of education 
and the involvement of a range of partners – both 
public and private. But we must also protect 
students from inadequate learning resources, 
low-quality provisions, degree mills and bogus 
institutions.
“The fast developments of the knowledge 
society demonstrate that globalization, 
particularly the globalization of higher education, 
is irreversible and cannot be stopped. It can, 
however be tamed through regulation and policy 
coordination.”
To this end, UNESCO has set up a Global Forum 
on International Quality Assurance, Accreditation 
and the Recognition of Qualifications in Higher 
Education. It’s task is to establish an international 
quality assurance framework and a code of good 
practice for providers of higher education. Its first 
meeting last October set the agenda. A second 
meeting to be held in Oslo (Norway, May 26-27) 
will further develop the Forum’s plan of action. 
The Forum will also look at ways of updating the 
six existing regional conventions dealing with 
recognition of qualifications and ratified by 130 
UNESCO Member States, and which could serve 
as a counterweight to the GATS (see box p.13). 
“The Forum serves as a complement to GATS, 
not a rival,” explains Ms Uvalic-Trumbic, “and 
provides a place where people and institutions 
involved with higher education can debate the 
issues from a wide range of perspectives – not 
just that of the market place – and decide what to 
do about them.”
Sue Williams
