of 1600m. It is the largest alpine lake in Asia and 
the second largest anywhere. Last year it became 
the centre of Kyrgyzstan’s second UNESCO 
biosphere reserve. Looking south, we could see 
the snow-covered Tien Shan mountains forming a 
spectacular wall, with peaks rising more than 7000 
m. Beyond them is China. And, behind us to the 
north, the more modest Kungey Alatau mountains 
separated us from Kazakhstan - and Siberia.
BRONZE-AGE ROCK PAINTINGS
A long cloud stretched out like a finger just above 
the boat and cast us in a bitterly cold shadow 
– even if “Issyk Kul” means “hot lake” in Kyrgyz, 
because the water never freezes in winter. But 
as soon as we got back on land, the late autumn 
sun was surprisingly warm again. Even Bolot had 
Kyrgyzstan finds 
ecotourism potential 
in its new 
biosphere reserve
The mountains seemed to close in with the 
evening sky as we turned our backs 
on Cholpon-Ata and its field of prehistoric rock 
drawings. Disco music blared out of the cassette 
player in Bolot’s brown Mercedes taxi as he rattled 
us between the Russian trucks on the old Chu 
Valley Silk Road back to Bishkek. “Zanzibar” 
and what sounded like “One-way chicken to 
the moon” had been thumping out for hours on 
end. Bolot only had one cassette and he insisted 
on listening to it. We didn’t want to spoil his 
concentration.
When we’d arrived in Cholpon-Ata, on the 
north shore of Lake Issyk Kul, five hours earlier, 
Bolot was in a bad mood. We never found 
out why. He seemed just to want to dump us 
anywhere and have lunch. So, we persuaded 
him to drop us off at a little marina, past the 
President’s summer dacha, and negotiated a one-
hour boat trip. The lake, which has something of 
Loch Ness about it, is over 180 kilometres long, 
60 km wide and 700 metres deep, at an altitude 



One-way chicken
to the moon
Cholpon-Ata’s 5000 
rocks drawings are 
in urgent need of 
protection. Several 
were destroyed 
to make way for the 
airport

perked up and was happy to follow our uncertain 
directions down a dirt track until, after a few 
false starts and mimed questions to locals, we 
found what we were looking for. Behind a purely 
symbolic 20m length of metal fence, a vast field 
opened up into the distant foothills, strewn with 
boulders. But these were no ordinary rocks. On 
their south faces, hundreds were inscribed with 
breath-taking bronze-age drawings of hunters, 
Siberian ibex, snow-leopards, horses and other 
animals.
There is no tourist infrastructure here, so 
we were free to roam, as if we were the first to 
discover the site. In a couple of hours, we only 
found a few dozen of the 5000 or so petroglyphs. 
The only other people we saw were a shepherdess 
and a gaggle of 12-year-olds. And they’d come 
to look at us, not the rocks. With Bolot waiting 
impatiently in the car, we had to hurry. Which 
is not what one wants to do in a treasure-hunt 
among drawings that are over 2500 years old. 
They were, we found out later, made by pre-
Kyrgyz nomadic (Scythian) people. With a 
shamanic spiritual tradition, the hunters would 
probably have wanted to evoke the spirits of the 
animals and make peace with them.
ECOTURISM PROJECTS
The Soviet legacy in Kyrgyzstan was sometimes 
a heavy one, with radioactive waste from local 
uranium mines dumped in the mountains. But the 
more remote countryside is stunningly beautiful 
and unknown to tourists. While ecotourism 
ventures are sprouting up, sometimes with 
UNESCO involvement, less respectful operators 
eyeing easy dollars could sound the death knell 
for what is still mostly unspoiled country. Today, 
sustainable tourism is high on the list of activities 
that the managers of the biosphere reserve want 
to encourage. Signposting the petroglyphs is 
already underway. And the biosphere reserve 
remains a sparsely populated, mountainous area, 
with an intact ecology, including snow leopards, 
brown bears, Marco Polo sheep and Siberian ibex, 
as well as rare birds and plants, just like on those 
rock drawings. 
Peter Coles
UNESCO in action science
Some of the 
petroglyphs are over 
2000 years old
