Europe’s thirsty desert 
The Spanish government strongly defends its decision 
to shift water from the Ebro basin to the parched southern 
province of Almeria — but environmentalists disagree 
A sea of plastic 
greenhouses at la 
Mojonera near El 
Ejido (Spain) 
1 the craggy sierra overlooking 
the blue Mediterranean 
+ YO mM across Spain’s southeastern 
province of Almeria, the view on a blazing summer’s 
day is like that of Siberia in winter. 
Every scrap of ground is covered with 
whitewashed plastic greenhouses that glisten like 
snow under the sun, producing much of northern 
Europe’s fruit and vegetables. Almeria is the world’s 
most intensive greenhouse culture, with hundreds 
of trucks every day taking produce directly to 
supermarkets in Germany, Scandinavia or Britain. 
But the greenhouses - and the golf courses, hotels 
and housing developments along the coast - are 
using far more water than the underground sources 
can provide. 
Sea-water intrusion is turning the aquifers saline, 
while the rivers have all completely dried up, 
greenhouses now covering their parched beds. 
The government thinks it can solve the water 
problem by pumping supplies from the Ebro basin in 
northern Spain. The national water plan, envisaged 
to cost nearly 23 billion euros, will include a 1,000- 
kilometre pipeline and 70 dams. 
Many citizens in the north and Spanish 
environmental groups oppose the project, which 
they say has been designed by and for the 
construction industry - a technical fix that will carry 
a heavy environmental as well as economic cost. 
The plan also is being critically reviewed by the 
European Commission and Parliament, since roughly 
a third of the funding will come from EU taxpayers. p> 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003

A growth industry. 
But at what cost ? 
i Greenhouses near 
- «- Tow gn » tan “on™ —— 
A aT we Re == =I a Puebla de Vilar near 
= Ta —_ a= i w&™ Almeria (Spain) 
a 
  
  
© Marc Alex/PIG/AFP, Paris 
p The government insists that the project is 
needed as a symbol of national unity as well as 
for economic and practical reasons. But, rather 
than unite the country, the plan has created deep 
divisions, since many valleys in the north will have 
to be flooded to hold the water. At the same time, 
the project has angered the region of Aragén, which 
depends on the Ebro. You can now drive for hours 
past abandoned towns in its dried-up landscape. 
Meanwhile, the prospect of a fresh supply of 
water is spurring growth in the hothouse industry. 
The sea of plastic is rapidly spreading eastward, 
where land is cheaper, to the fringes of the Cabo de 
Gata natural park, Europe’s driest spot. 
Trucks bring clean water down from the high 
sierra for restaurants, and most people drink bottled 
mineral water because what comes out of the taps is 
contaminated with salt and pesticides. 
Yet Spain -- which is dotted with dams that hold © Peter Barker/Panos Pictures, London 
back nothing but air, and silted reservoirs -- is A microbiologist 
prodigiously wasteful of its water resources. A report tests Ph levels in 
by the National Statistics Institute said the country polluted water in 
wastes five times more water than the amount that Kathmandu (Nepal) 
the government intends to shift under the national 
water plan. 
Barry James 
UNESCO the new Courier | October 2003
