Written out
of the script
F or decades shocking rates of illiteracy, 
  particularly in the poorest countries 
 have been declining. But UNESCO and 
other international agencies warn that a great deal 
more needs to be done.
In some countries, notably the former communist 
states, the gains of the past decades may even be 
lost as resources for education fall back. In many 
African countries millions of new teachers will 
be needed to deal mostly with rising demand for 
education, but also to offset considerable losses to 
the profession from the AIDS pandemic. 
And in states emerging from severe internal 
crises, such as Afghanistan and East Timor, it is 
challenging enough to deal with the short-term 

needs of reopening and rebuilding damaged schools 
without having to think of longer-term goals. 
A UNICEF study in 1998 predicted that illiteracy 
rates could even grow during the 21st century after 
declining dramatically during the 20th. Several other 
agencies have been similarly pessimistic saying that 
famine, conflicts and natural disasters have created 
huge refugee populations where children receive 
little or no schooling for long periods. 
According to UNESCO’s statistics, nearly one in 
seven of the world’s six billion people cannot read 
or write. This represents a considerable advance on 
the first survey of world illiteracy published in the 
1950s when 44 per cent of the world’s population 
was found to be illiterate. 
Women and girls make up two-thirds of illiterate 
people, although the gender gap is narrowing, and 
recent figures show that women are even gaining 
access to education and literacy at a faster rate than 
men. The trend is most evident in Africa where the 
percentage of illiterate women over the age of 15 
fell 6.4 per cent over the past decade to 49 per cent. 
Even so, the number of illiterate people is far too 
high - they are invariably from the poorest, most 
marginalized sections of society.
UNESCO’s first progress report since the World 
Education Forum is sobering: more than 70 countries 
will not achieve all the Dakar goals which include 
access to free schooling of acceptable quality for 
all children of primary school age, the elimination 
of gender disparities in schooling and a halving of 
adult illiteracy by 2015. 
Some 28 countries were not expected to achieve 
Total : 799 million2015
Total : 862 million2000
35% India
7% Pakistan
8% Bangladesh
Nigeria 2%
Ethiopia 3%
Brazil 2%
28%
Rest of the world
Egypt 3%
Indonesia 2%
10% China
34% India
5% Pakistan
Bangladesh 6%
Nigeria 3%
Ethiopia 2%
Brazil 2%
28%
Rest of the world
Egypt 2%
Indonesia 2%
16% China
“Women 
make 
up two 
thirds of 
illiterate 
people”
Adult illiterate population ins 2000 and 
projections for 2015
Source: 2002 Education For All Global Monitoring 
Report: Is the World On track?
Catching up on 
the lost years in 
Afghanistan, which 
has one of the 
world’s highest 
illiteracy rates

years. The Bank notes that in countries such as 
Rwanda, Malawi and Zambia incremental costs due 
to HIV/AIDS will increase recurrent budgets by 45 
percent. These figures have been issued at a time 
when both bilateral and multilateral aid to education 
has been declining.
However, even poor countries have shown that 
where there is the political will, much can be 
achieved. Cuba was able to mobilize nearly 270,000 
adults to reduce illiteracy from 23 to 3 percent 
within a few years of Fidel Castro’s 1959 revolution. 
More recently, Haiti, with a 52 per cent illiteracy rate 
has opened thousands of centres to teach Creole and 
reduce illiteracy to 25 percent by 2004. 
But the challenge remains daunting.  To achieve 
universal primary education by 2015, more than 15 
million new teachers will be needed – three million 
of them in sub-Saharan Africa alone – requiring 
massive investment in teacher training. Developing 
countries are also having a hard time even hanging 
on to trained teachers, many of whom are being 
poached by richer countries to cover their own 
shortages.
NO COUNTRY IS IMMUNE 
TO FUNCTIONAL ILLITERACY
In many of the world’s richest countries where 
free universal primary and secondary education is 
widely seen as having wiped out illiteracy, nearly 
a quarter of the adult population is incapable of 
understanding and using information contained 
in brochures, instruction leaflets for household 
appliances or medicines. 
No country, including many with decades of 
universal public education in place, is immune to so-
any of the three essential goals, two thirds of them 
in sub-Saharan Africa, but also including India and 
Pakistan. Other high-risk countries include several 
North African and the Arab states. Some central 
and eastern European nations are even moving 
backwards from previously high rates of literacy, as 
early childhood education in particular is cut back, 
and funding for education overall reduced. 
Worldwide, 78 countries are unlikely to halve adult 
illiteracy rates. They include four of the world’s 
most populated countries: Bangladesh, China, India 
and Pakistan which alone account for 61 percent of 
the world’s illiterate adults. 
Moreover, even those countries that appear to 
be on target will not be able to reach these goals 
without substantial foreign aid. The World Bank 
has attempted to quantify the amount of financial 
assistance required, particularly in Africa. It 
estimates a minimum funding gap of US$2.5 billion 
a year over 15 years rising to US$4.2 billion in some 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Latin America/
Caribbean
Eastern Asia/
Pacific
Sub-saharan
Africa
Arab States/
North Africa
South/
West Asia
World
Difference between male and female literacy rates (%)
2015
2000

called functional illiteracy – when people have either 
lost or never properly acquired adequate reading 
and writing skills necessary to function in present 
day society. In the case of the richest countries, it is 
a chilling indictment of school systems. 
The extent of functional illiteracy in rich countries 
only came to light in the mid-1990s as a result of 
the International Adult Literacy Survey, a 22-country 
study of 16-65 year olds conducted by the OECD. It 
found a clear gap between educational attainment 
and skills. But more revealing was the number of 
older people who, having learnt basic reading and 
writing skills at school, had lapsed into illiteracy 
because they did not use their skills in a way that 
was relevant to them. 
Definitions of literacy have changed over the 
years, from being unable to read and write in any 
language, to completion of five years of compulsory 
schooling. Now it is thought that to fully function 
in today’s complex society, six to eight years of 
schooling is the absolute minimum.
However, the high functional illiteracy levels in 
countries where 12 years of compulsory schooling 
exists suggest that a more reliable measure of 
acquisition is needed.
Yojana Sharma
