Water poverty % 
in midst of oil wealth * 
  
. - 5 . 
. A JSS 
Fr phe, 
al EFS 
© Steve Percy/Gamma, Paris 
In Kazakhstan, where the once immense Aral Sea is 
fast shrinking, citizens lack fresh water even as the country 
becomes relatively rich 
JNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003 
Aktau, on Kazakhstan’s Caspian shore, 
tap water is so heavy with chemicals that 
foreign-built washing machines last just a 
few months. Understandably, the residents of Aktau 
who can afford it prefer to buy mineral water from 
a shop rather than risk the yellow, smelly water in 
their sinks. 
The problem is a national one; Kazakhstan has 
the worst provision of clean drinking water in the 
Confederation of Independent States. In rural areas, 
instances of hepatitis and other water-borne diseases 
are high. All around the country, almost half the 
pumps and public taps are turned off permanently 
because they are worn out or sub-standard. 
Svetlana Voitova, who lives just shy of the 
Chinese border, in a large village called Narynkol, 
says: “We do not have water in our homes, so we 
use the village pumps. But often even the supply to 
the pumps is turned off because people do not have 
enough money to pay the local authorities for it. 
Then we have to use the river.” Even in the newly- 
constructed capital city, Astana, stories of water 
running brown are legion. 
But the problems do not stop there: Kazakhstan is 
also home to one of the worst water-related natural 
disasters on the planet. 
The Aral Sea used to be the fourth largest inland 
lake in the world. Since the fifties, botched Soviet- 
era planning has caused the water-surface area to 
shrink to a third of its original size and the shoreline 
has receded by 100 kilometres, leaving rusting hulks 
of fishing boats stranded on the land. Salt from the 
exposed water bed blows into the eyes and throats 
of those who continue to live there, and few crops 
  
 

   
    
will grow. The local fishing industry, which once 
produced 30,000 tons of fish a year, has almost 
entirely disappeared. 
Severe environmental degradation, unabated 
pollution, undrinkable water and infectious 
diseases are usually the by-products of poverty. But 
Kazakhstan is rich. Thanks to its oil, the government 
earns billions of dollars in foreign exchange from 
its joint-venture operations with multi-national oil 
consortia, who pay huge, but undisclosed, signature 
bonuses for extraction rights. 
The country runs an oil savings account, called 
the National Oil Fund. It is widely predicted that this 
will bulge with US$100bn by 2020. 
Ironically it is the areas richest in oil which 
have some of the worst water problems. While the 
pristine compound built to house the international 
oil executives of Atyrau - the city in western 
Kazakhstan know as the ‘oil capital’- has its own 
filtration system, local people do not drink tap water 
even after boiling. 
The oil money seems to be exacerbating this 
kind of inequality rather than healing it. There are 
no known immediate plans to spend any of the 
fund on social or environmental concerns. Aktau 
has a water filtration system, but it is broken, and 
the political will to fix it does not seem to be there. 
Adding to this, the change from central planning 
to independence was almost cataclysmic. After 1991, 
the country’s economy all but collapsed, taking 
Left: A former fishing 
services with it. By 1994, inflation was 1975 percent port on the Aral Sea 
(Kazakhstan). The 
sea is now 64 km 
and there was no food in the shops. Little wonder, 
then, that the Communist system of free drinking 
water provision fell apart. away 
Above: Flooded 
oil fields at Atyrau 
Now, although it is still a transition economy with 
all the difficulties that entails, there is some hope 
(Kazakhstan) in 
September 1994 
of improvement: the government is part-way into 
its Kazakhstan 2030 plan, which has stabilised the 
economy and intends to improve service provision. 
DISASTER OF THE ARAL SEA 
UNLIKELY TO BE REVERSED 
The Aral situation is also rooted in the past. Under 
the Soviet regime, the environment was seen as a 
testing or dumping ground, a resource to exploit to 
meet production quotas, or an irrelevance. Swathes of 
the country were used to explode nuclear weapons, 
and are now contaminated with noxious waste. 
The same thinking advocated that the Aral Sea be 
slowly drained to irrigate cotton fields. This area 
had been designated as the USSR’s centre for cotton 
production, and quotas had to be met at all cost. 
Post-independence, the same chaos that nearly 
caused the economic meltdown left the state 
unprepared to cope with large-scale environmental 
problems. 
Now, although international and non- 
governmental organizations are collaborating to stop 
the Aral Sea from shrinking further, the best-case 
scenario is that the recession be halted. It is highly ~~ p> 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003 
