Polluting cocktail poses 
an evolutionary threat 
Chemical products and hormones in water supplies 
    
  
  
F 
Water pollution 
near Phnom Penh 
(Cambodia) 
create environmental time bomb 
world has a finite supply of 
0 drinking water, under pressure from 
population growth but also by the 
demands placed on it by so-called progress. 
Far from dissolving into nothingness, many of 
the products of modern civilization that are being 
dumped into ground water supplies are proving 
surprisingly persistent. 
Pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers and the 
hormones and antibiotics used in animal production 
sink into the water table. Household cleaning and 
personal care products, disinfectants and other 
commonly used chemicals end up in sewage. 
In the industrialized world, the great majority of 
sewage plants are able to remove infectious agents, 
but this still leaves the problem of hormonally active 
products such as contraceptive pills that have the 
potential to affect the reproductive organs and alter 
the development of animals. 
Developing countries don’t have a chance. 
According to the International Association of 
   Ni A. 
‘il If 
ar 
ol 
  
    
  
     
f 
I 1 
  
    
 
EB 
it l . 
> 
” 
© Giuseppe Bizzarri/Panos Pictures, London 
Hydrological Sciences, 90 percent of wastewater 
treatment plants are not operative in Mexico. In 
Latin America as a whole, only two percent of 
sewage is treated. This is having a serious impact on 
ecosystems and bio-diversity. ‘ 
HAZARDS ARE UNKNOWN 
Every litre of wastewater contaminates on average 
eight litres of fresh water. The UN World Water 
Development Report estimates that the total of 
polluted water in the world is more than the amount 
contained in the world’s largest river basins. 
Yet the aquifers that store about 97 percent of the 
earth’s liquid fresh water, take thousands of years 
to accumulate, and their depletion or contamination 
can to all intents and purposes be considered final. 
Because this pollution is out of sight, some policy- 
makers believe they can ignore it. Others apply what 
is known as the precautionary principle. 
Although the tools to detect and measure 
polluting chemicals are improving, researchers and 
regulators do not know how quickly chemicals 
degrade, what impact they have on the environment, 
how they accumulate through the food chain or the 
magnitude of the human health problems they may 
be storing up. 
In addition, the chemicals being poured into 
the water supplies are likely to interact, exposing 
wildlife and humans to unpredictable additive and 
synergistic effects. 
The compounds ending up in the water supply 
are playing an increasingly important role in the 
life cycle of all creatures, including the writers 
and readers of this article. Therefore, everyone in 
developed and developing countries alike has a 
vested interest in ensuring that water remains the 
source of life, and not the engine of its eventual 
destruction. 
Carlos Sonnenschein and Ana M. Soto 
The authors are professors and conduct research at 
Tufts University School of Medicine 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003
