There is a palpable ambivalence in Vila, where 
traditional ways, or kastom (see page 36) are 
pitched against the bright lights of a globalizing, 
urban life. Frank, aged 25, who works in a drop-in 
centre for HIV/AIDS in Vila, set up by the Wan 
Smolbag community theatre group, is a product 
of this ambivalence. “Young people don’t want to 
follow the old ideas. They don’t want to listen to 
the chiefs. It’s better to have schooling and get a 
job,” he says. And yet he also believes that “life is 
better in the islands. You’re free to go anywhere, 
and there’s always food. Here if you want a 
coconut you have to buy it.” And, in Vila, the 
work, and therefore the money, is not always there.
The ambivalence is also seen in a hybrid culture 
growing up in Vila. The sacrosanct traditional 
nakamal where men gather at dusk in the islands 
to drink kava, has been transformed in Vila into a 
kind of pub, where both men and women unwind 
after a hard day’s work, going through empty 
versions of the traditional rituals. 
Port Vila, Vanuatu’s capital, may look like 
a sleepy town, but all is not well. Crime is 
increasing, in pace with youth unemployment; 
sexually transmitted diseases are widespread, 
and, when women are victims of violence, they 
have little hope of justice. Vila, as it is known, 
is increasingly a pole of attraction for those from 
the outer islands of Vanuatu searching for work 
– often to pay for school fees (see page 40). But 
some end up paying an even higher price - the 
loss of their traditional culture.
“When people come to Vila from the other 
islands they try to stay together, like in the 
village,” explains Jacob Kerere, head of the audio-
visual unit at the Vanuatu Cultural Centre in 
Vila, who also works as a kind of peacemaker for 
people from his own island, Tanna, who are living 
in Vila. “But Vila just changes their life. Good 
people become aggressive.” 
▲

Urban life in Vanuatu pitches traditions against 
western-style ‘progress’

To relieve its 
massive energy bill 
for imported diesel, 
Vanuatu is turning to 
its abundant coconut 
oil resource as an 
alternative
But kastom is surviving in Vila. Traditional 
methods of justice are being used to solve 
essentially urban disputes, like adultery and theft. 
So-called ‘kastom courts’ exist, where each party 
in a dispute pays the other a settlement, such as a 
pig and some mats, and shakes hands. “Then we 
drink kava the same day and chat,” says Jacob. 
“It’s like there’s never been a problem. But if you 
didn’t straighten it out with kastom, you will stay 
enemies for ever.” 
WHERE POLICE CANNOT GO
According to a survey carried out by the Cultural 
Centre’s Youth Project, young people prefer to 
be tried by the kastom court, not least because 
the police have a reputation for brutality. And, 
says Jacob, when the disputes are between 
communities from different islands – often over 
women or land – “it can involve big groups. The 
police cannot stop this kind of fighting. Only 
chiefs can stop this.”
In some cases, the kastom court decides to send 
a young offender back to his or her native island. 
But returning isn’t always easy. “They lose their 
kastom and forget their place here,” says  Bosen 
Napu, who lives a traditional life on Tanna (see 
page 36). “It’s like they’re dead for us. They go 
away and come back and don’t know how to 
do the ceremonies. They have no pigs or yams. 
People laugh and say you’ve lived in Vila for 
many years, but if you buy a pig all your money is 
gone, then what have you got?”
Peter Coles
Sibley Nyass teaches 
in English but is 
strongly attached 
to his culture and 
family, returning 
home at weekends. 
Wearing dreadlocks 
is a sign of maturity 
for a young male
