ICH'LEJE
Science is becoming more and
more universal. In order to
respond to thé questions raised
by modem science, ethics
must go global, with common
points of référence established.
Thé International Bioethics
Committee (IBC) has been
working at this task for several
months, creating thé basis of
a déclaration on thé universal
norms of bioethics. Thé IBC
will soon hand thé bâton to
govemment experts, who are
expected to meet and generate
thé final document that will
be submitted to UNESCO's
Général Conférence in 2005.
IBC Président Michèle Jean of
Canada answers our questions.
What wiM this future déclaration inctude?
Takiiig into account our consultations with UNESCO niember
states, we've chosen to focus thé déclaration on human beings
as moral actors with responsibiiities vis-à-vis animais, thé
environment and thé biosphère. Thèse areas could be thé focus
of other work done either by thé World Commission on thé
Ethics of Scientific Knowledge and Technology (COMEST), thé
IBC or other bodies.
Who witl thé déclaration be targeting?
Thé déclaration aspires to create a framework that could inspire
states in thé implementation of their policies, législation,
rules of good coaduct and codes of ethics. It's an instrument
that should help countries draft their own policies and their
own guidelines, while taking into account their cultures and
traditions, une of thé challenges is not to fall into thé trap of
cultural relativism.

Thé IBC's text is based on a séries of fundamentat prînciples,
with human dignity at thé forefront. Can this principle realty
be defined?
This notion is very complex and l don't thiak that we'll end up
with a précise définition. Human dignity can take diverse forms
in différent cultures. Others before us hâve tried to do it and we
always end up with solutions that don't allow for thé principle
to maintain its universality.
So, what's thé point then?
Human dignity is a notion that crops up in several international
texts, notably in thé Universal Déclaration of Human Rights,
and in thé works of philosophers Uke Kant. This principle bas
fhe advantage of putting forward a vision oî thé human being.
If we don't take human dignity into considération, what is
thé use of talking about principles like autonomy or informed
consent? l think that this notion constitutes a vision or an
objective to which we should strive, an objective which allows
us to establish a certain aumber of other principles that we can
define more cleariy.
Does such a plurafetic approach risk weakening thé
instrument?
We must not fall into any kind of cultural relativism, where
everything is mixed up and we can do aaything in thé name
of cultural diversity. This is why we specify in thé déclaration
that one cannot undermine thé values of justice, human dignity
and human rights in thé name of cultural diversity. Nothing
that bas been implemented should run contrary to thé général
and fundamental principles that we define. But one can - in
one's way of working, in one's relationship with spirituality and
religion - corne up with différent ways of implementiag thèse
same principles.
One of thé goats of thé future déclaration is to prevent
thé stigmatization of and discrimination against individuals
or a group of individuate. Coukl you give some récent
examptes of cases In which seiwrtlfic progress came up
against such a risk?
New risks hâve appeared, notably with thé development of
genetic science. For example, if you study thé "susceptibility"
of a given. population to certain aînesses, there is a risk that
certain sectors of thé population could be stigmatized. Those
who are more susceptible than others to developing a certain
iïlness due to their genetic make-up are maybe going to see
themseives denied jobs or health insurance. How can we make
sure that, on one hand, epidemiological reaearch - which can
benefit from thé study of genetic data from certain populations
- moves forward, but on thé other hand, that this does aot lead
to thé stigmatization of individuals?
There is also a question about thé collective diinensioas of
consent. If you décide to submit to a DNA test, it can reveal
certain susceptibilities withia your family and thus hâve
repercussions within thé family. On thé other hand, everything
should not be "geneticized" as thé mdividual is made up of
genetic data, but also of phenotypes, thé éducation he or she
bas received aad his/her environment.
Thé draft highHghts that scientific progress should always
attempt to promote thé wetl-being of individuals and
of thé human species as a whole. Are there sftuations in
which thé interests of thé individual and thé interests
of thé community clash?
Thé gréât challenge in bioethics is, as a matter of fact, to try to
reach equilibrium between those mterests. For example: if you
hâve a médication that costs 20,000 dollars a year per person in
a public health System funded by thé state, you might be forced
to décide not to subsidize that médication because it is too
costly aad those costs could adversely affect thé entire System.
There are collective iatercsts that must be counterbalanced with
thé intercsts of an individual. Bioethics allows us to inform
such a choice.
On such an issue tike thé one you just mentioned, how
could thé déclaration hâve helped hiform thé décision?
When we're talking about acting for thé good of thé individual
or individuals, thé déclaration is not necessariïy going to

Cottective intsrests
can sometimss
coaflictwithshoseof
ths mdivtsluai
help because thé level of social acceptability is not thé same
everywliere. But we hope to provide a framework that will
allow us, whea we're looking at thèse types of questions, to
make thé best possible décisions in thé given drcumstances
by applying thé fundamental aad secondary principles of thé
déclaration.
Thé text introduoes certain new or emerging principles
like thé principls of responsibUHy, of aceountabHity. What's
thé point of this prindple?
This principle is particulariy important iii thé current coiitext. Il
touches on thé whole question of thé integrity of scientists and
their responsibility, but also on thé responsibility of iadividuals.
We don't talk about it that often, but as individuals in a society
we also hâve a certain degree of responsibility with respect to
our health, thé way we behave, feed ourselves and live, with a
view to not undermining thé health System for our countrymen.
We often say, "My freedom stops where yours begins" that is
a question of balance.
AU of thèse principles remain rather général. Are you worried
that thé déclaration could become merely a statement of
good Intentions? What is its tnie usefulness?
Thé déclaration also recommends rather concrète measures,
like thé establishment of ethics committees, public debate, etc.
On ail of thèse issues, we hâve tu eiigage in public debates and
foster dialogue with scientists and civil society, to see how far
we want to go and how it would work. Ail this is very concrète
- we need ethics committees, we need ethics éducation
programs for scientists and health professionals, we need to
develop genetic couaseling programs... As for UNESCO, it must
develop procédures to implement thé déclaration, as well as
évaluation and monitoring procédures. AU thèse things will
breathe life into thé déclaration.
2004 - Re-elected président of thé IBC
2002 - Elected président of thé IBC
2002 - Named vice-president of thé board
of Quebec's health research fund
2001 - Nominated to Quebec's
Commission on thé Ethics of Science
and Technology
1998 - Nominated ta thé International
Bioethîcs Committee (IBC)
1995 - Received honorary doctorate in law
from Concordia University, Montréal
1993-1998 - Served as Canada's deputy
health minister
1982 - Published "Thé History of Women
in Québec, from New France to today"
fre-released in 1992)
1975 - Earned Masters in History from
thé University of Montréal
1974- Earned Masters in Education from
thé University of Montréal
This déclaration is aimed at estabUshing ethical prindples
that will provide a framework for récent scientiHc progress.
te it truly possJble to croate norms that wttl keep up with thé
speed of scientific évolution?
Certainly, science is developing at breakneck speed, but that
is predsely why we need this déclaration. In addition, thé
déclaration is due to be reviewed later on to take scientific
progress into account so that certain areas that might not be
initially covered can be included in subséquent work. l don't
think we should give up on moving forward just because
science is moving too quickly. On thé contrary, we must
continue to develop useful frameworks. Once we hâve a
good framework, we can gradually - notably through reports
and opinions - follow thé évolution and make thé necessary
adjustments. We cannot forget that bioethics must bc based
on an adéquate sdentific background and must not make
pronouncements based on unfounded principles.
Interview conducted by Jeanette Blom, SHS
