BARCELONA,
CULTURAL CROSSROADS
Access 
to drinking water, 
the death of 
languages, reading 
in the digital age, conflict prevention or the 
conditions faced by millions of refugees: all these 
issues and many more featured in the debates 
at Barcelona. Experts from almost 200 countries 
joined in a cultural marathon that also included 
20 exhibitions, 423 concerts – with artists ranging 
from Mstislav Rostropovich to Sting, Lenny 
Kravitz, Norah Jones, Bob Dylan, Alicia Keys, 
BB King and Alejandro Sanz – 20 circus shows, 
cabaret, puppetry, street theatre and much more. 
All of which took place in a 30-hectare area on 
the banks of the Mediterranean, in the presence of 
heads of state, intellectuals, artists, and above all 
else, almost three million visitors.
UNESCO entered into partnership with the 
Universal Forum of Cultures through a resolution 
adopted by the General Conference in 1997. 
UNESCO and the Forum’s Organizing Consortium 
– made up of the Spanish government, the 
autonomous government of Catalonia and the 
Barcelona Town Hall – signed a framework 
agreement, which first of all entailed general 
planning of the event, and later a detailed series 
of activities which have since taken shape at the 
Forum. The fruit of this collaboration has included 
The Barcelona Forum 2004, which has just closed its doors, 
turned the Catalan capital into a must-see cultural meeting point – 
in which UNESCO played a key part.
18
No less than 423 
concerts were held 
during the Barcelona 
Forum 2000

The festivities 
attracted nearly 3 
million visitors
Photos: © Forum Barcelona 2004/Agusti Argelich

such notable events as the Youth Parliament, the 
UNESCO Cities for Peace Prize, the presentation 
in Barcelona of UNESCO’s Fellini medals, or the 
participation of specialists from the Organization 
in dialogues on issues such as “poverty, micro-
credits and development” or “audiovisual 
communication and cultural diversity.”
Last May, the UNESCO Director General, 
Koïchiro Matsuura, explained the motives 
behind this alliance in a speech at the inaugural 
ceremony: “The Forum is, in my opinion, the 
symbol of civil society’s mobilization around 
some of the great challenges that all the cultures 
of the world will have to confront in the new 
century. Cultural diversity, urban planning 
for lasting development and peace are central 
themes of the Forum’s activities, and also three of 
UNESCO’s strategic priorities.”
GUARANTEED CONTINUITY
Now that its doors have closed, it must be said 
that the Forum proved one of those events that 
leaves neither its supporters nor its detractors 
entirely satisfied. In its defence, one could argue 
that the Forum was a success from the very 
day of its opening, for the simple reason that it 
was unprecedented and confounded those who 
gave it little importance or even predicted that 
it would never see the light of day. The Forum’s 
other great accomplishment is to have found a 
successor, thanks to a proposal from the Mexican 
city of Monterrey, capital of the state of Nuevo 
León, to host a second event in 2007. Nuevo 
León’s governor, José Natividad González, visited 
UNESCO last August to discuss with the Director 
General the broad outline of his plan. Based 
on the experience in Barcelona, Monterrey is a 
planning a shorter Forum (90 days long), with 
a smaller budget and a lower expected turnout. 
Even so, there is no doubt that the endeavour 
to stimulate dialogue between cultures so that 
progress can be made on the road to peace is 
worth all the effort.
Marcelo Aparicio
UNESCO has 
partnered the 
Universal Forum of 
Cultures since 1997 
