Mosî Americans are unaware
of African caltural héritage
as a component of thé Amgrifâin
way of life. We are far fromn Nly
ocognizing thé rôle that AWea
played in îhe création of tha UnEted
States and continues ta piay in te
peopie's daily lives.
oiira (AbelnwssSius eseutentes)
may hâve Cuff, Cuffy, Coffey,
or Coffee as a family name,
or Guida (h) or Weda as a
female first name. Their children love Bambi. They
say "Wow!" when impressed or surprised. Many
eat okra gumbo with rice. They listen ta jazz. They
are American, and would deny African influence
on their culture. Africa is just not seen as a possible
component of thé American Way of Life.
Thé name Koffi that thé world knows thanks to
United Nations Secretary Général Koffi Annan cornes
from thé Akan-speaking peuple of West Africa.
Ouidah is a coastal town in Bénin from which many
Africans were deported to thé Americas during thé
transatlantic trade in enslaved Africans. Wow means
"yes" in thé Wolof language of Sénégal and thé
Gambia. And Bambi is a Central African Bantu word
for antelope.
Thé word okra cornes from Akan and gombo is
Bantu for thé vegetable that is thé key ingrédient in
thé Louisiana stew called redundantly okra gumbo.
And thé rice that so enriched planters that it was
called "Carolina Gold" came to thé United States
from thé banks of thé Niger River and thé Atlantic
shores of Senegambia.
Some scholars hâve claimed, and most people still
believe, that although culture of African origin may
hâve persisted in farther south régions they consider
"exotic, " like thé Caribbean and Latin America, little
or no African culture came to thé United States, and
certainly none has remained. In 1919 sociologist
Robert Park stated that, "It is very difficult to find in
atermelon (Citrullus lanatus)
col (Brassici ( raci lar. oceph a)
breadiruit (Artocarpus

sarghtwn (Sorgttum vuigare)

?4 Keystone/Gamma, Paris
i-ew Aa»eri». 8*iS
teew that Watt
Disney's Bainlx
owBS ite nama ta
thé Bauiu word
thé South today anything that can be traced directly
backto Africa."
Such perspectives were challenged in Melville
Herskovits' 1941 Thé Myth o f thé Negro Post,
which demonstrated "that African survivais can be
discovered in almost ail phases of Negro life in thé
United States. " Yet in 1963 sociologist E. Franklin
Frazier maintained that, ". . . because of thé manner
in which thé Negroes were captured in Africa and
enslaved, they were practically stripped of their
social héritage."
Twenty years later, in an article about engineer
Lewis Latimer, in thé book Blacks in Science Andent
and Modem, thé African American scholar John
Henrik Clarke maintained that "Thé collective
contributions of African Americans to science and
inventions is so extensive that it is not possible to
live a full day in any part of
thé United States, or thé world in général, without
sharing thé benefits of
their contributions."
Why is there such ignorance and déniai of this
African présence in U. S. culture? Because in spite
of ail of thé accurate information that bas been
available for décades, schools and thé média
portray Africa as a continent characterized by
sévère problems rather than tremendous wealth
and resources, that has folklore rather than culture,
and that certainly could not hâve contributed to thé
civilization of thé United States.
This déniai of Africa as part of thé foundation of
U.S. society is especially true concerning intellectual
and technological matters.. Thé "Carolina"
served with thé okra gumbo, which niight be more
apprupriately tenned Seiiegambian rice, is an
excelleiit example.
Thé rice grown in South Carolina and other parts
ot thé Americas is Oryzaglaberrinia, différent froin
thé Asijn Ory'zii sativa. This West African rice
and thé complex System of knowledge involved
in growing it and making it edible were broiight
by Africans, but they hâve not been given crédit.
As shown in Judith Carnev's récent book, Black
Rice: Thé Afrimn Origins of Rice Ciiitivation in thc
Ameriras Portuguese mariners were credited with
introducing lire culture tu Afiica-iiol explaining
how sailors taught planters to plant, iind ignoring
Portiiguese writings abolit their jmazemeiit at
discovering cuin{»]ex rice prodiiction teclinology in
thé Senegiinibia.
Thus, Europeans assuined uiidue crédit for
African intellectual and techiiological achievements,
despite évidence ta thé contr. iry. Eiiropeans
from temperate zones dici iiot liave thé skills and
knowledge required for sucli cndcrivors as rico
cultivation, particularly in thé siib'tropical cliinate
of thé southern United States. Afric.in origins can
also be found for other éléments of fouiidational
technologies, such as thé animal husbandry
popularized in U. S. cowboy films.
Thé traasatlantic trade in enslaved Africans
needs to be reconceptualized as not just a soiirce
of unskilled labor, but more importantly, also as
a massive brain drain and transfer of knowledge,
technology, and culture from Africa to thé Americas.
Sheila S. Walker,
Director of thé African Diaspora
and thé World Program, Spelman Collège,
Atlanta, Georgia
