Jongo, a blend of song, dance and magie, bad faiJeii iRto oMivioti.
Thanks to certain communities such as Sâo José da Serra, this pièce of intangible
héritage brought by slaves who came from Angola ar Congo is again
in thé spotlight in Brazii.
JO
CSiapel, Sâo José
da Serra community
(Brazi!)
Militana and their son
Manoel were bought
in Bahia, in mid-19UI
century, to work on thé Sào José da Serra property.
Thé former coffee fazenda, converted now to
subsistence farming and small-scale stock breeding,
is aear Valença, in thé state of Rio de Janeiro.
According to his descendants, Pedro belonged
to thé Cabinda nation. Back then, thé slaves in
thé région were mostly of Bantu origin, sent to
Brazil from thé slave trade ports on thé coasts of
Angola and thé Congo, or via Mozambique. Thé
grandchildren, great-grandchildren and great-great-
grandchildren of Pedro and Militana now form
thé Sâo José da Serra community, a group that
perpétuâtes thé intangible héritage of its aacestors.
Nearly 80 people live in some 15 clay and straw
houses, with roofs made from plant materials and
mud floors. There is also a small chapel in thé
fazenda, and since 1970 a public school. Because
researchers, journatists and jongo fans from thé
big cities hâve "discovered" Sâo José da Serra, it
recently got electricity.
"Thé captive black man/ Worked so hard/ He
won his freedom/ Today May 13. " Thé inhabitants
of Sâo José da Serra dance to thèse words during
thé commémoration, which lasts several days, of
thé 1888 abolition of slavery in Brazil, on May 13.
Thé high point is thé caxambu, dance around a big
fire that bas been blessed by thé mae-de-santo(see
box) at thé beginning of thé festivities. A large cirde
is formed and one couple dances in thé middle
while thé rest sing jongos, songs which are often
improvised, to thé rhythm of timbus, drums made
from hollow tree-trunks sealed with animal hide.
According to thé elders, magie is an ingrédient
of traditional jongo. Thé singers "sent" each other
words that contained spells and thé "dialogues"
between singers could end up in actual battles.
Children were excluded from thé circle for this

