produce something that is mathematically 
complex (like language) we should, in principle, 
be capable of learning the code that expresses this 
complexity (mathematics). He therefore feels we 
may have the same kind of propensity to learn 
mathematics as we do for language. “People are 
stronger than they know,” he says. 
Tráng is also convinced that a grounding 
in mathematics is essential for everyone, 
providing not just basic numeracy, but tools for 
thought. “In developing countries the need for 
mathematics is so great that the idea of asking 
what’s the use of it is stupid. We’re not at the 
level of having too many mathematicians. We 
won’t be there for 50 to 100 years. But a country 
without mathematics has no soul. There is no 
science or technology without mathematics. And 
training in mathematics is comparatively cheap. 
A mathematician can be trained to become a 
biologist or another type of scientist, yet it’s not 
so easy to do the converse,” he says. But, he adds, 
not just any kind of mathematics will do. “There 
are mathematicians in Vietnam, for example,” 
he explains, “but they have been trained in a 
fairly backward way, like 19th century French 
mathematics for engineers. It doesn’t fit any more 
for a lot of purposes.” 



Language of the universe?
Talking about high-level mathematics 
with Lê Dung Tráng is a bit like 
trying to improvise with jazzman, John Coltrane. 
If you’ve got the language and the skills, you can 
fly very high. If not, you can feel on the outside of 
something you only think you understand.
“Mathematicians can still communicate 
 from one speciality to another, which is rare in 
other fields,” explains Tráng, head of mathematics 
at the ICTP, “but it’s hard to explain anything to 
an outsider. If I wanted you to see a problem I am 
working on, I would have to explain it to you for 
a long time, reduce it to concepts you could grasp. 
Each step might be very easy, but the whole 
process needs years of training.”
This idea of “understanding the code” crops up 
often for Tráng. And not only regarding maths. 
Yet, like Molière’s Monsieur Jourdain, who is 
delighted to learn he has been speaking prose 
most of his life, Tráng believes that, with training, 
we are all capable of a kind of mathematical 
competence. “The structure of language, for 
example, is already mathematically very complex. 
And even the most retarded person can express 
himself in a logical way.” And if we can already 
Mathematics knows no 
borders, even if cultures can put 
their stamp on it

Particle tracks in 
a bubble chamber 
at the Fermilan 
accelerator 
laboratory near 
Chicago (USA)

For Lê Dung Tráng 
a country without 
mathematics has no 
soul
Since 1972 Tráng has been returning every 
year to his native Vietnam to teach mathematics. 
But, he says “as time goes on, I feel they need 
me less as an individual.” In France, where he 
has spent most of his academic life, he says, an 
individual “can give a lecture and then a group 
of young people get excited and may even create 
a new school of thought. This happened to me.” 
But in a country like Vietnam, the needs are more 
fundamental. “You need to enlarge the base. At 
the beginning there were very few students I 
could train to become teachers or researchers. 
Now they have all made their careers and most 
are more important than I am.”
A DELICATE ALCHEMY
And for Tráng, there is something noble about 
being a teacher. “As a student, in my group, 
we were very keen on seeing the merit of the 
one who shows the way.” And he is proud 
to be able to trace his own lineage directly 
back to the late Renaissance mathematicians 
Galileo and Descartes, via great contemporary 
mathematicians, like Thom, Grothendieck and 
Hironaka, who taught him at the Sorbonne in 
Paris in the 1960’s. “It’s a very delicate alchemy,” 
he says. “To begin with, you need interesting 
teachers, and that is not easy in developing 
countries. But one is enough. And then you need 
the student to meet the teacher. This teacher 
doesn’t have to be a famous mathematician, but 
one who likes maths.”
But if mathematics may be a universal 
C
ru
nc
hy
 n
um
be
rs
language for science, 
Tráng believes it is 
nevertheless influenced by 
culture.“Different countries 
have different ways of 
doing mathematics,” he 
says. “The Vietnamese, for 
example, have a keenness 
for abstraction, like the 
Romanians. The French have a very different 
way of understanding abstraction compared 
to the British. Mexico is strong in analytic 
geometry, India in the theory of numbers, China 
in differential geometry. Every country also has a 
different way of seeing the relationship between 
mathematics and the rest of their culture. Most 
people think mathematics is something absolute. 
But that’s basically wrong.” 
 “Myself, I grew up in two different cultures. 
And as a kid I couldn’t understand that it made 
any difference. When I was older I realized 
that a lot of people couldn’t understand what I 
could. I thought there was something wrong with 
me. Little by little I realized it was a matter of 
understanding the cultural code.  Later on, when 
I went to Vietnam with people who knew nothing 
about developing countries, I was surprised by 
their reaction. Even if a developing country looks 
poor and powerless, it still has its own power. But 
without the cultural code, they just can’t see it. 
They only see the kind of power they are used to, 
like the power of machines.”
Peter Coles
