Intolérance (Durban, South Africa, 2001).
On® sphère in wbich Africa bas unquestionabty
inflwncsd miversal culture Es music. Black slaves
were atso th® ©riginators of voodoo and tbe différent
syncretic reiigions in thé Caribbeaa aad Soirth
Ameriea. CertBin culîs and mtssical styles are now
retumlng to their roots in Africa, l»8ar!Rg wttness to
thé excepîional wealîh ofthis cuîtural blendtRg, which
finds probably its most colourfuS expression in
Notfing earnival in LoBdoii.
and other styles of Afro-
Americaii inusic such as
Bliies . ippeared in thé
slavery.
Thé African héritage is also a primary basis of
Brazilian samba, Cuban rumba and Trinidadian
calypso, which ail became internationally popular
Combining thé skills of African story telling, singing
and instrument making, calypso usually involves
some social commentary, typically in thé form of
satire, with an infectious béat. It bas since been
influenced by European, North American and other
Caribbean cultures to produce reggae and thé most
controversial of ail forms of black music today, rap.
Cubaa music too has its roots in thé ritual music
of African slaves mixed with Catholic liturgies and
thé brass bands and guitars of Spanish colonialists.
It developed in a rural setting in which African
slaves and small farmers from Andalusia worked
and played music together. With thé end of thé Cold
War and thé popularity of "Thé Buena Vista Social
Club", film by German director Wim Wenders,
Cuban music is enjoying a résurgence around thé
world.
Another slavery-related art form enjoying global
popularity is Capoeira, leaping and wheeling in
stylized combat lo thé rhythm of drums. Rooted in
Bantu tradition of Angola, Capoeira was iised by
Africans enslaved in Brazil to practice their fighting

skills, unbeknown to their masters. When colonial
authorities, who at ftrst thought it a harmless dance,
eventually learned its rcal purpose they banned it on
penalty of death. But it continued to be practiced by
fugitive slaves who set up independent settlements,
known as Quilombos (see page 31). Capoeira
remained illégal in Brazil until thé 1930s, when il
received national récognition as a martial art. In
récent years it exploded out of Brazil and continues
to grow in popularity. According to thé International
Capoeira Angola Foundation, it is aow practiced
in 74 countries, and there are over 1,000 Capoeira
schools listed on thé intemet.
Besides culture, enslaved Africaas also carried
spiritual traditions with them to thé New Worid,
where they were modified to meet thé conditions
of slaver^ and arc aow being re-exponed back
to Africa. One of thèse was Voodoo, which gave
Africans enslaved in Haiti thé strength to survive,
resist and eventually overturn slavery. Many think
Voodoo hails from Haiti. But it originated in Africa,
where thé Fon tribes of Bénin first called it 'voodoo'
meaning 'spirit.' Although taking new fomis in Haiti,
including of Roman Catholicism, Voodoo
African-American
musician B. B. King
in concert in New
York on June 20, 2008
spinte.
Africans enslaved in America blended African
musical forms with European Christian hymns
to create spirituals, which developed into gospel
music. At first a predominanûy white style, it
became prominent in charismatic evangelistic
movements. Black gospel music became distinctive
by 1930, and is especially associated with

Briiish hobby
sprayed with
chscolate during
ths Notiiag Hiil
Carnival in Lcndon
Pentecostal churches. Today black church choirs

by drums.
Gospel and blues merged in America to produce
yet another popular genre known as soiil, which
also gives its name to a cuisine commonly
associated with African Americans in thé southern
United States. Soûl food reflects gastronomie
responses to racial and économie oppression, and
makes créative use of inexpensive products such as
yams, peanuts, okra, black-eyed peas and rice (see
p. 10). Simply prepared Kentucky fried chicken now
spearheads a fast food chain that reaches around thé
worid.
Thé most colorful manifestation of thé fusion of
diverse cultures in thé New World is undoubtedly
carnival. A spring fertility festival of thé Ancient
Egyptiaas adopted by thé Greeks, Romans and then
Christianity, thé carnival tradition was carried across
thé Atlantic by European settlers, and transformed
by descendants of African slaves who hâve now
taken it back to Europe in fhe form of London's
huge Notting Hill Carnival.
It started when slaves began to burlesque thé
extravagant pre-Lenten festivities that their masters
had brought from European courts. Later they added
éléments of West Africa's Egungun festival hononng
family ancestors, such as throwing talcum powder
on fellow masqueraders, ail wearing thé same

color of dress. Finally they turned this annual
explosion of dazzling color and fantasy into
frenzy by infusiag it with African-influenced
music and dance.
Like its counterparts in ancient Egypt and in
thé New Worid, London's Nottiag Hill carnival
is a célébration of life. Started 40 years ago
by a group of homesick Tïimdadians, it is
now an annual favorite loved by people from
ail cultures. Although thé historical legacy of
slavery, includiag racism, discrimination and
poverty, is far from played out, hope springs
from thé fact that people from around thé world
can enjoy together thé slave trade's cultural
legacy.
John Lawton,
Film Director
VoodoB ritual in
Bénin
