from the UNESCO archives
62
The long road 
to dialogue among 
civilizations
P
romoting mutual understanding 
between the peoples and civilizations 
of the world was already one of the 
objectives of the International Institute for 
Intellectual Cooperation (1925-1946), which 
preceded UNESCO – its archives have been 
incorporated into UNESCO’s. Leading intellectuals 
such as Albert Einstein and Chilean poet Gabriela 
Mistral (1945 Nobel Prize in literature) sought 
here to build “the defenses of peace in the minds 
of men” long before this vision became part of the 
preamble to UNESCO’s 1945 Constitution.
UNESCO started in 1949 a series of studies on 
“interrelations of cultures and their contribution 
For more than 
50 years, UNESCO has 
been promoting 
mutual understanding 
as a cornerstone 
for dialogue
April 10, 1957, the first 
session of the Committee 
for the “Major Project 
on Mutual Appreciation 
of Eastern and Western 
Cultural Values”, which 
continued ten years. At 
that time, UNESCO was 
based in the Hotel Kleber 
in Paris
© 
U
N
ES
C
O


Below: 
September 23, 1958, a roundtable 
in Cologne (formerly DDR) on 
East-West relations is broadcast 
live throughout Western Germany.
Bottom left: 
At UNESCO Headquarters, 
children learn about a project on 
the East and West in 1959.
to international understanding” published as “The 
Cultural Essence of Chinese Literature”, “The 
Place of Spanish Culture”, “Notes on the Culture 
of the U.S.A.” and “The Basic Unity underlying 
the Diversity of Culture”. A committee of experts 
convened by UNESCO issued a statement on 
“Humanism of Tomorrow and the Diversity 
of Cultures”. The famous UNESCO collection, 
“History of Mankind”, was one of the outcomes 
of this quest for better mutual understanding. 
Launched in 1950, it was first published between 
1963 and 1976 (and recently reissued, see p.76).
A first statement on race problems was issued 
in 1950 by a UNESCO group of experts who 
observed that: “Race is less a biological fact than 
a social myth and as a myth it has in recent years 
taken a heavy toll in human lives and suffering”. 
UNESCO published “Race and History” in 1952 
and “Race and Culture” in 1971 by French 
this issue and member of the group.
CULTURAL COOPERATION
Between 1957 and 1966 UNESCO led a ten-
year programme, the “Major Project on mutual 
appreciation of Eastern and cultural appreciation 
of Eastern and Western cultural values”. Its 
activities included basic studies and research, 
education for youth and information for the 
general public, as well as UNESCO’s translated 
literature series, “Representative Works”.
Numerous projects and activities on cultural 
policies and international cultural co-operation 
were carried out in the 1960s and 1970s. The 
Mondiacult Conference, held in Mexico in 1982, 
adopted the Mexico Declaration on Cultural 
Policies, which remains an essential reference 
document. The World Decade for Cultural 
Development, 1988-1997, the Silk Road project in 
the 1980s, the Slave Route project and the Culture 
of Peace programme in the 1990s are milestones 
on the road to international understanding. 
Globalization represents a new challenge for 
UNESCO’s work; the adoption of the Universal 
Declaration on Cultural Diversity in 2001 can be 
seen as part of the response. 
The terminology and concepts have changed 
over the years, but whether the programmes 
stress pluralism, diversity or interculturality, they 
all reflect the same conviction that dialogue is 
essential for peace.
Jens Boel
