The coup de grace for traditional life looms 
when the parents also move to a town, like Port 
Vila, on the island of Efate, or Luganville, on 
Santo, in search of work to pay for the school 
fees (over 45,000 Vatu or US$400 a year). But, 
even then, says Regenvanu, while a university 
education may help a young person find a good 
job, “less that 2 percent go to university, so the 
majority get pushed out of the system.” The 
informal settlements that have sprung up around 
Vila house many families who gave up everything 
to pay for their children’s education, and can no 
longer afford to return home.
The key to the new curriculum, already 
government policy for the first year of primary 
school in rural areas, is to teach in the vernacular 
language. “The best vehicle to gain literacy is 
through your own language,” says Regenvanu. 
And, while the Cultural Centre has been pushing 
for this since the 80s, he adds, the idea took off 
only when it got World Bank backing, following a 
national survey. 
“Vanuatu boasts the highest concentration of 
languages per capita anywhere – around 106 
for a population of about 200,000,” he explains. 
Over 80 languages are still very much alive, while 
Vanuatu’s education system takes children 
away from their native language and culture. 
A new project aims to reverse this and use 
school to reinforce both
Ralph Regenvanu, Director of Vanuatu’s Cultural 
Centre does not mince words when it comes to 
the nation’s education system. “School is one of 
the major factors that is breaking the transmission 
of culture,” he says. “We want education to be 
relevant to the community’s needs and to the 
needs of children, so that they feel empowered 
within their own community and not alienated.” 
Which is why the Cultural Centre and some 
non-governmental organizations are helping the 
Ministry of Education make radical changes to the 
curriculum. “It’s ambitious,” he says, “but at the 
moment it’s completely the other way round.”
At present, explains Regenvanu, children in 
Vanuatu receive primary education locally, but are 
taught in either English or French, with subject 
matter largely divorced from their daily lives. The 
20 percent or so who pass an entrance exam can 
go on to secondary school, which, more often 
than not, can be on another island, hundreds of 
kilometres from home. 
In the remote hills 
of Tanna, children 
still grow up in the 
traditional way, 
though change is 
already coming

“The syllabus will be based on the seasonal 
calendar, which is how traditional life is organized. 
It’s the yam cycle – or taro cycle in some islands 
– with different times of the year for planting 
crops, spawning times for fish, biological 
and environmental markers for different times 
of the year.”
“Each year, five new schools are selected to 
begin the first-year vernacular programme,” adds 
Regenvanu. “About 20-30 are already using it. 
The Ministry of Education policy is to have it 
fully implemented in a few years time.” The goal 
will then be to extend it to the first two, and then 
three years of primary school.
Now, in collaboration with UNESCO’s LINKS 
(Local and Indigenous Knowledge Systems) 
programme, the Cultural Centre is helping to 
develop an indigenous science curriculum for 
high schools, that will use concrete examples of 
traditional knowledge, like the taro plant irrigation 
system, the preservation of plant varieties, 
weather prediction, or a special fishing net that 
can stun the fish. “We’ve done a lot of research,” 
says Regenvanu. “Now we think we can turn 
it into policy.”
about 17 are endangered and eight are extinct. 
Malakula alone has 34 languages for a population 
of 18,000. Many people speak three, even seven 
vernacular languages.
Before teaching materials can be developed, 
these vernacular languages have to be written 
down, and a standard spelling drawn up. So 
far, says Regenvanu, this has been done for 16 
languages. “We have developed really basic 
materials – three books for each of the 16 
languages: one on the alphabet, one on birds and 
one on fish.”
He hopes that materials in at least 40 languages 
will eventually be available. “Some languages 
are dying.” he says, “It’s inevitable. Then the 
emphasis is just on recording the language for 
posterity.”
Vanuatu’s sand-
drawing is a 
sophisticated means 
of communication, 
now inscribed on 
UNESCO’s list of 
Intangible Heritage
