
The children rushed towards 
the Constantza as soon 
as they saw her in the 
Algerian port of Mostaganem. With a 
crew of 140 and 60 artistes on board she 
looked more like a floating stage than 
a warship. And, when night fell, mime 
artists, singers, actors and visual artists 
ran onto the deck against a backdrop 
of fireworks, to the delight of the local 
audience.
Last summer the helicopter carrier 
- lent by the Romanian navy - left 
Constantza (Romania) for a 17-port tour 
of the Mediterranean, stopping notably 
in Varna (Bulgaria), Marseille (France) 
Valencia (Spain) and Hamammet 
(Tunisia). It was Richard Martin, the 
director of the Toursky Theatre in 
Marseille, who first dreamed of a theatre 
on a ship from which artists and acrobats 
could send a message of peace and 
dialogue in the Mediterranean, through 
shows based on the region’s culture. The 
dream first became reality in 2001, with 
the help of the International Institute of 
Mediterranean Theatre (IITM), which is 
supported by UNESCO’s Mediterranean 
Programme. According to the founder of 
IITM, Jose Monleon, “this was a voyage 
about ethics. As relations between 
East and West continue to worsen, the 
idea was to replace confrontation with 
dialogue.” 
At each stage of the voyage, different 
regional influences and cultures came 
together, in an exciting and innovative 
blend. “I realised that people knew 
nothing about my culture and the 
situation in Serbia,” said 
actor, Vladan Brkovic. In the 
Moroccan port of Tangiers, Marina Pittau 
sang of the mountains of her Sardinia 
homeland, while the stopover in Tripoli 
(Libya), featured a tribute to the work 
of the late French singer Léo Ferré. In 
Salonika (Greece) a film by Bulgarian 
directors Nina Kovacheva and Valentin 
Stefanoff was shown, in which actors 
read passages from Homer’s Odyssey in 
their own language.
Both on board and ashore the 
conversations were in Russian, 
Romanian, Arabic, English, French, 
Italian and Spanish. And when language 
became a barrier, music, dance, gestures 
and the eyes took over. 
Maya Blanc


International Institute of Mediterranean Theatre
Artistic odyssey in
 the name of peace
