instance, might say ‘we have ten Tutsis here in 
the class. If four of them were killed, how many 
would we have left?’”
Education is often put forward as a panacea, 
and few would contest its importance in shaping 
citizens to play an effective part in their societies. 
But education, says researcher Sobhi Tawil of 
UNESCO’s International Bureau of Education, is 
also “an inherently ideological instrument that is 
related to political violence in both intended and 
unintended ways.” 
A recent report by Unicef, identifies several 
ways in which education is and has been 
manipulated negatively. These include denying 
access to education to certain groups, or using it 
to suppress their language and cultural values; 
segregated education that maintains inequality; 
the destruction or forced closure of schools; 
“The 
one thing I kept hearing 
from young prisoners in 
Northern Ireland,” says 
Professor Alan Smith, from Ulster University’s 
School of Education, “was a damning indictment 
of their education. Young men, just out of their 
teens and already serving time for murder would 
tell me ‘my school, my teachers, my textbooks 
did not give me the means to challenge what they 
were saying. I thought I was being told the truth. I 
later learnt that I wasn’t’.” 
“In Rwanda, before the genocide, segregation 
at school took a number of forms,” says John 
Rutaysire, director of the country’s National 
Curriculum Development Centre. “Pupils’ files 
identified them as Hutu, Tutsi or Twa. History 
and civics teaching reinforced social divisions 
by emphasizing ‘ethnicity’. A maths teacher, for 



Education often fuels 
conflicts, just as it can help 
to resolve them. A group 
of experts from seven countries 
that have experienced 
decades of violent conflict 
share their experiences 
and work for change
Part of the problem, 
essential 
for the solution

manipulation of textbooks for political purposes; 
and the inculcation of attitudes of superiority, for 
example, in the way that peoples or nations are 
described.
These characteristics have all been present in 
the education systems of seven countries that 
have been wracked over past decades by terrible 
civil wars - Bosnia and Herzegovina, Guatemala, 
Lebanon, Mozambique, Northern Ireland, Rwanda 
and Sri Lanka. They are all now involved in a 
research project being carried out by UNESCO’s 
International Bureau of Education in Geneva. 
Under the project, researchers and education 
authorities in each of these countries put their 
education systems under the microscope, 
searching out the teaching techniques, the 
textbook content, the structural characteristics 
and educational policies that may have fuelled the 
Sarajevo 1993. 
A mostly empty 
classroom in the 
then dominantly 
Serbian suburb of 
Grbavica
bloody conflicts arising among 
their populations. 
In Northern Ireland, for 
example, segregation is a 
fundamental feature of the 
conflict and the education 
system: 95 percent of children 
attend either Catholic or 
Protestant schools. “Education 
planners began questioning this 
in the 1960s and 70s, but change 
has been difficult to bring 
about,” says Michael Arlow, 
formerly of the Citizenship 
Council for the Curriculum, 
Examinations and Assessment in 
Northern Ireland. 
Segregation is also one 
of the main characteristics 
of education in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, where children 
attend Croat, Bosniac or Serb 
schools and follow three 
different curricula, administered 
by 13 different education 
authorities in the different cantons. “In BiH, each 
education authority is able to promote a culturally 
inappropriate curriculum, unregulated by any 
agreed curriculum standards,” thus reinforcing 
ethnic divisions explains Phillip Stabback, 
former Interim Director of Education with the 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in 
Europe’s mission to Bosnia and Herzegovina. He 
tells of an incident where Bosniac children were 
refused access to a neighbourhood Serb school. 
After intervention by the authorities, the children 
were admitted, but were then refused textbooks.
In Guatemala, the Mayan culture and language 
spoken by the majority of the population were 
simply erased for decades from an education 
system that was based on the Spanish culture and 
language of the colonialist minority. 
The first violent riots in post-independence Sri 

Lanka were sparked in the 1950s by “The Official 
Language Act” making the Sinhala language “the 
one official language of Ceylon”. Only in 1992 
was Tamil also recognized as an official language, 
but by then the two communities were deeply 
divided, says Prof. Lal Perera, the Director of 
the National Education Research and Evaluation 
Centre in Colombo.
For Professor Alan Smith, “The relationship 
between education and conflict needs to be 
factored into development programmes. We 
need to develop conflict-sensitive education 
systems.” Pooling their findings, the researchers 
involved in the IBE project are also focusing on 
efforts to correct anomalies and injustices where 
they can: transforming school programmes and 
restructuring education systems where they can. 
Such change is always a long-term job and always 
an uphill battle. 
Concludes the Unicef report: “the change of 
educational practice is a fundamentally political 
threat in the sense that it challenges structures of 
authority, dominance and control – in the North 
no less than the South.
Sue Williams
