to Herbert Marcuse, Karl Jaspers, Jeanne Hersch, 
Joseph Ki-Zerbo, Theodor Adorno and Arnold 
Toynbee, from Carlos Fuentes to Paul Ricoeur, 
Susan Sontag, Richard Rorty, Vaclav Havel, 
Desmond Tutu, Wole Soyinka and Toni Morrison, 
not to mention hundreds of eminent, though less-
famous experts in all sorts of fields; the long list 
of contibutors represents the crème de la crème 
of the world’s intelligentsia of half a century. 
The Arabic version was launched in 1986, and 
anthologies have been published in Hindi since 
1963 and Chinese since 1985.
BREAKING THE ICE
Among its special theme issues, Diogenes 
published “East-West Dialogue” in 1958 (issue 
no. 24), “Interactions of Civilisations” in 1960 
(no. 32), and “Diversity and Unity of Man” 
in 1987 (no. 140). For the 50th anniversary of 
Diogenes, celebrated at UNESCO in January 2003, 
Jean d’Ormesson said: “Diogenes has played a big 
role in bringing together people who could not be 
seen to be close. Time and again, we made Arab 
scientists and Israeli scientists work together, as 
well as American scientists and Soviet and Chinese 
scientists. It was maybe between the Soviet and 
the Chinese that we had the biggest problems. But 
we succeeded.”
Monique Perrot-Lanaud
It was back at the height of the Cold War, at 
the worst moment of East-West relations, that 
UNESCO launched its review dedicated to human 
sciences with the aim of building bridges between 
scientists of all disciplines and in all countries. 
The first issue came out in November 1952 and 
– in a truly unusual move for the time – it was 
published in three languages: English, French and 
Spanish.
With its title paying hommage to the Greek 
philospher who went about with a lantern in the 
daytime looking for an honest man, Diogenes 
is published by the International Council for 
Philosophy and Humanistic Studies (ICPHS), 
which was created by UNESCO in 1949. Diogenes 
was the brainchild of one man in particular: the 
French philisopher and writer Roger Caillois, a 
former surrealist who ran the publication until 
his death in 1978 and who gave it his cross-
disciplinary vision. A vision that his sub-editor of 
25 years, Jean d’Ormesson, said Callois described 
as “a mutual enriching of one discipline through 
another”.
Diogenes quickly became a free tribune for 
intellectuals of all types. From Emile Benveniste 

Fifty years
of smart writing
Since 1952 the review Diogenes has explored 
“world unity through the diversity of its 
topics,” as Octavio Paz, one of its contributors, 
so aptly puts it
www.unesco.org/cipsh
Two founding fathers 
of Diogenes in 1957
Right: Jean d’Ormesson 
(second to the left)
Below: Roger Caillois 
(to the right)
