GLIMMERS
  OF HOPE IN BAM
 At five in the morning on December 
 26, 2003, the earth shook with 
 tremendous violence for 12 seconds 
in south-eastern Iran, some 1,200 kilometres from 
Tehran. The earthquake, which registered 6.3 on 
the Richter scale, claimed the lives of over 40,000 
people and left a further 75,000 homeless; the 
citadel of Bam (Arg-e-Bam), the largest adobe 
fortress in the world and the quake’s epicentre, is 
now little more than dust and debris.
Those who were in Bam in the days following 
the catastrophe speak of “destruction on a scale 
that is hard to describe,” of a city that “looked 
like Ground Zero.” Yet even as the most pressing 
needs of survivors were being met, the possibility 
of repairing this jewel of Iran’s heritage began to 
take shape.
The citadel that used to stand within the 
Old City of Bam, which adjoins a new city by 
the same name, is 300 metres long and 200 
metres wide. Built almost 2,000 years ago, it is 
a remarkable example of ancient Iranian urban 
construction, and along with Persepolis the most 
precious relic of pre-Islamic Persian architecture.
Most of this magnificent site, which last year 
alone received 100,000 visitors, was destroyed 
in a matter of seconds. Alongside the illustrious 
history of Arg-e-Bam (see inset), a vital source of 
income for the city’s inhabitants also vanished: 
until the earthquake, the citadel had been a major 
tourist magnet, generating considerable revenues 
for the entire region.
Even so, despair has not overwhelmed the city 
completely. There are excellent records detailing 
many features of the citadel. In addition there is 
ample technical expertise to hand, since Iran has 
many well-trained professionals – over the past 
30 years Iran’s National Council of Monuments 
In the wake of the 
destruction, despair and 
nearly 30,000 deaths 
caused by the recent 
earthquake, the ancient 
Iranian city of Bam 
is starting to look 
forward to a possible 
reconstruction

A stop on the way
Bam also has a long 
history as a stopover on 
the fabled Silk Road. The 
prosperous trading along 
the Silk Road and Bam’s 
strategic position close to 
the Pakistan border made 
the city extremely rich, as is 
evident in the opulence of 
its extraordinary buildings. 
Most of the Old City , as it 
stood before the earthquake, 
dated from the  most recent 
period of reconstruction, 
carried out by the Safavids 
between 1502 and 1722. 
Three protective walls 
ringed the citadel,  which 
housed mosques, mansions, 
a bazaar, a caravanserai 
(merchants’ inn) and a 
residential neighbourhood 
where most of the city’s 
population lived. A garrison 
was located in the highest 
parts of the fortification, 
along with the Four Seasons 
Palace (Chahar Fasl) and the 
governor’s residence. The 
citadel was abandoned by 
its inhabitants for the first 
time in 1722 following the 
Afghan invasion, and again 
in 1810, when it was sacked 
by guerrilla forces from 
Shiraz.
The Bam citadel, 
largest adobe 
fortress in the world, 
in 2001
carried out restoration work on the citadel which 
it included on its list of protected historical 
monuments. 
“As always in such cases, caution is the only 
possible strategy,” says the architect and UNESCO 
consultant Hubert Guillaud, a specialist in mud 
and adobe buildings, “but it is still true that we 
have very precise records covering the 32 years 
of work that preceded the destruction of the site. 
Amongst these documents there is a body of very 
solid, interesting and highly valuable material that 
could be used for a possible reconstruction.”
Moreover, of the 24 historical monuments that 
stood outside the citadel of Bam, half can be 
restored as they have suffered only minor damage.
These factors underpin a restoration plan 
prepared by UNESCO and the Iranian authorities 
in the wake of a first expert mission to Bam last 
February. The first phase will involve reinforcing 

the structures that are still standing to prevent 
them from collapsing. Then data will have to 
be collected and all available information about 
Arg-e-Bam studied to lay the ground for the 
reconstruction, which will begin soon after.
The simultaneous inclusion of Bam’s citadel on 
the World Heritage List and the World Heritage in 
Danger List – in a process similar to that involving 
the minaret and archaeological remains of Jam, in 
Afghanistan, in 2002 – would give a much-needed 
impetus to these plans. “Given that the Iranian 
government had intended to propose Bam’s 
inclusion on the UNESCO World Heritage List, 
we will help in the preparation of the candidacy, 
which will be presented before the next meeting 
of the World Heritage Committee in June,” 
declared UNESCO’s Director-General, Koïchuro 
Matsuura.
It is certain that the “restoration of the 
monuments that suffered the worst devastation 
will take several years, and will need considerable 
support and solidarity from the international 
community,” added Matsuura.
Lucía Iglesias Kuntz
Above and middle:
Damages caused by the December 
2003 earthquake.
Below:
Bam before the earthquake
