Retracing the ‘slave routes’
The talking drums of Accra University beat 
out a chill warning: Slave raiders are 
coming. Arise and flee. Quickly, quickly, quickly. 
Ghanian students were recalling for our cameras 
the days when – despite such real warnings – 
millions of Africans were seized and shipped to a 
life of bondage in the New World.
These so-called ‘Slave Routes’ stretched from 
the African interior to the coastal slave markets of 
present-day Angola, Benin, Ghana, and Senegal, 
then over the Atlantic to the islands of the 
Caribbean, coastal Brazil and the southern United 
States. 
We were retracing these routes – filming as we 
went – across West Africa as part of UNESCO’s 
Slave Route Project, and began our journey at 
Ouida in Benin. Now a sleepy coastal town, Ouida 
was an early center of the trans-Atlantic slave 
trade. A huge tree shades what once was a busy 
slave market, where slaves were auctioned off like 
cattle and then marched down a track to the sea 
shore.
Today modern memorials recalling the 
inhumanity of the slave trade line the route of the 
slaves’ last journey on African soil. And a large 
monument marks the spot where they were loaded 
onto ships for their trans-Atlantic crossing to the 
New World. It is known as the Gate of No Return.
Torn from their homeland, imprisoned, and 
shipped to a life of bondage in strange lands, slaves 
found strength in the spiritual and cultural 
traditions they carried with them. One of these was 
Capoeira – leaping and wheeling in stylized combat, 
and used by Africans enslaved in Brazil to practice 
fighting skills, unbeknownst to their masters, to the 
rhythm of drums. Another was Voodoo – a spiritual 
tradition that gave Africans courage to break the 
chains of bondage in the Caribbean. Many think 
Voodoo hails from Haiti, but it actually originated 
in West Africa, where the Fon peoples of Benin first 
called it ‘Voodoo’ meaning  ‘spirit’. 
COMBAT STYLE
Forced labor existed in all the civilizations of 
antiquity, but it was ancient Greece which first 
elevated slavery to the rank of an institution and 
reduced the slave to the status of merchandise. 
African slave trade was first organized by Arab 
merchants in the seventh century. Slaves were 
bought in the interior and sold in the slave 
markets of North Africa and Zanzibar.
Later Europeans used slaves to work plantations 
they established on islands in the Indian Ocean 
(Mauritius, Madagascar, Comoros) and the 
Atlantic (Sao Tome and Principe, Cape Verde). All 
this, however, was small scale compared to the 
veritable industry of the 15-1800s, when millions 
of Africans were shipped by European slave 
traders across the Atlantic to the colonies of the 
New World. 
The Slave Route is 
a key project for 
2004, proclaimed by 
the United Nations 
“International Year 
to Commemorate 
the Struggle 
against Slavery 
and Its Abolition”. 
The aim is to 
better understand 
and exchange 
information on the 
slave trade and 
preserve historic 
sites. 
Right: Illustration 
of a European slave 
ship
© 
D
R

“Porte du non 
retour” (Door of no-
return), sculpture by 
Dominique Kouass, 
who installed the 
work in his native 
capital Ouida 
(Benin), which was 
a major slave trading 
port
SLAVE RAIDS
Discovery of the Americas and need for labor to 
exploit their wealth further amplified the tragedy. 
Europeans and Africans themselves resorted to 
slave raiding. 
Among the most feared of the African slave 
raiders were the Amazons of the Fon king’s 
6000-strong female bodyguard, who specialized 
in capturing women and children. To escape the 
slave-raiding Fon, whose beliefs barred them 
from venturing into water, certain tribes fled 
to the safety of Lake Nokoue, in what is now 
southeast Benin. 
European slave traders included the British, 

Dutch, French, Portuguese and Spanish, and, to a 
lesser extent, Germans and Scandinavians. They 
set off with shiploads of cheap wares, which they 
bartered for black slaves who were re-sold at 
considerable profit in the New World. Afterwards 
they sailed back to their home ports with cargoes 
of valuable products of slave labor such as 
sugar, tobacco and cotton. The fortunes of many 
European ports were built on this triangular trade. 
To protect their spheres of interest in West 
Africa, rival European powers built coastal 
forts and castles. At the peak of the slave trade, 
Ghana’s Atlantic coast was crowded with over 
50 such fortifications. One of them, Cape Coast 
Castle, is today a major attraction for tourists, 
many of them African-Americans, who file 
through the dank dungeons where slaves were 
crammed before their voyage. 
The Senegalese island of Goree, one of the 
main shipment centres of the West African slave 
trade, is also much visited. It is said that eleven 
million Africans passed through Goree enroute to 
the New World. 
FIRST REVOLT
The commercial enterprises of slave traders 
eventually evolved as rival European colonies. 
France made St. Louis (present-day Senegal) 
capital of its West African domains, and legend 
has it that it was from this beach that Europeans 
© UNESCO/Georges Malempré
UNESCO | the new Courier | January 2004

SCARS AND LEGACIES
Although slavery was officially abolished about 
150 years ago, legacies of the slave trade remain. 
The discrimination black peoples suffer results 
largely from racism developed to justify and 
sustain trans-Atlantic slavery. Inevitably there is 
considerable disagreement about the cause and 
effect of the slave trade. And retracing the Slave 
Routes across West Africa, I realised that healing 
the scars inflicted by an ordeal that lasted for 
centuries is going to be a long and difficult 
process.
John Lawton


snatched their first black slave, a small boy that 
Portuguese explorers took back to Lisbon to 
amuse their king.
The beginning of the end of slavery also 
occurred on former French soil, with an 
uprising of slaves led by Boukman, a Voodoo 
priest, in Bois Caiman, in the French colony of 
San Domingue, on the night of August 22-23, 
1791. In commemoration, August 23 has been 
chosen by the United Nations as the date of the 
International Day for the Remembrance of the 
Slave Trade and its Abolition.
