UNESCO in action culture
Haitians, most of whom are descendents of 
African slaves, and Dominicans, whose ancestors 
were Spanish settlers, have a hard time shedding 
stereotypes about each other  
Haitians and Dominicans:
two peoples, one island

“I’ve always wanted to live in the 
Dominican Republic,” says Mimi, 
a generously-shaped Haitian woman with a 
dazzling smile. Her husband, Charles, a slender 
Dominican, is sitting in the patio of their sheet-
metal house in the new quarter of Dajabon, a 
Dominican border town. “I don’t feel any racism 
here,” she says. 
“We decided to get married just 11 days after we 
met,” says Charles. Ten years ago, Mimi spotted 
him while she was doing her laundry in the river 
at Ouanaminthe, a neighboring Haitian town. 
That day, he crossed the border to visit some 
aunts who had moved back to Haiti after the 
1937 massacre in which 10,000 to 20,000 Haitians 
living in the Dominican Republic lost their lives. 
Sharing the same island, formerly called 
Hispaniola, Dominicans and Haitians do their 
best to live with a long history of conflict. In 
1937, the Dominican dictator Trujillo ordered the 
slaughter of Haitians living in his country. Much 
earlier, Haiti’s Toussaint Louverture and, in 1855, 
Emperor Soulouque occupied their neighbor’s 
land. Those events have left bitter memories on 
the island. 
Ouanaminthe, a Haitian 
market town on 
the Dominican border
© Caroline Pottier/Le Bar Floréal, Paris

In 1777, the Europeans split Hispaniola in half. 
The French populated the western part (which 
later became Haiti) with African slaves, while 
the Spanish brought farmers over from their 
homeland to settle the eastern part (the present-
day Dominican Republic). 
HALF-GODS AND GODESSES
Haiti and its African population forged their 
identity by overthrowing the French in 1794,” says 
sociologist Laënnec Hurbon, director of research 
at the Centre National Français de la Recherche 
Scientifique (CNRS) and holder of the UNESCO 
Chair on the slave trade and slavery in Port-au-
Prince. “In contrast, the Dominican Republic was 
built in opposition to Haiti and the threat of the 
island’s ‘Africanization’, especially embodied by 
Voodoo worship, which the Dominicans called 
cannibalism and witchcraft.” During election 
campaigns some politicians make no bones about 
advocating the “whitening” of the Dominican 
population, boasting about their descent from 
the indios, as the island’s earliest occupants 
are called. But Dominican history and culture 
definitely bear the stamp of African influence. For 
example, there is a Dominican brand of Voodoo 
with its “half-gods and goddesses”. Likewise, 
raras – Haitian music groups with ties to the 
voodoo spirits – are highly popular on Dominican 
streets during Lent.
People near the border on both sides often live 
as though they are citizens of the same country. 
Mixed godparents, spiritual ties, mixed marriages 
and semi-bilingualism are common, as the 
example of Mimi and Charles shows. On the feast 
days of patron saints, parishioners think nothing 
of crossing the border to go to mass and dance. 
“We eat and sleep together here,” says Antonio 
Vixima, a member of Ouanaminthe’s Sant 
pon Ayiti, an organization that brings the two 
peoples together. That group and its Dominican 
counterpart, Centro Puente, are campaigning to 
end violence.
But stereotypes die hard. Some Haitians say 
Dominicans are sneaky, bloodthirsty thieves. 
Dominicans consider newly arrived Haitians 
illiterate menial laborers, immediately saddling 
them with nicknames like kongo, brujo (witch) 
or rayano – because of the rays or stripes that 
the fence separating the island’s two states 
supposedly leaves on their clothes. A severely 
lopsided economic situation provides fertile 
ground for those clichés. 
RACIST STEREOTYPES
Drawn by the prospects of a job and a better life, 
an estimated 500,000 to one million Haitians 
are living on Dominican soil. Many are seasonal 
agricultural workers who never went home. Those 
who entered the country illegally are sometimes 
forcibly repatriated in unacceptable conditions, 
says an organization called Kadret. The people 
running the Welcoming Committee in the 
southern town of Thiotte say that mothers have 
been sent back to Haiti before they had time to 
fetch their children.
Compounded by racist stereotypes, those 
irregular situations weaken the migrants and 
engender a state violence that human rights 
organizations like the Refugee and Repatriated 
Citizens Support Group often condemn. “When 
my Dominican husband, who has since left me, 
In the Dominican 
Republic, Barahona  
is home primarily 
to Haitian sugar cane 
workers

groups are usually named after Haitians who 
died while crossing the border. In Ouanaminthe, 
the memory of the deadly machine-gun attack 
on a truck of illegal immigrants that occurred 
80 kilometers away is still fresh in everybody’s 
mind. That town’s committee is named after Elie 
Jean Baptiste, a young Haitian who was shot to 
death two years ago because he did not have five 
pesos to bribe the border guard. 
Groups promoting harmony between the 
two nations have recently scored some points. 
“Guilty soldiers stationed at the border might 
be dismissed or transferred,” says the Haitian 
consul in Dajabon. Several years ago, a joint 
governmental commission on migration issues 
was set up, also raising hopes. But with growing 
numbers of young Haitians attending Dominican 
high schools and universities, it may be necessary 
to wait until the next generation to see a genuine 
improvement in relations between the two parts 
of the island. 
Gwénaël le Morzellec


ransacked the house and hurt me 
in front of the children, I went 
to the police to file a complaint 
and was discriminated against 
because of the colour of my skin 
and my nationality,” says Siléna, 
showing her mutilated ear.
Estaban Sanchez, a lawyer 
from the Education and Legal 
Assistance Center in Barahona 
(southern Dominican Republic) 
says, “Justice does not apply to 
the bateyes,” the villages without 
plumbing or electricity built by 
Haitian workers. He is working on around 40 
cases of blatant violations of human and labour 
rights. 
However, Mr. Sanchez points out that the 
campaign against injustice is starting to pick 
up steam. People have formed committees to 
fight the impunity that perpetrators enjoy. Those 
Laënnec Urbon, 
the UNESCO Chair 
on Slavery at 
the University of 
Haiti, is working 
to reinvigorate 
education about the 
island’s history
