Edgar Morin’s 
most recent books 
are Eduquer pour 
l’ère planétaire, la 
pensée complexe 
comme Méthode 
d’apprentissage 
dans l’erreur 
et l’incertitude 
humaines (with 
Raoul Motta et 
Emilio-Roger 
Ciurana, Balland), 
Les Enfants du ciel : 
entre vide, lumière, 
matière (with Michel 
Cassé, Odile Jacob), 
and La Violence du 
monde (avec Jean 
Baudrillard, Ed. du 
Félin), all published 
this year

Edgar Morin
For the French 
philosopher and 
sociologist, dialogue is 
only possible between 
individuals who 
recognize each other 
as subjects with the 
same dignity and the 
same rights. That is 
why he is pessimistic 
about our era, which 
he describes as marked 
by Manichaeism 
and a breakdown in 
understanding
Could you help us define the concept of “dialogue 
among civilizations”, or even the notion of “civilization”, 
particularly in contrast to “culture”?
◗ According to a classic distinction, proposed by 19th century 
German sociology, we call culture that which belongs to 
an ethnic group, a nation or community – in other words 
its customs, beliefs, mores, rites, celebrations, gods and 
myths…. Whereas civilization is what can be transmitted 
from one culture to another. For instance, potato farming 
was transmitted from Andean America to Europe and then 
to the rest of the world, just as the use of the plough started 
in one corner of the world and spread everywhere. In other 
words, civilization is technical and material: it is what can 
be passed on.
The idea of “dialogue among civilizations”, however, 
takes the word “civilization” more in the sense of “culture” 

equality

 “Dialogue
assumes equality”

because it makes reference to a set of distinct features that 
supposedly can’t be mixed. When we speak of dialogue 
between civilizations in its ordinary meaning, we think 
in a simplified way of western civilization, or Chinese, 
Islamic, Christian, Iranian, African and so on. Yet if I speak 
of Chinese civilization, I think of the Tao or Confucianism, 
which of course can circulate. And Islamic civilization, for 
instance, encompasses countries and populations who have 
different cultures, even if it can obviously spread elsewhere 
in the world. In short, civilization and culture are vague 
concepts and subject to uncertainty!
It seems to me, however, that what UNESCO means is “We 
are different, we have different beliefs and religions, but our 
unique characteristics should not prevent us from engaging 
in dialogue.”
What does it mean for a civilization to “dialogue”?
◗ From my point of view, civilizations or cultures do 
not dialogue. Only individuals can engage in dialogue. 
Those concerned are part a culture, they are open and 
can recognize the existence of the Other. By using our 
differences as a starting-point, they think we can find 
common ground and a common language – for example 
“We are all seeking peace.” If you take the medieval 
Christian world at the time of the Crusades, dialogue 
was not possible either with Muslims or Jews. With the 
fundamentalist Islamic fanatics of today, there is no dialogue 
possible either, because for them all others are “infidel 
dogs”. As soon as the Other becomes a wrongdoer or an 
infidel, dialogue becomes impossible.
And today, are Westerners open to dialogue?
◗ Right now, a Good Empire and an Evil Empire have been 
defined as such by those in power in the United States, while 
from Al-Qaeda’s point of view it’s the exact opposite. Each 
claims to represent Good while the other represents Evil. 
And Manichean situations make dialogue impossible.
Certain Westerners, however, who have studied other 
civilizations, think that Islam cannot be reduced to 
fundamentalism; it’s a great religion that had an eminently 
civilizing role in the past, particularly in the era of Baghdad, 
the califates and Andalusia. They point out furthermore 
that it was the only great civilization of the High Middle 
Ages, that there are several interpretations of Islam, and that 
even in the heart of the Islamic world there are partisans 
of secularity. As soon as you have diversity in a culture or 
a civilization, you have people who are ready for dialogue. 
Generally they are the least conformist minds, “deviant” 
minds, sometimes the mixed-breed products of several 
civilizations.
“As soon as you have diversity in a culture or a civilization, you have people
who are ready for dialogue.“ Meeting with a song in the Caribbean
© UNESCO/Bailey

What is a “dialogue”?
◗ It’s when each person can set out his thesis, produce his 
arguments, and the other person is not prohibited from doing 
the same.
What are the conditions for dialogue?
◗ First of all, recognition of the Other as an interlocutor 
having rights equal to one’s own. Real dialogue is when 
you recognize the same dignity in the other. No dialogue is 
possible between a master and his slave. Dialogue assumes 
equality – which is a relatively new viewpoint in European 
culture! Western Europe dominated and exploited the world 
starting with the conquest of America; it practiced slave 
trading and slavery; it carried out the longest and harshest 
dominations in history. Yet in that same Europe, and perhaps 
as early as the conquest, deviant minds developed some 
of the key ideas that allow dialogue: it was Bartolomeo 
de Las Casas, Spanish priest, who said that the American 
indigenous people were humans like everyone else, and 
it was Montaigne who said we called other civilizations 
“barbarians”. It continued with Montesquieu who imagined a 
so-called Persian coming to examine France in the manner of 
an anthropologist brought up on human rights philosophy. In 
other words, Western Europe was simultaneously the home 
of domination and of ideas about emancipation. And it was 
by appropriating those ideas that colonized people were able 
to relatively obtain emancipation.
Philosopher 
   of complexity
◗ Philosopher and sociologist Edgar Morin is one of France’s 
leading contemporary thinkers. Born in Paris in 1921, he 
joined the Resistance during World War II. With university 
degrees in history, economics and law, he began his career in 
1950 at the CNRS (National Center for Scientific Research), 
with a particular concern for cross-disciplinary dialogue.
◗ He has concentrated on developing a method that can meet 
the challenge of the complexity of all modern knowledge, 
and reform politics and thought, in order to overcome the current 
global crisis. The five volumes of the “Method” – la Nature de 
la nature, la Vie de la vie, la Connaissance de la connaissance, 
Les idées, L’identité humaine – were published between 1977 
and 2001 by Seuil.
◗ His extensive body of work, translated into many languages, 
includes L’Homme et la Mort (Seuil, 1951); Introduction à 
une politique de l’homme (Seuil, 1965); L’Esprit du Temps (Grasset, 
1962-1976); Pour sortir du XXe siècle (Nathan, 1981); Les Sept 
savoirs nécessaire à l’éducation du futur (Seuil, 2000); “Seven 
Complex Lessons in Education for the Future” (UNESCO, 2001); 
Pour une politique de civilisation (Arléa, 2002).
◗ Among his other responsibilities, he is the President of 
UNESCO’s European Agency of Culture and holder of the itinerant 
UNESCO Edgar Morin Chair created in 1999 at the Universidad 
del Salvador in Argentina.
© Lefranc/Gamma, Paris

Above: Just before the 2001 legislative 
elections in Bangladesh, artists 
march against the “enemy of the nation”, 
Islamic fundamentalists.
Left: Anti-war demonstrators in New York, 
February 15, 2003 
What are the obstacles to dialogue in today’s world?
◗ There is an obstacle when what is sacred for one is not 
sacred for the other. For example, a Muslim, a Christian 
and a Jew cannot have a dialogue to establish whether 
Jesus rose on the third day, Moses received the Ten 
Commandments, or Mohammed had a revelation from the 
Angel Gabriel. But we can recognize what is sacred for the 
Other and engage in dialogue, that is to say make progress 
in knowing the Other.
Those who dialogue are a minority, but they exist. Though 
when they are very few, it does not go far.
What is the difference between dialogue 
and negotiation?
◗ Negotiating is bargaining for interests, to reach an 
agreement. Whereas genuine dialogue is understanding 
the Other. To understand the Other, first we have to try and 
know him in his entirety, know his beliefs, his customs, 
his rites, his civilization – which presupposes erudition 
or a certain education. We must understand that the 
Other is a subject like oneself, meaning an autonomous 
individual who commands respect. Then you need the 
subjective impetus of interest and sympathy. Without that, 
there is no comprehension. Today we are in conditions of 
collective hysteria and Manichaeism that prevent sympathy 
and therefore understanding. We are in a period where 
understanding is losing ground because of the war and its 
consequences.
How can we encourage this impetus towards 
sympathy, which you refer to?
◗ Take the example of France and Germany who fought for 
a century and a half. In France, it was taught in schools that 
the Germans were brutes and in Germany that the French 
were worthless. After World War II, it was decided that 
history books should be revised and that the socio-centric 
vision should be replaced by a wider point of view. But 
on the other hand, today in Western Europe, we continue 
to obscure certain parts of history when we study this 
continent. We forget, for instance, that the Ottoman Empire 
went as far as Hungary and the former Yugoslavia and that 
it played a civilizing role for centuries. You have to have a 
background in history to sympathize with the Other.
In other words, many conditions must be fulfilled before 
engaging in dialogue. Certain individuals with a key role in 
the government or civil society can also facilitate the process 
by producing manuals and books helping us to understand 
others. Mutual understanding is a condition for dialogue. 
Do you agree with Huntington that after the 
Cold War a clash between Western civilization and 
Islamic civilization was unavoidable?
◗ No, it was avoidable. But I would say that today the clash 
is under way, even if it hasn’t really occurred yet. Several 
elements point to it. For example, until the intervention 
in Iraq, the kamikaze (suicide bomber) phenomenon was 
limited to a very small group of Palestinian militants from 
the Islamic Jihad. Now it’s spread to Iraq, where you also 
find another form of kamikaze behaviour, close to what 
existed in Japan during World War II: even people who are 
not fundamentalist believers are ready to sacrifice their lives 
for their country. As soon as we’re dealing with escalation 
of war, repression of terrorism and military terror, a vicious 
circle of hate, contempt, rejection and disgust emerges, and 
perhaps at that very moment a war between civilizations 
starts, which we must combat.
How can we fight?
◗ With words, intelligence and conscience. We know what 
principles we must respect: understanding others and 
recognizing their rights. There are periods, such as ours, in 
which very little dialogue is possible.  I think we are entering 
a dark period. 
Interview by Sophie Boukhari
