 Computers have become indis-
pensable for people 
wishing to generate, access and share information, 
communicate and trade. But digital technology 
was designed primarily by people using Latin 
scripts, which only serve a fraction of the world’s 
population with its 6,000 recorded languages and 
50 odd writing systems.
Software has had to be developed to process, 
display, send and print not only scripts that 
go from left to right (as is the case with the 
European languages), but those that go from 
right to left (as with Semitic languages and with 
Mongolian which is, moreover, written vertically). 
Customized programming has been developed to 
deal with the specific features of different scripts 
and languages including, the Latin, Cyrillic, 
Arabic or Hebrew alphabets, for example, and 
symbols such as the accents that are common 
in French and Spanish. Furthermore, in many 
UNESCO is working to 
increase the presence of 
different languages on 
computers and on the 
internet as part of its effort 
to promote linguistic 
and cultural diversity and 
to support equitable 
access to information
A Chinese translator 
at work. The many 
thousands of 
Chinese ideograms 
are a challenge 
for computer and 
software developers.

Consortium have developed an ever-growing 
table, and matching computer codes, for all the 
letters, signs and symbols used in recognized 
scripts, addressing the issue of character and 
symbol recognition and use. UNESCO has been 
contributing to this standardization work through 
the Vienna-based International Information Centre 
for Terminology, Infoterm, which it founded 
in 1971.
The internet poses its own set of challenges 
in the quest for respecting diversity through the 
use of different languages and scripts in digitally-
based communication. The growth of the internet 
has also increased the need for standardization, 
to ensure that the solutions adopted by various 
operating systems are compatible and that texts 
sent from one computer to another are legible. 
Moreover, standardization is indispensable so 
that browsers and search engines such as Google 
recognize queries in different scripts. To facilitate 
recognition, standardized language tags have been 
agreed upon and embedded in webpages, to tell 
the browser which set of characters of signs is to 
be used. Such tags are, however, not available for 
all languages.
As far as scripts go, the ISO/UNICODE system 
currently covers the characters and symbols 
of some 50 scripts that support at least 244 
languages. At present it provides over 100,000 
unique codes for characters and symbols. Such 
standardization is essential for the sharing of 
languages letters change shape according to their 
placement in a word – as is the case in Arabic and 
Hebrew - or in a sentence (to become capitals) as 
is the case in Latin and Cyrillic writing.
STANDARDIZE TO SAFEGUARD 
DIVERSITY
Chinese with its thousands of ideograms, or 
symbols for words, is radically different from 
alphabet-based scripts. The ideograms pose a 
challenge in terms of keyboard layout, on screen 
rendering, printing and searching. In some cases, 
and in some languages, several systems of writing 
must be used simultaneously compounding the 
challenge. This is the case with Japanese, which 
uses three different writing systems consisting 
of ideograms, syllabaries, and an alphabet. But 
Japanese, like many non-European languages, 
occasionally uses Latin script, which must therefore 
also be supported by software alongside the script 
of the language for which it has been developed.
The International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) and the UNICODE 

information between computers, 
notably on the internet.
UNICODE is supported by “most 
operating systems, like Microsoft 
Windows, Apple OS and Linux, 
which provide the possibility of 
using the major non-Latin scripts but 
may not cater for all the symbols in 
those writing systems and their local variants,” 
explains Paul Hector of UNESCO’s Initiative Babel, 
which seeks to preserve threatened languages and 
promote multilingualism.
FLEXIBILITY OF THE SOFTWARE
UNESCO has also developed an information and 
retrieval software application, CDS/ISIS, which 
can handle different languages and writing 
systems and is available free of charge. UNESCO 
promotes the use of “open-source software” and 
“free software” such as Linux. It has contributed 
to the development of capabilities for Burmese 
and several African languages for the internet 
browser Mozilla, a free-software which is 
available free-of-charge.
Open source software and operating systems 
can be more easily adapted for a range of scripts 
and languages. “Commercial systems on the other 
hand are generally developed where there is a 
commercial incentive,” explains Davide Storti, of 
Babel. “Thus there are more software programmes 
and webpages in Icelandic, a language only 
spoken by a quarter million people than for the 
18 million Hausa speakers of Nigeria.”
It will take time to overcome all the barriers 
that have been preventing some languages from 
entering the digital age, but the commitment 
of governments and growing awareness among 
commercial and non-commercial software 
developers is encouraging, according to Paul 
Hector. He further points out that about 20 
percent of the world’s languages have no written 
form, but that the multimedia capabilities of 
today’s computers offer new opportunities 
for their entry into cyberspace and efforts are 
underway to create standardised writing systems 
for many of these traditionally oral languages.
Roni Amelan
Guidelines for
     Writing System Support
Above: The chart 
illustrates writing’s 
different directions 
– from right to left 
or left to right, 
horizontally or 
vertically (Source: 
www.sil.org) 
Right. Technology 
is allowing certain 
unwritten languages 
to enter cyberspace. 
It is too late for 
the language of 
the Zapara people 
(Ecuador and Peru) 
whose culture has 
been proclaimed 
a Masterpiece 
of the Oral and 
Intangible Heritage 
of Humanity.
