An Israeli and Christian Arab, Father 
Emile Shoufani has dedicated his life 
to encouraging dialogue between Jews 
and Muslims. In May 2003, the “Parish 
Priest of Nazareth” organized a multi-
confessional pilgrimage to Auschwitz. 
His commitment earned him the 
recognition of the 2003 UNESCO Prize 
for Peace Education
UNESCO : In 2003, the “Memory for Peace” 
trip to Auschwitz was above all a symbolic 
gesture. What, more concretely, did it do? 
Father Shoufani : The constructive element in this 
project wasn’t simply the visit to Auschwitz, 
which was important and symbolic in itself. It was 
also the preparation and the listening that went 
on beforehand that allowed us to learn about 
this part of history from the mouths of Jewish 
survivors and speakers and especially to learn 
together, as Jews and Arabs. Through this process, 
there was a big transformation in the way each 
one listened and was present with the others. And 
nobody was the same after coming back from 



“To be the same as 
everybody is hell”
© Collège Saint Joseph, Nazareth

Auschwitz. The feeling of unity, communion and 
solidarity that grew during the visit, the emotion 
and the expressions of humanity that could be felt 
in that place of inhumanity – that changed the 
people. They realized that it was about putting the 
human spirit at the centre of any conflict. All this 
education involving learning to know others and 
to be ready to listen, to shoulder responsibility for 
others, that for me was very important.
What was special about the trip for the Jews 
taking part?
◗ The reaction I heard the most was that seeing 
Auschwitz with Muslim and Christian Arabs was 
really something else. There was a feeling of new 
togetherness. What’s more, the discovery that a 
‘potential enemy’ is an imaginary construct was 
liberating for all of us.
Last year, you launched an appeal in which 
you called for a dialogue “free of all the 
suspicions accumulated” by Jews and Arabs 
over the past few generations. What did you 
mean by that?
◗ Today, we live in total ignorance about others. 
What is concentrated upon is the conflict, with its 
suffering and its traps. There has been a break in 
relations and language. We no longer understand 
each other. This idea that the other side will kill 
me if I don’t kill them first, that to continue to 
exist I have to kill others, is the biggest suspicion 
that exists today. It’s because we don’t know each 
other and because dialogue has never existed 
beyond the guns that this idea continues to fuel 
the conflict.
In your opinion, is it possible to put the 
Holocaust and the suffering of the Palestinian 
people on the same level?
◗ I don’t know where this comes from, this 
idea of always comparing suffering. Suffering is 
common to all of humanity. The idea of wanting 
to compare ourselves to say ‘I’m much more a 
victim than you’, this struggle within the cycles 
of death and violence which shows that even in 
suffering we want to come first, this is senseless. 
The Holocaust was something different in the 
sense that it was based on an ideology and 
a method of exterminating an entire people, 
wherever they were. It was the ideology behind 
the extermination of the Jewish people – and not 
just the methods used – that made the Holocaust 
so inhuman.
You also say that this conflict is not a 
religious conflict…
◗ It is not a conflict between Islam and Judaism. 
It is a conflict that takes on religious overtones, 
and that’s what’s so dangerous. Really, we are 
faced with problems of rights. The right of the 
Palestinian people, the right of the Jewish people, 
the right to dignity and to live together.
For ten years there has been much discussion 
about the notion of a clash of civilizations. 
What do you think of this?
◗ I won’t use that term. I believe more in the joy 
in the meetings of civilizations. It’s a joy to be 
able to meet others, to see that they are different 
in the way they think, their food, their style of 

dress and their religion, and to be able to share 
their culture. During the trip to Auschwitz, 
Muslims, Christians and Jews shared their 
prayers. There is a divine part in humans that can 
be shared through different religions and which 
makes communion possible. Instead of being 
prisoners of one single idea, of a monotone, the 
coming together enriched us. Today, humanity’s 
challenge is this: can we accept the differences, 
the diversity of existence, or do we all want to be 
the same? And to be the same, that is hell.
When you were studying, you learned about 
the non-directive method. How has this 
influenced your work?
◗ This method, which has been of great 
inspiration to me, involves developing a personal 
reflection in a student through dialogue. It’s 
not about making him think, but more helping 
him discover and express who he is and what 
he is thinking through a personal process that 
will change him. The classic teacher-student 
relationship doesn’t happen in our school. It’s all 
about reaching out to another, to somebody who 
is himself learning in order to embody teaching 
that is no longer external, but internal. Instead 
of ‘having’ knowledge, knowledge becomes 
personalised. We try to be, and not simply have 
something. It’s the key success of our school. 
This success isn’t only seen in the high rates of 
good exam results, but in a dynamism that creates 
beings capable of producing new ideas, thoughts 
and initiatives, and who can simply ‘be’, in a 
different fashion.
How do your students react during times 
when the crisis intensifies?
◗ You always have to be ready for very sharp, 
very violent reactions. We halt classes to give the 
students the opportunity to talk with the teachers. 
It aims to teach ways to express the hurt and the 
fear we are living with, to try to make sure that 
this expression, instead of remaining violent, is 
transformed into reflection and responsibility.
Peace education relies on responsibility. It is 
not just about singing about peace, but rather 
Father Shoufani 
shares a thoughtful 
moment at the Death 
Wall at Auschwitz 
with a group of 
Israeli Arabs and 
Jews he brought 
to the former Nazi 
death camp
© Czarek Sokolowski/AP/Sipa, Paris

Coming together 
at Auschwitz.

developing reflection and responsibility towards a 
conflict in which we have a role.
You are saying that, in fact, peace doesn’t 
so much depend on international will and 
initiatives, but more on this changing of 
mentalities?
◗ Absolutely. What’s more, it’s easy to see. No 
outside force has ever been able to establish 
peace. Both sides need to reach out to each other. 
That’s where an enormous amount of work needs 
to be done.
You have been awarded the 2003 UNESCO 
Peace Education Prize. What does that mean 
to you?
◗ For me, it’s recognition from the highest 
authority in education, culture and knowledge, 
which reinforces my idea that this work towards 
dialogue must continue. Education must be a 
priority for humanity. It is that which removes 
ignorance – the source of fear, the source of death 
and conflict.
Interview by Jeanette Blom,
Newsletter of the Human and Social Sciences Sector 
of UNESCO, No 2, July-September 2003.
© Marty Herskovitz
© Jean Pierre Billard
© Jean-Pierre Billard
