43
UNESCO | the new Courier | January 2004
Films for dialogue
Clashes between two youths 
who are flying kites in India, or 
the fear provoked in Jerusalem 
when a musical toy is passed 
around, are the topics of two 
of the five films made in 2003 
by film and television students 
in the context of the UNESCO 
project “Intensifying the dialogue 
among communities, cultures 
and civilizations”. Each received 
US$ 15,000 after selection from 
projects submitted by film and TV 
schools from all over the world. 
Each of the five fiction films, 
without dialogue, is a visual aid 
aimed at making young people 
more conscious of tolerance, 
dialogue and peace. They are 
entitled “The New Start” (India), 
“The Red Toy” (Israel), “The Wild 
East” (Romania), “The Neighbors” 
(Mexico), and “The Dance Circle” 
(Burkina Faso).
Marti prize 
travels to Mexico
Mexican sociologist Pablo 
González Casanova has won the 
2003 José Martí prize, which 
honors persons or organizations 
for their contributions to the  unity 
and integration of the countries of 
Latin America and the Caribbean, 
as well as to the preservation of 
their identities, cultural traditions 
and historical values. González 
Casanova teaches at the 
national autonomous 
university of Mexico 
(UNAM) and coordinates 
the project “Latin American 
perspectives” sponsored 
by UNAM and the United 
Nations University. He 
has distinguished himself 
through his fight against 
racism, apartheid and social 
exclusion – and is in fact donating 
his US$ 15,000 prize to some 
educational programmes in Cuba. 
The award ceremony on 
October 20, 2003, coincided with 
the 150th anniversary of the 
birth of José Martí (1853-1895), 
humanist, writer, translator, 
diplomat and teacher known as the 
“apostle of liberty”.
Gender target 
in doubt
Girls continue to face 
“sharp discrimination 
in access to schooling” 
in a majority of 
developing countries 
according to the 
Education for All 
Global Monitoring 
Report 2003/04, 
published by UNESCO 
last November.
Over the 1990s, girls’ 
enrolment increased 
faster than boys, 
but girls still make 
up 57 percent of the 
estimated 
104 million children out 
of school worldwide. 
The Report says 
gender parity in 
education remains a 
distant prospect in 
54 countries including 
16 countries in sub-
Saharan Africa as well 
as Pakistan and India. 
In China, boys will 
continue to outnumber 
girls in secondary 
schools for many years 
to come.
The need to 
supplement family 
income, along with 
cost and other barriers 
such as early marriage, 
HIV/AIDS, conflict, 
and violence in schools 
are listed as the main 
reasons keeping girls 
out of school. 
© 
U
N
ES
C
O
/E
du
ar
do
 B
ar
ri
os
© 
U
N
ES
C
O

Dialogue among 
cultures 
between cultures, through the discovery of a 
common heritage and shared values.”
In 1998, at the initiative of President Mohammad 
Khatami of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the United 
Nations General Assembly designated 2001 as 
United Nations Year of Dialogue among 
Civilizations (www.un.org/dialogue) for which 
the formal launch took place, in New York, on 
September 5, 2000, eve of the United Nations 
Millenium Summit. UNESCO and the United 
Nations, with the support of the Islamic Republic 
of Iran, organized on this occasion the first of 
what would become a series of roundtables, 
giving concrete expression to this dialogue. 
Reprinted below are selected excerpts from these 
proceedings.
dialogue and understanding 
 among cultures and 
civilizations has been at the heart of UNESCO’s 
mission since its establishment in 1946. Major 
activities undertaken over the years have, among 
others, included such flagship programmes as 
UNESCO’s General and Regional Histories series 
(see p.76), the Arabia Plan, the Mediterranean 
Programme, the Slave Route and Silk Roads, the 
Intercultural Dialogue in Central Asia Project and 
the Programme on Interreligious Dialogue.
All have helped to reveal how much different 
cultures owe to each other and, in the words 
of  UNESCO Director-General Koïchiro Matsuura, 
“highlighted the historical and contemporary 
processes that foster a positive understanding 
Promoting
Visiting Australian 
Aborigines, center, 
and Maasai tribe 
members meet in 
western Kenya near 
Loodoaraiak. As 
indigenous peoples 
and cattle herders 
they rely on the land 
for their livelihood. 
This common 
legacy brought them 
together for daylong 
discussions
© Khalil Senosi/AP/SipaPress, Paris

ars begin “Since w
,nds of menin the mi
mene minds of it is in th
defencesthat the 
of peace
d”constructemust be 

Left to right, Koïchiro Matsuura, Director-General 
of UNESCO, Seyyed Mohammad Khatami, President 
of the Islamic Republic of Iran, and Kofi Annan, 
Secretary-General of the United Nations at the 
roundtable on the eve of the Millenium Summit in 
New York on September 5th 2000.

One global civilization
❋ Alongside an infinite diversity of cultures there does 
exist one global civilization in which humanity’s ideas and beliefs 
meet and develop peacefully and productively. It is a civilization 
that must be defined by its tolerance of dissent, its celebration of 
cultural diversity, its insistence on fundamental, universal human 
rights, and its belief in the right of people everywhere to have a 
say in how they are governed. It is a civilization that we are called 
on to defend and promote as we embark on a new century.
Kofi Annan
Secretary-General of the United Nations
Polylogue
❋ We are now talking about a dialogue of civilizations, 
except that the first syllable of the word ‘dialogue’ is always 
di-, which means a conversation between two. I do not know if 
such a word already exists, but I should like to change the word 
from di- to poly-, a ‘polylogue’ among civilizations and cultures. 
With the problems of globalization only the big cultures will 
easily survive, but many of the smaller cultures will be seriously 
endangered. (...) I think that the concept of a ‘polylogue’ among 
civilizations and cultures is important for future discussion.
Masanori Aoyagi
Professor, University of Tokyo, Japan
Breezes from all directions
❋ Of course, the maintenance and promotion of identities 
and the protection of cultural and civilizational traditions, must 
not become a tool to shield ultra-nationalism and exclusionism. 
Mahatma Gandhi once said that he would certainly not like to be 
blown off his feet but would also not like to shut the windows of 
his consciousness to the rest of the world. He thought that breezes 
from all directions must blow through his house.
Jaswant Singh
Minister for External Affairs, India
A new millen 
The West versus the rest
❋ I would also like to notice that in this discussion about 
dialogue and where to go, it has always been about the West 
versus the rest. One says ‘polylogue’, but it is not. We do not 
hear about Asia and Africa trying to understand each other, or 
about Latin America and the Middle East, not because they do 
not need to, but because this whole issue of civilization is being 
approached in what I consider to be the totally false way launched 
by Samuel Huntington, rather than seeing civilization as a state, 
a single state, expressed in many different ways by different 
cultures.
Flora Lewis
Journalist, USA
It means little
❋ Though the Dogons or the Bamanan developed 
systems of thinking that referred to the extraordinary strength 
of their internal balance, nevertheless they were reduced to 
forced labour and to depersonalization in the face of better-
equipped civilizations. Though Dogon or Bamanan philosophy 
attracted a tiny number of experts, it was essentially a dead letter, 
incommunicable to the heirs of those peoples. It means little for 
an African to hear in roundtables that his continent is the cradle 
of humanity.
But that is where the respect for African cultures stops. When 
it is a question not of the past but indeed of the present of our 
continent, which is starving, ill, torn apart by debt, suddenly 
dialogue seems to become a deafness to the desperate appeal of 
a portion of forgotten humankind. We would like there to be a 
true dialogue among civilizations at last, one which is not just the 
subject of conversation among a few people from the developed 
world between the dessert and cheese courses. Rather, dialogue as 
a real commitment to respect the hundreds of millions of human 
beings who are drowning.
Alpha Omar Konaré
President of the Republic of Mali
New York, USA ,  September  5 ,  2000
Roundtable on the eve of the United Nations Mil lennium Summit
 h t tp : / /www.unesco.org/dialogue/en/publ icat ions.html

New York, 
September 11,  2001Eternal human questions
❋ Even though human beings inevitably inhabit a certain 
historical horizon, we could still aim at ‘meta-historical’ discourse. 
Indeed, a meta-historical discussion of eternal human questions 
– such as the ultimate meaning of life and death or good and 
evil – ought to substantiate and enlighten any dialogue on 
political and social issues. Without a discussion of fundamental 
questions, and by simply confining attention to superficial issues, 
dialogue will not get us far from where we currently stand. When 
superficial issues masquerade as ‘real’, ‘urgent’ and ‘essential’, 
and where there is no agreement, or even mutual understanding,  
concerning what is truly fundamental, misunderstanding and 
confusion will likely proliferate instead of any sense of empathy 
and compassion.
Seyyed Mohammad Khatami
President of the Islamic Republic of Iran
ium
The ghost of racism
❋ With all the advances in human genetics there may be 
the temptation to regard the issue of race as academic. But not 
for us Africans. Scars of historic and individual experiences 
are too deep and too fresh for us to engage in dialogue among 
civilizations without due recognition of the negative force of 
racism, even when it exists subliminally. For some time to come 
into this new century, a degree of soul-searching is an imperative 
for all dialogue between Africa and the world until the ghost of 
racism is finally laid to rest.
Olusegun Obasanjo
President of the Federal Republic 
of Nigeria
© Patrick Andrade/Gamma, Paris

A community of destinies
❋ Everyone agreed on the idea of both unity and diversity 
of cultures and of human beings. We should not say that on 
the one hand there is unity and on the other hand there is 
diversity. I believe that it is human unity, be it genetic, anatomic 
or cerebral, that produces this diversity. Diversity is not the 
opposite of unity and unity should not wipe out diversity for us. 
These are not mere formulae, these are things which each person 
must grasp for himself so that we have within us a feeling of 
the human community which does not abolish our differences. 
This human community should be deep enough so that, in this 
era of globalization, each and every individual can feel that our 
planet, Earth, is also our motherland and that today we have not 
only our own country, our own motherland, and sometimes an 
even broader attachment as Europeans do in the case of Europe, 
but that we also have a shared homeland. If we do not have 
this awareness and sense of a shared homeland, a community 
of destinies, then understanding, and therefore the dialogue of 
civilizations will be nearly impossible.
Edgar Morin
Philosopher, France
Unity in diversity
❋ In Mozambique we have made it possible for our 
people, regardless of race, colour, ethnicity, culture, political 
or religious belief, to work together for the construction and 
economic development of the country. This is the spirit of unity 
in diversity that underlies the recent economic and social progress 
the country has made.
Joaquim Alberto Chissano
President of the Republic of Mozambique



The individual and the universal
❋ A dialogue among civilizations can be seen as a 
dialogue between the individual and the universal. Great 
significance is given to this classical dialogue in the Koran when 
God, addressing men, tells them: O Men! We created males and 
females and We made peoples and tribes so that you may know 
each other! By transcending national and tribal groupings, the 
Koran has a specific purpose and reason for Man to recognize 
Man. To the motto on the Temple of Delphi, ‘Know thyself’, we 
could add ‘by knowing the Other’, or recognizing the particular 
identity of the Other. Cultures and civilizations, like individuals, 
can recognize their identities and originality only when they 
compare them to other cultures or civilizations.
Abdelaziz Bouteflika
President of the People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria

❋ We should start by thinking of what we mean when we 
use the expression ‘dialogue’. I sense that it is important to deal 
not only with dialogue among nations but also dialogue within 
nations. That is very important because dialogue among nations 
is something we are doing in this very house. For almost 60 years 
we have been dialoguing here. I will not comment on the outcome 
of this permanent dialogue but what is now very important is 
to think and reflect on dialogue within nations. Almost all the 
problems we are now facing have arisen as a consequence of 
differences within nations – internal wars, internal difficulties, 
internal civil wars – and our first objective should be to help 
countries start a real internal dialogue. There is no other way of 
having an internal dialogue than through democracy.
Democracy is indispensable for obtaining a dialogue within 
nations. 
Javier Pérez de Cuéllar
Ambassador, Peru 
Self-criticism
❋ I do not think we can avoid totally what one might 
call the purely academic aspect, the exhumation of the past. 
It is necessary, for instance, to understand absolutely what 
is happening now and why we are in a state of increasing 
intolerance in many aspects of human, social and national 
intercourse. Last century turned out to be one of the bloodiest that 
the world has known for quite a while. I should have thought that 
one reason for dialogue is to understand why human progression 
took such a seemingly retrogressive step. In the process of 
course there will have to be some soul-searching. We had some 
Left. Walking through 
Grozny, Russian 
Federation, 1996
Right. General elections 
in Cambodia, 1998 
indictments of certain civilizations, and these were quite accurate. 
One would hope that the result of dialogue would be that this 
kind of criticism would even come from within, a kind of self-
criticism. What have we done to other civilizations? What have 
we done to make other civilizations so suspicious, so resentful of 
us today?
Why is there such a catalogue of indictment from one side 
to the other?
Wole Soyinka
1986 Nobel Laureate in Literature, Nigeria
Re-written
❋ There are a number of initiatives that UNESCO has 
already taken on board. I would advise that as part of this Year of 
Dialogue, the United Nations be reminded that UNESCO is already 
on the road of dialogue among civilizations and that it needs 
resources and help for this. The Silk Road is certainly one of them 
because things happen along routes. The Slave Route is another. 
Those are just two, but other initiatives taken by UNESCO 
towards global understanding, tolerance and conviviality need 
tremendous support and should be brought into the discourse. 
Practically, UNESCO and the United Nations could do a great deal 
to encourage educational institutions in every part of the world 
to take those initiatives seriously. Lots of books need to be re-
written. Lots of histories need to be re-thought.
Rex Nettleford
Writer and Lecturer, Universityof the West Indies, Jamaica.

Left. Representatives 
of the world’s leading 
religions pray on the 
last day of a three-
day gathering in 
Aachen, Germany, on 
September 9th 2003
Right. Thai protesters 
in Bangkok, on 
October 19th 
2003, during the 
annual summit 
meeting of the Asia 
Pacific Economic 
Cooperation Forum
Too much silence
❋ The prejudices that must be overcome are still 
numerous, and numerous are the distortions that mark the way 
information is treated in presentations of the past and present 
histories of formerly colonized peoples. Too much silence 
surrounds the major facts of their history; the knowledge of which 
is essential in understanding present-day situations.
Their cultures have often been ignored, minimized or 
consciously biased, while the cultures of others have been 
unreasonably glorified. If we wish to instil respect for the cultures 
of others in the minds of the young, they must be educated and 
informed without excessive chauvinism. They must become 
aware that we all belong to the same human community, and that 
the accomplishments of each nation are an enrichment for the 
others. Clearly ignorance linked to illiteracy, poverty and isolation 
excludes too many people, denying them access to modern 
knowledge, which deprives them of the instruments for a better 
appreciation of what goes beyond the strict limits of their own 
world.
Abdoulaye Wade
President of the Republic of Senegal
The ice of Yalta
❋ It should be remembered that upon the collapse of 
communism, when the ice of Yalta melted, there were reasons to 
fear the revival of ethnic and civilization clashes still smouldering 
from the first half of the 20th century. However, we opted for 
good neighbourliness, openness and co-operation. The friendship 
of Poland and Lithuania may be an inspiring example here, and 
likewise excellent Polish-German relations, Polish-Ukrainian 
partnership, or the developing Polish-Russian dialogue.
All of Central Europe, with so many historical and cultural 
threads woven into its heritage, is today an area of stability, 
security and co-operation. It enters the structures of a united 
Europe, while also remaining open to dialogue with the East and 
with other civilizations. This is our contribution to forming the 
world of the 21st century, a world of interdependence and mutual 
understanding.
Aleksander Kwasniewski
President of the Republic of Poland
Globalization 
 
Vilnius, Lithuania ,  Apr i l  23-26 ,  2001
International Conference: 
Dialogue among Civilizations 
 http:/ /www.unesco.org/dialogue/en/publications.html
© Dagmar Meyer/EPA/Sipa Press

No civilization 
by itself
❋ No civilization by itself can claim 
to represent all humanity or to assume 
full responsibility for it. Neither can one 
single civilization claim exclusive rights to 
provide a universally valid vision of how 
to be a good human being and how to 
live wisely in today’s world. We may find 
answers to these questions only through 
dialogue among civilizations – or by means 
of a ‘polylogue’.
Only by participating in a polylogue of 
civilizations can a civilization get to know 
itself better and put its core values to a critical test. Only a lively 
polylogue of civilizations can help safeguard mutual respect and 
tolerance, dignity and partnership among people of different 
cultural experiences.
Valdas Adamkus 
President of the Republic of Lithuania, 1998-2003
Imperialistic goals
❋ Themes such as identity and otherness are not 
exclusively philosophical questions to be dealt with only by 
professional philosophers. In fact, the theoretical problem of 
defining identity in such a way that it does not lead to exclusion 
and discrimination is related to other, more urgent practical 
issues. For example, how can we begin a real dialogue while we 
are still far from a wholly inclusive concept of humanity and 
while at both national and international level, discrimination 
and exclusion are still facts of everyday life? How can we ignore 
the fact that even our contemporary world has its own ways 
of placing barriers between different human groups, and that 
sometimes political imperialistic goals are pursued by drawing 
wholly negative pictures of other cultures and civilizations? How 
can we achieve a real dialogue among civilizations if science and 
technology remain exclusively in the hands of a few powerful 
sectors of humanity? 
Seyyed Mohammad Khatami
President of the Islamic Republic of Iran



Dialogue among religions
❋ A complicated and in itself unique dialogue among 
different religions is currently underway in Ukraine. It should 
be noted that the mutual enrichment between different religions 
occurred many times in Ukraine. The orthodox Kyiv-Mohyla 
Collegium actively and intentionally used accomplishments of 
Roman Catholic theology in the seventeenth century. More than 
105 different religious groups work in my country today. The 
dialogue between them is conducted within the framework of the 
All-Ukrainian Union of Churches and Religious Organizations. 
This forum was set up for the purpose of resolving disputes 
through joint efforts of the state and the religious communities.
Leonid Kuchma
President of Ukraine
Counter-balancing forces
❋ May I remind you that France also was built by the 
contributions of numerous civilizations. A France which likes 
to incorporate those who come from elsewhere, benefiting from 
their knowledge and granting them citizenship as a passport to 
universality. A France that has chosen Europe yet remains open to 
the world in all its diversity. A France which sees in Francophonie 
an exemplary dialogue among cultures, one of those counter-
balancing forces which so many of us feel we need.
Jacques Chirac
President of the French Republic
 and cultural
diversity © Lalit Sakchai/AP/Sipa Press

Common  
and  
Monoculture
❋ While international 
exchanges are amplified, citizens feel 
more and more that the management 
of the world has been confiscated from 
them and that a ‘monoculture’ is being 
imposed on them. Confronted with this 
loss of decision-making capacity, this 
loss of references, this loss of identity, 
the temptation might be to withdraw 
into oneself, to fixate on the reassuring 
and set values of the past, in a climate 
of intolerance frequently verging on 
fanaticism, hatred and rejection of 
the Other. And if we wish to avoid 
that yesterday’s Cold War turns into a 
cultural confrontation, stirred by vast 
movements of international migration, 
we must, in the broadest sense of the 
word, democratize globalization before 
globalization denatures democracy.
Boutros 
Boutros-Ghali
Secretary-General of the 
International Organization of the 
Francophonie
The interaction 
of migrants
❋ The cultures of our world 
are the product of the interaction of 
migrants through the millennia. Look 
at the great and ancient civilizations 
of Asia. India and China have always 
accepted and amalgamated outsiders, 
forging their unique and lasting 
cultures through a composite of 
influences from outside – religious, 
military, economic. They are living 
examples of the power of cultural 
integration and assimilation. Look at 
the world of Islam, created through the expansion of a 
militant religion whose proponents unified vast territories 
and many ethnic groups around an idea still strong and 
valid today. Islam can serve as a living example of the 
power of multiculturalism.
Brunson McKinley
Director-General of the International Organization 
for Migration
Above. Residents 
of Siedlce, Poland, 
wave flags during a 
meeting with European 
Commission President 
Romano Prodi, 
May 19, 2003
Right. March in favour 
of peace and against 
military action in 
Afghanistan, Madrid, 
October 10, 2001
© Sipapress, Paris

The principle of secularism
❋ The meeting points of ancient Trade Routes may lie in 
other parts of the world, but India has always been a meeting 
point of Faith Routes. Besides all the faiths that originated here, 
India welcomed the Jews, Christians, the Catholics, Zoroastrians, 
Muslims and people belonging to other religions. We are 
proud of India’s age-old adherence to the ideal of Sarva Pantha 
Samabvhava – which means, respect for all faiths. I suggest 
that this principle of secularism, which is enshrined in India’s 
Constitution, should be accepted by all countries. Tolerance 
should become a global ideal. This would go a long way in 
promoting understanding, cooperation and peace among peoples 
belonging to different faiths and cultures.
Inaugural Address by
Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee
Prime Minister  of India
The threat of terrorism 
❋ The September 11th tragedy has drawn attention to 
the magnitude of the threat of terrorism and the need to take a 
common action to encounter this threat globally.
Terror in all shapes and forms is a global issue that has 
no boundaries. It cannot be linked to any religion, ethnicity 
or culture. Lack of basic needs, unfair distribution of wealth 
among the nations of the world, hunger, marginalization, 
poverty, unemployment, poor housing, illiteracy, oppression, 
totalitarianism, violation of human rights, minorities’ problems, 
corruption and disorder can in no way justify but only provide 
the grounds that breed terror and violence. In combat against 
terrorism, these underlying ills must be addressed urgently. 
Recep Tayyip Erdogan
Prime Minister of the Republic of Turkey
Delhi, India ,  Ju ly  9-10 ,  2003
International Ministerial Conference on the Dialogue 
among Civilizations
 http://www.unesco.org/dialogue/delhi
 http://www.unesco.org/dialogue/delhi/delhi_declaration.html  
Mass-scale exchange programs 
❋ Each year, China sends over one hundred thousand of 
its students and scholars to study overseas. In many countries, 
the number of Chinese students represents the largest among 
international enrollment figures. Meanwhile, in order to further 
facilitate mutual learning, China has become home to thousands 
of students from almost every nation in the world. China 
has made great efforts to actualize the mutual recognition of 
educational credentials with other countries, and the central 
government has issued a new regulation on China’s foreign 
cooperative schools. Such mass-scale exchange programs create 
numerous chances for dialogue among students and scholars 
from different cultural communities. In schools, curricula are 
redesigned to expose students to inter-lingual and cross-cultural 
contents. Students are trained to be globally oriented with high 
awareness and adequate capability for trans-cultural dialogue, and 
to do their utmost for world peace and human development. 
Zhang Xinsheng
Deputy Minister of Education, China
© Lyon Santiago/AP/Sipa Press, Paris

UNESCO stands ready 
❋ In regard to the dialogue among civilizations, my 
perspective from UNESCO convinces me of three important 
things. First, I believe that the new approaches to dialogue need 
to be rooted in concrete expressions of human interaction, not 
just in general agreements on principles. We must move from 
talking about dialogue to actual engagement in dialogue on 
matters of substantive concern - for example, on practical matters 
such as intercultural exchanges and tourism; the management 
of trans-boundary freshwater resources; the handling of issues 
in bioethics; or regional approaches to curriculum renewal and 
texbook revision.
Second, the new approaches and modalities are most likely to 
be found in those fields of human endeavour where the interface 
between knowledge and ignorance, between understanding and 
prejudice, is most acute. I believe that this interface is especially 
evident in precisely those areas covered by UNESCO’s fields of 
competence - education, the sciences, culture and communication. 
Here, the ethical and intellectual terms of debate are highly 
attuned to the character and needs of intercultural dialogue. 
Furthermore, it may well be at the junctures between these fields 
- for example, between education and science, between culture 
and technology, between social science and communication - that 
the most fruitful interactions can take place.
Third, for these reasons, I believe that UNESCO is the agency 
best placed within the UN system to help the dialogue among 
civilizations move into a new phase of development, through a 
broad-based collaboration with Member States, other members of 
the UN family, civil society, the scientific, artistic and academic 
communities, and other partners. UNESCO stands ready to 
provide the nurturing environment in which a new global 
dialogue can flourish.
Koïchiro Matsuura
Director-General of UNESCO
The culture of dialogue 
❋ What is now needed is concerted action on the 
development of a curriculum that can bring home to the students 
three important lessons, namely, (i) that the entire humanity 
shares one basic impulse towards progress and by sharing this 
impulse humanity can be seen as one vast surge of adventure 
which aims at continuous self-exceeding; (ii) that humanity, in 
its mature developments, tends to reject uniformity and adopts 
the law of unity that permits and respects cultural diversities; 
and (iii) that the future progress of humankind is bound up 
with the development of a new science and art of living together 
which necessitates adherence to the law of mutuality rather than 
conflict and the law of varied expressions rather than any uniform 
monotone. Education should aim at strengthening democratic and 
universal human values and respect for human rights. Education 
is the most powerful instrument for preparing a mind which can 
promote the culture of dialogue.
M. M. Joshi
Human  Resource Minister
Government of India
A common understanding
❋ The West faces some critical basic questions from 
Muslims around the world. Is the West not applying double 
standards? Does the West not invoke human rights merely as a 
means to put pressure on other nations, not to better people’s 
lives?  Our response to such questions must be to intensify 
the dialogue among civilizations at all levels, to renew our 
commitment to and our call for the peaceful resolution of 
differences, mutual tolerance and mutual respect. We believe in 
the principles of justice and the rule of law. The more prominent 
their role also in international relations, the greater the benefit for 
peace and stability. 
Internationally agreed norms and human rights obviously have 
a key role to play. We need to seek a common understanding of 
those universal values that will guide us through the 21st century. 
Real dialogue requires a solid consensus on those values and 
norms we hold in common.
Heimo Richter
Ambassador, Germany
Hundreds of Liberian women in a peaceful 
demonstration, call on the Liberian government and 
LURD rebels to cease fire and hold a dialogue for the 
sake of the women and children of Liberia
© Flomoku Pewee/AP/Sipa Press, Paris

Open-ended process 
❋ The dialogue among civilizations must of necessity be 
an ongoing, open-ended process, which should be allowed to run 
its course freely across civilizations. In our present-day world, 
however, the inescapable phenomenon of globalization impinges 
upon the realization of this ideal. As this historical process 
cuts across economic, trade, and cultural boundaries, and 
pursues objectives that very often run counter to the promotion 
of intercultural dialogue and understanding among nations, it 
impacts inevitably and strongly on human interaction and more 
importantly, on the sustainability or survival of minority cultures.... 
Sonia Mendieta de Badaroux
Ambassador, Honduras
The only 
hope 
❋ Internationalism 
is compatible with 
cultural diversity. It 
promotes cross-cultural 
understanding. Conversely, 
nationalism impedes 
such understanding. To 
engage in a dialogue 
among civilizations is 
to celebrate the spirit of 
internationalism. Today, 
when that spirit has been shaken by indiscriminate terrorist 
attacks, the spread of weapons of mass destruction, the lack of 
international cooperation concerning nuclear, environmental, 
and other issues, and above all by what appears to be the 
resurgence of national egoisms all over the world, it is particularly 
gratifying that so many delegates from so many countries have 
come together to affirm their commitment to inter-civilizational 
dialogue. Such dialogue can only strengthen internationalism, the 
only hope for a secure future for the entire human community.
Akira Iriye
Professor, Harvard University, USA
A group of tourists 
travelling through 
Amazonia, Brazil

The gaze of  
We all think the same way 
❋ If somebody put a gun up to my head and asked me 
what was anthropology’s greatest stride during the last century, 
I would readily say that it was exposing the fallacious character 
of racist myths, a discovery that dates back to Franz Boas’ work 
in New York at the beginning of the 20th century. Boas showed 
that mentally, there are no irreducible differences between human 
communities and that, basically, we all think the same way. In 
particular, there is no such thing as primitive thought. “Savage 
thought” does not exist. We are all primitives. We are the products 
of an evolutionary process that has lasted the same length of time 
for all of us. Differences in mental patterns between cultures do 
not result from any innate biological determining factor nor a 
typical historical process. We built our cultural differences; we can 
get rid of them if we want to.
Felipe Fernandez-Armesto
Professor at the University of London
Paris ,  January  30 ,  2003
Civilizations under the gaze of the Other II
International symposium
 http : / /www.unesco.org/dialogue/regard2/
Above. 
Johannesburg: 
grafitti wall 
dedicated to the 
memory of victims 
of violence
© Tait Selwyn/Gamma, Paris

“Essentialisation”
❋ In terms of dialogue between civilizations, we must 
avoid swinging from one “essentialisation” to another. History 
abounds with as many examples of Muslim tolerance towards 
Jews as it does with theologians’ violent calls to exterminate them 
in the name of God. It is as useful to teach the history of Muslim 
Andalusia in middle schools, for example, as it is fallacious to 
evade events such as the massacre of Grenada’s Jews in 1066. In 
this framework, the idea of tolerance must also be explained in 
its condescension, in the balance of power that it presupposes. 
Historicizing it, resisting anachronism, does not weaken the 
model but, on the contrary, puts it back into perspective and 
healthily inscribes it in the cycles of tension and conflicts we 
witness today.
Jocelyne Dakhlia
Research Director at the EHESS, Paris
 the Other
Who writes whose history?
❋ There is no denying that instead of helping to peacefully 
settle conflicts, the study and teaching of history is too often 
part of the problem. This is because the history taught does not 
always educate. At times, it inadvertently or deliberately fans 
the flames of conflicts or encourages repression, segregation, the 
manipulation of minds and even war. Accepting the gaze of the 
Other also means recognizing that peace and respect for human 
rights depend on an in-depth overhaul of educational content in 
order to promote quality education that will ensure the teaching 
of universally-shared values and civic education to foster peace.
A few figures speak volumes. In 1994, 4,363 history and 
geography books were published in France, 4,704 in the United 
States, 10,781 in the United Kingdom, 1 in Benin, 51 in Morocco 
and 208 in South Africa. In those conditions, what can people 
living in Africa, Asia and Latin America know about their 
civilizations and cultures? Who writes whose history? What gaze 
can the Other have, what gaze can be had of the Other, which 
amounts to asking, of oneself? The dialogue between civilizations 
is also important in the fight against poverty and inequality, 
which UNESCO has made a strategic priority.
Jean-Yves Le Saux
Office of Strategic Planning, UNESCO
A Palestinian girl watches Israeli 
tanks during a raid in the northern 
Gaza Strip on July 29, 2002 
following a Palestinian mortar 
attack
© 
Is
m
ae
l M
oh
am
ad
/G
am
m
a,
 P
ar
is

Portrait of a city 
under siege: 
Sarajevo, 1993 
The most powerful lever
❋ Education is the most powerful lever for promoting 
tolerance, understanding, dialogue, respect for diversity, 
human rights and democratic principles. The combination of 
these values and dimensions is what UNESCO calls the “quality 
of education”. It often requires an extensive revision of school 
textbooks, especially with regard to the critical presentation of 
relations between different cultures and among neighbouring 
countries. Strengthening cooperation in the area 
of university teaching means introducing and firmly rooting such 
changes in the region and fostering the emergence of a 
new generation of teachers and managers of modern teaching 
methods.
Education policies must ensure that cultural diversity 
becomes the driving force behind social cohesion. The systematic 
effort that education systems make to strengthen democratic 
citizenship and respect for human rights is an integral and 
essential part of this cohesion. Education for pluralism thus 
becomes an influential partner for political action in favour of 
pluralism.
Koïchiro Matsuura
Director-General, UNESCO
International convention 
❋ During the UNESCO General Conference this autumn, 
all of us were called on to state an opinion on the timeliness 
of drafting an international UNESCO convention to safeguard and 
promote cultural diversity. Switzerland believes it is important 
to seize this opportunity and will come out in favour of such 
an initiative. Because of its long-standing cultural mandate, 
expertise in the area of cultural diversity and universal character, 
UNESCO is the rightful and appropriate forum for drafting such 
a convention.
David Streiff
Director of the Federal Office of Culture, Switzerland
The lessons
of hist Melting pot
❋ Age-old Arab culture, we all know, is a synthesis, born 
of the marvels of Mesopotamia and ancient Egypt, patiently 
brought together with the mysteries of India and the Far East, 
the feats of the Phoenicians, the boldness of the Carthaginians, 
and the wisdom of the Greeks and Romans. In truth, it would be 
more appropriate to describe it as a melting pot of highly spiritual 
cultures, in which the human soul, totally purified, was able to 
open up to the Absolute and receive the Heavenly message.
Indeed, God chose our land as the locus of divine revelation, 
first Ur, then Egypt, Palestine and Arabia. Abraham, the father 
of all prophets, Moses, Jesus and Muhammed all had the same 
message: Do unto others as you would have them do unto you, 
love your neighbour as yourself.
Mongi Bousnina
Director General of The Arab League Educational Cultural 
and Scientific Organization  
A new mosaic
❋ Bosnia and Herzegovina is a special place for promotion 
of dialogue between different religions, cultures and civilisations. 
By using the basic principles of tolerance, by taking care of their 
own religious, cultural and national identity and by accepting 
others in their differences, peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina are 
trying to bear witness to a probability of coexistence of different 
cultural circles and to putting together pieces of a new mosaic of 
common culture.
In the country, which has still been curing its war-time 
wounds, traumas and physical pain and which will for a long time 
remain saddled by tragic heritage of the last war, we try to use 
open dialogue and conversation even on the most painful issues 
as means of looking for paths of reconciliation and forgiveness.
Dragan Čović
Member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina tripartite Presidency
Ohrid, Macedonia ,  August  29-30 ,  2003
Regional Forum “Dialogue between Civilizations”
 http : / /www.unesco.org/dialogue/ohrid

A model for other regions 
❋ It is important to note that- from the Medieval Ages 
until the end of the 19th century - religion based animosities 
were much less frequent in the region than in Western Europe. 
When the main objective was the establishment of a central 
administration on the basis of a French example, leaders of the 
region were confronted with a contradiction that still exists today. 
What is more important: a unified, homogenous nation state or 
preserving the multifaceted culture of those living in the region? 
We still do not have a satisfactory answer to this question. It was 
this dilemma that was the cause of so much suffering and tragedy 
for the people of this region in the 1990s.
If our present meeting was to have a practical objective, then 
it should be to rally the values of cultural and religious diversity 
against hegemony and standardizing aspirations. UNESCO can 
play an active role in promoting the stability of the region, if 
after the adoption of the universal charter on cultural diversity; it 
develops the accompanying convention and helps to put that into 
practice. This is a significant challenge for all of us: to protect the 
autonomy of the individual from obsolete ideological concepts. 
Countries of South-eastern Europe are destined to use their values 
of cultural and religious diversity and to serve as a model for 
other regions of our continent.
Ferenc Mádl
President of the Republic of Hungary
Culture corridors 
❋ Several years ago, at the initiative of the Bulgarian 
National Committee of ICOMOS [International Council on 
Monuments and Sites], an international team was set up, which 
included representatives of all countries from South-East Europe. 
This team developed a common methodology, on the basis of 
which each country systematized its cultural and historical 
heritage into ages, plotting it onto its national map. Then, a 
smaller team aggregated these maps and made a common general 
map of the cultural and historical heritage of Southeast Europe.
The result has been amazing! The preserved and historical 
heritage formed clearly visible culture corridors, which were 
traced across our lands millennia and centuries back, and today 
they have not only survived as the living memory of civilizations 
in our region but stand as some of the strongest ties among 
our people. These cultural and historical corridors disregard 
boundaries. They start from the Adriatic, run across several 
countries and end at the coasts of the Black Sea. Others set 
off from the Mediterranean Sea and reach all the way into the 
Carpathian Mountains. Still others trail along the course of the 
Danube. These corridors or as the scholars called them, “cultural 
and historical routes”, date from various ages, they were set up by 
various civilizations in which our forefathers also had their share, 
yet they are here, in our lands, and they are our most treasured 
heritage through which we can and must present ourselves before 
the world, as one of the cradles of the world civilization.
Georgi Parvanov
President of the Republic of Bulgaria
ory
© Laurent van der Stockt/Gamma, Paris

Family reunion after 30 years 
between a Greek Cypriot and her 
uncle, a Turkish Cypriot in the 
Turkish part of Nicosia, July 2003
International anti-terror coalition 
❋ We witness with attention that the major conflicts in 
the region and the world are not the conflicts instigated by ethnic 
or religious motifs, but conflicts among the values of freedom, 
democracy and emancipated societies on one hand, and anti-
values on the other hand, such as totalitarism, extreme fanaticism 
and terrorism. When Albania joined the international anti-terror 
coalition led by the USA, it joined exactly for the purpose of 
protecting these major values of today’s civilization. We are 
convinced that this is an essential contribution to the preservation 
of peace and development.
Alfred Moisiu
President of the Republic of Albania
A window
❋ Cyprus was recently and formally welcomed to the 
European family. However, it still remains open to the diversity 
of its inner self. Significant efforts have been made, especially 
intensified during the last months due to political circumstances, 
in order to establish a solid channel of communication between 
the two communities, which co-exist on the island. This major 
process of intercultural contact has launched the initiation of 
the breaking down of stereotypes, which imprisoned for many 
years the thoughts of the people of Cyprus and constituted an 
important obstacle for the development of intercultural dialogue, 
thus facilitating outside interferences in the internal affairs of the 
Republic of Cyprus. Our aim is to take all necessary measures that 
promote a spirit of co-operation and establish peaceful conditions 
for the sake of prosperity and development of the country and its 
people as a whole. We are nevertheless aware, that we may have 
opened a window, however there is a lot to be done until the gate 
is really open, and the island is reunified.
Petros M. Kareklas
Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Education and Culture, 
Republic of Cyprus
The outskirts of Europe
❋ The fate and the success of the new Europe and the 
European Union will depend on how relations among countries 
are arranged and on how the countries and nations that have for a 
long time been seen as ‘the outskirts of Europe’ are integrated in 
the European Union.
Stipe Mesíc
President of the Republic of Croatia
The priority of the question 
❋ Dialogue implies questioning by its very nature. 
Without accepting the priority of the question over the answer, 
we neither can conduct a genuine dialogue, nor develop a new 
understanding, nor gain new knowledge.
Ahmed Jalali
Islamic Republic of Iran, 
President UNESCO General Conference (2001-2003)
Life on the crossroads 
❋ There are churches and mosques, and synagogues and 
ancient sites standing side by side under this same sky. This is 
where the main roads connecting the East and the West went 
through. We understand our life on the crossroads of civilizations 
as an advantage and a treasure rather than as a curse and 
wretched fate.
Thanks to such understanding, our people have managed, in 
spite of all differences and attempts to manipulate national or 
religious feelings, to build permanent relationships of joint life 
and respect. The way in which the Republic of Macedonia faced 
the challenge in 2001 showed that there is only one solution to 
problems - dialogue. The culture of dialogue in our country is 
one of our most genuine values. In that spirit of dialogue and 
understanding, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia has 
undertaken all necessary measures not only to pave the way for 
the future in the shared homeland of all its citizens, but also to 
heal the wounds from the past, where a special place is given to 
the programme for renewing and reconstructing monuments of 
Christian and Islamic provenance damaged in the military actions 
of 2001.
Ilinka Mitreva
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Republic of Macedonia
© Katia Christodoulou/EPA/Sipa Press, Paris

M E S S A G E  F R O M  O H R I D
adopted by the Regional Forum on the Dialogue among 
Civilizations, Ohrid, August 29-30, 2003
EXCERPTS:
Forgiveness will help rid the region from the biases and 
ignorances of the past.  A new generation of democratically 
elected leaders in the region promises a more peaceful future 
given their dedication to dialogue and genuine cooperation.
We are determined to demonstrate that the region can turn 
itself, through its own strategies and effective means of 
dialogue and engagement, into a vibrant space where people 
can jointly rediscover the stimulating wealth of differences, 
cultural exchanges and interaction as well as their multiple 
identities. 
Free societies can be created only upon the existence of free 
individuals, who are sovereign in choosing their political 
status and in following their own economic, social and cultural 
development.
We stress the equality of each cultural tradition and recognize 
the value of each civilizing experience as an invaluable and 
integral part of the commonly shared human experience […] 
Indeed, diversity is not a threat. 
We are convinced that dialogue represents a new paradigm of 
security, especially in a globalizing world.
We believe in an active role of the private sector in promoting 
economic development of the region.  
Education remains the most fundamental basis for promoting 
tolerance, understanding, dialogue, respect for diversity, human 
rights and democratic principles. These values and dimensions 
together make up what is called “quality education”, which 
often entails a revision of school curricula and textbooks. 
Scientific and technological cooperation is an important domain 
where progress can and must be made, in particular through the 
rebuilding of scientific networks and infrastructures.
Once respect for cultural heritage allows people to understand 
themselves, it will also be a key to understand others 
[…] It is imperative to develop a culture of conservation and 
preservation. This will help avoid that cultural heritage becomes 
a symbolic target of aggression and intentional destruction. 
The Ohrid Forum welcomes the project Cultural Routes in 
Southeast Europe.  
Educational systems need to be adapted to create a new 
computer-literate generation.
Strengthening independent media and its professionalism, 
upholding freedom of the press and of expression, and 
promoting the right of access to information and knowledge are 
major challenges for Southeast Europe. 
Drawing lessons from history, we agree that reconciliation is the 
path for our common future. 
See full text: www.unesco.org/dialogue2001/ohrid/message.htm
In central Pristina, a billboard heralds peaceful relations 
between Albanians, Serbs and Roma (Kosovo, 2003)
© 
N
oe
l Q
ui
du
/G
am
m
a,
 P
ar
is
