Everyone is in favour of sustainable 
development. But how does it 
fit into urban planning? Five small 
historical coastal cities around the 
Mediterranean served as case studies. 
First evaluation
On 
Morocco’s Atlantic coast, 
Essaouira, city in the wind, 
is a port town with magical 
charm. For decades, the exceptional site and its 
intense cultural life have attracted artists and 
tourists, both Moroccan and foreign. But a slew 
of problems threatens to destroy the wonderful 
attributes of the old Mogador: coastal erosion, 
salt water seeping into the aquifers, depletion 
of natural resources, overpopulation, rapid 
socio-economic transformations, dilapidation of 
buildings – including the famous ramparts filmed 
by Orson Welles for his “Othello”.
Today, the collective will of the municipal 
and provincial authorities, local associations 
and a number of foreign partners is in the 
process of reversing the trend. They were able 
to combine their efforts when Essaouira in 1997 
became the first “case study” city of the Small 
Historical Coastal Cities Network, launched by 
UNESCO. Within that framework, ramparts and 
monuments have been restored, public spaces 
laid out, and a renovation of the sanitation and 
rubbish disposal systems is underway. A waste-
water treatment plant and a supervised dump 
are planned.

Much remains to be done, as the project 
evaluator, Algerian geographer Rachid Sidi 
Boumedine, has noted. He mentions “mixed 
results” in Essaouira.  Tourism has picked up, 
for example, notably through an increase in real 
estate transactions, but this economic boost has 
had perverse side effects, such as driving out the 
poorest residents to the city limits. Furthermore, 
the Mellah district, close to the wall, “is still in a 
state of advanced dilapidation when Essaouira’s 
Medina is included (since 2001) on the World 
Heritage List.” 
Nonetheless, a method of operation that 
associates all concerned actors has been put 
in place and has created momentum. This 
inclusive approach is the distinguishing 
characteristic of the “Urban Development 
and Freshwater Resources: Small Historical 
Coastal Cities” project, launched by UNESCO 
in 1996, aimed primarily at helping these cities 
to adopt urban planning policies that integrate 
the four pillars of sustainable development: 
environmental, economic (based in this case 
on tourism and highlighting heritage), social 
and participatory.
The project is currently underway in four 
other case study cities in the Mediterranean 
with the same problems as Essaouira: Mahdia 
(Tunisia), Omišalj (Croatia), Saïda (Lebanon,) 
and Jableh (Syria). All those involved in the 
project – architects, urban planners, geologists, 
hydrogeologists, mayors and UNESCO experts 
– participated in the project’s first evaluation in 
December 2003, in Essaouira.
What makes these five port cities special is their 
long, rich history, which goes back to prehistory 
Essaouira 
(Morocco).
Left, northern bastion 
of ramparts.
Middle. Ruined 
houses behind the 
northern Mellah 
rampart in the 
medina
in the case of Saïda and Mahdia, also former royal 
capitals, while Omišalj was once a major spiritual 
centre. They developed on sites that offered 
plentiful water, a sheltered spot for fishing and 
then trade, and surrounding fertile land.
Though each has a well-defined identity, all five 
now face the same challenges: how to restore a 
historical centre and balance the needs of modern 
urban development with respect for cultural 
heritage? Promote tourism as well as protect the 
environment? Without driving out the inhabitants, 
but on the contrary enlisting their participation 
in the process? And take advantage of the 
opportunity to train local artisans and architecture 
students? In short, how to create sustainable 
development on a small city scale?
MULTIPLE PARTNERSHIPS
Because these cities were looking for solutions, 
they chose to join UNESCO’s Small Historical 
Coastal Cities Network – which gave them a 
much broader choice of partners. Omišalj, for 
instance, a small city perched above the Adriatic 
on the Croatian island of Krk, signed a sustainable 
development cooperation accord with Taglio 
di Po (Italy) in 1997. Joining the network in 
1998, it became the focus of a study on water 
resources, nature preservation and safeguarding 
of cultural heritage, a joint effort of the Institute 
of architecture and urban planning of Venice, the 
Gembloux Agronomy Faculty, and the Zagreb 
Architecture Faculty in Croatia.
The study also made suggestions that made it 
possible to act quickly, with the participation of 
numerous specialists and students from Croatia 
and other European countries. Since 2000, Omišalj 
Left page:
Northern facade of 
the Mahdia (Tunisia) 
peninsula 
© Dominique Harger

has undertaken archeological excavation of the 
Roman site Fulfinium, restoration work on the 
paleochristian Mirine Basilica and an inventory 
of urban heritage, at the same time starting an 
operation that involves the public.
Commenting on Omišalj, Philippe Pypaert, 
specialist in UNESCO’s Venice office, explains that 
“beyond responding to a call for technical help, 
UNESCO has fulfilled its role of catalyst – which 
is to be effective but also respectful of local 
culture, and to succeed in promoting development 
based on local capacities. It did so by enlarging 
the debate and urging the municipality to take 
the longer, more demanding road, which was to 
elaborate a complex, well-defined action plan.”
The project’s strong point is its great flexibility. 
The idea is not to apply the same formula 
everywhere but to allow local actors to come up 
with their own solutions. In Tunisia, Mahdia’s 
distinguishing feature is a medina built on a 
peninsula. Since joining the network in 1999, the 


city has decided to build its new marina closer to 
the sebkha (coastal saltwater lagoon) instead of 
on the Punic port, and it has begun to draw up a 
plan to safeguard and revitalize the Medina. The 
line of dunes along the coast on the north beach, 
destabilized by a block of hotels, is now secured 
with new fencing, making it possible to expand 
the beach and use the boulevard again. Other 
projects include a waste-water treatment plant, 
the creation of wetlands, and the relocation of 
polluting industries. And Madhia’s Demonstration 
House is one of the project’s most original 
creations (see box).
On the coast of Lebanon, Saïda – the old Sidon 
– joined the Network in 2001. The first students, 
French and Lebanese, arrived at its Demonstration 
House in 2003 (see box) and its seafront 
boulevard is now a pedestrian promenade, as in 
Jableh, Syria. The latter, which became a case 
study city in 2002, plans to set up a training 
workshop in urban management and regional 

Jableh, universities are supporting the project by 
providing training for local participants and by 
drawing up plans for intervention.”
In terms of raising awareness of sustainable 
development, the impact is obvious, and not 
just on local authorities. In Croatia, Pypaert is 
pleased to note “the enormous echo we have 
encountered in the region.” In 2001, for instance, 
seven administrative units in Krk signed a plan 
to manage water resources on the island; Rijeka, 
the capital of the province, is considering creating 
a sustainable development school and Agenda 21 
committees have multiplied along the Croatian 
coast. In Essaouira, a protest movement formed 
in October 2003 to oppose a plan to build a hotel 
complex along the wall.
Six years after its launch, the Small Historical 
Coastal Cities Network continues to expand. 
Besides the case study cities, it has two partner 
cities, Kotor (Serbia-Montenegro) and La Rochelle 
(France). North and south of the Mediterranean, 
cities, universities and associations have signed 
a number of bilateral conventions. At the 
December evaluation meeting in December 2003, 
participants were unanimous: “Let’s go on!” 
Monique Perrot-Lanaud
development, while Syrian universities and 
institutions have begun the first housing surveys.
The project has developed its methodology 
and capitalized its assets in the course of action, 
as noted by its evaluator. At the beginning, 
he says, “European universities did mostly 
surveys (architectural surveys in Essaouira) and 
analysed and experimented on a limited scale 
(Demonstration House in Mahdia).” Then, “they 
produced an interpretation and made sense 
of what was going on, as well as formulating 
action plans (Omišalj). Since then, in Saïda and 
Saïda (Lebanon)
Above: Neglected old houses 
are sub-let to the poorest 
inhabitants, who live in them 
in increasingly insalubrious 
conditions
