UNESCO in action education
Northern Ireland:
stripping away stereotypes
Teaching mutual respect – carefully – in 
Protestant and Catholic schools
When people from the Simon Community 
asked students at St Joseph’s High 
School in Creggan to describe a homeless person, 
the stereotype of an old, drunk, dirty person 
emerged.The visitors then revealed they were 
all homeless. Creggan is a strongly Catholic area 
of Derry in Northern Ireland. In predominantly 
Protestant Dromore High School, south of Belfast, 
pupils had a similar lesson last year.
Brian McCutcheon remembers the lesson. “We 
drew a picture and mostly it was an old man, 
rough-looking, but then we found that most 
homeless people are women under the age of 
30.” Said Stephen, “I learned that you should 
not always judge people by how they look. You 
should talk to them and see what they are like. 

They are not trying to mug you and they are not 
out to get you.” This has filtered through to other 
subjects he is studying, like history.
Dromore and St Joseph’s are two of the 25 
Northern Ireland schools involved in a pilot 
project over the last few years on Social, Civic and 
Political Education (SCPE), called “Citizenship”. 
Both are planning to teach the subject to 15-
16 year-olds for a new General Certificate in 
Secondary Education (GCSE) examination, as well 
as to secondary students. 
In Dromore, when teacher Simon Walker 
introduced the topic of asylum seekers and 
refugees, he asked his pupils to role-play, with 
some acting as asylum seekers and others as 
Home Office officials. He invited a person from 
Derry who was a refugee in Donegal. He displayed 
old photographs of nearby Hillsborough with 
banners in Irish and asked the students where it 
was. “Dublin” or “Falls Road,” they replied. Says 
Walker, “They were shocked when I told them it 
was Hillsborough. It can be a good start to a lesson 
because it provokes thought and discussion.”
MANY FACES OF 
‘THE GOOD CITIZEN’
One key question is whether citizenship can and 
will tackle Northern Ireland’s sectarian divisions in 
a way that the compulsory themes of education for 
mutual understanding and cultural heritage have 
failed to do. Another is whether certain aspects of 
citizenship will be more problematic in Protestant 
Left: Students 
at Dromore, 
a Protestant high 
school in Northern 
Ireland, rethink 
what it means to be 
a “good citizen”
Top: In Guatemala, 
the PROMEM project 
teaches Maya 
children about their 
own culture in their 
own language, 
despite resistance 
from some teachers 
and even parents
Bottom: After the 
ceasefire in Belfast

schools because of the common perception that 
human rights are a Catholic cause.
“We are always very wary of teaching 
people to be ‘good citizens’ because people 
have different opinions of what that means,” 
comments Mary McCay, the teacher responsible 
for the initiative in St Joseph’s. “We hope to 
tackle the issue by expecting pupils to respect 
the rights of everyone, whether Protestants, 
Unionists or anyone else, to have a voice and 
listen to other opinions. It will take a bit of 
building up to so that they become familiar 
with the concepts.”  Her pilot students agreed 
on a class charter setting out the rights 
and responsibilities of everyone, and active 
participation in the themes appeals to them.
Simon Walker agrees: “Our experience is that 
you don’t rush into human rights in Northern 
Ireland. We begin with the black experience in 
the United States and find that pupils empathise 
with them. You can ask pupils why they 
empathise with blacks and can they see any 
parallels with Northern Ireland.” He summarizes 
his approach: “We look at global first and local 
afterwards.”
Paul McGill
▲
Citizenship takes on 
new dimensions with 
students at St Joseph’s, 
a Catholic high school in 
Londonderry
Right: A student at 
Ferdeusi High School in 
Kabul
