With Arab, African, Indian and European 
influences, Zanzibar’s Stone Town illustrates the 
island’s exceptional cultural fusion
Anchored in the Indian Ocean 
off Africa’s east 
coast, Zanzibar, an island state within the 
United Republic of Tanzania, is an ethnic and 
architectural expression of a unique meeting 
place, mixing the cultures of Africa, the Arab 
region, India and Europe over more than a 
millennium. This is particularly visible in 
Zanzibar’s old Stone Town. Designating it a World 
Heritage site in 2000, UNESCO described it as “an 
outstanding material manifestation of cultural 
fusion and harmonization”. As gateway to East 
Africa and turning point in trade between Africa 
and Asia, Zanzibar brought together migrants, 
traders, conquerors and slaves.
Africans, Arabs, Indians, Persians, Portuguese, 
Dutch and English met and mingled here and 
left behind a hybrid civilization characterized by 
a distinctive stone architecture, a rich, eclectic 
cuisine, and a diverse population that introduced 
the words of many nations into Kiswahili, a 
language of Bantu origin. 
BLENDING AFRICA AND OMAN
The majority of the population of Zanzibar is of 
Bantu (African) stock. They first arrived on the 
island as migrants as early as the first century AD; 

others were brought much later as slaves. 
Swahili, meaning “coast,” is the name given 
to people of mixed Bantu and Omani Arab 
origin and it is their culture and language that 
dominate Zanzibar society today.  Similar to the 
Swahili are the Shirazi, who are likewise of part 
Bantu extraction, but mixed with Persian rather 
than Omani blood. The Shirazi Persians landed 
in Zanzibar in 975, fleeing – it is said – from 
a prophesized disaster in their homeland. A 
considerable number of Indian peoples remain on 
Zanzibar, as well as a sizeable population from 
the Comoros Islands. Europeans are noticeably 
small in number considering their position as 
colonial rulers of the island for several centuries.
The Arabs, who are still numerous, arrived in 
Zanzibar in the 8th century, riding the monsoon 
winds from Oman to trade in ivory, slaves 
and gold on the East African coast. The island 
provided an easily-defended base from where it 
was possible to control 1,000 miles of mainland 
from present-day Mozambique to Somalia.
SUPPLY POINT ON THE ROUTE
TO INDIA 
From the 15th to the 17th century, the Portuguese 
used Zanzibar as a supply point for their sea 
routes to India, and in the mid-18th century 
the Dutch arrived in search of slaves for their 
plantations in the East Indies. Later, Indian traders 
Stone Town is 
famous for its 
sculpted doors
Above: Zanzibar’s 
beachfront
Right: A typical day in 
one of the city’s markets
came to buy spices and ivory. The Omani Arabs 
regained control of the islands in the 19th century, 
and in 1832, Sultan Sayyid Said moved his 
Sultanate from Muscat to Zanzibar where he and 
his descendants ruled for over 130 years.
CENTRE OF THE ANTI-SLAVERY 
MOVEMENT
 Zanzibar was of great symbolic importance 
in the slave trade. It was both one of the main 
slave-trading ports in East Africa – by the1860s 
between 10,000 and 30,000 slaves a year were 
passing through – and also the base from which 
slavery’s opponents such as David Livingstone 
conducted their campaign against it, particularly 
beginning in 1890 when the island became a 
British Protectorate.
Spices gradually replaced slaves as the main 
product handled on Zanzibar’s markets. Cloves 
were introduced after British and French botanists 
broke the Dutch monopoly, and today Zanzibar is 
one of the world’s main suppliers. 
It is also an increasingly popular tourist 
destination, offering idyllic beaches and a spicy 
cuisine.

With the help of UNESCO and other like-minded 
organizations the unique architecture of 
Zanzibar’s Stone Town is being restored. It is a 
chaotic labyrinth of winding streets lined with 
whitewashed coral-rag houses. There are endless 
little shops, busy bazaars, caravanserais and 
courtyards, fortresses, former sultans’ palaces and 
faded colonial mansions, two huge cathedrals, 
many mosques and a Hindu temple - all crammed 
into an area of one-square-mile.
This outstanding example of architectural 
heritage, however, is also a living city with 
extreme poverty. Over 50 percent of the buildings 
of Stone Town are public housing, mainly for 
very poor families. This poverty is a key factor 
in the problem of degradation facing the Stone 
Town. Neither the residents nor the authorities 
administering the buildings have the means to 
restore or generally even maintain these multi-
family dwellings.    
Community-based rehabilitation programmes 
are helping to save some crumbling housing 
assets, whilst directly improving the lives of the 
disadvantaged with better living conditions. This 
is an end in itself, and a means to an end: Stone 
Town’s architectural heritage is being preserved, 
as well as the future of tourism.
John Lawton
