Violence in schools has 
become a global problem. 
Teaching young people how 
to resolve their conflicts 
before they erupt should 
be part of every school 
curriculum
BRINGING PEACE TO
THE PLAYGROUND
defences of peace must be constructed,” states the 
preamble of UNESCO’s Constitution. And what 
better place to start building these “defences” 
than at school, in the minds of youth? Such is 
the thinking underpinning UNESCO’s work in 
the area of peace and non-violence education 
programmes. Yet how to pass the message when 
schools themselves can no longer be considered 
a safe haven from the violence that affects many 
societies, but rather a foyer for it? 
Violence in schools regularly makes headline 
news in many countries. It has its roots in 
the many ills of our societies today: poverty, 
emigration, civil strife or any of the many forms 
of social injustice. There are no simple recipes for 
solving it, says Antonella Verdiani, in charge of 
non-violence education programmes at UNESCO 
and for whom the adage “prevention is better 
than cure” still holds true. “Because once a 
conflict has erupted, it is often too late.” 
That is why it is so important, she says, to give 
teachers, school workers and pupils themselves, 
the pedagogical tools to prevent and transform 
“Since wars begin in the minds 
  of men, it is in the 
 minds of men that the 
the violence with which they are confronted on a 
daily basis at work (see following article). 
“UNESCO’s aim is to publicize – through 
conferences or publications – the practices of 
non-violence so that they can be of use to primary 
and secondary schools, inspire teachers and 
give rise to solutions to curb the rise of violence 
among young people. Confronted with this 
problem, which is almost global, creativity, a big 
capacity for humour and above all love can help 
the various players to transform a conflict into a 
meeting.” 
The series of 
photos was taken 
in a classroom of 
14-year-olds at the 
Claude Monet school 
in Argenteuil 
(Paris suburbs)

“During this millennium,” writes UNESCO 
Assistant Director-General John Daniel in the 
preface to “Best Practices of Non-Violent Conflict 
Resolution in and out-of-school”*, “we must look 
beyond what the founding fathers, despite their 
visionary approach, intended by the expression 
‘defences of peace’. In the current situation of the 
world, it is not a question of effective defences 
but rather to effect a more radical change: to 
change our vision of the world, our way of 
educating, communicating and living together.”
Cristina l’Homme

MEDIATION IN SCHOOL:   
Pupils and teachers 
from a school in 
suburban Paris are 
learning to resolve 
their conflicts without 
coming to blows
“They don’t pay attention 
 to me!” 
  the teacher complains. 
     “She persecutes us!” 
     the two students shoot back.
The exchange rapidly becomes more heated. 
The teacher tries imposing her authority, while 
the students ask her to explain herself.  
The atmosphere at the Claude Monet High 
School in Argenteuil, near Paris, is explosive. 
Aggressive even. And it all happened much 
too fast.
This school, designated a “priority teaching 
zone” because of the many problems of its 
area – widespread poverty, social and cultural 
deprivation, a predominantly immigrant 
population, a black-market economy, frequent 
violence – is not an isolated case, and its situation 
could have rapidly worsened. Yet it managed to 
▲

At the hearing-out-place 
of a high school in the 
Paris suburbs, conflicts 
are defused by talking to 
each other
  FINDING A WAY OUT
defuse the dangerous tensions.  How?  By creating 
the structure and spirit of mediation.
The school’s principal, Christian Comes, has 
a clear appraisal of the problem: schools are 
increasingly multi-ethnic and multi-cultural.  
And school life has become too caught up in the 
difficulties of communication and the violence 
they generate.
A French association dedicated to mediation 
and training mediators, the Centre de Médiation 
et de Formation à la Médiation (CMFM), teamed 
up with UNESCO in 1997 to start a project which 
allows schools and principals to learn about 
mediation.  This partnership gave Christian 
Comes the means to see through his idea.  He 
offered pupils a tool, a sort of 12-point rating card, 
to take the “temperature” of their relationship 
with teachers, and organized weekly get-togethers 
to talk over the results. More importantly, he set 
up a space for mediating conflicts that he calls 
a “hearing-out place” where two people having 
a problem can talk in front of a mediator.  “A 
place where frustrations, verbal violence, can be 
expressed,” explains Caroline Anville, a modern 
literature teacher.  “Where one can be listened 
to without being judged. Because if violence is 
not expressed through language, it ends up being 
expressed through actions.”
The mediation process is simple: initially, each 
party states his or her case separately.  “Then the 
mediator brings them together and asks questions 
in a way to get them to air their feelings,” one 
of the trainers, Colette, says.  “Listening and 
empathy can allow a conflict to be resolved 
because an agreement -- if one is reached -- will 
be respected by both sides.  But keep in mind that 
mediation is not a miracle solution: the success 
rate is only 35 per cent.”
To put the structure into place, the principal 
offered mediation training to various adults in the 

school, then to students.  They learned techniques 
of asking questions that spur a dialogue, and used 
role-playing to further their skills.  
Mediation has given Laurence, a teacher’s aide, 
“a different reading of human relations, one that 
is more distanced, more respectful. I came to 
understand that, if a pupil is being aggressive, it’s 
because he’s suffering.” 
“The arguments are often small to begin with 
– ‘what are you looking at?’ – but the physical 
or verbal violence that follows can be extreme,” 
Florence, a sports and physical education teacher, 
adds.
The training has proven a hit with the students; 
within two years around 60 of the 650 pupils at 
the school have gone through the course.  “The 
students are really happy to be able to talk, to be 
heard.  The room is always open,” Charlen, one 
young mediator, says.
“At the start, they accused us of wanting to 
cut classes by doing the training,” Saba, another 
student in Charlen’s class who is also a mediator, 
recalls.  But then an episode happened where 
some pens were stolen, and a game organized 
in the “hearing-out place” unraveled what had 
happened and the objects were returned.
Saba feels pride, she says, “Even if there are 
more failures than solutions, because we’re the 
ones who find them.”
The teacher and her two students in the 
“hearing-out room” are face-to-face.  They 
have spoken as equals and said what they were 
thinking without the threat of punishment 
hanging over their heads.
“I showed disrespect, I know that,” one of the 
pupils admits.
“I had the impression she hated me,” the 
teacher replies.
Cristina L’Homme

Police may be 
called in when the 
situation gets out of 
hand (here in 2002 
in Valenciennes, in 
northern France)
