agaiast humaaity*, thé
slave trade constitutes one
i. of thé most tragic pages of
our history. Four centuries of terrer and humiliation.
Human beings captured, chained, deported, sold like
merchandise, exploited, tortured. Ten million? Twenty
million? Thé exact number is unknown, and could
hardly convey thé extent of thé catastrophe of thèse
dehumanized people: families separated, populations
decimated, a continent dispossessed of its greatest
wealth.
Thé year 2004, which marks thé bicentennial of
thé création of Haiti, thé first independeat black
state, has been proclaimed International Year for thé
Commémoration of thé Struggle against Slavery and
its Abolition by thé Général Assembly of thé United
Nations (p. 47). It is a time to accomplish our duty of
remembrance, but also to "to bring renewed attention
to this abiding and widespread influence of African
cultures and civllizations, " to quote thé Director-General
of UNESCO, Koïchiro Matsuura.
Despite thé horror that pervaded it, this commerce
in human beings carried with it cultural values and
ideas. It laid thé ethical and cultural foundations of
Caribbean and Indian Océan societies and profoundly
affected sodeties on thé American continent. It was thé
origin of a blendîng of cultures that coastitutes one of
thé modem's world's greatest riches. A peculiar cultural
odyssey.
Africaa influence is most obvions in music and
religion (p. 26 aad 30). But we hâve more than just jazz,
jongo and voodoo. We also hâve agriculture. Africa is
présent in thé daily life of Americans, down to thé food
on their plates, whether they rcalize it or not [p. 32).
Thé legacy of slaves is often little known, if not Uterally
obscured, particulariy in thé sciences. Few are aware,
for instance, that thé "father of thé smallpox vaccine"
Edward Jenner was not even born when Onesimus, a
slave, revealed to his master thé method used by African
healers to combat thé disease (p. 35). And not many
people suspect that thé "typically Palladian" houses in
Louisiana are just as typically African (p. 39).

Créole culture, formed around an African core,
is undoubtedly one of thé most positive outcomes
of thé slave trade - a barbarie act that led ta thé
création of new societies. By putting down thé
foundations of new societies that incorporated
their cultural, linguistic, spiritual and esthetic
characteristics - in short, their identity - slaves
brought about a genuine miracle (p. 42).
If this dossier in UNESCO's New Courier focuses
primarily on little-known aspects of African
influence in thé world, born of thé slave trade, it
also opens an even lesser-known chapter: how
cultural values, customs and social practices that
were exported with thé slaves then returned to
Africa (p. 44).
Ten years ago, UNESCO launched thé programme
"Slave Routes" with thé purpose of retracing
thé slave trade's path, analyzing particulariy
thé interpénétration of différent cultures of thé
continents concerned. A number of publications
hâve emerged on thé subject, and new projects
are multiplying, especially targeting young people.
Commemorative sites such as Stone Town of
Zanzibar (United Republic of Tanzania) or James
Island (Gambia) hâve been inscribed on thé World
Héritage List, while thé Carnival of Barranquilla
(Colombia) and La Tumba Francesa (Cuba), as
well as a number of other cultural expressions and
practices, hâve been proclaimed masterpieces of oral
and intangible héritage of humanity (p. 48).
In presenting a dossier devoted to thé diverse
legacies that African slaves and their descendants
left behind, UNESCO's New Courier is attempting
to discover thé positive effects of thé slave trade.
Examining thé past is a way of calling thé présent
into question.
Jasmina Sopova
UNESCO
* Thé slave trade and slavery were recognized
as a crime against humanity at thé World
Conférence against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related
