EDUCATION: A  
■ The figures are staggering. Every day 8000 people die 
of AIDS and another 14000 are infected. With nearly 70 
percent of the world’s 40 million people living with HIV, 
Africa is hardest-hit by the disease, and the continent’s 
women and children are most vulnerable. In sub-Saharan 
Africa almost six out of every ten people infected are 
women [p. 33].
And the virus continues its deadly progression almost 
everywhere, ignoring all borders and taking hold in areas 
which, until now, have been relatively untouched. In 
Eastern Europe for example, and notably in Russia, HIV/
AIDS is rapidly gaining ground, especially amongst drug 
users [p. 35].
Considerable efforts have been made to prevent its spread, 
but have often proved ineffective. Despite being well 
informed of the dangers of AIDS, Kenyan truck drivers, 
caught in the trap of poverty and insecurity, are among 
those considered most at risk [p. 38].
However, there are signs of hope. Following the example 
set by Thailand [p. 40] several countries have introduced 
policies that have served to brake the spread of the disease. 
The diversification of prevention techniques has also 
paid dividends. From Delhi to Rio and Abidjan, popular 
television series based on AIDS help to relay information 
about the virus and the different problems it raises [p. 43].
Antiretroviral treatments are also giving new momentum 
to prevention efforts, in that they offer a new perspective 
to AIDS sufferers and encourage people to get tested. 
Eight years ago, Brazil implemented a policy of universal 
access to treatments, and the rate of new infections is now 
falling [p. 46].
But the battle is far from won. The World Health 
Organization and UNAIDS predict that unless prevention 
efforts are not dramatically increased, the number 
of or AIDS-infected people around the world will reach 
45 million by 2010.

VACCINE FOR HIV/AIDS 
A SOCIAL DISEASE
Unknown 20 years ago, AIDS is now the number one 
cause of death among young adults in the world. The 
evolution of the epidemic has consistently exceeded the most 
pessimistic predictions. Today almost 40 million people are 
infected and AIDS orphans number more than 13 million.
In the absence of a vaccine or a treatment that can 
cure the disease, prevention remains the best antidote. 
WHO estimates that two-thirds of infections likely to 
occur between now and 2010 can be avoided if prevention 
strategies are reinforced. Much has already been done. Many 
countries have integrated AIDS education in school curricula. 
Millions of dollars have been invested in projects aimed at 
high-risk populations and campaigns for the general public. 
The city of Paris recently put up posters showing a tourist 
on a beach, surrounded by exotic beauties. Almost a banal 
souvenir postcard, except that the floral wreath he wears 
around his neck is a funeral wreath.
Despite all these efforts, ignorance about HIV/AIDS and 
its means of transmission remains daunting. In Mali, Benin 
and Haiti, 40% of young girls do not know how to protect 
themselves. (DHS, 1998-2002). Even people who are the 
most exposed often continue to deny the gravity of the 
disease. More than 90% of Haitian adolescents, for instance, 
think that the risk of their contracting the virus is low or 
even non-existent, when the country has one of the highest 
rates of the disease after sub-Saharan Africa (UNAIDS).
MISINFORMATION
Furthermore, inaccurate ideas about the virus and 
stigmatization of patients continue to flourish, even in 
developed countries. A study carried out in the US in 2000 
shows that 40% of those questioned think they can be 
contaminated by sharing a glass of water with someone who 
has AIDS, or by his cough (UNAIDS). In these conditions, 
the recommendations adopted by the United Nations General 
Assembly in June 2001 in the wake of the Millennium 
Summit seem practically unattainable. It is difficult to see 
how 90% of young people aged 15 to 24 will gain access, 
between now and 2005, to information and education and 
reduce their vulnerability to the virus.
▲
According to WHO, 
nearly two-thirds 
of new infections 
likely between now 
and 2010 could be 
avoided with better 
prevention
Conceived and prepared by Agnès Bardon

To explain the failure to halt the spread of the 
epidemic, many have criticized the approach 
taken thus far as too moralistic, too simplistic, 
and not taking into account the pathology’s 
singular aspects. Experience has proved that mere 
information is not sufficient to change sexual 
behaviour. “We reacted to AIDS as we did to any 
public health problem, with the same rational 
information campaigns,” regrets Mary Crewe, 
director of the Centre for the Study of AIDS at the 
University of Pretoria (South Africa). “It’s not a 
disease like other diseases. We should have tried 
to better understand what governs sexuality and 
desire.” 
Others also deplore the fact that emphasis 
was systematically put on changing individual 
behaviour rather than focusing on the disease’s 
social ramifications. “AIDS was long considered 
from a simply medical angle, without taking 
into account the social context in which it 
was developing,” analyzes Michael J. Kelly, 
former professor at the University of Zambia 
and a specialist on the relationship between 
HIV/AIDS and education. The virus, which is 
now primarily transmitted through heterosexual 
contact, infiltrates society through its weaknesses, 
▲
striking the most vulnerable: the poor, women, 
ethnic minorities, migrants, youths. “AIDS takes 
advantage of war, lack of education, gender 
inequality. It is truly a social disease,” stresses 
Alexandra Draxler, programme specialist at the 
International Institute for Educational Planning 
(IIEP).
NO MAGIC BULLET
FOR PREVENTION
Experience does prove that prevention can work, 
but only under certain conditions. “There’s no 
magic bullet. We know that in order to get results, 
a policy of prevention has to work in several 
directions at the same time and be advocated 
by political leaders, health services, school and 
civil society,” explains Peter Aggleton, Dean of 
Research and Consultancy at London University’s 
Institute of Education and HIV/AIDS specialist. 
If a country as highly affected as Uganda has 
succeeded in significantly reducing the epidemic, 
it is because efforts were supported by political 
will at the highest level. The instituting of 
rigorous epidemiological controls, the mass 
distribution of condoms, the absence of taboo 
about the disease, and the commitment of 
AIDS in the world In 2003, 38 million people were living with HIV/AIDS.
(Source: UNAIDS, 2004)
Prevalence
in adults
15.0% – 39.0%
 5.0% – 15.0%
 1.0% –  5.0%
 0.5% –  1.0%
 0.1% –  0.5%
 0.0% –  0.1%
Not available

political, community and religious leaders all 
contributed to the policy’s success.
School also emerges as a key factor in the 
fight against the virus, among other reasons 
because the 15-24 age group is the first to be 
hit. According to estimates, nearly half of new 
infections occur among young people under the 
age of 24, while statistics indicate that attending 
school decreases the risk of infection. A study 
conducted in Africa and Latin America shows 
that girls who have had schooling have their first 
sexual relations later and are more likely to insist 
that their partner use condoms (UNAIDS). In 
contrast, young people who have had little of no 
education are 2.2 times more likely to contract 
the virus than those who have finished primary 
school (World Bank). 
The influence of school is such that experts 
often refer to the “education vaccine”. It is not 
only because AIDS information is available in 
schools. In a more general way, education gives 
young adults greater self-confidence and control 
over their lives. “School is a very effective 
social protection. It gives students the ability 
to process information they receive but also to 
become more empowered and independent, 
notably strengthening their capacity to resist peer 
pressure,” adds Michael Kelly.
THE “EDUCATION VACCINE”
Under these conditions, UNESCO’s role is crucial. 
Its 2004-2008 strategy for preventive HIV/AIDS 
education, elaborated in the context of its 
collaboration with UNAIDS, places education 
at the heart of preventive action. The goal is to 
give everyone the opportunity to acquire the 
knowledge and attitudes necessary to limit the 
impact of the virus, by working with ministries, 
NGOs and experts as well as teachers. The idea 
is to make sure that the message fits the targeted 
audience as closely as possible. “Social values, 
religion, family relationships all determine how a 
message will be interpreted. A campaign based on 
the idea of death will not have the same impact 
in a Christian country and a society that believes 
in reincarnation,” underlines Helena Drobna, 
assistant specialist for UNESCO’s Programme on 
Cultural Approach to HIV/AIDS.
Access to the new antiretroviral treatments is 
also an essential factor in prevention. Accordingly, 
one part of UNESCO’s strategy is devoted to 
access to care and education about treatment. 
Nearly 90% of 
Haitian adolescents 
say they are not 
concerned about 
AIDS, when the 
country has one of 
the highest rates of 
the disease in the 
world.

While no cure is available at present, existing 
drugs do increase life expectancy and quality of 
life for people infected with HIV/AIDS, and can 
incite those who have doubts about their HIV 
status to get tested. When treatment exists, an 
increase in consultations and voluntary testing is 
noted in many regions, according to WHO’s most 
recent World Health Report.
Nearly 6 million people currently need 
antiretroviral drugs. In 2003, only 400,000 of them 
received them. The “3 million by 2005” initiative 
launched by WHO to increase the number of 
patients receiving treatment is a tough challenge 
for the finances of countries and the international 
community, but the end justifies the means. 
“We have to act quickly and decisively,” insists 
Michael Kelly, “if we don’t want AIDS to become 
a disease of the poor.”   ■
▲
“The biggest challenge to EFA goals”
To what extent does HIV/AIDS affect the goals of 
Education for All?
HIV/AIDS is perhaps the biggest challenge in the 
face of EFA goals. The impact of the pandemic on 
schools is certainly much more extensive than we 
ever imagined. It affects the supply, the demand 
and the quality of education. In the most afflicted 
countries, teachers are often in the high-risk social 
groups. And as for the pupils, the regularity of their 
school attendance is notably reduced if they are 
infected by the virus, or if someone in their family is. 
Because then they have to work to help support their 
families. And on top of that, schools are not free from 
the discrimination exercised against people who are 
affected by HIV/AIDS.
At the same time, education remains the most 
effective means of preventing the disease. We can 
hope that this crisis situation the epidemic has 
caused, which is having disastrous effects on the 
institution, can also serve in the long run to bring 
about a reform of schools, for instance by promoting 
peer teaching, better adaptation of schedules to the 
rhythm of children’s lives, particularly in rural zones, 
or by acting to prevent discrimination.
The last UNAIDS report shows that the epidemic, 
instead of decreasing, is continually growing. In this 
context, what action should UNESCO take?
To eliminate the disease, it is not enough to advise 
people not to have sexual relations, or to use 
condoms. More in-depth work is needed. That is 
why UNESCO is pursuing its strategy of prevention 
education. And that means not only delivering a 
prevention message, but also inciting people to think 
about their lives and to make the right decisions. It 
involves teacher training, integration of HIV/AIDS-
related issues in school curricula, and consideration 
of the social context in which the epidemic develops. 
Human rights, gender and poverty issues are crucial 
in understanding the disease. UNESCO also has a 
Mary Joy Pigozzi is director of the Division for the Promotion of Quality Education.
