In this extract from his Nobel Prize Lecture, on December 7, 1992, the St. Lucian poet, 
Derek Walcott, pays homage to the uniqueness of his native Antilles, and shows how 
the casual tourist may miss all that is essential
But in our tourist brochures 
the Caribbean is a blue pool into 
which the republic dangles the 
extended foot of Florida as inflated 
rubber islands bob and drinks 
with umbrellas float towards her 
on a raft. This is how the islands 
from the shame of necessity sell 
themselves; this is the seasonal 
erosion of their identity, that 
high-pitched repetition of the 
same images of service that 
cannot distinguish one island 
from the other, with a future of 
polluted marinas, land deals 
negotiated by ministers, and 
all of this conducted to the music of Happy 
Hour and the rictus of a smile. What is the earthly 
paradise for our visitors? Two weeks without 
rain and a mahogany tan, and, at sunset, local 
troubadours in straw hats and floral shirts beating 
“Yellow Bird” and “Banana Boat Song” to death. 
There is a territory wider than this – wider than the 
limits made by the map of an island – which is the 
illimitable sea and what it remembers.
All of the Antilles, every island, is an effort 
of memory; every mind, every racial biography 
culminating in amnesia and fog. Pieces of 
sunlight through the fog 
and sudden rainbows, 
arcs-en-ciel. That is the 
effort, the labor of the 
Antillean imagination, 
rebuilding its gods from 
bamboo frames, phrase 
by phrase.
Derek Walcott
© The Nobel Foundation 1992
(History) is there in 
Antillean geography, in the 
vegetation itself. The sea 
sighs with the drowned from 
the Middle Passage, the 
butchery of its aborigines, 
Carib and Aruac and Taino, 
bleeds in the scarlet of the 
immortelle, and even the 
actions of surf on sand cannot 
erase the African memory, or 
the lances of cane as a green 
prison where indentured 
Asians, the ancestors of 
Felicity, are still serving time.
That is what I have read 
around me from boyhood, 
from the beginnings of poetry, the grace of effort. 
In the hard mahogany of woodcutters: faces, 
resinous men, charcoal burners; in a man with a 
cutlass cradled across his forearm, who stands 
on the verge with the usual anonymous khaki 
dog; in the extra clothes he put on this morning, 
when it was cold when he rose in the thinning 
dark to go and make his garden in the heights 
– the heights, the garden, being miles away from 
his house, but that is where he has his land – not 
to mention the fishermen, the 
footmen on trucks, groaning 
up mornes, all fragments of 
Africa originally but shaped 
and hardened and rooted 
now in the island’s life, 
illiterate in the way leaves 
are illiterate; they do not 
read, they are there to 
be read, and if they are 
properly read, they create 
their own literature.
