Community
multimedia centres
In the most remote regions, users 
of information and communication 
technologies connect with the rest 
of the world
On 
September 11 2001, when a 
Tuareg guide heard about 
the terrorist attack, he went 
to Timbuktu and sent an e-mail to ask about 
a New York doctor he’d met in the Sahara the 
year before. That gesture of solidarity, between 
individuals seemingly worlds apart, was made 
possible by the technology that the Community 
Multimedia Centre (CMC) in the Malian town 
makes available to the public.
This UNESCO programme, which seeks to bridge 
the digital divide, gives the most destitute and 
isolated communities in the developing world 
access to information and communication 
technologies (ICT). At present, 30 CMCs are 
© UNESCO/CMC de Koutiala, Mali

Opposite page: 
Originally a community 
radio station, the 
Koutiala CMC (Mali) 
opened in 2002
Top: Phone, fax and 
e-mail in Koutiala to 
communicate with the 
wider world
Middle: Listeners to a 
community station in 
Cuamba (Mozambique) 
will soon be able 
to “radio-browse” 
websites with local 
experts
Bottom: New horizons 
at the Kothmale CMC 
(Sri Lanka)
operating in 16 countries spread out over three 
continents (see box). The CMCs integrate 
community radio stations with the infrastructure 
of community telecentres, i.e. computers linked 
to the internet, printers, faxes, photocopying 
machines, photo equipment, scanners, etc.
“RADIO-BROWSING”
A key activity of the CMC is “radio-browsing”. It 
consists of a radio broadcast that gives listeners 
the opportunity to become long-distance 
cybernauts. During a show on a given subject, 
the programme host talks to a specialist about 
the content of previously selected internet sites 
(see following article on Benin). The presence 
of a specialist makes it possible to pick out the 
reliable sites from the mass of sometimes-dubious 
information to be found on the web. It was thanks 
to such a “radio-browsing” show, for example, 
that an illiterate woman in Sri Lanka decided 
to contact the Kothmale CMC to make a virtual 
pilgrimage to a sacred Buddhist shrine in India via 
a website.
Complementary technologies, such as radio 
and internet, set the CMCs apart from traditional 
communications projects. Stella Hughes, 
Senior Programme Specialist in UNESCO’s 
Communication Development Division 
explains: “The CMC is an integrated association 
of technologies, of which the internet is a 
component. The radio is a means to broadcast 
information in the local language to the heart of 
communities. ‘Radio-browsing’ helps to bridge 
the generation gap, because parents can become 
familiar with the internet and not feel out of their 
depth when their children talk about downloading 
documents, for instance. Sometimes the parents 
themselves make suggestions on how to make 
use of web resources. I know of one case, a Sri 
Lankan baker who wanted to diversify the range 
of products in his bakery, who asked his son to 
search for new pastry recipes.”
VIRTUAL OFFICE
The CMCs are regularly turned into virtual offices. 
In Mali, some Tuaregs travel several days by camel 
to get to the Timbuktu CMC to read e-mails and 
check the travel arrangements of the next group 
of tourists they will be guiding on a desert trek. A 
number of Malian immigrants, originally from the 
region of Kayes and living in Paris, have contacted 
UNESCO to take computer classes in order to 
communicate with their relatives through the 
CMC in Kayes. Young people from Côte d’Ivoire 
are seeking to make friends with young people in 
neighbouring Senegal. At the Nakaseke CMC, in 
Uganda, farm workers are taking advantage of the 
internet to get information on the potential risks 
of genetically-modified seeds.

ONLINE TRAINING
The CMC does not only aim to facilitate access to 
useful activities such as job-hunting or checking 
the price of agricultural goods in town, it also 
seeks to encourage the creation of locally relevant 
content. The development of a community’s own 
resources, particularly data banks, audio and 
video archives, posters, brochures and CD-Roms, 
are also part of the CMC’s mission. The goal is to 
gradually accumulate useful knowledge relevant 
to the community. To that end, the computer 
programme eNRICH (http://enrich.nic.in) is 
proving to be a particularly useful tool. This 
community information browser allows users 
to set up their own gateway websites easily and 
quickly. They can then go directly to internet sites 
that best serve their needs or interests. Similarly, a 
set of training modules (Multimedia Training Kit) 
aimed at CMC staff is available online to facilitate 
their work and integrate traditional media and ICT 
(http://www.itrainonline.org).

Illiterate people also come to the CMCs. They can call 
on instructors who help them browse the web, just as 
people used to employ professional scribes. The monitors 
write e-mails and also read back the answers. As for 
semi-literate people, they learn to spot certain reference 
points as they browse. Though the digital divide is far 
from being bridged, the CMCs prove that when people 
have access to ICT, they know exactly how to benefit 
from it, adapting it to their own needs.
Asbel Lopez
Waïdou Kare trains a student 
on the Internet at the Banikoara 
CMC in Benin
