SCIENCES LOSE THEIR GLAMOUR
international Conference on the teaching of 
sciences and technology which was held at 
UNESCO Headquarters in June 2004 represented 
a new step in the collective approach to the 
problem. Several recommendations were made 
during this meeting (see box 1), which was 
organised by the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science (AAAS) with the support 
of the National Science Foundation (NSF).
More than ever before, research appears to 
be one of the major driving forces of economic 
development. In OECD member countries alone, 
the number of researchers rose from 2.4 million 
in 1990 to 3.4 million in 2000, and the demand 
continues to rise1. In early April 2004, the High-
Level Group on Human Resources for Science 
and Technology in Europe called on the members 
Are
young people fed up with 
 science? How can their curiosity 
  and taste for scientific 
adventure be stimulated? Many observers fear 
a shortage of scientists in the near future. This 
fear, repeated again and again in developed 
countries in recent years, is replicated in emerging 
and developed countries, where the training of 
young people to work in research is a vital issue, 
as much for the development of democracy as 
for their economic future. In this respect, the 
Considered boring and badly-paid, 
science is inspiring fewer and 
fewer vocations. Yet the world needs 
more and more scientists.

of the European Union to take action to reach 
the target of recruiting 500,000 new researchers 
by 20102. The NSF meanwhile estimates that 
2.2 million scientific and engineering jobs need 
to be created in the decade 2000-2010. In such a 
context, it is easy to see why there are concerns 
when certain scientific disciplines are being 
deserted, the population is aging, especially in 
Europe, and there are the risks of relying on 
foreign “human capital”.
In emerging or developing countries, science’s 
lack of appeal can largely be attributed to the lack 
of infrastructure and a policy on science. This is 
certainly the case on the African continent, as 
Professor Nyiira Zerubabel, executive director of 
the Ugandan National Council for Science and 
Technology, told the conference: either young 
people go abroad, or they choose another training 
path which offers more promising employment 
terms and salary. The brain drain hits these 
countries hard. In order to resolve this situation, 
Pakistan has put financial incentives in place, as 
Syeda T.K. Naim, a consultant on the Ministerial 
Committee on scientific and technological 
policy of the Organization of Islamic Conference,
explained. These include a raise in salaries for 
those researchers who publish in an international 
journal and for holders of a PhD. In India, Amitabh 
Mukherjee, director of the Centre for Science 
Education and Communication at the University of 
Delhi told the conference that the number of staff 
in the scientific streams had been rising since 2001.
The relative lack of interest in science is part 
of a complex picture in which the global migration 
of students plays an essential role. For example, 
more and more Chinese and Indian students 
choose other OECD countries over the United 
States, or they stay in their own countries3. Less 
is known about why certain streams are losing 
their appeal. The French physicist and academic 
Yves Quéré believes there are three reasons for 
this: “Science (in the way it is taught these days) 
is boring, it is considered dangerous and people 
believe they will never earn much by working in 
it.” Everyone seems to agree with this analysis 
of the problem and on the necessity to begin 
teaching science from primary school level. This 
aim currently has even greater support because 
the InterAcademy Panel (IAP) backs it, according 
to Yves Quéré, who co-chairs this international 
federation of science academies.
INTRODUCING SCIENCE
IN PRIMARY SCHOOL
It is precisely on this subject that most 
experiments have been done thanks to several 
high-level pioneers.
First there was the remarkable work of the 
American physicist and 1988 Nobel Prix Prize 
winner Leon Lederman in schools in under-
privileged suburbs of Chicago, of which Yves 
Quéré spoke with admiration: “Everyone was 
leaving these schools and violence reigned. 
Leon Lederman introduced an initiation to 
science using active methods and he educated 
the teachers at the same time as the pupils. He 
completely turned the situation around. It was 
very impressive.” In the mid-1990s, Yves Quéré 
and astrophysicist Pierre Léna discovered this 
work with Georges Charpak, winner of the 1992 
Nobel Prize for Physics, who had been invited 
to see it by his colleague and friend Lederman. 
Once they returned to France, the three academics 
created the “La Main à la Pate” association 
(see box 2). Their objective was to reintroduce 
the teaching of science to primary schools, by 
putting the emphasis on experimentation and 
investigation. The experiment was sufficiently 
successful for it to be repeated around the world.
In her speech to the international conference 
in June 2004, Shirley Malcom proposed that this 
approach be considered for use at higher levels. 
Malcom, the director of the education section of 
human resources at AAAS, said access to science 
for everyone was similar to UNESCO’s promotion 
of Education for All. She was also echoing the 

“Declaration on Science and the Use of Scientific 
Knowledge” which was adopted in Budapest in 
19994: “ (...)Science education is essential for 
human development, for creating endogenous 
scientific capacity and for having active and 
informed citizens”. This declaration received the 
backing of UNESCO Director-General Koïchiro 
Matsuura who saw it as fitting in perfectly with 
the Johannesburg World Summit on Sustainable 
Development.
Dominique Chouchan
1. Mario Cervantes, project manager of the Directorate 
for science, technology and industry at the OECD, 
L’Observateur, http://observateurocde.org/, mars 2004
2. http://europa.eu.int/comm/research/
conferences/2004/sciprof/index_en.html
3. Third European Report on Science & Technology 
Indicators 2003, http:www.cordis.lu/indicators/third_
report.htm
4. The World Conference on Science was held in 
Budapest from 28 June to 1 July 1999 organised by 
UNESCO in cooperation with the International Council 
for Science (ICSU).
