UNESCO in action education
An ideological arsenal
different communities, of which the Maronite, 
Druze, Sunnite, Shiite and Greek Orthodox 
are the main religious groups, and the experts 
couldn’t agree on which identity should prevail 
over others, and which perspective to give on the 
recent conflict,” explains Nemer Frayha, former 
President of the Education Centre for Research 
and Development. 
DISPUTES OVER TITLES 
AND TIMELINES
“It was an extremely difficult task, because of the 
immense ideological arsenal in people’s minds 
that had to be taken into account,” Professor 
Antoine Messara told the French daily, Liberation 
(Jan.7, 2003), adding that “we tried to respect 
the differences and to present the various points 
of view so that students could form their own 
opinions.”
In 1990
, the Taef Agreement, which 
ended the 15 year-old Lebanese 
civil war, specified that school curricula should 
be reformed to strengthen “national belonging, 
fusion of citizens, spiritual and cultural 
openness,” and that textbooks, especially for 
history and civics, should be rewritten. However, 
this has proved a tortuous task and many schools 
are reported to have given up teaching history 
altogether. Those that have continued are using 
manuals that have not been revised for more 
than 35 years, and which stop at the war for 
independence in 1943, with the result that, for 
today’s generation of students, the violent civil 
war that broke out in 1975 is a black hole. 
Educators and legislators set out in 1994 to 
create new textbooks that would fill the gaps 
and promote the idea of a national identity. 
“But Lebanon’s society is a mosaic of some 17 

Two specialized committees and six years of 
discussion and compromise later, the task of 
writing the textbooks finally began. The primary 
texts were finished in September 2001. But the 
minister for education, says Nemer Frayha, 
“suspended their distribution because he objected 
to a lesson title in the third grade textbook about 
the nature of the 636 A.D. Arab conquest of what 
is now Lebanon, and thought that a timeline in 
the lesson showing the arrival of different peoples 
discredited the Arabs as invaders.” 
Yet another committee was formed to revise the 
new texts. But says Frayha, “nothing has been 
done.”
Sue Williams
