phenomena of physical or spiritual
return to thé ancestral homelaad
began even before thé end of
slavery. Often thé same ship that transported
human cargo to thé New World returaed to thé
African coast with other people aboard, who
carried with them new knowledge, ideas and
practices. Thé latter aonetheless seemed familiar to
local populations.
For nearly four hundred years, thé Atlantic
shipping route in both directions allowed for
exchanges that gave birth on both sides of thé
océan to hybrid cross-breed cultures, which remain
fundamentally African. There is no better illustration
of thé movement of Africans and their descendants

Asttbject ftendiscu. a b'e E ! srican culture owes to African slaves. Much
(ess tatked afeoirt is wh Africa awes to diasporc artain cultural values, customs and social
pfactices thé slaves took w m to thé ABIC contiRent returned to Africa, generally in modified
but recogiiizaWe
(-
in thé Atlantic world (thé European, American and
African coasts) than thé expérience of black sailors.
They acquired valuable knowledge of navigation
and a number of them went into trade, accumulating
enough capital to buy their freedom.
Such exchanges were undoubtedly thé most
fruitful between Bahia, in BrazU, and thé Benm Gulf.
According to certain estimâtes, nearly two million
people crossed thé océan aboard slave ships in 250
years. During this period, Braziliaas of ail origins
and conditions - white slavers, mulattos, free men
and slaves - settled in places ranging from thé cape
of Sao Paulo to thé mouth of thé Niger River. Port
cities such as Agoue, Aneho, Ouidah, Cotonou,
Porto-Novo, Badagri and Laos were marked by thé
Westt' is<
AfricEia-A
return of freed slaves of Brazilian origin, called
Aguda or Amaro.
Thé expérience acquired during their years of
captivity and thé kaowledge of European languages
and customs were extremely useful to those who
decided to try their luck on thé African coast as
traders, craftsmen, farmers or hired help. Many
started shops; others made their fortune in thé slave
trade. Masons, foremen, carpenters, cabinetmakers,
goldsmiths and barber-surgeons brought new know-
how to thé région. A aovel architectural style was
created, using previously unknown methods and
unusual materials. Converted to Catholicism, thèse
retomados brought with them religious practices
that continue today, such as thé extravagant feast-
days in honor of thé Lord of Bonflm, identical to
those in Bahia.
Following thé abolitions of slavery, freed
slaves from Brazil, Cuba, thé West Indies and
thé United States settle on thé Slave Coast and
inland, reinforcing and diversifying thé American
influences. Ghana, Libéria and Sierra Leone thus
became important réception centres for retomados
and people freed by British forces fighting thé illicit
slave trade. Maay of them contributed to developing
thé cultivation of oil-yielding plants, which became
thé region's principal économie activity to replace
thé slave trade.
Starting in thé 19th century, Afro-American
churches in thé United States began to send aid and
missionaries to thé African coast and sometimes
even inside thé African continent. Black missionaries
converted and brought Western-style schooling to
some of thé population, at thé same time promoting
American university éducation for Africans and thé
founding of vocational schools in several African
régions. Mostly they intensifted thé exchange of
ideas between Africans and Americans.
Pan-African conférences in thé first half of thé
20th century, numbering an overwhelming majority
of représentatives from thé US and thé Caribbean,
played a major rôle, in spite of limited African
participation, in thé birth of a supranational and

CetekratisBs 00
Maw 25, 2093, in
Jotonaesburg
(SoBthMrisaioîtSte
48ft ansîversary
Organizatieia of
Wrican Un<^ a»d 8bB
birthdtheAfricaa
^
intercontinental identity, as well as an alliance
against racial and colonialist dominance. Following
World War II, many national libération movements
picked up thé ideas that came eut of thé conférences
to justify their struggle. In thé long term, pan-
Africanism provided a solid ideological base for thé
leaders pushing for modem policies in Africa, some
of whom became thé principal actors in thé new
international relations that emerged as countries
became independent. Pan-Africanism also served as
thé basis for founding thé Organization of African
Unity (OAU), now thé African Union (AU).
During thé 20th century, économie exchanges
between thé two continents deteriorated, but
cultural exchanges, particularly in music and thé
performing arts, did not diminish. North-American
music noticeably affected thé birth of urban identity
in South Africa. On thé western coast, thé musical
dialogue is even aider. Retornados from Cuba
and thé West Indies. as well as British soldiers
recruited in thé Caribbean, introduced syncretic
musical styles in thé region's urban areas. Those
returning from Brazil put an indelible mark on
urban music in Nigeria and Bénin. Thé introduction
of record-players and records facilitated extensive
dissémination of music from thé other side of thé
Atlantic. Recordings by thé famous groups Septeto
Habanero and Trio Matamores béat ail thé audience
records in thé first half of thé 20th century.
Instruments of mixed origin like thé maracas,
congas and bongos, which arrived in Africa in thé
1950s, led to thé development of an impressive
style of rumba, characteristic of today's Démocratie
Republic of Congo. Thé rumba, calypso, Bahia's
"axe", jazz, soûl, reggae and hip-hop, ail musical
genres of African origin, came/returned to Africa
and are now enjoying undeniable success ail aver
thé continent. Dance and théâtre hâve also absorbed
North-American, Cuban and Brazilian éléments. A
derivative of thé "bumba-meu-boi", for example, a
sort of popular Brazilian opéra, of European, Indian
and African origin, has been "adopted" by Nigeria
under thé name of "boi" (ox in Portuguese) and as
"burrinha" [female donkey) in Bénin.
Cartos Liberato de Sousa,
of thé Fédéral University of Sergipe,
Brazil
^Vlu<si6Â[ [y[&trîÂmt^
bangos - a pair of smalt single-
headed drums made from
hollowed tree-trunks, created
in Cuba around 1900. Always
p!ayed with bare hands using
pressure to produce varying
sounds and pïtches, thé two
drums are of varying sizes,
with thé heads made of nailed
membrane or plastic material.
oongaa - used either singly or
as a pair, thèse long, narrow,
barrei-shaped drums are made
out of wood or fibreglass, thé
head being ofthick vetlum.
An intégral élément of Latin
American dance bands in thé
1930s, they are played with
thé fingers, thé hand pressure
providing a variety of sounds
and pitches.
mairecas - Of pre-Columbian
tndian origin, thé word mbaracé
dénotes a gourd containing dry
seeds. Widely used in dance
bands in Cotombia, Vanezuaia
and Brazil, this pair of rattles
with wooden handtes providss
rhythm and has been adopted
everywhere else by pop bands
and percussion ensembles.
Sources: Thé Oxford Companion
to Music; New Grave Dictionary of
Music and Musicians.
