Joseph Dunn/Laura Plantation, Louisiana
Sta es from West A ica l archit
inLoOTsiana. TheyliroiglîttraditS na know-ho tfaat
onditions in îbe south ef he
d construction techniques
appropriate for thé climatic
Lam-a Plantattoo's
main house was butlt
by thé descendante
uf thé (irst slaves
wbo amved {rom
Ce^ry
years ago, l visited
some of thé plantation
homes along thé
Mississippi River, outside New Orléans. It was not
my first visit to thé area, but l had never before
wanted to visit them. This time, however, l vetttured
out to see thèse beautiful places that once witnessed
so much humaa suffering. l was silenced when l
saw one-room slave cabins built on raised wooden
posts, weathered by time, but still standing.
Thé first site l visited was Laura Plantation. La
maison principfde or manor house was built in 1805,
on land granted to thé French owner by Président
Thomas Jefferson.
Thé main house was built by thé descendants of
thé first slaves brought to Louisiana from Sénégal
in thé eariy 1720s. Builders from thé Bambara
and Wollof tribes were highly valued for their
construction skills. Every spring, thé Mississippi
River would flood, just as rivers in Africa flooded,
and thé slaves used thé same architectural solution
as they did for houses in Africa. As Joseph Dunn,
spokesman for Laura Plantation, explains, "Thé
main house of Laura Plantation rests on 72 pyramids
that are identical to those found in West Africa. in
thé Sénégal and Gambia région, according to thé
architects that we coasulted."
Because thé house was built on alluvial laad,
thé builders dug a 750 m2 hole, 2. 5 m deep. At thé
bottom of thé hole, they put down a sort of raft of
cypress and willow logs, on top of which they built
72 brick pyramids to support thé foundation aad
make thé ground level stable. Once thé hole was
filled with earth, brick columns were erected on
some of thé pyramids. Thé columns support thé
horizontal beams that hold up thé building, forming
an above-ground basement.
Today, when visitors stand on thé floor of
thé above-ground basement and look up at thé
horizontal beams supporting thé first floor, they
can see thé Roman numerals numbering one to 30
on thé beams. Thé slave builders eut thé beams
^

^
from 1000-year-old cypress trees harvested from thé
nearby swamp. It took them approximalely one year
to sélect and eut down thé trees.
Because thèse houses were constructed on 30
horizontal beams and 30 vertical posts. tliey were
called "maisons de trente". Predating thé Civil
War, they share a striking number of arcliitectural
features with West African houses: gatleries,
porches, pillars one tu four feet liigh, (lie use of
plastered clay for walls, thé decoratioii of façades
with patterns in bas relief OT in paint, relativeiy
small interior rooms, and detached kitcliens built
away from thé main house. Thèse characteristics are
found in plantations along thé Mississippi, in thé
Garden District residential quarter of New Orléans,
and in Charleston, South Carolina.
"Thé method used by thé Senegalese builders was
similar to what we now call prefabricated. They
prepared everything in advance and thé house had
to be finished in 11 days, " says Duna, adding, "Thé
Créole architectural style that is typical of oui région
is a blend of Palladian and African ingrédients.
That's why it's very close to thé style found in West
Africa, and even in thé Indian Océan."
African understanding of doiiieslic space, which
was ideally suited for thé subtropical climate in thé
south of thé United States, as well as construction
techniques an-ived in Louisiana by way of thé
slave trade route, stopping off iii Brazil and in thé
CdribbCtin and making modifications to suit each
locale along thé way.
In 1733, a factory building constructed in thé
Gambia by local Mandingo designer-builders far tlie
English Royal African Compaiiy was described by ils
British factor:
"Their next work was to mdke a porch, callcd
an Alpainter by thé natives, who preteiid a right
to hâve oiie at every factory, that they inay liave
access dnd she!ter....Here a house is built with a
hall [piazza] of40 foot l)y 13, two-lodging rooms 20
font by 13, .ind ihree strong storehouses, without
aiiy iroii work, truwels, squares or carpenter's rules,
and with thé sin<illest expense to (lie Coinpany, for it
was done by thcir servants only .."
NumberedttoXXX,
thé beams were eut
from thousand-year-
old tress
^Fv^^ui^ baiUtK^ Ar-t<s
In 2002, thé New Orléans
Muséum of Art presented
an exhibition, "Raised to
thé Trade" showcasing
thé artistry of thé building
trades and thé talent of thé
builders who helped make
New Orléans an architectural
gem. Thé muséum also
recorded, aver four years,
thé oral historiés of builders
who are living today, but
growing older. Because
young people today hâve not
been interested in learning
thé building trades, thé skills
of thèse master craftsmen
coutd be lost. Thé exhibition
curators hope that "Raised to
thé Trade" will inspire young
people to learn thèse unique
building skills, ensuring
that thé architecture of New
Orléans witl be preserved by
qualified restorers.
D. D.

. ^
f^hs
^
This passage also attests to thé expérience of thé
Mandingo designer-builders and of thé economy and
skill with which they worked. It forever répudiâtes
thé idea that Africans came to thé Americas as
unskilled, uncivilized people. Dunn adds, "It has
been our expérience that many of our visitors
think only of African slaves within thé context of
fieldwork. Hardly ever are they afforded crédit
for designing, constructing and maintaining such
buildings as Laura Plantation, and yes, most of thé
French Quarter in New Orléans."
Descendants of slaves handed down from
génération to génération thé building techniques
inherited from their ancestors. Résides thé brick
pyramids, thé main house at Laura plantation also
incorporâtes what is known as "Senegalese plaster",
made of ground oyster shells, sand and water, aad
"evaporation planks" at thé point where horizontal
beams meet vertical pillars, intended to protect thé
wood from humidity.
and European technique bas been perpetuated until
now.
Thé names of slave architects aad builders are
lost to us, but thé architectural treasures they built
continue to enchant ail who visit them. In spite of
beauty in architecture, iron work, thé décorative arts
and furniture. That beauty is with us today.
Denise Dennis,
American novelist
Nearthe main house,
thé rudîmentary
cabinsthatservedas
slave quarters
^av-tRe/v
VôA^i^:
Jay D. Edwards, Vemacular
Vision; Thé Gallery and Our
Africanized Architectiiral
Landscape, éd. Jonn Ethan
Hankins; and Steven
Maklansky, Raised to thé
Trade: Créole Bmlding Ans
ofLouislana, (New Orléans
Muséum of Art, New
Orléans, Louisiana, 2002)
