Water Wars and Peace
 If we do not establish the means to ensure international cooperation, 
water could become a major source of confl ict.
If water is set to dominate our 21st century 
world, then do we risk water wars? Many believe 
so. One vital necessity is a global reconciliation 
service, set up this year by UNESCO and the 
World Water Council. Th e Water Cooperation 
Facility is based at UNESCO in Paris. Its mis-
sion is to “promote cooperation, peace and 
prosperity in developing and managing trans-
boundary waters.” 
Th e task is potentially huge. Almost half the 
world’s population lives in international river 
basins. Two-thirds of these basins have no trea-
ties for sharing their water. The River Nile 
passes through ten countries. The Danube, 
Rhine, Niger and Congo all pass through nine, 
and the Zambezi through eight. 
Africa – a continent of haphazard bounda-
ries mostly created in the chaos of imperial rule 
– has 80 transboundary rivers. In Asia, Bangla-
desh and Pakistan receive more than 90% of 
their water from India. A meeting organised by 
UNESCO in Greece late last year heard how the 
fracturing of the former Yugoslavia has created 
seven new shared river basins. 

Increasing numbers of countries also share 
underground water reserves.  Jordan shares 
with Saudi Arabia the Disi aquifer that repre-
sents its “last substantial unexploited water 
resource”, according to a UN study. Th e vast 
Nubian basin aquifer straddles the borders 
between Libya, Egypt, Sudan and Chad. 
Lack of knowledge about underground 
water resources is a major cause of tension. So 
UNESCO is currently undertaking a project to 
create the world’s most detailed map of Inter-
nationally Shared Aquifer Resources (ISARM). 
The African phase of the survey mapped 20 
cross-border aquifers never delineated before. 
Ghanaians discovered they share an aquifer 
with Cote d’Ivoire. Benin learned that the aqui-
fer providing water for the city of Cotonou 
extends across the border into Togo. 
ISARM is helping these countries draw up 
rules for sharing the water. It has also serves as a 
meeting place where Israeli and Palestinian 
hydrologists share data about the much-disputed 
mountain aquifer that straddles the West Bank. ◆
F.P
In Bangladesh, a 
woman collects water 
from the Ganges
