On the second floor of the Jenny 
Niström high school in Kalmar, a 
small port in southeastern Sweden, 
the laboratory used by the environmental awareness 
class is spotless. Various lab instruments arranged 
neatly on the shelves, often made by the students 
themselves, are used to analyze samples taken 
on school field trips. In one corner, two glass 
beakers on a burner contain yellowish liquids. 
“It’s an experiment in progress,” says earth science 
professor Sven Åhlin, explaining that the students 
are inspecting water taken from a pond near Kalmar, 
which could contain suspicious substances.
On the balcony behind the lab, a small 
greenhouse houses several aquariums where plants 
of all kinds are growing. “The students planted 
them and they take care of them,” Åhlin insists. 
The results of each experiment carried out by the 



BALTIC SEA: 
INTRODUCTION TO NATURE 101
High school students in Kalmar, Sweden, are  
not learning about the environment from textbooks.  
By taking water samples and analyzing their make-up, 
they are learning about pollution in the Baltic Sea. 
Their high school is one of 200 institutions working 
together in the Associated Schools Project  
Network (ASPnet) to try to improve environmental 
conditions in the landlocked sea. 

students are carefully logged in a notebook so that 
the class can study the evolution of environmental 
conditions in the Kalmar area.
These experiments are more than just a classroom 
science lesson: they are evidence of true interest in 
the environment. And that interest did not just crop 
up yesterday. Since the high school opened its doors 
in 1992, Åhlin has taken his students every year 
to collect samples from the Baltic Sea in order to 
observe the evolution of the water quality.
The results have been poor. Very poor, even. “Not 
only have the levels of phosphorus and nitrogen 
continued to increase,” says the teacher, who speaks 
of the “eutrophication of the Baltic Sea”. But since 
he moved to Öland Island, just off the coast of 
Kalmar, more than 20 years ago, Åhlin has noticed 
other dramatic changes. “Several species of fish are 
in the process of disappearing, and bird fertility rates 
are consistently dropping”, he says. He is not the 
only one who is alarmed. At a meeting of European 
Union environment ministers in Brussels on March 
10, Lena Sommestad warned her colleagues. Citing 
the worrying conclusions of a report published in 
early March in Stockholm, the Swedish minister said 
that without quick and effective action, the Baltic 
Sea, its marine life on the point of suffocating, soon 
would be beyond help.
But Åhlin, who is in his 50s, refuses to give in 
to pessimistic predictions. On the contrary, the 
teacher is convinced that “the future of the planet 
lies with the younger generations”. And that’s one 
of the reasons why he chose, starting in 1992, to 
participate along with his students in the Baltic Sea 
project. Launched three years earlier, the project 
stemmed from a conference of European education 
ministers held at UNESCO’s Paris headquarters in 
1988. At that meeting, the ministers in attendance 
agreed on two points. One, they acknowledged the 
need to improve water quality in the Baltic Sea, 
and two, they voiced their wish to bolster relations 
between young people in the region.
200 SCHOOLS LOOKING FOR 
ENVIRONMENTAL SOLUTIONS
Inspired, Finland’s national commission for 
UNESCO invited representatives from all countries 
bordering the Baltic Sea to Helsinki in May 1989. 
The commission proposed to launch a project aimed 
at “encouraging schools in the countries along the 
Baltic Sea to reflect together on the environmental 
problems that the region and its residents must 
face”. The initiative, sponsored by UNESCO’s 
Associated Schools Project Network, earned a 
favorable response.
Fifteen years later, more than 200 schools are 
participating in the Baltic Sea project in Sweden, 
Finland, Denmark, Poland, Germany, Russia and 
the three Baltic states. And while the goal has not 
Shallow and partially 
closed, the Baltic 
is threatened with 
enthrophication due 
to pollution
Every year, students 
take samples to 
evaluate water 
quality

by the central board of the Baltic Sea project. For 
one week, about 100 youths from nine countries 
bordering the Baltic Sea and from the region around 
Africa’s Lake Victoria studied the problem of 
eutrophication and its consequences for the survival 
of tuna.
Before the Nacka conference, each school 
invited drew up proposals aimed at stamping out 
the scourge threatening the Baltic Sea. “Nearly 
70 percent of cultivated land in Sweden produces 
fodder,” explains Therese. “It would therefore be 
good to reduce meat production in order to slow the 
production of fodder and cut the use of fertilizer, 
traces of which are still being found in rivers and the 
sea.” That was just one suggestion discussed during 
the week of seminars, at which experts listened 
attentively to the ideas put forth by the youths. 
Therese, who is 19, admits that even just a few 
years ago, the environment was not exactly one 
of her top priorities. But after three years at Jenny 
Nyström high school, she says she is now aware of 
the important consequences her actions may have 
for the environment. Once she graduates, she hopes 
to enroll at the environmental sciences school at the 
University of Umeå in northern Sweden.
But Sven Åhlin wants to keep things in perspective. 
“My goal is not to turn all of my students into 
fire-breathing ecologists, but to turn them into 
responsible adults,” he says. Mission accomplished? 
Since 1992, things have really changed at Jenny 
Nyström high. Not only does the cafeteria sort its 
recyclable garbage, the school has 30 bicycles for 
use on field trips and its environmental council is 
hoping to soon receive the “green high school” seal 
of approval. 
 
Anne-Françoise Hivert
Freelance journalist, Lund (Sweden)
changed since 1989, the Baltic Sea project is now 
focused on the idea of sustainable development. 
As the coordinator of the Swedish project, Martin 
Westin, explains, “the goal is to help students 
understand the scientific, social and cultural aspects 
of the relationship between man and nature”.
KEY INGREDIENTS, STUDENT 
EXCHANGE AND COOPERATION
Even more so than environmental awareness, the 
project aims to encourage students in different 
countries to work together. For the past several 
years, Åhlin has worked with high schools in 
Kalmar’s two sister cities in Lithuania and Russia 
-- schools that are not yet participating in the Baltic 
Sea project but which are soon expected to join 
UNESCO’s Associated Schools Project Network. In 
May 2003, about 30 students from the high school 
in Zelenogradsk, in Russia’s Kaliningrad province, 
spent a week in Kalmar before welcoming their 
Swedish counterparts the following autumn. An 
“unforgettable” experience, according to Stina 
Andersson and Maria Carlsson, two high school 
graduates who made the trip. 
Despite their initial apprehension, “we quickly 
realized that despite our cultural differences, we 
pretty much had the same values,” says Maria. 
“We all had the same goal: the fight to protect our 
environment,” adds Stina. This is a point of view 
shared by Therese Henriksson, a student in her final 
year of high school who participated last September 
in a conference in Nacka, near Stockholm, organized Students learn 
ecology in the field
