talking to LAURA KONG
“MANY LIVES COULD 
HAVE BEEN SPARED”
According to the latest estimates, the tsunami that struck countries with  
coasts on the Indian Ocean in December 2004 caused nearly 300,000 deaths. 
Had an early warning system been in place in the region, the toll would not 
have been as heavy. UNESCO’s Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission 
set up such a tsunami alert system in the Pacific in 1965, and is now working 
on a world-wide one that will be operational by June 2007. Laura Kong, 
Director of the International Tsunami Information Centre based in Hawaii, 
outlines the project’s benefits.

The Pacific Tsunami Warning Centre had detected and 
located the earthquake, but was unable to warn people on 
the coasts of the Indian Ocean countries of a tsunami risk. 
Could we have imagined a different scenario?
LK. We could have, if there had been an early warning 
system. First it detects an earthquake, determines how large 
it is and then sends out a warning to the right people, in the 
right manner. It’s also necessary to confirm that a tsunami 
wave has been generated, because most earthquakes don’t 
generate tsunamis. That requires instruments. Such a system 
also means that those notified then have to know exactly 
what to do, which is to get at least 1km inland or move  10 
meters uphill. If such a system had been in place, many lives 
could have been spared in December 2004.
 But the problem is that many countries don’t have a 24-
hour instant alert system. Japan and Hawaii have sirens, as 
well as radio and TV broadcasts. Japan can get a message 
out in two to five minutes. But they often get earthquakes 
and tsunamis, so they can justify the amount of money 
they put into the system, while Hawaii’s notification system 
was developed with other hazards in mind as well, like 
hurricanes, because regional scale tsunamis are rare.
But Indonesia, for example, doesn’t have the necessary 
communication infrastructure at the local level.  It’s a pretty 

The offices of Radio 
Republic Indonesia 
could not withstand 
the gigantic wave
tough challenge for them to set up a 
system. And their special case, being 
in a seismically active area, is that the 
hazard is right off their coast. So they 
probably don’t have much time to 
make a warning. 
Q. There have been pledges to get an 
early tsunami warning system for  
the Indian Ocean up and running in 
12-18 months. Is that feasible? 
LK. An interim system can be ready 
soon, using the existing warning 
centres and data stream. The seismic 
network is probably already there to 
detect the largest earthquakes. But it 
is not good enough to be able to tell 
accurately whether the earthquake 
is in the water or on land. They’re 
going to need a lot more instruments 
to do that – and the data have to 
be collected and sent somewhere in 
real time. With unlimited resources 
in terms of money and people, it’s 
possible to deploy these instruments 
and get a system running in a year or 
two.
In Bangladesh, a lot of money was 
put in to develop a storm surge early 
warning system in the last decade. If it is able to deliver a 
message instantly at all hours of the day, you no longer have 
to develop that component; you’re just adding the tsunami 
warning. So there’s no need to wait. Work can start now in 
these countries. But this means education of public officials, 
elected officials, government heads, agency staff, fire, police, 
and then the public. 
Q. So there are seismic detectors already in place  
in the Indian Ocean?
LK. They’re there. The existing global network has enough 
fidelity to identify when there’s a very large earthquake, 
and then to locate it. To have a more precise location it 
would take more instruments, perhaps 5 or 10 more stations 
– and probably that will happen. But if there were a large 
earthquake tomorrow, the Pacific Tsunami Warning Centre 
and all the other geophysical observatories that get this freely 
available data stream would know instantly about it. They’d 
be able to locate it quickly and be able to estimate its size. 
Q. How do you detect a tsunami and where it’s heading?
We can detect it in the open ocean using deep ocean 
detection systems, but we still have to model it or propagate 
it to shore. These systems are very sensitive gauges that sit 
on the ocean floor and measure changes 
in pressure in the water column above. 
It’s a new technology that has just 
become operational in the last few years. 
Because tsunami waves go out in 
every direction from the epicentre, there 
is a very simple way to know if one has 
been generated, by using tide gauges at 
the coasts. So, if another tsunami event 
occurred off western Sumatra, that wave 
would hit at least one tide gauge before 
it started heading towards Thailand or 
Malaysia. And if a large wave generated in 
Indonesia is detected on a coastal gauge, 
that’s a pretty strong indication that as 
much or more energy is going the other 
way towards Sri Lanka. If you had a deep 
ocean gauge between where it occurred 
and the Indian continent, then that would 
be a direct indication that a large wave 
had been generated.  We would still need 
to carry out numerical models to estimate 
its wave height or coastal impact.
Q. Once you have a system in place,  
the instruments have to be maintained. 
What does that involve?
One of the limitations of the deep ocean 
pressure gauges is that they need power. 
They sit on the ocean bottom and talk to the surface by 
modem when there’s a large signal. If it’s big enough 
they transmit the data to a satellite. But this requires 
maintenance. At present, every year after you deploy one 
of these instruments, you have to go back in a ship, locate 
the gauge, bring it to the surface from perhaps 4000 metres 
▲
At a glance
A Life in 
Seismology
Laura Kong has been Director 
of the UNESCO/IOC International 
Tsunami Information Centre, 
based in Honolulu, Hawaii (USA) 
since 2001. 
After finishing her PhD 
in marine seismology at the 
Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology and the Woods 
Hole Oceanographic Institution 
(USA) in 1990, she spent a year 
as postdoctoral fellow at the 
Earthquake Research Institute in 
Tokyo (Japan), before taking up a 
post as geophysicist at the Pacific 
Tsunami Warning Center. 
From 1993 to 1995, she 
worked as a seismologist at the 
Hawaiian Volcano Observatory. 
From 1996 to 2001, before 
becoming Director of ITIC, she 
held a research post at the 
Hawaii Institute of Geophysics.

Ocean buoys ready 
to be deployed in the 
Pacific
▼
depth, change the batteries and the hard disk, service it, then 
throw it back in the water. This has to be done for each of 
the instruments. So the recurring cost is high, in addition to 
the initial investment. These deep ocean devices might cost 
up to $300,000 to deploy initially and then perhaps $50,000 
a year to maintain. So you can put in ten of the coastal tide 
gauges, which are a lot easier to install and maintain than 
these ocean buoys, for the cost of one deep ocean gauge. But 
the ocean buoys give you a data point in the middle of the 
ocean, which the other one can’t. And they buy you extra 
time for a warning.  Technology is improving very quickly 
these days so it’s very probable that the costs of the deep-
ocean systems will go down and servicing time may be 
reduced as better and more reliable electronic components 
are developed. 
Q. So what will be the next stages?
LK. The IOC can’t implement an Indian Ocean system 
by itself. It doesn’t have the funding base, or the human 
resources. It has information and guidance that we’ve used 
in the Pacific. Each nation has to contribute what they can 
in terms of instruments and infrastructure to build a regional 
system. The IOC doesn’t own any of it.
In order to build a truly regional system, nations need 
to contribute national resources in a freely available way, 
especially in terms of data sharing. This is critical to its 
success.
Q Do all the States involved agree on this?
LK. We are aware that some countries have not freely  
shared their data in real time in the past. Some countries do 
have networks that are not yet generating real-time data,  
and so we hope to encourage and work with them so that 
they will be able to contribute for example, sea-level  
data, to a regional warning centre.   It’s well known that  
data sharing is critical, and so we will want every country 
who participates in the system to  
contribute Through the IOC 
coordination process, we hope to 
achieve this consensus opinion, as 
well as agree on where and how the 
regional centre will function.
Q. Is there a working group to  
see the proposed global early warning 
system through to its becoming 
operational in 2007?
The IOC will coordinate the regional 
effort inter-governmentally. But the 
regional effort has to be built on 
national efforts, with each country 
responsible for its own national system, built according  
to their particular seismology, organisational structures, 
culture, and ways of interpreting warnings. That’s a big job. 
The IOC, and particularly the ITIC, which I run, are of  
course ready and willing to assist in their efforts. 
Countries are moving very quickly to identify monitoring 
requirements and establish plans for communicating 
information to their peoples. That is a good sign that we  
will see a minimal system implemented in the next year or 
two.  But if that’s going to happen, it means a huge amount 
of work and resources. No one’s getting any sleep now.
Interview by Peter Coles
Paris (France)
