The Rebirth of Kunqu Opera
 Proclaimed by UNESCO in 2001 
as a Masterpiece of the Oral and 
Intangible Heritage, this traditional 
Chinese art, once threatened with 
extinction, is now the object of 
renewed interest. 
A young girl appears as soon as the fi rst notes of 
music are heard. Draped in a richly embroi-
dered costume, she performs graceful hand 
movements. Th e elegance of her gestures is 
enhanced by her long silk sleeves. Accompa-
nied by a fl ute, she begins to sing and the audi-
ence holds its breath.
Th e scene is an excerpt from “Th e Peony 
Pavilion”, one of the classic plays of the Kunqu 
Opera. It tells the tragic tale of Du Liniang, who 
dreams during a walk in the park that she meets 
and falls in love with a young man. Unable to 
live her dream in reality, she falls mortally ill 
and, as she is dying, asks to be buried in the gar-
den where she met her beloved. Later, Lui 
Mengmei, a student on his way to the capital, 
passes in front of Du Liniang’s house and asks 
to spend the night there. As he sleeps, he dreams 
of the young girl. Revealing to him that he is the 
one her heart desires, she asks him to open her 
coffi  n. Liu Mengmei does so and Du Liniang 
comes back to life.
Since 2004, this updated version of the play, 
produced by Bai Xianyong, one of China’s best-
known contemporary authors, has been staged 
in a dozen universities in China. Teachers and 
students can buy tickets for as little as 10 yuan. 
Each time the performance attracts a large audi-
ence. “Th e opera is so sweet, so graceful that I 
Shi Hong Mei in a 
performance of “The 
Peony Pavilion” at the 
Huguang theatre in 
Beijing

was profoundly touched,” admits Hu Chunni, a 
political science student at Nanking Univer-
sity.
Th is traditional art form, whose beginnings 
can be traced to the 16th century Ming dynasty, 
is one of the oldest types of opera in China. 
Originating in the eastern province of Jiangsu, 
it combines singing, dancing, gesture and reci-
tation. Its influence on Chinese theatre and 
opera is undisputed. 
| Ongoing revival and new museum
But this golden age is long gone, and the art has 
been declining since the 18th century. Provin-
cial operas, notably that of Beijing, ended up 
replacing Kunqu. Th e performances, oft en very 
long—some could last several days—were soon 
only being staged for a handful of scholars. 
“Historically, this art was kept alive by the intel-
lectual elite. It is considered too diffi  cult for the 
general public to understand,” explains Bai 
Xianyong. In fact, in the second half of the 19th 
century, most of the actors had joined troupes 
engaged in other forms of opera. “Th ere are 
only about 600 professionals left  in China,” 
laments Ke Jun, vice-president of the Jiangsu 
Kunqu Opera Th eatre. As a result, of the 800 
plays in the repertoire at the end of the Qing 
dynasty, less than 200 remained in the 1950s 
and several dozen only have survived to the 
dawn of 21st century. 
Proclaimed a Masterpiece of the Oral and 
Intangible Heritage in 2001, kungqu has expe-
rienced a rebirth in the past few years. Four 
classical plays, including “Th e Peony Pavilion” 
or “The Palace of Eternal Life”, have been 
restored and updated. A Kunqu Opera museum 
was opened in 2003 in Suzhou, in Jiangsu Prov-
ince. The exhibits include masks, costumes, 
manuscripts and ancient instruments.
In 2004 the Chinese government decided to 
devote 10 million yuan per year to revive this 
traditional art form. Th e money will be used 
mostly to collect librettos and ancient materi-
als, to stage new plays and to train profession-
als. Some fear the allotted funds are insuffi  cient 
to fulfi l this enormous task. “Nonetheless, today 
this art form has been brought back to life,” 
notes Ke Jun.  Just like Du Liniang, the young 
girl in “Th e Peony Pavilion”. ◆
Wang Li
