CHIAPAS WOMEN INVEST 
IN THE FUTURE
Responsible for half the world’s food 
production, women play a key role in 
sustainable food security, particularly 
in developing countries. Yet they have 
considerably less access to land and 
investment funds than men. That is why 
microcredit, celebrated by an International 
Year in 2005, often seems like the only 
solution to break poverty’s vicious circle. 
An example: In the province of Chiapas 
(Mexico) women are taking advantage of 
both loans and literacy classes, provided by 
a programme UNESCO supports.
M aría Pérez Pérez, from the district 
of Zinacantán, never thought she 
would be able to learn to hold a 
pencil at 48, or pick up an exercise book and scan 
the lines to make sense of its content.
“I didn’t go to school when I was a girl because I 
had to look after the animals, and help my parents, 
who were very poor. But now I regret never having 
made the effort to learn,” says María, who like the 
vast majority of indigenous women, only speaks her 
mother tongue.
But she is one of the 345 women talking 
literacy classes, thanks to UNESCO’s support 
of the Alternativa Solidaria Chiapas (Al Sol), a 
non-governmental organization that provides 
microcredits to poor women so they can raise their 
▲
A majority of Tzotzil 
women cannot read 
or write

own and their families’ living standards.
One of the 25 groups of women enrolled in the 
literacy programme holds its classes in Zinacantán, 
a municipality located around 10 kilometers from 
the colonial city of San Cristóbal de las Casas and 
a stronghold of the Tzotzils, one of the main ethnic 
groups to have descended from the Mayans. Every 
fortnight, around a dozen women, all of them 
adults with children, meet for an hour’s class given 
by their teacher, Rosalinda Bolom, who is herself 
Tzotzil and speaks in their language – without 
which her work would be impossible.
MAKESHIFT SCHOOL IN A 
STUDENT’S HOME
The classes themselves are held in the patio of 
a modest home belonging to one of the group’s 
members: there are neither chairs nor tables, and the 
students write either standing up or sitting on the 
ground, both of which are clearly uncomfortable.But 
since they are thrilled to be learning, these minor 
handicaps don’t worry them. Most of the students 
start to laugh nervously once the teacher arrives: 
the time has come to hand over homework. The fact 
that one student has not written her letters correctly 
sparks a chorus of laughter and whispers in their 
native tongue. Learning new letters or phrases also 
prompts excited reactions.
Using a small white piece of cardboard as a 
blackboard, Rosalinda Bolom writes Va-Ve-Vi-Vo-Vu, 
and asks her students to repeat the sounds to check 
they have not forgotten the previous lesson. With 
small children hanging from their large skirts, the 
indigenous women copy down the latest lesson.
“We can’t make progress as quickly as we’d like 
because these are not the very best conditions to 
work in, and because we only have classes every 
fortnight, but even so many of the women have 
learnt to read and write,” observes the teacher, 
who adds that María is one of the most advanced 
students. She and some other students have finished 
the first of the three levels, and are now learning 
how to add, multiply, divide and subtract.
“I didn’t know how to sign my name, but now 
I do and I’m very happy about it,” declares María 
with delight. She adds, “I want to keep on learning 
so that I can do the accounts for my business and 
live a bit better.” Her husband, she explains, instead 
of getting angry with her, has supported her in 
From Bangladesh 
to Chiapas
Alternativa Solidaria 
Chiapas (Al Sol Chiapas) 
is a copy of the microcredit 
programme that has been 
operating in Bangladesh. 
Established in 1998 in San 
Cristóbal de las Casas, it hands 
out loans to poor women who 
would like to embark on a 
productive business venture. 
Executive Director Claudia 
Rovelo explains that the project 
began with 23 women, but has 
since expanded to cover 4,679, 
most of them indigenous rural 
workers.
Upon joining, a woman 
receives a 1,000-peso loan 
(worth a little under $100), but 
over time they can increase 
their credit to 15,000 pesos in 
order to finance projects such as 
setting up small grocery stores, 
or businesses that buy and sell 
fruit, vegetables and chicken, or 
craft and flower workshops.
Al Sol was created by Pilar 
García and Claudia Rovelo 
after they made contact with 
members of the Grameen 
Bank in Bangladesh, owned 
by Muhammad Yunus, who 
loaned them a “seed capital” of 
$20,000 on a 2 % interest rate. 
“We began the programme with 
those resources and then we 
paid back the credit, allowing us 
to work with other foundations,” 
says Rovelo. “Any woman who 
wishes to start or expand any 
productive venture, and needs 
money to do so, is a candidate 
for a microcredit from Al Sol,” 
declares Rovelo, who explains 
that the programme is oriented 
solely towards women because 
they have the least chance 
of securing money for such 
activities. “And women are 
very reliable. Al Sol has a bad 
loan rate of only 0.1 %.” At the 
same time, Al Sol offers other 
non-financial programmes, such 
as literacy training, improving 
the quality of homemade 
craftwork, and a novel project 
about nutrition that began in 
January this year. Demand is 
now so high that by 2008, Al 
Sol estimates it will have made 
microloans to 15,000 women.
▲
© Victor Manuel Camacho Victoria, Mexique 

to receive the credit, and that condition is enough 
to persuade them to make the effort to learn,” he 
declares. “At the start, many of them refused to take 
classes, saying they were very old and stupid, but 
bit by bit they became more confident.”
The literacy programmes are underway in five 
indigenous districts in Chiapas: Zinacantán, San 
Juan Chamula, Teopisca and San Andrés Larráinzar. 
In December 2004, 345 women were taking part, 
while 50 more are on the waiting list. Claudio 
Rovelo, executive director of Al Sol, underlines the 
importance of the basic literacy programme, pointing 
to the fact that 80 percent of the 4,000 members of 
Al Sol do not know how to read or write. “The main 
problem we had was a lack of money to support 
the programme, but in 2002 we secured finance 
from the Gills Foundation in Belgium, and then we 
contacted UNESCO. Our application was approved 
in 2002, and we were given $8,000 to start off with. 
In November 2003 they gave us another $4,000, 
and we have just signed an agreement to keep the 
programme going,” he says.
UNESCO’S CONTRIBUTION
Rovelo observes that UNESCO checks the 
methodology used in the classes, and suggests 
relevant changes in accordance with its experience 
in providing adult education. The finance provided 
by UNESCO is employed to pay the teacher’s wages, 
acquire teaching materials and fund visits to the 
communities where classes are held, he says. For its 
part, Al Sol pays its representatives’ travel expenses.
“Every month we send UNESCO a report on 
how the programme is going,” Rovelo says, adding 
they although they currently only have one teacher 
- albeit supported by volunteers from the Puebla 
Iberoamerican University - they are thinking of 
employing another to meet ever-rising demand.
Elio Henríquez Tobar
Correspondent of the Mexican daily “La Jordana”
taking the course and improving herself. Thanks 
to a small loan from Al Sol, she has also been able 
to plant flowers that she later sells, generating a 
small income for the family. During each class, 
Rosalinda is joined by an Al Sol representative, who 
is in charge of handing out credits. While Rosalinda 
teaches, he collects the repayments on debts every 
fortnight – an effective strategy, which tends to 
guarantee that the students turn up for class.
LITERACY AS A CONDITION 
FOR CREDIT
The Al Sol representative who accompanies 
Rosalinda is also a Tzotzil, Domingo Hernández 
Díaz, who explains that the idea of teaching the 
women how to read and write emerged once Al Sol 
decided it would not accept thumb and fingerprints 
on its loan contracts. “Even if they only put their 
initials, at least they have to learn how to write 
Despite Spartan 
conditions, women 
attend literacy class 
assiduously
