Oceans, vital to the planet’s survival, are being misused.  
Overpopulated coastal areas have suff ered damage due to marine 
pollution that causes the proliferation of algae capable of poisoning 
ecosystems. The 19 million tons of carbon being injected daily by 
human activity could permanently upset the marine environment. 
For 45 years now, UNESCO’s Intergovernmental Oceanographic 
Commission (IOC) has been busy getting to know the ocean. Regular 
global monitoring and data sharing constitute the essential two-fold 
challenge, whether the task is sending tsunami warnings or creating 
reliable predictive models, keys to adapting to future disturbances.   
Ocean s
Off  the coast of 
Mauritius
Monitoring the Oceans

“It’s every oceanographer’s dream!  In real time, 
the Argo network lets us measure water salinity 
and temperatures throughout the world’s oceans,” 
says Mathieu Belbeoch, technical coordinator of 
the Argo project. Aided by the Intergovernmental 
Oceanographic Commission (IOC), this is a project 
devised to help understand the ocean’s role in cli-
mate. Since 2000, fl oats have been cast from boats 
and even airplanes at a steady rhythm of around 80 
per month. Coverage is not yet uniform but already 
worldwide, aft er the installation of 1,955 devices 
out of an expected total of 3,000. Th is is the fi rst 
time in history that we have been able to observe 
the superfi cial layer of oceans to such an extent.
But even if knowledge has progressed, the 
oceans still hold many secrets. Th ey occupy 71% 
of our earth’s surface and also play an essential 
role in the regulation of the climate. Because they 
cannot be reproduced in a laboratory, they must 
be observed. Oceanography, however, is a young 
science and doesn’t yet have the measuring net-
work of meteorology. Created 80 years aft er the 
World Meteorology Organization, the IOC came 
into being at UNESCO in 1960 to coordinate 
research on oceans, an essentially international 
subject of study. Its objective: encouraging the 
collection of scientifi c information in the marine 
environment and sharing it with the 131 Mem-
ber States. 
| Improving models for forecasting
Th e stakes are enormous. More than half of the 
world’s population lives less then 200 kilometres 
from the coast.  Th at type of high concentration is 
the origin of coastal zone pollution, 70% of which 
comes from water waste and household and 
industrial refuse dumped directly into the sea. 
Fishing, upon which many developing countries 
depend, is also a problem.  Between 50 to 90% of 
the largest  predatory fi sh have disappeared in the 
last 15 years because of the over-exploitation of 
fi sh resources. On top of that, marine currents are 
spreading climatic abnormalities on a large scale. 
Take for example El Niño, whose disastrous 
eff ects (scarcity of fi sh, drought and torrential 
rains) have been felt from Alaska to Australia and 
from East Africa to Brazil. The phenomenon 
aff ected some 125 million people and cost 30 mil-
lion euros in damages due to fl ooding, forest fi res 
and cyclones in 1997.  
To forecast the arrival of El Niño, a type of 
natural disturbance that generally occurs every 
three to five years, 72 floating sensors were 
installed in the tropical Pacific Ocean in the 
beginning of the 1990s. Th is network enabled 
the forecasting of the 1997 episode six months in 
advance. Today the system has been extended to 
all the oceans. “Th e major challenge now is to 
establish and perpetuate the Global Ocean 
Observing System called GOOS. Argo is one of 
the components” explains Patricio Bernal, IOC 
executive secretary. GOOS coordinates the 
eff orts of 61 Member States participating in the 
collection and unrestricted exchange of data on 
the marine environment. Th e in situ measuring 
network is already half-installed, and is comple-
mented eff ectively by satellites. Th ese provide a 
picture of all the oceans, in essentially real time.
The information is the basis for models 
describing the sea’s condition. Improving the 
models, and thus the ensuing predictions, is 
essential for tracking climate change. “But we 
also have to worry about developing countries 
having access to data and being able to use it,” 
Patricio Bernal points out. For these predictions 
allow us not only to anticipate phenomena such 
as the rising of sea level, coastal erosion and the 
decrease in fi sh resources, they also enable us to 
determine the ideal moment for harvest or the 
location of shoals of fi sh. ◆
Mathilde Elie
A network of data for Africa
 Marine Institutions from 25 African countries have come together in the 
Ocean Data and Information Network for Africa (ODINAFRICA), supported 
by IOC and the Government of Flanders. Designed to provide access to the 
latest oceanographic information, the network has developed the necessary 
infrastructures and competencies for archiving and management. Each 
Member State is now equipped with an Information Centre and a National 
Centre of Oceanographic Data.
