The Success of Private Schools 
in Zambia: A Dirty Secret
 Public schools are free in Zambia, but many parents prefer to send their 
children to private schools.
The Ngoma community school in southern 
Zambia is private, but there is nothing grand 
about it. Its makeshift  new classroom is missing 
walls and there are holes between the empty can-
vas fertiliser sacks that make up its roof. Inside it 
is easy to spot the many pupils who have lost 
their parents, usually to AIDS or malaria, because 
they are allowed to attend classes without wear-
ing the school’s simple blue uniform.
Th e Zambian government may have made 
primary education free in all its schools three 
years ago, but some state schools still turn away 
students whose families cannot aff ord uniforms, 
books or Parent Teacher Association fees. Par-
ents who work on the sugar plantations that 
surround Ngoma say they choose the private 
school because it is more practical and cheaper 
for them to pay its 62 pence monthly fees than 
to send their children to the nearest state-
funded school 10 kilometres away.
James Daka, an irrigation supervisor with 
three children, says:  “It’s a good school. Th e 
teachers are not all trained like at the govern-
ment school, but community schools are 
cheap.”
| Success for unregistered schools
Headteacher Emily Mwembe says her pupils 
outperform pupils at the nearest state school 
when they bus them there to sit reading and 
writing tests.
Ngoma is far from unique. Researchers led 
by James Tooley of the University of Newcastle 
(United Kingdom) have found hundreds of 
similar private schools doing successful work in 
the poorest areas around the world. Th e schools 
are oft en unregistered and their pupils missing 
from offi  cial data. In the Indian city of Hydera-
bad, the researchers found that 35% of the 
schools were state-run, 23% were private 

schools recognised by the Government, and 
37% were private schools that did not offi  cially 
exist.
Th e researchers tested 9,000 children from 
government and fee-paying schools in India, 
Ghana and Kenya. Th ey found, once they con-
trolled for background variables, that the chil-
dren at the unregistered private schools 
performed 14 percentage points better in maths 
and 20 percentage points better in English.
“No one suspected that private slum schools 
would be better,” says Tooley. His fi ndings raise 
the question of whether international agencies 
should consider giving fi nancial backing to the 
fee-paying schools.
Th e priority should be to help governments 
provide a free education for all, says the World 
Bank, but it also recognises that fee-paying 
schools can play a crucial role.
Bob Prouty, an education advisor to the 
World Bank, says that many children in the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo would have 
missed out on education altogether during the 
last 15 years of political upheaval and civil war 
if they had not been able to attend private com-
munity schools. “It’s kind of a dirty little secret,” 
he says. “But where private schools are provid-
ing an education for the very poorest commu-
nities, it has to be seen as an indictment of the 
existing system.” ◆
Michael Shaw in Ngoma, Zambia

Public schools are free 
in Zambia, but many 
parents choose private 
schools
