
Water is set to defi ne our new century in 
the way that oil defi ned its predecessor. 
Across the world there are disturbing signs that 
the world is running out of water. In 2015, ac-
cording to current estimates, 40% of the world’s 
population will experience diffi  culties in obtain-
ing a supply of water suffi  cient for daily needs. 
Already certain regions – northern China, the 
western United States, North Africa and west-
ern Asia – are pumping water faster than aquifer 
sources can be replenished. Some of the world’s 
largest and best-known rivers – the Indus and 
the Nile, the Yellow River and the Ganges, the 
Colorado and the Rio Grande – no longer reach 
the sea in any volume for part of the year. All 
are being exhausted by the demands of irrigat-
ing water-hungry crops and taps in burgeoning 
cities.
In September 2000, countries participating in the United Nations 
Millennium Summit pledged to reduce by half the number of people 
in the world deprived of clean water, between now and 2015. This is a 
highly ambitious goal, considering it means every day providing access 
to running water to another 300,000 people. Given the circumstances, 
how should the world respond to anticipated shortages? Do we need 
more science and engineering, or is the fi rst priority to change the way 
we use this vital resource?
The Rush for Water
The Yangtze, great 
river that irrigates 
southern China

Water
Among other examples, Lake Chad has 
decreased in size by four-fifths in the last 
40 years. Wells too are emptying as we pump 
out underground reserves that have survived 
for thousands of years. The loss of these 
resources is a hidden holocaust on a par with 
the destruction of rainforests; yet it is barely 
remarked upon.
Worldwide, we are ‘mining’ some 200 cubic 
kilometres of water a year. Half a billion peo-
ple are consuming wheat and rice irrigated 
with water reserves that are not being replen-
ished. 
| Moving water
Can science come to the rescue? Th is is highly 
unlikely. True, ever-bigger engineering projects 
can move water round the planet. In 2003 at the 
World Water Forum a coalition of governments 
and industry leaders called for a doubling in the 
number of large dams across the world. But 
many would be on rivers already running dry. 
Another idea is to move water between river 
basins. China is currently spending tens of bil-
lions of dollars on three giant transfer schemes 
to take water from its great southern river, the 
Yangtze, to relieve the artery of northern China, 
the Yellow River. India has an even bigger plan, 
currently under discussion, to divert part of the 
fl ow of its great northern monsoon rivers, like 
the Ganges and Brahmaputra, to its arid south 
and west – at a cost some believe could reach 
US$200 billion. Th ere are schemes too to divert 
Congo River water into the Sahara and divert 
Australia’s northern tropical rivers into its 
desert interior.
But these schemes are hugely costly, and 
cheaper solutions are available. One way of 
relieving local water crises is by moving water 
in the form of food. Th ere is a huge hidden 
trade in what is being called “virtual water”, 
defi ned as the water needed to grow crops or 
produce other products that would have used 
large amounts of water if grown at home. 
“In recent years, water has become a hidden 
part of world trade,” says Arjen Hoekstra, until 
recently at UNESCO’s Institute for Water Edu-
cation, in Delft , the Netherlands. “Whenever 
we buy a T-shirt made of Pakistani cotton, or 
eat Th ai rice or burgers made of meat from 
Central America, we are infl uencing the hydrol-
ogy of those countries – taking a share of the 
River Indus, the Mekong or the Costa Rican 
rains.” 
Hoekstra estimates the global virtual water 
trade at around 1,000 cubic kilometres a year, 
mostly in crops like grains, vegetable oil, sugar 
and cotton. “About 15% of the water used in the 
world for human purposes is not used for 
domestic consumption but for export in virtual 
form,” he adds. 
This trade is essential for the survival of 
some countries, especially in the Middle East. 
Iran, Egypt and Algeria could starve otherwise. 
Water-stressed Jordan effectively imports 
between 60 and 90% of its water in the form of 
food. More water fl ows into the Middle East 
each year as a result of imports of “virtual water” 
than fl ows down the River Nile.  
| The price of virtual water
But, he says, virtual water is sold as a virtually 
free resource: “Water is generally priced far 
below its real economic, social and environ-
mental cost.” Pakistan, for instance, consumes 
a third of the fl ow of the River Indus in order to 
grow cotton for export. When the Soviet Union 
transformed the deserts of Central Asia into a 
vast cotton plantation, it sowed the seeds of the 
destruction of the Aral Sea. Hoekstra estimates 
the European market for cotton alone is respon-
sible for a fi ft h of the emptying of the sea.
If on the contrary virtual water were prop-
erly priced, it could act as a global market to 
help the world make better use of its limited 
supply of water. And it would be much more 
effi  cient than moving water round in bulk. But, 
besides this route towards the globalisation of 
water supplies, UNESCO’s water scientists have 
taken more interest in the subtler and cheaper 
arts of reviving traditional water systems – 
water systems that give communities greater 
control over their own water supplies.
Often these have the advantage of being 
cheaper, and of making better and more sus-
tainable use of local water resources. Th ey rep-
resent one route towards solving water crises. 
We need to fi nd others, to help prevent water 
from becoming a luxury available only to a 
privileged few. ◆
Fred Pearce
