Uganda: The Price of Free School for All
 Increasing enrolment is one objective, but the quality of learning must 
be preserved at the same time. An illustration  in Masindi, Uganda.
Although seven-year-old Fred Sekayingo cannot 
see, his hand shoots up regularly to answer Har-
riet Myendwoha’s questions. Each time he 
speaks, his 103 classmates burst into thunderous 
applause. Fred beams.
Th is is primary 4 class in Kamurasi Demon-
stration Primary School in rural Masindi, 130 
miles from Kampala, Uganda. It boasts 145 disa-
bled children on its 1,091 pupil roll, which has 
tripled since the government abolished primary 
school tuition fees in 1997.
Despite having a teacher: pupil ratio of 1:110, 
sparse learning resources and a shortage of qual-
ifi ed special needs teachers, headteacher Byoona 
Ntairaho is determined to deliver primary edu-
cation for all - ensuring girls, orphans and disa-
bled children are in his fold. Myendwoha, who 
self-funded her course in special educational 
needs, visits parents to encourage them to send 
their disabled children to school. She is training 
Kamurasi’s other teachers to teach Braille and 
has taught all pupils to sign so the special needs 
children feel included.
“Although it is government policy, most 
headteachers don’t even attempt inclusive spe-
cial needs education because it’s a bother, but I 
have an interest,” explains Ntairaho.
With funding from UK charity Farmer’s 
Overseas Action Group, he is building a special 
needs boarding house so the children can receive 
an inclusive education even if they live miles 
away. He already has a special needs resource 
centre, funded by charity Sight Savers Interna-
tional. Last year the school achieved a 100% pass 
rate in primary leaving exams (PLE), with six 
girls scoring grade 1 passes. 

When countries rapidly expand primary 
enrolment by abolishing school fees in one 
stroke, the class sizes can rocket, weighing heav-
ily on the quality of learning. In Uganda, which 
now spends a quarter of its budget on education, 
the number of primary 6 pupils achieving 
national numeracy and literacy competencies 
has halved since 1999.
So what is Ntairaho’s secret? “Kamurasi is 
really shining because it has a visionary 
headteacher,” says district education officer 
Derek Nkata, who oversees Masindi’s 186 pri-
mary schools. But a closer look shows the school 
also has support from a visionary district offi  ce.
| The quality imperative
“Th e general attitude towards universal primary 
education is ‘it’s always there, even if I don’t 
come in today,’” Nkata says. “We are now get-
ting headteachers to sign performance contracts 
to eradicate this laisser faire attitude. We hope 
this will have a positive impact on teachers as 
well.”
Ntairaho employs several strategies to ensure 
his pupils come to school and focus on work. He 
conducts home visits to promote girls’ education, 
and even self-funds surprise pregnancy tests for 
girls - to deter men from defiling his female 
pupils, which might force them to drop out.
Concerns are shared at regular parents’ meet-
ings. “I keep reminding parents of their duty to 
provide exercise books for their children,” he 
says. “Because they have survived with-
out education, they don’t understand 
its worth and would rather use their 
children as a source of income.” Other 
schools that have won over skeptical 
parents have seen a dramatic increase 
in resources, through community fun-
draising, and also in results. 
Like all Masindi schools, Kamurasi 
is benefi ting from a fi ve-year-old part-
nership between the district and Link 
Community Development, a non-
governmental organization that sends 
British teachers to Uganda, Ghana 
and South Africa to gain and share 
leadership experience, boost numer-
acy and literacy teaching, and help 
schools with development plans.
Since 2000, PLE results in Masindi 
have jumped from near bottom of the 
56-district league to ninth place. And in 2003, it 
was the highest performing rural district in the 
country. Nkata attributes this success to a com-
bination of Link’s support and an infl ux of more 
highly qualifi ed teachers, because the govern-
ment has raised the minimum entry requirement 
to six O Levels, which must include English and 
Maths. Th e government this year has also allo-
cated time to numeracy and literacy in the lower 
primary curriculum to combat the national 
decline in results.
Nkata is now doing research at London’s 
Institute of Education to establish whether the 
quality of teaching can be raised by adopting 
alternative teaching methods and using existing 
resources diff erently. “Large classes are here to 
stay so we need eff ective teaching methods for 
big groups,” he explains. He believes co-opera-
tive learning among peer groups and interactive 
teaching would make learning more eff ective in 
over-crowded classrooms. 
In the meantime, he is trying to fi nd funds 
to train 200 unqualifi ed primary teachers in 
service and is building 1,000 classrooms – 
helped by British government aid - to reach the 
pupil: teacher ratio target of 1 to 55. At the rate 
of 50 classrooms per year, this could take 20 
years. Th at’s a long time for education for all to 
become a reality. Sekayingo is lucky that he has 
Ntairhao on his side.  ◆
Abi Newman
Abolishing school 
fees has caused 
skyrocketing numbers 
of pupils
