On the eve of World Environment Day (June 5) 
this year, the BBC news website showed a 
number of ‘before and aft er’ images of various 
places around the globe, taken several years apart. 
Th e message is clear. Th e images tell a story of 
dramatic, accelerating loss over the past decades: 
loss of forests, wetlands, fauna, glaciers, air quality, 
fresh water, beaches, sea ice.... Th e list is long. And 
the question the images raise no longer seems to be 
‘what can we do?’ but ‘is it too late?’
Some refuse a ‘doom and gloom’ scenario. 
Urbanisation, for example, may be paradoxi-
cally the best solution to rising population in 
the face of fi nite resources. Some argue that a 
city’s environmental impact per capita is less-
ened, as people may be packed into a relatively 
small space, compared to individual houses 
surrounded by lawn. Others argue that while 
this may be true locally, cities have an unseen 
impact on the ecology of places hundreds, even 
thousands, of kilometres away that supply them 
with water, energy, food and clothing. 
Urbanisation does not only destroy biodi-
versity, either, even if it leads to the disappear-
ance of certain plants. Alien species may not 
always be unwelcome, if they succeed in surviv-
ing in this environment. “Th e most important 
thing is that plants continue to function, 
In French Guyana, a 
forest fl ooded by the 
installation of a dam
With a population due to number 9 billion people by 2050, dwindling 
resources and ever-increasing threats to biodiversity, the Earth is 
suff ering from disquieting symptoms. Some of the damage is already 
irreversible. But all is not lost. Certain changes linked to global warming 
may even be benefi cial, if we can manage them.
Taking the Pulse of the Planet
Env ironment

whether they’re from China or Siberia,” says 
Charles Peters, Curator of Economic Botany at 
the New York Botanical Garden (USA), speak-
ing at a 2003 meeting on urban ecology co-
organised by UNESCO.
| Ecosystem approach
According to the World Conservation Union 
(IUCN), the spread of invasive alien species is 
nevertheless a threat to biodiversity. Out of 
their native context, they destroy whole ecosys-
tems. And biodiversity is the best buff er against 
change, constituting a vast reservoir of evolu-
tionary possibilities. 
In South Africa, white settlers introduced 
several species of fast-growing Australian aca-
cia for timber, and to stabilise dunes. In the 
Cape region (see p. 43), the introduced species 
became more successful than the indigenous 
vegetation, rapidly replacing thousands of hec-
tares of one of the world’s richest fl oral king-
doms with water-thirsty shrubs that support 
few of the native birds, insects and reptiles. 
Today, across South Africa, alien invasive plants 
use an estimated 3.3 billion cubic metres more 
water than indigenous plants, in a region that is 
already prone to drought.
In 1995, the South African government 
introduced its Working for Water programme 
and legislation to clear invasive alien species 
and replant indigenous species. It has since 
provided over 40,000 jobs nationally, through 
some 300 programmes, most of them for the 
poorest of the poor, and is one of the most suc-
cessful examples anywhere that environmental 
change can be reversible.
Meanwhile, the Convention on Biodiversity, 
signed by 150 government leaders at the 1992 
Rio Earth Summit, acknowledges that the tradi-
tional conservation ideal of preserving pristine 
nature from the destructive infl uence of people 
is no longer viable. Instead, it adopts an ‘eco-
system approach’, which it defi nes as “a strategy 
for the integrated management of land, water 
and living resources that promotes conserva-
tion and sustainable use in an equitable way.” 
UNESCO’s Man and the Biosphere programme 
(MAB), launched 21 years before Rio in 1971, 
anticipated this inclusive approach.
Recently, in partnership with UNESCO’s 
International Hydrological programme (IHP) 
and the Mountain Research Institute (MRI), 
MAB set up a network of biosphere reserves in 
mountain areas to monitor global change – both 

social and climate-related. “Mountain areas are 
very sensitive to climate change,” says Greg 
Greenwood, Director of MRI. “Higher eleva-
tions are expected to warm faster than lower 
elevations in the global circulation models that 
we have.” 
Natarajan Ishwaran, Director of UNESCO’s 
Natural and Earth Sciences Division, is not a 
‘doom and gloom’ supporter either. “Th e chal-
lenge is to identify examples of what works and 
to replicate them, ideally with short-term results 
that people can see,” he says, stressing that it is 
essential to be pragmatic. Using the example of 
illegal logging, he asks: “How do you stop it? 
It’s not just an enforcement issue. First of all 
you have to start talking to the local logging 
industry and see if you can win friends and con-
verts who can help make the changes happen in 
the short term. This can mean some radical 
approaches, like encouraging the poacher to 
turn gamekeeper.” This has literally become 
reality in several ecotourism projects.
Perhaps it’s time to remember Wendy 
Campbell-Purdie, a British woman who, in the 
1960s, planted 130,000 trees on the edge of the 
Sahara in Bou Saada (Algeria) as a ‘green wall’ 
against desertifi cation. Even if her choice of tree 
was not ideal, it worked, with crops soon grow-
ing in their shade. And 2006 is, aft er all, the 
International Year of the Desert. ◆
Peter Coles
Env ironment
