Signatories to the World Heritage Convention on November 16, 
1972 were not fully aware of the far-reaching implications of their 
action. But now, over 30 years later, the UNESCO label on remarkable 
sites represents national pride combined with substantial benefi ts 
from tourism. Each year new sites are added to the World Heritage 
List. Further eff orts are needed, however, to make the list more 
representative. Long-term protection from war, looting, natural 
catastrophes, tourist overfl ows and climatic change represent other 
major challenges to the survival of these sites.
A Tribute to the Past
Her itage
Certain sites, like the 
Acropolis in Athens, 
are victims of their 
own success
© Martin Parr/Magnum, Paris

Her itage
“
Come discover over 2000 years of history,” 
promises a Chinese on-line travel agency, off er-
ing tours to several World Heritage sites including 
the Summer Palace in Beijing and the Great Wall. 
Obviously, being on the List is a selling point that 
tour operators are eager to tout.
Th e success of the World Heritage List has 
not fl agged since 1972. With 180 States Parties, 
the Convention is one of the world’s most rati-
fi ed international instruments. Each year, new 
sites are added to the list, which has expanded 
from a dozen in 1978 to 812 in 2005.
Over the years, inscription on the World 
Heritage List has become synonymous with 
national pride and non-negligible windfalls in 
tourist revenue. “As a result the pressure applied 
by elected officials at nomination time has 
increased; it is proportional to the stakes,” says 
Léon Pressouyre, a UNESCO expert and pro-
fessor at the University of Paris I-Sorbonne. 
“Th ere is no doubt the candidacies are becom-
ing more politicized,” confirms Mechtild 
Rössler, Chief of Europe and North America at 
the UNESCO World Heritage Centre.
While it is diffi  cult to measure the exact 
repercussions of a nomination on the number 
of visitors, it clearly has an impact on the image 
of the site. “Visitors to Lyons increased in 
number by about 20% in 1998 aft er the city 
was inscribed,” says Bruno Delage, offi  cial in 
charge of heritage issues for the city of Lyons 
(France). “It is very diffi  cult to attribute this 
rise directly to the listing. But Lyons, which 
before was essentially a city for business tour-
ism, has recently seen cultural tourism 
develop.” 
| Growing interest in heritage
Th e general public, fond of old stones and large 
parks, has become the most vocal defender of 
the quality of sites. “Heritage, which originally 
was the privilege of experts, has become every-
body’s business,” says Dinu Bumbaru, Secre-
tary-General of ICOMOS, the International 
Council on Monuments and Sites. 
Each day, the UNESCO Heritage Centre 
receives dozens of emails, postcards or letters, 
oft en to warn of degradations noted on a site. 
“One morning, I was unable to open my desk, 
there were too many letter bags. In a few days, 
I had received 30,000 letters,” says Mechtild 
Rössler. It was just aft er the 1999 campaign 
against the expansion of a salt production 
plant at Laguna San Ignacio, near several whale 
sanctuaries at El Vizcaino, Mexico. Th e Mexi-
can government fi nally refused to authorize 
the expansion project, bowing to pressure 
from the World Heritage Committee and the 
intergovernmental body that every year exam-
ines the state of conservation of sites and nom-
inations. 
Not all such stories have a happy ending. “I 
can think of a number of monuments that are 
in very bad condition,” says Henry Cleere, of 
ICOMOS. Some sites are overrun by tourists 
and become victims of their own popularity. 
One example is Machu Picchu in Peru. Since it 
was inscribed on the Heritage List in 1983, the 
number of visitors to the Inca citadel has soared 
from 9000 in 1992 to 150,000 foreign tourists 
pouring in ten years later. Under these condi-
tions, preserving the integrity of the sites 
becomes a diffi  cult task.
| Dealing with degradation
“Today the Convention has reached the age of 
maturity,” says Francesco Bandarin, Director 
of the Heritage Centre. “In the early years, the 
priority was to identify the sites. Today the 
emphasis is on conservation. We can impose 
high standards.” In theory, at least. With a 
budget capped at US$ 4 billion annually (with 
an additional US$ 11 million of extra-budget-
ary funds designated for specifi c projects), the 
possibilities for action are limited in face of 
damage caused by war, looting, natural catas-
trophes, excessive tourism and even climatic 
change (see article p. 22). Yet the lack of 
resources is but one aspect of the problem. Th e 
means to incite countries to fulfi l their com-
mitments to conservation are also lacking. “We 
sometimes get the feeling that just getting on 
the list is the goal for certain countries,” says 
Guy Debonnet, of the Natural Heritage Section 
of the World Heritage Centre. In theory, the 
Convention allows the removal of a neglected 
site from the list, but this provision has never 
been applied. Th e only mechanism used in case 
of site degradation is to put the site on the 
World Heritage in Danger List, which coun-
tries tend to see as a sanction. As a result there 
are only 33 sites on the In Danger List when 
www.unesco.org/en/courier/heritage 19

probably many more are eligible. Countries 
with neglected sites oft en do not respond to 
pressure to comply with World Heritage site 
criteria. “Yet, as long as there is no effi  cient 
monitoring,” warns Raphaël Souchier, an 
anthropologist and co-author of “Le patri-
moine mondial”,1 “it is the market that will 
impose its law”. And rarely does that work out 
for the best.
Agnès Bardon
1. Le patrimoine mondial, Dominique Audrerie, Raphaël Souchier, Luc Vilar. 
Editions PUF, 1998, Paris. 
Her itage
