UNESCO’S CHANGING PARTNERSHIP 
WITH THE PRIVATE SECTOR
The idea came in 1999, at the World 
Economic Forum in Davos. 
United Nations Secretary General 
Kofi Annan invited the private sector to work 
with the UN. The Global Compact was launched, 
and a new relationship between business and 
multilateral organizations was born. Since 
then, the concept has developed, particularly 
in the field of information and communications 
technology (ICT), integral to achieving global 
Millennium Development Goals.
The new cooperation is also key to meeting the 
Education For All goals. As Mr Abhimanyu Singh, 
Director of UNESCO’s Division of International 
Coordination and Monitoring of EFA points out: 
“If we are to have a better chance of achieving 
the EFA goals, then it cannot be done without 
broadening the partnership to the private sector, 
globally and in-country.”
Elizabeth Longworth, Director 
of UNESCO’s Information Society 
Division, agrees. “The digital divide 
is one of the greatest obstacles to the 
fulfilment of UNESCO’s key mandate 
to help create, share, disseminate and 
preserve knowledge,” she said. 
UNESCO’s growing list of 
partnerships with ICT companies 
include Hewlett-Packard, Intel, 
Microsoft, Alcatel and Hitachi, 
and range from teacher syllabus 
programmes to community access 
centres, science networks and 
recording cultural heritage. The 
nature of the partnerships also varies, 
from more traditional sponsorship to 
strategic agreements where each side 
contributes individually and no money 
changes hands. 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
So far, results from the field are impressive. 
Where UNESCO might have funds to train one 
teacher, a partnership in the same area with an 
IT company can enable 1,000 teachers to be 
trained. However, partnerships with business 
need to be carefully considered, particularly when 
commercial interests are at stake. “We can’t enter 
strategic partnerships for the sake of partnering 
with the private sector. There has to be a very 
strong strategic objective for UNESCO,” said Ms 
Longworth. While each agreement is different, 
all must fit within the Guidelines on Cooperation 
between the United Nations and the Business 
Community, issued by the Secretary-General in 
July 2000
In recent months, much attention has 
ICTs are key in 
reaching Millennium 
Goals
Once limited to sponsoring, partnerships between the private sector and 
UNESCO are now becoming more numerous and ambitious. Information 
and communications technology (ICT) are providing a special opportunity to 
experiment with a new form of cooperation with business.

been focused on two particularly high profile 
partnerships between UNESCO and the private 
sector: a Memorandum of Understanding 
with Intel and a Cooperation Agreement with 
Microsoft. These represent a new level of strategic 
engagement with the private sector, taking 
partnerships beyond the more traditional idea of 
funding and sponsorship to defining how to meet 
the needs of developing countries. While these 
new partnerships have attracted much media 
attention, not all reactions have been positive. In 
December 2004, the French newspaper Le Monde 
cited fears that such agreements were diluting 
UNESCO’s strong support for Free and Open 
Source Software (FOSS).
For Ms Longworth, such fears are are based on 
misunderstanding. In 2003, the World Summit 
for Information Society produced a Declaration 
of Principles and Action Plan stressing the 
need for all software, whether proprietary or 
non-proprietary, to be in a technology-neutral 
approach to development. To this end, Ms 
Longworth said UNESCO gives strong support to 
the development of free and open software. One 
example is the software “Moodle” in six branches 
of the Arab Open University.
GUIDED BY COMMON INTEREST 
IN SOCIAL PROGRESS
“Our mandate is about knowledge transfer,” Ms 
Longworth said. “We could argue that we are 
absolutely committed to open source and we have 
done a huge amount to promote this ideologically 
and practically.In an ideal world we would all use 
open source – it has low prices, it’s interoperable, 
there are lots of advantages. But if we are talking 
about immediate development we cannot always 
wait, and how can we tell developing countries 
they must only use open source where developed 
countries have a choice?” she asked.
Philipp Müller-Wirth, Specialist for Cooperation 
with the Private Sector at UNESCO, is acutely 
aware of the new challenges and opportunities 
for UNESCO in working with the private sector. 
When he arrived at the Organization in 1993, the 
idea of working with business extended to the 
latter contributing money through sponsorship 
programmes. Today, he facilitates a plethora of 
public-private partnerships, from L’Oréal’s high 
profile Women in Science programme to the 
Hewlett-Packard partnership to reduce brain drain 
in Southeast Europe. “In working with UNESCO, 
companies not only associate themselves with a 
legitimate image, but they obtain access to our 
networks which are often strong in countries 
where their structures are still weak,” he explains 
Though sometimes diverging, the interests 
of UNESCO and the private sector can also be 
common interests. UNESCO needs the private 
sector’s powerful influence and ability to leverage 
funds, while business benefits from better 
educated and trained populations.
 “The long-term interests of the private sector 
are the same as those of UNESCO. Both have a 
fundamental interest in sustainable development 
which allows people and their countries to 
achieve real social progress and prosperity,” 
stresses Wallace Baker, a senior partner in the law 

firm Baker and McKenzie, in his 2003 study on 
UNESCO.
This common interest is consistently cited by 
UNESCO’s ICT partners. For Microsoft, the digital 
divide will not diminish unless public and private 
organizations work together. Frank McCosker, 
Microsoft Senior Director of Global Strategic 
Accounts, said the ICT revolution had been one of 
the single biggest drivers of economic growth and 
prosperity ever witnessed: “By working together, 
we can most effectively reach our common 
goals to support regional and local economic 
development,” he said.
For Intel Foundation President Wendy Hawkins, 
the collaboration with UNESCO enables Intel 
to leverage the best practices developed via its 
professional development curriculum. Above all, it 
enables Intel, which has already trained 2 million 
teachers worldwide, to maximize its impact.
“The challenge of preparing all students to 
participate fully in the worldwide knowledge 
economy is a big one, and we believe it can be 
addressed most effectively through the cooperation 
of all interested parties,” Ms Hawkins said.
Kerry Elgar
Paris-based freelance journalist
