This Indian Ocean 
island is named 
Tromelin, after the 
survivors’ rescuer



THE SHIPWRECKED MEMORY 
OF THE UTILE SLAVES
On July 31, 1761, the French 
ship L’Utile is shipwrecked on 
a tiny island in the Indian 
Ocean. Not long after, the sailors 
manage to reach Madagascar, 
but they leave behind the 
Malgache slaves they had 
embarked illegally on L’Utile. 
Only a handful of survivors 
remain when they are found 
15 years later, in 1776. UNESCO 
has reopened this lost chapter  
in the history of the slave trade.
A corvette drops anchor near a small 
island, lost in the Indian Ocean, on 
November 29, 1776. The island seems 
completely deserted, a stretch of white sand 
with a few palm trees. Yet the sailors discover a 
baby and seven women, all former slaves from 
Madagascar. Dressed in tunics of woven feathers, 
they are the only survivors of a shipwreck 15 
years earlier. They survived by eating birds, turtles 
and shellfish.
Max Guérout, former French navy officer and 
vice-president of France’s marine archaeology 
research group, GRAN, tells the story: “L’Utile left 
Bayonne in southwest France for the Mascarene 
Islands on November 17, 1760. It called at 
Madagascar to replenish food supplies, and the 
captain, Commander La Fargue, decided to take 
aboard 60 slaves, against the governor’s orders. 
He set sail for the Ile de France, now Mauritius. 
Blown off course by the bad weather, the ship 
was wrecked on the reefs of a small island, one 
▲

kilometer square, which now bears the name 
of the man who saved the last few survivors: 
Tromelin.”
A “relation”, one of the gazettes sold on the 
street in those days, gave details of the shipwreck: 
“Traversing a host of dangers, most of the 
crew finally succeeded in reaching the island. 
Almost all were injured, maimed and covered 
in bruises; they were specters rather than men.” 
At the beginning of their exile, the survivors 
salvaged wood from the wreck as well as tools 
and supplies: “a few kegs of brandy and a few 
barrels of flour.” They built a forge and dug two 
wells, “the thick white milky liquid” from the 
first proving to be toxic. In spite of the hostile 
environment, food was not a major problem. All 
they needed to do was catch one of the 500-kilo 
sea turtles that lived on the island.
ABANDONED, FORGOTTEN, 
FINALLY RESCUED
Just two months after the wreck, the survivors 
managed to build a boat. “Preparations were 
made for an imminent departure on the night of 
the 26th to the 27th of September,” according to 
the gazette. “All hands worked feverishly… they 
were able to move the boat along rollers, despite 
several accidents and unrelenting terror…Finally 
it was launched, held by an anchor salvaged from 
the wreck.” But not all the shipwreck victims 
were invited aboard the “Providence”, name given 
to the vessel. “The 122 French sailors boarded 
hopefully, arms around each other so they 
could all fit, with a small amount of food. The 
blacks, whom they were forced to leave behind, 
maintained an oppressive silence.”
About 60 men and women stayed on the island, 
with a “writ testifying to their services” and the 
promise that the sailors would return to 
rescue them. As for the French sailors, 
they reached Madagascar a few days 
later, and continued to Mauritius where 
they made a report on the shipwreck 
and the slaves. “The governor of the 
Ile de France was so angry at the late 
captain La Fargue for having disobeyed 
his orders by taking slaves aboard the 
Utile that he refused to send a ship to 
get them,” says Max Guérout. “On the 
day the crew arrived, he wrote, ‘Today 
the Utile survivors arrived. The captain 
has died. Good for him.’” Yet it was the 
slaves who paid for his transgression.
After waiting in vain for two years, the 
desperate survivors built a raft and 18 of them 
sailed for home. We do not know if they made it. 
We do know is that the second attempt at escape, 
10 years later, failed. A French sailor was on the 
second raft, and had they succeeded, he would 
have produced a written account.
In 1773 or 1774, when the Utile shipwreck 
victims were long forgotten, a passing ship 
spotted signs of life on the Ile de Sable. The new 
governor dispatched the vessel the Sauterelle to 
the rescue, but it failed in its attempt to approach 
the little coral island, surrounded by waters 4000 
meters deep. Two sailors headed for shore in a 
canoe, but smashed up against a reef. One sailor 
managed to swim back to the ship, the other was 
left on the island. According to the women who 
were finally rescued, the sailor and the last three 
male survivors then built a raft. The four men, 
with three of the women, sailed away from the 
island. They were never seen again.
Another two expeditions failed before the 
corvette La Dauphine finally arrived, on 
November 29 1776. The Chevalier de Tromelin, a 
royal navy officer, was its captain. What happened 
when he met the last survivors, and where is his 
report?  Hard to say, because “It’s mentioned in 
the archives, but I can’t get my hands on it,” says 
Max Guérout, who is trying to trace the officer’s 
descendants in Lorient, in southern Brittany.
So far, much of the historical research linked 
to these events has been fruitful, due largely 
to UNESCO’s financial support. More than 100 
documents have been examined in several cities 
in France, notably Bayonne, where the ship was 
commissioned. Genealogical research has begun 
to find descendants of the Utile sailors; more is 
planned on Mauritius, where Tromelin took the 
seven women and the little boy. 
GENEALOGICAL RESEARCH
This historical research is one of three dimensions 
of the “Forgotten Slaves” programme launched 
by the GRAN, as part of the International Year 
for the Commemoration of the Struggle Against 
Slavery and its Abolition (2004), and of UNESCO’s 
Slave Route Programme. (http://www.unesco.
org/culture/dialogue/slave).  Inspired by the story 
of the Utile, “Forgotten Slaves” aims to conduct 
historical and archaeological research to elucidate 
every aspect of this terrible event, representative 
of the slave trade. It will also serve as part of an 
information campaign targeting the media, the 
▲
UNESCO in action culture
An account of 
supplies the Utile 
took on board when 
it left Bayonne 
(French Navy 
Archives)

Map of Île de Sable, 
drawn after the 
Utile’s shipwreck 
(French National 
Archives)
general public and schools, to raise awareness 
of issues surrounding slavery.  Software called 
“I-maj”, recently launched on GRAN’s website 
(http://www.archeonavale.org/) allows partners 
to write, edit and post texts approved by the 
project’s supervisors. 
A group of 17 children from a primary school 
in Brittany (France) are the first partners in 
this category. The school is not far from the 
Tromelin family manor, and the pupils are 
focusing on the Chevalier’s life. Guérout looks 
forward to extending the network of schools to 
Reunion Island, Polynesia and Martinique and to 
forming partnerships with UNESCO’s Associated 
Schools Project Network and the 90 schools in 
SEED (Schlumberger Excellence in Educational 
Development Programme) in New York.
Finally, an exceptional adventure will begin 
in 2006 with the archeological phase of the 
“Forgotten Slaves” project. A dozen archeologists, 
divers, scientists and doctors are off to Tromelin 
Island for a 25-day land and underwater survey.
“It’s a complicated operation,” says Guérout. 
“Tromelin is not a tourist destination. There are 
no flights and access by sea is particularly risky 
because of whirlpools, currents and breakers.”
Where there’s a will, there’s a way. On the 
island, the GRAN will try to locate the old camps, 
the forge, the well and the only permanent 
building dating back that far, a shelter for the 
fire. “There’s a theory that they kept the fire 
going for 15 years,” says Guérout. “That does not 
seem very likely, given the trade winds and the 
frequent hurricanes.” The doctor looking after the 
team will also do physical anthropology research 
should they find burial places.
Underwater, the team will explore the wreck, 
and also vast sedimentary basins, which 
according to Guérout “are a sort of receptacle at a 
depth of six or seven meters, into which objects 
may have fallen”. Pieces of ceramic have already 
been found washed up on the shore. Each little 
fragment is significant to recreate the history of 
the forgotten slaves, who are now being rescued 
from oblivion.
Jasmina Sopova
For more information:
http://www.unesco.org/culture/ 
dialogue/slave>
http://www.archeonavale.org
1. The island is still 
today home to a large 
colony of sea turtles, 
and has been listed 
as a natural reserve. 
Its “green turtle” 
is an endangered 
species and protected 
since 1981 by 
the Washington 
Convention (1975). 
