PAINFUL       AFTERMATH
On December 26, 2004, the waters of the 
Indian Ocean crashed into the Sri Lankan 
coast, killing more than 30,000 people. 
The giant waves have left behind a 
devastated landscape of ruins and debris. 
Martin Hadlow, Director of UNESCO’s 
Antenna for Post-tsunami Operations in 
Colombo (Sri Lanka) tells the story. 
When the earth began to shake in 
Sumatra, Indonesia, on March 28, the 
tsunami that devastated the Indian Ocean 
coasts in December 2004 was fresh in 
everyone’s mind.
Terrified that they would see the sea 
rise up once again, people living on the 
coast rushed out of their homes and ran 
for higher ground. The scars inflicted by 
the disaster are still visible everywhere in 
affected countries, adding to the climate 
of fear (see article p. 5). This time the 
earthquake did not cause a giant wave, 
but the new alert re-emphasized the 
urgent need for a tsunami early warning 
system.
UNESCO has a long history 
of experience in this field. The 
Intergovernmental Oceanographic 
Commission (IOC) launched a tsunami 
warning system for the Pacific in 1968 
(see article p. 11). Thanks to the data 
supplied by hundreds of seismic stations 
and tide gauges installed in the Pacific, 
the system makes it possible to detect 
the appearance of a huge tidal wave and 
to warn the countries concerned, so that 
they in turn can alert their citizens living 
on the coast. Transmitting information 
at maximum speed is a key factor in the 
prevention of disasters.
That is why, in the aftermath of the 
catastrophe that struck the countries 
bordering the Indian Ocean, UNESCO 
proposed putting in place, as of June 
2006, an interim warning system in 
the Indian Ocean region, until a global 
system comes into operation in June 
2007. Experts believe that such a device 
can save numerous lives (see interview 
p. 8). But the chances for success and 
for the system to work also depend on 
the long-term efforts of all the countries 
involved. Because tsunamis are rare 
occurrences, they may eventually be 
relegated to a secondary level of priority. 
That is why it is crucial to develop a 
culture of prevention that sustains a 
constant awareness of the risk.
Agnès Bardon

PAINFUL       AFTERMATH
 Welcome to the tsunami affected 
areas. The wording on the 
sign by the main road south of Colombo seems 
incongruous. The name of the sign’s sponsor, a 
local commercial firm, is written below. Within 
minutes of leaving the outskirts of greater 
Colombo, the first indications of tsunami damage 
become apparent. Broken houses, collapsed walls, 
scattered debris. Even here, on the relatively 
sheltered west coast of Sri Lanka and away 
from the full impact of the tsunami, the water 
held enough energy to cross a major highway, 
scouring the earth, flattening trees and buildings, 
▲
disrupting the main railway line and bringing fear 
and misery in its wake.
But this is just the beginning.. All along the 
low-lying parts of this busy, two-lane beachside 
road are scenes of unparalleled destruction. One 
can only look and wonder. Wonder at the sheer 
terror created when a wall of water, somewhere 
between three and ten metres high, suddenly 
reared up from the calm sea, consumed the 
beach, roared into hotels, houses, shops, schools. 
Buses, trucks, even a moving railway locomotive 
and carriages, were thrown great distances by the 
raw power of the flood.  “These heavy vehicles 

floated like feathers on water” I was told. Three 
of the recovered railway carriages now stand on 
display as a reminder of the day when some two 
thousand passengers lost their lives. Death visited 
hundreds and hundreds of kilometres of this 
coastline. Recent burial sites are clearly evident, 
white cloth both indicating deep mourning and 
marking the resting places of the deceased.
REBUILDING 
FOR THE FUTURE
As we drive further south towards Galle and 
Matara, the destruction becomes even worse. 
Affected area. Please help us! pleads a hand-
written sign with a red arrow pointing off the 
main road and down a small alley towards the 
sea shore. Large black plastic tanks containing 
potable water become commonplace by the side 
of the road. Local dwellers stand quietly by them 
in small queues, containers in hand. Whole 
encampments of tents, neatly laid out in rows, 
become more evident on sporting and recreation 
fields on the inland side. Everywhere, there are 
further tangible examples of the outpouring of 
funds from the global community: small wooden 
structures funded by a German NGO, blue plastic 
sheeting provided by the refugee agency, UNHCR, 
rugged structures from Japan….
Families are laying concrete blocks and bricks 
as they start afresh. Everyone seems busy 
rebuilding their lives and their futures. One can 
only marvel at their strength and 
fortitude. Less then two months 
after the tsunami, the railway 
tracks, grotesquely twisted and 
buckled beyond use, have been re-
laid by Sri Lankan rail workers and 
much of the main line reopened to 
train traffic.
But amid the signs of hope 
and renewal are the elements of 
ongoing despair. The foundations 
of a house stand near the beach, 
concrete steps leading up to what 
was once the first floor. Now, there 
is nothing above. A man sits on 
the steps staring out to sea. But the 
tsunami was also cruelly selective, 
some buildings looking remarkably 
unscathed, while neighbouring 
properties were completely 
destroyed. Even the dead have 
found no peace, cemeteries being 
disturbed by the raging water and headstones 
smashed and toppled. 
The ancient city of Galle also awaits the return 
of tourists. The huge Galle Fort, a UNESCO World 
Heritage listed site, seems, to my untrained eye, 
to be relatively unscathed. Within the walls of 
the Fort, the old houses are intact. I am told 
that the water from the sea flowed through old 
portals in the walls and into the town’s drainage 
system, but without causing damage, apart from 
minor flooding. Soon-to-visit UNESCO teams will 
expertly assess the effects of the tsunami on the 
Fort and another old fortified area at Matara, a 
town further south.
WAITING FOR BETTER TIMES
At the Rampart Hotel, the veranda restaurant 
overlooking the Galle Fort and the sea is almost 
empty. The hotel staff laments their current fate 
and look forward to better times. On the way 
out, the shop manager calls me into his empty 
store. It’s a quiet time for him too. Outside the 
walls, the tsunami swept through Galle’s main 
bus station and market, carrying many people to 
their deaths. Galle’s famous cricket ground also 
bore the brunt of the sea’s invasion, the playing 
turf being sodden by saltwater and needing 
replacement before international cricket fixtures 
can again be played.
Lost hopes and shattered dreams crowd each 
side of the road as we travel onwards to our 
It will take time 
for the Hotel Al 
Madeena in Galle 
(Sri Lanka) to reopen
© UNESCO/Nigel Swann 

Devastation in Galle 
(Sri Lanka)
terminus, Matara. Houses within Matara’s old 
Dutch-era fort have fared less well than those 
in Galle. Without the protection of an all-
surrounding wall and caught between the beach 
and a lagoon, the homes were brutally destroyed 
by the seawater. In the lagoon, four young men 
carrying long wooden prod at the sea floor. We 
are told that they are looking for some 15 missing 
vehicles which now lie somewhere in the lagoon, 
probably under tonnes of mud and sand. There is 
little chance of finding human remains here as the 
sea, when it retreated, took back to itself much 
of what it had destroyed. Across the lagoon, a 
large fishing vessel sits high above the level of the 
water, thrown there by the tsunami’s destructive 
force.
INCALCULABLE COST OF 
SHATTERED DREAMS
As we drive back towards Colombo, I realise 
that I have seen just a small part of the southern 
region affected by the tsunami. The east coast 
of Sri Lanka was, apparently, more harshly 
struck and devastation in some places is almost 
complete. Sri Lankan authorities estimate that, 
nationwide, some 31,000 people were killed by 
the tsunami and over one million displaced. More 
than 100,000 homes and some 176 schools were 
destroyed or damaged, and many museums and 
archives completely wiped out. This is human, 
social and cultural catastrophe writ large.
Nothing that I have watched on the television 
news has prepared me for the reality of seeing 
the damage with my own eyes. While a monetary 
figure can be placed on replacing bricks and 
mortar, fishing boats and railway lines, the human 
toll is incalculable. It can only be imagined how 
these people, who have lived with the sea as their 
friend, livelihood, food source and cultural focal 
point for countless generations, can ever view the 
now tranquil Indian Ocean waters in the same 
way again. As I drive northwards to Colombo, I 
watch the waves rhythmically rolling ashore on 
the white sandy beach. A now benign sea hides 
its capability to crush entire villages, kill whole 
families, traumatize millions of survivors and 
carry away trucks and trains, as if they were just 
“feathers on water”..
Martin Hadlow 
Colombo (Sri Lanka), February 21, 2005
