THE SAN: SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
BEFORE ITS TIME
Key element of sustainable 
development, water 
management presupposes 
a solid knowledge of 
the environment and its 
resources. Indigenous 
populations often have 
mastered this knowledge 
for generations. This is 
true of the San, who for 
centuries were able to 
make the most of the scant 
water resources to be found 
in the desert region of the 
southern Kalahari (South 
Africa). This knowledge, 
however, based on respect 
of the local ecosystem, 
was lost at the time of 
colonisation. 
When the political leadership 
of the ‡Khomani San 
Association (1) sat with 
three of the most fluent speakers of the ancient N/u 
language, they asked the elders for guidance on 
the land claim and restitution process. The elders 
identified the three most important resources of their 
aboriginal culture in the Southern Kalahari: !haa, 
!ão, //kx’am. That is: water, land and truth. Water, 
and access to water, has been a key variable in the 
defense, conquest and colonisation of the Southern 
Kalahari.
The oldest members of the San community 
remember a time when there were no boreholes in 
the Southern Kalahari. There was no surface water 
available except during the rains. The people lived 
off those plants that absorbed water, including the 
all important tsamma melon (Citrillus Lanatus), a 
favored wild food with plenty of liquid. During the 
19th century, settlers could not penetrate the interior 
of the Southern Kalahari (where the present borders 
of South Africa, Namibia and Botswana come 
together) without using the traditional technology of 
the San people. 
WAR AND WATER 
When this region became engulfed in the Nama-
German war (1904-1908) that spilled over from 
neighboring Namibia, the humble tsamma melon 
became critical to all parties. The German imperial 
Elders of the San 
community consider 
water a fundamental 
element of their 
culture

army had to water its men, horses and camels 
entirely on desert food. This all took place in the 
peak of summer when temperatures soar up to 50 
degrees in the shade - and there is very little shade. 
Both sets of aggressors kidnapped San trackers to be 
able to help them through the endless sand dunes 
and find all the crucial plants to feed and water 
them.
The San themselves had a number of techniques 
for capturing and managing water. Ostrich eggshells 
would be cleaned out and buried deep within the 
red sand dunes during the rainy season. Water 
would percolate down through the sand dunes, 
weeks after the rains and the surface water were 
gone. The eggs would be recovered when necessary 
and plugged with a wax stopper. To this day the 
practice continues on some farms, though people 
now use plastic bottles.
The government of Britain and the Union of South 
Africa were deeply disturbed about the sovereignty 
issues involved in the German invasion of the 
Southern Kalahari, and soon Britain was at war with 
her previous ally. The South African government of 
the day decided to recruit white settlers to fill up 
the frontier and consolidate the border. Boreholes 
had to be sunk to achieve this. During the early 
1920s the government sponsored white farmers 
to sink boreholes, particularly along the riverbeds 
(the Auob, N‡osob, Molopo and Kuruman) where 
subterranean water was easily accessible. 
CULTURAL IDENTITY  
VERSUS COLONISATION AND 
TECHNOLOGY
The sinking of the boreholes had a drastic effect 
on the Southern Kalahari. Firstly, the seasonally 
nomadic San people lost all of their territory in 
a matter of a few years. Fences were put up and 
people were not permitted to move freely. Secondly, 
as elsewhere, the settlers went on killing sprees, 
devastating the wild animal population. By 1927 
there was a famine throughout the area, as game 
had become so scarce. This drove San to live and 
work on farms where they would earn a meagre 
income to afford to buy food that had once been 
theirs for the taking and managing. Farmers banned 
the San from practicing their traditional religion, 
including the powerful trance dance that was 
used for healing. The San identity was ruthlessly 
suppressed. First there were scientific efforts to 
determine authenticity that involved measuring 
people’s heads, noses and genitalia. During this 
time much of the culture, language and traditional 
knowledge was not passed down to the younger 
generation for fear of stigmatising them. All of this 
because of borehole technology.
The Southern Kalahari is composed of a number 
of different soil types, but the predominant type is 
that of red sand dunes. When it rains, water runs 
down between two dunes. This is called a ‘street’. 
Where several streets meet and the water cannot 
run off anywhere a ‘pan’ is formed. Some of these 
pans may have been in place for up to a million 
(1) In most San languages, 
extra-alphabetic signs are 
used to represent clicks, 
which are predominant 
and distinct. The phonetic 
inventory of the San 
language is in fact so rich 
that all the other symbols 
of the roman alphabet 
are already used for 
something else. N u has 
145 different phonemes, 
which is three times 
more than in standard 
English. Many of the 
signs used come from the 
International Phonetic 
Association alphabet.
= dental click; = lateral 
click; != alveolar-palatal 
click; = palatal click

years. According to the San (and confirmed by 
scientists), the chemical composition of each dune 
and pan is distinct. Some pans are now mined for 
salt. The San know which streets produce the best 
plants, and which pans have potable surface water 
after rains. The water in some pans will cause 
immediate diarrhoea or can even be poisonous to 
humans. There are, however, traditional methods for 
purifying some of the water. The San give names to 
pans to remember this, such as Large Diarrhoea Pan 
(Xausndi ‡gas).
During the process of the land claim against the 
Kalahari Gemsbok National Park (now Kgalagadi 
Transfrontier Park), the Park officials argued that 
there was no potable water in the park. A mapping 
project has demonstrated that not only is water 
available through the plant life, there are also a 
number of sites where water can be had on the 
surface or just below the surface. These water 
sources were already pointed out seventy years ago 
to the settlers and the warden, and are still known 
to some of the older people.
On March 21, 1999, the South African government 
awarded the Southern Kalahari San almost 40,000 
hectares of land outside the national park, and 
25,000 hectares inside the park as restitution and 
redress for their losses. On the day that Thabo 
Mbeki gave the land back, the N/u speaking elders 
gathered and prayed to their ancestors to send rain. 
This article is excerpted from 
the following publication 
coming out soon in English:
WATER AND INDIGENOUS 
POPULATIONS
Coeditors: Rutgerd Boelens
Coordination, WALIR (Water Law and 
Indigenous Rights Progreamme)
Wageningen University, Netherlands
Moe Chiba and Douglas Nakashima
UNESCO-LINKS (Local Indigenous 
Knowledge System)
UNESCO Publications
As Mr. Mbeki climbed into his limousine to depart, 
a large rain cloud moved over the land settlement 
site and rained huge drops of rain in the otherwise 
hot and dry desert. For many of the westerners this 
was a marvellous and inexplicable phenomenon. 
After the transfer of the first farm to the San in 
December 1999 a great rainy season began, with 
the highest rainfall since the early 1970’s, when the 
last San were expelled from the park. The new rains 
have restored all of the wonderful plant life and 
replenished the animal life. Some of the elders are 
back on the land and are taking their grandchildren 
out into the dunes to collect tsammas, gemsbok 
cucumbers and desert onions. So much rain fell that 
the streets filled like reservoirs and both the N‡osob 
and Auob began to flow for only the third time in 
a hundred years. Ironically, the massively irrigated 
agriculture along the Orange River, land that was 
taken from the indigenous peoples by the settlers, 
was swamped with water and the crops started 
rotting that year. 
Nigel Crawhall
In the Kalahari 
desert, tsamma 
melons are a vital 
source of water
President Thabo 
Mbeki during 
ceremonies for 
restitution of San 
land, 1999
