School for Girls: Creating Equal Opportunity
 For the last three years, the United Nations has implemented a programme in Asia 
aimed at bringing girls back into the classroom
Many ministry staff  battling to improve girls’ 
education in Asia are highly motivated but iso-
lated within their own countries, as their govern-
ments barely acknowledge the importance of 
“mainstreaming” gender issues into all aspects of 
policy. “Oft en offi  cials say we don’t have gender 
problems because all girls are in school but in 
terms of equality and opportunities there are 
many problems,” says Ochirkhuyag Gankhuyag, 
from UNESCO’s Bangkok bureau. Girls must 
not only be given the chance to fi nish school, 
they must be able to get jobs without facing dis-
crimination, he says. Th e UN’s Gender in Educa-
tion Network in Asia (GENIA) programme was 
launched in 2002 to provide support and train-
ing to those who can make a diff erence. Based in 
Bangkok, GENIA identified “Gender Focal 
Points” (GFPs) – ministry of education offi  cials 
responsible for promoting equality -  in 11 Asian 
countries* and organises workshops for them so 
that they can learn from each other. 
“GENIA has strengthened our capacity to 
respond,” says Yangxia Lee, head of the Gender 
and Ethnic Minority Education unit of the Laos 
Ministry of Education.
Before, Laotian officials were dismissive 
about gender mainstreaming, but with UN 
involvement, senior offi  cials are more likely to 
come to meetings, she says. “We are able to show 
them there is a problem of gender equality, for 
example through analysis of textbooks, where 
few girls are represented in key roles,” she says.
Now offi  cials realise that unless the govern-
ment tackles the tradition of girls shouldering 
the burden of housework, few will attend school, 
and that simple interventions such as providing 
adequate toilet facilities for girls in all schools 
could make a huge impact.
Taj Mohammed Qureshi of the Pakistan 
Ministry of Education said simply erecting a 
boundary wall around a school has helped 
Girls in school
 104 of 180 countries for which 2002 data are available have reached gender 
parity in primary education
 Signifi cant gender disparities - favouring boys - are concentrated in the Arab 
states, South and West Asia and in many Sub-Saharan countries
 Despite overall progress between 1998 and 2002, gender parity in secondary 
education is the exception rather than the norm. 
 In fourteen Sub-Saharan countries where less than one in three teachers is a 
woman, 20 % fewer girls go to school than boys. But in several southern African 
countries, where three out of four teachers are women, more girls go to school 
than boys.
Source: 2006 Education For All Global Monitoring Report
www.unesco.org/en/courier/education 5

increase the number of girls attending. “Parents 
feel girls are insecure without a boundary wall 
because passers-by will gaze at their daughters,” 
he said. Hence, two provinces of Pakistan have 
erected some 64,000 boundary walls around 
schools in recent years.
Early marriage – sometimes as young as 12 to 
14 – is common to both Laos and Pakistan. 
“Married girls must be brought back to school,” 
says Lee. “Even if there are just two classes with 
mixed age groups. Th ere should be a school close 
by.” Th e further away the school, the greater the 
fear of parents that their girls will be sexually 
molested; the longer the walk, the less time the 
girl has from domestic duties, she says.
In Laos, creating a “Grade Zero” has enabled 
girls to bring their small siblings for whom they 
have responsibility, or their own children, to be 
cared for while the girls learn in the upper classes. 
Th is is being extended to all schools by 2010. In 
Pakistan, providing girls with a midday meal 
gave parents an added incentive to send girls to 
school. Th ese are just some of the ideas that other 
Asian countries can draw from. The GENIA 
workshops have helped develop the UNESCO 
toolkit for promoting gender equality in educa-
tion, particularly helpful on how to explain the 
issues to senior offi  cials. Translated into many 
languages and much in demand, the toolkit also 
helps monitoring and evaluating of gender 
equality. ◆
Yojana Sharma
*Cambodia, Laos, Viet Nam, Thailand, Mongolia, Pakistan, Tajikistan, 
Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan
In Pakistan, special 
measures are taken 
to incite parents to 
send their daughters 
to school
