Under threat from urban development and demographics, the Sao Paulo City Green  
Belt Biosphere Reserve in Brazil is receiving an increasing number of visitors.  
A plan to teach sustainable tourism is designed to make the local young people aware 
of the fragile nature of their environment while also lifting them out of the poverty trap. 
ocean of greenery. But this paradise is under threat 
from the anarchic urbanization of the surrounding 
towns. With already 92 percent  of its original 
surface area lost, Mata Atlântica is a victim of the 
attraction it holds for the people of the Sao Paulo 
region. Already a popular destination for Sao Paulo 
residents, the forest is attracting increasing numbers 
of foreign tourists - with disastrous consequences for 
the environment.
That is why in 1994 UNESCO made the Sao 
Paulo City Green Belt a Biosphere Reserve, in order 
to preserve this natural heritage site that is home 
to one of the greatest examples of biodiversity 
A BIOSPHERE RESERVE TEAMS UP 
WITH GREEN TOURISM
The road that leads to Paranapiacaba 
crosses the heart of the Mata 
Atlântica, the Brazilian Atlantic 
forest. This little town is dependent on Santo André, 
one of the towns in the suburbs of Sao Paulo that 
is part of what is known as the “Green Belt”. In 
summer, the road is sprinkled with manacas flowers, 
whose white and violet colours contrast with the 
green of the abundant vegetation. It is difficult to 
believe that such a natural paradise can exist near to 
a megalopolis of 17.8 million people like Sao Paulo. 
And that in the space of barely 40 minutes, you 
can go from a world of concrete and asphalt to this 

in the world, and to ensure that protecting the 
environment, improving the residents’ social 
conditions and developing the economy go hand in 
hand. 
Paranapiacaba thus became one of the bases 
for the Youth Training Programme for Eco-
jobs, an educational project created in 1996 to 
introduce pupils to activities related to sustainable 
development and to promote environmental 
protection in the region.
NEW LIFE FOR 
LOCAL ECONOMY
Seven town authorities in the Greater Sao Paulo area 
and the State Forestry Institute participate in this 
programme, which trains girls and boys aged 15 to 
21 from under-privileged families over a two-year 
period. Seven hundred of them have already taken 
the course; another 290 are currently studying.
“We offer them lessons in ecotourism, forestry, 
sustainable agriculture and waste recycling so that 
they leave here aware of the necessity of protecting 
nature,” explains Rodrigo Victor, the reserve 
coordinator. And so that they leave better qualified 
to find jobs.
Because in the long term, the project is all about 
energizing the local economy. “The whole Sao Paulo 
City Green Belt, including its forests and waterfalls, 
has enormous potential. Not only can sustainable 
tourism lead to more respect for the  environment, 
it can also help local communities by bringing them 
work,” says Vanessa de Souza Silveira, one of the 
programme’s coordinators. According to the Tourism 
Secretariat of the State of Sao Paulo, activities 
related to ecotourism could increase 70% in five 
years.
In the classroom of the Paranapiacaba Youth 
training programme, the girls and boys look just 
like teenagers anywhere else in the world. André 
Fantineli, 20, wants to be a disc jockey; Paulo 
Pinheiro, 16, has ambitions to be a policeman; 
Salatiel Santos, 15, wants to be a lawyer... All of 
them aspire to a better future. From low-income 
families, they live in the poor suburbs that surround 
▼
More than 700 young 
people have already 
taken the training 
courses for “ecojobs”

the big cities and are exposed to many of society’s 
ills: drug dealing, domestic violence, unemployment, 
poverty...
Today, one year after they began the training 
offered by the Youth programme, some say they 
have changed. Salatiel views the forest in a new 
way. “Before, for me the forest represented a 
place where you could enjoy yourself, tearing 
down trees... Now I know that the vegetation is 
important for all of us,” he says. Renata Silva, 20, 
has discovered her vocation in life. “I really want to 
work in tourism. I have learned to speak in public, 
as a guide,” she says.
POSITIVE RESULTS
Some have already taken the first step. On the 
former motorway linking Sao Paulo and the coastal 
town of Santos, which has been transformed into 
an ecological route, young guides lead tourists on 
walks and explain to them the importance of Mata 
Atlântica, giving them information about local 
history or the fauna and flora of the region. “We 
have managed to convince our partners that it is 
preferable, for the development of the region, to 
take on young people from around here rather than 
bring in people from other regions, even if they are 
qualified. This allows us to create more jobs in the 
city,” Vanessa says.
The results speak for themselves, especially for 
the young people, a large number of whom are 
now free from the trap of social exclusion. Elaine 
Cristina Alves da Silva, 19, is one of the guides. 
Thanks to the lessons, she has overcome her 
shyness. Eventually, she would like to study biology 
at university, just like another guide, 18-year-old 
Ednalva Aparecida Oliveira, who is already taking 
courses at the tourism school. It represents a victory 
for her, given that her parents were opposed to her 
taking part in the Youth training programme. “They 
wanted me to continue working in the family bar 
and they thought the lessons were a waste of time,” 
she says.
 A waste of time? In Sao Bernardo do Campo, a 
community to the south of Sao Paulo, 18 teenagers 
have followed the Youth training programme for two 
years. When they completed it, they all found work 
as guides for the Sao Bernardo Ecotouristic Office for 
Coastal Paths.
Gabriela Michelotti
Freelance journalist, São Paulo (Brazil)
Manaca flower. The 
Sao Paulo reserve 
is home to one of 
the world’s richest 
biodiversities
