The Mekong: an Exception to the Rule
 Unlike most great rivers, which have lost their natural fecundity, 
the Mekong has succeeded in preserving its resources.


Once the world’s rivers teemed with fi sh. Th en 
during the 20th century, most of them were bar-
ricaded by dams that tamed their wild waters. 
Almost everywhere this has caused a drastic 
decline in wild fi sheries. One of the few places 
this has not happened is the Mekong River, the 
great artery of Southeast Asia, where half a cen-
tury of warfare kept the dam-builders away.
| Maintaining natural fecundity 
Here, without barriers, the fi sh have prospered, 
especially in a vast forested basin off  the main 
river that still fl oods in the monsoon season, 
called the Tonle Sap, or Great Lake. Th e lake is a 
UNESCO Biosphere Reserve. Its complex 
hydrology, in which the fl ow of the river that 
connects it to the main river reverses its direc-
tion twice a year, maintains it as the nursery of 
the world’s largest inland fi shery, and the source 
of livelihood for more than a million local peo-
ple, according to a joint study by UNESCO sci-
entists and Columbia University in New York.
The lake has a long history of sustaining 
large populations. On its shores sits the World 
Heritage site of Angkor Wat, one of the great 
jungle civilisations 1,000 years ago, which fed 
itself on fi sh from the lake and rice from the 
paddies that it watered. 
Today the Mekong is threatened by increas-
ing demands on the river’s resources, from 
hydroelectric power companies, cities who 
want water supplies, and navigators who want 
to dredge its rapids. UNESCO  scientists are 
working with the Cambodian government and 
the intergovernmental UNESCO-backed 
Mekong River Commission on proposals to 
integrate uses of the river to maintain its 
extraordinary fecundity.
Th is forms part of a wider UNESCO initia-
tive that encourages research on how best to 
maintain and revive the natural fecundity of 
river systems, oft en by concentrating on the wet-
land fish nurseries within their catchments. 
Other examples include the Sudd wetland on the 
Nile, the Iquitos fl oodplain in Peru and the wet-
lands of the Yellow River. But the Mekong, as 
the least domesticated, is a good place to start.
“Th e Mekong is not just another river,” says 
Chris Barlow of the Mekong River Commis-
sion. “It is the least modifi ed of all the major 
rivers of the world.  Th e fi sheries are a source of 
natural wealth for the poor. If they were 
destroyed, people’s only alternative would be a 
job in a factory making textiles for the West.” ◆
 F.P
The Tonle Sap in 
Cambodia is an 
enormous fi shing 
reserve
