Editorial
On November 16, 1945, the Constitution of the Organization was signed and sealed to 
give expression to the international community’s hopes for a world of solidarity and 
dignity following the “great and terrible war” to which it had just put an end.
And just as our forerunners denounced at the root of that war “the denial of the 
democratic principles of the dignity, quality and mutual respect of men”, so we must be 
alert, for the future, to the threats looming over those principles and that dignity. Horror 
always arrives suddenly, in the form we least expect. Twelve years before 1945, nobody 
could have imagined that the “fi nal solution” would be conceived and put into practice. 
We must derive from that example of historic blindness the resolve never to relax our 
vigilance and the desire to forestall any lessening of respect for human dignity.
Following the end of the Second World War, as the world assessed the extent of 
the crimes and disasters caused by oblivion, contempt and assaults on human dignity, 
UNESCO was created to avert the recurrence of such a tragedy and to build the foundation 
for “the intellectual and moral solidarity” of humanity.
Today, as the 21st century begins, the intrinsic value of UNESCO’s mandate appears in 
its full power. More than ever, it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace must 
be built. This means affi  rming dignity in and through diversity.
To celebrate its 60th anniversary, UNESCO has chosen to highlight the coherence 
and intelligibility of its long existence. Besides celebrating the date of its creation 
on November 16, we have also decided to evoke, over the course of 60 weeks, the 
activities developed over 60 years, with results obtained, projects launched and the new 
challenges we are now facing.
In that spirit, this special issue of the new Courier celebrates the 60th anniversary by 
presenting reports on ten key subjects. Each puts into perspective UNESCO’s action and 
illustrates with a few concrete examples how much progress has been made and which 
questions are still pending. The themes resonate with global news and demonstrate the 
relevance of the issues that concern UNESCO. The close ties between the latest events, 
the major issues of our time and UNESCO’s activities – often less than spectacular – best 
reveal the instrument of international cooperation that was intended by its founders and 
emphasize how essential it is today.
Finally, this issue is also special because it marks a turning point in the 50-year history 
of the Courier. It opens a door to another way of sharing its articles with the greatest 
number of readers, and contributes to UNESCO’s presence on the internet. The 60 themes 
of this 60th anniversary will be presented on the website as a certain number of reports 
that fi nd their continuation in the thousands of pages that are on line. In 2006, the 
electronic version will prevail.
My wish, therefore, is that as you read the reports in the new Courier and take the 
time to refl ect today on human dignity, you will contribute to bringing about, in the 
face of what Hannah Arendt called “the banality of evil”, the emergence of new forms of 
analysis and refl ection to help us fi nd the path to solidarity.
Koichiro Matsuura

E ducation for  All
In 2000 UNESCO was asked to lead a worldwide drive to achieve 
Education for All by 2015. The aim: provide a good quality primary 
education for every child, halve adult illiteracy and secure equality 
of opportunity between girls and boys, women and men. Other 
key objectives: widening early childhood care and youth and adult 
learning. Five years on, however, progress has been uneven. Two of the 
most critical challenges: achieving gender equality and ensuring the 
quality of learning as enrolment rises. 
Primary school pupil in 
Trinidad
Key to the Future
© Caroline Penn/Panos Pictures, London

E ducation for  All
It has been a landmark year for development. Anti-
poverty campaigns and the Live 8 concerts helped 
turn up the heat on the leaders of the G8 group of 
industrialized countries, who raised hopes by pledg-
ing an extra US$50 billion of aid to Africa. Th at was 
followed by an EU members’ pledge to increase aid 
to 0.7% of gross national income by 2015.
While this represents a welcome boost of 
resources, the US$1.16 billion per annum spe-
cifi cally targeted at basic education remains far 
short of the estimated US$5.6 billion funding 
gap required to reach universal primary educa-
tion and gender parity alone.
Peter Smith, UNESCO’s Assistant Director-
General for Education, is not satisfi ed: “I want 
to see more commitment from donors,” he 
stresses. But developing countries must raise 
their spending too, or donor fatigue will set in, 
he says: “Th ey will say ‘Who wants to invest in 
something that the people who own it don’t 
want to invest in’.”
| New ideas needed
Globally only 47 of the 163 countries with data 
had achieved universal primary education by 
2002, leaving 100 million children out of school. 
There is certainly a growing commitment 
among countries to creating national plans to 
widen education provision. But other chal-
lenges exist, such as quality of education, the 
subject of UNESCO’s 2005 Education For All 
Global Monitoring Report, “Th e Quality Imper-
ative”. For instance, in Zambia and Uganda, 
which have both abolished school fees, it is easy 
to fi nd schools with well over 100 and even 200 
children per class. Another challenge is how to 
ensure the poorest and most disadvantaged 
children are brought into the system, starting 
with girls but also AIDS orphans, disabled chil-
dren and street children.
One avenue would be to expand or comple-
ment the World Bank’s Fast Track Initiative, 
which is designed to channel multilateral funds 
to countries with sound plans to expand educa-
tion. Th e idea is to widen the fl ow of funds, and 
urge donor countries and developing countries 
to make commitments. Th e hope is to work with 
politicians to bring the private sector into dis-
cussions about investing in educational infra-
structure. 
 UNESCO has a key role to play, says Smith, 
not only as a convenor, but as a provider of new 
thinking, to help countries fi nd imaginative ways 
to tackle the shortfall in teacher quality that do not 
involve recreating expensive and outmoded fac-
tory-style learning environments. Th is will mean 
fi nding new models of teaching – perhaps by par-
aprofessionals or even mothers. “Our job is to 
show people best practice, to show them the new 
ideas that work and give them the best resources 
– then they have to make their own minds up 
about what they want to do,” Smith says.  ◆
Brendan O’Malley
International editor of
Th e Times Educational Supplement
Th e record so far
 Worldwide, 100 million children are not in school.
 Two-thirds of countries have achieved gender parity at primary level, 40% at 
secondary level and 3% at tertiary level.
 To achieve universal primary education and gender parity alone, aid targeted 
specifi cally at basic education needs to be raised to US$5.6bn.
 Globally 771 million adults are illiterate. The adult literacy rate is expected to 
reach 86% by 2015.
Source: 2006 Education For All Global Monitoring Report
In Nectangula, 
Mozambique, pupils 
help build their school
