Education:
a Priority Response
 Contrary to the traditional approach, education is as crucial in 
emergencies as food or shelter.
“In emergency situations, many still view educa-
tion as a low priority. Th is is an extremely short-
sighted approach. As if lack of education could 
not kill you!” exclaims Christopher Talbot, Pro-
gramme Specialist at UNESCO’s International 
Institute for Education in Emergencies. He sug-
gests starting by asking the simple question: 
‘where are children if they are not in school?’
“Schooling can protect against recruitment 
into military forces,” he continues. “It prevents 
exploitation in dangerous professions. When 
life is chaos, it gives structure and stability. 
Learning and play can for example help chil-
dren deal with serious traumas. School is also a 
great place to pass on life-saving messages and 
skills. Health and hygiene, HIV/AIDS preven-
tion, landmine awareness and peace and con-
flict management can all be promoted at 
school,” says Talbot. 
Traditionally, education has been seen not as 
a humanitarian priority, but as a long-term 
development activity.  Awareness of the need for 
education in emergency situations is on the rise, 
but what is called the relief-development gap is 
far from closed. Humanitarian agencies still tend 
to focus on people’s biological needs, whilst the 
development community prefer to see a peace 
agreement before they intervene in education. 
| Guidelines and standards
“In the real world, the division between relief 
and development makes no sense. People have 
only one life. Th ey cannot aff ord to ‘wait for 
peace’ before investing in their children” under-
lines Talbot. “In the case of the Southern Sudan, 
for example, people had been ‘waiting for peace’ 
for 21 years. Still, in some areas, local and inter-
national agencies have pulled three generations 
of children through the whole cycle of school-
ing. Just because there is war, it does not mean 
you can do nothing.”
But there is room for error between doing 
nothing and providing quality education. In 
conflict situations, the education system is 
oft en embroiled in the prob-
lems that spurred the emer-
gency in the fi rst place. In some 
cases, it has helped suppress 
the languages, traditions, art 
forms and religious and cul-
tural practices of disadvan-
taged groups. “Schooling does 
not always translate into edu-
cation – i.e. learning - or into 
good education – i.e. learning 
what is worthwhile. We know 
that schooling mirrors society 
and that it can reproduce the 
bad alongside the good,” says 
Anna Obura, an educational 
consultant and the author of 
the book “Never again: Educa-
tional Reconstruction in 
Rwanda”. 
Refugee camp in 
Polataka, Sudan

 Good practice guides and standards for 
education in emergency situations have now 
been developed. Th e Inter-Agency Network for 
Education in Emergencies (INEE), currently 
hosted by UNESCO in Paris, works to share 
and promote those standards (see box). “People 
out in the fi eld see how vital education is for cri-
sis prevention and recovery. Agencies and 
donors should no longer have any excuse not to 
prioritise education in emergency situations.” 
says INEE Network Coordinator Mary Menden-
hall. Yet given most of the rich countries’ fail-
ure to provide adequate funding for Education 
for All, as reported by the Global Campaign for 
Education’s 2005 report, it is not certain that 
this priority will be recognized. ◆
Eli Wærum Rognerud
