Judging from the champion’s pose, arms  
 outstretched with trophy in hand, you might  
 have thought that 15-year-old Tomoya 
Hirata’s team had just won one of Japan’s 
prestigious national sporting events.  
But triumph for Hirata and his 61 classmates 
at Shinjo Middle School, came for their tsunami 
preparedness project at the second annual “Disaster 
Prevention Education Challenge Plan” workshop, 
held last month [February 27, 2005].  The national 
program, sponsored by the cabinet and several 
ministries, selects the year’s top twenty local 
disaster prevention programs and then awards one 
top prize.  
They take tsunami disaster mitigation seriously in 
Japan, especially in places like Tanabe, Wakayama 
prefecture, where Hirata’s school is.  The town sits 
The recent tsunami that devastated 
the Indian Ocean coasts has made 
it obvious that high-risk areas need 
to mitigate the effects of natural 
disasters. Japan long ago put together 
the world’s best tsunami warning 
system. The key to its effectiveness: 
making even the youngest citizens 
aware.
▲



JAPANESE PUPILS FIRST 
IN PREVENTION
Japan is regularly 
hit by tsunamis: 
Hokkaido Island in 
September 2003
© 

out on the Kii peninsula which, facing the Nankai 
and Tonankai seismogenic zones, has been struck 
several times by deadly tsunamis and is thought to 
be prime target for another major one in the near 
future.   
With earthquake generating zones all around, the 
country has developed a national tsunami warning 
system that is generally taken to be the best in the 
world. 
But the warnings alone mean little.  “A warning 
alone doesn’t save lives,” says Haruo Hayashi, a 
professor at Kyoto University’s Research Center 
for Disaster Reduction Systems, who chaired the 
organizing committee for the workshop.  “The 
warning is just a trigger,” he says.  “People need 
priming.”
BEATING 
THE CLOCK
Japan’s warning system is an impressive one, whose 
development accelerated in the 1980s.  In 1983, a 
hundred people died when a magnitude 7.7 quake 
gave rise to a tsunami hit on the Japan sea coast.  
The warning came in 17 minutes.  The tsunami 
came in seven.  
The current system is based on a network of 
180 seismometers cabled to onshore monitoring 
stations.  It takes only two minutes for a preliminary 
measurement of an earthquake to reach one of six 
regional monitoring stations.  
Then the computer magic begins. The Japan 
Meteorological Association has pre-calculated 
100,000 scenarios based on location, depth, and 
magnitude of a given earthquake.  Within one 
minute, the simulations predict whether and where 
the earthquake might produce a tsunami.  The 
warnings ride along television screens and set in 
motion local disaster mitigation measures. 
Estimates may be off, and small tsunami can be 
either missed or their impact overestimated. But 
with the looming threat of a large tsunami from 
the nearby Nankai trough, which runs only Japan’s 
pacific coast, there is no choice.  “Speed is more 
important than accuracy,” says Hayashi. 
Experts think that an earthquake is overdue 
there.  The greatest fear is that it could wreak 
havoc on Tokyo. But tsunamis are a great fear 
all along the coast.  A Nankai earthquake of 
magnitude 8.6 would, according to simulations, 
throw a 7.5 meter tsunami wave at Wakayama in 
eight minutes. 
Japan’s system would get a warning in time.  But 
would people have the wherewithal to react? 
CHILD’S PLAY 
Preparedness exercises take place in most Japanese 
coastal towns. And the training starts young. 
Efforts start with construction of tsunami hazard 
maps, based on the country’s tsunami disaster 
prevention manual distributed by the cabinet office.  
The maps outline potential dangers such as narrow 
roads likely to be washed out and bridges likely to 
be wiped out in a tsunami event. They also clearly 
mark where refuge points are.  
Part of the Tanabe team’s winning entry is a 
3-D map of the coastline showing where the water 
would likely inundate.  Another group added an 
inductive approach to estimating tsunami arrival 
times, interviewing the town’s tsunami veterans 
about how long previous tsunami took to reach their 
homes.    
Preparedness measures also take into 
consideration that, like the Sumatra tsunami in 
December, tsunamis often victimize people not 
familiar with the area.  Across the Kii peninsula 
from Tanabe, students at three schools in 
Kushimoto, created easy to grasp pictograms that 
indicate the height of a given location above sea 
level and the direction of the ocean.  The signs have 
Posters with 
prevention messages 
aimed at people on 
the street

been placed at easily noticeable spots around town 
making it easier for people, especially visitors, to 
know where to go for refuge. Takaharu Sugimoto, 
an official in the local government, says they are 
hoping that UNESCO will adopt the design, which 
won a runner-up prize at this year’s workshop, as 
an international standard.
Striving to impress upon the community 
tsunami’s potential danger, Shinjo middle-schoolers 
hit on a morbid historical lesson.  They designed 
a traditional Japanese “kamishibai”—a play using 
drawings along to illustrate the speakers’ narrative—
based on an 1944 episode, “unthinkable today”,  
in which the government stopped issuing weather 
reports and information on disasters lest they prove 
a disadvantage to the war effort.  Unsure of what 
to do, the protagonist, the son of a fallen soldier, 
is swept away by a tsunami leaving his mother 
completely alone. 
Materials produced by the students in Tanabe 
and elsewhere are incorporated into role-playing 
activities and drills. In Tanabe, some 80% of the 
citizens turn out for these yearly events. The sirens 
sound and the people dart off towards the refuge 
site.  At the end, they meet to discuss how much 
Students have 
produced an 
illustrated story to 
raise awareness  
of tsunamis
time expired—and what the implications would 
have been for their safety.
But some preparedness activities might not be 
suitable for children.  Three years ago, citizens 
living on a landfill coast in Kushimoto came to grips 
with news that a tsunami would come in less than 
10 minutes after an earthquake.  In their drills they 
knew it took 15 minutes to make the roundabout 
trip to the appointed refuge site. 
A direct path would force them to go over one of 
the national railway tracks.  Negotiations with Japan 
Railways went nowhere. In the end the citizens took 
matters into their own hands and built the bridge 
anyway.  Now they can get to their refuge in six 
minutes.
David Cyranoski, 
Asia-Pacific correspondent 
for Nature
