The images of desolation from New Orleans 
(United States), ravaged by Hurricane Katrina 
in September 2005, were seen around the world. 
An exceptional occurrence? Unfortunately not. 
Between 1994 and 1998, 428 natural and techno-
logical disasters were recorded. Between 1999 and 
2003, the fi gure climbed to 707 annually. Th ese are 
the numbers cited in the 2004 World Disasters Re-
port published by the International Federation of 
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. 
And the most pronounced increase is noted 
in the poorest countries. Another indicator: in 
2004, according to the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees, there were more 
than 9 million refugees around the world. And 
millions more are victims of the damages caused 
by fl oods, droughts, earthquakes, landslides, 
storms and other natural disasters.
Th ough emergency aid professionals have 
acquired real expertise in the last 20 years, 
coming up with the appropriate response to 
such daunting challenges is not easy. 
Emergency response is more than truckloads 
of high-protein survival bars, blue plastic tents 
Devastating fl oods, brutal wars, 
deadly hurricanes – confl icts and 
catastrophes are competing for 
the news headlines. And in every 
case those liable to suff er the worst 
consequences are the poorest. 
Seven times as many people are 
likely to die if a natural disaster 
strikes a developing country than 
if it hits a rich country. When it 
comes to safeguarding freedom 
of the press, providing the means 
for education in emergencies 
or protecting cultural heritage, 
UNESCO does its part.
Coping
with
Emergencies
Somalian refugee in a 
camp in Jordan
© Alexis Duclos/Gamma, Paris

Cr i ses  and Emergencies
and mobile health centres. The post-crisis 
recovery requires planning. “Many crises we 
can in fact prepare for. Most importantly, 
when a war breaks out or a disaster strikes, the 
relief eff orts must be placed within a long-term 
strategy for the country” says Louise 
Haxthausen, Coordinator for post-conflict 
operations within UNESCO’s Bureau of Field 
Coordination.
| Holistic approach
UNESCO has traditionally not been classifi ed 
as a humanitarian agency, but reconstruction is 
more than physical rebuilding. “A core objec-
tive is to advocate for a more co-ordinated and 
holistic approach to emergencies in the inter-
national community,” says Haxthausen. 
UNESCO does not focus on providing services, 
but on creating strategies for transition and 
capacity-building of local staff  and institutions.
Its activities range from setting up tsunami 
early warning systems to security training for 
media professionals. In Iraq, for instance, cur-
rently the most dangerous country in the world 
for journalists, UNESCO runs training pro-
grams through the International News Safety 
Institute. Th e Organization is also concerned 
with providing access to education to children 
living in areas hit by crises and confl icts, and 
with preserving cultural heritage. One example 
is a two-year project in Afghanistan to safe-
guard the Bamiyan site, where two gigantic 
Buddha statues were destroyed by the Taliban 
in March 2001.
UNESCO’s work often goes unnoticed. 
Other UN agencies such as UNHCR, UNICEF 
and the World Food Programme tend to take 
the lead roles. Haxthausen admits that coordi-
nation within the UN system and with other 
agencies remains one of the Organization’s 
main challenges in situations of emergencies 
and reconstruction. “UNESCO’s mandate is in 
fact very clear. Th e challenge relates to the con-
ditions on the ground,” she says, and explains 
how tasks and responsibilities in emergency 
situations are in reality oft en assigned on a ‘fi rst 
come fi rst serve’ basis. “UNESCO has not made 
enough early investments. We do not have the 
necessary field presence or the capacity to 
deliver fast enough. It is clear that humanitar-
ian intervention and development are not the 
same,” she notes.
On UNESCO’s part, one new initiative to 
improve its emergency response is the plan to 
draw up a personnel roster for rapid deploy-
ment of staff  in crises and reconstruction situa-
tions. The roster would not consist of relief 
workers in the classical sense, but advisors who 
are experts in UNESCO’s fi elds of competence. 
Th is system is already widely used by aid organ-
izations. One of the biggest rosters, managed by 
the Norwegian Refugee Council, lists 600 civil-
ians of diff erent professions who are on stand-
by, ready to go and lend a hand within 72 hours 
in case of emergency. “In its core areas, 
UNESCO has strong competencies. These 
should be made available as soon as possible in 
crises,” says Marcus Volker at the UNESCO 
Bureau of Human Resource Management.
| Foundation for the future
But are these rapid deployment emergency 
actions compatible with long-term develop-
ment eff orts? Th ose in favour of them see no 
contradiction between the two. What is done in 
an emergency must lay the ground for long-
term development, they argue. Take Sierra 
Leone, where 70% of schools were destroyed in 
the civil war that ended in 1972: the substantial 
amount of aid brought by NGOs and UN agen-
cies in the immediate post-war period was cru-
cial to later reconstruction (see article p. 69). 
“In 2000, 300,000 children had no school to go 
to, and many of them were traumatised. We 
would never have made it without international 
aid,” says William Taylor, General Director of 
Education in Sierra Leone. It is a testimonial 
that should infl uence donors.  ◆
 
Eli Wærum Rognerud
Two months after the 
tsunami, school starts 
again in Hikkaduwa, 
village in Sri Lanka
