“One day, I will walk again.” Paralysed from the 
age of 16, Jim Langevin, a United States Con-
gressman from the state of Rhode Island, is pin-
ning his hopes on research into embryonic stem 
cells (ESC). He spoke in support of the research 
at the US Congress in May 2005.
Like him, many researchers think that these 
cells can be used to regenerate organs and dis-
eased tissue. Not yet assigned a function, they 
can play any role. They are “pluripotent” – 
meaning that they can become any sort of cell, 
whether blood, muscle or nerve. Th eir regener-
ative capacity appears to be superior to that of 
adult cells taken from the spine or the umbilical 
cord.
But do we have the right to use and then 
destroy human embryos in order to obtain the 
embryonic stem cells? Even if these are ‘extra’ 
embryos, which would not be used for  in vitro 
conceptions? Most religious authorities are 
opposed to the idea, on the grounds of respect 
for human embryos.
| Cloning for research
Th e research on ESCs also raises the issue of co-
called “therapeutic” cloning. Researchers have 
in fact already cloned embryos from the cells of 
a patient, in order to obtain stem cells with the 
same genetic characteristics as the patient. But 
even when it is done for therapeutic reasons, 
cloning inspires fear. In March 2005, the Gen-
eral Assembly of the United Nations adopted a 
Declaration which invites all Member States to 
“ban any form of human cloning insofar as it is 
incompatible with human dignity”. UNESCO, 
for its part, prefers to refer not to “therapeutic 
cloning” but to “cloning for research pur-
poses”.
For the time being, laws and practices vary 
from one country to another. Th e Republic of 
Korea allows cloning for research purposes but 
bans human cloning. Th e United States recently 
considered relaxing the restrictions it put in 
place in 2001 on research into ESCs. Germany 
and Costa Rica ban the destruction of embryos 
for research purposes. In France, ten research-
ers signed a petition calling for therapeutic 
cloning to be made legal.
As the debates continue, so does the research. 
A privately-owned American company, Geron, 
announced that, providing permission is 
granted by relevant authorities, it would carry 
out the fi rst tests of ESCs on humans in 2006 to 
treat lesions to the spinal cord. But there’s no 
question yet of a cure. ESCs are, at best, a hope 
for the future. ◆
Samir Tounsi
The Cells of Discord
 While they hold out the hope of curing some serious diseases, embryonic 
stem cells raise the question of the moral status of the embryo.
