Afghanistan: A Difficult Return 
for Girls
 Four years after the fall of the Taliban, education for girls and other 
marginalised children is not yet a reality
Kokabar is something of a celebrity in Afghani-
stan’s Parvan province because she ran an under-
ground beauty parlour during the Taliban years, 
when make-up salons were banned.
“Th e fi rst time the Taliban entered our prov-
ince, they smashed up my shop and beat up my 
husband. Aft er that I worked in secret with local 
brides,” she says.
Now she has two salons in the bazaar in Cha-
rikar city, north of Kabul. She is the inspiration 
and master trainer for dozens of girls who want 
to learn literacy and some skills they can use to 
secure their future. Th is is a UNICEF-supported 
scheme, one of several ways the NGO is trying to 
reach the children, especially girls, left  with no 
hope of an education in a country blighted by a 
quarter of a century of war - and the Taliban’s 
ban on girls setting foot in class.
Crammed into a tiny room with a large mir-
ror, ten of them are watching Noorzia, 15, taking 
tips from Kokabar as she prepares the face of 
Samia, 14, with heavy make-up for a “Night of 
Henna” ceremony, when the groom’s family visit 
the bride’s home before the wedding.
“I’ve not been to school,” says Noorzia, and 
neither have any of her peers. Her family was 
forced by fi ghting to move three times during the 
war years - once when a rocket hit their house. 
Th e scheme is run by another NGO, Aschiana, on 
a strict commitment to provide  50% of places for 
girls.  Th e 500 learners are a mixture of refugees, 
street children and demobilised fighters, who 
have all been deprived of education by war or 
poverty or both.  Aschiana gives them a year’s lit-
eracy classes and ten months’ vocational training, 
plus a placement in income-earning activities 
such as beauty treatment, tailoring, carpentry or 
livestock management. Th ey will then be able to 
enter formal school by sitting an exam to deter-
mine their grade, or go off  and make an income. 
“Th e priority is their literacy training,” says 
Mohammad Israel, project supervisor. 
| Inventing new solutions
It’s an unconventional approach, but then new 
models of learning are needed in a country where 
the school age population is increasing by a mil-
lion a year as refugees return and so many schools 
are in ruins. In the Salang Valley just north of 
Charikar, 15 of the 19 schools don’t even have a 
tent to house them.
UNICEF representative Bernt Aasen says 
that despite a massive campaign to get girls into 
school, boys have benefi ted more. “In nine prov-
inces less than 10 % of pupils are girls and in two 
or three there are virtually none at all.”
High on the Salang slopes is one possible 
solution. In a cliff -edge hamlet of stone cottages, 
two girls are teaching a class in their home - two 
dozen girls and a handful of boys sit on an 
Afghan carpet covering the mud fl oor. It’s the 
last of three shift s.
Parwin, 18, and Nasreem, 15, are returnees 
from Iran where they reached grades 11 and 10 
respectively. Th ey have been given 15 days’ inten-
sive training in child-centred methods and acceler-
ated learning techniques, under a community 
school scheme run jointly by the government and 
UNICEF. Th e community is meant to provide a 
room and salary, but in this case the father has 
received nothing. He is investing in hope that one 
day his girls will become professional teachers. It 
means the girl pupils don’t have to walk an hour to 
the nearest school with the attendant risk to their 
Preparation for the 
henna ceremony

in Ethiopia - the development of a paraprofes-
sional teaching workforce that is trained on the 
job over ten years - a village-based teacher work-
force could liberate a mass of rural girls in this 
country from the constraints of custom and isola-
tion on their schooling.
But even in the cities there are many social 
obstacles to overcome. At the Charikar training 
salon, Noorzia says her real hope is that when she 
fi nishes the training course she will be able to 
attend formal school. “But I am already engaged,” 
she says. “It depends if [my fi ancé] will allow me 
to go or not.” ◆
Brendan O’Malley in Charikar, Afghanistan
honour, one of the main reasons why parents keep 
them at home. The training of 70,000 religious 
leaders across the country to convince parents that 
it is not a sin in Islam to send girls to school will 
tackle another barrier. “We are planning to cover 
half a million children, most of them girls,” says 
Mohammad Rostam Faqirzada, national director 
of primary education. Th ere are 10,000 schools so 
far, reaching 170,000 pupils. “Th e idea is that they 
will study there for three years, during which time 
the government will be able to build a school close 
to their community or children will be able to travel 
further,” he says.
Only 15% of Afghan teachers are qualifi ed. If 
UNICEF were to borrow an idea it is advocating 
