It is December 26, 2004. Several elders from the Moken tribe, a small  
 community of sea gypsies from the Surin islands Marine National Park 
 off the coast of Phang-Nga Province, Thailand, notice that the sea is 
churned up and moving in an unusual way. They raise the alarm. Most of the 
inhabitants rush to take refuge further inland. When they return, the village 
has been entirely swept away by La Boon, as the Moken call the tsunami that 
devastated the region. Their boats and houses mounted on piles have been 
reduced to a heap of wood and debris. But while Thailand mourns more than 
5,000 victims, the Moken community was spared. The elders’ knowledge of the 
sea saved their lives. And ever since, their story has spread around the world.
In the aftermath of the catastrophe, UNESCO Bangkok took part in one 
of the missions launched by the United Nations Disaster Assessment and 
Coordination (UNDAC), based in Phuket, Thailand, to evaluate the damage 
done to the environment and settlements in the region. Through the Science 
Sector’s Coastal Regions and Small Islands (CSI) programme and the Local 
and Indigenous Knowledge Systems (LINKS) CCT project, UNESCO has for the 
last several years taken an interest in the indigenous peoples of the Andaman 



Spared by the sea

The Moken village, 
built right on the 
beach, as it was 
before the tsunami 
(above)
Photos Derek Elias

Islands and especially the Moken, who live in a protected zone that has 
been a national park since 1981. Acting on the conclusions of the UNDAC 
mission, the team working on the project for the Surin islands travelled 
there to assess damage and determine what aid the community required.
The Moken are now rebuilding their village, using bamboo and leaves 
woven together, in a non-traditional location inland, as dictated by the 
local government authorities. They have settled in a forest, further from the 
sea, and therefore a presumably safer but certainly not more advantageous 
site. The new village is less sanitary and has poor  ventilation and a 
cramped design. Of most concern, the visibility of the Moken’s natural 
environment, the sea, is substantially reduced.
The influence of the outside world is growing all the time. Since the 
national park authorities forbade them from catching certain species such 
as the sea cucumber and some shellfish that they used to sell, the Moken 
have been deprived of one of their sources of income. A number of them 
have already abandoned fishing to work as diving guides for tourists or 
garbage collectors. The objective of UNESCO’s Coastal Regions and  and 
Small Islands programme is to call attention to their plight and help 
influence policy to allow the Moken and other sea gypsy communities in 
Thailand to continue to uphold their traditions and livelihoods, within the 
National Parks that encompass their traditional homelands and waters.
