Senegal:  Coastal Zones at the Mercy 
of the Waves 
 With more than 700 kilometres of seashore, Senegal is one of the 
countries that suff ers most from coastal erosion.
Children cast their fi shing lines into the sea. At their 
feet waves break against enormous cement blocks. 
Th e blocks are all that remains of a wall built between 
the sea and the fi shermen’s houses lining the coast. 
Loosened by the swell, the wall collapsed. 
Th e ocean is advancing everywhere in Rufi sque, 
situated 25 kilometres south of Dakar. Standing in 
her doorway, in a traditional African robe, Tiébama 
can’t stop talking about the problem. “Th e wall just 
in front of my home fell down,” she complains. 
“When it rains, the sea moves forward. In two weeks 
my house will be flooded.” The rainy season is 
approaching, and the inhabitants are worried. 
Currents sweep away the sand from Rufi sque’s 
coast and deposit it further south. Th e beach is 
slowly being hollowed out and the shore is reced-
ing. Abdoulaye Ndiayhe, an old fi sherman who 
off ers his services as guide, insists that more than 
100 metres once separated the sea from a house 
whose ruins are now being lapped by the waves. 
Some fi shermen’s shacks have already been par-
tially claimed by the sea. 
Erosion of the coastline is one of the most criti-
cal environmental problems facing the coastal 
countries of West Africa, according to the “African 
Process”, a project supported by UNESCO’s Inter-
governmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC). 
Initiated by 11 sub-Saharan countries, the “African 
Process”, launched in 1998 during the Pan-African 
Conference on Sustainable Integrated Coastal 
Management (PACSICOM), analyzed the situa-
tion. In Africa, the Atlantic Ocean carries away an 
average of one or two metres of beach per year, and 
up to 20 metres in certain areas. Senegal, with its 
700 kilometres of coastline is particularly aff ected. 
More than half of the population lives on the coast 
where 85% of industry and services are located, in 
particular the country’s two most important 
resources, fi shing and tourism. Th e threat is very 
real. Already, in Mbao, to the south of Dakar, a 
mosque has fallen into the water. A little further, in 
Sally, tourist facilities have had to be abandoned. 
| Crucial need for data
People are mainly responsible for the erosion. Th e 
natural transportation of sediment by currents is 
defi nitely compounded by human activity such as 
sand extraction. Th e rise in sea level is another fac-
tor that accounts for 20% of the phenomenon. And 
for the last twenty years, the swell seems to have 
become more powerful. Climatic changes that mod-
ify winds from the West may be the cause. “Th ere 
are indications but we don’t have enough data to 
prove it,” says Isabelle Niang-Diop, a specialist in 
coastal geology at the University of Dakar.
In such a context, access to oceanographic data 
is crucial: the understanding and prediction of oce-
anic phenomena depend on it. Th at is why the ODI-
NAFRICA project (see box p. 13) has started making 
existing data available. Information centres have 
been connected to the Internet for access to world-
wide bases and specialized electronic newspapers. 
Scientifi c publication catalogues about Africa have 
been put online and oceanographic data available 
for each country has been referenced and digitized. 
“We are also centralizing data compiled in coun-
tries originating from the satellite network of the 
IOC, from oceanographic campaigns, and our seven 
coastal stations,” specifi es Anis Diallo, the adminis-
trator of Senegal’s Centre of Oceanic Data. Dakar’s 
tide gauge, which ODINAFRICA will modernize 
between now and the end of the year, will once 
again measure sea level, an important element in 
understanding coastal erosion. 
In the meantime, Tiébama worries about the 
wall that collapsed. She has been trying to call 
attention to her problem for a year now, in vain. 
Soon her house too will be lapped by the inexorable 
waves.   ◆
M.E
Battered by the 
waves, Rufi sque’s wall 
collapsed
