Bhaktapur: Open-Air Museum
 The Nepalese city attracts tourists, but also looters. Because the 
Kathmandu Valley is threatened by pollution, war and urban sprawl, 
it has been added to the List of World Heritage in Danger.
Fourteen kilometres east of Kathmandu, the 
capital, is Bhaktapur, ‘the city of devotees’ that 
is like an enormous open air museum. Th e city 
features thousands of religious art objects, not 
just in Hindu temples and Buddhist shrines, but 
also in public squares, scattered along the streets 
and narrow lanes, or on the facades and in 
niches of private homes. But while they delight 
tourists, these treasures also attract dealers who 
see them as sources of income in a lucrative 
Asian Art market.
“Looting and illicit traffi  cking have stripped 
this area of some of its most important art 
works and monuments. Sacred gods, wor-
shipped and valued by generations of Nepalese, 
should not lie in glass cases in the West,” says 
Aidan Warlow, Programme Director for the 
Kathmandu University Department of Art and 
Design. 
Eff orts to preserve cultural heritage in Nepal 
have increased in recent years. Yet stolen objects 
can still be found in museums, art shops, auc-
tion houses and private collections around the 
world. An Uma Mahesvara statue, stolen from 
Bhaktapur in 1984, is just one example. The 
statue is on display in the Guimet Museum in 
Paris, one of the world’s leading museums of 
South East Asian art. Retrieval of such objects is 
diffi  cult, because they oft en have been through a 
number of dealers who may even have obtained 
legal documents. 
Fighting illicit trafficking is problematic. 
Increased documentation of valuable items, for 
instance, can have negative effects. A list of 

objects to be protected can also be used by loot-
ers. Says Warlow, “It is actually a serious 
dilemma. To a professional art thief, a catalogue 
with the ‘top ten’ valuables in a village is like a 
treasure map.”
| Increasing awareness of danger
Th e Kathmandu Valley was added to the World 
Heritage List in 1978, and was already then a 
region threatened by rapid population growth, 
economic and social change, increasing pollution 
and high earthquake risk. “Looting of statues is a 
serious problem, but the biggest threat lies in the 
gradual deterioration of the ‘urban texture’ sur-
rounding these monuments” says Giovanni Boc-
cardi, Chief of the Asia and Pacifi c Unit at the 
World Heritage Centre. “Ancient architecture 
has for example been irreversibly damaged by 
uncontrolled building work and demolition”.
Th e decade-long confl ict between the Nepa-
lese government and the Maoist rebels has 
added further diffi  culties to the site’s conserva-
tion. “Large areas of the country are now out-
side formal control, and therefore open for 
anyone who wants to loot and traffi  c. As people 
get poorer, or fl ee their homes, the risk of theft  
or simply damage also increases dramatically,” 
says Koto Kanno, Head of the UNESCO offi  ce 
in Kathmandu.  
In 2003, the Kathmandu Valley was inscribed 
on the List of World Heritage in Danger. 
Kanno explains how the labelling of the 
Kathmandu valley as ‘endangered’ caused 
strong reactions: “Th e inscription was a 
big blow to the government as well as the 
population - people felt it was humiliat-
ing.” Th is is not uncommon; most coun-
tries with world heritage sites wish to 
avoid inscription on the ‘endangered’ 
list. 
In Nepal, inscription has nonetheless 
increased awareness amongst offi  cials of 
the need to take fi rm action in World 
Heritage sites. “Th e government is taking 
this work very seriously. A warning from 
the World Heritage Committee that 
Lumbini, the birthplace of the Lord Bud-
dha, may also be moved to the ‘endan-
gered’ list stimulated an immediate 
action plan and the involvement of both 
local and international conservation 
experts”, says Kanno.
More important, however, is to increase the 
awareness in the communities. “In the Kath-
mandu Valley, the surroundings are as much 
part of the cultural heritage as the monuments 
themselves. Yet people are largely unaware of 
the treasures right there in front on them,” says 
Kanno. 
Th e export of art work is oft en also facilitated 
by locals. When impoverished individuals will-
ingly sell a monument or a part of their house 
for a few dollars, it is generally because they do 
not understand its real worth. Once aware of the 
importance of preserving cultural heritage, the 
communities themselves become the best guard 
for their monuments and their surroundings. ◆
Eli Wærum Rognerud 
Bhaktapur, “the city 
of devotees”
