Big Classes, a Threat to Standards
 Faced with infl ation in the number of pupils, teachers have no choice 
except to adapt their methods.
“Many teachers are only teachers on paper,” 
says Georges Hedad, Director of UNESCO’s 
Division of Higher Education. Many countries 
are indeed reducing the years of training as the 
demand for teachers rises.
UNESCO is focusing on trying to redress 
the balance with a strong push to increase the 
capacity and quality of teacher training in Sub-
Saharan Africa. “If quality of education is to be 
reformed, the best approach is to start with 
reforming teacher education, which itself will 
change primary education,” says Virgilio 
Juvane, of the Commonwealth Secretariat, 
which is working with UNESCO to study the 
problem of teacher education in both English 
and French-speaking African countries. 
“Large class-sizes are unlikely to be reduced 
in the next 10-15 years, so it is more realistic to 
provide teachers with the techniques to teach in 
a better way,” Juvane says. 
| Teachers learning new roles
In Namibia and Uganda and in several districts 
of Tanzania, multigrade classes where pupils 
are divided into small groups, each with sepa-
rate activities, have been an eff ective way to 
improve learning at primary level.  But fi rst, 
teacher training has to be changed from the 
Primary school class 
in the Central African 
Republic

widespread chalk-and-talk teacher-led model 
towards a more child-appropriate model where 
teachers act as facilitators.
Initially, 17 countries* have been selected to 
help set up a national plan of action for teacher 
training, beginning with Angola, Niger, Zam-
bia and Ethiopia, says Hedad. Another 30 coun-
tries will join within 5 years. 
With rising enrolment and huge classes, 
teachers need support and mentoring. Zambia 
has set up teacher resource centres in school 
areas, where teachers can update and refresh 
their skills. Mozambique and Tanzania are pro-
viding in-service education through distance 
education, which includes the use of radio, tel-
evision and videos. It is cost-effective and 
includes a small group of tutors and educators 
to provide assistance. 
Th e training of school principals is key for 
improving secondary education quality. “If 
school leaders do not support teachers’ train-
ing, it will not have an impact on teaching qual-
ity,” says Sonia Bahri, UNESCO’s Chief of 
Section for General Secondary Education. Th e 
UNESCO-linked International Institute for 
Capacity-Building in Africa, based in Addis 
Ababa, has been running programmes for prin-
cipals, while workshops are being conducted in 
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and 
other countries. ◆
Yojana Sharma
*Angola, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, 
Congo, DR Congo, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Madagascar, Niger, Nigeria, Sierra 
Leone, Tanzania and Zambia.
www.unesco.org/en/courier/education 9
