Learning for a Better Future 
 Mohamed was only fi ve year old when he was forced out of his village 
in Sierra Leone by armed rebels. Today, as a refugee in Guinea, he is 
going to school to try and build a future. 
“I was only fi ve years old then, but I remember 
well. I still have nightmares about it,” says 
Mohamed Camara. Every minute of that day in 
1996, when his village was attacked by rebel sol-
diers, is an indelible memory. Now 14, the ado-
lescent is one of the thousands of children who 
left  Sierra Leone as civil war raged between the 
army and the Revolutionary United Front 
(RUF). He is now a refugee in Kabamoussaya, 
130 km south of Conakry in Guinea. 
“One day when I was playing outside with 
my friends, a gang of young people came on us 
in a surprise attack. Th ey started fi ring on us 
from their jeep. My friends and I panicked and 
ran to reach our homes.  I found my parents. My 
dad was caught by a machete, and there was 
blood everywhere.  My sister was killed. Some 
time aft erwards they got back into their jeeps 
and drove away.  Th e streets were full of dead 
people.  Aft er they had gone, my dad took us 
into the bush. For many, many days, we ate only 
fruit and wild roots, and drank muddy water” 
says Mohamed. 
Th e fi ght between the government forces and 
the RUF lasted a total 11 years. Attacks like those 
experienced by Mohamed and his family were 
commonplace. Children as young as eight were 
forced to join the fi ghting forces – those who 
refused were killed or mutilated. Between 15,000 
and 20,000 Sierra Leonean children fought as 
soldiers, most of them on the rebel side. 
Mohamed and his parents managed to 
escape, and aft er weeks on the run, crossed the 
border to Guinea, where they were given shelter 
in the town of Kabamoussaya. Th ere, for the 
past nine years, they have been trying to rebuild 
their lives, hoping one day to return. Shortly 
aft er arrival, Mohamed joined Wanifi li, a make-
shift  school constructed out of wood and cov-
ered by plastic sheeting donated by UNHCR. 

Classes are still overcrowded with an average of 
80 pupils per class, and teachers, many without 
formal training, are working with scarce 
resources. For Mohammed and his peers, school 
is nonetheless their main hope for the future 
and the place to learn essential life skills. In 
addition to traditional subjects such as science, 
maths and language, teachers use sports and 
music classes to help children cope with their 
traumas. 
“Resources are hard to come by here,” 
explains Mohamed Lansanah, a teacher who 
also comes from Sierra Leone.  “But we are 
investing in the reconstruction and the peaceful 
future of our country through the education of 
these young people.”
 Th e eff orts of Mr Lansanah and the com-
munity groups are paying off . In 2004 Wanifi li 
achieved results above the regional average. 
Mohamed Camara ranks second in his class. He 
dreams of one day returning home: “When I 
fi nish my studies I want to be a professor.  Th at 
way I can fi ght for peace and development in 
Sierra Leone.” ◆
Alhassane Souare 
Mohamed Camara, 14, 
is one of thousands 
of children who fl ed 
Sierra Leone
