
                                 Doping has entered into the public consciousness 
                   with the announcement that 2006 tour de france champion floyd landis 
has tested positive for elevated testosterone levels. fans worldwide are wondering, 
                           was this year’s race nothing more than a sham?
the dope on cycling  
our de France Champion Floyd 
Landis’s positive test for elevated 
levels of testosterone cannot be 
written off a simply a case of public-
ity. Landis will face a tribunal where 
he will be called on to explain the 
presence of synthetic testosterone 
and likely faces a two-year ban from 
all sport. However, he responded 
to the positive test results defiantly, 
proclaiming, “I was the strongest 
man in the Tour de France and that 
is why I am the champion.” Going 
further, he vowed, “I will fight these 
charges with the same determina-
tion and intensity that I bring to my 
training and racing. It is now my 
goal to clear my name and restore 
what I worked so hard to achieve.” 
Cycling has been saddled with 
doping allegations, scandals and 
deaths for years, but only within 
the last decade have they made 
front-page news. In 1998, authori-
ties apprehended the Festina Team 
masseur at the Franco-Belgian 
border with more than 400 doping 
products for the team’s riders in 
the Tour de France. During the en-
Street football match between Argentina and Brazil.

High levels of testosterone were found in Floyd Landis’ blood 
after he won the 2006 Tour de France.

suring investigation it was not only 
revealed that the Festina Team was 
involved in systematic doping with 
a range of drugs to boost their per-
formance, but also that a number 
of other teams were implicated in 
this dangerous practice. Ultimately 
seven of the original 21 teams and 
at least 89 of the original 189 riders 
were barred from the race. 
The 2006 Tour de France was 
meant to be a new beginning. 
However, just weeks before the 
start, a major doping investigation 
in Spain called Operacion Puerto 
implicated 58 riders, amongst them 
the favorites Jan Ullrich, Ivan Basso 
and Francisco Mancebo, in an or-
ganized blood doping ring. These 
riders were removed from the Tour 
before it began along with six oth-
ers riders who were implicated by 

the Tour Organizers who sought 
to give this pinnacle cycling event 
renewed credibility. This effort was 
entirely undermined by Landis’s 
failed drug test.
Too good to be true
The public is left reeling because 
Landis’s Stage 17 victory was the 
highlight of the Tour. After a miser-
able performance in the previous 
Stage that dropped him to 11th 
place, Landis flew over the moun-
tainous Stage 17 to finish well clear 
of the leaders. It was an inspirational 
performance, the most heroic feat 
seen in recent years. To now learn 
that banned drugs made this pos-
sible is heartbreaking. Cycling fans 
are left with nothing but emptiness 
as another hero like Olympic Gold 
medalist Tyler Hamilton is found to 
the shadow of his former teammate, 
Lance Armstrong. Instead he faces 
the ignominy of being the first Tour 
winner to be stripped of the title 
due to doping and lengthy legal 
processes. Alternately he has the 
chance to set the record straight 
about the culture in cycling and the 
pressures of professional sport. 
The cycling world faces renewed 
criticism to deal with the drug prob-
lem inherent in their sport. Although 
cycling has the most publicized 
problem with doping in sport, Pat 
McQuaid, President of the Inter-
national Cycling Union, states that 
they are working hard to stamp 
out drug cheats. “Cycling is at the 
forefront of the fight against dop-
ing,” he says, citing that the big-
gest challenge is to “eradicate the 
institutionalized doping.” It is all too 
easy to blame the cheating athletes 
and not the system which creates 
them. Change is required at all lev-
els within this sport. The administra-
tors, managers, coaches and team 
doctors need to take ownership of 
problem of doping and do all that 
is required to remove this cancer if 
the sport is to survive.
Why is doping 
such a problem?
Asked his opinion about what leads 
athletes turn to doping, McQuaid 
blames society. “For athletes to 
have different ideals than the rest 
of society is being a little bit overly 
optimistic,” he quips. And maybe 
McQuaid isn’t too far off the mark. 
After all, we live in a society where 
most strive for fame and fortune and 
where medical remedies are readily 
available. Unfortunately fundamen-
tal values and ethics like honesty 
and integrity have been lost some-
where along they way. 
Other sports are not immune to 
the problem of doping in sport. 
This is apparent with the revelation 
that Justin Gatlin, joint 100-metres 
world-record holder, has recently 
tested positive for elevated testos-
terone levels just like Landis. Foot-
ball, Baseball, Tennis and Triathlon 
also have dealt with this problem. 
The incontrovertible fact seems 
only to be that doping is a constant 
reality in sport. It has reached the 
point recently where every fan has 
to ask himself what he can believe 
in and whether sport holds the 
same luster as a source of inspira-
tion for all.
Matthew Quigley, 
in Sacramento, California (USA).
“I was the strongest man 
in the Tour de France 
and that is why 
I am the champion.”  
Floyd Landis
Jan Ullrich and Ivan Basso in the 2004 Tour 
de France. Ullrich and Basso were among 
the 58 riders implicated in an organized blood 
doping ring on the eve of the 2006 race.

would be the dream of most official 
teams, but in this case, is aimed at 
promoting dialogue. In street soc-
cer, it is up to the players in both 
teams to decide on the score in a 
third half-time, once the game is 
over. The final result depends not 
only on goals, but also on things 
such as “clean” playing, comrade-
ship and respect of the adversary. 
Chauvinism no longer holds true 
either, as two women have to be on 
the field at all times in each team of 
seven players. But street soccer’s 
most genuine quality is its social 
goal: “We don’t care whether these 
young players become success-
ful athletes, or great artists. What 
counts is that they turn into people 
who generate solidarity within our 
community”, explains Fabián Fer-
rero, who founded the Defensores 
Club twelve years ago with Julio 
Jiménez.
“We started this club because we 
couldn’t stand seeing these chil-
dren and youngsters sitting at street 
corners with nothing to do”, Fabián 
recalls. “We live in a complex area, 
where 250.000 inhabitants are 
spread out in 15 neighbourhoods 
of working class families who often 
have 5 to 6 children. Since the tan-
neries closed in the nineties – and 
these were the main source of labor 
South American street football final match in Buenos Aires (Argentina).
