O to be incorporated gradually into the 
Representative List, provided they are 
located within States that have ratified 
the Convention.
Discovering 
the soul
Another of the Convention’s important 
measures is the requirement that each 
country establish one or several inven-
tories of intangible cultural heritage ex-
isting on its territory. 
In certain cases, this process is well 
under way and is producing some truly 
remarkable results. “In Venezuela, we 
are now conducting a very detailed 
census of heritage in all its forms,” ex-
plains José Manuel Rodríguez, presi-
dent of Venezuela’s Institute of Cultural 
Heritage. “We have recorded more 
than 68,000 entries coming from all 
of our country’s 335 communities and 
what we have discovered is the genu-
ine soul of the population. People are 
astonished that the state is taking an 
interest in things that belong to them in 
ral traditions and expressions (includ-
ing language as a vehicle of intangible 
cultural heritage), traditional performing 
arts, social practices, rituals and festive 
events, knowledge and practices con-
cerning nature and the universe, tradi-
tional craftsmanship – all merit safe-
guarding for future generations, in the 
same way as the Galapagos Islands or 
the Egyptian Pyramids. 
Since 20 April, date of its entry into 
force, the Convention for the Safe-
guarding of the Intangible Cultural 
Heritage stands watch to ensure the 
continuity of this living testimony to hu-
man creativity. 
To date, 47 States – from Algeria, 
first to approve it in February 2004, 
to Albania, which ratified it on 4 April 
2006 – are parties to this Convention 
that completes UNESCO’s standard-
setting measures for the safeguard of 
cultural heritage. 
The text is based on certain articles 
of the 1972 Convention for the Protec-
tion of the World Cultural and Natural 
Heritage that protects “tangible” forms 
of expression of heritage, both monu-
ments and natural sites. It thus antici-
pates the creation of a General Assem-
bly which will have its first meeting next 
June, an Intergovernmental Committee 
for the Safeguarding of the Intangible 
Cultural Heritage and a Fund that will 
make it possible to finance safeguard-
ing projects. 
The Convention also stipulates that 
two lists will be drawn up: the Repre-
sentative List of the Intangible Cultural 
Heritage of Humanity, and the List of 
Intangible Cultural Heritage in Need of 
Urgent Safeguarding. 
The 90 Masterpieces of the Oral and 
Intangible Heritage of Humanity so far 
proclaimed by UNESCO are likely 
                                  the entry into force of the Convention for the safeguarding 
                       of the Intangible Cultural heritage represents a new phase for this living 
                                    and intrinsically fragile heritage.
IntangIble herItage
a tangible boost
As the Galapagos Islands  
or the Egyptian Pyramids,  
all merit safeguarding 
for future generations.
The sand designs of Vanuatu are a Materpiece  
of Intangible Cultural Heritage.

a very intimate way.” 
These inventories will make it possible 
to classify intangible heritage in its dif-
ferent forms - the items to be included 
on representative lists, of course, but 
also Living Human Treasures. 
The concept, created in 1950 in Japan, 
was adopted by the Republic of Korea 
in 1964, then by the Philippines, Thai-
land, Romania, the Czech Republic, 
Bulgaria and France, where the living 
treasures are called “masters of crafts” 
and are goldsmiths and silversmiths, 
traditional bookbinders or makers of 
musical instruments. 
Languages too are protected by the 
convention, not just as means of com-
munication but also as reflections of 
a particular perception of the world. 
Inventories can also be taken of tradi-
tional music. 
A little more than two years elapsed 
between the Convention’s ratification 
by UNESCO’s General Conference in 
October 2003 and its entry into force. 
For Antonio Augusto Arantes, former 
president of Brazil’s Institute for Nation-
al Historical and Artistic Heritage, “The 
speed of the ratification process was a 
real surprise. But it proves simply that 
governments are resonating to some-
thing that civil society, at least in my 
country, has laid claim to for 20 years.” 
This is just what Juan Goytisolo, presi-
dent of the jury for the first two Proc-
lamations of the Masterpieces of the 
Oral and Intangible Heritage of Hu-
manity, was describing when he spoke 
of “the infinite wealth and variety of hu-
man inventiveness regarding the origin 
of the world and our presence in it.”  
Lucía Iglesias Kuntz
Demonstration devoted to the Intangible heritage 
of Southeast Asia, UNESCO headquarters, March 2006.
