O
                                          in valencia’s vast “huerta”, the heartland of spain’s orchards, 
                 water is an historically strategic element. for centuries a special court has met 
                              on every thursday to settle disputes relating to this key resource.
Valencia
WAter Wisdom
n Thursday at midday in the cathe-
dral square in Valencia the faithful 
hurry to mass while tourists feed pi-
geons or read restaurant menus. At 
the first strike of twelve on the bell, an 
“alguacil”, or constable, comes out of 
an adjoining building and picks up a 
long cane with a golden harpoon on 
one end. 
He is followed by eight men dressed 
in the long black shirts traditionally 
worn by farmers in the region. These 
are the members of the “Tribuna 
del Agua”, an ancient institution that 
meets each Thursday. 
In public hearings, the court settles 
disputes on the distribution of water 
among the eight channels that irri-
gate the 17,000 hectares of land that 
form the huerta, where citrus fruits, 
rice, grapes and peaches are grown 
for all of Spain and for export. 
At the sound of the cane striking 
the granite pavement, eight men with 
greying hair take their seats in front of 
the Porch of the Apostles on chairs 
made of wood and tooled leather. 
They are not judges, but “Sindicos”, 
or magistrates, elected democrati-
cally for a period of two years, who 
represent the owners of all the eight 
channels. 
They have no legal training and farm 
their land for their livelihood. All have 
the reputation for being ‘honest men’. 
The Sindicos master the rotations 
and watering periods, and it is their 
duty to distribute water proportionally 
and see to it that the channels that 
cross their land are maintained so 
that water may flow to the other farm-
ers’ fields.
Water Court meeting in the cathedral plaza in Valencia (Spain).

“a society that claims 
to attack water problems 
must make serious efforts 
to develop effective 
institutions and processes 
that can mediate disputes...”.
Second UN World Water Report
‘I come every Thursday because it 
is my duty’. Vicente Baixauli Pastor, 
Sindico of the Favara canal, one 
of the largest in the area. He is 
astounded by anyone who would 
doubt the usefulness of the Court. 
‘The Court is for people who don’t 

do things right, and they clearly have 
to respect our decisions, as our in-
stitution was founded by the Caliph 
of Córdoba, who was a lord of great 
distinction and high rank’. 
A court 
of Arab origin
It was the Arabs, during the time of 
Abderraman II and Al-Hakem II who 
perfected the irrigation system of the 
huerta. He designed the water dis-
tribution methods, and defined the 
principle according to which water 
distribution and the land are insepa-
rable. 
Arabic origins can be found in words 
such as azud (sluice gate), acequia 
(canal) and fila (a measurement unit 
equivalent to a variable quantity of li-
tres per second). 
The court in its current form was 
founded around 960 under the reign 
of Abderraman III, and it is thought 
that its sessions were held in front 
of the Porch of the Great Mosque, 
which is now the cathedral. 
The hearings of the Court take place 
in the open air, and only in the Valen-
cian language. Everyone acts on their 
own behalf, without a lawyer, pros-
ecutor or any written documents. It is 
possible to call witnesses or order an 
inspection of the land if this is consid-
ered necessary.
Justice, laws 
and common sense
Court verdicts cannot be appealed. 
‘We are a Supreme Court, because 
we use good sense’, states Baixauli. 
Even though he asserts that his de-
cisions have always been fair, he re-
grets that he once convicted a saint. 
‘What happened was that there 
was too much water in the main 
canal, which destroyed the crops 
of a farmer who in turn accused his 
neighbour of letting in more water 
flow than was needed. He was the 
one I should have punished for false 
accusation, but as he had already 
lost his harvest, it seemed too harsh. 
So, I punished Saint Peter for too 
much rain and. As I am a Catholic, I 
later wrote him a letter asking him to 
forgive me’. 
According to María Jose Mascarell 
Navarro, professor of administrative 
law and civil procedure at the Uni-
versity of Valencia, several factors 
explain the fact that the Court has 
endured and that its decisions are 
systematically respected: ‘First, be-
cause it exercises its authority not 
over only one canal, but over all the 
channels. Then, because it is not a 
higher authority, but a court in which 
the Sindicos are elected democrati-
cally by the people. Above all, the tra-
ditional farmers see the fact of being 
judged in public as an affront. This is 
why they generally reach agreement 
beforehand’. 
Meanwhile, Baixauli explains to 
anyone who wants to listen what 
he sees as the real dangers to the 
huerta: tourism, the main activity of 
the region. ‘You see, our children do 
not want to hear about rice or or-
ange trees, because farmers do not 
make much from their harvests - the 
person who makes money today is 
the one who plants pillars’.
Lucía Iglesias Kuntz.The system of “acequias” was created in muslim times.

Sessions are in public and in Valencian language.
