          rieks smeets, head of unesCo’s Intangible heritage section, 
             examines the implications of the entry into force of the Convention 
      for the safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural heritage.
there WIll be no more 
ProClamatIons of masterPIeCes   
How would you define oral 
and intangible heritage in very 
simple terms? 
Rather than defining it, it may be bet-
ter to recapitulate the areas covered 
by this heritage. It concerns music and 
traditional dance; traditional theatre; 
oral expressions such as folktales or 
sagas; traditional knowledge related 
to nature and the universe; skills linked 
to craftsmanship; and rituals and fes-
tive events like carnivals. Generally, 
they are expressions passed down 
from one generation to the next that 
play a significant role in the commu-
nities where they are practiced, inas-
much as they give them a sense of 
continuity and identity. 
Among the many masterpieces pro-
claimed by UNESCO, we can give 
special mention to the Patum in the 
city of Berga (Spain), proclaimed in 
2005. It’s a noteworthy example be-
cause all the inhabitants are invited 
to participate, including the children. 
They take part in the festivities by pa-
rading in the street like the adults, but 
with a miniature bestiary. They learn in 
this way to imitate the grown-ups’ be-
haviour and become the future actors 
of this heritage.
The Convention 
for the Safeguarding 
of the Intangible Cultural 
Heritage, adopted in 2003, 
enters into force on 20 April. 
What impact will this have? 
The text consolidates a new con-
cept of heritage that has developed 
in the last three decades. In 1972, 
the Organization adopted a Conven-
tion on the Protection of the World 
Cultural and Natural Heritage, fo-
cused on monuments and natural 
sites. Already in the 1970s we had 
begun thinking about other aspects 
of human heritage. But it took time 
for this approach to become con-
crete and to produce the Conven-
tion that is now taking effect. 
What has changed is that now a 
binding legal instrument exists, ratified 
by numerous States. This instrument, 
first of all, will enable raising aware-
ness in the international community. 
Then it will make it possible to safe-
guard this heritage in new ways. The 
emphasis is placed on the role that 
must be played by the groups and 
communities who hold this heritage, 
not only to identify its different forms 
but also to safeguard them. Finally, the 
adoption of the text creates the pos-
sibility of raising additional funds to fi-
nance more programmes and actions.
The proclamation 
of masterpieces was 
at the heart of the intangible 
heritage programme. 
Will that still be true?  
No, there will be no more proclama-
tions of masterpieces as there were 
in 2001, 2003 and 2005. Once the 
Convention enters into force, master-
pieces present in States Parties’ terri- 
tory will be inscribed on the Repre-
Interview by Agnès bardon and Stephen Roberts.
The Patum of Berga.

“they are expressions passed 
down from one generation 
to the next that play 
a significant role 
in the communities 
where they are practiced”.

sentative List of the Intangible Cultural 
Heritage of Humanity. The condi-
tions under which they will be in-
cluded have yet to be determined 
by the Intergovernmental Commit-
tee that will implement the Conven-
tion. But most of the masterpieces 
are to be found on the territory of 
States that have already ratified 
the Convention. We can therefore 
expect that a great many of them 
will soon be included among the 
items inscribed on the representa-
tive list. 
What are the key issues  
or the future? 
Many aspects need further definition. 
We have to specify what this repre-
sentative list will comprise. The States 
that will implement the Convention 
must also identify the communities 
that hold this heritage. Often a system 
of representation has to be set up 
for these groups, or help provided 
so that they can create NGOs. 
Authorities, too, particularly at the 
local level, have to be made more 
aware of the existence, values and 
importance of this heritage. There’s 
still work to be done to increase 
consciousness of this cause.
Rieks Smeets, Chief of Section 
for Intangible Heritage.

Traditional music of Morin Khuur (Mongolia).
