                       for the past ten years, a project has been helping parents in Jordan’s rural 
               and underprivileged regions. until now it focused mainly on mothers, 
                            but fathers have begun to participate, brought in by way of religion.
JorDan
Fathers inCluded
ight o’clock in the morning. Sami-
ra Darwish is getting ready for her 
weekly get-together with neighbour-
hood women. We are in Abu Dhar Al 
Ghafaari, in the Palestinian refugee 
camp of Marka, north of the Jordanian 
capital. Like many other camps that 
materialized because refugees were 
flooding into the country in 1948 and 
1967, Marka at the beginning was 
simply a collection of canvas tents 
donated by the United Nations. As 
time passed, tents were replaced 
by rough shacks, piled one against 
the other. Comfort is rudimentary at 
best. Unemployment, poverty and 
overpopulation have prevailed in the 
camps for as long as three genera-
tions. 
Smira grew up in the neighbour-
hood. That is why she is accepted 
easily, despite her young age. At the 
development centre’s headquarters 
in Abu Dhar Al Ghafaari, a dozen 
women are sitting around the table. 
The topic of the day: the custom, 
which is still popular in the camp, of 
coating babies’ skin with salt to make 
them more robust. The heat is op-
pressive, but Samira’s smile never 
wavers. She explains that not only is 
the practice useless for increasing a 
baby’s vitality, it can even cause de-
hydration. A little later, she advises 
mothers never to use tap water, 
which in the camp is not fit for drink-
ing, to cool off their baby bottles.
Glaring disparities
Samira is a trainer for the Bet-
ter Parenting Initiative, launched by 
UNICEF in 1996 with the support of 
several Jordanian ministries (health, 
education, social development and 
religious affairs), the UNRWA (United 
Nations Relief and Works Agency) 
A global strategy for early 
childhood development
Jordan’s strategy includes 
legislation pertaining to the 
health of pregnant women and 
children, the role of the family 
and the quality of daycare 
centres. The goal is to pay 
more attention to children 
by creating kindergartens in 
remote or less privileged areas 
and providing daily meals and 
warm clothing to children who 
need them. The project aims 
to raise the number of four-
year-old children in school from 
28% to 35% by 2008, 
and to 50% by 2013. 
Discussion among trainers.

for Palestine refugees, and the Noor 
al Hussein Foundation. Based on 
the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child, the project encourages fami-
lies in rural or underprivileged areas 
to acquire sound parenting skills from 
pregnancy on through early child-
hood. Recent studies in the country 
have indeed revealed glaring dispari-
ties in the care given to children under 
the age of three. In ten years, nearly 
45,000 parents have benefited from 
the project and 1500 professionals 
have been trained.
Fathers too
Several times a week, at meetings 
like the ones organized by Samira, 
the group discusses such topics as 
weaning, the importance of communi-
cating with children, or ways to identi-
fy possible developmental problems. 
Sessions are led by professionals – 
teachers, doctors, social workers or 
nurses – who receive training. 
At the beginning, the project fo-
cused almost entirely on mothers. 
No more. Now 37% of the trainers 
are men, with 63% women. The only 
difference is that men get involved 
through their religious practice. The 
men’s sessions are held in certain 
mosques following Friday prayers, 
with the imam’s blessing. 
“The number of male trainers is 
slowly growing,” observes Suzanne 
Salihi, deputy chief of the Better Par-
enting Initiative in UNICEF’s Amman 
office. She stresses the importance 
and impact of the training that takes 
place in the mosques. The project 
has produced a handbook about 
early childhood development for 
imams, and already 30 imams are 
participating. It’s a first step. “It still 
remains much more difficult to make 
contact with the men than with the 
women” adds Suzanne. “You have 
to push aside certain taboos, explain 
that playing with the child is not just 
for mothers, and changing a baby’s 
nappies is not degrading. This is not 
always self-evident.” 
Yet the effort seems to be pay-
ing off. Samy, a trainer in the Marka 
camp, sees concrete results: “Some 
of the people who trained with me 
have changed their attitude towards 
their children.
Adjnadine Samran, 
in Amman.
Homework session.

Trainer Samira with a amily in the Marka Camp  
located in the north of the Jordan capital.
