                                         the agave plant that grows in the valleys of Jalisco (Mexico) 
                           is useful not only for making the famous Mexican liquor. 
             the blue plant confers identity on the whole region, which is now inscribed 
                                                      on the World Heritage list. 
tequila-tinted landscape
A sea of blue agave.

“This sea of agave 
stretches from the slopes 
of the Tequila mountain 
to the deep gorges carved out 
by the Santiago river.”
Asea of blue, the shade of neither 
sky nor water, with a tinge of green 
and grey, colours the austere lands 
of the Jalisco valleys. This sea of aga-
ve stretches from the slopes of the 
Tequila mountain to the deep gorges 
carved out by the Santiago river. 
From the mountain top, the kingdom 
of agave appears in all its immensity. 
The spiny plants shaped like bluish-
green stars trace well-defined lines. 
They form a vast mantle of pointy 
leaves patiently absorbing the rays 
of the sun to transform them first into 
sugar and then, through human inter-
vention, into tequila. 

They say agave is tough, like the 
people who live around it. That it 
takes root in arid lands from which 
it draws life and blooms. It is fibrous 
and resistant. Patient, but also joy-
ful. Its long and robust leaves fan out 
from their spherical stem, which they 
render almost invisible. It is the piña, 
the ball, head or heart of the agave, 
the ground-level tabernacle where 
the plant stores the juice that one day 
will be transformed into tequila.
Long-term  
harvest
You have to wait at least eight years 
for agave to mature. Then comes 
harvest time. The jimador, the per-
son in charge of the harvest, chops 
off the agave leaves one by one to 
clear the heart, which weighs at 
least 20 kilos. 
Patience. You can’t hurry nature. 
Nor the good tequila drinker. He 
knows about the number of years 
agave plants need to mature, the 
experience of the men who cut 
them one by one, the hours if not 
days of roasting, at low tempera-
ture. He knows you have to wait 
until the juice ferments, then put 
the juice through the stills the 
Spanish imported. And after that 
let it rest peacefully, in the dark and 
cool of the casks. 
That is why the good drinker sips te-
quila when he is settled in his equipal, 
large wooden armchair typical of 
the region, in the cool shade of a 
patio or terrace. He drinks it with 
the respect you give to an ances-
tor, and with the gratitude you owe 
to someone who has taught you to 
appreciate waiting. 
Agave is equally generous to chil-
dren and sober people. The piña 
is comprised of segments that are 
easily separated once it is cooked. 
The pieces, which in the heat of the 
oven take on a bright coffee colour, 
make a delicious treat. Along the 
side of the road, on town squares 
and during village fiestas, people 
sell this peculiar delicacy, which 
you chew to extract the very sweet 
juice until you are left with taste-
less fiber, which you then spit out. 
Agave is also a source of honey.
Incendiary spirit
Tequila has acquired a reputation as 
an acrid beverage. The golden age of 
Mexican cinema portrayed it as an in-
cendiary spirit that burned the throats 
of brave Mexican caballeros and in-
cited them to fight. But now finally 
tequila has shed its image as a drink 
reserved for men. It is often enjoyed 
at home with the family as a cocktail. 
Even though it can be mixed with 
sodas, connoisseurs prefer it “dry”, 
which is to say pure. They serve it in 
a caballito, a small glass designed to 
accommodate all the aromas of te-
quila, or else in little earthenware jars. 
An increasing number of women also 
appreciate it. Some mothers even 
dip their finger in tequila and rub 
their children’s gums with it to soothe 
toothache. 
In Mexico, cloudy afternoons that 
inspire contemplation and intimate 
conversation are called tardes te-
quilaras, but any day is good to sip 
this national drink, produced with pa-
tience and wisdom in the magnificent 
blue sweep of the Jalisco fields.
Juan Carlos Núñez Bustillos, 
in Guadalajara.
Alambiques at San José del Refugio, Jalisco, Mexico.
