It’s a good beginning for this Irish boy.

                              for the last 20 years, in certain districts of ireland’s capital, 
the Community mothers Programme has been working with women who have just given birth 
                                 to their first child. The innovation: experienced local mothers 
                                             are the ones giving guidance to the beginners.
irelanD  
mothers talking to mothers
INot long ago, the district of Ballymun 
was just a series of dingy gray build-
ings bristling with television aerials, 
their stairwells splattered with graffiti. 
Unemployment and drugs were en-
demic. In the last few years, however, 
the impact of the “Celtic Tiger” eco-
nomic boom has transformed even 
this working-class area, located some 
five kilometers from downtown Dub-
lin. Little by little, the blocks of build-
ings were torn down and their occu-
pants moved into cozy little houses. 
Even a luxury hotel has materialized 
and others are in construction. An 
unthinkable possibility eight years 
ago, when the Community Mothers 
Programme (CMP) implanted itself in 
the area. 
Launched at the beginning of the 
1980s, the CMP helps mothers who 
are giving birth to their first child to 
get off to a good start. It operates 
mainly in the less privileged parts of 
the city. The Programme is offered 
to all first-time mothers; choosing to 
participate or not is up to them. But in 
neighbourhoods like Ballymun, nearly 
80% sign up. In 2005, more than 
50% of the women enrolled in the 
Programme were single mothers and 
close to 10% were teenagers.
Discussions 
over coffee
Similar programmes exist, notably in 
the United Kingdom. What makes the 
CMP different is that it is run not by 
social workers or nurses but by moth-
ers from the community, selected and 
trained by the Programme. They are 
volunteers, receiving only a small sti-
pend to cover transportation. Once 
a month, over a period of two years, 
they visit the families. Casually, over 
a cup of coffee, they chat with the 
child’s mother about the little one’s 
progress or possible difficulties. “It’s 
working because it has one foot in 
formal education system and the 
other in non formal learning. The idea 
is for the parents to feel, at the end, 
like experts on their own children,” 
says Brenda Molloy, head of the 
Programme. Not putting health work-
ers on the front line helps greatly in 
winning the trust of the young mothers. 
“The get-togethers are very informal. 
You feel very comfortable talking,” 
says Antoinette, mother of 4-month-
old Tadhg. 
Jean, 38, is lively, chatty and burst-
ing with energy. She took advantage 
of the Programme when her first child 
was born, 12 years ago. Now she has 
become one of the visiting mothers in 

Ballymun. “We’re not there to impose 
anything on the mothers, we’re there 
to answer any questions they might 
have,” she explains. “For instance, is it 
normal that my child does this, or that 
he isn’t like that? We rely on our ex-
perience and common sense. And if 
there’s something we don’t know, we 
ask one of the Programme nurses.”
Measurable results
Another resource for visiting moth-
ers is the documentation provided 
by the health services. With the 
help of diagrams, it explains why it 
is a good idea to speak lovingly to 
your baby, hold him in your arms, 
get him his vaccinations, and not 
give him too many sweets. “Really, 
these are things that seem obvious, 
but they’re not necessarily obvious 
if they weren’t passed on to you. 
I didn’t know, for instance, that it 
was so important to read stories to 
your children,” confides Siobhan, 
another Programme graduate who 
has now become one of the visiting 
mothers in Ballymun. As soon as a 
child is nine months old, therefore, 
mothers are encouraged to join the 
nearest library. 
The CMP employs a dozen nurs-
es and works with nearly 1200 
mothers with an annual budget of 
800,000 Euros. The results are 
already measurable. In 1990, the 
Bernard van Leer Foundation con-
ducted a study with 232 women 
who were first-time mothers. Of 
those who had been involved in 
the Programme, 98% read stories 
to their children, versus only 54% 
of the others. Seven years later, a 
follow-up study with one third of the 
same women revealed that 50% 
of the Programme graduates were 
against slapping as an education-
al method, versus less than 25% 
among the others. “CMP” mothers 
are also more likely to supervise 
their child’s homework, limit time 
spent in front of the television, serve 
varied meals and take their children 
to the dentist. “It doesn’t seem like 
very much,” emphasizes Brenda 
Molloy, “but those few hours spent 
with the mothers can make all the 
difference.”
Agnes Bardon, 
in Dublin.

The idea is for the parents to feel, at the end, like experts on their own children.
A mother attending Community Mothers programme  
with her referring nurse.
