          Prince talal bin abdul aziz, President of the arab Gulf foundation 
                    for united nations development organizations (aGfund) 
               has repeatedly warned of the water shortage threatening 
                      a number of arab states, particularly in the six Gulf states.
arab StateS Suffer 
from Water Scarcity  
interview with Prince talal
You were one of the first 
to draw attention to the threats 
to freshwater resources in Arab 
States, especially 
in the Gulf region. 
What is the current situation?
I often insist that the issue of wa-
ter in the region is a matter of sur-
vival. The greatest challenge facing 
people in the Arab world, especially 
in the Gulf (rulers and ruled alike), 
is how to deal with the issue in a 
sensible way. The serious implica-
tions of the current situation call 
for something to be done rapidly. 
Looking at the situation of water in 
the Arab world in light of the Water 
Poverty Index, it becomes clear that 
the Arab world is on a dangerous 
downward slope towards an abyss. 
According to this index, a country 
suffering from water shortage is one 
whose average per capita share of 
water is below 1000-2000 m3 per 
year. Using this measurement, 13 
Arab countries fall within the cat-
egory of countries with water short-
ages or water scarcity; among them 
are a number of Gulf States. 
Do you think the solutions 
currently proposed 
to limit water consumption 
are sustainable? 
In our view, the practical solution 
is for governments to adopt well-
designed water management poli-
cies which deal rationally with the 
problem while preventing waste 
and bridging the gap between 
available water resources and fu-
ture needs. This should be done 
by revising the regulatory and legal 
framework: a large part of the wa-
ter problem in our region is a result 
of regulations and laws. 
In the Gulf, we are now witnessing 
a growth in awareness of the need 
to overcome the water crisis. We feel 
that this movement can be more ef-
fective if education is harnessed pos-
itively, and the private sector and civil 
society are mobilized to perform their 
duty to help Arab governments. 
Scientific research should be con-
centrated in a Gulf State scientific 
institution which involves universi-
ties and draws on the experience 
of States and the expertise of inter-
national organizations. The creation 
of such an institution would make 
data available and help to resolve 
the discrepancies and conflicting 
approaches regarding the vari-
ous readings of the “water situa-
tion”, such as the raging debate on 
groundwater reserves. 
Developing countries that face se-
vere water shortages should pursue 
creative, non-conventional policies 
in order to deal with the crisis. One 
idea could be to undertake studies 
on the relocation of inhabitants of 
areas suffering from water shortag-
es to regions within the same coun-
try where water is plentiful. Indeed, 
consideration could be given to the 
idea of moving the inhabitants of 
that State to a neighbouring State 
which is not facing a water crisis. 
This idea remains on the table, and 
those responsible should examine 
the feasibility of implementing it at 
the national or regional. 
Interviewed by Bassam Mansour
Prince Talal.

How can we best convince 
people of the seriousness of 
dwindling freshwater reserves 
and the need to rationalize 
consumption? 
It is extremely important that plans 
and projects adopted by govern-
ments be based on solid popular 
support, which should strengthen 
them and provide a backdrop for 
their implementation. This means 
making people in the Arab world and 
the Gulf fully aware of the realities of 
the situation. This is the responsibility 
of the media, by which I mean the 
free and independent media. The 
starting point should be the promo-
tion of a “culture of water” among 
the various social sectors, stressing 
the importance of rationalizing con-
sumption. The other essential factor 
in rationalizing water consumption 
is education. Its inclusion in curricu-
lum development will help prepare 
younger generations and make them 
aware of the future that awaits them 
if they ignore the water issue. 
Researchers agree that there 
is a causal link between good 
governance and good water 
management. Do you agree? 
Reform is an integrated system. 
There can be no talk of economic 
reform in isolation from concomitant 
political and social reform, because 
the economy is a reflection of politics 
and the social environment. Politics 
and the economy naturally cast their 
shadow on the social sphere. Reform 
thus has three dimensions and is in-
divisible, although it may be put into 
practice gradually, in stages. Dealing 
decisively with the water issue is thus 
part of the overall reform process. For 
instance, in order to address institu-
tional shortcomings and inadequate 
water management, there needs to 
be political determination at the high-
est levels, and sufficient resources 
must be allocated to the reform 
national institutions, an endeavour 
which should be guided by the rel-
evant modern concepts. 
In this sense, the reform processes 
underway in the countries of the re-
gion can make a positive contribu-
tion to the solution of the water issue 
through the civil society organiza-
tions. These organizations, with their 
creative potential, can spearhead true 
changes in ways of thinking which 
may help to boost the water reserves 
available for future generations. 
AGFUND has worked on a num-
ber of water-related
programmes, what 
are the challenges you are
trying to overcome, 
in particular through your 
cooperation with UNESCO? 
The development and funding strat-
egy we are pursuing at AGFUND 
addresses health, education, institu-
tion-building and private develop-
ment. Water plays a crucial part 
in developing these four sectors. 
For instance, it would not be pos-
sible to imagine a comprehensive 
approach to tackle poverty without 
taking into account the complica-
tions arising from freshwater scar-
city in poor communities. By the 
same token, projects to develop 
the education sector cannot be 
separated from efforts to address 
the water problem. If this were not 
so, UNESCO would not be at the 
forefront of this problem. 
AGFUND has made great prog-
ress in its efforts to focus attention 
on the water problem, particularly 
in promulgating the concept of a 
“scientific and institutional culture”, 
which we encourage in order to 
tackle social, economic and po-
litical problems. An example is our 
cooperation with the World Bank 
which has led to the publication of 
the most recent scientific report on 
water in the region, “A water sector 
assessment report on the countries 
of the Cooperation Council of the 
Arab States of the Gulf”. The aver-
age annual per capita share of water 
in the Arab Gulf States lies between 
60 and 370 m3. What is even more 
worrying, according to the report, 
is that this figure is expected to 
be halved by 2030, in view of high 
growth rate of the region’s popula-
tion, which is expected to increase 
to 56 million.
Cooperation with UNESCO in the 
water sector is ongoing. This is an 
extension of our development rela-
tions with the Organization. Perhaps 
the clearest sign of this cooperation 
is the fact that UNESCO desig-
nated the President of AGFUND as 
Special Envoy for Water for 2003, 
in order to draw attention to water 
issues worldwide. 
We at AGFUND support all of 
UNESCO’s work on water issues. 
This is why we announced at the 
World Water Conference in Delft 
(Netherlands) the establishment of 
an AGFUND-UNESCO Fund to 
support UNESCO projects on wa-
ter issues. AGFUND donated $1 
million to the Fund. We have also 
called upon governments, organiza-
tions and individuals concerned with 
development issues to provide the 
necessary material support to sup-
port UNESCO’s work and activities.
We look forward to seeing – as we 
have repeatedly called for – the es-
tablishment of supreme water coun-
cils in the countries of the region, 
who are entrusted with periodic as-
sessment of the volume of reserves 
and of new resources, and monitor-
ing of existing resources. Such an 
authority would constitute a kind of 
national database bringing together 
all estimates of water resources in 
the country, and would be involved 
in the design of policies and various 
strategies for their implementation. 
We believe that UNESCO, with its 
expertise and know-how, may help 
in this regard. For its part, AGFUND 
will spare no effort to support the 
idea, whether through funding or 
Stripped water towers in the Gulf region  
providing precious water supply. 

“We look forward to seeing 
– as we have repeatedly 
called for – 
the establishment 
of supreme water councils 
in the countries of the region”.
