                  the confusion prevailing in particular in political discourse makes it possible 
                         to claim “the right to offend”1 or to ascribe different meanings to the same terms: 
                         freedom of expression, laicité, terror etc. Philosophy can provide the tools against 
            this misuse which has crucial results for practice, believes turkish philosopher ioanna Kuçuradi.  
ioanna Kuçuradi :  
A sisypheAn tAsk
  nterest in philosophy has increased 
all over the world in the past few 
decades. To deal with philosophy, 
especially with so-called applied 
philosophy and ethics, has become 
fashionable. Thus philosophy has 
moved out of its ivory tower into the 
open air. 
This development is double-edged. 
On the one hand it helps increase the 
number of people who try to reflect 
on what is going on around them, 
but on the other this popularization 
of philosophy, can be dangerous: any 
unscrutinized or confused thought 
dares present itself as philosophy. 
The main role of philosophy is, I think, 
to shed a strong light on what is go-
ing on in the world –a light that also 
makes it possible to see the ethical el-
ements inherent in all human relations 
and action– and thus help us better 
understand what has to be done 
–or what can be done– in a given 
concrete situation, so that human be-
ings can live with dignity. If philoso-
phy wishes to play this role, what are 
philosophers’ special tasks?
A mish mash of words
One of the issues that philosophers 
are expected to deal with is the 
conceptual confusion prevailing in 
all areas of human endeavour, but 
above all in political and semi-political 
discourse. This confusion makes it 
easier to use words expressing cer-
tain concepts and ideas, in order to 
hide interests. To fight this misuse of 
words we need clear concepts. 
It is widely assumed that, in the social 
and human sciences, there cannot 
be any “definitions accepted by ev-
erybody”. The lack of such definitions 
has crucial results for practice. For ex-
ample, it makes it possible to speak of 
“the right to offend”1 or to ascribe dif-
ferent meanings to the same terms ac-
cording to interests, as often happens 
at present with terms like freedom of 
expression, laicité, terror etc. Perhaps 
there are no epistemically justifiable 
definitions, but this does not mean 
that none can be made. And making 
them is a typical job for philosophers. 
Another term fraught with problems 
is “value”. People –including many 
philosophers– call value what they as-
sume to be “good”. In an age in which 
the search for meaning leads people 
to become suicide bombers, fully 
grasping the concept of value and that 
linked to ethical values is another task 
expected from philosophers.
An urgent task for philosophers 
at present is to explain the different 
kinds of norms. If we are aware of the 
Ioanna Kuçuradi (Turkey).

Conceptual confusion prevails.

epistemological differences among 
them, we can no longer put human 
rights norms and cultural norms in the 
same pot, and consequently claim 
that human rights are “European 
values” that are quite different from 
“Asian values”. 
Clear concepts  
and ethical values
To produce norms is not a task for 
philosophers. However, it is their task, 
and an inexhaustible task, indeed – 
to develop philosophical ethics, i.e. to 
put forth philosophical knowledge of 
the human ethical phenomenon. 
We can force people to behave 
according to norms, but we cannot 
force them to act ethically, i.e. to treat 
others as ends in themselves and not 
only as means to an end. To act ethi-
cally, individuals have to come to grips 
with themselves, through knowledge 
of philosophical ethical values. One 
of the aims of philosophical educa-
tion should be to help people do so. 
Philosophy needs to provide clear 
concepts and knowledge of ethical 
values for mankind, so that individuals 
become able to grasp the problems 
in what is going on in the world, re-
flect on the problems and, if they can 
manage it, take ethical decisions and 
act ethically. 
Dr Ioanna Kuçuradi, 
President of 
the Philosophical Society of Turkey.
Philosophers face a Sisyphean task.
