At Gayane Eliazarian’s fingertips, fine 
scissors or a brush remove time’s 
wrinkles from a page, bring out the 
carmine red of an illumination, or 
save a thousand-year-old text from 
obliteration. The workshop she runs 
restores an average of 20 to 30 man-
uscripts a year. The task is both titan-
ic and painstaking, in certain cases 
requiring several years. Ms Eliazarian 
is proud to show off a 19th century 
Russian book on her desk, sent to 
Erevan from St Petersburg for res-
toration. Proof of the Matenadaran’s 
expertise in this domain…And work 
on this kind of “recent” document is 
nothing compared to what will be 
needed for this 11th century Arme-
nian book of the gospels that Ms 
Eliazarian pulls out of the safe, where 
the manuscripts soon to be “resusci-
tated” are kept. 
When such efforts are deployed to 
preserve ancient texts, it’s best to go 
digital. “Whatever precautions are 
taken in terms of preserving manu-
scripts, you can never completely 
rule out the possibility that some will 
be physically destroyed by the pas-
sage of time. Digitizing is the surest 
means to safeguard these unique 
documents,” asserts Chouchanik 
Khatchadrian, a researcher at the 
Matenadaran.
Virtual Matenadaran: 
free admission
As part of the UNESCO program 
“Memory of the World”, a team led 
by Archak Banutchyan developed 
in 2000 and 2001 the Virtual Mat-
enadaran on the museum’s website. 
The result: the creation of a virtual 
gallery, containing more than 1000 
illuminations that can be contemplat-
ed at leisure on the site; more than 
5000 pages of manuscripts posted 
on line, with descriptions and trans-
lations from Armenian into French; 
a data base, to consult these pages 
or to search the Matenadaran col-
lection. “Our choice of documents 
to be digitized and put on line was 
guided by three criteria,” explains Mr 
Banutchyan. “First, we chose the 
pages we’d already published. Then 
our researchers identified excerpts 
that were the most representative 
of the manuscripts’ content in terms 
                       in the heart of erevan, capital of Armenia, the Matenadaran houses seventeen
                      thousand manuscripts and 30,000 documents, some dating back to antiquity. 
         texts on very varied subjects, written in Arabic, Persian, Syriac, greek, latin, Amharic,
               Japanese and certain indian languages, are stored together in this museum-library, 
                    created at the same time as the Armenian alphabet in 405. 
                            today the Matenadaran is entering the digital age thanks to UNeSCo.
of the subjects concerned, from the 
religious to the profane, from history 
to medicine. Finally we took into ac-
count the artistic qualities of the 
works – the aesthetic aspect of the 
the matenaDaran,  
from copyist monks  

manuscripts, the kind of illuminations, 
and so on.” 
This project is innovative because, 
as Mr Banutchayan points out, “in 
the late 1990s, we were only begin-
ning to be aware of the importance of 
internet resources and digitization in 
general.” Now we see that the project 
has made it possible not only for the 
Matenadaran scholars to make con-
tact with their foreign counterparts, 
but also to open the museum’s doors 
to amateurs from all over the world. 
A large number of the Matanadaran’s 
visitors these days first visited its 
website.
Copying by hand, 
digitizing: 
same reasoning
Digitizing represents also a significant 
advance compared to microfilm tech-
niques. “Putting manuscripts such 
as these on microfilm takes much 
longer than digital copying, which 
requires only one photo per page,” 
says Gevork Ter Vartanian, the Mat-
enadaran’s chief curator. It reduces 
the risk of damaging the manuscripts 
when they are handled – and these 
are unique documents, many of them 
Armenian translations of originals that 
have disappeared for ever. 
The same reasoning lies behind 
copying these manuscripts by hand, 
as people did 12 centuries ago, and 
digitizing them, Mr Banuchayan fur-
ther underlines. The idea is to pre-
serve a unique fragment of the world’s 
memory. Like the priest from the Lori 
region who saw how the Communist 
regime was starting to persecute reli-
gion and buried a splendid 15th cen-
tury New Testament, rescuing it from 
the threat of destruction. Removed 
from its underground hiding place 
only in the 1960s, it was brought 
in pitiful state to the Matedanaran, 
where it was restored.
Laurence Ritter, 
Armenian journalist 
and sociologist
