Lana Shaheen, was one of the Palestinian 
ten female television reporters who 
received UNESCO-supported training 
at the Aljazeera Centre in Qatar. Since 
her return, she has had to adjust the 
principles and skills she learnt to the 
harsh reality of a tense conflict area.
The caller on the telephone informed me that 
Rafah crossing point - the only gateway for people 
in the Gaza Strip to the outside world - would be 
operating the following day. I was invited to come 
to Jordan by Al Ghad TV, to attend a preparatory 
course leading up to my new job as their Gaza 
Strip reporter. This was very good news – so why 
did I react with worry and fear, instead of pleasure 
and joy? The explanation can perhaps serve to 
illustrate the working conditions of Palestinian 
journalists. 
Of course the idea of the new post was extremely 
encouraging. It meant more work experience to add 
to my CV and another source of income besides my 
main job with Palestine TV and other freelancing. 
But I was upset at the need to leave the Gaza Strip 
as a prerequisite. It wasn’t so much the difficulties 
and humiliation we face at the crossing. More sig-
nificant was the possibility of getting stranded on 
the other side, waiting for weeks or even months 
for a reopening so I could return home. 
I still remember a painful loss due to the irreg-
ular operation of Rafah crossing. I was eagerly 
looking forward to rejoining colleagues in Istanbul 

“Danger is part of the Palestinian 
journalist’s daily routine”

Today was a busy day because the students attending the University in Nablus were voting for student president

for the follow-up of a course on good 
governance and human rights, but I 
couldn’t go because the crossing was 
closed. Freedom of movement – essen-
tial to a journalist’s pursuit of a story – 
is a right not guaranteed to Palestinian 
media professionals.
The challenge of 
objectivity
It is not the only obstacle we face. 
Endeavoring to apply the valuable pro-
fessional instruction I received in my 
UNESCO-sponsored training course at 
Al-Jazeera Centre, I sometimes feel 
frustrated. Practicing objectivity in 
reporting, for instance, may not be 
harmful to journalists in the west, but 
it can be fatal in underdeveloped coun-
tries ruled by undemocratic regimes if it is seen as 
threatening to dominant interests. As a Palestin-
ian journalist, I have to stress balance and recon-
ciliation in order not to upset this or that party, 
remembering that almost every party has its own 
militia, and every prominent official his own armed 
guards. Insisting on objectivity can lead to being 
fired from one’s job, if not to detention, prison or 
death. 
On another level, I also can’t help noticing, 
when I’m doing a news report in the way I learned 
from my Al-Jazeera trainer, the big difference in 
quality between Al-Jazeera’s editing units or 
transmission equipment and that of Palestine TV. 
Our limited financial resources make it hard to 
upgrade or replace equipment – and we don’t have 
enough in the first place to cover the needs of 
news sections and programs production. The jour-
nalist has no choice but to make concessions on 
quality.
A dangerous profession
The fact that I am an eastern woman living in a 
Moslem community imposes extra restrictions. The 
Palestinian community still finds it improper for a 
woman to stay out late at night, though covering 
urgent news may require it. Modern casual clothes 
like jeans, so much easier for moving freely, can 
be considered as contravening religion, customs 
and traditions. Even within my family, I sometimes 
have difficulty in making my husband – an under-
standing, pragmatic partner, but an oriental 
Moslem man – accept that my work makes special 
demands. He is very sensitive to certain forms of 
conduct imposed by my job, like going out unex-
pectedly or traveling abroad. 
Overall, danger is the most distinguishing char-
acteristic of the Palestinian journalist’s daily rou-
tine. In such a volatile flashpoint as the Gaza 
Strip, most reporting tasks, unfortunately, are 
risky. If a journalist is sufficiently bold and dedi-
cated to cover the almost daily clashes - between 
different militias and armed groups, or attacks by 
Israeli occupation forces - he/she is certainly risk-
ing his/her life . To make the situation worse, no 
protection exists in the way of medical or social 
care for journalists who are injured. ■
Lana Shaheen in Gaza, Palestinian Territories
© Flickr/Arros Alforn
Hawara - check and commuting point south of Nablus, Palestinian 
Territories
