sharply, especially since 2002. 
Many countries in Africa and Asia 
have taken special measures to lift 
barriers to girls’ education through 
campaigns, better sanitation in 
schools, free learning materials 
and recruitment of more female 
teachers. Latin American countries 
have implemented effective subsidy 
programmes to offset the costs of 
schooling for the poorest house-
holds. 
Public expenditure on education 
increased by over 5% annually in 
sub-Saharan Africa and South and 
West Asia, the two regions farthest 
from achieving the EFA goals. Fi-
nally, aid commitments to basic 
education increased substantially 
between 2000 and 2004, from 
US$2.7 billion to US$5.1 billion, 
with low-income countries benefit-
ing most. 
Success creates  
its own problems 
As schools attract a larger and 
more diverse student population, 
they face pressure to offer more 
classrooms, trained teachers and 
textbooks. Across the world more 
than 18 million new teachers will 
be needed by 2015, with the 
greatest challenge in sub-Saharan 
Africa. Governments are taking 
stop-gapping measures to avoid a 
crisis by hiring teachers on short-
term contracts, but this is not a sus- 
tainable solution for improving quality. 
Adequate teacher training and pro-
fessional development are keys to 
better quality schools. 
he international community is set-
ting itself more and more targets 
in all domains: education, health, 
climate change etc. Global targets 
signal the collective recognition of a 
problem and the collective will to do 
something about it. This is why over 
160 governments committed to six 
goals in 2000, in Dakar (Senegal), 
aimed at assuring quality education 
for all by 2015. Two of the Education 
for All goals (EFA) - universal pri-
mary education and gender parity 
- are also Millennium Development 
Goals, a broad set of poverty reduc-
tion objectives endorsed by over 
200 countries. Targets are also poli- 
tical instruments that citizens can 
use to hold governments to account 
for their pledges. They are, howev-
er, of little significance if not regu-
larly monitored, with results used 
to inform and to influence policy. 
The EFA Global Monitoring Report, 
now in its sixth edition, serves this 
purpose for basic education.
Reasons  
for optimism
The latest Report asks a seem-
ingly straightforward question at 
the midway point to 2015: “Will 
we make it?” The scorecard leaves 
ample space for optimism because 
there is clearly a “Dakar effect” 
since 2000. Progress has been 
faster than in the 1990s on several 
fronts. In sub–Saharan Africa enrol-
ment in primary school increased 
by 36%, in South and West Asia 
by 22%. Governments in fourteen 
countries abolished primary school 
tuition fees, a measure that has fa-
voured access for the most disad-
vantaged children. The number of 
out of school children has dropped 
                                   in 2000, the international community committed to six goals aimed 
                     at assuring education for all by 2015. we are halfway there and we have good reason
                            to be optimistic. But much remains to be done in early childhood education, 
                                       gender parity and literacy.
Education for all by 2015: 
Will We make it?  
Warao woman at Robinson Mission, National Literacy campaign in Venezuela (2005).

Relatively low learning achieve-
ment in language and mathemat-
ics characterize many countries 
worldwide. Pupils need to spend 
more time learning in school, with 
enough trained teachers, textbooks 
and learning materials. They are 
most likely to acquire literacy skills 
if they start learning in their mother 
tongue. 
Inclusion stands among the great-
est challenges for education today. 
Special measures are now required 
to reach the 72 million children who 
are not in school. They may belong 
to indigenous groups, live in rural 
areas, urban slums or countries in 
conflict, suffer from a disability, or 
have lost one or both parents to 
HIV/AIDS. In all cases poverty is 
a major constraint. Only through 
policies that recognize that children 
from different backgrounds have 
different needs can education be-
come fairer for all. Small interven-
tions such as health and school 
feeding programmes can make a 
big difference to learning.
All the goals  
matter
Extending the reach of education 
now calls for a much bolder focus 
on all the EFA goals, with more fi-
nancial support from donors. Sev-
eral facts are cause for concern: 
early childhood education, gender 
parity and adult literacy. 
Children under age 6 in most de-
veloping regions lack access to care 
and education programmes. These 
have the proven potential to offset 
disadvantage, prepare children for 
primary school and increase their 
chances of doing well there once 
enrolled. The whole education sys-
tem benefits when children enjoy 
the right start. 
Girls: data available for the school 
year ending in 2005 confirms that 
the gender parity goal in primary 
and secondary education set for 
that year has been missed. Only 
three additional countries reached 
parity since 1999. Only about one-
third of countries reported parity in 
both primary and secondary edu-
cation in 2005. Disparities remain 
widespread in sub-Saharan Africa, 

the Arab States and South and 
West Asia, where they mainly fa-
vour boys. In several other regions, 
including Latin American and the 
Caribbean, girls are at an advan-
tage. 
Literacy: 774 million adults lack ba-
sic literacy skills. Although the adult 
literacy rate has increased in devel-
oping countries, the absolute num-
ber of illiterates has barely changed 
over the past two decades. Lack 
of literacy is synonymous with de-
privation, making individuals, and 
especially women, more vulnerable 
to ill-health, exclusion and exploita-
tion. It also heightens the chance 
that parents will not send their own-
children to school. Literacy must be 
promoted in school and in society 
Outside school activities. New Windsor, New Zealand.

at large through adult education 
programmes and access to the 
written word through appropriate 
media and publishing policies. 
To these difficulties is added the 
issue of international aid. In Dakar in 
2000, the international community 
pledged to support countries’ com-
mitment to education by providing 
higher levels of aid. Between 2000 
and 2004, aid for basic education 
increased by 90% but fell in 2005, 
sending out a negative message. 
Aid needs to increase sharply to 
meet the annual external financing 
need of US$11 billion. 
Education is everyone’s concern. 
Projections suggest that the EFA 
goals will not be reached on cur-
rent trends. The pace of change 
can be accelerated with much 
greater political will, resources and 
partnerships, both within countries 
and between them. As societies 
become more knowledge intensive, 
the education goals are more rele-
vant than ever. But policies must be 
grounded in a concern for inclusion 
and quality for all age groups. The 
targets set in 2000 act as a bea-
con, drawing countries forward to 
provide a way out of poverty and fulfil 
the right to education.  
Nicholas Burnett, 
Director of the 2008 EFA Global 
Monitoring Report, Assistant Director-
General for Education (UNESCO).
“The targets set in 2000 act as a beacon”. This drawing was part  
of an exhibit of children’s drawings from Cuba. UNESCO, 1970.
