A cation and Empowerment (FREE), 
a non-government organization set 
up in November 2005 as a private 
initiative to bring education to wom-
en of the oil-rich but restive Niger 
Delta region of Nigeria. 
Reading testimonies of ‘students’ 
is how Alaibe commences work in 
her Lagos office. “We tell them to 
write the letters in their own hand-
writing so that we can monitor their 
progress,” she says. But the bulk 
of her work is in the rural areas of 
Bayelsa, an area blessed with multi-
billion dollar oil reserves, but where, 
toothy grin appears on Alaere Alai-
be’s face as she reads another tes-
timony: “Thank you Madam for the 
wonderful opportunity to be back 
in school. Now I can write letters 
to my friends to invite them to my 
party.” This moving testimony was 
sent by Boma, a former student, to 
inform Alaibe of her progress since 
she was transferred to secondary 
school after spending more than a 
year at Okolobiri’s Adult Literacy 
Centre in Bayelsa State, Nigeria.
The centre is one of the 27 built by 
Alaibe’s Family Reorientation Edu-
ironically, stark poverty, infrastruc-
tural decay and environmental 
degradation have persisted due to 
years of neglect and corrupt misap-
propriation of funds.
Not-for-profit initiative
Education and health facilities are 
two major areas of need among the 
poor masses of the Delta. These are 
the key areas where Alaibe’s FREE 
have been providing support to the 
neglected people of the region in 
the last two years. “We do not op-
erate in the urban region. We go 
Welcoming Patti Boulaye at Alaere Alaibe’s health centre in Opokuma.
            The Nigerian NGo, Family re-orientation education and empowerment (Free) 
                     was awarded the uNeSCo Confucius Prize for literacy for creating a network 
                        of learning centres. it provides literacy skills to adults, 
                                especially to women and out-of-school girls.
a TesTimoNy of hope  
for a beleaGuered area 

deep into the rural areas of Bayelsa 
and Delta States, where access is 
difficult. There are many areas that 
you can’t reach except by spending 
three or four hours on a boat.” 
Poor road and water networks and 
difficult access in many villages and 
towns can frustrate development 
plans for the region. But they do not 
deter Alaibe, 43, whose background 
is in Bayelsa though she was born 
and educated in Lagos. “I come 
from a family of seven girls and two 
boys who were educated by a poor 
and illiterate mother in a poor area of 
Lagos. I thought if my siblings could 
take turns to help our mother sell fish 
in the Ajegunle boundary market, and 
all nine of us have university educa-
tion now, I think it is only fair to give 
back to this region,” Alaibe says. 
Three years before the inauguration 
of her NGO, she had been rousing 
rural Bayelsa women folk with a new 
not-for-profit project, FREE, which has 
become a useful platform for mass 
literacy programmes, especially for 
women who missed their first chance 
of getting educated. It was her per-
sonal initiative that started the project 
with the creation in 2002 of the first 
Pioneer Adult and Non-Formal Study 
Centre at Trofani. Another was soon 
created at Opokuma. The number of 
centres grew to 16, spanning 12 
communities, after FREE became 
fully operational in 2005. This re-
markable educational project now 
numbers 27 centres that provide lit-
eracy training to some 700 learners 
and it is spreading to more commu-
nities. 
In 2006, FREE built the Support 
for Africa Health Centre in Igbain-
wari Town, in Bayelsa State, in part-
nership with the UK-based Support 
for Africa Foundation of Nigerian-
born singer, Patti Boulaye. FREE 
also organizes education and 
health seminars and a large number 
of activities, including free eye tests 
and the distribution of spectacles 
to students. 
Old women with no education at 
all are a priority target group for 
FREE, which also accepts single 
mothers and youths with missed 
opportunities. “Our aim in this area 
is to design a curriculum that will be 
good enough to make them return 
to standard schools so that they 
can fit in with other students,” Alai-
be says. Lucky students in this cat-
egory enjoy free scholarships from 
a bank, negotiated by FREE. Close 
to 20% of FREE’s learners wind up 
returning to formal education.
Bridging the gap
This method is proving to be a re-
markable support system in Nigeria, 
where only 35% of the population 
is literate. Although public education 
is free at the primary and secondary 
levels, many years of infrastructural 
decay and official neglect have dras-
tically lowered standards, according 
to Universal Basic Education (UBE), 
a Federal Government of Nigeria 
organization. Literacy is even lower 
among girls and women, due to social 
and cultural prejudices, which still 
prioritize education opportunities for 
boys. Many families, unable to afford 

a TesTimoNy of hope for a beleaGuered area
Patti Boulaye (left) et Alaere Alaibe (right), during the inauguration of the Health Centre at Igbainwari.

school uniforms and meals, are pre-
vented from sending their wards to 
school. Only 15% are able to secure 
admissions to tertiary institutions 
every year in a country of 140 million 
people. 
FREE’s initiative bridges the gap 
between expensive private schools 
and failing public establishments, 
especially in the Niger Delta.
With support from the National 
Mass Education Commission 
and teachers who agree to take 
less than Nigeria’s minimum wage 
– of 5000 Niaras monthly (about 
US$40) –  FREE provides eve-
ning classes between 4 and 6 p.m., 
Monday to Friday, in all its centres. 
“It’s a volatile region and sometimes 
we are greeted with aggression. 
It takes a lot to convince them that 
we are not calling them out for po-
litical reasons,” says Alaibe, whose 
husband, Timi, heads the Niger Delta 
Development Commission (NDDC), 
the government agency mandated 
to bring improvement to the region. 
Her privileged position, coupled 
with people’s scepticism about 
fund-raising methods of NGOs, 
makes fund-raising difficult. But per-
sonal and family resources, corpo-
rate support and small contributions 
from community leaders have helped 
keep the project alive, and FREE 
operates with an annual budget 
of 20 million Niaras, approximately 
US$150,000. 
FREE’s message of hope con-
tinues through people like Regina 
Joyful, a community women’s leader 
in Igbogene. She used to thumb-
print to cash her money at banks. 
But after two years with FREE, she 
proudly announces that she can 
now append her signature on the 
cheque book.
Steve Ayorinde, 
Nigerian journalist
