Control of the media has always been a temptation. Repressive regimes
without a free press go to extreme lengths to silence journalists.  
New media are harder to control than traditional media, but so is the quality 
of the information they put out.
provide assistance to its Member 
States, who wish to adapt or trans-
form their media and press legisla-
tion to internationally-recognised 
principles, which are respectful of 
freedom of expression.” UNESCO 
also uses World Press Freedom 
Day (3 May) “to highlight free press 
issues and the importance of an in-
dependent media in the democratic 
process,” she adds. 
And a growing number of non-
governmental organisations, includ-
ing CPJ, Reporters Without Bor-
ders (RSF), Article 19, International 
Freedom of Expression Exchange 
(IFEX) and the International Fed-
eration of Journalists (IFJ), publish 
continually updated regional alerts 
on abuses of press freedom and 
put pressure on governments impli-
cated. 
“A key part of promoting freedom 
of expression and freedom of the 
press around the globe is to give 
it maximum visibility,” says Cou-
dray. And there are some surprises, 
demonstrating that Western de-
mocracies do not have monopoly 
on press freedom. The 2006 RSF 
Worldwide Press Freedom Index, 
which ranks 168 countries on a va-
riety of criteria, puts the USA in joint 
53rd place, alongside Botswana, 
Croatia and Tonga, and far below 
Costa Rica (29th place). The top 
15 places are all taken by countries 
in Northern Europe.
Rapidly-changing  
media
Meanwhile, the media are also 
changing rapidly, providing new 
opportunities to get around censor-
ship. Not only do most major news-
papers in developed countries have 
online editions, but some of the 
leading new players in online news 
production, like Yahoo! do not even 
have a print edition. And, most sig-
ccording to the latest (April 2007) 
Roy Morgan poll of Australians’ 
perception of professions, journal-
ism ranks near the bottom, with just 
12% of those polled feeling that 
newspaper reporters have ‘high’ or 
‘very high’ standards of ethics and 
honesty. This is just below Mem-
bers of Parliament (16%) but ahead 
of car salesmen (4%) and Estate 
Agents (9%). Yet one of the first ac-
tions following a political coup is for 
the new leaders to take control of 
the media, such is their perceived 
power to influence public opinion. 
And, over the past decade, accord-
ing to the International News Safety 
Institute (INSI), over 1,000 journal-
ists and support staff have been 
killed worldwide. 
Some of these deaths attract in-
ternational attention, like the mur-
der last October of Anna Politkovs-
kaya, special correspondent for the 
independent Moscow newspaper 
Novaya Gazeta and laureate for 
this year’s UNESCO/Guillermo 
Cano World Press Freedom Prize. 
But dozens of other, less celebrat-
ed journalists meet a similar fate 
each year. Prahlad Goala, of India’s 
Asomiya Khabar Assamese-lan-
guage daily, was rammed by a truck 
while riding his motorcycle and 
then stabbed to death. According 
to the Committee for the Protection 
of Journalists (CPJ), he had been 
reporting on corruption among lo-
cal forestry officials linked to timber 
smuggling. 
Journalists – like all other citizens 
- are protected under Article 19 of 
the 1948 Universal Declaration on 
Human Rights. But this right isn’t 
enforced. On the contrary, under 
repressive regimes, journalists are 
imprisoned for speaking out.
Promoting  
press freedom
“One of the tasks of UNESCO, 
through its Division for the Freedom 
of Expression and Peace”, says Syl-
vie Coudray, a Senior Programme 
Specialist at UNESCO, “is to 
MEDIA  
UNDER ATTACK

The APM (Association for Private Media) printing plant project,  
coordinated by UNESCO and supported by international donors.
Article 19 of the 1948 universal Declaration on Human Rights protects 
journalists. It states that “everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and 
expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interfer-
ence and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any 
media and regardless of frontiers.”

nificantly, the rise of blogs has given 
anyone with an internet connection 
the opportunity to contribute to 
news and information, creating a 
new corpus of ‘citizen journalists’. 
In March 2007, the blog search en-
gine, Technorati, registered over 70 
million blogs, with a new one cre-
ated every half second. 
The ‘blog’ - and associated citizen 
journalist - brings new problems in its 
wake. Repressive regimes increas-
ingly use sophisticated technology 
to jam offending websites and even 
force internet service providers to 
identify inconvenient bloggers, who 
may then be arrested. There is also 
the question of the reliability and 
impartiality of the information pub-
lished on blogs. “The phenomenon 
will place a heavy responsibility on 
professional journalists to maintain 
high standards of fact-checking, 
honesty and objectivity,” according 
to Timothy Balding, Chief Executive 
Officer of the World Association 
of Newspapers in his opening ad-
dress to a conference on New Me-
dia: The Press Freedom Dimension 
held at UNESCO Headquarters on 
15-16 February, 2007. 
The determination of people not 
just to read news, but to be read, 
has also had an impact on tradi-
tional news media, through their 
websites, where the public is en-
couraged to send email commen-
taries, SMS messages, photos and 
videos of breaking news from mo-
bile phones. Far from being a threat 
to the profession of journalism, says 
Rosenthal Calmon Alves, of the 
University of Texas at Austin (USA) 
speaking at the UNESCO confer-
ence, “it gives journalism a chance 
to survive, by becoming more inclu-
MEDIA UNDER ATTACK
Riots in Venezuela


sive, more connected with the com-
munities it serves.” 
Despite the new technology, old 
media, especially radio, are still 
powerful means of overcoming 
restrictive controls. SW Radio Af-
rica, broadcasting out of studios 
near London (UK) on short-wave, 
is aimed at listeners in Zimbabwe. 
“Hardly anyone has broadband in 
Zimbabwe,” according to Gerry 
Jackson, the station’s manager, 
speaking at the UNESCO confer-
ence, “and connections are ex-
tremely slow.” SW Radio Africa also 
uses SMS messages – where the 
challenge is to compress the news 
into 160 characters – and the inter-
net. “The moral to the story,” says 
Jackson, “is try absolutely every-
thing you can to circumvent the 
censors, and don’t give up.”
	

	
