1990 – The Education for All (EFA) 
campaign is launched in Jomtien 
(Thailand). The international commu-
nity pledges to provide quality basic 
education to all children, youths and 
adults. 
2000 – In Dakar, Senegal, more than 
160 governments set six goals to be 
reached no later than 2015. The goals 
concern early childhood education, 
primary school, life skills, adult literacy, 
gender parity and quality education. 
2007 – “We are halfway there and we 
have good reason to be optimistic,” 
says, in this issue of the UNESCO 
Courier, Nicholas Burnett, UNESCO 
Assistant Director-General for Educa-
tion and director of the just-launched 
2008 EFA Global Monitoring Report. 
Troublesome areas remain nonethe-
less, notably early childhood educa-
tion, gender parity and adult literacy. 
One reason for delays is the per-
ception of education as an opportu-
nity rather than a right, says Jan de 
Groof, professor of education law 
at the College of Europe in Brug-
es. “When the right to education is 
flouted, the courts can and must in-
tervene,” he asserts, citing the exam-
Editorial 
year of school can be stigmatized for 
life. For that reason the country, 30% 
of whose 13 million inhabitants lack 
literacy skills, launched the campaign 
“Save the first year”. 
And to return to the most delicate as-
pects of Education for All, David Archer, 
from the NGO Action-Aid, explains 
why illiteracy costs more than literacy. 
Sylvie Cromer, from Lille 2 University, 
demonstrates that gender inequali-
ties are visible even in mathematics 
textbooks. Indian Journalist Shiraz 
Sidhva tells the story of working 
children in Bangladesh to whom the 
state is giving the opportunity to suc-
ceed. Ann Therese Ndong-Jatta, Direc-
tor of Basic Education at UNESCO, 
talks about the Organization’s activities 
on behalf of early childhood, notably in 
developing countries where preschool 
education remains the privilege of the 
wealthier families. 
The features of this issue of the 
UNESCO Courier offer a photo report 
on education for girls in Yemen, a coun-
try making considerable effort to close 
the gender gap in schools; and a brief 
summary of the six Dakar goals. 
Jasmina Šopova
ple of Roma children who just won 
their appeal at the European Court of 
Human Rights. 
Schools with instruction entirely 
in Romani would represent a form 
of segregation, says Roma Michaela 
Zatreanu, education expert (Roma-
nia) who advocates multicultural edu-
cation. 
Meanwhile Adama Samassekou 
from Mali, president of the African 
Academy of Languages, is fighting 
much more fiercely for the integration 
of mother languages at school. “We 
need a school that is attached to soci-
ety, not torn from it,” he declares. 
But Africa has other problems in 
education. In Cameroon, for instance, 
contract teachers comprise 53% of 
the labor force at primary level. They 
have as many responsibilities and far 
fewer rights than their civil service 
counterparts. How then can they pro-
vide quality education? Lawyer-teach-
er Vincent Bikono tells his story. 
On the other side of the Atlantic, 
Ecuador wants to set the example 
by greatly increasing its investment in 
education. Minister of Education Raúl 
Vallejo Corral presents an overview of 
the reforms. 
Also in Latin America, Guatemala 
thinks that children who fail their first 
UNESCO campaign «Send my friend to school» (2005). Work by Pepe Agost (Spain).
