Like about half of her friends at the time, molecular 
biologist, Claire Wyman, met her husband, Roland 
Kanaar, when they were graduate students at the 
University of California, Berkeley (USA). The crunch 
came when they both started to look for permanent 
jobs. “We were open to all sorts of options in terms 
of jobs and where we might end up,” she says. But, 
as Roland was slightly ahead of Claire in his career at 
the time, “he was offered three pretty good posi-
tions and I didn’t even get an interview.” Claire did 
not want to live apart from her husband, or to take a 
teaching job – alternatives that face many young, 
dual-career scientists. So the couple decided to take 
up one of the offers, and move to the Netherlands, 
where Roland was born. 
At Erasmus University, Claire could work part-
time, which, she says, “was virtually unheard of in 
universities in the USA at the time.” They found the 
flexibility at Erasmus enabled Claire to take time 
off to have children, while remaining active in her 
field, supported by grants. “I was finally offered an 
associate professor position in the same depart-
ment as my husband,” she says. “We ended up work-
ing on the same topic and now have overlapping 
research groups.” In the USA, she adds, “it would 
have been much more difficult to work part time 
when my children were small - and to have main-
tained the respect of my colleagues while doing 
that.”
It’s even harder for physicists
The ‘dual-career’ problem is at its most acute in phys-
ics, where the gender gap is at its widest. Out of 
roughly 40,000 members of the American Physical 
Society, only about 2,400 (6%) are women. And, 
according to a major survey of women physicists car-
ried out in 1998 by Laurie McNeil of the University of 
North Carolina and Marc Sher of the College of Wil-
liam and Mary, about 68% are married to scientists, 
half of them physicists. Even though a smaller pro-
portion (17%) of male physicists marry scientists, 
the study suggests “it is increasingly likely that the 
top candidate in a search (for a job) will have a 
spouse who is also seeking professional employ-
ment.” In most cases, if there is no opening for the 
spouse, he or she is expected to accept a part-time, 
or less secure job, dependent on grant funding. And, 
according to the survey, “the lower-level offer goes 
more commonly to the female member of the couple.” 
This, obviously, perpetuates the scarcity of women in 
high-level physics research. 
According to the survey, some university faculties 
in the USA find dual-career couples an awkward com-
plication, which they would rather avoid. “I went to 
a number of job interviews,” says geographer, Ruther-
ford Platt, of Gettysburg College, “and some were 
quite unprofessional. I had people pull me aside and 
ask me about my spouse, whether she was in academia 
and looking for a job as well.” But, as more women 
compete for permanent positions in science faculties 
in the USA, higher education institutions are under 
pressure to become more flexible.
© Micheline Pelletier/Gamma



The trailing spouse syndrome
Women scientists, especially physicists, are likely to marry other scientists – which can 
create problems if both partners look for jobs at the same institution.

Creative solutions
One solution, originally favored by smaller teaching 
universities, like Gettysburg, and slowly catching on 
in major research institutions, is to split a tenured 
position into two, part-time posts. This is particu-
larly attractive to young academics looking for their 
first tenured job. 
“We have a joint appointment now,” says Ruther-
ford Platt. “My wife and I are considered 1.5 people. 
I’ve maintained my full-time position and Monica has 
a part-time, tenure-track position. She’s a permanent 
part of the faculty and has half of the teaching obli-
gations. We have a small child and that works well 
for us. It would have been harder to negotiate two 
full-time positions. This is better for us, at our point 
in our life.” 
Rutherford Platt acknowledges that they were 
fortunate. “We both fit in the same department,” he 
says, “but our expertise is different. We compliment 
each other. If two people are in different depart-
ments, one of the departments may have no incen-
tive to make it work for the other person.” 
Increasingly, says Claire Wyman, the male partner 
may well be the ‘trailing spouse’, and even the big 
research universities in the USA are willing to find a 
solution, especially for more senior positions. “There 
are many more highly talented and desirable female 
scientists now,” she says, “and I see universities 
accommodating them. I don’t think it’s because they 
are enlightened. If you want that person to come, 
you have to accommodate what they want. If what 
they want is a building named after them, then you 
do that. If they want a position for their partner, 
maybe you do that. It can be a matter of market 
forces. And women are more interested in demanding 
an appointment for their partner than a building 
named after them.” ■
Peter Coles in London, United Kingdom
