   The Tanzanian Children’s book Project has just been awarded 
        the uNeSCo king Sejong literacy Prize for its work promoting
              the love of books among children and adults. This work has proved very positive 
                         in helping the young perform at school, and adults in the community.
The loNG-lasTiNG memory  
of sTorybooks
Kiswahili, which is easier to under-
stand than English.”
Social change
The Children’s Book Project, a non-
governmental organization, was 
launched in 1991 by CODE, a 
Canadian charitable organization, 
as a measure to alleviate the acute 
shortage of books in Tanzania, par-
ticularly children’s books. “Before 
CBP, there was a serious lack of 
reading books in schools in the 
country, because the government 
monopolized publishing houses 
[…] There was a need for interven-
tion; CBP intervened,” Ms Dumea 
says. The NGO’s aim was to de-
velop a strong reading culture, sus-
tained by effective reading skills 
and the provision of quality reading 
materials. 
CBP collaborates with publish-
ers to produce its own selection of 
children’s books in Kiswahili. It then 
purchases 3000 of the 5000 cop-
ies of each title for free distribution. 
“Our objective is to develop and 
promote excellent quality and cul-
turally suitable books in Kiswahili 
and make these materials accessi-
ble,” CBP’s Marcus Mbigili says. To 
date, 237 titles have been distribut-
ed to 3642 schools in the country, 
and the demand for CBP-trained 
writers has increased in Tanzania, 
Kenya and Uganda. So far, 356 
writers, 191 of them women, have 
been trained in CBP workshops. 
“In general, women are sensitive 
writers; some of them draw on 
their own experiences. They advo-
cate social change in their writing. 
For example, women from Zanzibar 
aasai women were inspired by 
a visit to Children’s Book Project 
(CBP) libraries in the Morogoro 
area to build a temporary classroom 
for their children, hire a teacher and 
ask the District Education Officer 
(DEO) for books. The DEO turned 
to the CBP, which sent the newly 
established school reading mate-
rials and included it in its reading 
programme. 
“The Maasai women’s reason for 
starting the school was to empower 
their children for them to gain ac-
cess to information, a stronger 
voice in the household and help 
their mothers in managing finances,” 
the Project’s Secretary, Pili Dumea 
explains. 
And they were right: schools join-
ing CBP improve. Mwajuma Tyeah, 
headmistress of Mwendapole pri-
mary school (Kibaha district, Coast 
Region), a school with 876 pupils 
and only seven classes, confirms 
this: “Since we became part of the 
programme in 1998, the school has 
significantly improved. Performance 
is better and the pupils and teach-
ers are more skilled. For the last 
three years, all our pupils who sat 
for the standard national examina-
tion passed to the next level, com-
pared to about five years ago, when 
only 24% to 25% passed. We are 
also among the top three schools in 
the district.” 
Sofia Beda, an 11-year-old pupil 
at the school, agrees: “Pupils from 
neighbouring schools come here 
and that is a good sign, it means we 
are better! I have read most of the 
books in the school library, which 
helped me learn about different 
topics through interesting stories 
told in our own national language, 
Pupils reading the story of Tabu, a boy from the village of Taire.

prefer writing on gender inequality,” 
Ms Dumea comments. 
CBP also organizes training work-
shops for illustrators, publishers 
and printers. As the demands in 
health, environment, educational 
and human rights practices evolve, 
the programme teaches new cre-
ative strategies and techniques in 
presenting relevant information and 
encourages indigenous creation. 
In 1997, the NGO initiated a read-
ership programme. The programme 
develops primary school teachers’ 
skills in teaching reading and writing 
based on progressive child-centred 
methodologies. “We have competi-
tions, reading tents and book do-
nations, all as a part of motivating 
children and adults to read books,” 
Ms Dumea explains.
The remotest areas
Today, the Children’s Book Project 
has established 96 school libraries 
among 99 programme schools. Al-
though these libraries were meant 
for students and teachers, commu-
nity members increasingly visit them: 
“Data from 11 districts showed that 
more than 9000 borrowers in the 
programme school libraries were 
adults. And last year, we awarded 
Zena Muuigi, a woman from Bingwi 
village in the Coast region, for hav-
ing read 100 titles in a year,” CBP 
Assistant Monitoring Coordinator, 
Mary Kihampa, says. 
The Project is bringing about social 
change and adults are now benefit-
ing from this project that was start-
ed to benefit their children. “In rural 
areas, school libraries are centres 
for recreation and education, where 
village meetings and discussions 
on various issues are conducted. 
Therefore, adults get the opportuni-
ty to see the books and read them, 
discuss and apply the skills in their 
daily life,” Ms Dumea says, and, she 
adds, “They inspire their friends to 
attend literacy classes. Frequent 
adult readers have gained self es-
teem and personal empowerment. 
Women have gained confidence in 
speaking during village meetings 
and running for village positions.” 
CBP wishes to expand, but lacks 
resources to do so. Ms Dumea 
urges: “We would like to go to all 
schools, especially those in the re-
motest of areas, but we lack suffi-
cient resources. We need the gov-
ernment’s support.” 
CBP spends just over US$ 
325,000 a year and is funded by 
various international and national 
governmental and non-governmen-
tal donors from Europe and North 
America. “Our strategies can be 
adopted in schools to improve the 
learning situation, build a reading 
culture in both children and adults 
which, in the long run, will lead to 
sustainable development,” says Ms 
Dumea, concluding: “There is a 
need to rekindle the desire to read 
amongst society at large, for, be-
yond the textbooks, it is the memory 
of the story books that lasts longest 
in our minds.”
Gladys fahari, 
Tanzanian journalist

A few publications from the Children’s Book Project.
The loNG-lasTiNG memory of sTorybooks
At the Mwendapole primary school, aside from the school’s main library, 
every class has a mini-library of its own.
