Even if they are far from reaching parity 
with their males colleagues, more females 
than ever are researchers. But they remain 
largely absent from the highest rungs of the 
profession and must often make difficult 
choices between professional career and 
private life.
When nuclear physicist, Fay Ajzenberg-Selove, was a 
post-doctoral researcher at Princeton University 
(USA) in the 1950s, she had to sneak into the parti-
cle accelerator building at night to work – it was out 
of bounds to women. While this could not happen 
today, a flurry of recent reports shows that women 
scientists are still often at a significant disadvan-
tage compared to their male colleagues, especially as 
their careers advance. 
Data for 2004 just published by the European Com-
mission show that women make up just 29% of those 
employed as scientists and engineers in the European 
Union – even fewer (18%) in the business and enter-
prise sector. And it is precisely this sector that is 
expected to provide the resources for the EU to meet 
its Lisbon Strategy target of 3% of GDP for research 
by 2010. According to a 2006 EC publication, “this is 
likely to involve the creation of some 700,000 new 
research-related jobs by 2010 – which Europe will 
have trouble filling as long as half of its population 
remain sidelined in the S&T field.” 
A similar picture emerges globally. According to 
UNESCO’s Institute for Statistics (UIS) women make 
up less than 30 percent of researchers in 34 out of 89 
countries surveyed, while only 17 – 18% of countries 
have gender parity in science and technology research 
jobs. The picture changes slightly according to disci-
pline, with women even forming the majority of 
researchers in life sciences and medicine. But, accord-
ing to one observer in the USA, women are “rare as 
hens teeth” in mathematics and physics. A 1999 study 
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 
revealed only 15 tenured women faculty in the School 
of Science, compared to 194 men. The figure had 
scarcely changed in the previous two decades, 
although swift policy changes in the light of the 
report have gone some way to improve the 
inequality.
For Renée Clair, UNESCO Executive Secretary of 
the L’Oréal-UNESCO For Women in Science programme, 
the 1995 World Conference on Women in Beijing 
(China) marked a turning point in awareness of this 
gender bias in science. “Before that, the issue didn’t 
even arise,” she says, blaming ingrained and largely 
unconscious stereotypes that promote the idea that 
women “aren’t made to do science.” As recently as 
January 2005, the president of Harvard University, 
Lawrence H. Summers sparked a 
furor by arguing that innate dif-
ferences explain why fewer women 
succeed in maths and science 
careers, forcing his resigna-
tion. Findings in psychol-
ogy and neuroscience 
tends to suggest that 
social stereotypes are 
the most potent neg-
ative influence for 
girls, although males 
Rare as hens’ teeth?
© Micheline Pelletier/Gamma
© UNESCO/Michel Ravassard
Renée Clair, UNESCO 
Executive Secretary of the 
L’Oréal-UNESCO For Women 
in Science programme 4

One of the difficulties women face is whether to 
interrupt their career to have children, often just 
when they also need to intensify their research 
output to get ahead. In the Athena survey, more 
women (32%) than men (4%) had taken career breaks. 
And a higher proportion of women (29%) than men 
(14%) reported difficulties in returning to work. For 
women, the difficulties were mainly centred on find-
ing work, flexible hours of work and childcare, as 
well as the negative attitude of colleagues and man-
agers. Not surprisingly, more women than men move 
‘sideways’ into managerial posts and away from 
research. 
Projects like Athena have already begun to bear 
fruit, with research funding bodies drawing up ‘best 
practice’ guidelines for equal opportunities, with 
incentives for research institutes that introduce 
them. Meanwhile, other obstacles are beginning to 
emerge. In countries like India, with its technology 
boom, young women are preferring to go for highly-
paid jobs in information technology – ironically once 
an all-male preserve, but increasingly dominated by 
women. ■
Peter Coles in London, United Kingdom
and females may differ in the strategies they use to 
solve the kinds of problems encountered in scientific 
research. 
One way to redress the imbalance, says Renée 
Clair, is to “change the image of science and the 
image of women in science,” by providing attractive 
role models. After all, of the 513 Nobel Prizes for 
physics, chemistry and physiology or medicine 
awarded since 1901, only 12 have gone to women - 
two of them to the same person, Marie Curie. This, 
explains Renée Clair, is one function of the L’Oréal-
UNESCO For Women in Science prizes awarded each 
year since 2000 to outstanding women scientists 
from five continents. The 2006 awards will be 
announced in Paris on XX February. 
Boosting the number of female undergraduates 
studying science is one way towards parity in employ-
ment in scientific research, especially in countries 
where girls may be denied access to even basic edu-
cation. “I didn’t even know that one could do research 
in mathematics as a career,” says Ramdorai Sujatha, 
winner of the 2006 Ramanujan prize for her work in 
mathematics at the Tata Institute of Fundamental 
Research in India. “There was absolutely no informa-
tion dissemination.”
But recent evidence suggests that other forms of 
discrimination emerge during the career of a woman 
scientist, effectively barring them from the top jobs 
– what has come to be known as the ‘leaky pipeline’. 
A 2004 survey carried out by the Athena Project, a 
consortium of UK research funding bodies, universi-
ties and government science departments launched 
in 1999, found little evidence for discrimination at 
the bottom of the career ladder. Indeed, women were 
slightly more likely than men to succeed in their first 
application for a lectureship post. But women were 
significantly under-represented at senior levels and, 
in the older age groups, were more likely to be on 
short-term contracts. 
© Peter Coles
23-year-old Hansi Devi repairs a solar lantern at the 
Barefoot College in Tilonia, Rajasthan (India) after a 6-
month training course
