More than 15,000 documents 
have been exhumed and  
catalogued in timbuktu thanks to 
UNeSCo. the project, funded by 
the government of luxembourg, 
has notably given support to the 
Ahmed baba documentation and 
research Centre for its efforts  
in restoration, conservation,  
commercialization and  
publication of the contents  
of the manuscripts.
T students enrolled at the University of 
Sankore camp in front of the ulemas 
reputed to be exceptionally erudite. 
In this “city of 333 saints”, the arrival 
of a number of Arab-Berber intel-
lectuals, fleeing Muslim Andalusia 
invaded by Christians, determines, 
for one, instruction of the Arabic lan-
guage and Islamic science. In 1512, 
Leo Africanus reports that higher 
profits can be made there from sell-
ing books than from any other mer-
chandise – proving the value of the 
written word. 
Today some of these manuscript 
documents have vital political sig-
nificance, as for instance the Tarikh 
el Sudan that traces the succes-
sion of the chiefs of Timbuktu in the 
15th century, or the Tarikh el Fetash, 
which does the same for medieval 
Sudan. The existence of this heri-
timbuKtu manuscripts: 
AfricA’s written history 
unveiled
he key to a sizeable portion of Sa-
helian Africa’s written memory is 
buried in Timbuktu, city perched on 
the crest of the Niger River in Mali. 
There, in the 15th century, at the 
height of the gold and salt trade, 
merchants and scholars are thick 
as thieves and the 25,000 African 
tage clearly refutes the stereotype 
that characterizes Africa as a conti-
nent of exclusively oral tradition.
Long forsaken  
treasures
But do the indigenous populations 
of Mali know that they possess, un-
der their feet or in their attics, hun-
dreds of thousands of vital manu-
scripts dating from the 13th to the 
19th century? Nothing is less cer-
tain. Because of a sanctified notion 
of African oral tradition, an absence 
of translation due to lack of funds 
(barely 1% of texts are translated 
into classical Arabic, French or Eng-
lish) and a certain reserve about 
rummaging through the memory of 
Africa, however honourable, gov-
                                 Some two hundred thousand ancient manuscripts that were disintegrating slowly 
                                           but surely in libraries, cellars and attics in timbuktu (Mali), today are 
                                systematically inventoried, preserved and digitized. these priceless treasures, 
                                    the oldest dating back to the 13th century, are contributing to the rehabilitation 
                                               of Africa’s written history.
A manuscript from Timbuktu (Mali).

ernment authorities are hesitant to 
exhume what resembles a political 
golden age. 
Let us judge for ourselves: trea-
tises on good governance, texts 
on the harmful effects of tobacco, 
pharmacopeial synopses…works 
on law (particularly on divorce and 
the status of divorced women), the-
ology, grammar and mathematics 
sit in dusty heaps in private librar-
ies or at the Ahmed Baba Docu-
mentation and Research Centre in 
Timbuktu. Written commentaries by 
the sages of Cordoba, Baghdad or 
Djenne can still be seen there. On 
screen-fronted shelves, legal acts 
regulating the lives of Jews and 
apostate Christians testify to the in-
tense commercial activity of the era. 
Parchments concerning selling and 
freeing slaves, the market prices of 
salt, spices, gold and feathers are 
propped against correspondence 
between sovereigns from both sides 
of the Sahara, illustrated with illumi-
nations in gold. 
All this is frightening. It is intimidat-
ing, to the point that even scientists 
are troubled by so much available 
knowledge. George Bohas, profes-
sor of Arabic at the Ecole normale 
supérieure in Lyon and an initiator of 
the Vecmas programme (evaluation 
and critical editing of sub-Saharan 
Arabic manuscripts) notes, “We 
estimate the body of existing manu-
scripts at 180,000, of which 25% 
have been inventoried, less than 
10% catalogued, and 40% are still 
timbuKtu manuscripts: africa’s written history unveileD

timbuKtu manuscripts: africa’s written history unveileD
in wooden or iron containers!” Not 
counting all the manuscripts stashed 
in the homes of families, who don’t 
want to give them up, either out of 
ignorance or for sordid profiteering 
reasons.
An African panorama 
rises to the surface  
of history
To pore over these manuscripts that 
have been successfully saved from 
insects and sand dust is a boon for 
the eyes as well as the spirit. The 
ensemble, generally inscribed on 
paper from the Orient (later from 
Italy) but also on sheepskin, bark 
or the scapula of a camel, is under-
lined, explained and annotated in 
the margin or on the colophon, final 
page of a book or at the end of a 
papyrus scroll where the copyist 
notes his name and the date he fin-
ished his work. Indirectly, we learn of 
an earthquake or violent brawl that 
perturbed the writing. Thanks to a 
few isolated modern translators, an 
entire African panorama rises again 
to the surface of history. The texts 
are decidedly not homogeneous, 
for good reason: though the over-
whelming bulk is written in Arabic, 
copyists expressed themselves ac-
cording to their origins – Tamashek, 
Hausa, Fula, but also Songhai, Diou-
la, Soninke or Wolof – using a com-
mon calligraphic base inspired from 
Maghribi, a cursive Arabic script, the 
form of which made it possible to 
use less paper. 
Now, how can we imagine this 
fabulous historical exploration with-
out the direct participation of local 
inhabitants, African scientists and 
national governments? This sums 
up the political challenge attached 
to the Timbuktu manuscripts, and 
beyond them, to the definitive reha-
bilitation of Africa’s written history. 
Jean Michel Djian, 
french journalist 
and Associate Professor, 
University of Paris 8
