Inhabitants of the Caribbean 
on the same wavelength
From Haiti to Jamaica, an active network of local radio stations are able to share their 
experiences and pool resources across marine and linguistic divides on an internet portal.
© Sonia Mills
The Hamalali Garinagu Studio aims to preserve and 
promote the Garifuna language
It’s a good idea whose time has been a long time a-
coming…the idea that if Caribbean people could 
share the challenges and problems and solutions of 
their communities, ‘live and direct’ through a radio 
link, community empowerment and Caribbean iden-
tity could spread like a bushfire. 
UNESCO’s effort to support community broadcast-
ing in developing countries started decades ago, but 
it is in the last ten years that the rapid development 
and penetration of the internet and associated tech-
nology has made collaboration and exchange not 
only possible but evident. In the last three years in 
the Caribbean the spread of internet usage, like cell 
phones, has not been just a phenomenon, it has also 
been a demonstration that poor and rich alike, the 
now generations, want access to technology that will 
allow them to play and to communicate. 
The technology has raced ahead but the hard chal-
lenge to organizations, governmental and non-gov-
ernmental, and to funding agencies, remains the 
same: how to make communication projects sustaina-
ble. In all instances, the challenge is about the sus-
tainability of human as well as technological and 
economic resources.
Increasing Collaboration across 
the Caribbean
UNESCO/International Programme for the Develop-
ment of Communication (IPDC) has led the effort 
and sustained support for intensified collaboration 
and exchange between some pretty far-flung and 4

remote communities across the Caribbean region. 
Training has been delivered to radio stations in 
Guyana, Suriname, Jamaica, Dominica, Belize, Cuba, 
and Haiti in various aspects of Multi Media Centre 
operation and management. Given the community 
volunteer character of many of these organizations, 
some of the community multimedia centres (CMCs) 
cum radio stations have had mixed fortunes and 
will predictably continue to have their ups and 
downs. 
Delivering training at the actual locations of 
community radio stations on a rotating basis has 
encouraged the sharing of ideas and networking 
among different radio stations and helped to grow 
the feeling of community and comradeship. 
In October 2005, at a meeting in Suriname, the 
decision was taken to develop a regional network 
of CMCs. This decision set the stage for the final 
step towards the creation of the long-dreamed-of 
network. To help the process along, UNESCO has 
provided funding for the creation of an internet 
radio portal which will allow all interested CMCs to 
webcast through the Multimedia for Caribbean Com-
munities (MCCLinks) website. 
According to Alton Grizzle, the UNESCO Officer 
currently responsible for this development: “The cre-
ation of the Caribbean Internet Radio Portal will 
facilitate increased local content development and 
sharing, expand the reach of community media and 
provide a common space for self-expression and 
creativity.” 
In the first stage the three or four stations with 
greatest capacity will stream their broadcasts live. 
Until the other stations can do the same, they will 
provide content by e-mail or by regular mail to ROOTS 
FM, which is responsible for receiving and scheduling 
content. The Regional Radio Project (RRP) is working 
with several Caribbean community stations to 
strengthen their capacity to produce and deliver 
radio programmes. The technical management of the 
portal is provided by the Container Project, a quasi-
CMC located in rural Jamaica which has also bene-
fited from UNESCO/IPDC support.
Results that make a difference
Mervin Jarman, the founding manager of the Con-
tainer Project gives an example of the sort of mate-
rial that community radios can share: “We’ve got 
alot of taped programmes from Dominica – cameos 
about the effect of Hurricane Ivan particularly on 
the lives of young people – I found them totally riv-
eting. There could be devastated young people right 
here in my community. Listening to them, I FELT 
them” 
“I am very grateful to be a part of bringing this 
idea to fruition,” says Rosamond Brown of ROOTS FM. 
“Yes, it’s been a long time coming, and the one dis-
appointing fact is that so many communities are still 
so remote that accessibility will remain a challenge.” 
A challenge that he hopes to overcome with time. 
The Caribbean Internet Radio Portal is a long-
awaited opportunity for people across the Caribbean 
to hear the voices of their brothers and sisters telling 
their own stories and concerns and searching for 
answers together. ■
Sonia Mills in Kingston, Jamaica
