                       Education should enable people to take root in their culture as well as open 
           them up to other cultures. africa needs schooling that integrates its languages, 
                    history and social values, according to adama Samassekou, 
                                president of the african academy of languages (acalan).
for multilingual Education  
in africa
Multilingual education based on the mother 
language must be developped.
This article is taken from Adama Samassekou’s talk at the session of “21st Century Dialogues” 
held at UNESCO on 13 September 2007 on the topic “How to make education fairer?”
If education were a consumer 
product, we would make it fairer by 
distributing it equitably among all 
the peoples of the world, so that no 
one would be lacking. But if educa-
tion is a process of conditioning, 
with the aim of shaping children’s 
personalities so that as adults they 
can find their place in the society 
in which they live, then the educa-
tional project is linked to a societal 
project. 
In that case, would it be fairer for 
everybody to practice the same 
education, at the risk of falling into 
global cultural leveling? Isn’t the di-
versity of educational methods the 
best guarantee of the cultural diver-
sity we are so fiercely safeguarding 
these days? From this standpoint, 
to increase fairness in education, 
don’t we have to make sure that 
all the world’s peoples have the 
means to create their own educa-

tional systems? And shouldn’t we 
think about taking concerted action 
to make education fairer, by making 
access to educational means more 
equitable?
Universal knowledge 
and endogenous 
knowledge
The need to preserve each peo-
ple’s identity and singularity 
doesn’t exclude the need for com-
munication and exchange with the 
rest of the world. If, in every corner 
of the globe, we succeed in blend-
ing harmoniously a certain quan-
tity of universal knowledge and a 
certain quantity of endogenous 
knowledge, this education enables 
humans to take root in their local 
cultures and also to become part of 
an international culture. 
Maybe it’s a dream, but it would 
be good to remember the greatest 

projects of humanity were, for a 
long time, dreams. Let us recall the 
wise words of Brazilian Don Helder 
Camara: When you dream alone, 
it’s just a dream; but when several 
people have the same dream, it’s al-
ready the beginning of reality. 
In my part of the world, Africa, 
the situation is sadly only too well-
known. Who has described it bet-
ter than the author of “Educate or 
Perish”, the late Professor Ki-Zerbo 
(Burkina Faso), with his highlighting 
of what prevails on our continent: 
a culturally integrating education, 
which for decades has not respected 
the right of millions of pupils to 
have an identity; education that im-
poverishes, too, because it is dis-
connected from production; and 
finally a socially violent education, 
because it fosters the social ex-
clusion of the less-privileged, who 
are handicapped by the preceding 
anomalies. 
We need a school that is attached 
to society, not torn from it. A school 
that would give real actors back 
to society, and not victims of the 
cognitive violence represented 
by the repression of the mother 
language. 
I am convinced that if we want to 
achieve education that is fairer in 
Africa, we must develop a multilin-
gual education based on the mother 
language, an education in the African 
languages of the learner, in partner-
ship with the European and inter-
national languages serving today 
as official languages in the greater 
majority of African states; an 
education that builds bridges 
between early schooling in the 
formal sector and literacy training 
for those who are past the age of 
starting school.
Education and culture 
are indivisible
Most African countries continue to 
endure an unacceptable situation: 
as soon as they start school, chil-
dren start learning in a language they 
don’t speak at home. Introducing 
African languages in the African 
school systems – as a vector of learn-
ing and as a subject of study – is one 
of the goals of the African Academy 
of Languages, which I head. We 
decided to undertake a genuine re-
habilitation process for education at 
continent level, by reestablishing the 
link between education and culture 
and by including our languages and 
our history in school curricula. It’s 
what I call the reestablishment of the 
African educational system, charac-
terized by three essential principles, 
like the three stones of the African 
hearth: rebuilding cultural identity 
of the learner by taking as a base 
the simultaneous use of the mother 
language and the official language; 
linking school to life, by restructur-
ing curricula and promoting profes-
sional training, entrepreneurship and 
active educational methods; and 
promoting a dynamic of partnership 
around and for the benefit of the 
school, allowing the entire educa-
tional community to contribute to a 
school project in which participants 
can recognize themselves. 
Taking African languages into ac-
count as working languages in all 
domains of public life must start at 
school, the best place for building 
know-how and developing knowl-
edge, before it takes its place in 
other social spheres. Africa is the 
only continent in the world where, in 
most countries, the person on trial 
doesn’t have access to justice in his 
or her mother language, and still has 
to rely on an interpretation system in-
herited from the colonial period. Let 
us remember the indignation of Ma-
hatma Gandhi, who as a lawyer in 
court was obliged to express himself 
in English while an interpreter trans-
lated his words into his own mother 
language. “Isn’t this ridiculous,” he 
would say. “Isn’t it a sign of slavery? 
Must I blame the English or myself?” 
Africa has decided to change the 
situation by creating the African 
Academy of Languages. It’s a con-
tinental structure concerned with 
all language issues, which makes it 
unique in the world. It aims to set up 
a real partnership in Africa between 
what I would call “Africanophony” – 
the condition of speaking one or sev-
eral African languages – and other 
linguistic spheres: English-speaking, 
French-speaking, Spanish-speaking, 
Portuguese-speaking etc, with a 
view to intercultural civic education. 
In this way, the African Academy 
of Languages represents one of 
the major catalysts for the ongoing 
African cultural Renaissance.
Adama Samassekou, 
President of the African Academy 
of Languages, former Minister 
of Education of Mali (1993-2000).

We need a school that is attached to society,  
not torn from it.
Children must learn in the language they speak at home.
