Myanmar has the world’s highest 
proportion of women researchers at 85%, 
according to the UNESCO Institute for 
Statistics. But why are research hotspots 
like China and the United States missing 
from the list of 100 countries with 
available data? A careful look behind the 
statistics.
Only about one-quarter of the world’s researchers are 
women, according to estimates by the UNESCO Insti-
tute for Statistics (UIS). This is hardly surprising, 
given the hidden barriers and glass ceilings of so 
many laboratories and lecture halls. 
But eyebrows might rise after a closer look at the 
statistics illustrated in the map below, where research 
magnets – like China, the United Kingdom and the 
United States – slip into the grey zone of ‘no data 
available’. 
Are these countries ignoring women in science? Or 
is the UIS sleeping on the job? Fortunately, the 
answer is no to both questions. But these countries 
are using different techniques to collect the data 
which cannot be compared internationally. 
For example, the UIS and other organizations gen-
erally rely upon headcounts of men and women work-
ing in these fields. But many of the most developed 
countries calculate full-time equivalencies instead. 
“So they’re not actually counting people but shifts,” 
explains Ernesto Fernández Polcuch, who is responsi-
ble for science and technology (S&T) statistics at 
the UIS. 
So strangely enough, the UIS can report that 
Myanmar and Lesotho have the world’s highest pro-
portions of women researchers at 85% and 76% 
respectively, topping the list of about 100 countries 
and territories. But the Institute cannot provide 
these statistics for countries like Australia or the US.
Detailed information, but not 
enough
And yet the US probably collects some of the most 
detailed information on the gender, ethnicity and 
disability status of its scientists. The National Sci-
ence Foundation (NSF) isn’t just counting the number 
of women scientists and engineers but keeping tabs 
on the numbers of patents they receive and even 
their demographic circumstances. 
For example, men on average have 12 subordi-
nates compared to nine for women, among supervisor 
scientists and engineers in the private sector. The 
NSF has also found that family responsibilities are 
cited as the reason for not working by about 27% of 
women with science and engineering doctorates who 
are either unemployed or out of the labor force com-
pared to just 1.5% of men. Women scientists and 
engineers are also more likely than men to be 
divorced and separated. 
No statistics, no problem, 
no policy...
© UNESCO/Niamh Burke
Analysis of water samples for trace elements, Athens, 
Greece

This gold-mine of information can lay the founda-
tions for national policy-making, even if most of the 
data cannot be compared internationally. But for 
other countries, like those of the European Union, 
comparability is critical in efforts to harmonize sci-
ence policies and put women researchers on the 
political agenda. 
“No statistics, no problem, no policy,” as stated 
by Dr Hilary Rose* of University of Bradford (UK). 
“You just get gestures. Statistics help identify prob-
lems and can monitor the effectiveness of 
remedies.” 
Rose’s comments resonate in countries like Aus-
tria, Germany and The Netherlands, where there are 
low percentages of female scientists and relatively 
little data on them, according to the European Com-
mission’s Helsinki Group on Women in Science. In 
contrast, many of the newer members of the Euro-
pean Union and associated countries benefit from 
the communist legacy of good statistics and high 
proportions of women scientists and researchers.
Finding innovative monitoring 
solutions
Through the Helsinki Group, a network of statisti-
cians is trying to better identify and monitor the 
factors that bring women in and out of the research 
field. They are not simply looking at how many 
women pursue research but how they progress in 
their careers. 
For example, to what extent do women set the 
scientific agenda? Part of the answer lies in the 
Map: © UNESCO Institute for Statistics
Share of women researchers, 2003 (UIS)

 composition of scientific boards. Only in Finland and 
Sweden do women constitute more than 40% of board 
members, followed by the UK and Denmark with more 
than 30%. But in most EU countries, the share varies 
from one in five to even less than one in ten, accord-
ing to the report She Figures 2006. 
Another innovative tool is the Glass Ceiling Index, 
which compares women’s and men’s chances of reach-
ing a top academic position. Basically the higher the 
score, the ‘thicker’ the so-called ceiling to women’s 
advancement. Romania and Turkey report the most 
positive results, with 1.1 and 1.4 respectively, com-
pared to the EU average of 2.1. In contrast, the 
greatest barriers were found in Malta (11.7) followed 
by Lithuania (3.2). 
At the UIS, Fernández Polcuch dreams of collect-
ing this kind of data internationally. While glass ceil-
ings are beyond his reach, he will soon have a new 
source of data arising from a joint project between 
the UIS, Eurostat and the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD). 
Inspired by a US survey, the three organizations 
have developed a way to track the careers of doctor-
ate holders internationally. In particular, the UIS 
designed a model questionnaire to help countries 
with little experience in this field conduct their own 
surveys. So for the first time, developing and indus-
trialized countries will be able to compare the sala-
ries of male and female engineers, for example, or 
the time it takes them to find jobs in their field. 
A number of countries have already piloted the 
survey, while others prepare to implement it. The 
results, expected by 2008, should considerably 
expand the global perspective on women in science 
while shrinking those disconcerting grey zones of ‘no 
data available’. ■
Amy Otchet, UNESCO Institute for Statistics (UIS)
