                                     for the last fifteen years, the programme Memory of the World has focused
                                         on conservation and digitization of humanity’s documentary heritage. 
                    With UNeSCo’s support, measures have been taken to preserve dozens of archive 
collections, thousands of meters of film, millions of pages of manuscripts, books and periodicals.
symbolize the history of humanity to 
the attention of a wider public. But 
the people backing the programme 
quickly came up against a contradic-
tion: the most important documents 
are not in danger because they are 
already the object of extensive safe-
guarding measures; little-known 
archive collections are the ones in 
danger. 
To reconcile these two concerns, 
the Register was established in 
1997. Every two years, the docu-
ments most representative of hu-
manity are inscribed in it. At the 
same time we launch projects to 
safeguard documents that are in 
particular need of attention. 
Many of these projects involve 
digitization, since our main goal is to 
make these documents accessible 
to the general public. For instance, 
one of UNESCO’s first projects was 
undertaken with the National Library 
of the Czech Republic, in Prague. 
It began very modestly with 
US$20,000, which allowed us to 
digitize a few collections of histori-
cal manuscripts. But this partnership 
with UNESCO motivated other or-
ganizations to sponsor projects. The 
library now has an excellent work-
shop that digitizes not only collec-
tions but also documents request-
ed by researchers – it costs about 
US$20 to digitize an entire manu-
script. The library in fact became in 
2005 the first laureate of the Jikji 
Memory of the World Prize. 
You said the programme’s  
main goal was to make 
the documents accessible 
to the general public. 
What about conservation? 
Conservation is not an end in itself, 
it is a means, a necessary condi-
tion, to allow the world’s citizens to 
have access to documentary heri-
tage. The ultimate goal is access to 
the contents of these documents, 
which before the digital age were 
generally under lock and key. How 
many people had the opportunity to 
see Gutenberg’s Bible before digiti-
A few years ago, the public 
responded very enthusiastically 
to the re-release of “Metropolis”, 
German film-maker Fritz Lang’s 
masterpiece, in its restored and 
digitized version. In 2001, it was 
included in the Memory of the 
World Register. 
It was the first film to be inscribed 
in the Memory of the World Reg-
ister. Besides its unquestionable 
qualities and the innovations it intro-
duces in special effects, costumes 
and music, this monument of cin-
ema holds particular interest from 
the point of view of conservation 
and restoration.  
The Friedrich-Wilhelm-Murnau 
Foundation (Munich, Germany), 
which owns the rights to Fritz Lang’s 
film legacy, went to considerable 
lengths to get hold of all known 
copies, extract the best elements 
and undertake a digital restoration. 
It thus gave new life to the film and 
made it possible for audiences in the 
21st century to see a work of excep-
tional quality that was filmed in 1927.
The Memory of the World  
programme came into being  
15 years ago. What inspired it? 
From the beginning, the programme 
 set itself a double goal, both to safe-
guard threatened documentary heri-
tage and to bring documents that 
Documentary  
heritage  
in the Digital age:
NtervieW With AbdelAziz Abid
Former Secretary-General of the National Library of Tunisia, Abdelaziz Abid 
is now a programme specialist in the Memory of the World programme. 
Cover of a brochure published for the opening 
of “Metropolis.”

zation existed? Now everybody can 
see it. The programme therefore 
adopted digitization immediately. 
Not as a safeguarding measure, but 
as a means to ensure access. 
But there’s one thing to remember 
– just because you digitize a docu-
ment doesn’t mean you’ve safe-
guarded it for ever. Its conservation 
is an ongoing concern. At the same 
time, you have to preserve the digi-
tal document. Without preserva-
tion, a digital document disappears 
in ten years. 
That means that digital 
documents are even more 
fragile than those on traditional 
materials? 
Of course. A piece of parchment 
can survive for several centuries. 
Newsprint lasts several decades. It 
isn’t that the CD-ROM or the USB 
key can’t last for decades too, but 
the way in which the information 
is coded soon becomes obsolete. 
The problem isn’t the lifespan of the 
physical materials, but the progress 
in formats. 
In Yemen, manuscripts were dis-
covered in the main Sana’a mosque 
by chance that had remained walled 
up for 13 centuries! If you forget a 
digital document somewhere, at 
the end of ten years there’s nothing 
left of it. 
If we don’t pay attention to pre-
serving digital documents, we will 
leave a black hole for future genera-
tions. They’ll find Sumerian clay tab-
lets, Chinese, Arabic and European 
manuscripts and paper…and get-
ting to the 20th and 21st centuries, 
nothing! We must preserve traces 
of what we have created.
What has to be done? 
We have to begin by adopting a 
real digital conservation strategy. 
We can’t leave it to chance. Every 
country has to have an institution 
responsible for coordinating digi-
tal preservation efforts at a national 
level, to avoid either duplicating or 
overlooking things. 
At the same time, documents must 
be moved periodically from one for-
mat to another. In most documen-
tation centres and archives these 
days, what is basically a very simple 
technique is applied automatically. 
Is this expensive? 
Five dollars per gigabyte is the es-
timated annual preservation cost of 
digital information. A gigabyte con-
tains a lot of information, however, 
and the price doesn’t seem exorbi-
tant. But when you take into account 
the quantity of digital information cir-
culating in the world, which is to say 
some 12 billion gigabytes, it means 
60 billion dollars a year. This is enor-
mous. 
A global organization can’t take on 
this task. UNESCO’s role is less in 
funding than in alerting public opin-
ion, guiding and supporting countries 
to adopt policies to make it possible 
to safeguard their documentary heri-
tage, in whatever form. But every 
country has its own work to do. 
In 2003, UNESCO’s Member 
States adopted the Charter on 
the Preservation of the Digital 
Heritage. To what end? 
The Charter focuses attention on 
all the problems I have brought up. 
In a way, it pulled the emergency 
cord. It’s an official document that 
sets out general principles, but is 
not legally binding. 
At the same time, UNESCO also 
published, in collaboration with the 
Australian National Library, a large 
volume of guidelines for digital con-
servation. It deals with technical 
procedures and is available on line. 
Interview by
 Jasmina Šopova
Documentary heritage in the Digital age
Czech National Library Prague historic manuscripts collection.
