With American film so dominant 
across the world, it may come as 
a surprise to some film enthusiasts 
to learn that the very first full length 
narrative feature film was in fact 
made by Australians. 
Films depicting news events or 
domestic scenarios had been 
screened before awe-struck audi-
ences from the late 1800’s on, but 
they were usually no longer than 
ten minutes in duration, taking up 
just one film reel. That all changed 
when an Australian family of the-
atrical entrepreneurs took it upon 
themselves to create an hour long 
narrative film, using five reels in to-
tal, heralding the beginning of what 
was to become the feature length 
film experience. 
The Story of the Kelly Gang, in-
scribed on UNESCO’s Memory of 
the World Register in 2007, opened 
in Melbourne’s Athenaeum Hall on 
Boxing Day, December 26, 1906. It 
showed a fictionalised account of a 
real life bushranger, Ned Kelly, who 
had been caught and hanged just 
twenty five years earlier. 
The exploits of Ned Kelly and his 
band of thieves captured the imagi-
nation of Australians in Kelly’s life-
time and went on, after his death, to 
attain mythical status in the Austra-
lian psyche. Whatever violent acts 
they had committed, in a post co-
lonial context the Kelly Gang were 
seen as anti-authoritarian heroes, 
standing up to corrupt cops and de-
fending the honour of women. The 
iconic image of Kelly’s last stand 
at The Glenrowan Hotel, wear-
ing a homemade suit of armour to 
protect him against police bullets, 
continues to stir emotion in a nation 
built upon the courage, conviction, 
and as some contend, forced crimi-
nality of exiled Irish convicts.
The making and  
unmaking of a movie
Film exhibitor Charles Tait tapped 
into a universal fascination with this 
story and went on to write, direct, 
and with his brothers John and 
Nevin, produce and distribute an 
hour-long version of it. They were 
aided by other family members on 
acting duty, along with fellow exhib-
itors Millard Johnson and William 
Gibson as co-producers, technical 
advisors and camera operators. 
The Story of the Kelly Gang enter-
tained audiences across Australia 
for weeks, and a year later, played 
to packed houses in New Zealand, 
Britain and Ireland. 
Screenings took place in most 
Australian cities simultaneously, 
suggesting that at least half a dozen 
prints had been made. So contro-
versial was the subject matter that 
the film was immediately banned 
in the Victorian towns in which the 
Kelly gang operated. Years later a 
state wide ban was imposed, and 
by the 1930’s all films with a bush-
ranging theme were banned across 
Australia. The world’s first feature 
length film led directly to the first 
ever case of censorship! 
The Story of the Kelly Gang was 
not only unique for its running time; 
it also evidenced a very sophisticat-
ed use of cinematography. Scenes 
would often run for up to ten min-
utes, framing the action in a theatri-
cal manner in mid- to long shot, and 
establishing the conventions that 
would lay the groundwork for what 
was to become cinema’s most en-
during genre – the western. 
Despite its popularity, and due 
mainly to the limitations of highly 
perishable easily flammable film 
stock, The Story of the Kelly Gang 
all but disappeared by the mid for-
ties. Other versions of the story had 
been made, some of which created 
confusion amongst historians as to 
the authenticity of the original. But 
by the mid seventies, fragments 
of the Tait brother’s 1906 master-
piece began to turn up, sometimes 
in the most unlikely places.
On the importance 
of snippets
A tiny strip was found in Adelaide, 
another in Melbourne, most likely 
remnants left by local exhibitors, 
some of whom would re-arrange 
scenes, insert their own inter-titles 
or even ad scenes from out-takes. 
return of the Kelly gang
       detective work, technical progress and luck lie at the core of the restoration 
              of the Story of the Kelly gang, the world’s first feature length film. 
                            With it, Australia recovers the earliest record of a myth dear to its heart 
                                     and part of its collective memory.
“The Story of the Kelly Gang” - 1906: Ned Kelly shooting Fitzpatrick 
in the horse yard.

In 1982 someone hand delivered 
a long but severely damaged se-
quence to the offices of a film in-
dustry magazine after finding it at a 
garbage dump. But by far the big-
gest breakthrough came in 2006 
when a whole reel in near perfect 
condition was located at the Na-
tional Film and TV Archive in the 
United Kingdom. 
These snippets, together with ar-
chived copies of the original pro-
gramme brochure, helped Aus-
tralia’s National Film and Sound 
Archive reconstruct The Story of 
the Kelly Gang. Advances in digi-
tal restoration made by Haghefilm 
Laboratories in Amsterdam meant 
that recovered footage could be 
remastered, damage to individual 
frames caused by dust and dirt was 
cleaned up and missing frames 
were replicated where necessary, 
by borrowing from those that did 
exist. Even so, only 17 minutes re-
main of the original film, with some 
key scenes chemically burnt almost 
beyond recognition. 
The value of the well maintained 
programme brochures, posters, 
still photographs and press reviews 
from 1906 cannot be overstated 
– these archives have been as im-
portant as the discovery of film 
fragments in determining continuity, 
identifying characters and estab-
lishing narrative order. 
A great deal of detective work lies 
at the core of this attempt to recover 
a record of a story that looms large 
in the Australian collective memory. 
This film depicting a key historical 
event is of immeasurable value to 
Australia’s cultural heritage. A cen-
tury on, and the story of the Kelly 
Gang and its impact on Australian 
national identity is as vivid as ever. 
Jo Chichester, 
producer, Sunday Arts, 
ABC TV (Australia)
return of the Kelly gang

The original programme brochure.
Original programme cover of the restored  
version of “The Story of the Kelly Gang”.
