                                            are girls and boys equal in mathematics textbooks? 
     this is not evident, judging by the study conducted by Sylvie cromer, lecturer at lille 2 university. 
with a group of african academics, she analyzed primary school textbooks in several countries 
       in the region. result: girls become fewer as the scholastic level rises.
gEndEr Equality in math tExtbookS 
an impossible equation?


School books are not neutral with respect to gender parity
Interview by Agnès Bardon, UNESCO Courier. 
What did this study  
examine? 
The study is the result of scientific 
research carried out within the frame-
work of the Réseau international de 
recherche sur les représentations 
sexuées dans les manuels scolaires 
(RIRRS – international research net-
work on gender representations in 
textbooks), and of regional seminars 
organized by UNESCO in several 
African countries. Universities in Côte 
d’Ivoire, Cameroon, Togo and Senegal 
volunteered to examine the math 
books used throughout the primary 
level in their country, adding up to a 

total of six years. This is a novel initia-
tive because up until now, the study 
of gender representations in school-
books has mainly looked at history 
or French books. We chose to look 
at math books because normally we 
consider science to be neuter and 
abstract – therefore it was interesting 
to see whether it was as sexless as 
we generally think. It’s also interesting 
insofar as scientific fields of study 
attract, as we know, many more boys 
than girls. In addition, we took a quan-
titative approach while other studies 
are generally qualitative – which is to 
say we looked not only at situations 
and illustrations but also counted 
each gender instance in the books. 
This thorough survey yields an exten-
sive body of knowledge.
What are the main findings  
of this study? 
It reveals first that textbooks aren’t 
neutral when it comes to gender 
equality. They are based in fact on 
examples from daily life that call upon 
representations of gender. To learn 
counting, for instance, you find a 
mother who goes to market with a 
certain number of eggs in her bas-
ket, or a child who travels a number 
of kilometers. What is noteworthy is 
that the characters who play a role 
in books designed for the youngest 
pupils are often children. At that level, 
Old school textbook: male and female figures  
are treated the same. Is this an exception?
©
 D
R we see that there is practically parity; 
we count as many girls as boys. But 
as the level rises, the adults are more 
and more present. And when adults 
are represented, there is a majority 
of men. The over-representation of 
men reaches 67.6% in Cameroon 
and 76.4% in Togo. It means that 
the more we advance, the more the 
masculine figure takes over and the 
more the deficit in female characters 
becomes flagrant.
Is the difference 
only quantitative?
No, masculine and feminine 
characters aren’t treated the same 
way. In one out of two instances, when 
the subject is a man, he’s identified by 
his profession. When it’s a woman, 
she’s often identified by a family rela-
tionship – she’s the mother, sister or 
daughter “of”. And when she’s identi-
fied by her profession, she’s usually 
from the informal sector: for example, 
she’s selling produce from the fam-
ily garden, but she doesn’t have the 
status of a shopkeeper. Girls are also 
more often shown in passive situa-
tions. I remember the cover of one 
textbook that showed a boy and a 
girl at school. The boy was writing on 
the blackboard while the girl was sim-
ply handing him a geometry triangle. 
There’s nothing shocking about this. 
We’re far from the sexist stereotypes 
you could find in schoolbooks 30 
years ago. Yet the stereotypes haven’t 
disappeared; they’ve reconstituted 
themselves in more subtle forms. 
Do these representations  
have real impact 
on schoolchildren? 
In all societies, text books are a fun-
damental educational tool, even with 
competition from multimedia. They 
are a powerful vehicle for transmitting 
knowledge, and also values. It’s even 
truer in developing countries where 
books are expensive. In classes, 
therefore, they make full use of them. 
Which is why it’s so important for the 
books to transmit images of equal-
ity, because they have the power to 
legitimize them. And a girl can’t feel 
her ambition to learn mathematics is 
legitimate if that knowledge is shown 
as a masculine privilege.
The male figure dominates in most school books  
and manuals.
