       twyfelfontein, namibia, a rock art site with few rivals, has just been added 
    to the World Heritage list. it is on its boulders that the prehistoric inhabitants 
           of the valley chose to reveal how they perceived their world.
Grave  enGravinGs
A giraffe, antelopes and a spotted lion with four toes:  
one of the most famous rock engravings at Twyfelfontein.

In a relatively remote and isolated 
valley in the semi-desert environ-
ment of western north-central Na-
mibia is what must surely be the 
most spectacular accumulation of 
rock engravings in all of southern Af-
rica. And certainly a rock art site with 
few rivals around the world. This well 
known group of rock art sites has 
come to be known by the misnomer 
‘Twyfelfontein’, Afrikaans for doubt-
ful fountain. The valley’s spring is far 
from fountain-like, and although it is 
small it is actually quite dependable. 
The Damara name, /Ui-//Ais or jump-
ing waterhole, is perhaps more ap-
propriate. Driving into the valley one 
is struck by the wide-open and san-
dy valley floor with its dry river beds. 
Even more striking are the valley 
sides and the enormous boulders 
that appear to be literally tumbling 
down towards the bottom. It is on 
these boulders that the prehistoric 
inhabitants of this valley chose to re-
veal how they perceived their world. 
We know from excavations by Dr 
Eric Wendt, one of Namibia’s pio-
neering archaeologists, that prior 
to European colonial engagements 
two kinds of people lived in the val-
ley for extended periods of time. Ex-
cavated remains indicate that hunt-
er-gatherer peoples were the first 
occupiers; artefact assemblages are 
typical of the Late Stone Age dat-
ing from 6000 to 2000 years ago. 
These Stone Age hunters and gath-
erers made most of the engravings 
and probably all the paintings; iconic 
imagery – depictions of animals and 
humans. Then sometime between 
2000 – 2500 years ago the sec-
ond group of occupiers arrived in 
the valley: Khoekhoen people who 
herded sheep and goats and had 
ceramic pots. Rock art made by the 
herders is unmistakably different to 
that of the hunters and gatherers; it 
is thought to be entirely geometric, 
including, at Twyfelfontein, pecked 
circles, and rows and rows of dots. 
Much more is known about the rock 
engravings and paintings made by 
southern African hunters and gath-
erers, than the enigmatic geometric 
imagery of herder groups. In fact this 
distinction has only recently been 
developed by Sven Ouzman and 
Benjamin Smith, rock art research-
ers working in South Africa, and it 
enables a much greater understand-
ing of the peopling of southern Af-
rica and their making of the various 
rock art traditions there. 

There are various estimates of 
how many engravings and paint-
ings there are at the Twyfelfontein, 
but it is difficult, if not impossible 
to provide a definitive count. Ernst 
Scherz, who produced an impres-
sive and unsurpassed documenta-
tion of Namibian rock art, said that 
there were around 2500 engrav-
ings, but modern estimates exceed 
5000 individual depictions.
The hunt: 
an interpersonal 
dialogue
Painted and engraved images we 
see today on the rock surfaces of 
southern Africa, certainly those we 
can ascribe to hunters and gather-
few. It is these human activities that 
tend to dominate the rock paintings. 
Hunting is a common theme in the 
rock paintings of southern Africa, 
including those at Twyfelfontein. 
For a long time images that depict 
the hunt and/or its paraphernalia 
were thought to depict hunter-gath-
erers attempts to acquire food. Our 
understanding of the way in which 
hunters and gatherers the world over 
think about the hunt shows this kind 
of interpretation is grossly naive. The 
hunt reveals an interpersonal dia-
logue between two sentient beings 
in the world: human and non-human 
animal. Hunting for hunter-gatherers 
is not simply about the procurement 
of food, it is a skilled way of engag-
who has carried out ethnographic 
work amongst southern African 
San communities for several de-
cades now, suggests that the pres-
ence of these actions shows that 
“activated in each hunt is a feeling 
of sympathy, and the implicit recog-
nition that the animal is a moral and 
sentient kindred being”.
Something 
unfamiliar
The engravings, particularly those at 
Twyfelfontein, have very few depic-
tions of humans; by far the majority 
of the engravings at Twyfelfontein 
depict animals and their spoor. But 
many of these depictions are not 
simply realistic depictions of ani-
mals and their tracks. Often these 
engraved images have features that 
indicate we are dealing with some-
thing unfamiliar to our way of think-
ing about the relationship between 
humans and animals. A number of 
the depictions of animals have ‘un-
real’ features. For example, many 
rhinoceros have exaggerated horns, 
lion spoor often have more than four 
toes, and giraffe are sometimes de-
picted with greatly elongated necks. 
These ‘unreal’ features demonstrate 
the active role animals were believed 
to play in maintaining the flow of su-
pernatural potency. 
The rock engravings at Twyfelfon-
tein revealed a deeper understand-
ing of the world to the hunters and 
gatherers that lived there in the past. 
Today these engravings set the 
stage for a different kind of relation-
ship, that between tourists and the 
past. Despite the sad and unavoid-
able fact that tourism adds further 
pressure to the natural weathering 
processes that are slowly destroying 
southern Africa’s cultural heritage, 
the rock art of the Twyfelfontein Val-
ley continues to shed light on the 
different peoples that have created 
this irreplaceable heritage.
Thomas A. Dowson, 
 a South African archaeologist, 
has carried out extensive research
 in the Twyfelfontein Valley, 
and the surrounding area.

Students from the University of Namibia copying engravings.
Twyfelfontein Valley at sunset.

ers, reveal a world in which both hu-
man and non-human beings actively 
engaged with one another, and their 
many and varied attempts to main-
tain the flow of supernatural potency 
between constituents of that world. 
The continued flow of supernatural 
potency between animals, and other 
animate and inanimate beings, and 
humans was fundamentally important 
for the reproduction of the world in 
which the hunters and gatherers lived. 
Human beings, be they accom-
plished hunters, gatherers, or sha-
mans, mothers or fathers, or their 
children, were all sentient beings, 
who in their day to day engagements 
with each other and the landscape in 
which they lived were intimately and 
actively involved in world-renewing 
activities. And those activities includ-
ed hunting, gathering, sexual inter-
course, and trancing to identify a 
ing with the world that ensures the 
circulation of supernatural potency. 
The hunted provides food and sus-
tenance, while the hunter ensures 
he and his community behave re-
spectfully towards this act of giv-
ing. So-called avoidance behaviours 
associated with the hunt are exten-
sively documented for southern Afri-
can hunter-gatherers. The Canadian 
anthropologist Mathias Guenther, 
