Situated in a mountainous area in 
the north-east of Guangxi Zhuang, 
Longsheng Autonomous County is 
inhabited by some 170,000 people, 
three-quarters of them belonging to 
ethnic minorities (Miao, Yao, Tong 
and Zhuang). The literacy rate is to-
day particularly high, thanks to the 
Community Education Administra-
tion Centre. 
As part of its literacy programme 
for women (launched in 1992) and 
its programme of poverty eradica-
tion through education (1998), the 
Centre has virtually eliminated illit-
eracy: nearly 100% of young adults 
in the county can now read and 
write. And the 3700 ethnic minor-
ity women living in the county that 
were found to be illiterate in 1997, 
had all acquired literacy in 2000, 
according to a survey.
Made-to-measure  
instruction
While it is difficult to end illiteracy, 
it is even more difficult to maintain 
the literacy rate at a satisfactory 
level. This is why the Centre also 
launched the idea of home school-
ing: teachers go to women’s homes 
to teach them to read and write, and 
follow up to make sure they don’t 
forget what they learned. 
The key to the Centre’s success is 
its use of teaching methods geared 
to local conditions: bilingual text-
books (Mandarin-Yao, Mandarin-
Zhuang, Mandarin-Tong and Man-
darin-Miao); classes comprising 
students who belong to the same 
ethnic group; flexible schedules 
(night school, classes during the off-
season); enhanced education curri-
cula (studies associated with prac-
tical activities); classes according 
to category of student (boys, girls); 
possibilities for boarding, individual 
assistance and so on. Another es-
sential ingredient is the involvement 
of all community members, from the 
youngest to the oldest, by way of 
village cadres and activist farmers. 
And finally, the teaching is effective 
because it creates a link with devel-
opment of agriculture, tourism and 
services.
Forty thousand fewer 
poor people
Pan Jufeng, for example, learned to 
read and write at age 40 through 
the Centre’s programmes, after 
which she trained another 35 illiter-
ate women and created a song and 
dance troupe with her ‘pupils’. Later, 
the members of this ensemble, hav-
ing taken elementary English les-
sons, focused on tourism. The team 
now receives hundreds of visitors a 
day. They have become a pillar of 
the region’s tourism. 
Pan Jufeng symbolizes the Cen-
tre’s success, one might add. She 
took part in the national women’s 
literacy contest held in Beijing and 
won first prize. 
What proved crucial for the 
Longsheng communities was com-
bining literacy with technological 
liTeracy versus poverTy
     An extensive literacy programme carried out by the Community education
       Administration Centre in the poor rural areas of longsheng (China) 
            has produced spectacular results in a decade, earning it uNeSCo’s 
      international reading Association literacy Prize for 2007.
A husband teaching his wife.

Students in a Tong village.

training, health and family planning, 
environmental protection and other 
areas connected to everyday life. 
Today, numerous farmers and arti-
sans have technical aptitude in two 
or three specialties besides their 
own. In 2006, the average income 
per inhabitant rose to 1978.4 yuan 
(US$ 261), or 5.7 times more than 
in 1990. The number of poor peo-
ple decreased by about 40,000.
Zhao Liming, 
Deputy Director of Communication, 
Longsheng County
