                        too often, education is perceived as an opportunity rather  
                              than a right, although access for all children to free 
         and compulsory education is guaranteed by most constitutions. 
     when the right to education is flouted, the courts can and must intervene.
Education, 
a fundamental right
et us look at India: an estimated 
58 out of 185 million children aged 
5 to 14 years are not in school. 
(Editor’s note: According to other 
sources, India had 13.5 million 
children not in school in 2005.) 
Yet the original text of the 1950 
Constitution of India stated that 
‘The State shall endeavour to pro-
vide, within a period of ten years 
from the commencement of this 
Constitution, for free and compul-
sory education for all children until 
they complete the age of fourteen 
years.’ The 10 year deadline for the 
provision of free, universal elemen-
tary education is long passed and 
has not been met. 
In 1992 and 1993, the Supreme 
Court of India examined two cases 
in which the plaintiffs claimed a 
judicially enforceable right to edu-
cation. The Court expressed its 
concern at the obvious failure of 
the Government of India to fulfil 
its duty: ‘Does not the passage of 
44 years more than four times the 
period stipulated in article 45 con-
vert the obligation created by the 
article into an enforceable right?’. It 
held that the right to education up 
to age 14 contained in the Consti-
tution amounted to a ‘fundamental 
right’ enforceable by law. The im-
mediate effect of the decision: any 
child below the age of 14 denied 
access to primary education could 
approach a court and obtain an or-
der directing the authorities to initi-
ate appropriate measures. 
The Indian Court re-characterized 
the right to education as a funda-
mental right. This activist approach 
has not been followed in other 
continents. The European Court of 
Human Rights (ECtHR) rather re-
luctantly adhered to such a judicial 
interpretation.
A European  
break-through
A case in point is that of the 18 
Roma children living in the Czech 
Republic who were placed in a 
school for children with learn-
ing disabilities. The Roma unsuc-
cessfully complained in the Czech 
courts in 1999 that this placement 
was discriminatory on the basis 
of race and ethnic origin and con-
stituted a breach of their right to 
education. They maintained that 
the State’s “differential treatment” 
in sending them to special schools 
only served to aggravate the dif-
ferences between them and the 
pupils attending regular schools. 
They therefore requested that the 
State take positive measures to 
compensate for their socio-cultural 
handicap and afford them instead 
a means of resuming the normal 
curriculum. 
In 2000, the applicants turned to 
the ECtHR. Despite the disturbing 
statistics resulting from the place-
ment of Roma children in special 
schools, the ECtHR held that on 
the basis of the relevant facts, the 
reason for the applicants’ place-
ment in special schools was not 
based on their ethnic or racial 
origin. Thus the Roma children 
were not treated differently from 
children of non Roma origin. The 
court voted six to one that there 
had been no violation of Article 14 
November 2007 : Roma children’s victory  
at the European Court of Human Rights.

This article is based on the talk Professor de Groof  
gave at the 13 September 2007 session of “21st Century Dialogues” 
on the theme “How to make education fairer”.

of the European Convention on 
Human Rights (prohibition of dis-
crimination), and no violation of 
Article 2 of Protocol No. 1 
(the right to education). 
On 14 November 2007, how-
ever, the Grand Chamber of the 
ECtHR, by a vote of 13 to 4, ruled 
in a ground-breaking judgment 
that segregating Roma students 
into special schools is indeed a 
form of unlawful discrimination, 
in breach of Article 14 of the 
European Convention (prohibit-
ing discrimination), and of Article 
2 of Protocol No. 1 (securing the 
right to education). As such, the 
judgment pointed out that the 
Convention addresses not only 
specific acts of discrimination, 
but also systemic practices that 
deny the rights to racial or ethnic 
groups. It also underscored that 
racial segregation which disad-
vantages members of a particular 
racial or ethnic group amounts to 
discrimination in breach of Article 
14 - thereby bringing the ECtHR‘s 
Article 14 jurisprudence in line 
with antidiscrimination law of the 
European Union. 
Infringements on the right to edu-
cation and unequal educational 
opportunities are perhaps the 
most complex problem facing so-
cieties today as they struggle for 
social cohesion and economic de-
velopment. There may be no silver 
bullet to eradicate them. However, 
fair legal processes within schools 
themselves would already be a 
good start. They would not only 
make it a safer environment but 
also give the proper signals about 
a fairer society. Most important, 
they would affect the way young 
people react to, and interact with, 
authorities and legal processes 
throughout their adult live.
Jan de Groof, 
Professor of Education Law 
at the College of Europe in Bruges.

Education is a fundamental right
(A school in Slovenia).

