                                More than half the inhabitants of Bangladesh’s city slums are children: 
             nearly 15 million boys and girls, of which 8 million must work to help their families survive. 
                         for a cost of 35 dollars a child, the government has launched an education project 
                               for child workers, giving them a chance to change their lives.
thE inViSiblE childrEn  
of bangladESh
Some eight million children work in Bangladesh.

welve-year-old Hosneara has been 
wielding a heavy hammer to chip 
bricks since she was nine. But her 
life changed two years ago, when 
she started spending two hours a 
day at a learning centre close to 
her home in one of the poorest 
slums in Dhaka, Bangladesh. “The 
employer used to cheat me, but he 
can’t anymore, because I’ve learnt 
how to count,” she says proudly. 
Farzana, an 11-year-old domestic 
worker, is equally proud that she is 
able to count the change returned 
to her at the grocery store. And 
Al-Amin, who’s 11, is happy to 
have escaped toiling in a factory 
since he helped his father start 
and run a phone and fax facility – 
he too received his basic educa-
tion at a learning centre close to 
the slum where he lives. 
These are just three examples of 
thousands of children who have 
benefited from the Basic Education 
for Hard to Reach Urban Working 
Children (BEHTRUWC) project. 
Supported by UNICEF and man-
aged by the Bureau of non formal 
education of the government of 
Bangladesh this project was initia- 
ted in 1997. Its first phase ended 
in June 2004. Currently it is in its 
second phase which runs through 
2009. The project seeks to pro-
vide vulnerable child labourers in 
Bangladesh with a basic primary 
school education while they con-
tinue to work. Though the eradica-
tion of child labour is the ultimate 
goal, the project recognizes that it 
is not yet feasible to do away with 
the malaise in a country where 
an estimated 7.9 million children 
work to help their families survive. 
The children are “hard to reach” 
because many of them work invis-
ibly, behind closed doors. Often, 
they are domestic workers in pri-
vate homes, or toil in small sweat-
shops where there is no regula-
tion, and most often, exploitation. 
“We are looking to prepare the 
children for the better life options 
that will be available to them once 
they have a basic education,” says 
Shamima Siddiky, UNICEF’s edu-
cation specialist in Dhaka, who 
monitors the program.
The Roadside Schools, as they are 
sometimes called, targeted 8-14 
year olds in the first phase, with 
11,550 centres in six cities, reach-
ing 339,150 working children. 
Classes were held in two shifts to 
accommodate the children’s work 

schedules, with a maximum of 30 
students per class. Learning mate-
rials were provided, and there was 
no homework involved. 
Trained for a job
Based on the studies and evalua-
tions of the initial phase, a number 
of strategic changes have been in-
corporated in the second phase, ex-
plains Siddiky. An older age group of 
10-14 years, who are even less likely 
to return to mainstream education 
has been targeted, with 200,000 
children to be enrolled in 8,000 
new learning centres by June 2008 
— 3,310 of these are already opera-
tional. The basic education course, 
which allows students to reach an 
equivalent of grade 3, has been ex-
tended to 40 months, from the ear-
lier two-year program. 
Priority has been given to vocation-
al training in a trade or livelihood skill. 
– The first phase having produced 
1,000 graduates in Dhaka, Sylhet 
and Barisal, the second phase will 
enroll twenty thousand working chil-
dren above the age of 13 in training. 
A future 
for 35 dollars
The project will then assist the trained 
children with job placements, or self-
employment, and follow up on their 
needs for six months. Students not 
chosen for vocational training will 
also be linked to services through 
other relevant organizations.
Many of the learning centres are 
located in close proximity to city 
slums, where there is a concentra-
tion of working children who lack the 
most basic amenities, and have no 
access to schools. Over one-fifth of 
Bangladesh’s population of 140 mil-
lion lives in urban areas (about 28.8 
million people). Children account for 
about 56% of slum inhabitants – 
nearly 15 million boys and girls. 
“Our main task is to identify the 
children, and then motivate them to 
attend classes,” says Siddiky. “It is 
very important to involve the commu-
nity in this endeavour, with teachers, 
parents and employers working 
together to ensure a brighter future 
for the children.” The project includes 
a month-long training program for 
teachers who are recruited locally, 
and have the basis for contacts with 
parents and employers in the vicinity. 
“Most of the teachers are women, 
who have a better chance of ap-
proaching parents and getting girls 
to attend,” says Reazul Quader, Joint 
Secretary and Project Director for 
BEHTRUC, BNFE. Since girls are 
particularly vulnerable to violence and 
exploitation, especially as domestic 
workers, and as part of an improved 
gender strategy, learning centres at-
tempt to enroll 60% girls. 
“The project has been running 
smoothly so far,” says Quader. “One 
of the main problems we face is high 
drop-out rates, which have recently 
increased from 20% to 30%,” he 
adds. Quader explains that this is 
mainly because slum inhabitants are 
evicted by government agencies, and 
have to seek a new home every two 
or three months. “The government 
has decided to halt evictions, in or-
der to improve attendance,” he adds. 
“The children really enjoy coming to 
the learning centres, because they 
know it (education) will eventually 
change their lives.” 
This project has cost 39.5 million 
dollars up to date, i.e. 35 dollars per 
child a year. 
The main donors are the Swedish 
and Canadian governments.
Shiraz Sidhva, 
Indian journalist

For 35 dollars a year, this child can have  
a better future.
Child workers (Dhaka, Banglades), in an aluminum 
tableware manufacturing workshop who learn to read 
and write after hours.
