Press freedom brings responsibilities  
as well as privileges for journalists. 
Unlike its ‘ugly sister’ – censorship - media regulation protects 
the public from disinformation. But is it enough?
SENSE  
AND CENSORSHIPD

Journalists may be central play-
ers in the defence of an open so-
ciety – but, without regulation, they 
can also be used as protagonists 
of deceit and propaganda, serving 
political or commercial interests. 
Rwanda’s infamous ‘hate radio’, 
Radio-Télévision Libre des Mille Col-
lines (RTLM), broadcast from 1993 
to 1994 and played a key role in 
fuelling that country’s genocide, in 
which an estimated 800,000 Tutsis 
and moderate Hutus were massa-
cred in just three months (Human 
Rights Watch). But, thirteen years 
on, Rwanda’s journalists, like their 
colleagues in neighbouring Burundi 
and the Democratic Republic of 
Congo (DRC), are gradually rebuild-
ing public – and professional - cred-
ibility, after years of state censorship 
and control. And, central to this evo-
lution, is regulation of their profes-
sion by journalists themselves. 

Ironically, it was a 1991 law allow-
ing media pluralism, passed soon 
after Rwanda adopted a multi-party 
system that opened the way for 
‘hate media’ to emerge. But the 
devastation spurred on by RTLM 
later led the new Rwanda Patriotic 
Front (RPF) government to be sus-
picious of uncontrolled media – a 
situation that has only begun to re-
lax in the past few years.
An improving situation
“The government is still cautious, 
and hasn’t given the media a com-
pletely free rein,” says Cyprien Ndi-
kumana, representative in Burundi 
and Rwanda for the international 
non-governmental organisation, Pa-
nos Institute Paris. 
“And, of course, journalists are 
still careful what they say,” Ndiku-
mana adds. “But, given the histori-
cal and cultural context, there has 
been a very positive development 
since 2004, with pluralist media, 
including ten or so independent 
radio stations.” One of these, Con-
tact FM, broadcast a live phone-in 
programme with the head of state, 
President Paul Kagame, in Septem-
ber 2006. 
In 2002, the Rwandan govern-
ment established the High Council 
of the Press (HCP) with responsi-
bilities for regulating the media. But, 
says Ndikumana, “it is a consulta-
tive body, and does not have much 
power. It can give advice to the 
Minister for Information, who licens-
es new media and has the power 
of sanction.” A new law is currently 
before parliament, though, which 
will transfer these decisional pow-
ers to the HCP. Meanwhile, journal-
ists are gradually becoming more 
organised, with a recently estab-
lished Press Centre and fledgling 
Commission for ethics and codes 
of conduct set up by the Rwandan 
Association of Journalists (ARJ). 
The Democratic Republic of 
Congo may have a recent bloody 
history as the theatre for what has 
been dubbed ‘Africa’s World War’, 
in which over three million people 
were killed (Amnesty International). 
And yet, the country has also made 
remarkable progress in institution-
alising press freedom. In 2003, as 
part of the Sun City Agreement, a 
new, independent regulatory body 
– the High Authority for the Media 
(HAM) – in particular to ensure that 
the media gave fair and balanced 
coverage to all parties during the 
first multiparty elections for over 40 
years, in July 2006. 
“At one point during the elections,” 
recalls Cyprien Ndikumana, “made 
itself very unpopular with both the 
party of the incumbent president, Jo-
seph Kabila, and the opposition par-
ty of Jean-Pierre Bemba. This was 
a sign that the HAM was indepen-
dent and neutral. It even suspended 
some radio stations, including the 
public radio and television channel.” 
As well as its solid legal basis, the 
HAM also owes its success to the 
strong leadership of its president, 
Modeste Mutinga, a courageous 
journalist, often imprisoned for 
his views, and who, in 2000, was 
awarded the Committee for the 
Protection of Journalists Interna-
tional Press Freedom Award. 
The creation of OMAC (Organisa-
tion des Médias d’Afrique Centrale) in 
2001 by a wide range of media stake-
holders in the region, including journal-
ists, press media owners and press 
freedom associations was an attempt 
to enable national media to draw on 
regional strengths. With backing from 
UNESCO and other international or-
ganizations, OMAC issues alerts on 
abuses against the press, as well as 
providing training and support for jour-
nalists in the region.
More steps needed
The institutionalisation of press free-
dom, through laws that protect jour-
nalists, independent media regula-
tory bodies, journalists’ associations 
and media monitoring bodies, is still 
only a part of the solution. 
“The press cannot be free so long 
as journalists live and work in impos-
sible conditions,” says Ndikumana. 
“In countries like Rwanda, and 
several countries in Central Africa, 
there is no central labour agree-
ment, salaries are often not paid 
and are inadequate,” Ndikumana 
adds. “So journalists are some-
times manipulated by political and 
financial interests, which obviously 
compromise the quality of their 
work.” 
One practice, prevalent in DRC, is 
so-called ‘coupage’ – where vested 
interests pay journalists to publish 
favourable articles about them. “It 
kills press freedom,” says Ndikuma-
na. “The only solution is to improve 
the conditions of journalists, pro-
vide better training and strengthen 
the capacity of the profession to 
regulate itself.”
