mass of the people as the only true fount 
of right and law, or whether it be simply in 
recognition of their right to the information 
they need… 
It is, I believe, when we look on the prob-
lems of information in this way that we be-
gin to realise their deep relationship with 
science and culture. Every group, scien-
tific, artistic, professional or social which 
has its reality in performing a service to 
mankind should, for this reason, have its 
own organs of information and expression. 
Though from one angle they may repre-
sent different and sometimes conflicting 
professional interests, their contributions 
are necessary to the common welfare of 
mankind and to the international under-
standing and unity we seek.
	
	
“The realisation of freedom of information 
does not consist simply in opening up ac-
cess to more and more masses of infor-
mation of any and every kind. Nor does it 
mean the absence of let or hindrance to 
information…A laisser-faire anarchy in the 
services of information is incompatible 
with the true nature of liberty, and can only 
derive from a blindness to the real needs 
of the world, to the real inequalities which 
exist, to the basic character of many of the 
obstacles which have been established, 
and to the true sources of the differences 
of opinion on the nature of these obsta-
cles… 
We must have it in our considered minds 
to denounce both the distortion of news 
and the common vulgarity of which the 
purveyors of news are so frequently guilty. 
Here the professional organisations in the 
field of information, with their undoubted 
awareness of the problem before us, have 
a great social role to play in applying them-
selves even more intensely to the consid-
eration of the self-criticism, self-discipline 
and self-education which the occasion 
requires. 
What criteria are we to adopt in the 
evaluation of the content of information? 
If we attach ourselves, as in the old days 
of artisan press solely to the individual’s 
right to express himself, the only criterion 
we can adopt is the criterion of truth. From 
this standpoint, the only constraints you 
can ask for are those rooted in the require-
ments of public order. Further, it has be-
come plain to us how much too general is 
this criterion of abstract truth…It would be 
better, I suggest, to describe freedom of 
information in terms of the functional rela-
tionship of information to the needs of the 
people, whether it be in recognition of the 
The Courier looks back   
Dr Julian Huxley, UNESCO’s first Director-General, outlined his views on press freedom in a speech  
before the United Nations Conference on Freedom of Information in Geneva on 25 March 1948.  
The following month, The Courier carried an abridged version of his address. An excerpt:
Dr Julian Huxley, UNESCO’s first Director-General.
