Laureate for Africa of the 2007 L’ORÉAL-
UNESCO Awards, Ameenah Gurib-Fakim 
has spent much of her life taking 
inventory of plants in her homeland, 
Mauritius.
What if, one day soon, medicinal plants could cure 
diarrhea in children, at little cost? Or bitter melon – 
Momordica charantia – provide a treatment for cer-
tain forms of diabetes? Ameenah Gurib-Fakim believes 
in this. Her team has actually investigated the vir-
tues of the exotic fruit, which acts as a starch blocker 
to slow the release of free glucose into the 
bloodstream. 
When you see Professor Gurib-Fakim sitting at her 
pro-vice-chancellor’s desk at the University of Mauri-
tius, elegant in her tailored suit, her appearance 
doesn’t exactly evoke the countryside. Yet the 45-
year-old professor of organic chemistry, who received 
her degree from the University of Exeter (United 
Kingdom), has devoted much of her life to tracking 
the myriad plants of her native land, the island of 
Mauritius. 
Back when she began, the study of the yellow fan 
palm, bois goudron (Antirrhoa frangulacea) or liane 
calli (Sarcostemma viminale) was hardly in vogue 
among young scientists. “Plant research wasn’t very 
credible,” she admits. Even less so for a female 
researcher. “When you’re a woman, it’s only when 
you’ve made it past the barrier of prejudice and you 
have a list of accomplishments that you’re taken seri-
ously. That’s why many women give up along the 
way,” deplores the scientist and mother of two.
A long-term project
Ameenah Gurib-Fakim didn’t give up. On the contrary. 
Thanks to her, a full inventory exists of the medici-
nal and aromatic plants on Mauritius and the neigh-
boring island of Rodriguez. A long-term project, 
considering Mauritius is a true reservoir of biodiver-
sity. Out of 634 known medicinal plants, 15% are 
endemic (i.e., found only on the island). 
Professor Gurib-Fakim took a particular interest in 
the pharmacological properties of these plants, an 
aspect not covered in previous studies. In addition 
to taking the usual samples, the researcher and her 
team visited villages to collect traditional knowl-
edge. They had to get past the resistance of local 

Budding Plant 
Research

healers, not always enthusiastic about sharing their 
wisdom with outsiders. 
As a number of these plants could be used as 
alternatives to commercial medicines sold in phar-
macies, the interest they represent is more than 
anecdotal. Nearly 80% of the population of poor 
countries already relies on medicinal plants for 
treatment. What matters now is making sure the 
poor countries don’t miss out on the commercial 
exploitation of these products, for the profit of big 
industrial firms. 
“Africa has already lost so much,” declares Gurib-
Fakim, due to the absence of a legal framework to 
protect intellectual property. This was one of her 
reasons for becoming a founding member of the Asso-
ciation for African Medicinal Plants Standards. Since 
its creation in 2005, the organization, which regroups 
scientists, industrialists, exporters and herbal thera-
pists, has pursued its aim to bring to the world 
market African plant remedies that meet interna-
tional norms.
The plant cause
The initiative is promising, as long as these plants 
with their multiple benefits don’t die out. And some 
are already threatened. On Rodrigues, out of 
193 medicinal plants, 23 of them endemic, about 
20 have dwindled down to only one or two clumps. 
“Young people have to be made aware that plants 
are both rare and useful,” she stresses. As a con-
tribution, she published a guide book in 1983 on 
the flora of Mauritius intended for the general 
public. 
Ameenah Gurib-Fakim doesn’t hesitate to come out 
of her laboratory to advocate for plants. In 1998, she 
participated in a World Bank project to create small 
gardens in schools to cultivate medicinal plants. 
“When we give endemic plants value as ornamental 
plants, it helps to propagate them,” she explains. 
The international recognition she is receiving 
today will certainly be helpful to her cause. It also 
distinguishes this woman scientist as a role model of 
success for young female scientists in the South. “To 
encourage girls,” she insists, “you have to impart 
self-confidence very early on, so that they believe 
they have a chance to succeed.” ■
Amina Osman, in Port Louis, Mauritius
