ing tangible contributions to the at-
tainment of internationally agreed 
development goals. 
Moreover the Organization has set 
two overarching priorities- Africa and 
gender equality. In general, UNES-
CO will strive to act in a unified man-
ner and favour an “intersectoral” ap-
proach, rather than organizing work 
sector by sector. UN coherence and 
effectiveness begins at home. As 
we are striving to “deliver as one” at 
the country level, we must also dem-
onstrate within our own organization 
that we can act together as one. 
Lip service alone will not suffice. We 
must also solidify our presence and 
impact at both the global and coun-
try levels, capitalizing on our range of 
competences and functions.
Will UNESCO have 
the necessary resources 
to implement its activities?
It is in the nature of our mission that 
we are always asked to do more and 
hence need more resources. 
But in a world with limited resour- 
ces, where governments are also 
tightening their budgets, we must 
learn to economize and to implement 
our activities in the most cost-effective 
manner. New modalities may need to 
be applied which will allow us to ren-
der assistance with less financial in-
put without compromising results and 
quality of delivery. In this context, think 
only of the potential of South-South 
cooperation. 
At this General Conference, I am 
asking UNESCO’s Member States to 
provide us with a budget level of US$ 
631 million for the next two years. This 
is above the zero-nominal growth level 
that has constrained us in past years. 
It is not as high as many of us would 
have wished. But I am confident that 
it is a level that can command con-
sensus among the different interests 
and aspirations of our Member Go- 
vernments. Consensus on the bud-
get level would thus strengthen the 
Organization as a whole and lay a so- 
lid foundation for support in the years 
to come.                               
You have said that UNESCO 
plays a key role in the reform 
of the United Nation’s system. 
Could you explain? 
UNESCO is playing a key role in 
the reform of the UN system for a 
number of reasons. For one, no sus-
tainable development effort is con-
ceivable at the country level without 
education, without culture and with-
out science and technology which 
are our Organization’s fields of com-
petence. They all are key drivers for 
the attainment of the internationally 
agreed development goals, including 
the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs). UNESCO is indispensable 
in providing the requisite expertise 
and assistance to its Member States. 
Our efforts globally to design a 
structure that better responds to the 
expectations of developing countries 
and the exigencies of donors are al-
ready beginning to bear fruit, in par-
ticular where it counts: for the people 
of developing countries. 
UNESCO is also in a privileged po-
sition to take advantage of the link-
age between global normative work 
and its translation into operational 
reality - applying best practices and 
proven knowledge in all regions of 
the world. 
I am convinced that UNESCO must 
proactively contribute to the UN re-
form pilots currently under way in a 
few countries. This will help us gain 
experience with new, more effective 
modalities of cooperation, and to in-
sert ourselves into a range of com-
mon UN programmes in different 
countries. Dedicated training efforts 
for field and headquarters staff will 
help ensure that UNESCO provides 
high-quality assistance.
What are UNESCO’s priorities 
for the coming two years?
UNESCO’s priorities for the com-
ing two years are set out in the new 
medium-term strategy and the pro-
gramme and budget, both of which 
will be adopted by the General Con-
ference in October. 
Each Programme Sector will have 
to pursue two or three specific pri-
orities and seek to attain explicitly 
defined results. This results-based 
approach will be a consistent fea-
ture of all our activities in the future. 
Our efforts will be measured by the 
extent to which we succeed in mak-
                             What are UNESCO’s priorities for the next two years? On the eve 
                                   of the Organization’s General Conference (16 October - 3 November) 
                                    which will determine its new programme and budget, koïchiro Matsuura, 
                                             the director-General, gives us a preview of the coming biennium.
Responding  
to new exigencies  
Koïchiro Matsuura,  
Director-General of UNESCO.

Koïchiro Matsuura answers Jasmina Šopova’s questions. 
