With The Inheritance of Loss, Kiran 
Desai has become the youngest female 
laureate of the booker Prize (200). 
In her book she talks about exile, 
globalization and belonging to two 
cultures. born in New Delhi in , she 
left India in 8 with her mother, the 
author Anita Desai, to live in england 
and then the United states.
For Kiran Desai, life has been a heady whirl of travel 
and adulation since October 2006, when her second 
book, The Inheritance of Loss (Atlantic Monthly Press, 
2005) won her the coveted Man Booker Prize. The shy 
and unassuming 36-year old who hails from India, 
but has spent more than half her life in the United 
States, is today one of the most sought-after new 
voices on the international literary circuit. 
Criss-crossing the globe from Hay on Wye in Wales 
to Copenhagen, to Shanghai, Hong Kong, South 
Africa, Sri Lanka, Brazil, Canada, Indonesia, Desai 
© Jerry Bauer
Kiran Desai, the youngest laureate of the Booker Prize.



Kiran Desai: A life between east and West
4

laughingly describes her recent life as “living in car-
toon form,” where she hops from place to place. 
Desai’s new life is in stark contrast to the nearly 
eight years she spent toiling on the book that won 
her fame. “It was a long, long journey for me,” she 
admits. “I was devastated and sad at the end of it.” 
The often lonely process of writing was actually a 
happy one for her, she insists. Running out money 
after she spent her publisher’s advance and being too 
poor to afford health insurance or a place to call her 
own was not easy. 
“I was quite stern and mean-spirited while writ-
ing the book, fearful of the risk I was taking,” she 
explains. She hopes winning the Booker will change 
that, allowing her to be “more eccentric” and to “play 
more” when she writes again.
Immigration is a great con game
But the hardest part about writing was coming to 
terms with her own identity, as someone who had 
been born in one country and resided in another. The 
daughter of renowned Indian author Anita Desai, 
Kiran Desai was born in India in 1971 and immigrated 
to the United States via Great Britain when she 
was 15. 
She thought she had “migrated in quite a simple 
way at first”, until she started writing the book and 
confronting “what it means to live between east and 
west.” 
The process led her to examine her own family’s 
history of migration and exile – Desai’s maternal 
grandmother was German and never returned home 
after moving to India before World War II; her grand-
father was a refugee from Bangladesh. Her father’s 
father hailed from a small village in the western 
Indian state of Gujarat, went to England to study, 
and returned to work for the Indian Civil Service. “My 
leaving India was no accident. There were certain 
moves made long ago that ensured that I would 
leave.” 
“I think immigration is a great con game; you tell 
yourself lies, you reinvent yourself in many different 
ways, and to undo all of that took a long time,” she 
said in an interview with CNN. 
At first, Desai imagined that as time went by, 
she would feel more American than Indian, but she 
holds onto her Indian passport. “People are con-
stantly asking me where home is, and after writing 
the book, I have less of an answer than ever before,” 
she said. 
“Literature is located beyond flags and anthems, 
simple ideas of loyalty,” she feels. But working on 
the book led her back to India in many different 
ways. She felt “much more Indian” after writing 
the book than she had before. “Being part of the 
Indian diaspora gives one a precise emotional loca-
tion to work from, if not a precise geographical 
one. This book was a return journey to the fact of 
being Indian, to realizing the perspective was too 
important to give up. America might give me half a 
narrative, but I had to return to India for the other 
half of the story, for emotional depth, historical 
depth.” 
“The book is movingly strong in its humanity… a 
magnificent novel of humane breadth and wisdom, 
comic tenderness and powerful political acuteness,” 
observed the writer Hermione Lee, who headed the 
team of judges awarding the Booker to Desai, making 
her the youngest woman to win the award in its 40-
year history.
4
4
© Flickr/Sangeet Kothari
The Indian band Colonial Cousins rocks New York, near Bryant 
Park.

My mother opens a magic space 
to me
While Desai is quick to acknowledge the influence of 
writers including V.S. Naipaul, R.K.Narayan, Salman 
Rushdie, Chinua Achebe, Naguib Mahfouz, Gabriel 
Garcia Marquez, Truman Capote, Tennessee Williams, 
Kenzaburo Oe, Kazuo Ichiguro, and Gabriel Garcia 
Marquez, it is her mother who has had the most pro-
found influence on her writing. “To my mother I owe 
a debt so profound and so great that this book feels 
as much hers as it does mine,” Kiran Desai said, as 
she accepted the prize which her mother has been 
nominated for three times, but never won. 
The mother-daughter relationship, explains Desai, 
goes much deeper than just editing manuscripts. 
“When I walk into her home (Desai lives about an 
hour’s drive away from her mother) it is almost as if 
another dimension opens up, a magic space in which 
I can work and think like nowhere else,” she explains. 
“It is the peace of it, the stillness of the light, the 
flavour of exile that seems essential to writing, the 
fact that everything seems to bend to the fact of it 
being a writer’s home. It’s the rhythm of a writing 
life that comes from 50 years of working, and from 
that older time of being a writer in India when you 
wrote for writing’s sake alone, not for the cocktail 
samosas.” 
In the not-too-distant future, Desai hopes to 
escape the limelight and spend some time with her 
mother in Mexico, where they will both write and she 
will start her new book. Like her mother, Kiran Desai 
does not feel comfortable discussing her work before 
she finishes writing it. But her third book will likely 
be set in “a mish-mash of locations for the sake of 
being able to explore the truth and lies that exist 
between places,” she reveals. 
Desai will also stray far from fiction to contribute 
to “AIDS Sutra: The Hidden Story of AIDS in India,” a 
collection of first-hand accounts by well-known writ-
ers based on encounters with a wide variety of people 
affected by AIDS in India. To be published by Random 
House India in May, the book is funded by the Bill 
and Melinda Gates Foundation, and aims to promote 
a public dialogue about the disease in India and 
abroad. 
Shiraz Sidhva, Indian journalist, 
living in the United States 
© Regoli Nara
The Inheritance of Loss brought Kiran Desai back to India, her 
country of origin.
4
