Torbay – alias the English Riviera - on south Devon-
shire coast is a gentle arc of pink sandy beaches and 
red cliffs, linking three towns that could hardly be 
more different. At the southern tip of the bay, Brix-
ham, home to Britain’s largest fishing fleet, still 
looks quaint, with its cottages and shops huddled 
under the steep cliffs of Berry Head. Opposite, 
Torquay’s Victorian elegance has acquired a rougher, 
urban edge, as though every square inch of land, 
© UNESCO/Peter Coles



View of Torbay with raised beaches in cliffs showing signs  
of past sea level change.
4
even impossibly steep hills, has been built on, with 
little attempt at coherence. And, in the middle, 
Paignton, with its wide lawns, palm trees and former 
gentleman’s club, resembles a once beautiful old 
lady, now relying on powder and rouge. 
For local historian, John Risdon, “Torbay’s three 
main towns, Torquay, Paignton and Brixham owe their 
very existence to their geology, which created shel-
tered beaches and harbours”. 
On a balmy summer’s day, as children paddle in 
the sea with their buckets and spades, it is hard to 
imagine that this was once arid, equatorial desert, or 
that corals had flourished here in tropical waters. 
It is equally hard to conjure up a picture of early 
humans, a few hundred million years later, chasing 
mammoth over the cliffs, then competing with hyae-
nas for the meat. But these are some of the time 
warps that, with the right guide, are clearly visible in 
what, in September 2007, became the latest addition 
to a new Global Network of National Geoparks, under 
the aegis of UNESCO. 
The concept of geopark is recent. “Culture and 
biodiversity have well-established programmes to 
make sure they are valued and protected,” says Mar-
garete Patzak, of UNESCO’s Division of Earth Sci-
ences, “but, until 2004, when the geoparks initiative 
was launched, our geological heritage had largely 
been overlooked.” Since the network has been 
neanderthal man  
at the seaside
Before Agatha Christie and Charles Darwin, 
the English Riviera was visited by the 
Neanderthal man! So many celebrities in 
the United Kingdom’s new geopark, the first 
in the world entirely located in an urban 
zone! The new Global Network of National 
Geoparks, launched in 2004, is one of the 
tools under the aegis of UNESCO that aims 
at preserving our environment.
<<<The Global Network of National Geoparks
The Global Network of National Geoparks, under 
the umbrella of UNESCO, was launched in 2004 as a 
platform for active cooperation between experts and 
practitioners in geological heritage. 
To qualify for membership of the network, a proposed 
Geopark has to be an area with a significant geological 
heritage, and have a coherent and strong management 
structure, with a sustainable economic development 
strategy. A Geopark creates enhanced employment 
opportunities for the people who live there, bringing 
sustainable and real economic benefit, usually through 
the development of sustainable tourism. 
The Global Network currently features 54 selected, high 
quality National Geoparks from 17 countries (Austria, 
Brazil, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, France, Germany, 
Greece, Ireland, Italy, Iran, Malaysia, Norway, Portugal, 
Rumania, Spain, United Kingdom).>>>

 running, the 53 national geoparks so far designated 
have brought private sector, public and research com-
munities together in a number of innovative local 
and national projects.
A stage set worthy  
of Agatha Christie
There is probably no better place to get to grips with 
the extraordinary history in the English Riviera 
Geopark than underground, in Kents Cavern, now 
buried among the houses, shops and hotels coating 
the steep hills of Torquay, on the northern cusp of 
Torbay. 
About 375 million years ago, this part of England 
was under the sea, south of the equator, before the 
tectonic movements of the Earth’s crust thrust it 
north, forming today’s continents. Over millions of 
years, shells and bones from marine organisms formed 
the cave’s sedimentary limestone rock. A series of ice 
ages and warmer, interglacial periods, starting about 
2.5 million years ago, hollowed out the caves provid-
ing shelter for animals and early man. 
“The cave has an uninterrupted sequence of human 
occupation going back half a million years,” says Nick 
Powe, Managing Director of Kents Cavern and great 
grandson of Francis Powe, who bought the cave in 
1903. Francis’s father in law, George Smerdon, had 
been foreman on pioneering excavations there, led 
by William Pengelly in the late 1800’s. By candle-
light, Pengelly, a teacher from a small town in Corn-
wall, systematically dug away the floor of the cave, 
formed by debris after each ice age, turning up evi-
dence of human occupation 500,000 years ago, along-
side bones from cave bears, cave lions, mammoths, 
woolly rhinos and hyaenas. 
Charles Darwin, who wrote the finishing chapters 
of his Origin of Species at Meadfoot Beach in Torquay, 
was in regular correspondence with Pengelly whose 
discoveries shook the orthodox scientific community 
in London, which adhered to the Biblical theory that 
God created Man about 6000 years ago. 
A fragment of human jawbone found in the cave, 
recently estimated to be 35-40,000 years old, is the 
oldest record of modern man (Homo sapiens) Europe. 
Now, DNA from the fragment is being studied by the 
UK’s Natural History Museum. It may, after all, be 
from a Neanderthal skull, and therefore a crucial link 
in the history of human occupation of the United 
Kingdom, proving that Neanderthals and modern man 
coexisted there. 
Kents Cavern also inspired one of Britain’s most 
famous crime writers, Agatha Christie, who was born 
and grew up in Torquay. In her murder mystery, The 
Man in the Brown Suit , Agatha Christie’s heroine, 
Anne Beddingfeld, describes her palaeontologist 
father spending his days in Hampsly Cavern, “bring-
ing to light portions of cave bear and woolly 
rhinoceros”.
© UNESCO/Peter Coles
Nick Powe, Managing Director of Kents Cavern, holding 
reconstruction of Neanderthal skull.
4
4
© UNESCO/Peter Coles
Fossilised coral at Hopes Nose, Torquay, Devon.

Sustainable development is more 
than concrete and cranes
Although the geoparks initiative is aimed at preserv-
ing our global geological heritage, explains Marga-
rete Patzak, “it is also very much about people”. The 
initiative has even led to a new concept of “geotour-
ism” as tool for sustainable economic development. 
“Geologically interesting places like the Antarctic or 
deserts would not be considered for geopark status,” 
she says, “as they are too inaccessible”. 
For Mel Border, Geopark Officer and Education 
Ranger for Torbay Coast and Countryside Trust, being 
located in an urban area, the English geopark has 
direct benefits for the local community, not least 
through its potential for job creation. “There is 
extreme deprivation in the Torbay area,” she says, 
“since the decline in tourism in the 1970s. Some local 
children have never even been to the beach.” 

The geopark now has a network of local teachers 
developing curriculum-based coursework to be made 
available online to teachers across Europe. “Economic 
development comes from the roots up,” adds Nick 
Powe. “It’s about educating children. It’s amazing 
how some schools have taken to the geoparks idea.” 
The English Riviera Geopark Organisation (ERGO) is 
now actively developing its partnerships not just with 
schools and universities in the region, but also with 
other geoparks through the 32-member European 
Geopark Network. Local experts regularly give guided 
walks and lectures for the public. About 3.7 million 
tourists visit the region each year. Meanwhile, ERGO 
is building private sector involvement through brand-
ing and a code of practice. “Sustainable development 
is more than concrete and cranes”, says Nick Powe. 
Peter Coles, British journalist. 
