The inauguration ceremony for the 
Aksum Obelisk (or Stele 2 for the 
experts) coincides, give or take a 
few days, with the end of the second 
Ethiopian millennium. The year 2001 
begins on 12 September in Ethiopia, 
which still uses the Julian calendar 
replaced in the West by the Grego-
rian in the 16th century. The African 
Union has decided to make the new 
Ethiopian millennium a “millennium 
for all Africa”, in tribute to a country 
that was never colonized.
In March 2005, UNESCO announced to 
the world the return to Ethiopia of 
the Aksum Obelisk, in Rome since 
1937. Mussolini’s troops had found it 
lying on the ground, broken into 
three pieces, and hauled it back to 
the Italian capital. 
It took extensive negotiation to bring 
about the stele’s return, called for by 
the peace accords in 1947. The  largest 
aircraft in the world, the Antonov, 
had to be hired to transport the three 
enormous granite sections in three 
stages. The Aksum airport had to be 
modernized and two bridges rein-
forced for the convoy to reach its 
destination. Above all, what had to 
be ensured was that Stele 2’s reinstal-
lation would  … 
Focus
The reTurn of The 
Aksum oBelisk  
Aksum, Ethiopian site listed as World 
Heritage since 1980, regains its status as a 
hub of African culture this month. A number 
of eminent personalities from culture and 
politics are converging on it - as they did at 
the beginning of our era when the Kingdom 
of Aksum rivalled Rome, Persia and China 
- to pay tribute not to a king, this time, 
but to an obelisk! The 24-metre, 152-ton 
monolith sculpted in Aksum 17 centuries 
ago, which has become a symbol of the 
Ethiopian people’s identity, has returned to 
its original home after 70 years of exile.  
Jasmina Šopova
Aksum, July 2008: the steel tower waiting for its obelisk. 
© UNESCO/Michel Ravassard
Partial view of the main stele site; start of the work to reinstall  
the Aksum Obelisk. © UNESCO/F. Bandarin

When the second block was placed 
within the tower on top of the first 
one, the synthetic fibres – Kevlar 
bars – were inserted in the new 
holes before the surfaces of the two 
blocks were sealed by a resin-based 
mortar. Same procedure for the third 
block. A technological feat, to say 
the least.
Ancestral grandeur
The scale of this operation led by 
UNESCO is reminiscent of its first 
world heritage safeguarding cam-
paign 50 years ago in Nubia. At that 
time, the Abu Simbel and Philae 
Egyptian temples were cut up into 
blocks and moved to a new location 
to avoid their being submerged after 
the construction of the great Aswan 
Dam. 
This latest project cost close to five 
million dollars, just for the studies 
and construction. The funding, also 
covering the dismantling of the obe-
lisk in Rome and its transport back to 
Aksum, is entirely provided by the 
Italian government. 
Aksum is thus recovering little by 
little its ancestral grandeur, lost 
for the first 1000 years of our era. 
The obelisk is majest ical ly 
enthroned in the middle of this 
little town, once the capital of an 
empire and a centre of Christianity. 
Aksum’s cultural wealth belies the 
town’s small size: a labyrinth of 
royal tombs, ruins of ancient pal-
aces likely to include the Queen of 
Sheba’s, ruins of 4th century 
churches…Aksum’s fabulous treas-
ures will be revealed in our next 
issue, devoted to the Ethiopian 
sites inscr ibed on the World 
Heritage List.  
Lattanzi for the reinstallation of the 
obelisk. It executed the engineering 
project designed by the Italian firm 
Croci Associati, in collaboration with 
Ethiopian experts, notably the 
archaeologist Tecle Hagos and the 
engineer Messele Haile Mariam. 
A platform with rails was installed, 
in order to slide the three pieces of 
the stele up to an immense steel 
structure, only one-tenth the size of 
the Eiffel Tower but equally impres-
sive. Using a hemispheric hinge and 
a mobile crane, the first block was 
hauled up the tower then dropped 
inside it, on top of its new eight-
met re re inforced conc rete 
foundation. 
“That way it won’t fall down again!” 
jokes the Italian technician Mauro 
Cristini, who emphasizes he’s no 
expert on “obelisk erec-
tion”. How’s that? He’s 
the head of the project 
team! “Have you seen 
many obelisks erected 
recently?” he says with 
a smile. True, the sub-
ject is no longer taught 
in schools. 
Much more seriously, he 
explains how each block 
is attached to the 
other: “At the end of 
the 1930s, the three 
parts of the stele were 
patched back together 
using metal bars 18 cm 
in diameter. This time 
we’ve added four perfo-
rations in each block 
that are only 5 cm in 
diameter, and inserted 
synthetic fibre bars to 
improve the stele’s seis-
mic resistance.” 
… not damage the archaeological 
site, which comprises a royal necrop-
olis from several pre-Christian dynas-
ties. (The UNESCO team carried out 
“non-destructive” remote sensing 
exploration that makes it possible to 
see what is underground without dig-
ging.) Finally, it was necessary to 
consolidate Stele 3, standing not far 
from its famous neighbour. Among 
the decorated monoliths in situ (most 
of them are not engraved), Stele 3 is 
the only one still standing. It leans 
slightly, however, like the Tower of 
Pisa.
A technological feat
In short, after two years of work, 
UNESCO’s World Heritage Centre 
signed an agreement in June 2007 
with the construction company 
Mauro Cristini, head of the technical team, responsible  
for the obelisk’s reinstallation.  © UNESCO/Jasmina Šopova

What an adventure!
The 2005 return of the Aksum Obelisk to its original 
site in northern Ethiopia is a highly symbolic event. 
Its reinstallation this summer (2008) is a genuine 
technical feat.
The second segment approaches the first. The techni-
cians insert the Kevlar bars in the new holes, to 
increase the stele’s seismic resistance.
Before and after: one of the metal bars (18 cm diam-
eter) inserted in the stele in the late 1930s, in Italy, 
and one of the new ones (5 cm diameter) made of syn-
thetic fibres inserted in Ethiopia.
A risky operation: temporary metal reinforcements 
used during the stele’s transport were replaced with 
new ones, making it possible to lift the granite blocks 
and place them inside the tower.
