Lydia Cacho ribeiro: “International 
visibility is a shield for threatened 
journalists.”
“I believe the role of journalism is to be 
a lantern, allowing society to exercise its 
right to know and understand; I believe 
human rights are non-negotiable. As long 
as I live, I will continue to write and 
writing will keep me alive.” 
My work as a journalist and my activism as a citizen 
are intertwined. I have been sensitive to the cause 
of defending human rights since I was a small child. 
My mother, who was French and moved to Mexico 
© José Gallardo / Random House Mondadori
Lydia Cacho Ribeiro, 2008 UNESCO–Guillermo Cano World 
Press Freedom Prize.
This forceful declaration of faith is made by Lydia 
Cacho Ribeiro (45), Mexican freelance journalist and 
head of a centre that helps abused women in 
Cancun. 
Laureate of the UNESCO/Guillermo Cano World 
Press Freedom Prize, she answers questions put by 
Lucia Iglesias (UNESCO). 
Through your books and hundreds of articles, you 
have denounced pedophilia, trafficking of minors, 
corruption, organized crime, gender discrimination 
and violence against women. You’ve done it despite 
death threats and attempts to murder you. You’ve 
fought legal battles. Where do you find the strength 
to act? 

when she was very young, had always practiced social 
activism. It was an integral part of her life and she 
brought up her children in that spirit. I grew up in a 
family where defending human rights was the natural 
responsibility of citizens, and neither an effort nor a 
sacrifice. 
For many years I hosted a show for a community 
radio station in Quinatana Roo state, where we were 
always bringing up the issue of violence against 
women. Sometimes women came unexpectedly to the 
studio. Some had been slashed with machetes; others 
told us their husbands threatened to kill them. They 
asked us for help but I didn’t know what to do for 
them. So then we decided to start a support group 
and finally we were able to open a maximum security 
shelter for women and children who were the victims 
of violence, as well as a counseling and aid centre. 
How does the centre operate?
The Cancun centre for aid to women and their chil-
dren (CIAM) is a non-profit organization that subsists 
on donations. I run it, but I make my living from 
journalism. The staff, though, is on salary. They are 
professionals in the defense of victims. The CIAM 
has been recognized as one of the best aid centres in 
Mexico. It’s a progressive organization. We’ve pro-
tected wives of drug dealers, politicians, masons, 
farmers….in other words, we take in any woman 
knocking on our door who is involved in a violent 
relationship.
Do you think things are in the process of changing? 
Is all this work worth the effort? 
Of course it’s worth it. Many things are evolving, 
people are in prison because of the book I wrote [Los 
demonios del Edén, Published by Grijalbo Mondadori, 
2005], many victims spoke out and received help in 
different parts of the country. Society reacted vigor-
ously, and for me it’s a great honour. More than prizes 
we might win, it proves our work as journalists is ful-
filling its purpose and being useful. 
In addition, after my detention and because of 
the media reaction and the intervention of important 
social and political actors, journalism was decrimi-
nalized. I was thrown in jail precisely because jour-
nalists could legally be held after being accused of 
defamation and libel. All that disappeared following 
my court case. Now, such matters are tried in civil 
The itinerary of a heroine
A few dates
1963 Lydia Cacho Ribeiro is born in Mexico. 
2002 She is awarded the Journalism Prize for Journalism of the State of Quintana Roo. 
2003 Publication of Las Provincias del Alma (Demac Publishers), where she describes the discrimination 
against women with HIV. 
2005 Publication of Los Demonios del Edén (The Demons of Eden - Grijalbo Mondadori Publishers), 
indicting the paedophile mafia in Mexico. 
2006 Publication of Esta Boca es mía y tuya tambien (This Mouth is Yours and Mine too - Planeta 
Publishers). The same year, she is awarded the Francisco Ojeda Award for journalistic courage 
for her investigation on the violent death of hundreds of young women in Ciudad Juárez, 
Northern Mexico, the Don Sergio Méndez Arceo Prize for the protection of human rights, 
the Yo Dona Prize rewarding humanitarian work (Spain) and the Coatlicue-Mujeres en el Arte 
Prize. 
2007 Publication of Memorias de una Infamia (Memoirs of an infamy - Giraldo Mondadori Publishers). 
She obtains the Amnesty International Ginetta Sagan Award for Women and Children’s Rights. 
She receives distinctions from non governmental organizations Human Rights Watch and 
Oxfam. The Cable News Network (CNN) gives her the title of CNN Hero 
2008 She receives the third Casa Amèrica Catalunya Prize for Freedom of Expression (Spain), the 
Unión de Periodistas de Valencia Prize (Spain) and UNESCO’s World Press Freedom Prize. 
4

courts, as they are in all other more advanced 
countries. 
Furthermore legislation concerning child pornog-
raphy has developed considerably; above all, the sub-
ject has been covered in the media. Sexual abuse of 
children was a taboo subject in Mexico. Since my 
court case, forums on the issue have multiplied and 
specialized organizations have sprung up.
Do you fear for your life? Have you ever been afraid 
during your career?
Of course I was afraid when I was kidnapped in late 
2005. I was held somewhere between Cancun and 
central Mexico and tortured for 20 hours. But as time 
goes by, you learn to master your fear and it becomes 
a tool for making certain decisions and building cer-
tain strategies. 
I have to say too that after receiving about 20 
death threats over the telephone, you learn to keep 
living without really taking it into account, because 
it would be insane. I’d have to leave not only my 
country but maybe also my profession, and I’m not 
ready to do that. 
Do you have special security to protect you when 
you go out? 
For about three years I had four federal agents as an 
escort and I went everywhere in an armoured van. 
But in March 2007, this federal van was the target of 
a bombing attack, and the police still haven’t 
4
 investigated the matter. So it seems having federal 
agents in charge of your security isn’t really a guar-
antee. A few months ago I decided to give up this 
escort and to simply take the usual precautions that 
reporters have to take when exercising their profes-
sion, wherever they are. 
But can you work normally under these 
circumstances? 
That’s exactly where there’s a trap in the security 
measures offered to journalists. Since I investigate 
organized crime and human rights, it’s very difficult 
to get certain informants to speak to me, given that 
we are constantly guarded. 
Last year, when I’d begun writing my book on the 
traffic of women in the world, I felt that my range of 
action was limited because I wasn’t free to talk to 
my informants. To be guarded when you’re a journal-
ist is really like being in prison, as if you were a 
criminal under the supervision of police, not know-
ing whether they’re watching over you or watching 
you. 
How do you feel about receiving the UNESCO/ 
Guillermo Cano World Press Freedom Prize? 
First I’m very honoured to be awarded such recogni-
tion, when after all I’m simply doing a job I love and 
consider essential in a country like mine. Psychologi-
cally it’s very important for me to feel supported 
today, after being imprisoned and tortured because 
of my work; and after these events revealed the 
extent of institutional corruption that victimizes 
journalists in Mexico. We must remember that after 
Iraq, Mexico is one of the most dangerous countries 
in the world for journalists. 
And I also feel this kind of recognition gives us in 
a way a certain protection, because international 
visibility is a kind of shield.
What topic are you working on right now?
As I said, I’m finishing a book about the interna-
tional networks involved in the trafficking of women 
and girls. It’s a map of the world showing not only 
who is behind these organizations and how the net-
works buying and selling human beings operate, but 
also the relationships maintained by highly-placed 
political leaders locally and internationally to  protect 
© Cimac
Lydia Cacho at the Journalists’ Club in Mexico, her home town.
4

On May 3, UNESCO cel-
ebrates World Press 
Freedom Day, underlin-
ing the issue of access 
to information. What 
can be done so that 
people can have access 
to plural and independ-
ent information? 
Electronic media play a 
crucial role. Media 
monopoly, much criti-
cized by the interna-
tional community, is one of the major problems today 
in Mexico. That’s why keeping community radio sta-
tions going is vital. Unfortunately we’re in a phase of 
repression regarding these radio stations. A few days 
ago in the state of Oaxaca, two young women who 
managed a community radio broadcasting news in 
one of Mexico’s traditional languages were murdered. 
Here in the state of Quintana Roo where I’ve been 
living and working for 22 years, we speak Maya, but 
news are very rarely broadcast in this language. I 
think we need more community radio and that we 
have to invest in electronic media, which are more 
easily accessible to the Mexican people, even if the 
most important issue is to improve content. 
* Lydia Cacho Ribeiro’s concern for the future of community 
radio speaks to an issue of critical importance, first and 
foremost for practitioners, but also for policy leaders and 
scholars. A 2008 World Bank report calls community radio 
vital to development; yet laws governing spectrum regula-
tion often disadvantage not-for-profit community broadcas-
ters. The issue has been the focus of a two-year study funded 
by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of 
Canada. The study — Sound as a Dollar?: The Propertization 
of Spectrum Resources and Implications for Non-Profit Com-
munity Radio in Guatemala — was undertaken by Victoria 
Henderson (Queen’s University) and is due for release in Fall 
2008.
the networks involved in the 
trade. 
What is the situation right 
now in Mexico regarding free-
dom of the press and 
information? 
It’s evident journalism has 
become in recent years a cru-
cial element for change in 
Mexico, as the democratic 
process inevitably goes hand 
in hand with more truthful 
information. The single party 
that ruled the country for 70 years controlled the 
media, both economically and editorially. With the 
change in government, when President Vicente Fox 
was elected for the preceding six-year term 
(2000-2006), we saw a degree of new openness in 
the media, which we Mexican journalists are in the 
process of learning how to handle. 
It is crucial to have journalists in Mexico in 2008 
to describe the real situation in this country of 104 
million inhabitants, 30 million of whom are in the 
grip of extreme poverty. It’s a country where the rich 
are richer than Europeans and the poor poorer than 
Africans. We journalists have to understand these 
disparities and the risk we run by uncovering the 
fundamental characteristics of national problems. 
“...as indigenous women, we have our 
space in the radio. And this space... I know 
that the mainstream radio would never 
give it to us because we are women and 
as indigenous people we are discriminated 
against. In this case, in our radio, we 
have space to express ourselves and to say 
what we feel, what we think... about our 
traditional clothing, about our language...”  
Angelica Cubur from Radio Ixchel 
(Guatemala). *
4
© V. Henderson, 2007
Angelica Cubur, of Radio Ixchel (Guatemala).
