The most fundamental challenge 
in the world today is poverty. I 
do not know of any major issue that 
is not connected to poverty and the 
increasing divide between those who 
have and those who are forced to 
look for food on the world’s rubbish 
dumps. 
This is also the case with AIDS. 
However, poverty is not an active 
virus. But the consequences of pov-
erty are in a profound way linked with 
AIDS and the increasing hardships it 
constitutes for the poorest countries 
of the world. 
The worst thing about poverty and 
the need that comes along with it 
is that so many of the problems 
involved are completely unneces-
sary. There is so much we could 
have prevented already and 
stopped yesterday – if we had had 
the will. We have the resources, 
we have the logistics. But still we 
live in the age of unnecessary 
problems. 
Let me now talk about illiteracy. 
It is a disgrace for the whole 
world that we in the year 2008 
have yet to eradicate illiteracy on 
our planet. Still millions of children 
are forced to enter life without know-
ing how to read and write. The fact 
that we deny so many children these 
elementary tools means that we 
render them defenseless on so many 
issues related to AIDS. How can we 
expect a young person who lacks the 
ability to understand written infor-
mation, who is unable to grasp the 
essence of vital knowledge, to pro-
tect her- or himself from becoming 
infected? Of course people talk, of 
course there is radio. There are also 
theatrical groups who travel the 
country to inform people. But the 
fact remains that we live in a world 
where the ability to read is necessary 
to acquire information.
It is important to see this connection. 
One of the most crucial instruments 
for controlling the proliferation of 
AIDS in the future must be to make 
sure that every child is given the right 
to learn how to read and write. 
Being a writer myself I know that 
there is only one symbolic book that 
truly matters: the ABC-book. Whether 
it is written in a book or on a compu-
ter screen does not really matter. 
Naturally, the fight against poverty is 
a war fought on many different levels 
simultaneously. And since we will be 
forced to make priorities I am con-
vinced that to teach people how to 
read and write is decisive. 
Poverty – AIDS – illiteracy. They all 
connect. And at least one of these 
issues we could have eradicated yes-
terday – illiteracy. 
We did not. 
Let us do it today.  
The ABC Book: The only imporTAnT Book
World famous novelist, winner of the Academy of Swedish Crime Writers prize (1991 
and 1995) and of the prestigious Litteris et Artibus award (2006), Henning Mankell has 
another less-publicized interest besides writing mysteries: health and education in Africa. 
The Swedish author, 60, divides his time between Europe and Africa and is the volunteer 
director of the “Teatro Avenida” in Maputo (Mozambique).  
All royalties from “I Die, but the Memory Lives on”, the book he published  
in 2004 (Random House UK Ltd), are donated to the fight against HIV/AIDS. 
Henning Mankell agreed to share his main concerns with our readers  
in this issue’s editorial, written specially for the UNESCO Courier.
Henning Mankell, Swedish novelist  
