his name is Saroyan
William Saroyan is not simply the writer 
with a style as light as the mists above 
the fields and fruit trees of Fresno, 
his hometown in California (United 
States). His work, strongly influenced by 
a childhood torn between the Armenia 
of his origins and the promise of 
America at the beginning of the 20th 
century, is marked by the dislocation 
of immigration and uprooting. 
A prolific author with a tone both tender 
and sarcastic about the small world 
that nurtured his early years, William 
Saroyan had a life darker than his sunny 
writings would lead us to believe.
almost normal family life in Fresno, where most of 
the residents were Armenian farmers. 
Saroyan taught himself to write by devouring all 
the books that fell into his hands. He quit school 
early, finding a job at the San Francisco Telegraph 
Company, and started writing his first pieces, some 
of which were published by the Armenian-American 
newspaper “Hairenik”, founded in Boston in 1889 by 
the Hayerenik Association. Originally published in 
Armenian, the paper became entirely English-lan-
guage in 1969 under the name “Armenian Weekly”. 
In celebration of the 100th anniversary of his birth 
on 31 August 2008, the UNESCO Courier pays tribute 
to a writer of substantial humor and infinite 
melancholy. 
William Saroyan was born on 31 August 1908 in 
Fresno, into an Armenian family that had immigrated 
to California in the United States. The family cocoon 
soon disintegrated. His father, a modest farmer who 
had tried briefly to find fortune in New Jersey, died 
in 1911. The family fell apart and William and his 
brothers were sent to the orphanage. Six years later, 
his mother Takouhi found work and was able to take 
her children back. Young William was restored to an 
© All rights reserved
In "My name is Aram", William Saroyan paints the best portrait 
of his youth in California.
4

4 Much of Saroyan’s writing is set in Fresno, which 
has decided to celebrate his centenary this year. 
Many first-generation Armenian immigrants found a 
home there, as did survivors of the 1915 genocide. 
Saroyan’s childhood left him with strong impressions. 
He depicts a semi-peasant society where Armenian-
American children grew up among the watermelon 
fields, the big traditional patriarchal Armenian family 
and school, which was supposed to teach them the 
rules and language of their new homeland. 
Though warm, the “family clan” described by 
Saroyan is deeply nostalgic for the natal soil. It is 
also marked by the contrast between Armenian soci-
ety and the often painful adjustment to American 
society.
The writer who turned down the 
Pulitzer prize
It was undoubtedly in “My name is Aram”, published 
in 1940, that Saroyan most vividly portrayed the 
years of his youth amidst a gallery of truculent and 
offbeat adult characters, a slice of secular Armenian 
life under the California sun. Yet it was another 
book, 
“The Daring Young Man on the Flying Trapeze and 
Other Stories”, published in 1934, that brought him 
significant success. Saroyan describes the tribula-
tions of a young writer in America’s Great Depression. 
In 1946, he published “The Adventures of Wesley 
Jackson” and narrowly escaped court-marshal, the 
army deeming the book overly pacifist. 
His first theatre play in 1939, “My heart’s in the 
Highlands”, was staged at the Guild Theatre in New 
York. His other play published that year, “The Time of 
your Life”, earned him a Pulitzer prize, which he 
refused. Some say Saroyan rejected the idea of a 
press magnate like Pulitzer judging works of art; 
others maintain Saroyan simply thought the play was 
“no better and no worse” than the rest of his work. 
Most of Saroyan’s narratives have a light tone and 
a host of humorous details, yet melancholy often 
seeps in. His life was far from harmonious. At the end 
of the war and following his marriage, which would 
give him two children, his growing success assured 
him an income. He began dividing his time between 
Fresno and travel to Europe and to Russia to visit 
Armenia, but also took to alcohol and gambling. His 
contradictory passions prompted a divorce. By the 
end of the 1950s, he was living more or less perma-
nently in Paris, still drinking and gambling. He died 
18 May 1981 in the place where he was born, Fresno. 
Laurence Ritter, Armenian journalist
