Fossilized skeletons of amphibians and reptiles inside 
stumps of fossilized trees preserved in their upright 
growth position for 300 million years: that’s what 
the Scotsman Charles Lyell and the Nova Scotian Wil-
liam Dawson found on the cliffs of Nova Scotia, east-
ern Canada, in the middle of the 19th century. Since 
this extraordinary adventure of the founding father 
of modern geology and the most outstanding Cana-
dian geologist of the 19th century, the Joggins Fossil 
Cliffs have attracted geologists, studentsand other 
people of all ages. 
These cliffs are not fossilized cliffs per se. They 
are made of sedimentary rocks containing fossils of 
plants and animals that existed when the sediments 
© UNESCO/Walley Hayes
The Joggins cliffs are the Galápagos  
of the Carboniferous period.
tropical canada!
Two metre long “millipedes” and thirty metre high “scale trees” once inhabited the 
now ghostly Joggins forest, on the western coast of Nova Scotia, Canada. A geological 
wonder, the Joggins Fossil Cliffs have been added to the World Heritage List.
4

were deposited by flooding rivers, during the latter 
geological Carboniferous period. 
The twenty to thirty metre high cliffs are made of 
numerous sloping layers of Carboniferous sedimen-
tary rocks. They are covered by a ten to twelve metre 
thick horizontal deposit of Till or “Boulder Clay,” left 
about thirteen thousand years ago during the melt-
ing of the thick sheet of ice that blanketed the area 
during the last Ice Age. 
The cliffs are exposed on the shore of the 
Chignecto Bay near the head of the Bay of Fundy, to 
the North East and South West of the small town of 
Joggins. The late Carboniferous strata slope down to 
the south at about twenty degrees from the horizon-
tal. In places, the originally horizontal sediment 
layers are cut by river channels that migrated to dif-
ferent positions while meandering over their flood-
plains. Later flooding deposited new sediment layers 
in the channels. 
The Carboniferous sedimentary rocks and their 
contained fossils are all of non-marine, terrestrial 
origin, and provide many clues regarding the late 
Carboniferous environment and climate. All the clues 
indicate the sedimentation took place under a tropi-
cal climate, on a portion of the crust located in the 
Tropics near the Earth’s equator. 
Since then, ocean-floor spreading (Continental 
Drift) has made this part of the crust move north-
wards to its present position, about half- way 
between the Equator and the North Pole.
Giant millipedes…
Perhaps the most remarkable animal that existed in 
the jungle-like forests of Joggins during the Coal Age 
was “Arthropleura” – a two metre long arthropod 
similar to an enormous millipede or a sowbug, which 
lived on the rotting vegetation of the forest floor. 
Large slabs bearing this beast’s distinctive footprints 
were found in 1964 in a huge rock fall near Lower 
Cove, at the northern end of the cliff section. The 
footprints, recovered in 1966, were moulded into a 
polyester-resin and fibreglass cast that was on dis-
play at Mount Allison University in Sackville (New 
Brunswick) until 1999, and is now at the Fundy Geo-
logical Museum in Parrsboro, Nova Scotia. A large 
piece of the rock bearing the original trackway is on 
display at the new Joggins Fossil Cliffs Interpretive 
Centre. 
No actual specimen of the animal itself has been 
found at Joggins, but its tracks are abundant and it 
must have existed there in large numbers. Similar 
trackways occur in other areas of the Upper 4
© UNESCO/Walley Hayes
The Joggins cliffs have attracted visitors  
since they were discovered.
© UNESCO/Walley Hayes
Fossilized tree.
4

 Carboniferous rocks in Nova Scotia, and also on the 
other side of the Atlantic Ocean in western Scotland, 
on the Island of Arran in the Firth of Clyde. 
Besides actual land-dwelling creatures such as 
“Arthropleura”, fossils of aquatic animals living in 
the rivers and lakes of the area and rare examples of 
airborne, flying insects, such as large dragonflies, 
have been found.
… and scale trees
The trees in this equatorial jungle were enormous 
“Scale Trees” related to present-day Club Mosses or 
Lycopods. Their bark was covered by leaf scars that 
looked similar to the scales of fish or reptiles, and 
whose pattern varied depending on the type of tree. 
A diamond pattern is usually characteristic of “Lepi-
dodendron” whereas “Sigillaria” is characterized by 
parallel vertical rows of scars on the trunk. “Lepido-
dendron” and “Sigillaria” were the most abundant 
trees in the ancient Joggins forests. 
These trees were gigantic: the fossilized trunks 
could reach one metre in diameter and be thirty 
metres high. Their roots, called Stigmaria, are sedi-
ment-filled cylindrical fossils spreading out from the 
bases of the stumps. They are found in a layer of 
fossil soil called seat-earth or underclay, upon which 
the trees used to grow. Such layers were usually 
located below coal seams, which resulted from the 
combination of tree remains, rotten vegetation and 
peat that accumulated on the forest floor and were 
compressed by successive sediment layers and 
forests. 
The boggy undergrowth of the forests abounded 
in Calamites, a plant species similar to present-day 
Horsetails or Equisetums whose fossilized stems, 
occasionally with needle-like leaves still attached, 
are often found in the area. 
If you want a little souvenir, the beach and fore-
shore of Joggins are full of sandstone casts of Calam-
ites and Stigmaria. However, be careful! The site is a 
protected area where fossils cannot be extracted from 
the cliffs or foreshore reefs without a special permit. 
Laing Ferguson, Mount Allison University, Sackville 
(New Brunswick, Canada). 
