All countries – rich and poor – will have to sit 
around the same table to find a solution to 
the problem of climate change, believes the 
Italian climatologist Filippo Giorgi. Member of 
IPCC, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (Nobel Peace Prize 2007),  
Mr Giorgi is also the head of the Earth System 
Physics Section in UNESCO’s Abdus Salam 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics 
“Abdus Salam” (Trieste, Italy).
Interview by Jasmina Šopova.
Refugees of the 
future will be 
“climate refugees”
© Francisco Ferreira de Campos (Brazil)
Drawing by Francisco Ferreira de Campos (Brazil), one of the 
laureates of the student contest organized by IYPE. 4

According to the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report 
(2 February 2007), “most of the global average 
warming over the past 50 years is very likely due to 
anthropogenic greenhouse gas increases”. You have 
said that one of the big challenges today is to 
“manage the unavoidable and avoid the unmanage-
able”. What does this mean? 
Some further human induced climate change is una-
voidable, because it is unrealistic to think we can 
suddenly reduce emissions drastically to stabilize 
concentrations at the current level or even to attain 
lower levels. This will require implementing adapta-
tion policies. However, it is even more important to 
stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations under the 
danger level at which the earth’s climate can be pro-
foundly affected and in turn can profoundly affect 
human societies and natural ecosystems, especially 
for the next generations which will inherit the envi-
ronment we leave them. 
In addition, because greenhouse gas can stay in 
the atmosphere a long time and because of the iner-
tia of the climate system, what we do now will be 
felt for many years, so action is needed now. This 
will require strong and urgent mitigation policies to 
reduce emissions in the next decades. Adaptation 4
and mitigation have to go hand in hand; the one 
cannot be the solution for the other. 
The IPCC Fourth Assessment Report also states that 
“warming of the climate system is unequivocal”. 
Did this statement lead to a revolution in our minds, 
concerning our responsibility? Did you notice 
changes in climate policies this last year? 
I feel that this is the statement that really made the 
difference. For the first time the scientific commu-
nity expressed a certainty that the global warming 
problem is real. 
The public perception of this problem has really 
changed, especially in the United States and Aus-
tralia and in countries, such as China and India. In 
Europe there has been a high consciousness of this 
problem for some years, although it has also increased 
in recent years. A number of factors contributed to 
this change in public perception. 
The 2003 European heat wave and hurricane Kat-
rina [United States, 2005] made people realize how 
vulnerable even industrialized countries are to cli-
mate, regardless of whether those events can be 
directly linked to climate change or not. The Stern 
report [Stern Review on the Economics of Climate 
Change, 2006] pointed to the incredibly high poten-
tial costs of climate change. Some high visibility 
media events brought attention to the problem: the 
movie “The Day After Tomorrow” [Roland Emmerich, 
2004], Michael Crichton’s book “State of Fear” [2005] 
and of course Al Gore’s movie “An Inconvenient Truth” 
[2006]. And then our report gave scientific solidity 
to all these messages.
Will climate change increase the divide between rich 
and poor?
Climate change will not be felt by all countries in the 
same way. Developing countries are more vulnerable 
because of their lower capacity to respond to climate 
change. This will likely enhance the large imbalances 
across countries we see today and increase friction. 
In some cases, expected changes such as sea level 
rise and widespread increase in drought conditions 
might lead to massive population migrations, the so 
called climate refugees, and this will of course 
increase tension. 
© UNESCO/NOPD Isidro Magana
Floods in New Orleans after Katrina in September 2005.
4

However, the solution to the climate change prob-
lem requires a probably unprecedented global coop-
eration effort across countries, so it offers a great 
opportunity for international collaboration and coor-
dinated action. All countries will have to sit at the 
same table to solve the problem. 
According to the “Climate Change Index” you pub-
lished in September 2006, the Mediterranean and 
North-Eastern European regions are the most promi-
nent “Hotspots”? Why? 
The index is based on changes in the averages and 
the variability of temperature and precipitation. The 
Mediterranean and North-Eastern Europe emerged as 
the most prominent hotspots, but not for the same 
reasons. 
For the Mediterranean the main problem, indi-
cated by model projections, is important warming 
and a marked reduction in precipitation in the spring 
and summer seasons. This is due to a northward shift 
of the storm track (storms increasingly travel north 
of the Mediterranean) and the intensification of local 
soil moisture-precipitation feedbacks (decreased pre-
cipitation leads to drier soil and warmer conditions, 
which in turn inhibit precipitation etc.). The models 
also project an increase in variability during the 
warm season, which implies a relatively large increase 
in the occurrence of extremely warm and dry seasons 
(even warmer and drier than the summer of 2003). 
This would lead to severe increased aridity and per-
haps even desertification, especially in the southern 
Mediterranean countries. 
In North-Eastern Europe, the main effect is a large 
increase in precipitation related to higher frequency 
and intensity of storms, conditions more prone to 
flood events, and important warming in the cold 
season. The latter is due to the melting of snow, 
which decreases surface reflectivity and induces a 
higher absorption of solar radiation, thereby intensi-
fying warming.
You seem to be particularly concerned by the effects 
of land-use changes. 
The problem is that current model projections of cli-
mate change do not include land-use change and for 
some regions this is an important source of uncer-
tainty that needs to be better addressed in 
the future. We have indications that land-use change 
can have large effects, even larger than greenhouse 
gas warming in particular in some specific regions, 
for example West Africa. But at the global scale the 
effect of land-use change is minor compared to that 
of greenhouse gases. I also think the effects of 
atmospheric aerosols and dust may be important at 
the regional scale and need to be better addressed in 
the future. 
A personal question at last: after the announce-
ment of the Noble Foundation, in October 2007, you 
declared to the Italian journalist Fabio Pagan: “Il 
mio sogno? Andare a Oslo per la cerimonia del 
Nobel”. Did you realize your dream, attending the 
Oslo ceremony? 
I did not get to go. It was a relatively small delega-
tion, 25 people, and only 4 slots remained for a 
draw including several hundred IPCC bureau mem-
bers and authors. I unfortunately did not win. 
Maybe another time! 
4
© Massimo Silvano, ICTP Photo Archives. 
Filippo Giorgi.
