Slight , graceful and silent, Aksum 
is like an aristocrat who has come 
down in the world. Pillage, vanda-
lism, arson have dr iven her to 
conceal her remaining treasures in 
different crannies of an old cup-
board. Only the main stelae park 
reigns over the middle of the town, 
testifying to the extent of Aksum’s 
suffering. 
Except for one obelisk tilted like the 
leaning tower of Pisa, none of these 
monoliths with their carved symbols 
remained upright through the ages. 
Even the famous obelisk just rein-
stalled in Aksum after forced exile in 
Italy since 1937 was lying broken in 
five pieces when Mussolini’s troops 
found it (See “The Return of the 
Aksum Obelisk”). But as for most of 
the uncarved stelae, they are still 
sticking straight up towards the sky. 
“That’s why people think the sculpted 
obelisks didn’t fall down by them-
selves, but were toppled by a Jewish 
queen,” says the young historian 
Redae Tesfay. “But in fact for an obe-
lisk to last through time, the portion 
buried underground has to amount to 
10% of its total size. And this rule 
was not respected.” A miscalcula-
SilEnt giantS
Three parks planted with giant stelae, a 
labyrinth of royal tombs, vestiges of the 
Queen of Sheba’s palace, an “Ethiopian 
Rosetta Stone”, the Ark of the Covenant 
containing the ten commandments… an 
incredible treasure, poised between myth 
and history, is hidden in Aksum, where 
the heart of ancient Ethiopia still beats.
Jasmina Šopova 
The biggest monolith ever sculpted, on the ground near  
a 360 tonne block of stone.  © UNESCO/Michel Ravassard
tion? Incredible, for people who 
showed such prowess, but apparently 
so. 
As for legend, a queen called Gudit 
(the monstrous) or Esato (the fiery 
one), a historical character from the 
10th century about whom we do not 
know much, is said to have invaded 
Ethiopia in search of the Ark of the 
Covenant, the sacred chest contain-
ing the two tablets inscribed with 
the ten commandments. Furious at 
not finding it, the queen destroyed 
the whole town and put an end to 
the Aksumite kingdom. In memory of 
this unfortunate event, women are 
not allowed into the Maryan Tsyon 
Basilica, which supposedly still 
houses the famous Ark.
The Queen of Sheba, 
mysterious as ever
How did the Ark of the Covenant end 
up in Aksum? Well, it was brought 
from Jerusalem by Menelik, first king 
of Ethiopia, son of a king of Israel 
and Queen Makeda. Some say he was 
the born to King Solomon and the 
Queen of Sheba. About 30 centuries 
ago he founded the Solomonic 
dynasty, of which the last Ethiopian 
Emperor, Haile Selassie, (1892-1974) 
claimed to descend. 
“According to tradition, Menelik hid 
the Ark of the Covenant in his moth-
er’s palace, which is about three kil-
ometers from the centre of Aksum. 
This hiding place was recently dis-
covered by the archeologist Helmut 
Ziegert, from the archeological insti-
tute of the University of Hamburg,” 
explains Fisseha Zibelo, the manager 
of the site of Aksum. The news did 
indeed make headlines last May. 
“The Dongour Palace that you see 
was excavated by the French arche-
ologist Francis Anfray and rebuilt 
between 1966 and 1968. It has 50 
rooms; we don’t know   … Tomb with the false door, Aksum.  
© UNESCO/Jasmina Šopova

which showed they were used for 
local commerce.” Ge’ez, now a liturgi-
cal language, is the ancestor of the 
Amharic language spoken today by 
the majority of Ethiopians. 
Most eloquent of all is certainly the 
local “Rosetta stone,” standing today 
in a small specially designed build-
ing, at the edge of a steep and wind-
ing trail at a distance from central 
Aksum. Found by shepherds in 1982, 
it tells the story in three languages 
– Greek, Ge’ez and Sabean – of the 
Nubian campaign undertaken by 
Ezana, the last pagan ruler and first 
Christian king of Aksum. Converted 
around the mid-4th century, he 
brought the Kingdom to its peak. 
Human interest note: the Ge’ez text 
is engraved on one of the narrow 
faces of this rectangular slab (the 
other was left blank) and the scribe, 
running out of space, continued writ-
ing on the Sabean side, like a school-
boy finishing his sentence in the 
margin when he gets to the bottom 
of the page. 
And thus, from one monument to the 
next, ancient Aksum divulges chap-
ter after chapter of its past, a tapes-
try of legends and history.  
Archeologists found a magnificent 
necropolis under the stelae, but they 
arrived after the looters. The tomb 
with the false door, the tomb with 
the brick arches and the mausoleum, 
majestic and empty, remain mute 
(see box, “The three tombs”). 
Even more enigmatic are the designs 
engraved on the obelisks. Unique in 
the world, these replicas of houses 
with several stories – with door, win-
dows and beams – contain no inscrip-
tions to help scientists penetrate 
their mystery. When not marked with 
a cross, they are capped by a symbol 
representing the sun and the moon. 
According to some historians, this 
pre-Christian symbol could refer to 
the local deity Mahrem, correspond-
ing to Aries the Greek god of war, 
but nothing more is known. 
The old coins are more loquacious. 
They reveal about 20 kings, show the 
different phases of Aksum’s economic 
development and situate in time the 
town’s conversion to Christianity. 
“The gold pieces are marked with 
Greek inscriptions because they were 
used for internat ional trade,” 
recounts Redae, “while the words on 
silver and bronze coins are in Ge’ez, 
… exactly what they were used 
for. It dates back to the 7th century 
but people have always called it ‘the 
Queen of Sheba’s palace’,” Zibelo con-
tinues. “That’s what inspired Helmut 
Ziegert to do more digging, and he 
discovered another palace below the 
one we knew.” Three sections of this 
ancient palace, thought to date back 
to the 10th century B.C., can now be 
v iewed by the public. To the 
untrained eye, the dif ference 
between the ruins from the two 
 periods is imperceptible. 
A small road leading to Gondar (see 
the article “The country of the king 
with the protruding tongue”) sepa-
rates the Dongour palace from one of 
the three stelae parks of Aksum. It is 
a vast field dotted with monoliths 
that are only roughly worked. Most of 
them are several metres high. “The 
blocks of stone were quarried from 
Mount Gobadura,” says Zibelo, point-
ing in the distance to traces in the 
vegetation left by the rollers used to 
transport them. After so many centu-
ries, the grass has not grown back. 
The sight is indeed astonishing: 
thousands of tons of stone took this 
path. It is enough to see the enor-
mous slab in the central park that 
measures about 20 metres by seven. 
Its weight is estimated at 360 tons. 
Next to it, the largest monolith ever 
sculpted by humans lies broken, a 
wounded colossus. The legend that 
angels transpor ted the stones 
becomes almost plausible.
Riddles and 
revelations
Legend easily takes root where his-
tory fails. No date, no name appears 
on these immense chunks of stone. 
View of Dongour Palace.  © UNESCO/Jasmina Šopova
