Focus
amsterdam: a paradise for book-lovers
A collection of poems sold rapidly at 50000 copies. This doesn’t happen every day. And not just 
anywhere. Especially in the middle of the 17th century! And yet it did happen in Amsterdam, 
appointed World Book Capital by UNESCO this year. After Madrid, Alexandria, New Delhi, 
Antwerp, Montreal, Turin and Bogotá, UNESCO 
appointed Amsterdam World Book Capital, 
thus acknowledging the role it played since its 
golden era, in the 17th century, to this date. 
Events started on 23 April this year, World Book 
and Copyright Day, and will last until 22 April 
2009.
Serge van Duijnhoven, Dutch writer and historian living in 
Belgium, tells us the story of the book in Amsterdam.
© Serge van Duijnhoven
Amsterdam’s municipal library welcomes a million visitors a year.Since twelve years I live, as a Dutch writer-in-resi-
dence, in the centre of Brussels. And there is much 
to be said for living in this multi-faceted, slightly 
surrealist capital of Europe. Whoever agrees with 
Lautréamont’s definition of beauty as “the coming 
together of an umbrella and a sowing machine on an 
operating table”, will definitely feel himself at home 
in this bilingual city on the vault-line of North and 
South, East and West. 4
However, I always feel a great excitement and, to 
a certain extent, relief, when I take the train and 
travel north to Amsterdam. Compared to the arid 
atmosphere of Brussels, as interesting as it may be, 
with three ugly Dutch bookstores (and one beautiful 
one that had to close down because of lack of sales), 

Amsterdam is like a paradise for book-lovers. The city 
on the Amstel houses all important publishers, count-
less bookstores, and weekly or even daily second-
hand book-markets, like the ones in Oudemanhuispoort 
and Spui-square where in the afternoon many writers 
gather in the surrounding café’s. 
Only recently, the jewel was put on the crown of 
this city with the opening of a magnificent library 
building boarding on the docks of the IJ and over-
looking the age old city centre. The building, a sub-
lime construction of architect Jo Coenen, offers 
seven floors, 25.000 meter shelve space, 28.000 
square meters, comfortable foyers and study corners, 
exhibition spaces with books on display, a café, 
 theatre and restaurant on the top floor. A temple of 
books as I have never seen before, where one imme-
diately feels at ease and wants to stay as long as 
possible.
Sanctum of free speech
Amsterdam has a strong reputation of intellectual 
freedom that it tries to honour with the upcoming 
festivities of being World Book Capital. Ever since 
the end of the sixteenth century, the city was a place 
of refuge for free speech and the written word. In 

Holland, people opened themselves to the sea and to 
everything that came from afar, while those on the 
sandy soil of other provinces turned their backs on 
it. Tolerance was in Amsterdam not a mere principle 
but a practical necessity: the open merchant city, 
being the meeting place of all sorts of different cul-
tures, could not allow itself to indulge in the large-
scale prosecution of those adhering to different 
beliefs. Whilst throughout the continent books were 
being burnt, in Amsterdam books were being fabri-
cated and traded. 
With the fall of Antwerp in 1585 (when the King 
of Spain, Philip II, took possession of the city) tens 
of thousands of immigrants came to Amsterdam from 
the southern Netherlands, bringing with them their 
trading expertise, their capital, and their goods, as 
well as their appreciation of art, culture, their verve, 
their language and literature. It was largely by their 
efforts that Amsterdam’s publishing trade acquired 
its international reputation. 
Another wave of immigrants arrived from Portu-
gal: Sephardic Jews who had lost their livelihoods 
there because of the Inquisition. These laid the foun-
dations of the tobacco trade and the diamond indus-
try, and also made Amsterdam famous as a centre for 
Hebrew typography. Religious observance was not 
controlled by the state; there was no oppression by 
the Inquisition; there was freedom to marry within 
the community; no one was compelled to live in a 
ghetto; and Jews could acquire property freely. Such 
freedom was unheard-of elsewhere. Money, freedom 
and culture pushed aside the old medieval combina-
tion of “honour”, “nobility” and “heroism”. The city 
paradoxically grew into a realization of a medieval 
utopia: the safe, enclosed space in which new and 
old citizens alike could cast off the yoke of serfdom. 
“This church consecrated to God knows not enforced 
beliefs, nor torture, nor death,” the Jewish immi-
grants, full of trust, wrote above the door of their 
Portuguese Synagogue. They called Amsterdam the 
Jerusalem of the West.
Books sold like hotcakes
The English philosopher, John Locke, wrote his “Epis-
tulae de Tolerantia” in Amsterdam, among other 
works. The Frenchman Rene Descartes found the lei-
sure and freedom to conduct his research, just as did 
his home-grown colleagues Baruch Spinoza, Hugo de 
Groot (Grotius) and Christiaen Huygens. The great 
French philosopher of the Enlightenment, Voltaire, 
who visited Amsterdam seven times and had his work 
published here, remarked that it made no difference 
to the Dutch whether they traded in books or in tex-
tiles, and that what was written in these books did 
not concern them one bit as long as they made money 
out of them. That aside, however, he saw the city as 
an inspiration, as an anticipation of the utopian 
4
©  Serge van Duijnhoven
A library to stay in.
© all rights reserved
Engraving of a book market in Oudemanhuispoort 
(Amsterdam) by van H. Horst (1967).
4

spirit of the Enlightenment – or “Felix Meritis” (Hap-
piness through Achievement) as one of the best-
known art society’s in the city is still called. 
Apart from the notion of freedom, books made in 
Holland had an excellent reputation because of the 
craftsmanship of the engravers, the quality of the 
paper (papie de Hollande!) and the fair price per 
copy. Moreover, the Dutch printing press was 
extremely inventive by creating pocketbooks for the 
masses (the bible by Menasseh ben Israel, the world 
atlas by the Dutch cartographer Willem Jansz Blaeu 
who became famous with his richly illustrated world 
atlas in eleven editions). 
During the seventeenth century, more books were 
been published in Amsterdam than in all other coun-
tries of Europe as a whole. Almost 30.000 people 
made a living in this field. In 1600 the city had 96 
book shops; in 1699 the number had risen to 273. An 
illustrated book of poems by the Dutch poet Jacob 
Cats, written in 1655, immediately sold more than 
50.000 copies, an amount poets nowadays can only 
dream of. Jews that were being prosecuted and 
chased around Europe, in Amsterdam were allowed to 
publish books in Hebrew, Latin, Spanish, Portuguese 
and even Yiddish, to such an extent that the city 
became the world book capital of Jewish 
publications. 
From atop the new library building, with its splen-
did view on the city, the contrast between the bus-
tling inner city and the spaciousness of the IJ River 
can be best appreciated. 
With a little bit of imagination, it is here between 
the atlases of Bleau, Mercator and Hondius exposed 
in glass boxes on the third floor, that one can see 
the endless row of shimmering masts, spires and sail-
boats lining up with cords along the wooden pali-
sades that for centuries have marked the city of 
freedom and trade. 
Jasmina Šopova 
