In your photo exhibition “Absences”, 
you have documented the repres-
sion that occurred in Argentina. 
Why is it important to document 
these violations of human rights, 
instead of allowing these painful 
memories to rest, as some have 
suggested? 
Some of the gravest human rights 
offenses, in my opinion, are those 
committed by States – that is to say, 
when the State is the agent of terror 
and becomes an instrument of illegal 
repression by using methods so per­
verse as the forced disappearance of 
people. These sorts of actions have 
consequences for society: Initially, 
there is the fear and uncertainty. Then 
over time, there is the sense of not 
being able to mourn. 
So what I am trying to convey in my 
work is that, more than just the forced 
disappearances of people that hap­
pened in Argentina, there is also the 
time that has passed. I want to reflect 
the double effect that time has had. 
On the one hand, there is the time 
that the survivors endured while living 
in the absence of their lost loved one. 
On the other hand, there is the time 
forfeited by the persons who disap­
peared and did not have a chance to 
live out their lives. When I was creat­
ing the concept of this show, I thought 
that it would be good to capture the 
aging of the survivors. And it is this 
very basic and human concept that 
the terrorism of the State destroyed.
How did your work develop with 
the relat ives of those who 
disappeared? 
In all cases there were moments where 
real connections were made and where 
they relived the moment in the origi­
nal photo. It was truly a journey to 
the past and, at the same time, a look 
into the future. There were cases 
where some of the relatives had never 
since returned to the place in the ori­
ginal photo. I don’t know whether it 
was consciously or instinctively, but 
every one of the relatives  
Capturing tHe essenCe of absenCe
Argentine photographer Gustavo Germano’s exhibition, “Absences”, explores the universe 
of the victims of “disappearances” during Argentina’s “Dirty War” (1976-1983). Photos are 
juxtaposed in pairs, one old and one recent. On the new one, a person is missing. Disappeared 
for ever, without leaving a trace.
Interview conducted by Lucia Iglesias and Casey Walther (UNESCO). 
 © Gustavo Germano
 © Gustavo Germano

 gave me their complete trust to 
work with them. I think this is reflec­
ted in the photos. Personally, I am 
humbled to have been the vehicle 
through which these people were able 
to denounce these crimes, and to 
have created the moment that allowed 
this to be conveyed. I also believe 
that, even though my intention was 
not to do an autobiographical project, 
the fact that I myself experienced 
losing someone in my family to these 
same crimes has allowed a greater 
rapport with these people, because 
between us there is a shared brothe­
rhood. And through this project, my 
own family has been able to grow. 
What’s more, all the people that I pho­
tograph are from the Entre Rios 
Province in Argentina, where suppos­
edly “nothing happened”. I come from 
that province, and I felt that it was 
important to document cases of disap­
pearances that were not known and 
affected normal people from distant 
villages and to show that the tragedy 
affected this province as well.
What is the current situation in 
Argentina with respect to these 
crimes? 
In Argentina, they have abolished the 
laws that, until recently, had hampe­
red the prosecut ion of those 
 responsible for these crimes. Little by 
little, these people are finally being 
brought to trial, although to defend 
themselves they’re evoking the time 
that has passed and arguing that pro­
secution should wait until their lives 
have ended since they are already very 
old. Nonetheless, a few have been 
convicted, which we of course 
applaud. This is why my work tries to 
raise public awareness of this issue. 
In 1999, UNESCO awarded its Prize for 
Peace Education to the Mothers of the 
Plaza de Mayo, an association of moth-
ers whose children disappeared in that 
period.  
