Passionate advocate of the preser-
vation of cinematographic heri-
tage, she launched an ambitious 
project this summer: preserving nearly 
1,500 Cuban short films that recap 
the history of the 20th century. They 
form the substance of her next 
70-minute documentary: A Cuban 
Memory of the World. This significant 
c inematographic collec t ion has 
 submitted its candidacy to UNESCO’s 
Memory of the World Register.
On 1 January 2009, Cuba will mark 
the 50th anniver sar y of i t s 
Revolution. Cinema was a major 
 vehicle for the revolutionary enthu-
siasm of the early years, and films 
were made to proclaim the ideals of 
justice and solidarity. Less than 
three months after the revolution 
the Cuban government founded the 
Instituto cubano del arte e industria 
cinematograficos (Cuban institute of 
cinema art and industry, ICAIC). 
Then, in 1987, Colombian writer 
Gabriel García Márquez (1982 Nobel 
Prize winner) inaugurated the Escuela 
Internacional de Cine y TV (EICTV) 
with Fidel Castro, in San Antonio de 
los Baños, near Havana.   …
Focus
Saving thE Cuban Noticieros 
Duplication on 35 mm film and 
appropriate storage are the only 
reliable means of preserving our 
audiovisual heritage, according 
to Franco-Brazilian director and 
screen writer Alice de Andrade, 
who is concerned about digital 
materials, formats and equipment 
becoming obsolete. Daughter 
of the famous director Joaquim 
Pedro de Andrade (1932-1988), 
a leader of the Cinema Novo 
movement in Brazil, she recently 
restored 14 of her father’s films. 
The project took four years. 
Alice de Andrade, Franco-Brazilian director and screenwriter
Analysis of negative and positive newsreel images, film 
preservation workshop, Cuba.  © Ana Ines Manzano
Santiago Álvarez and Fidel Castro during the filming of a Noticiero. © ICAIC

tion digital restoration of his 14 
films turned me into a passionate 
advocate of safeguarding cinemato-
graphic heritage. In the interim, 
economic hardship and the climate of 
the island had combined to let salt-
peter and mould wreak havoc with 
Cubas film collections. Kept in poor 
conditions, they required urgent 
action. 
I then proposed setting up a work-
shop to safeguard this heritage as 
part of EICTV, which had all the 
resources for such a project. Several 
teachers had even participated in the 
production of the now-endangered 
films, and were therefore directly 
concerned by their fate. And the 
school has the infrastructure and 
equipment needed for the analysis of 
film material, a prerequisite for res-
toration: editing and cutting facili-
t ies, a f ilm department, photo 
laboratory, screening rooms and 
sound studio. 
Last summer we put on the first 
Cinematographic Conser vat ion 
Workshop, with the support of the 
International Federation of Film 
Archives of the Ibermedia Programme 
for the development of Spanish-
American audiovisual production, as 
well as Cuba’s National Commission 
for UNESCO. At the same time the 
ICAIC, with the Cuban Film Archives 
and EICTV, launched a safeguarding 
campaign for  the Not ic ie ros 
Latinoamericanos ICAIC.
Noticieros 
Latinoamericanos: 
unique perspective
The Noticieros Latinoamericanos ICAIC 
were weekly news magazines, pre-
senting the latest regional and inter-
national headlines in a direct and 
original style. Between 1960 and 
1990, Cubans were wild about them, 
crowding into the island’s 60 cinema 
theatres to catch the week’s news 
update. Some of the audience would 
even leave af ter the Noticieros 
Latinoamericanos ICAIC, not staying 
to watch the film that followed. 
Armed at first with rudimentary cam-
eras and leftover f ilm reels, the 
ICAIC “image warriors” filmed bomb-
ings, uprisings, revolutions and 
political coups all over the world, as 
well as profiles of great Cuban art-
ists. That was how they learned the 
art of film-making. Increasingly well-
equipped as they went along, they 
ended up as the years passed writing 
the history of the 20th century, from 
a unique perspective. 
Thank s  to  Sant iago Álvarez 
(1919-1998), exuberant and innova-
tive director who embodied the spirit 
of the Noticieros Latinoamericanos 
ICAIC adventure, a number of “icono-
clastic” documentaries   …
…Cuba was still at that time a 
major centre of Latin American film 
production. Coppola, Scorsese, Scola, 
Taviani, Sorín, Jarmush, Tarantino, 
Storaro are only some of the great 
names who taught there. Students 
came from Africa, Asia and Latin 
America: Juan Carlos Cremata, Eryk 
Rocha, Camila Guzmán Urzúa, Tanya 
Hermida, Vicente Ferraz attended the 
“school of the three worlds”, as it 
was called back then. Today it is the 
“school of all the worlds”, open to 
everyone. 
I learned film-making in this melting 
pot of cultures and personalities at a 
time when Cuba was undergoing the 
greatest crisis in its history, just 
after the fall of the socialist block in 
the late 1980s. 
I did not go back to Havana until 16 
years later, for the presentation of 
the entire restored collection of films 
made by my father, the Brazilian 
director Joaquim Pedro de Andrade. 
Four years of working as the techni-
cal coordinator for the high resolu-
Noticiero film crew covering Peru earthquake (1970). © ICAIC

…were produced. Some became 
world-famous: Now!, Hanói, Mardi 13, 
Ciclón, 79 printemps ou Hasta la victo-
ria siempre. In all, 1,493 Noticieros 
Latinoamericanos ICAIC were made 
over 30 years, each about 10 minutes 
long.
Countering  
the irreversible
Our cinematographic safeguarding 
workshop analyzed 33 of these last 
summer. For three weeks in the San 
Antonio de los Baños coconut grove, 
seven eminent international experts 
volunteered their services to develop 
a recovery strategy for the Cuban 
film archives. They trained 35 Latin-
American apprentices, most of them 
Cuban. 
Besides courses in theory, we pre-
pared film material that we sent to 
Mexico for restoration (the ICAIC lab 
is excellent, but out of commission 
since 2005). In only one week, 9 edi-
tions of the Noticieros were dupli-
cated on silver emulsion (35 mm) 
film. We then screened and analyzed 
the restored films. A unified and 
motivated working team was formed 
and I am proud to say, without fear 
of contradiction, that all who par-
ticipated in this adventure will 
remain forever committed to con-
serving moving images. 
It is important to stress that every-
one realized this film collection was 
threatened and on the brink of suf-
fering irreversible damaged. The col-
lection urgently needs to be copied 
onto silver emulsion 35 mm film, still 
the only reliable material for preserv-
ing our audiovisual heritage. The new 
technologies represent considerable 
resources, but are fraught with risk 
– materials, formats and equipment 
are expensive and become rapidly 
obsolete. 
The ICAIC, which has just received 
one million euros from the Junta de 
Andalucía (Spain) to rebuild its film 
storage facilities and fix up its film 
laboratory, was receptive to our 
project. 
Now the Cuban government must 
invest as much energy as it initially 
put into the production of the 
Noticieros into their conservation. It 
took 30 years to create the collec-
tion, and it will take at least 10 to 
save it. 
The ICAIC will again take on its pio-
neering role in global film-making, 
this time through the conservation 
and promotion of its film heritage. 
This article appears in the UNESCO 
Courier this month to mark World 
Day for Audiovisual Heritage on 
27 October.
