will people from all over the planet understand the 
issues and evaluate the players?
What is a journalism  
professor’s job?
Last summer 50 students and a dozen faculty from 14 
universities on five continents came together in 
Salzburg, Austria, to address just those kinds of 
questions. One of the faculty members for this global 
initiative came from China. At the start of the three-
week session he expressed serious concern. No matter 
how good the training at his university, his journal-
ism students were not being hired, privately-owned 
media outlets didn’t want to pay for reporters and 
editors when they could get unpaid interns to do the 
work. And besides which, the faculty member said, 
most of those media were tabloid-type outlets in 
which solid news—not to mention accuracy and bal-
ance—were hardly valued. Gossip and celebrity cov-
erage dominated Chinese print and online outlets. 
What was he to do as a journalism professor? 
The three weeks of the Salzburg Academy on 
Media & Global Change, during which the partici-
pants created a curriculum to teach media literacy to 
students around the world, transformed that Chinese 
professor’s opinion about his job. His work was not 
just to teach journalism students how to report on 
The world is poised to watch the 2008 Olympics, 
beginning with the opening ceremony in Beijing on 
8 August. Eighty-thousand people will be in attend-
ance at the National Stadium and an estimated four 
billion more are expected to be viewing via live tel-
evision and internet feeds. 
Already for several months, controversies are 
swirling in the media about the games—from the 
route that the Olympic torch is taking around the 
world to the decision to move the swimming and 
gymnastic events so that they can be seen live during 
primetime in the United States. Protests over the 
outbreak of violence in Tibet and China’s human 
rights record threaten to disrupt the games. 
The Olympic sporting events as well as the Olym-
pic controversies will all be covered by the world’s 
media. How will the public make sense of it all? How 
© David Wise



“Press freedom is not just essential in times of political crisis.”
4
freedom of expression:  
a right to be taught
Paradox: Media have never been more 
vital for the nurturing of civil society but 
freedom of expression is now in retreat. No 
society can be free, open and fair without a 
diversity of voices. To remedy this situation, 
students of journalism must first be taught 
to develop a critical mind.
© Maurice Albrecht
“Teaching them to notice what isn’t being said and isn’t being 
shown”

the events and issues around them, but to instruct 
all the students in the university about the impor-
tance of a free and fair media. Without an audience 
educated to understand how essential access to 
information is to the exercise of citizenship, there 
will be no pressure for quality journalism. 
Media have never been 
more vital for the nurturing 
of civil society but freedom 
of expression is now in 
retreat. So much attention 
has gone into managing the 
new technologies, consider-
ing the viability of existing 
business models, coping with 
the dramatic demographic 
shifts in audiences and con-
demning the seemingly insa-
t i a b l e  d emand  f o r 
scandal-mongering media that 
there has been little space for 
expressing other concerns. 
But press freedom organi-
zations have recorded the 
global losses—the violations 
of free speech, the targeting 
of journalists, the repression 
of both bricks-and-mortar as 
well as virtual media outlets, 
the marginalization of minor-
ity voices. Finally, recently, the depredations on free 
expression and a free press have become impossible 
to ignore.
A matter of life and death
Last year according to the Paris-based World Associa-
tion of Newspapers, 95 media employees were 
killed—44 in Iraq alone, 8 in Somalia, 6 in Sri Lanka 
and 5 in Pakistan. Other 110 media workers died in 
2006—among them such leading voices as Russian 
investigative reporter Anna Politkovskaya. In Paki-
stan this past November when President Pervez Mush-
arraf suspended Pakistan’s constitution, several TV 
stations were shut down, foreign cable newscasts 
stopped and controls over the content of news 
reports imposed. Punishments against journalists 
ranged from heavy fines and suspension of broadcast 
licenses to sentences of up to three years in prison. 
And even in the West, France has been struggling to 
deal with the children and grandchildren of North 
African immigrants who have been marginalized in 
many ways, including their 
access to media—unless 
they are rioting—and fur-
ther demonized through 
stereotypical depictions 
that reinforce a negative 
image that is out of step 
with reality. 
It shouldn’t take threats 
and riots to put freedom of 
expression centre stage. 
Press freedom is not just 
essential in times of politi-
cal crisis. Free media that 
allow a diversity of voices 
to be heard and all ideas to 
be discussed play a central 
role in both the sustaining 
and monitoring of good 
government, as well as in 
the fostering of economic 
development and the 
encouraging of corporate 
transparency and account-
ability. Freedom of expression is a life and death 
matter and a bread and butter issue. To live the good 
life, as well as to live a safe one, the public needs to 
understand how fundamental the right to freedom of 
expression is. 
How can that case be made? Through the schools, 
through courses and case studies and assignments 
that give students not just the tools to criticize 
media for their tabloid news habits or their pander-
ing to a youthful demographic, but that show stu-
dents that without a diversity of voices, without a 
media that can represent all opinions, there can be 
no free and open and fair society. Without the ability 
to hear all voices, without the protection for all 
voices, only the powerful voices will be heard. Teach-
ing all students to evaluate what they read and hear 4
4
© E. Boy
“Media have never been more vital for the nurturing of civil 
society.”

and see and teaching them to notice what isn’t being 
said and isn’t being shown is critical to their  eventual 
exercise of their rights as citizens and their access to 
opportunity. 
Come 8 August, when the Olympic Games begin, 
most of those watching will take for granted their 
ability to see the athletes from around world com-
pete in the events. Wouldn’t it be great if the 

 diversity at the Games were reflected in the diversity 
of expressions in the media? Wouldn’t it be great if 
all those watching at least just understood that this 
should not only be a right but is a necessity? 
Susan Moeller, 
Director of the International Center for Media 
and the Public Agenda (United States) 
