journalists come 
first
Over the last two decades the legal 
framework of the media in Africa has 
evolved; the independent and community 
media have expanded. Nevertheless, 
various factors have been employed by 
most African governments to hinder 
freedom of expression and of the press: 
Freedom of Information remains a great 
challenge at continental level.  
© Christopher Herwig
A street newspaper in the making, Monrovia (Liberia).
access to 
information… 
4

In 1995, the Senegalese press group Sud Communica-
tion media group was prosecuted by La Compagnie 
Sucrière du Sénégal (CSS) and condemned by the 
court to a fine of 500 000 000 FCFA (763 000 Euros) 
for publishing information on customs fraud by the 
company. The court did not consider if the informa-
tion was true or not; the issue was rather: how did 
the information leak, who leaked it, and how did the 
journalist get the document? 
Although it dates back several years, this case 
serves as an example. In most African countries if 
you publish documents or information contained in 
documents from the public administration, you run 
the risk to be sued by the government and the civil 
servant who released the document gets into deep 
trouble. In this case the judge does not even con-
sider the veracity of the document or the 
information 
Access to public information remains a challenge 
for working journalists and most journalists in Africa 
often rely on rumours to write their articles. 
The right to investigate and to report freely with-
out any form of hindrance lies at the core of quality 
journalism. Just as the right of Communities to access 
public information ensures better housing, health, 
education and development budgets; combats cor-
ruption and alleviates poverty; and enables demo-
cratic participation. Good governance is centred on 
the principles of accountability and transparency. 
This, however, cannot be achieved anywhere, if infor-

mation that is so very vital to the public interest 
continues to be hoarded by governments.
Tactics to breach laws
Article 9 of the African Charter on Human and Peo-
ples’ Rights guarantees freedom of expression as a 
fundamental human right besides the “Right to Life” 
- that is the right to seek, receive and impart infor-
mation and ideas. In Africa all the countries have 
signed and ratified the African Charter, thus taken 
the commitment to uphold the principles of the Char-
ter. In addition, the majority of the governments 
have reflected this fundamental principle in their 
national constitutions. 
In response to the numerous calls and complaints 
by media organisations in the continent about the 
“inadequacies” of the Charter, the African Commis-
sion on Human and Peoples’ 
Rights adopted in 2002 the Declaration of Princi-
ples on Freedom of Expres-
sion in Afr ica, which 
recognises that “freedom of 
expression is an inalienable 
human right and an indis-
pensable component of 
democracy”. 
However, the Declaration 
like the Charter is not bind-
ing on the member states 
and has not brought in the 
desired results for the erad-
ication of all obnoxious 
media legislations in the 
continent. Media organiza-
tions in the continent are 
therefore, currently advo-
cating for the adoption of a 
Protocol to the African 
Charter on Freedom of 
Expression in Africa, which should be binding to all 
the states. 
Despite this development many African govern-
ments have legislated very draconian measures in 
order to intimidate the press. Such arbitrary meas-
ures include the charging of exorbitant license fees 
for media houses, registration of journalists, obnox-
ious libel and defamation laws, the levy of heavy 
importation taxes on media related materials and 
equipment, arbitrary arrests, attacks and jailing of 
journalists.
A new coalition
Last year, a few weeks before he relinquished power, 
President Olusegun Obasanjo refused to approve the 
FOI bill voted by parliament on 21 February, after 
eight years of administrative steps. The bill is cur-
rently before the new administration of President 
Umaru Yaradua. 
With the exception of 
South Africa, Angola and 
Uganda, Africa has been 
lagging behind in the 
global movement towards 
the adoption of Freedom 
of Information Laws which 
should guarantee journal-
ists the access to infor-
mation held by public 
authorities. Coalitions in 
Nigeria, Ghana, Kenya, 
Sierra Leone, Tanzania, 
and Zambia have been 
f ighting for about a 
decade for the Freedom of 
Information bill to be 
adopted but to no avail. 
This is why in Septem-
ber 2006, media and civil 
society organisations 
from Africa met in Lagos 
to discuss ways to pro-
mote the right of access 
to information held by 
public authorities and, in 
4
4
© UNESCO
Media diversity is a sine qua non 
condition of democracy.

particular, to share experiences in advocacy and 
strategies for advancing the adoption of laws that 
fully protect this right. The meeting set up a coali-
tion and established the Africa Freedom of Informa-
tion Centre based in Lagos (Nigeria). 
The centre should serve as a clearing house and 
enable civil society to participate in governance and 
transform itself into a true constituency. 
Gabriel Baglo, 
Togolese journalist, director of the Africa Bureau of 
the International Federation of Journalists 
© Pal Skeggs

Demonstration, in May 2006, in front of the 
Journalists’ Union in Cairo (Egypt)
4
