eration of Journalists, 177 media professionals were 
killed in 2007. The Iraq war, in particular, has led to 
unprecedented numbers of journalists being killed or 
suffering physical attacks. 
Of course, a journalist could be murdered by their 
spouse, die in an unfortunate car accident or be the 
victim of a random shooting. In many cases, how-
ever, the fact that they are a journalist is not just a 
random circumstance but structurally linked to the 
case in one of two ways. First, journalists may, by 
virtue of their profession, find themselves in danger-
ous situations, for example because they are report-
ing on war, social unrest or disasters. Even more 
serious, however, are cases where journalists are tar-
geted because of what they write. 
The media has variously been described as the 
fourth estate, the watchdog of the social interest 
and a key underpinning of democracy. In these roles, 
journalists often create enemies, many of them 
people who wield significant power in society, some 
of whom lack scruples or have even been involved in 
criminal activity. In some cases, these people go to 
the extreme length of threatening the journalists 
who have exposed them, or even of perpetrating 
crimes of violence, including murder, against them. 
Such attacks are heinous crimes which affect not 
only their target but journalists as a group. A single 
© UNESCO/Cyril Bailleul
Nikita White reads her essay during the launch of IYPE on 
12 February 2008 at UNESCO.
4
shoot a journalist and  
society is wounded
Justice is done in less than 15% of the 
approximately 500 cases involving murders of 
journalists for their work in the last 15 years. 
States have the obligation to combat the 
impunity in relation to these crimes, for each 
time a journalist is attacked, democracy is a 
victim.
Let us recall the case of Orgür Gundem v. Turkey in 
March 2000 that was brought before the European 
Court of Human Rights. The case involved Orgür 
Gundem, an Istanbul-based daily, which had been 
harassed and attacked so persistently that it eventu-
ally had to close. 
Seven staff members, including journalists, were 
actually killed and the paper suffered numerous 
attacks – arson, bombs and even armed attacks – 
against newsagents, shops selling its paper and its 
offices. Several petitions by the newspapers to the 
authorities calling for assistance were met, for the 
most part, with no response. Finally some minor pro-
tective measures were put in place. At the same time, 
the authorities launched an official investigation of 
the newspaper, as well as several criminal 
prosecutions. 
The Court held that Turkey had breached the news-
paper’s right to freedom of expression by failing to 
protect it against these attacks. It reiterated the 
obligation on Turkey to put in place ‘positive meas-
ures of protection’. The Court also dismissed Turkey’s 
claim that it was relieved of this obligation because 
the newspaper supported terrorist groups. The State 
might prosecute the newspaper for any illegal mate-
rial it had disseminated, but it could not simply 
ignore the repeated attacks on it.
Censorship by killing
Stories of attacks on journalists are, unfortunately, 
all too common. According to the International Fed-

instance of serious retaliation sends a signal to all 
journalists involved in exposing abuses that they are 
at risk. The aim of those perpetrating these atroci-
ties is to silence all those who would report on the 
matter, whether it be crime, official incompetence, 
corruption or some other social evil. This problem 
has been referred to as ‘censorship by killing’.
To ‘seek and receive’  
information is a right
Most crimes against journalists have a particularly 
chilling effect and are, therefore, crimes against 
society as a whole. We all rely on the media as a pri-
mary source of information, whether about events 
abroad, problems in our own society or anything out-
side of our direct sphere of experience. We need this 
information for a variety of fundamental democratic 
functions: to exercise our right to vote, to ensure 
the proper custody of public resources, and to bring 
those responsible for wrongdoing to justice. To the 
extent that attacks on journalists limit the ability of 
the media to provide us with this information, they 
threaten democracy. As such, they are crimes against 
us all, not just against journalists. 
International human rights law recognises this 
aspect of the right to freedom of expression. 
Although we normally think of this right as protect-
ing the right to speak, the right to impart informa-
tion and ideas, it has a dual nature. It also protects 
the right of the listener, and this is reflected in the 
fact that international guarantees refer not only to 
the right to impart but also to ‘seek and receive’ 
information and ideas. 
In addition, international law goes beyond pro-
hibiting States from interfering with free speech and 
places a positive obligation on States to ensure 
respect for the exercise of freedom of expression. 
International courts have held that States are under 
a positive obligation to make a special effort to pre-
vent attacks on journalists, to investigate such 
attacks and to bring those responsible to justice. 
Where the State is directly involved, for example in 
attacks perpetrated by State officials, there is also 
an obligation to compensate the victims. 
Unfortunately, the evidence suggests that many 
States are failing in their responsibility to combat 
impunity in cases involving attacks on journalists. 
According to the Committee to Protect Journalists, 
justice is done in less than 15% of the approximately 
500 journalists murdered in the last 15 years. 
Toby Mendel, Senior Director for Law, author of 
ARTICLE 19 
4
© New York Times
The Lebanese journalist May Chidiac, in her wheelchair, after the 
2005 September attack on her life.
© All rights reserved
Justice is done in less than 15% of cases involving murders of 
journalists for their work in the last 15 years.
