Today you are living between Jerusalem and New 
Jersey. How does this experience “between two 
shores” shape you? 
Living “in between” is another description of my way 
of being a writer, of having all at once a close and a 
remote vantage point on myself and the world. 
Since childhood I was convinced that the only way 
to “really live” would be to become a writer. But this 
dream crumbled, because all of my admired models 
wrote about far away places where fascinating child-
hoods take place, whereas I had no choice but to 
write about a boring childhood with two elderly par-
ents (both married again after having had previous 
living or dead families, about which I knew almost 
nothing) in a third floor apartment of a new housing 
project in Tel Aviv. 
The only way out was to flee. So for my PhD I 
decided to leave for Paris. It was a way to confront 
myself, to ask questions, from a distance. In a cen-
tury of exile and migration, I was not the only one 
experiencing this situation: that of starting to cher-
ish my own story far from home. I became an alien, a 
minority, an exile, akin to the Parisian street-corner 
hobos. In Paris for the first time I felt what it meant 
to be the other. 
When I came back to Israel I was no longer the 
same. I left Tel Aviv and settled in Jerusalem. Yet I 
feel the tension that exists between the two cities 
like a tug between the sacred and the profane. 
Since, my family life has taken me from my home 
in Jerusalem to Paris or New Jersey for periodical 
stays. Living in between became my writer’s exile, a 
constant mode of putting into question, of facing 
new challenges. 
Ilana Tsouriel, the heroine of your novel snapshots 
is, like you the daughter of one of the State of Isra-
el’s founding fathers. She maintains she is hit by 
the “curse of wandering”. What does this represent 
for you? 
Ilana uses this term ironically to describe her cosmo-
politan life as an echo to the Zionist criticism of the 
Jewish Diaspora, and to the dream of “saving” the 
Jews from a destiny of Exile and wandering, by 
returning to the Promised Land and a new independ-
ent State. Ilana leaves Israel pained by the violence 
of the nation building process, and the conflict it 
michal Govrin : the curse of wandering
Michal Govrin reveals the passionate – even erotic – dimension of the Israeli-Palestinian 
conflict. Born in Tel Aviv, the novelist, poet and theatre director today lives between 
Israel and the United States. She is the laureate of the 2003 Acum Prize which rewards 
Israel’s best literary work.
Interview by Jasmina Šopova 
© Forward Association
Michal Govrin
4

engendered. But as she matures as an architect, she 
tries to escape these rigid contradictions. In her 
Monument for Peace project for Jerusalem, the epi-
center of the conflict, she draws on Jewish tradi-
tional concepts that introduce a dimension of 
wandering and renouncing as another way of life in a 
place (the Sabbatical Year, the Sukkah Hut).
Your mother survived the holocaust. To what extent 
did this influence your way of being and your work?
My mother, a strong woman full of life, never spoke to 
me about what she had gone through. As soon as she 
arrived in Israel in 1948 she had the number tattooed 
on her when she entered Auschwitz removed through 
plastic surgery. Therefore, as a child, I did not know, 
“that my mother had been in the holocaust”, neither 
did I know why her son, whose pictures were hidden 
in her lingerie drawer I would secretly open, was not 
alive. The long and complex process of discovery 
started for me at adolescence. It kept changing with 
every stage of life and with the extreme period we 
are going through. It is an open question with which 
I live, and a commitment I uphold, loyal to my moth-
er’s ethics, that of being a “Mensch” (real human 
being). For me this is the only real lesson to be drawn 
in the face of the abyss of humanity. Most of my writ-
ings, whether novels, poems or essays, attempt, again 
and again, to put this unique and extreme experience 
and duty, into words. 
Ilana’s love for the Palestinian Sayyid fills her with 
a feeling of betrayal to her father. What can you 
say about this feeling? 
Ilana and Sayyid’s affair unravel the passionate – even 
erotic - dimension of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. 
A conflict that is rooted in the Abrahamic Religions 
based on a passionate rivalry and mutual exclusive-
ness between brothers. The consequences of the polit-
ical conflict are tragic because loyalty to one story is 
simply perceived as the inevitable betrayal of the 
other. Ilana, a dedicated member of the Peace camp, 
believes she can go beyond this boundary, even if she 
betrays her father’s Zionist commitment. But as the 
novel unfolds, and she reads more from her father’s 
legacy, she understands that his own dream of Peace 
was not so far from hers, whereas during the Gulf war 
and the Intifada, she feels betrayed by Sayyid and the 
members of the Palestinian theater company who 
slowly turn their backs on their collaboration. 
Where does betrayal end, where does loyalty 
begin? What is betrayal and what is loyalty? - is a 
major question that Snapshots raises from the per-
sonal, erotic and political point of view, all the while 
also asking whether betraying rigid convictions is 
not in fact the same as true loyalty. This is a ques-
tion that a woman may well be in a position to put 
forth in the most poignant way– since she rarely has 
the right to do so, since women are rarely able to 
decide on their own existence and bodies.
You teach at the School of Visual Theatre in Jerusa-
lem. As a novelist, what is your relationship to 
theatre?
Sometimes, like an actor, I “improvise”, lead the text 
to unknown places, hidden even from me, only to 
hunt down and touch the unsaid. Often I use the 
monologue, to capture the subtleties and fluctua-
tions of the living voice, of the fleeting moment. 
And then, through rhythm, respiration, body expres-
sion, I “draw in” the reader to “perform” this mono-
logue, to experience it as powerfully as an actor who 
is carried by the role he plays. 
© Riverhead Books
Snapshots, Riverhead Books, 2007. 4
4

As a teacher of young directors in Israel, with 
students from backgrounds as different, even 
opposed, as this region provides, I have worked both 
with Jewish students expressing through Chekhov 
their pain after the settlements were uprooted in the 
Gaza Strip, and with Palestinian students also trying 
to transmit their pain through writing and directing 
actors. My approach has always been the same: to 
develop the young artists’ unique talent and mission, 
along with a fundamental commitment to the art of 
the theater, that is to say, a sincere and unbiased 
commitment - beyond all else – to the human dimen-
sion of theater, to humanism. 
© 2007; Balance
The Danya Elraz Ballet at the Visual Theatre of Jerusalem.
