The Kallawaya, itinerant herbalist healers from 
Bautista Saavedra province in the state of La Paz, 
have developed down through the centuries a “family 
language” in their kinship groups (ayllu), within 
which they have transmitted their holistic medicinal 
know-how from generation to generation. They 
named it Machaj Juyai, the “folk language”, still 
spoken today by the eight ayllus of the Kallawaya in 
a province where the language of social relations and 
daily life is Quechua. 
Already colonial administrators were curious about 
this language and writers of Hispanic and mixed 
origin testified to its “rareness”. As early as the 17th 
century, information circulated regarding the exist-
ence of a specialized language of herbalist healers 
who spent their time concocting remedies for Inca 
kings and their entourage.
The Kallawaya and the Eiffel 
Tower
Scientists in the 19th century, however, would not 
recognize the Kallawaya as having their own lan-
guage, and questioned them on their knowledge of 
herbal medicines in the dominant language of the 
high plateaus, Aymara. The Kallawaya speak it, in 
order to communicate with a larger number of 
patients and to enlarge their sphere of activity. 
With the aim of publishing a list of medicinal 
plants with industrial properties and present it at 
the 1889 Universal Exposition, the one for which the 
Eiffel Tower was built, Bolivian scientists and civil 
servants asked the Kallawaya to describe in Aymara 
the properties of more than 100 plants brought to 
France for this great “celebration of civilization”. 
This was the moment the idea spread that the Kalla-
waya were Aymara. 
Another half-century had to elapse before the 
Kallawaya were accepted as a specific group with its 
own language and forms of expression. The Machaj 
Juyai-Kallawaya language was 
heard by scientists in cer-
emonial and healing con-
texts, and it was also 
proven that it was used 
to a great extent as a 
language of communica-
tion within the group. 
There was thus, mid-
20th century, renewed 
interest in the Kallawaya’s 
language as an expres-
sion of their know-how. 
According to some, 
Machaj Juyai-Kallawaya 
was the secret language 
of the Inca kings and 
those closest to them. 
Other experts attempted in vain to find parallels 
between Machaj Juyai and the ancient Puquina lan-
guage, or the Uru from the Andean high plateaus. 
Others imagined a possible link to languages of the 
the secrets of machaj Juyai-Kallawaya
Developed down through the centuries, Machaj Juyai is a “secret language” still spoken 
by a few families of traditional herbalist healers, the Kallawaya, who live in the Bolivian 
Andes. They propagate a now-threatened ancestral knowledge, which UNESCO is working 
to safeguard.
© Ministerio de Cultura, Bolivia
Kallawaya ritual.
© Flickr
The Kallawaya’s 
cosmovision was 
proclaimed a masterpiece 
of the oral and intangible 
cultural heritage of 
humanity by UNESCO in 
2003.

Amazonian forest, where the Kallawaya traveled to 
seek out the herbal, animal and mineral resources 
they used to prevent and cure illness. The Kalawaya’s 
role as intermediaries between the Incas and the 
Amazonian populations may have influenced their 
language.
Chronicle of a death foretold
Obviously the Kallawaya’s language was subjected to 
the influence of Quechua, which was the instrument 
of their forced conversion to Catholicism. The Kalla-
waya elite were persecuted in the 
17th century in the battle led by 
the Catholic Church known as 
“extirpation of idolatry”. Children 
were separated from grown-ups, to 
be brought up by Spanish people 
or Quechua Catholic priests. Que-
chua exerted further influence on 
the Kallawaya in the 19th century, 
when the latter emigrated mas-
sively to Peru, where they found 
numerous clients and even became 
in the early 20th century the offi-
cial doctors of President Augusto 
Bernardino Leguía. On their own 
territory too, the Kallwaya felt the 
demographic pressure of neighbor-
ing ayllus, who spoke Quechua. 
This is why today Machaj Juyai-
Kallawaya has absorbed nearly all 
the phonology and grammar of 
Quechua. 
More recently, Machaj Juyai-Kallawaya’s vitality was 
sorely tested during two historical events. The first 
was the Chaco War (1932-1935) between Bolivia and 
Paraguay. The Kallawaya were mobilized as aides to 
the doctors responsible for giving care to the enor-
mous contingent of indigenous Bolivians, comprised 
of Aymara and Quechuas. Kallawaya lost their lives in 
great number, which would have serious repercussions 
on subsequent demographic development. 
The second event was the 1952 revolution led by 
the National Revolutionary Movement (NRM), which 
led to structural social change: the right to vote was 
extended universally, the biggest national mining 
companies were nationalized and agricultural lands 
were redistributed. The Kallawaya’s traditional 
nomadic way of life gave way to settlement in cities, 
where they became herbalists or jewelers. 
The idea of sending young Kallawaya to medical 
school, sparing them criminal prosecution for prac-
ticing indigenous medicine outlawed by Bolivian law, 
came out of this urban environment. This has created 
space for the struggle to decrimi-
nalize indigenous medicine in 
Bolivia. The Kallawaya are becom-
ing professionals within the 
framework of Western university 
knowledge, but they are doing so 
at the cost of a crucial cultural 
dimension: the Machaj Juyai-Kall-
awaya language. These days a 
large majority of Kallawaya is tri-
lingual – Castilian, Aymara and 
Quechua – but few of them are 
fluent in their original language. 
During the 2001 census con-
ducted by the Bolivian state, the 
existence of the Kallawaya ethnic 
group and its language was not 
recognized. Nor is UNESCO’s proc-
lamation of the Cosmovision of 
the Kallawaya as a masterpiece of 
the oral and intangible cultural heritage of humanity 
legally recognized. At present, the Kallawaya are 
taking steps in order to obtain legal recognition from 
the Bolivian Parliament for themselves and their lan-
guage. The new Constitution (currently in the making) 
could prove them right.
By Carmen Beatriz Loza, researcher at the Bolivian 
institute of traditional Kallawaya medicine 
(El Alto, La Paz, Bolivia)
© Flickr/Alex Shtrahman
Witch market where the Kallawaya get their 
supplies. (La Paz, Bolivia).
