  
Why wildlife matters 
y 4 “Pom 
le J Fa 
Prose Norman Myers £ WWF, Gang. Switzerland 
The UNESCO Courier 2008 N°10 
“If all the beasts were gone, men would die 
from great loneliness of spirit, for whatever 
happens to the beasts also happens to the 
man. All things are connected, Whatever 
befalls the earth befalls the sons of the 
earth.” These words were written by an 
Indian chief, Seathl, in a letter to the Presi- 
dent of the United States in 1855. Above. a 
herd of African elephants. Poaching for iv- 
ory is a serious threat wherever elephants 
are accessible, and in Africa elephant num- 
bers have declined considerably in recent 
vears, 
32 
N this age of technology. of computers. 
television, supersonic aircraft and nuc- 
lear power stations. why should wild 
ammals and plants matter to us any longer? 
Surely they must now go into the ash-can of 
history. along with bows and arrows. wood 
fires and horse transport? 
On the contrary, it is a matter of life and 
death, in every sense of the phrase. that 
animals and plants should continue to exist. 
For every day of our lives, every man, 
woman and child in the world depends on 
them for vital parts of their welfare, 
Animals and plants contribute 10 human 
welfare in three main wavs, They provide 
much of the material basis of human life: 
almost all our food. much of our clothing. 
and in many parts of the world still most of 
the maternal for building and of the fuel for 
heating and lighting our dwellings. In addi- 
tion. they provide the knowledge that is 
essential for maintaining this material basis. 
and indeed for preventing a widespread 
return to more primitive conditions. Not 
least, they contribute sigmficantly to our 
enjovment of our environment. both in our 
daily recreation and in our wonderment at 
both the beauty of the natural world and at 
the mysteries of the universe. 
It was recognition of the importance to 
mankind of the genetic resources repre- 
sented by animal and plant species. both

by Richard Fitter 
   
wild and domesticated, and alarm at their 
widespread destruction, that eight years 
ago led the International Union for Con- 
servation of Nature and Natural Resources 
(TUCN) and the World Wildlife Fund 
(WWF) to produce the World Conservation 
Strategy (see the Unesco Courier, May 
1980). This has three primary objectives: 
(1) to maintain viable stocks of all animal 
and plant species (it must be all because we 
still know so little about the value of the 
great majority of species: it is only quite 
recently, for instance, that the value in the 
treatment of cancer of a little-known Mada- 
gascar plant, the periwinkle Catharanthus, 
was discovered): 
(2) to maintain large enough stocks of 
species already known to be of value to 
man, so that they can be cropped. harvested 
or otherwise enjoyed indefinitely: and 
(3) to maintain pure air and water and 
fertile soil, 
Though all three aims of the World Con- 
servation Strategy are plain common sense, 
they are widely disregarded by both govern- 
ments and individuals, thanks to our pre- 
sent social and institutional arrangements. 
How are we to overcome this widespread 
neglect and manage the world’s animals and 
plants, both wild and domesticated, on a 
sustainable basis. i.c. so that they continue 
to be available for our benefit? 
The UNESCO Courier 2008 N°10 
The two main threats to species, which 
have led to the extinction of some and se- 
vere reductions in the numbers of many 
others. are overexploitation and habitat 
destruction, 
Historically. overexploitation, both legal 
and illegal, has been the more important. In 
the last century, overhunting exterminated 
the passenger pigeon in North America and 
nearly exterminated the bison there too. In 
the present century, systematic poaching 
for their horns and ivory has almost exter- 
minated the black rhinoceros and severely 
reduced elephant numbers in Africa, 
Moreover, overhunting of the great 
whales, especially in the southern oceans. 
despite the cfforts of the International 
Whaling Commission (IWC) set up espe- 
cially to prevent this, has reduced almost all 
stocks throughout the world to the level of 
commercial extinction, Since their hunting 
is now forbidden, the whaling industry has 
in effect committed suicide. Marine fish 
stocks throughout the world have also been 
steadily overexploited so that many of them 
are no longer available for human consump- 
tion. The world’s last great reservoir of 
plentiful fish stocks is now in the Antarctic 
and sub-Antarctic. Will current efforts 
through the Antarctic Treaty be too little 
and too late to save these too? 
But today widespread habitat destruction 
33 
~~ 
Photo J. Esser £) WWF, Gung, Switzertand 
A 
The vicuna (Lama vicugna), a ruminant re- 
lated to the llama, lives in the high Andes. Its 
exceptionally fine and warm wool was highly 
prized in North America and Europe, and so 
many vicuna were slaughtered that the spe- 
cies was threatened with extinction until 
Peru took protective measures to save it in 
the 1960s. 
is by far the most serious threat to both 
animal and plant species, especially in the 
great rainforest belt of the developing 
world. Here the burgeoning human popula- 
tion makes constantly increasing demands 
for timber and cultivable land. “More peo- 
ple and less swamp”, as an elderly Floridan 
pithily explained the decrease of the cougar 
in his district. Ten hectares of virgin tropical 
forest are estimated to be disappearing 
every minute. At this rate of clearance 
hardly any of the surviving 2 to 3 billion 
hectares will remain outside national parks 
and other protected areas by the end of the 
century, now only a dozen years away. 
Pollution is an almost equally important 
factor. Chemical wastes from both industry 
and agriculture, as well as from the activi- 
ties of individuals such as automobile 
travel, are steadily impairing the quality of 
, 
e ART ing - WERE ¥ : Pr ry v TRS 
GE RE an ESTE, Lae Se :

Ph
ot
o 
Pr
om
o 
Le
te
li
er
 
©)
 
Ja
ca
na
, 
Pa
ri
s 
~
~
 
2 
J h. \ 
The African northern white rhino (Cer- 
atotherium simum cottoni) lives under threat 
of extinction because of hunting for its horn. 
By the early 1980s it was estimated that its 
numbers had been reduced to fewer than 700 
animals. The biggest population of northern 
white rhinos today live in Zaire's 500,000- 
hectare Garamba National Park, which in 
1980 was included on Unesco’s World Herit- 
age List as a natural property of outstanding 
universal value, 
The Arabian oryx (Oryx leucoryx) was once 
common throughout the desert areas of Ara- 
bia, Syria and Mesopotamia. By 1972 it had 
become extinct in the wild through intensive 
hunting. Fortunately, before that happened, 
a few had been captured and used to build 
up breeding herds. In 1980 the oryx was 
successfully reintroduced in Oman, 
—_—   
Fi 
B
N
 
g 
| 4 El Ram a XS 
Ve 
£| A wy 
— Ea SA Hi 2 
BOE RRR 
The UNESCO Courier 2008 N°10 
  
JE* 
> Ea 
-.y £ 
og \ , > 
of 5 
. 4 
| 
air, soil and water. The most dramatic effect 
i$ that of acid rain, due to a “chemical soup™ 
still not fully understood, which is des- 
troying both forests and freshwater fish 
stocks throughout the northern hemi- 
sphere. 
To stop overexploitation, we must reg- 
ulate cropping and harvesting. This calls for 
both licensing of individual hunters, some- 
times with specific bag limits, and quotas for 
commercial harvesting. The problem is al- 
ways enforcement, as witness the umversal 
existence and increasing audacity of 
poachers even in national parks, and the 
dismal record of the whaling industry. 
The accurate estimation of stock size is 
another problem. The IWC has its own 
scientific committee to do this for whales, 
and [UCN has set up a Conservation Moni- 
toring Centre (CMC), to create an accurate 
data-base for all species. The Centre is also 
responsible for the Red Data Books, brain- 
child of Sir Peter Scott, which summarize 
key information about endangered species. 
So far the chief weapon against habitat 
destruction has been the creation of nation- 
al parks, nature reserves, wildlife refuges or 
other protected areas. But can enough land 
be set aside in this way in the next ten or 
twelve vears to save the many thousands of 
species that today face certain extinction 
from rainforest loss alone? The number of 
species so threatened may indeed be mil 
lions, if the latest estimates of the world’s 
invertebrate species—an incredible 30 mil- 
hon—are correct. 
The two bodies which bear the brunt of 
the responsibility for saving species are 
IUCN and WWF. They share a headquar- 
ters in Switzerland and are greatly helped 
34 
  
R2L AS 8 2 
a 
: - w / 
oe Fa 
"a 
| vi, whe 
is PE a rs | 4 A A 3 
Lo Joh aR. 2 
by the United Nations Environment Prog- 
ramme (UNEP). which strongly supports 
and grant-aids IUCN. Birds are covered by 
the International Council for Bird Preserva- 
tion (ICBP), headquartered in the United 
Kingdom and currently grant-aided by 
WWF. 
IUCN operates through six commissions 
of scientific experts: the Species Survival 
Commission (SSC), the one mainly con- 
cerned with species conservation, works 
through a network of more than 90 special- 
ist groups, to which nearly 2,000 zoologists 
and botanists all over the world voluntanly 
contribute their expertise. Among the most 
active groups are those covering African 
elephants and rhinos, antelopes, cats, pri- 
mates, crocodiles, marine turtles, dragon- 
flies and orchids. The Trade Group is re- 
sponsible for IUCN's input into the impor- 
tant Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species (CITES). The SSC 
also has close links with ICBP, which has its 
own series of working groups, such as those 
for parrots, flamingos and bustards. 
Two other relevant IUCN commissions 
are those for Ecology (general habitat prob- 
lems, pollution) and National Parks and 
Protected Areas. Unesco’s Man and the 
Biosphere Programme also plays a vital 
part in preserving habitat for species, as do 
such international conventions as the World 
Heritage Convention, and the Ramsar Con- 
vention on Wetlands of International Im- 
portance. 
Many non-governmental organizations 
belong to IUCN, and some are active in the 
species conservation field in their own 
right, notably the Bombay Natural History 
Society, the Fauna and Flora Preservation

Society of London, the Frankfurt Zoologic- 
al Society of the Federal Republic of Ger- 
many and the New York Zoological 
Society. 
Unlike IUCN, WWF and ICBP operate 
largely through national organizations or 
sections, ICBP's network being consider- 
ably the more extensive world-wide, WWF 
is primarily a fund-raising body, and in- 
creasingly tends to raise funds for its own 
programmes and projects. 
So where do we go from here? How can 
this array of national and international 
bodies help to achieve our aim, the con- 
servation and sustainable use (which in- 
cludes non-consumptive uses, such as bird- 
watching and whale-watching) of animal 
and plant species? 
More, and usually a lot more, of what we 
are already doing scems to be the answer, 
First we must set aside and manage properly 
adequate areas of habitat, This includes 
ensuring that big development projects take 
account of the need to conserve genetic 
resources, 
We must also ensure that all wild popula- 
tons that are harvested are not over- 
harvested. This means both cracking down 
on poaching everywhere, not just in pro- 
tected areas, and properly enforcing the 
CITES trade regulations. Finally, and most 
important of all, we must carry with us not 
only the decision-makers, politicians and 
administrators, but also villagers and 
townsfolk all over the world. Without their 
goodwill, and their realization of where 
their own real long-term interests lie, every- 
thing will be lost. Ww 
RICHARD FITTER, British naturalist and au- 
thor, has been a member of the Species Survival 
Commission of the International Union for Con- 
servation of Nature and Natural Resources 
(IUCN) for 24 years and is currently chairman of 
ity Steering Committee. His 29th book was Wild- 
life for Man, a source-book on species conserva- 
tion for the World Conservation Strategy, and his 
30th, a field guide to the north-west European 
countryside in winter, will appear in September 
1958. 
The green turtle (Chelonia mydas), found in Pp 
tropical seas, is overexploited for its meat, 
its eggs and its shell, used to make tourist 
souvenirs. Turtle populations have been sev- 
erely reduced and in some regions have dis- 
appeared completely. Right, baby green 
turtles. 
The UNESCO Courier 2008 N°10 
Illicit trade 
in threatened species 
billions of dollars annually, has been 
responsible for massive declines in the 
numbers of many species of animals and 
plants, The scale of over-exploitation for 
trade aroused such concern that an interna- 
tional treaty was drawn up in 1973 to protect 
wildlife against such over-exploitation and to 
prevent international trade from threatening 
species with extinction, 
Known as CITES, the Convention on In- 
ternational Trade in Endangered Species of 
Wild Fauna and Flora entered into force on | 
July 1975 and now has 96 member countries. 
Enforcement of CITES is the responsibility of 
these countries, which are required to ban 
commercial trade in an agreed list of cur- 
rently endangered species and regulate and 
monitor trade in others that might become 
endangered. Governments are also required 
to submit reports, including trade records, 
to the CITES Secretariat in Switzerland. 
The wildlife trade involves a wide variety of 
species, both as live specimens and as pro- 
ducts, Millions of live animals and plants are 
shipped around the world each year to supply 
the pet trade and to meet the demand for 
T HE international wildlife trade, worth ornamental plants. Furskins, leather, ivory 
and articles manufactured from these mate- 
rials are all traded in large quantities. 
CITES provides protection for species in 
two main categories, “most endangered spe- 
cies”, and “other species at serious risk". 
Among those listed in the former category are 
all apes, lemurs, the giant panda, many 
South American monkeys, great whales, 
cheetah, leopards, tigers, Asian elephants, 
all rhinoceroses, many birds of prey. 
cranes, pheasants and parrots, all sea turtles, 
some crocodiles and lizards, and giant 
salamanders. 
Included in the second category are species 
which might become endangered if trade in 
them is not controlled and monitored. Inter- 
national trade in these species is permitted 
with proper documentation issued by the gov- 
ernment of the exporting country. The list 
includes all animal species in the following 
groups which are not already in the first 
category: primates, cats, otters, whales, dol- 
phins and porpoises, birds of prey, tortoises, 
and crocodiles, as well as many other species 
such as the African elephant, fur seals and 
birds of paradise. 
