A large number of “developed” states have official 
languages, but their populations of various ethnic 
origins speak a number of other languages every day. 
“It has been estimated that in the year 2000 more 
than one third of the population under the age of 35 
in urbanized Western Europe had an immigrant minor-
ity background”, said a UNESCO document about lan-
guage diversity (see link), which notes that that “the 
biggest immigrant groups in the European Union are 
Turkish and North African and live in France, Germany 
and Britain”. 
Politicians in western countries are today drafting 
laws to tighten  immigration conditions and are 
introducing language and culture tests. To ask appli-
cants for immigration to know the rudiments of 
French, Dutch or English, as well as the basic rules of 
how the host countries work, does not seem absurd. 
But when they arrive, there is often an attempt to 
“erase” their mother tongues from their heads, espe-
cially if these are considered as “minor” languages. 
We only need to remember the October 2004 report 
about internal security in France (see link to Report 
about the prevention of delinquency). “[For children 
from 1 to 3 years old], only parents, and especially 
mothers, have contact with their children. If the 
children are of foreign origin, the parents should 
force themselves to speak French at home, in order to 
get the children used to having only this language to 
express themselves in” says the report, noting: “But 
if, in certain cases, they feel the reluctance of their 
fathers, who often insist on the use of the dialect of 
their countries of origin at home, they will be dis-
suaded from doing so. It will then be necessary to 
take action to encourage fathers to go in the right 
direction”. 
Languages and immigration: bilingualism 
is an asset
To deprive immigrant children of their mother tongues is to create situations of conflict 
between the family model and the social model, which is to scorn their identities. If 
their languages and cultures were respected by school systems, they would develop a 
better esteem of themselves and of others.

In the original French passage the word ‘français’ 
(French), designating a language, was written in cap-
itals, which is contrary to the rules of French spell-
ing. It may be supposed that ‘speaking a dialect’ is 
understood as speaking Arabic, Chinese, Serbian, 
etc. 
According to this report, the cognitive, educa-
tional and social development of children that are 
not forced to speak French at home would be com-
promised, as they would inevitably have language 
disorders, leading to behavioural disorders, later 
resulting in delinquency!
The mother tongues of 
immigrants under accusation
This absurd position reflects a flagrant ignorance of 
language development and of the role of the mother 
tongue in the psychic, cognitive and cultural con-
struction of an individual. How for a moment could 
one imagine that a mother might speak a language 
that she did not master well to her child? How could 
one be ignorant of the fact that the mother tongue 
conveys affects, that it enables the organization of 
cognitive faculties, that it symbolizes – for children 
of immigrant background – the continuity between 
the country of origin and the family. 
To deprive the child of the mother tongue at home 
is to create a situation of conflict between the family 
model and the social model and between family and 
school, with the further risk of impoverishing cul-
tural references and weakening socialization. 
This also implies that bilingualism is not consid-
ered as an asset but as a handicap, as an obstacle to 
successful education and integration, above all when 
the languages concerned, such as Arabic, Chinese or 
Russian, are, ridiculously, called ‘rare’. When the lan-
guages concerned, such as English or German, are 
‘socially valorized’ languages, bilingualism becomes a 
symbol of the elite! 
The arguments and proposals for the use (or rather 
non-use) of the mother tongue in the 2004 Report 
about the prevention of delinquency have many sup-
porters in political and academic circles in France, 
but the report gave rise to violent reactions: associa-
tions, NGOs, trade unions and intellectuals were 
mobilized, and the wording of the report was modi-
fied. In the 2005 version, the following can be found: 
‘Recognition of early bilingualism as a factor of inte-
gration. After many debates, the commission has 
considerably changed its position on the subject. It 
also seems that maintaining both the mother tongue 
and the dominant language enables children to have 
better results at school (...).’
Conflict or dialogue of languages?
The last twenty years of research into psycholinguis-
tics and sociolinguistics has unequivocally shown 
that the acquisition and learning of several languages 
by children, no matter what their socio-cultural back-
ground may be and no matter which languages may 
be concerned, does not hinder the cognitive and edu-
cational development of these children in the slight-
est. On the contrary, bilingual children show a greater 
speed and flexibility in certain learning situations, 
and develop better communication skills. If they are 
slightly deficient in the second language, this is 
often temporary, and they compensate for this by a 
richer mental system, cognitive skills that are often 
more efficient and a richer vision of the world. 
When educational difficulties affect children of 
immigrants, most teachers in France place the blame 
mainly on the conflict of languages and cultures. How-
ever, if the languages and cultures of immigrants were 4

Mother and child in Ireland.

emphasized more, taught to all pupils in schools and 
respected by the school system and by the dominant 
society, individuals would develop a better esteem 
and respect of themselves and therefore of others. 
François Cheng, a Chinese author, who arrived in 
Paris at the age of 20 without knowing a word of 
French, and who has been a member of the Académie 
Française since 2003, wrote in his book Le Dialogue 
(2002): “fate made that from a certain time in my 
life, I became the bearer of two languages, Chinese 
and French. Was it only because of fate? Unless, all 
the same, there was a part of deliberate free will in 
it? The fact remains that I tried to take up the chal-
lenge, by coming to terms with the two languages in 
my own way, with the most extreme consequences. 
[…] It is not surprising that since then, in the heart 
of my linguistic adventure, which is directed towards 
the love for an adopted language, one theme has had 
pride of place: dialogue…” 
Dialogue between communities, dialogue between 
languages - linguists know and emphasize the fact 
that immigrants contribute to the dynamism and 
enrichment of languages such as English or French. 
As an example, the mixing of Chinese, Korean, Japa-
nese and Vietnamese with English is a worldwide 
phenomenon, which immigrants of various Asian ori-
gins use to communicate with each other, therefore 
making their own linguistic contributions. It is the 
same for “Spanglish”, a hybrid language that mixes 
English and Spanish, which is very popular with young 
people in United States, and is one of the most strik-
ing examples of changes in a language faced with 
immigration and globalization.
Ranka Bijeljac-Babić, Franco-Serb psycholinguist, 
Université de Poitiers et Paris 5 - CNRS.

Ceremony conferring François Cheng of the Académie 
française (right) the title of Professor honoris causa of the 
Tongji University, China.
