decided in favour of the Commission, with a few 
exceptions. Now the judgment is being appealed. 
stop “fast food information”
It took European institutions in Brussels ten years of campaigning to start making 
certain dossiers available to the public. Journalists are demanding access to European 
Commission projects before they are adopted, to allow advance public debate.
What are the problems with access to information 
in Europe? 
On one hand, the journalists covering European insti-
tutions are swamped with information and they have 
to sort it, because some is of dubious value. On the 
other hand, they come up against obstacles trying to 
obtain the information they think is important. 
For example, there is ongoing litigation between 
the European Commission and the International Press 
Association, representing journalists working in Brus-
sels. The Association is demanding access to certain 
dossiers regarding competition, maintaining that 
documents the Commission submits to the European 
Court of Justice to back up its decisions about com-
pany mergers and acquisitions should be made public. 
The Commission claims these documents contain con-
fidential or commercially sensitive data and refuses 
to make them public. The Court at the first level 
4
© European Commission
Europe is not united with respect to norms on access to 
information.

But I understand it’s not 
the Commission’s role to 
release projects before 
they’re adopted. 
Does that mean access to 
information is not self evi-
dent in Europe? 
There are extraordinarily 
diverse traditions in Europe, 
the Europe of the 27 but 
also that of the 15. The 
Nordic countr ies, for 
instance, are much more 
open than those in the 
south, like France and Italy, 
where information is often withheld, or the United 
Kingdom, where a spokesman will give you the public 
side of his country’s position in a negotiation, but 
not the real content of the negotiation or the posi-
tion of other countries. 
In Brussels, if a journalist wants to know what’s 
going on at the Council of ministers, he’ll go see the 
representatives of the Nordic countries where thanks 
to a tradition of the right to information you can get 
an overall view. 
The lack of a consistent practice within the 15 or 
the 27 does not facilitate the work of the European 
Union when it wants to impose norms on candidate 
countries. What is it going to tell the Turks, for 
instance – you have to behave like Danes or you 
have to behave like Italians? 
In Europe, to my knowledge, the question of access 
to information does not come under European law, 
except as far as institutions are concerned.
What are the greatest threats to the press in the 
West?
The deterioration of press quality. The laziness of 
journalists, readers or television viewers who want 
everything reduced to sound bites. What the French 
economist and politician Jacques Delors calls “fast 
food information”. During my 30-year career, I’ve 
witnessed the people-ization of the written press – 
the space for international and even national news 
on important issues has been cut to accommodate 
Another example – for a long time 
they refused to give us the lists of 
beneficiaries for the common agricul-
tural policy subsidies. These show that 
particularly in the United Kingdom, 
the royal family and the big aristo-
crats are among the main beneficiar-
ies of European agricultural subsidies 
– something the press always finds 
amusing. 
Who is “they”? 
That’s exactly the issue. The Commis-
sion claims it’s the Member States. 
But in any case, we are moving 
towards generalized release of such 
information. It took ten years of campaigning to get 
results. 
Another controversy is centered on the role of the 
Commission’s industrial advisers. The difficulty lay in 
finding out which adviser was appointed in order to 
check whether there might be conflict of interest, if 
the adviser to a commissioner might not be the owner 
of a business that had a commercial interest in the 
legislation – which was inevitably sometimes the 
case. There too, the Commission put up obstacles at 
the beginning and finally agreed to publish the lists. 
It’s now underway. 
Personally, I don’t feel they’re hiding everything 
from us. There are journalists who have taken that 
stance.
To what extent should a legal text that is still a 
draft be made public?
As an agency representative, I don’t have an opinion. 
As a journalist, I would like to have maximum infor-
mation. I think it’s legitimate that there should be 
public debate beforehand. Industry, the NGOS and 
other actors in different fields – climate change, bio-
fuels, regulation of financial markets or transport – 
all have offices or employ lobbyists to try and 
influence the process in advance, before the Commis-
sion’s proposals are published. 
I don’t hide the fact that I sometimes get draft 
legislation not from my Commission sources but from 
an NGO or industrial lobby. 4
© UNESCO/Aleksandar Džoni-Šopov
Confidential.
4

the “lifestyle” section, sports, people, and the thing 
I hate, and not because I’m a snob, local news. 
The loss of independence is another real threat. A 
free press needs to have financial means that are 
independent of governments and independent of the 
big economic interests. Yet the number of readers 
buying quality press is shrinking. Yesterday (17 April 
2008), the New York Times announced a loss. In 
France, Le Monde recently announced a loss and job 
cuts. Advertising and ad revenues are shifting to the 
internet, away from the classic print media. 
As a result there are agencies surviving thanks to 
major public subsidies, for instance, with the conse-
quent threat to their independence. 
In any case, the media always run this risk, not 
just from governments, but also from company 
owners. That’s why there are constant attempts to 
create instruments, like conscience clauses, designed 
to protect the independence of editors and journal-
ists, with laws that vary in different countries. 
Yet we mustn’t forget there are many countries in 
the world where the press has so many other crush-
ing problems they would be only too happy to have 
problems like these. 
© Flickr



«People-ization» of the written press: but famous Chinese 
actress Maggie Cheung has other plans.
