The man whose name means “small stream” in Per-
sian Dari, Rudaki, was born in 858 near Panjakent, 
200 km north of Duchanbe, Tajikistan’s capital. At 
the age of eight, he recited the Qur’an by heart. 
Later, his fame as a fine poet, brilliant musician and 
singer having reached Bukhara (today in Uzbekistan), 
he was invited to the court as official poet. He spent 
a large part of his life in the service of the Samanid 
dynasty (875-999). 
Capital of the Arab Caliphate’s first great inde-
pendent State, Bukhara was considered the centre of 
Tajik culture. The Samanids encouraged the develop-
ment of the sciences, architecture and poetry writ-
ten in Persian. The population was known for its level 
of instruction, Islam having contributed to a wide 
distribution of sacred texts. According to the Persian 
philosopher, writer and doctor, Avicenna, the Bukhara 
library possessed “books of which numerous people 
even ignored the existence”.
The poet of inaccessible 
simplicity
A link between two epochs, Rudaki succeeded in 
merging the Pre-Islamic musical and poetic tradi-
tions, Iranian Tajik song and radically new forms of 
Arabic verse into his art. Rudaki wrote in new Persian 
(Dari). The Persian having existed until then had to 
adopt, after the Arab conquest of Central Asia and 
the spread of Islam, Arabic writing. 
The verses of the « Sultan of Poets », as he was 
called, are imbued with his faith in human reason, in 
the wisdom of experience, the will to master knowl-
edge, and the doing of good and justice. The terse-
ness, the simplicity of his poetic expression gave 
birth to a new literary style, known as the Horasa-
nian or Rudaki style, which dominated Persian poetry 
during several centuries. Still during the Middle Ages, 
scholars would qualify the style of the poet as “sakhle 
moumtans” (inaccessible simplicity). 
Celebrating nature, man, his noble feelings and 
his ideals, he broached questions of philosophy and 
ethics, attempting to improve the mores of his time 
Landmarks
rudaki, the sultan of Poets
« Since the world rose from darkness, no one yet, on Earth, has regretted to have 
devoted his life to study », wrote Abu Abdullah Rudaki (858-941), rightly considered 
the founder of Tajik Persian literature. 
Supported by Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Kazakhstan, Tajikistan 
submitted a proposal to UNESCO for the celebration of Rudaki’s 1150th anniversary. 
the UNesCo Courier pays tribute to Rudaki on the occasion of World Poetry Day (21 
March).
© all rights reserved
Abu Abdullah Rudaki.
4

by the power of the poetic verb. He was the first, in 
Persian poetry, not only to contemplate man but also 
to place him at the centre of his art: ordinary man, 
man on earth, “earthly” man who thinks simply and 
clearly. 
Rudaki excelled in different poetic genres: rubai, 
ghazal, qasida, kitia, masnavi and other gallant lyri-
cal poems. But of his entire work, only the qasida, 
The Mother of Wine, and some forty roubais (quat-
rains) remain. The rest is made of panegyric, lyric 
and didactic fragments of works, such as the poem 
Kalila and Dimna and five other texts. 
After having served more than 40 years at the 
Samanid court, the poet fell out of favour, towards the 
end of his life, because of his sympathies for a rebel-
lious people, the Qarmates. And because he is known 
to have died a blind man, some believe that his eyes 
had been pierced before he was banished from the 
court. He spent the rest of his life in poverty. He died 
in 941 in Panjrud, the village of his birth. 
Moukammal Odinaeva, Lola Olimova, Tajik journalists
A joint initiative of UNESCO and the International 
Union of Geological Science (IUGS), the year encour-
ages scientists to work on ten broad themes particu-
larly relevant to society: health, climate, groundwater, 
the oceans, soils, deep earth, megacities, hazards, 
resources and life. 
The UNESCO Courier’s next issue will be devoted to 
the International Year of Planet Earth. 
© Foteh
Rudaki’s statue in Panjakent, Tajikistan
