reserves in 2005 for its “natural and landscape 
values”, the Sierra del Rincón incorporates five 
municipalities with a population count of 818 inhab-
itants, only half of whom live there year-round. 
The month of February is just beginning, but the 
sun is shining brightly. On the main square in La 
Hiruela, one of the reserve’s villages, four or five 
locals are sitting in the sun chatting. When asked, 
they all say they’re proud to live in an area with the 
prestigious label of “UNESCO Biosphere Reserve”. 
Boost for biosphere reserves
They’ve been called “the lungs of the planet” or “sustainable development laboratories” 
and both depictions are accurate. But biosphere reserves are above all pioneer areas 
where the needs of humanity and nature are reconciled. The International Year of Planet 
Earth provides an opportunity to give one of UNESCO’s emblematic scientific programmes 
a boost.
Eighty-five kilometers along the Madrid-Brugos high-
way, a sign on the right points to the small road that 
leads to the Sierra del Rincón biosphere reserve. 
There, an expanse of 15,230 hectares is home to 193 
species of vertebrates, 694 species of vascular plants 
(holm oak, downy oak, beech, birch and pine) and 
139 species of non-vascular plants (lichens, mosses 
and mushrooms). Fifty-five of these species are 
endemic and four of them are in danger of extinc-
tion. Accepted into the global network of biosphere 4

© Luiz de Mog
Mata Atlantica, Brazil.
4
The place is so quiet it’s hard to believe there’s a 
bustling city of three million people only 90 km away, 
with its problems of air pollution, urban waste and 
lack of greenery.… “Being close to a big city is both 
an advantage and an inconvenience,” says biologist 
Elena de Mingo, head of the reserve’s technical 
centre. “On the positive side, residents have access 
to a wide range of infrastructures and social services 
– hospitals, schools, etc – near by, which is not the 
case in more remote reserves, even in Spain. The 
proximity also makes it easy for people to come and 
visit on weekends. And of course when it come to 
attracting conservation and research projects, we are 
lucky to be considered a jewel in the crown of the 
Community of Madrid.” The latter does indeed finance 
environmental protection projects and initiatives. 
“In short, we represent a priority area for a govern-
ment with means at its disposal, and that’s very pos-
itive,” she adds.
Humanity and nature
“But we also come up against certain problems,” de 
Mingo admits, “such as having to organize tourism 
down to the tiniest detail, so that it won’t have a 
negative impact on what we’re trying to safeguard. 
That’s why we have hikes on ecological trails that 
always follow the same route. The other side of the 
coin is that the younger generations have trouble 
staying, because building new houses is prohibited. 
All that stands in the way of renewing the demo-
graphics and creating employment”. 
© UNESCO/Lucía Iglesias



Sierra del Rincón Reserve, Madrid.
The balance between human activity and environ-
mental protection is precisely the major challenge of 
UNESCO’s Man and the Biosphere programme. From 
Yellowstone Park (USA), on the list since 1976, to the 
recently-inscribed Rostovsky reserve (Russian Federa-
tion) the global network of biosphere reserves today 
counts 531 sites located in 105 countries. It includes 
arid and semi-arid lands, mangroves, tundra, snowy 
peaks and seascapes. What do all these sites have in 
common? What threatens them?
laboratories for climate change
The third World Congress of Biosphere Reserves, held 
in Madrid last February and attended by over 800 
delegates, was organized around these questions. 
“The goal was to revise the entire management strat-
egy in order to deal with new challenges, such as 
loss of traditional know-how and cultural diversity, 
population growth, decrease of arable land or climate 
change,” explains Miguel Clüsener-Godt, Programme 
Specialist in the Division of Ecological and Earth Sci-
ences at UNESCO. “It’s a fact, climate change is upon 
us, and we are feelings its effects. Biosphere reserves 
are the ideal places to study consequences and look 
for ways to mitigate them.” This is precisely the aim 
of the Madrid Strategy, which consists of 31 goals 
organized into 65 actions. Among the measures 
planned are promoting the incorporation of urban 
landscapes into the biospheres; organizing training 
on different kinds of ecosystems; establishing 

 biosphere reserve pilot sites to 
measure their economic contri-
bution to local economies; 
increasing the involvement of the 
private sector; and promoting 
incentives for creating products 
with the “biosphere reserve” 
brand. 
The MAB Programme 2008-
2013 will be run according to the 
Madrid Strategy and such repre-
sentative sites as the Brazilian 
Atlantic forest, which covers 
4.5% of Brazil, Mount Kenya or the 
French Camargue will benefit. 
Elena de Mingo at Sierra del Rincón 
sums up what’s at stake: “The bal-
ance between humans and nature 
still exists for now, but safeguard-
ing it is a delicate task.” The 
Madrid Strategy, adopted this 
International Year of Planet Earth, 
will certainly be a valuable tool to 
make that task possible. 
Lucía Iglesias Kuntz
© Yiting Liang



Fontainebleau Forest, near Paris.
