Mathis Wackernagel (Switzerland), 
Executive Director of the Ecological 
Footprint Network. 
The Network, a non-profit organization 
that promotes ecological, social and 
economic sustainability, compiles 
national footprint accounts, measuring 
the ecological resource use and 
resource capacity of nations over time. 
Wackernagel told Roni Amelan of 
UNESCO’s Bureau of Public Information 
about the purpose of the network. 
The Global Footprint Network was established in Cali-
fornia in 2003 and its main goal is to end our shoot-
ing ourselves in the foot. Our metabolism has become 
© UNESCO/Michel Ravassard



Mathis Wackernagel (to the right) and Roni Amelan, at UNESCO.
How much can we spend?
Ecological Footprint consists in measuring how much land it takes to meet a person’s 
needs according to lifestyle, consumption versus regeneration. It was developed by 

overburdened, we consume more than we can gener-
ate. The most visible sign of that is climate change. 
It is possible to sustain this for some time because 
of existing stocks but we are heading towards eco-
logical bankruptcy.
When do you expect the stocks we rely on to run 
out?
In some parts of the world we have already reached 
bankruptcy. Haiti and Darfur for example are areas 
where everything comes together: civil wars are the 
result of many factors including, not least, shortage 
of resources. In Darfur, we see that there is no wood 
in a radius of ten kilometres around the refugee 
camps. Dramatic situations, including conflict and 
even war, are becoming increasingly frequent in some 
poor parts of the world where the inhabitants cannot 
pay for the resources they lack. 
Even according to the most optimistic forecasts, 
we will have to use twice our planet’s resources by 
the year 2050. Fisheries are already collapsing, there 
is a growing water problem in Australia with rising 
salinity in the water table. Meanwhile water levels 
are going down alarmingly in Yemen, for example, 
from ten metres 50 years ago to 800 metres now. 
Libya is investing in huge projects to try and over-
come its water shortage. 
Twenty years ago Gro Harlem Brundland [former 
Prime Minister of Norway, now serving as the UN 
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy on Climate Change] 
spoke about sustainability for future generations, 
but now we are talking about sustainability for our 
own generation. 
Do you feel that we are preparing ourselves effec-
tively for the imminent shortage of resources? 
To a certain extent, some rich countries are taking 
necessary measures, but too slowly. In some cities 
for example car traffic has to be reduced on some 
days because of poor air quality. But such necessary 
steps can only be taken in cities that have a reasona-
ble public transportation network. Fifty percent of 
the world’s population live in cities but cities account 
for 70 percent of the CO2 emissions. Cities are very 
intense consumers of energy, but they could be more 
efficient. There could be great economy of scale, 
because of their compactness. People who live and 
work in cities travel over shorter distances and heat-
ing is more effective in large buildings than in 
detached houses. 
In Houston (Texas, U.S.A.) three times more 
resources are used per inhabitant than in Sienna 
(Italy), for example. Yet the quality of life in Sienna 
is no less good than in Houston. Sienna is more effi-
cient because of the way it was built. Being resource 
efficient does not necessarily mean reducing the 
quality of life.
Can we reasonably expect to achieve a balance 
between resource consumption and supply?
Finding ways of cooperating for the well-being of all 
is not unprecedented. This is already being done 
among small groups and in some countries with 
respect to environmental consideration. Clearly much 
remains to be done to adapt such activities to the 
global scale. But I am convinced that this dream is 
possible. 
The dichotomy between developed and developing 
countries is becoming outdated because the current 
model of development is reaching breaking point. 
The future will offset countries that use less resources 
against those that use more than they have, which 
will become weaker. 
The United States uses twice what they have, 
whereas Egypt, Italy and Switzerland use three times 
as much as they have. Switzerland can afford to pay 
4
4
© Martin Baran
Slums, Port-au-Prince, Haïti.

for this but that’s a liability. Either the prices of 
 everything go up or supplies are disrupted. 
Have you observed any improvements in resource 
expenditure? 
Being able to talk about it is already a great thing 
considering that we have denied this problem for so 
long. For years, there has been great resistance to 
talking about climate change. Every city faces the 
risk of a break down, like an overburdened bridge 
that resists for some time but finally collapses. As 
resources become more expensive and their supply 
gets disrupted, cities will not be able to operate. To 
avoid this we will have to, among other measures, 
reduce our dependence on private cars, improve 
energy efficiency. Countries with stable or declining 
populations will be able to survive better, not least 
because they will be spared the need to expand their 
infrastructure. 
© Qin Tongchun

Drawing by Qin Tongchun, China, one of the laureates of 
the IYPE student contest.
