Gebran Tueni, Lebanese journalist and director of the 
Beirut daily, An-Nahar, was assassinated on 12 
December 2005. Condemning this crime, UNESCO’s 
Director-General, Koïchiro Matsuura, said at the time, 
“The global press community has lost one of its great 
defenders. Mr Tueni’s death is a terrible loss not only 
for his family, friends and colleagues, but for the 
cause of freedom of expression and press freedom in 
the Middle East”. 
“I’m less afraid for myself than for those I love.” 
That is how Gebran Tueni responded to Marlene Kha-
life, when she asked him to react to the death threats 
he had received over his political stand and opinions, 
whether in his own newspaper or other public and 
political platforms. These were among his last words 
that morning, shortly before his car was blown up in 
the eastern suburb of Mekalis, as he drove from his 
home in Beit Meri (Mount Lebanon) to his newspa-
per’s offices in Beirut’s Martyrs’ Square. His paper 
published the interview the next day. 
The explosion that shook the Lebanese capital 
was so violent that only the remains of his body and 
those of Nicolas El Falouti and Andre Mourad were 
left, scattered in nearby gardens. This crime brought 
a sudden end to a life that had been filled with thun-
der, energy and hope for a better future. Gebran 
Tueni was 48. Throughout his life he had to face end-
less personal tragedies – notably the early deaths of 
his sister Nayla and brother Makram – as well as the 
national tragedy of a war that struck the entire coun-
try. The Lebanese war broke out on 13 April 1975, 
gebran tueni: 
the man who was like thunder
“As a journalist, I aim to write the truth. And as a Congressman, I aim to speak the 
truth”, said Lebanese-born Gebran Tueni in an interview with the Courier’s Bassam 
Mansour in July 2005. Here he paints a 
portrait of this fellow countryman, who 
shared a passion for electronic games and 
with his involvement in highly dangerous 
political affairs, which cost him his life in 
December 2005. 
© An-Nahar, Beirut
Gebran Tueni in the An-Nahar press room.
4
destroying everything as it went, especially the 
young generation that became caught up in it. 
These trials seemed to become a part of Gebran’s 
character, and never shook his dream of a country 
built on principles of freedom, diversity and equality, 
with freedom of expression as its cornerstone.
Listening to a multitude of voices
Gebran Tueni founded what was then the weekly 
newspaper Arabic and International An-Nahar, in 
Paris in 1977, with other journalists of his genera-
tion. It stood out for the diversity of the opinions it 
published, even if they were sometimes contradic-
tory. For Gebran Tueni, freedom of expression was 
not a matter of defending an idea, but of adopting a 
point of view, while allowing others to have different 
views on the same subject. 
In the political arena, Gebran Tueni joined with 
men and women who were known for their courage, 
and who would not hesitate to overstep the mark: 

whether it was President Bechir Gemayel, Gen-
eral Michel Aoun (a friendship that forced his 
exile to Paris from 1990 to 1993), or Prime Min-
ister Rafic Hariri. After Hariri was assassinated 
on 14 February 2005, Gebran Tueni was called 
upon to play an important part in the so-called 
“Cedar Revolution” or “Independence Revolu-
tion”, that led him to office as congressman for 
Beirut in the Lebanese parliament. But he never 
allowed his political career to interfere with his work 
as director of the daily, An-Nahar. He always felt his 
function as a politician to be complementary to his 
work as a journalist. 
When I went to visit the headquarters of his news-
paper in July 2005, along with colleagues from 
UNESCO, I raised the possibility of a conflict of inter- 4
est between these two activities. 
“Not in the least”, he replied. “There 
is no conflict at all … As a journal-
ist, I aim to write the truth. And as 
a congressman, I aim to speak the 
truth.” It was a genuine answer, 
filled with the innocence and can-
dour that were so characteristic of 
this man. Faced with a world torn 
between good and evil, love and 
hate, beauty and ugliness, he 
enjoyed imagining it free of political 
dealings and machinations. And, 
above all, he refused to bow down 
before those with power, or to give 
up in the face of Realpolitik. 
With the same youthful ardour 
that refuses to follow the 
crowd, despite the pas-
sage of time, when he 
returned from exile in 
1993 he created a weekly 
youth supplement to An-
Nahar. In its editorial he 
announced that it would 
be “an independent plat-
form for free-thinking 
young writers”, and that 
it was time that they 
“expressed themselves 
openly – even with the 
distractions of youth – 
on whatever preoccupies 
them!” He also declared 
that the supplement was 
intended to be the 
“mirror of daily life for a 
whole generation that 
no-one has listened to, either in the past or the 
present”. 
In 1990, Gebran Tueni became an active member 
of the World Association of Newspapers (WAN) and 
advisor on Middle-Eastern affairs to WAN’s president. 
He was also a member of WAN’s Fund for Press Free-
dom Development, created in 1994. After his assas-
sination, the Fund launched the annual International 
Gebran Tueni Award for press freedom, awarded for 
© An-Nahar, Beirut
Demonstration after  
Samir Kassir’s assassination.
4
Note intime
Born on 15 September 1957, Gebran Tueni was the son of Ghassan 
Tueni, doyen of the Lebanese press, and the great Lebanese poet 
Nadia Tueni. His paternal grandfather, Gebran Tueni, founded the 
newspaper An-Nahar in 1933. His maternal grandfather, Mohamed 
Ali Hamade, was a diplomat and writer. The grandson loved to say 
that he was half Muslim, half Christian, in a country where one’s 
religion was sometimes more important than one’s nationality.
He was just seven years old when he lost his elder sister, Nayla, 
to whom he felt very close. His parents hid the truth from him. 
They told him that Nayla had gone away on a journey... This 
tragedy always hung over the family, breaking Nadia’s heart, 
who dedicated a collection of poems to her daughter, entitled 
“Lebanon: 20 Poems for a Love”, published in 1979. When Gebran’s 
eldest daughter was born, he didn’t hesitate to give her the 
name of his lost sister. Even so, the suffering did not cease, and 
was added to by Nadia’s long illness. 
“We never felt weak or afraid in her 
presence,” said Gebran, adding, in an 
interview with Marlene Khalif, that “she 
faced her illness with great courage, dignity 
and openness. Until the end, her smile 
radiated through the house …”. In 1983, 
Nadia Tueni departed this world, leaving 
behind two sons, Gebran and his younger 
brother Makram, who also departed before 
his time in a car accident in Paris. It was 
1987; he was 21 years old. 
B.M.

the first time in 2006. On this occasion WAN’s presi-
dent, Timothy Balding, told Roula Beydoun in an 
interview published on 13 December 2006 in An-
Nahar, that “we felt the need to keep the spirit of 
Gebran Tueni alive, especially given the energetic 
part he played in all of our activities, by promoting 
press freedom for over 20 years”.
No-one dies before their time
Gebran played while he worked. This man, who was 
involved in the most dangerous affairs, knew how to 
keep his youthful spirit alive and looked at the world 
with dazzled and joyful eyes, triumphing over a 
mountain of sufferings. He loved electronic games 
and car racing. He also enjoyed reading horoscopes. 
He was a Virgo. “No-one dies before their time,” he 
said in 2005. In June that year, his fellow journalist 
and colleague at An-Nahar Samir Kassir died in a car 
bomb attack near his home as he set off for work.
Shortly after, in September, a similar explosion hit 
journalist May Chidiac, laureate of the 2006 UNESCO/
Guillermo Cano Prize for Press Freedom. By a miracle 
she survived, although she lost a leg and an arm. The 
entire country was plunged into fear, as bombs 
exploded everywhere. 
On the evening of 11 December 2005, Gebran Tueni 
returned to Beirut, brushing aside advice that he 
should remain abroad. The day after he came back, 
his car exploded. His father, Ghassan Tueni, who had 
now lost his third child, said that the final blow was 
that he could not even kiss his son’s cheek before he 
was buried. 
This was the journey of Gebran Tueni, who resem-
bled one of those men that his mother, the great 
Lebanese poet Nadia Tueni, described in these 
words: 
“In our mountains men can be found,  
who are just like thunder,  
And know the world is apple-round…” 
by Bassam Mansour, UNESCO 
4
© An-Nahar, Beirut
Gebran Tueni checking the newspaper’s printing.
© An-Nahar, Beirut 
Gebran Tueni welcoming students in the newspaper's offices.
