
  
Eten d 
Through ethical 
reflection, 
humanity can now 
keep pace with the 
challenges of 
science instead of 
realizing too late 
when things have 
gone wrong 
A biologist using state-of-the- 
art microscope equipment to 
Insert DNA segments into 
embryos. 
The UNESCO Courier 2008 N°10 


1994   
THE COURIE
R: 
NESCO 
and bioethics 
by Georges B. Kutukdjian 
Scientific research on the human genome, 
= and especially on gene therapy and the 
chagnosis of genetic diseases, has far-reaching 
implications tor the lives of all of us—children, 
men and women alike. It is a field holding our 
immense prospects for man’s self-reansformation 
and it will, in the long run, require societies to 
make certain choices, As a result, it is giving 
r1s¢ to anxieties that may in some cases be jus- 
tified but are more often irrational. 
These anxieties lie behind the effort many 
countries are now making to look into the eth- 
ical framework of such research. Legislation 1s 
starting to be adopted to define limits for med- 
ical practice and some types of research, in order 
to ensure that human dignity will be respected 
Two points must be stressed, however. In the 
first place, the type of legislation differs signif- 
icantly from one country to another and we do 
not have any common vardstick to judge it by. 
Secondly, it does not exist everywhere in the 
world, but only in some of the industrial coun- 
tries. Elsewhere, there are are sull a number of 
grey arcas surrounding research and experi- 
mentation. 
It is for all these reasons that the Director 
General of UNESCO decided to set up an Inter- 
    
A CODE FOR LIVING 
national Bioethics Committee and invited Ms. 
Noélle Lenoir, a member of the Constitutional 
Council of the French Republic, to preside over 
its deliberations. 
The Committee met for the first rime in Sep- 
tember 1993 and commenced its work by jdenti- 
fving three priority themes. These are genetic 
screening and testing, the therapeutic applications 
of genetics research, and population generics. 
Genetic testing 
Should genetic screening be made compulsory 
for so-called “risk™ populations or should it 
simply be made available to them? Should it be 
introduced into premarital examinations or be 
included in prenatal diagnosis? Should it be car- 
ried out before gamete donation or the implan- 
tation of embrvos fertilized in vitro? 
At the outset, a distinction must be made 
between two kinds of genetic tests. Tests in the 
first category are used to identity a particular 
gene which is virtually certain to bring on a 
hereditary disease. Those in the second cate: 
gory show whether or not a person has a pre 
dispositi on to certain diseases and thus reveal sit 
uations involving varving degrees of probability. 
Depending on ‘the environment and sundry 
other factors, about some of which little 1s 
known, the outward symptoms of a disease may 
appear in its carly Stages Or mayv emerge only 
later, and the disease wself may vary in seventy. 
A genetic mutation may become more dominant 
and grow worse from generation to generation, 
On the other hand, the tendency for genetic 
damage to occur may be reversed. In short, the 
same defect ina person's genotype (genetic con- 
stitution) may take different forms in his or her 
phenotype (the physical constitution as it inter- 
acts with the environment). 
This influence of the environment on the 
form a genetic mutation may take brings into 
play the concept of the responsibility of indi- 
viduals towards themselves and their families 
and the responsiblity of citizens towards the 
community. Preventive medicine could there- 
fore be said to go hand-in-hand with predictive 
medicine. 
Should people be told that there is a proba- 
bility that they will eventually develop Hunt- 
ington’s chorea, for example, and transmit it to 
their offspring? Should their close or distant  

  
a 
The UNESCO Courier 2008 N°10 
  
(ng 
@e 
Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde: the temptation 
[ knew well that I risked death; for any drug that so 
potently controlled and shook the very fortress of iden- 
tity might, by the least scruple of an overdose or at the 
least inopportunity in the moment of exhibition, utterly 
blot out that immaterial tabernacle which I looked to it 
to change. But the temptation of a discovery so singular 
and profound at last overcame the suggestions of alarm, 
... | compounded the elements, watched them boil and 
smoke together in the glass, and when the ebullition had 
subsided, with a strong glow of courage, drank off the 
potion. 
The most racking pangs succeeded: a grinding in the 
bones, deadly nausea, and a horror of the spirit that 
cannot be exceeded at the hour of birth or death. Then 
these agonies began swiftly to subside, and I came to 
myself as if out of a great sickness. There was something 
strange in my sensations, something indescribably new, 
and, from its very novelty, incredibly sweet. I felt 
younger, lighter, happier in body; within I was conscious 
of a heady recklessness, a current of disordered sensual 
images running like a mill race in my fancy, a solution of 
the bonds of obligation, an unknown but not an inno- 
cent freedom of the soul. I knew myself, at the first 
breath of this new life, to be more wicked, tenfold more 
wicked, sold a slave to my original evil: and the thought, 
in that moment, braced and delighted me like wine. 
ROBERT LEWIS STEVENSON 
Scottish writer 
The Strange case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (1886) 
  
22 
  
  
and insurance companies? Can a company’s 
medical service insist on being given the results 
of genetic testing? 
Since genetic testing may extend over several 
generations and involve varying numbers of 
individuals, questions about the storage and 
confidentiality of the data are bound to arise 
sooner or later. How long should genetic data be 
kept and how can its confidentiality be guaran- 
teed? Who should be empowered to divulge or 
withhold information which often involves 
whole families? 
Similarly, if people can choose to know what 
their genetic future will be, can they also choose 
not to know? Should they or should they not be 
compelled to take account of the results of 
genetic testing? 
In this regard, it is important that people 
should be freely able to exercise their discretion. 
Information that is liable to change their whole 
lives and force added od he on them 
should not expose them to any form of dis- 
crimination. Genetic testing should not prompt 
the authorities to adopt repressive policies 
leading to a restriction of individual freedoms. 
Another ethical issue connected with genetic 
testing is bound up with the need to ensure that 
all countries, including the least advanced ones, 
reap benefit from them, so that they too can 
join the fight against hereditary diseases. 
Therapeutic applications 
The first question that has to be raised relates to 
the pre-implantation diagnosis performed on 
artificially fertilized embryos which, in view of 
its greater simplicity and lower cost, is likely to 
replace gene therapy in cases of rare genetic dis- 
eases. This involves a choice that is already 
framed in ethical terms. 
The second question is whether the work 
currently being done is not liable to become nar- 
rowly focused on looking for the genes that 
account for people’s behaviour—their sexuality, 
for example—their talents and abilities, or even 
their “deviances”. This could lead to a kind of 
genetic reductionism whereby people would be 
defined exclusively in terms of their genome, or 
to a situation in which some individuals or groups 
of individuals might be stigmatized by society, 
ostracized or even eliminated. This would be 
tantamount to adopting eugenic policies. 
There are other problems. We know, for 
example, that through agriculture, gene therapy 
could bring about radical changes in public 
health. A diet of genetically modified plants 
could become a regular form of treatment, a 
sort of oral “vaccine” given in repeated doses. 
However, the in vivo reproduction of these 
plant species would be liable to give rise to new 
recombined organisms that could become vec- 
tors for diseases. In such an eventuality, what 
kind of preventive measures and legislation 
should be instituted? 
The same applies, mutatis mutandis, wo the use 
of human genes for the development of transgenic

  
animals. What limits should be set on the supply 
of human genetic material? Should it be reserved 
solely for therapeutic purposes, say for xeno- 
rafts, and its use for any other purpose, such as 
I improving livestock, be ruled out? 
We have to accept that the issue of transge- 
nesis applied to the human species now has to be 
faced. Reports of germ-line therapy experiments 
on embryonic cells or spermatozoa have recently 
been published in scientific journals. 
As a result of the rapid strides being made by 
genetic engineering, it is now possible to store 
gametes and germ cells in “banks” for possible 
future use, such as for autografts. This practice 
is now regarded as acceptable, under certain 
conditions, for young cancer patients who have 
to undergo X-ray treatment or chemotherapy 
and who wish to preserve their chances of later 
conceiving children by in vitro fertilization 
techniques. With the exception of these medical 
cases, the storage of gametes and germ cells 
poses the problem of the storage of human 
products generally, as well as that of storage 
methods and the criteria governing access to 
such “banks”. 
Lastly, careful thought has to be given to 
the best ways of protecting the intellectual prop- 
erty of researchers whose inventions have indus- 
trial or commercial applications. Should such 
protection be regarded as akin to copyright? 
How is 1t possible to regulate access to genetic 
data banks and their possible industrial or com- 
mercial uses? 
First, steps must be taken to secure the free 
and informed consent of population groups 
participating in major surveys on population 
genetics. The scientific aims and objectives of the 
surveys should be clearly explained to them. 
The results of these surveys should not be 
detrimental to those who participate, nor should 
they lead to discrimination against them. Nor 
 
The UNESCO Courier 2008 N°10 
should they be allowed to lead to the establish- 
ment of a genetic pseudo-classification of the 
population groups involved. 
These results should also be communicated to 
the individuals and population groups concerned. 
Access to genetic data banks where the infor- 
mation is stored, the processing of this informa- 
ion and its use should be rigorously defined. 
The human genome project 
Deciphering the totality of genetic information 
on the human race is an ambitious project which 
calls for international co-operation, The ensuing 
progress will help to prevent and treat genetic 
diseases which are incurable today. Ir will also 
make a significant contribution to understanding 
the structure and the functions of the genetic 
system and individual development, as well as 
the “natural history” of DNA. 
Such fundamental knowledge of human beings 
clearly raises ethical, social and legal problems, and 
consequently it 1s not surprising that Unesco 
attaches very great importance to it. The human 
genome project has a place among UNESCO's 
activities because of UNESCO's ethical mission 
and its competence in the fields of education, sci- 
ence and culture. UNESCO offers an ideal envi- 
ronment for multidisciplinary debates on the dif- 
ferent aspects of study of the human genome. 
UNESCO is thus fully involved in this project. 
By organizing or encouraging meetings, holding 
workshops, helping to finance training pro- 
grammes and awarding short-term scholarships, 
UNESCO is seeking to do three things: to 
encourage international co-operation and co- 
ordination, to stimulate debate on the many 
repercussions of the human genome project, 
and to promote the participation of countries of 
the South and East. The sharing of knowledge 
between North and South, East and West 1s, 
after all, an ethical imperative in itself. m 
  
23 
A CODE FOR LIVING 
- 
  
St. Cosmas and St. Damian 
graft onto the deacon 
Giustiniano the leg of a recently 
deceased Ethiopian. 15th 
century fresco by Fra Angelico 
In the San Marco Museum, 
Florence, 
{Nlustration taken from the 
catalogue of La vie en kit, 
éthique et biologie © Fondation 
ge I'Archa oe |3 Fraternité, 
Paris), 
GEORGES B, KUTUKDJIAN 
Is the head of Unesta’s 
Bioethics Unit, A philosopher 
and anthropologist, he has 
published a8 number of papers 
on kinship systems ang 
proverds, and |terary essays on 
Marguerite Duras, Kafka and 
Proust. He was the co-editor, 
with Antonio Papsca, of 8 
collective work on the rights of 
peoples, published in 1981 by 
CEDAM, Padua (Italy), 25
