We must recognize that today half 
the people in the world do not bene­
fit even minimally from due consid­
eration of their identity and their 
status, despite well­known interna­
tional advances in domains as basic 
as the fight against torture, legal 
sanctions for assaults on women, or 
the recognition of the rights of refu­
gees and migrants.
The poverty that causes billions of 
people acute suffering obviously vio­
lates the ideals promoted by the 
Declaration and calls into question 
Article 28: “Everyone is entitled to a 
social and international order in 
which the rights and freedoms set 
forth in this Declaration can be fully 
realized.” 
Defending the ideals and missions 
cont a ined in  the  Un ive r s a l 
Declaration of Human Rights requires 
above all fighting poverty, this ten­
tacular phenomenon. We know its 
causes, sometimes rooted in the 
social and cultural reality. 
The fight must first tackle prejudices, 
particularly the idea of human dig­
nity as a mere refuge in face of the 
combined effects of discrimination, 
exclusion, inequality and injustice. 
The concept of human dignity goes 
far beyond that. It is inconceivable 
without the right to education, 
decent housing, sanitation. And it 
All international texts on the pro­
tection of human rights are 
based on the concept of human 
dignity, as proclaimed in the pream­
ble of the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights. Often the concept is 
understood more through what 
assaults or opposes it, not what 
enriches and honours it; undoubted­
 ly this is because of its very particu­
lar background, in the aftermath of 
the Holocaust and Nazi death 
machine. This strong affirmation of 
dignity shared by all humankind 
leads to the first and most famous 
article of the Declaration: “All human 
beings are born free and equal in 
dignity and rights. They are endowed 
with reason and conscience and 
should act towards one another in a 
spirit of brotherhood.” 
But equal dignity for all human 
beings does not generate only rights. 
In addition, and primarily, it repre­
sents a call to action, vigilance and 
prevention. Recognizing our own dig­
nity makes us answerable to every­
one else; there can be no dignity 
without genuine solidar ity and 
brotherhood. 
Sixty years after the adoption of the 
Declaration, where are we regarding 
fundamental respect for human dig­
nity and integrity, these corner­
stones of human rights? 
rejects resignation and helplessness 
in the face of situations experienced 
as inevitable. 
A single example to stress once more 
– the fight against extreme poverty – 
represents a problem that UNESCO, 
the NGOs, political decision­makers 
and civil society must put as first 
priority on their agenda. Their coop­
eration is a decisive element in the 
fight to eradicate poverty and to 
ensure an international order that 
guarantee the observance of the 
rights contained in the Declaration. 
More than ever it is our duty to 
ensure the effective implementation 
of all the human r ights in the 
Declaration. We must concretize this 
respect for human rights, which 
means simultaneously respect for the 
other in his difference and self­
respect.   
Human rigHts, Human dignity
Sixty years after the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, what is the 
reality for individual dignity and observance of human rights, in a world where billions 
of people suffer from poverty? Safeguarding the ideals and missions contained in the 
Declaration means fighting poverty.
Pierre Sané, UNESCO Assistant Director-General for Social and Human Sciences 
