4
Véronique tadjo, 
a collector 
of travel souvenirs
Exile begins when you can no longer return 
to the country you left behind, says poet, 
writer, and painter Véronique Tadjo, laureate 
of the Grand Prix Littéraire d’Afrique Noire 
2005. Born in 1955 in Paris and raised in 
Abidjan, she now lives in South Africa after 
having traveled throughout the world.
Interview by Bernard Magnier, French journalist 
and specialist in African literature.
How did your numerous travels contribute to your 
work? 
I can almost associate each of my texts with a little 
flag. Each text is marked by the place in which I 
wrote it. I borrow and incorporate a number of ele-
© Book SA
Véronique Tadjo: «It would be interesting to see where 
women’s literature is heading in the long term.» 4

ments gleaned here and there, much like a collector 
bringing back souvenirs from her trips. 
I have traveled extensively since birth. I married 
a journalist, and continued traveling: England, 
Mexico, Nigeria, Kenya, and today, South Africa. 
My first book of poems, Latérite (Hatier, 1997), 
was born from crossing the desert after I left Paris 
having completed my studies. I was homesick. I told 
myself that it would be good to travel slowly, to 
return to the Côte d’Ivoire by land and discover the 
desert I was dreaming of. Rather than taking pic-
tures, I began to write in order to capture my experi-
ences. This is the voyage that truly triggered my 
desire to write.
Are you sensitive to your immediate environment 
when you write?
Absolutely. When you live with people, you end up 
integrating their hopes and problems. You would like 
to know them better, to better understand them. I 
do not like to lock myself up to write. I want to be 
able to participate in daily life, share, communicate 
and exchange ideas. 
Sometimes I tell myself that, had I not lived in 
Kenya, I would probably not have been as sensitive 
to the Rwandan genocide. There were so many Rwan-
dan refugees in Nairobi, and the newspapers fre-
quently covered the topic while I lived there. Writing 
The Shadow of Imana (Actes Sud, 2000), the book 
that enabled me to exorcise Rwanda, was thus a logi-
cal outcome. 
It has been a long time since you lived in Côte 
d’Ivoire. How do you experience the Ivorian crisis? 
For a long time, I traveled, my mind and heart at 
peace, telling myself that I could return home when 
I wanted to. Things changed with the Ivorian crisis. 
I had the impression the door suddenly closed and 
left me outside. I found it difficult to understand 
what was happening, how we got there. I felt alien-
ated, as if everything had to be started all over 
again. 
I believe that exile begins when you can no longer 
return to the country you left behind, when the way 
back becomes painful. But somehow, I think that 
many Ivorians felt the same thing. This idea that the 
change was irremediable. The feeling that nothing 
will ever be the same. 
Numerous writers throughout the world live in exile. 
Do you think that being in exile is beneficial for 
writing? 
There is desired exile and forced exile. When we are 
in exile but are serene, we may be in a ‘comfortable’ 
position. In fact, distance can help put things into 
perspective, take a few steps back. We have the pos-
sibility of removing ourselves from the daily grind 
and to keep our head above water. We can adopt the 
position of an observer, a luxury that is beyond the 
reach of those who permanently live in the thick of 
the action. 
4
4
© Éditions Actes Sud
Cover of the book that enabled Véronique Tadjo to exorcise 
Rwanda.

However, exile can only be serene if we can return 
to our country regularly. Otherwise, we end up living 
off blurry memories which becomes an uncomfortable 
situation. The country is then more a myth than a 
reality. 
I see no advantage in living in a sad exile because 
it is painful. Although it may drive one to write, it 
may also lead to great despair. As the memory of 
little things fades, self-awareness falls apart. And we 
are left with a difficult choice: forget our previous 
life and adopt a new one or live as if we were skinned 
alive.
Since the publication of your first book, the place 
of women in the African literary landscape has con-
siderably evolved. What do you make of this 
evolution?
Women make their voices heard and demonstrate a 
remarkable—and logical—dynamism in writing. It 
has taken many generations to allow them to have 
access to education. It has also taken many genera-
tions to allow them to speak up in societies where 
their voices were not encouraged. With women’s 
entry into the workforce and into the political arena, 
mentalities have finally evolved. Today, the young 
generation benefits from a greater open-mindedness 
and an enhanced mobility. 
It is regrettable, however, that living in Europe 
remains a rite of passage for those wishing to make a 
name for themselves that transcends the borders of 
their country of origin. This is due, in part, to the 
continent’s lack of editorial infrastructure. 
I also worry about globalization, which absorbs 
all forms of writing to better commercialize them. It 
would be interesting to see where women’s literature 
is heading in the long term. What are its trends? In 
what ways are women’s discourses different from 
those of their male predecessors? Somewhat like in 
politics. 
What is the state of youth literature? How do you 
see the evolution of its production in the last few 
years? 
Youth literature is, in my opinion, the missing link. 
We cannot have a thriving literature able to reach its 
public if young people haven’t been taught to enjoy 
books and reading. Thankfully, things are evolving 
quite well. African editors have understood that 
there is a promising market for this type of litera-
ture, as youth under the age of 15 represents nearly 
half of the African population. 
The themes and illustrations of books for youth 
are more and more varied. This is a good thing, 
because we have to encourage young people to 
develop their imagination. 
©UNESCO/ Véronique Tadjo
« Life cycle », painting by Véronique Tadjo, photographed 
by the artist in her garden in Nairobi (Kenya).
4
