Kyrgyz: an “emerging” language
In the streets of Bishkek, two languages are found side by side on advertising billboards, 
at newsstands and in conversations. After gaining its independence in 1991, Kyrgyzstan 
adopted Kyrgyz as its national language and kept Russian as the official language. 
Linguistic results are mixed.
Out of the 15 former Soviet republics, Kyrgyzstan is 
the only one – along with Kazakhstan – to keep 
Russian as its official language in addition to its 
national language, Kyrgyz. Yet the latter, a member 
of the Turkic group of languages, is spoken by 73% 
of the population (amounting to 3.7 million people). 
At the same time, in the capital Bishkek, center of 
Kyrgyzstan’s public and cultural life, Russian 
remains present if not dominant. 
The generations educated in Russian at the time 
of the Soviet Union, notably in urban areas, speak 
Kyrgyz without mastering it entirely. Often it’s a 
language they learned in school. “If tomorrow the 
government decided to switch to Kyrgyz, I’d never 
make it in my professional life,” says Jyldyz Asan-
bayeva, program assistant at the Public Policy 
Institute. She’s among the 2 to 3% ethnic Kyrgyz 
who don’t consider Kyrgyz their mother language. 
© UNESCO/Katerina Markelova
Russian and Kyrgyz newspaper stand in Bichkek, the capital of 
Kyrgyzstan. 4

The language has a long oral tradition, with its 
famous epic bards called akyns, but the today’s 
alphabet, starting with Latin characters and then 
changing to Cyrillic, dates back only to the 1920s. 
And for the duration of the Soviet period, its use 
was limited to rural areas (within families and 
between friends) or in certain circles of the intelli-
gentsia (concerned about the preservation of the 
language), even if Kyrgyz is used for teaching in 
most schools and is studied at the highest level in 
Moscow and Leningrad (now St Petersburg).
Russian: back and forth
Shortly before independence, with the impetus of 
perestroika, local authorities imposed Kyrgyz as the 
national language, by passing the 1989 law on the 
national language of the Soviet Socialist Republic 
of Kyrgyz. But political will is one thing, reality 
another. Due to insufficient means, the law was 
not applied; very quickly, funds were reduced and 
the civil servants in charge dismissed. 
Interest in the language fluctuated according to 
the numerous changes in government in the coun-
try, where the political situation was in frequent 
upheaval. Different decrees came one after another 
in support of Kyrgyz, but this protectionist linguis-
tic policy only exacerbated tensions in the country, 
which is home to 80 different ethnic groups who 
use Russian to communicate among themselves. 
Concerned to see Russian-speaking people leaving 
the country in droves, deputies in 2000 voted a 
new law on the official language: Russian and 
Kyrgyz from then on had equal status, the first as 
official language and the second as national 
language. 
Good news for Russian speakers in Kyrgyzstan, 
who in 16 years of independence had not felt the 
need to learn Kyrgyz, for lack of a coherent linguis-
tic policy. 
Authorities wanted to “create a necessity” to 
speak Kyrgyz, but didn’t allocate the resources. 
“Our Institute doesn’t have the funds to publish 
our scientists’ research. The manuscript for the 
Great Russian-Kyrgyz dictionary, which has 250 
pages, is sitting in a cupboard covered in dust,” 
laments Kadyraly Konkobayev, director of the Lin-
guistic Institute of Kyrgyzstan’s Academy of Sci-
ences. While during the Soviet era more than 30 
fundamental texts on the Kyrgyz language were 
published, almost none have been produced since 
the country’s independence. 
Konkobayev sounds another alert: “The literary 
and artistic situation is dire. In the literature 
department, we don’t have enough authors to study 
in the area of Kyrgyz national literature and, I have 
to say, many of our contemporary writers are prac-
tically illiterate.” It isn’t only the authors, he adds; 
one only has to look at the poor quality of the 
newspapers. 
“The work accomplished since independence 
regarding the development of the language is 
unsatisfactory,” explains Tachboo Djumagulov, 
president of the Commission for the Development 
of the National Language. But since the March 2005 
revolution (which ousted President Aska Akayev) 
efforts are increasing: “Before 2005 state subsidies 
amounted to US$ 35,000; now they’re US$ 
170,000.” 
© Kyrgyz National Commission for UNESCO
The art of the Akyn was proclaimed by a masterpiece of the oral 
and intangible cultural heritage of humanity by UNESCO in 2003.

Even if that’s nothing compared to the US$ 30 
million spent in neighboring Kazakhstan to pro-
mote Kazakh, results are tangible. Television is the 
best example: before 2005, there was only one 
Kyrgyz-language channel; now five out of ten 
devote 60% of air time to programs in Kyrgyz.
Education: the weak link
Education seems to be the main element missing 
from the national language battle. “On one hand 
the number of hours of Kyrgyz instruction is 
increasing in schools and universities, but on the 
other hand there are very few qualified teachers,” 
explains Konkobayev. Indeed, all universities have 
established a new post: vice-rector for the Kyrgyz 
language, responsible for promoting it and encour-
aging professors to give courses in it (including 
within Russian-language universities). 
Thanks to the Commission’s efforts to develop 
the national language, new teaching methodolo-
gies for Kyrgyz have been developed. They replace 
the old ones, often very cumbersome and ineffec-
tive, and introduce short dialogues, games and 
concrete examples. With 3,000 copies of the course 
in circulation, it is nonetheless difficult to meet 
the needs of the more than 2,100 schools (1,700 of 
them entirely Kyrgyz) and the 40-odd universities 
across the country, some of which give Kyrgyz 
classes. Besides, the state funds the publication of 
textbooks for schools, but not for universities. 
Result: university textbooks simply don’t exist. 
The mixed linguistic results in Kyrgyzstan bring 
up questions about the methods employed. Is it 
really useful to impose a language without devel-
oping the educational infrastructure? Measures 
taken to preserve the Kyrgyz language must be 
entirely revised, in the context of globalization, 
which here too is knocking at the door with English 
and becoming more and more of a threat.
Katerina Markelova, journalist for the UNESCO 
Courier
© UNESCO/Katerina Markelova
In one of the country’s biggest libraries, the most recent 
textbooks in Kyrgyz date back to 2002.
