the extent of the impending consequences and pre-
vent them from ever occurring. 
Creativity exists in a different part of the brain - 
a part that someone very close to me still taps into 
everyday. His creative streak is enviable, but so too 
are his skills with the Playstation! His passion for 
mythical creatures and plastic wrestlers is something 
© UNESCO/Cyril Bailleul



Nikita White reads her essay during the launch of IYPE on 
12 February 2008 at UNESCO.
4
“If I was a grown up I would do 
something about it”
All is for the best in the best of worlds. So thought little Killian before his older sister, Nikita, 
decided to “have a little chat” with him. The laureate of the student contest organized by the 
International Year of Planet Earth (IYPE) tells us how she initiated her brother to the facts of 
the Planet.
The outline for this essay emphasized a ‘creative’ 
approach – I shuddered in the face of this task! This 
isn’t a concept I’m hugely familiar with. Creativity 
was never something I could claim credit for. One 
might call me a cynical empiricist but I prefer the 
notion of an analytical observer! It is imperative for 
us to judge the matters we take the time to note. 
Passive observation is a crime that we cannot allow 
ourselves to commit, especially in relation to planet 
earth. […] 
Here are a few thoughts. What about when a baby 
cries out for food, you feed it. When the dog bounds 
around the house practically running up the walls, 
you bring him for a walk. When you are feeling tired, 
under the weather, you might take a rest, put your 
feet up. But what about a planet that is in need of a 
rest? What about a planet that needs to exercise 
itself? What about a planet that is being starved? 
This is what the International Year of Planet Earth is 
about for me. It’s about listening to our planet. It’s 
about doing something about what our planet has to 
tell us. It is simply about giving our planet back what 
it has given us: life.[…] 
What we are in for if the current trends in plane-
tary exploitation continues is beyond anything that 
we will have seen before. If ever we do happen to 
catch a glimpse of it, we know we have reacted too 
late. We hear about cities disappearing underwater, 
polar bears drowning, animals liable to extinction, 
environmental refugees- the list is endless. There are 
endless suggestions about adaptation and mitigation 
measures. This is where we are asked to start using 
our imaginations because the reality of these poten-
tial outcomes can never be realized. It is pivotal that 
we use our imagination at this stage to understand 

I have never seen equaled. Meet Killian, my eight 
year old brother.
Explaining climate change  
to children
We use both our imagination and our methodical 
thinking to understand the potential outcomes of a 
planet that is abused; floods, droughts, storms, dis-
ease, and inevitably death. It doesn’t always require 
imagination as these things are currently happening 
in some form but its grasping the threat they pose to 
both us and our planet in the future that requires us 
to think bigger. I decided what I would do was share 
some facts with Killian and encourage him to use his 
imagination to engage in some meaningful dialogue 
with his big sister. The following is the very insight-
ful conversation that followed. 
We sat down and I told him I wished to have a 
little chat. He was immediately suspicious but as a 
young boy whose teacher’s major complaint is that 
he never stops talking, he wasn’t too reluctant for a 
chance to babble on! […] 
Considering his penchant for the sun, like most 
other people, I ask him can people affect the weather 
and if they could, should they interfere? 
“No they can’t but if they could they should leave it 
cos it wouldn’t be fair to people who like winter”. I’m 
pleased he is showing such consideration for people 
like myself who have a mild aversion to anything 
over ten degrees Celsius! He tells me it doesn’t need 
to rain but it does as summer is for sunny weather 
and winter is for cold. He carries on to disclose the 
fact that he would love to go to France as it looks 
nice and he thinks its sunny. His favourite animal is 
a dog. He had never heard of extinction and couldn’t 
tell me what the environment actually was. He told 
me that cars had no effect on the environment. He 
didn’t know where the heating and electricity for our 
house came from. He believes that nothing is wrong 
with the planet. Interestingly though when I asked 
him what was the worst thing he could imagine hap-
pening to our planet he replied, “the largest thun-
derstorm in the world that would destroy all the 
cities and towns.”
“It’s not gonna happen in years”
Well I should definitely try and point out where I’m 
going with all this. I wanted Killian to think about 
the living things around him. I wanted him to con-
sider the interaction between these things. Climate 
change demonstrates these facts clearly. I then did 
possibly the most unimaginative of all things, typed 
“explaining climate change to children” into Google. 
Welcome Tiki the Penguin to the conversation! Along 
with this extremely informative creature I used some 
material devised by the British embassy in Brussels 
for the purpose of educating Belgian school 
children. 
Firstly we went through the embassy’s animations. 
They explained the effects that cars and electricity 
had on the environment. After going through them 
both I asked Killian was he worried about how much 
people used cars? “No, I don’t feel scared. It’s not 
gonna happen in years”. This, you should note is from 
a young boy who gets dropped to and picked up from 
school by his mother in our family car everyday. A 
slightly self-interested answer indeed! 
I enquired further asking him to specify when he 
thinks it will happen? 
“A long time away. I don’t really think it’s happening” 
he responds. It seems that even a child with the 
most active of imaginations finds it difficult to 
fathom our impact on the planet. 
4
4
© UNESCO
“The ultimate test of a moral society is the kind of world it leaves 
for its children”, Dietrich Bonhoeffer (German theologian).

I elaborated further 
with Tiki. This presenta-
tion was a lot more com-
prehensive in that it was 
very explicit about our 
actions and their conse-
quences. He seemed to 
think about it more this 
time. He agreed that it 
was not right for busi-
nessmen to make money 
if they don’t care about 
the environment as “it 
won’t be fair for places 
where it is cold”. He con-
curred that we need to stop global warming as “it 
wouldn’t be fair to the penguins and the polar 
bears…oh and all the poor people too.” 
The most important ques-
tion I think was “What is 
the one thing you think we 
need to do to stop it?” His 
answer was one that we 
need to listen to: “Whatever 
you have to do”. Even if it 
meant not making lots of 
money? “Yes even if it meant 
not making lots of money. If 
I was a grown up I would do 
something about it.” 
This text is drawn from 
the essay of the Irish student 
Nikita White, one of the 6 
laureates of the student contest (18 to 22 years of 
age) organized by the International Year of Planet 
Earth. 
© Guy F. Raymond



«No, I don’t feel scared.» says little Killian.
