did not have to prove they were 
sending their children to school, or 
had passed a medical examination. 
According to the World Bank, though, 
a number of beneficiaries of the BDH 
voluntarily applied these conditions. 
According to a 2006 impact assess-
ment, the BDH scheme has led to a 
17-point increase in schooling and a 
10-point reduction in child labour.
A new impact assessment is just 
being prepared, but Ecuador ’s 
Minister for Economic and Social 
Integration, Jeannette Sánchez, 
already expects the BDH to show “a 
significant qualitative leap” this 
year. “We are currently changing an 
assistance programme into one of 
economic protection and integra-
tion,” she says. The main changes, 
she points out, are an increase in the 
allowance to US$30 a month, applied 
since she took office, and, especially, 
encouraging beneficiaries to take 
joint responsibility for the scheme’s 
implementation. 
“Joint responsibility means asking 
mothers to look after the education 
and health of their children,” explains 
Jeannette Sánchez. “In other words, 
that they use part of the Voucher to 
pay for these expenses.” To ensure 
that the money is being well spent, 
the government has recently carried 
out sample checks in three provinces: 
Napo and Pastaza (in Amazonia) and 
Carchi (in the mountainous region to 
the north of the country). “The pop-
ulation in these provinces is spread 
out and health and education are 
precarious,” explains David Alomía, 
an economist and director of the 
body responsible for overseeing the 
Voucher under the ministry. 
He explains that the education and 
health controls in these three prov-
inces looked at 1026 and 2054 house-
holds, respectively. The study showed 
that 218 families did not present evi-
dence of school attendance or care 
for their children under 18 years of 
age, that 242 mothers  … 
“I’ve often thought about taking 
my children out of school,” admits 
Luis Guamán, who earns the equiva-
lent of US$3 a day as a construction 
worker, “but thanks to the school 
voucher, they can carry on learning.” 
This 30-year-old, who recently arri-
ved from Imbabura, in the north of 
Ecuador, went to the offices of the 
state-run Social Protection Pro-
gramme, looking for information 
about the Human Development Vou-
cher (BDH). “They told me to come 
to the capital (Quito) for help,” he 
explains, looking tired after his two-
hour journey. He has come with his 
27-year-old wife, Dolores Isama, and 
papers to prove he qualifies for the 
Voucher. His family is one of the 
1,303,318 households (October 2008 
figures) considered by the Ecuado-
r ian government as among the 
country’s 40% poorest. “Thanks to 
this help, my children can continue 
to go to school,” says Dolores, a 
housewife with three children aged 
eight, four and three years. “I want 
them to have a full education.” Like 
her, 78% of those receiving the BDH 
are mothers, and many are also head 
of the household. 
The BDH is a cash allowance set up in 
1999 under the name of “Solidarity 
Voucher.” Unlike similar programmes 
in other countries in Latin America, 
there were no strings attached. In 
the beginning, to qualify for the 
US$30 per month allowance, parents 
Public suPPort for Education in Ecuador
A public sector programme being implemented in Ecuador, where 
families are given cash to send their children to school, has led to a 
noticeable increase in attendance, while reducing child labour.
Paulina Rivadeneira,  
journalist with Diario Hoy (Ecuador) 
Luis Guamán and Dolores Isama with a BDH officer.  © Paulina Rivadeneira

situations in terms of education and 
health care – a lack of centres, access 
problems, or complaints about the 
services provided – we pass on the 
reports to the Ministries of Health 
and Education. Once this campaign is 
over, we will have a detailed national 
picture of the social situation.” 
In 2008, the programme’s budget was 
almost US$408 million - US$48 mil-
lion more than the previous year. 
Given the global economic crisis, it is 
difficult to predict what the BDH 
budget will be for 2009, but Ecuador’s 
President, Rafael Correa, has sug-
gested it should be increased. 
Magdalena Sepúlveda Carmona, an 
independent expert on human rights 
and poverty for the United Nations, 
became particularly interested in the 
BDH scheme during a visit to Ecuador 
from 10 to 14 November. She says 
that the programme has grown, cov-
ering a wider area, while the allow-
ances have increased. However, she 
cautions that more efforts will be 
needed to enable families receiving 
the BDH to escape poverty and des-
titution, especially given that almost 
38% of the Ecuadorian population 
lives in poverty and 12% in extreme 
poverty. Even if the State has 
increased its social sector spending, 
she says, “progress has only been 
partial and Ecuador is still signifi-
cantly lagging behind.”   
has already seen its benefits. The 
wages of her farmer husband – US$7 
a day – are too low to send their four 
children, aged 11, 10, 7 and 5 years, 
to school. “We use the Voucher to 
pay for food and school fees. Without 
it, the children could not all go to 
school,” she says, handing a Social 
Protection Programme worker the 
documents to show that she had ful-
filled her joint responsibility com-
mitment - education, care, medical 
exam and vaccination certificates.
State involvement
Explaining that the verification cam-
paign is now extending to cover the 
entire country, David Alomía recog-
nises that the state also has its obli-
gations of joint responsibility: “When 
we find ourselves faced with new 
… did not have certificates to 
show that their infants (under one 
year old) had attended a health clinic 
(six consultations a year) and that 
1999 mothers had not carried out the 
required health check-ups for their 
children aged between one and five 
(one consultation every six months). 
Although the latter figure seems 
alarming, David Alomía says that this 
is a general problem, affecting most 
Ecuadorians, regardless of their 
socio-economic situation. “We have 
no culture of prevention. If a child 
seems healthy, no one thinks of 
sending him to see a doctor.” When 
an irregularity is noticed, mothers 
are notified that they have 45 days 
to present a certificate. “It is likely 
that the school or health centre is 
too far from their home. But if the 
family is in the wrong, the allowance 
is suspended until they provide the 
required proof,” he explains, empha-
sising that this is not a sanction. 
“We wouldn’t want to penalise a pop-
ulation that, until now, has already 
been excluded. Our aim is to raise 
their awareness of the importance of 
investing in education and health.” 
Ligia Hernández, 37, has been receiv-
ing the Voucher for five years and 
The Social Protection Programme office receives those qualifying for the Voucher. 
There are 22 offices like this one in the country. © Paulina Rivadeneira
Luis Guamán and Dolores Isama with a BDH officer.  © Paulina Rivadeneira
