You wrote a dozen books in French before choosing 
Wolof, your mother language. Why this reversion? 
Actually, my language was always there, inside me. 
The only problem I faced was the ability to write in 
my language. I was “corrupted” by French. I spoke 
everyday Wolof, but I didn’t possess it intimately. 
© UNESCO/Gargi Shinde
Boubacar Boris Diop.



Then there was Rwanda. A group of writers I 
belonged to went there after the genocide, in 1998, 
as part of the operation “Rwanda: writing as a duty 
to memory”. I said to myself that if we’d let 10,000 
Rwandans get killed per day for three months, if 
nobody had done anything, this conveyed a certain 
contempt for Africa… 
At that moment I felt even more strongly the 
desire to write in my mother language. It became 
essential. Oh, at first it was painful…I was very 
afraid of writing a French novel in Wolof. I had to 
fight against myself, but the Diops are stubborn! 
Then I began to hear voices – voices that came up 
out of the past. And writing became very easy. I 
am certain that my first novel in Wolof, Doomi golo 
(the she-monkey’s young), is my best piece of 
writing. 
Is writing in Wolof therefore also a political act? 
Absolutely. Coming back to the title of my novel The 
she-monkey’s young: what’s a monkey? It’s an imita-
tion of the other. The passage that best sums up the 
book is the one in which you see a huge mirror in the 
middle of nowhere. Two gorillas find themselves in 
front of the mirror and they see their own images. 
They start fighting their reflections and as a result 
of hitting the mirror, they hurt themselves and die. 
What we call hatred of the other is in fact self-hatred. 
You have to be able to tolerate your image in the 
mirror, assume your identity. 
At the moment I’m translating this novel into 
French. It will be published in France in September 
2008.
Preaching in the wilderness or banking 
on the future?
After prolific production in French, the Senegalese novelist Boubacar Boris Diop decided 
to write in Wolof. For a poor, multilingual population with an oral tradition, books are 
not a priority. Yet African writers who express themselves in their national languages are 
becoming more and more numerous.
Interview by Jasmina Šopova 

Why didn’t you decide to publish it in French in 
Senegal?
Because now there are only publishers in national 
languages. That’s good news, anyway… even if their 
tongues are hanging out! They work with enthusi-
asm, but with immeasurable difficulties too: no way 
to make a profit, no distribution… True, the state 
occasionally steps in. The “Direction du Livre et de la 
Lecture” (book and reading administration) funded, 
for instance, a second edition of my book Doomi Golo 
after the first run of 3000 copies was sold out. 
Besides my publisher Papyrus, there’s the « Organ-
isation Sénégalaise d’Appui au Développement » 
(OSAD) that does remarkable work. And also ARED 
publishers, but they’re specialized in research and in 
education for development. 
How many readers can you have in Wolof? 
If I’d asked myself that question, I would never have 
started writing! It’s true that where I come from, 
many people don’t know how to read and don’t buy 
books. And they have other priorities: their children’s 
health, feeding their families… There’s also another 
phenomenon: rich people who live in poor societies 
generally prefer buying a fancy car, because you can’t 
show off a book…
We have to accept this situation and bet on the 
long term. It will take a while for books written today 
in the African languages to prevail, but they’ll even-
tually find acceptance. Thirty years ago, literature in 
national languages didn’t exist, except for a few iso-
lated cases. Today the situation is the opposite: hun-
dreds of books have been published in Wolof and 
Pulaar, definitely more than in French. 
There are two writers’ organizations in Senegal, 
one composed of writers in French, the other of writ-
ers in national languages. The latter are far more 
numerous, but they have no visibility, because we 
live in a society where French is the language of 
prestige. 
Do you count on diaspora readership? 
A great deal. But although the younger generations 
of the diaspora speak their mother languages, they 
don’t know how to read or write them. This is why I 
had the idea of organizing a Wolof workshop with 
young people whose background is Senegalese immi-
gration in France. At first the parents didn’t neces-
sarily see any benefit in their children learning their 
mother language, but there was great demand from 
the young people. We’re starting in Bordeaux on 25 
February. It’s an idea that seems odd initially, but if 
it works I’ll be very proud of it.
Often when one travels from one African capital to 
another, one has to stop off in a European capital. 
Does this also happen in the world of African 
literature?
It would be fantastic if I could translate the Kenyan 
writer Ngugi wa Thiongo directly form Kikuyu into 
Wolof, without going through English and French… 
To my knowledge there’s almost no translation from 
one African language into another. My novel Doomi 
© UNESCO/Papyrus
Cover of Doomi Golo, book by B.B. Diop in Wolof, at Papyrus.

Golo is translated into Pulaar now. But who will trans-
late it into Swahili? Do we have to wait two or three 
centuries? Not necessarily, but that’s what I fear, 
alas. 
You know, Africa was divided up by the colonial 
powers in Berlin in 1885. Africans speak to each 
other through the colonial languages. And me, 
making fun of it, referring to the Berlin Wall of the 
Cold War, I call it our “Berlin Wall”. It is invisible but 
terrible – it separates the English- French- and Por-
tuguese-speaking countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
With Moussa Konaté, Malian writer who heads 
the French-speaking festival “Etonnants voyageurs” 
(Amazing Travelers) in Mali, I’ve often discussed 
the idea of organizing a big meeting of African 
writers who write in national languages. A way of 
at least making cracks in this wall. But it’s easier 
to find sponsors for French-language writers than 
for those who write in national languages. UNESCO 
could be the perfect venue for such a pan-African 
encounter, particularly this year, international year 
of languages. And it’s an international space. With-
out walls.
