To mark the recent reinstallation 
of the Aksum Obelisk in its origi-
nal location in northern Ethiopia, the 
UNESCO Courier revisits some of the 
country’s cultural sites. Our travels 
off the beaten path lead us to ano-
ther treasure less obvious, less monu-
mental than the castles of Gondar, 
less visible than the rock-hewn chur-
ches of Lalibela, but just as impres-
sive: Ethiopia’s intangible heritage.
“Tangible cultural heritage can be a 
genuine instrument of reconciliation,” 
declared UNESCO’s Assistant Director-
General for Culture, Françoise Rivière, 
last 4 September, during the inaugu-
ration ceremony of the Aksum Obelisk 
on its original site. The 17 centuries 
old stele, taken to Rome in 1937 by 
Mussolini’s troops and brought back 
to Ethiopia by the Italian government 
is proof of this. Standing 24 metres 
high and weighing 150 tons, it is the 
second largest stele on the Aksum 
World Heritage site, close to the 
border with Eritrea. 
“This is a global first,” said Francesco 
Bandarin, Director of UNESCO’s World 
Heritage Centre. “The reinstallation 
of Stele No. 2, in the framework of 
the 1972 Convention concerning the 
safeguarding of natural and cultural 
world heritage, opens a new chapter 
in history,” he added. “It is a chapter 
that concerns not just Ethiopia but 
all of humanity.” 
“In a certain way, this obelisk is a 
symbol for all of Africa,” said the 
Ethiopian Minister of Culture and 
Tourism, Mohammed Dirir, in the 
interview he gave the UNESCO Courier 
last May. He explained that by trans-
porting the obelisk to Rome, Mussolini 
was taking revenge for the defeat of 
the Italian colonial troops in Adua 
(1896) in northern Ethiopia. “But we 
won’t live in the past,” he main-
tained. “It is the future we must look 
to. We will not forget, but we have 
forgiven.” 
For the last two years, culture and 
tourism have worked hand in hand in 
Ethiopia. Dirir is convinced that his 
country, with its “millennia of his-
tory”, must take advantage of its cul-
ture “to develop responsible tourism”. 
When he states that cultural heritage 
forges the country’s international 
image, he is not thinking only of mon-
uments. He is referring to customs, 
like the coffee ceremony, and to hand-
icraf ts, the livelihood of many 
Ethiopians, particularly women and 
young people. He stresses too the 
notion of “shimgalina”, meaning both 
dialogue and wisdom, as well as 
Ethiopian hospitality and its spirit of 
tolerance.
Showcase projects
True, tangible and intangible herit-
age are inseparable, particularly in 
his country. This is one reason why 
Rivière decided to launch another 
“worksite”, specifically in Lalibela, 
the Ethiopian World Heritage site 
renowned for its monolithic churches 
carved in to the rock. 
“The idea is to carry out projects inte-
grated in world heritage sites,” she 
explains. “These ‘projects’ are 
intended to contribute to economic 
and human development by focusing, 
according to need, on cultural tour-
ism, safeguarding intangible heritage, 
promoting cultural diversity, dialogue, 
languages or cultural industries. We 
will identify one site per region to 
launch these projects. In Africa, it 
will be Lalibela, where UNESCO has 
been present for a long time.” 
The foundations for the new initiative 
are already there: the Organization 
has several conventions at its dis-
posal, including those concerning 
natural and cultural heritage (1972), 
intangible cultural heritage (2003) 
and the diversity of cultural expres-
sions (2005). “By operating in symbi-
osis, these instruments can transform 
culture into a powerful agent for 
development,” says Rivière.  
Editorial
Jasmina Šopova 
Saint-George, one of the most intriguing churches of Lalibela (Ethiopia)  
© UNESCO/Jasmina Šopova
