developed countries lack basic writ-
ten communication skills. There then 
emerged in France the new word «ill-
etrisme» (illiteracy), as opposed to 
formerly used “analphabetisme” 
(analphabetism), the idea being to 
distinguish between “analphabetic”, 
having never been to school, and 
“illiterate”, having learnt badly or 
forgotten everything. But many 
national and international institu-
tions sometimes used one term and 
sometimes the other. The two cate-
gories were inevitably mixed up, as 
some people had received little 
schooling, whereas others had 
acquired knowledge elsewhere than 
at school. Finally, there are many 
different levels between a complete 
lack of proficiency in basic skills and 
total proficiency. Writing a simple 
message phonetically or working out 
what a sign means are significant 
skills compared to total ignorance. 
For this reason, measuring illiteracy 
and comparisons between countries 
are dif f icult, as results vary 
 enormously according to the criteria 
used.
The paradox  
of rich countries
In its 2009 Education for All Global 
Monitoring Report, UNESCO considers 
that the world literacy rate for adults 
has risen, increasing from 76% in the 
per iod 1985-1994 to 84% in 
2000-2006. However, 776 million 
adults still lack minimum literacy 
skills. And this figure does not only 
concern poor countries. Despite offi-
cial statistics that “generally under-
estimate” the phenomenon, by 
announcing, for example, a literacy 
rate of 99% in North America and in 
Europe, there are still pockets of 
illiteracy and of low literacy in devel-
oped countries. 
The International Adult Literacy 
Skills Survey (IALSS), carried out 
from 1994 to 1998   … 
Someone in the street, on public 
transport or in a shopping centre, 
asks for directions, although every-
thing is clearly indicated on signs. 
He or she seems absent-minded, very 
tired, or exasperated by contradic-
tory information. Sometimes those 
asked for information think nothing 
of it. Other times, they understand: 
this person does not know how to 
read, and is making an incredible 
effort to hide it. 
Talking  
about illiteracy 
Terminology varies. In 1958, UNESCO 
declared that an illiterate person was 
someone who could not “both read 
and write a short simple statement 
on his [or her] everyday life”. Twenty 
years later, UNESCO introduced the 
more refined concept of “functional” 
illiteracy, designating the inability 
to “read, write and calculate for his 
or her own and the community’s 
development”. Up to the 1980s, 
industrialized countries believed that 
they had eradicated the phenome-
non. It was thought only migrants 
who had come from countries with-
out compulsory schooling lacked 
mastery of the written word. This 
was an illusion, which technical 
progress has helped to dispel. 
The growing scarcity of purely 
“manual” activities has revealed that 
a minority of the populations of 
illitEracy: imPossiblE to hidE
According to the latest UNESCO global report on education, more and more people know 
how to read and write, but 776 million adults are still illiterate. This phenomenon affects 
industrialized countries, where a minority of the population faces daily difficulties. 
Luc Cédelle, 
French journalist at the newspaper Le Monde   
Literacy classes for immigrant workers in Bobigny (France).  © UNESCO/Michel 
Ravassard

“Illiteracy”, declared Pr incess 
Laurentien during a UNESCO regional 
conference in Baku (Azerbaijan) in 
May 2008, “is often linked to major 
personal problems – low self-
esteem, social isolation and an ina-
bility to function independently”. 
She concluded: “There is no silver 
bullet in eradicating illiteracy. We 
must work together to raise aware-
ness, implement practical initia-
tives and measure actual results”. 
All concerned countries are at this 
juncture today.   
… by the OECD and published in 
2000, defined a scale of proficiency 
from 1 to 5, which was later used in 
other surveys. Level 1 designated the 
weakest skills and level 2 the ability 
to “get by” despite insufficient pro-
ficiency. But this survey sparked a 
controversy. While developed coun-
tries consider that 10% of their pop-
ulations have serious difficulties 
with writing, this survey gave much 
higher figures, putting 45 % of the 
population of Great Britain and 40 % 
of the population of Germany at 
levels 1 and 2. France, which was 
also rated at 40%, withdrew from the 
survey. 
In France, the subsequent use by the 
Agence nationale de lutte contre 
l’illettrisme (ANLCI) (National agency 
to combat illiteracy) of a survey 
about “information and daily life”, 
carried out in 2004-2005 by l’Institut 
national de la statistique et des études 
économiques (INSEE) (National insti-
tute for statistics and economic 
studies) estimated, but with differ-
ent criteria, that 9% of the popula-
tion aged 18 to 65 who had studied 
in the country were illiterate. 
However, for 15 to 18-year olds, the 
rate is much lower: only 4.5%. 
The IALSS survey was controversial, 
yet it had the positive effect of 
encouraging the countries concerned 
to implement plans to fight illiteracy 
and ask serious questions about the 
efficiency of their educational sys-
tems, which are now measured by the 
PISA surveys (Programme for interna-
tional student assessment), published 
every three years by the OECD since 
the year 2000. On the other hand, 
IALSS was not followed up. The OECD 
Programme for the International 
Assessment of Adult Competencies 
(PIAAC) is designed to make up for 
the lack of a common measurement 
tool, but its first assessments are not 
expected before 2011.
Netherlands: 
Reversing the trend
In 1994, another international adult 
literacy survey, (IALS), carried out in 
Canada, the United States, the 
Netherlands, Ireland, Germany, 
Poland, Sweden and Switzerland, 
already showed the complexity of the 
measurement criteria. On a scale of 1 
to 5, it measured three categories of 
skills: understanding prose, “docu-
ments” and texts with quantitative 
information. In these three catego-
ries, 10% of the Dutch population 
was no higher than level 1. 
According to the Lezen & Schrijven 
(Read & Write) foundation, created 
in 2004 and chaired by Princess 
Laurentien of the Netherlands, 1.5 
million Dutch people are at the 
lowest level of this scale, 1 million 
of whom were born and educated in 
the country. According to a survey 
by the foundation, a quarter of 
these are almost totally illiterate. 
Furthermore, 6% of salaried workers 
have major difficulties in reading 
and writing. 
Women at school, Timor-Leste.  © UNESCO/Katy Anis
Language education for Dutch-
speaking adults at the Knowledge 
centre Literacy Dutchspeakers 
(KAN). © UNESCO/Sake Rijpkema
