Sunglasses propped on her head, a white iron mega-
phone in hand, she begins the day by uttering: 
“Friendship is a sacred name, a sacred thing. It exists 
only between good people […] There can be no 
friendship where cruelty, disloyalty and injustice pre-
vail.” Silvia Elena Machado reads aloud one of the 
posters an independent publisher Superabundans Haut 
stuck on the pink walls of the function room in Unit 
31 of the Ezeiza women’s prison, located in the sub-
urbs of Buenos Aires. 
Every Friday for the past five years, this room 
hosts a poetry workshop bringing together ten to 
fifteen inmates. Today, [December 7, 2007], is a day 
of celebration because it marks the second edition of 
the annual poetry festival entitled “I Didn’t Do It.” 
A crowd of people follow Silvia Elena across the 
room. She continues reading the Discourse of Volun-
tary Servitude, by French writer Étienne de La Boétie: 
“Between mean people […] there is no love, only 
fear. They are not friends, but accomplices.” The 
megaphone is passed from hand to hand, and after 
Silvia Elena, who has returned to the prison for the 
first time after having been freed ten months ago, it 
is the turn of Laura Ross, an inmate without a fore-
seen date of release: “Decide to stop being 
servile...” 
Other convicts, other voices, read with difficulty, 
timidly, encouraged by small pats on their backs from 
fellow prisoners. Applause resounds. Outside the sun 
is shining but the prison guards are not authorized 
to open the door that gives onto the small 
courtyard.
I Didn’t Do It
“I Didn’t Do It” is Bart Simpson’s favorite expression 
[Bart is the 10 year old boy who is one of The 
Simpsons main characters], which the workshop par-
ticipants selected two years ago to baptize their first 
festival. They also gave this title to their first anthol-
ogy of poems. In the anthology, María Medrano, the 
poet who, once a week, with fellow Claudia Prado, 
enters Ezeiza prison with a cartload of books, writes 
maría medrano: Inside - outside
Once a week, for the past five years, Argentine poet María Medrano gets behind the bars 
of a women’s prison near Buenos Aires to animate a poetry workshop. In so doing, she 
builds a bridge between “inside” and “outside”, which has become a vital space for the 
prisoners of different nationalities.
© UNESCO/Juana Ghersa
Poems exhibited at the festival “I Didn’t Do It”.
© UNESCO/Juana Ghersa
The second poetry festival “I Didn’t Do It” just started!
4

“Most women who participate in 
the workshop had never had any 
contact with this literary genre. 
Some of them decided to sign up 
to ‘kill time’, others, to see what it 
was all about. But what is certain 
is that, bit by bit, the workshop 
has become a vital space [...] They 
did not want to write ‘tumbera’ 
poetry [note: tumbera is the term 
used to designate what belongs to 
the prison world in Argentina ; la 
tumba (tomb) means jail], because 
for them, this language is part of 
the depersonalization process of 
which they are victims: when you 
enter prison, you stop being a person and become a 
‘package’ (this is what the guards call the inmates), 
you receive a new first name, a new surname ‘tum-
bero’, and little by little, daily language becomes 
prison language.” 
Here, poetry becomes a space of resistance, even if 
the penitentiary system considers it part of the “non-
productive”, cultural workshops, meaning that they do 
not generate any revenues as opposed to the bread- or 
stuffed-animal-making workshops (prisoners who par-
ticipate in these receive a small salary which they can 
spend themselves or send to their families). 
Two years ago, when she read her texts at the first 
festival, Liz, a young Black woman with small braids 
cascading down her forehead, was pregnant. Today, 
she sees her son, Jehová, running among the male 
and female poets, journalists and visitors who have 
come in from the outside, while she awaits her turn 
to share her writings. She says: “I will read something 
I really like, and hope you will also like it… ‘I love 
him like the cancer that eats into my flesh.’”
Breaking the walls of language 
as well
A young, blond woman, whose pregnancy is already 
far along, asks a photographer who has come to 
attend the festival to take her picture: she wants to 
send it to her fiancé who is outside and cannot 
always visit her. She also wants to take advantage of 
the presence of a digital camera to 
see herself because there are no 
mirrors in the jail. 
Through the windows up high we 
can see airplanes: the airport is 
only a few kilometers away, which 
is also the reason why this unit 
receives women accused of traffick-
ing narcotics. They are “mules”, 
people who transit towards other 
countries, who were caught by cus-
toms officers with drugs in their 
luggage. A number of these women 
are foreigners. They did not under-
stand the details of their sentence. 
It is only in prison that they learned Spanish. 
In this little Babel, however, they have found a 
way to partake in the poetry workshop. Around one of 
the six meeting tables, we hear Polish, German, and 
Romanian words. One day, María Medrano came to the 
workshop with poems written in these women’s 
mother tongues. The prisoners of the workshop had 
the idea of bringing these texts to the festival, of 
reading them in their original version and translating 
them to share them with fellow inmates and visitors. 
Carmen, a blond Romanian woman of 52 with a 
proud and soft voice, remembers that she had cried 
that day: “Then, I began to translate the text so that 
others could understand what it says. And today, I 
wanted to sing it, but I was so moved that I did not 
dare.” It is not the fear of 
speaking in public that 
discouraged her, but rather 
the memory of her mother, 
who had passed away in 
Romania the week before. 
In February, Carmen 
will be extradited, which 
is the usual route for 
women accused of traf-
ficking narcotics.
Soledad Vallejos, journalist 
for the newspaper 
Pagina 12 of Buenos 
Aires, Argentina
I love him like the 
cancer that eats 
into my flesh 
I hate him as much 
as the air I breathe 
I desire him as 
much as I desire 
death 
I reject him as 
much as I reject 
happiness 
Where are you? 
Liz M.
© UNESCO/Juana Ghersa
The prisoners’ manuscripts “go outside”. 
They stay “inside”.
4
