Most African countries gained 
their independence in the 
1960s. These new circumstances 
called for a decolonization of his­
tory. Theories ­ including Hegel’s ­ 
that kept Africa on the sidelines of 
history (calling it an “ahistorical” 
continent) had greatly influenced 
Europe­centred approaches to the 
African past: African history was 
considered an appendix to European 
history. African oral traditions were 
considered unreliable “repetitive 
memory” and could not, according 
to those fixated on writing, serve as 
a source for history. It was even for­
gotten that Africa was not only a 
reservoir of oral tradition but had a 
long tradition of writing, not just in 
Egypt but also in Ethiopia, Mali (Tim­
buktu), Nigeria (Kano) and Tanzania 
(Kilwa). 
Joseph Ki­Zerbo, alongside Cheick 
Anta Diop from Senegal, was the 
standard­bearer for decolonizing 
Landmarks
restoring afriCa’s dignity
The Professor, his compatriots affectionately nicknamed 
him. His ambition: to unite science, consciousness 
and life as much as possible, to create a “different 
world”. Joseph Ki-Zerbo was born in Toma (Burkina 
Faso) on 21 June 1922; he died on 4 December 2006 
in Ouagadougou. 
Joseph Ki-Zerbo was one of the fathers of modern 
African historiography, the high point of which was 
the publication of eight volumes of “General History of Africa” 
(UNESCO Publishing, 1970-1990). A member of the scientific 
committee for the production of this collective work, Ki-Zerbo played a key role in the pioneering 
project.
Doulaye Konaté, professor at the University of Bamako and president of the African Historians Association. 
African history. His intellectual lead­
ership was key within the so­called 
“1956 generation” that set the foun­
dations of African history “starting 
from the African matrix”, by ridding 
it of racist prejudice. Breaking with 
earlier approaches and methods that 
were inappropriate for reconstituting 
the African continent’s past, the 
Professor pushed for acceptance of 
traditional African oral traditions as 
historical sources, in addition to 
written and archaeological sources. 
He called into question the idea of 
prehistory referring to the period 
preceding the invention of writing, 
which particularly on the African 
continent was rich in creativity. He 
directed Volume I of the “General 
History of Afr ica” published by 
UNESCO (1970­1990), devoted to this 
topic of African prehistory as well as 
to problems of methodology. 
In addition, his “Histoire de l’Afrique 
Noire d’hier à demain” (1972) (History 
of Black Africa) is the pivotal text 
that represents a new approach to 
African history, one that tries to 
identify the internal and external 
processes that can explain the long­
term evolution of the continent.  
 
Historian Joseph Ki-Zerbo.  © Le Soleil
Cover of the book “À quand l’Afrique ?” 
by Joseph Ki-Zerbo. © All rights reserved

 
Historian and activist
Ki­Zerbo’s intellectual opus cannot 
be analyzed separately from his 
political activism, which began when 
he was a young student and partici­
pated in the founding of different 
polit ical par t ies including the 
Mouvement de Liberation Nationale 
(MLN, National Freedom Movement), 
to promote independence and unity 
on the continent. A staunch pan­
Africanist, supporter of N’Krumah 
(Ghana) and Patr ice Lumumba 
(Congo), he made a point throughout 
his life of turning his thoughts into 
actions. In this spirit he cofounded 
the African Historians Association, 
of which he was president from 1972 
to 2001. He expressed his commit­
ment to defending human dignity on 
every front. 
For Ki­Zerbo, “The real historian is 
the intellectual in the polis, the 
organic intellectual involved in his 
environment while maintaining a 
certain distance, without which he 
would be a mere partisan.” His edify­
ing analyses of today’s challenges – 
deve l opment ,  g l oba l i z a t ion, 
education, environment, identities ­ 
gave rise to a series of books with 
evocative titles: “Educate or Perish” 
(1990), “The other ’s mat” (1992), 
“When Africa?” (2003). The knowl­
edge and wisdom that impregnate his 
work give it universal impact. It is 
rooted in humanism, fed by profound 
African values and inviting otherness 
(the kind that does not alienate) to 
build “a different world” of solidarity 
and mutual respect. 
In 2004, Dany Kouyaté directed a 
docu mentary about and with Joseph 
Ki-Zerbo , “Identités et identité pour 
The Professor
First African to receive an agrégation teaching degree, Joseph 
Ki­Zerbo had a long career as a professor that took him from 
France to Senegal and Guinea before returning to Upper Volta 
(former name of Burkina Faso) in 1959, where he held important 
positions in education and culture: Director General of National 
Education, President of his country’s National Commission to 
UNESCO, academy general inspector. His courses and lectures 
in numerous universities and at conferences all over the world 
helped train many African leaders and help ensure an “African 
presence” in the intellectual debate on the great challenges of 
the late 20th century.
Joseph Ki­Zerbo also contributed significantly to a certain 
integration of higher education in Africa, particularly by 
cofounding CAMES (higher education council for Africa and 
Madagascar), of which he was the first Secretary General. This 
inter­African institution harmonizes teaching programmes and 
develops common criteria to promote teaching careers in higher 
education, thus participating in the sharing of member states’ 
human resources and know­how. 
D.K. 
The Professor, his compatriots’ affectionate 
nickname for him. © Right Livelihood Award 
Foundation Archive
l’Afrique”; it is available at the 
Centre d’Etudes africaines pour le 
Développement afr icain (CEDA) 
founded by Ki-Zerbo in 1980. 
