You recently coined the concept of 
“urban intensification”. What does 
it mean? 
By around 2050, one of two Africans 
will be living in an urban environ­
ment, if the growth of cities in 
Africa continues at the current pace. 
Yet there is no surge of industriali­
zation to go with the urbanization 
that would make it possible to offer 
hopes for the future to those who 
leave the rural areas. In European 
countries, the rural exodus went 
hand in hand with an industrial revo­
lution. Those who arrived in the 
towns came to take work, jobs and 
positions created by industry. This is 
not at all the case in Africa. 
Millions of people are crowded into 
shantytowns, on vacant lots, getting 
by as best they can. There is no real 
preliminary urban planning – no 
housing, no dr inking water, no 
plumbing or electricity. Shelters 
spring up in a completely chaotic 
way. 
The expression “urban intensifica­
tion” designates both the way in 
which people arriving from the coun­
try take over this new space, by 
transposing their own ways of life 
there, and the transformations that 
thus take place at the level of values: 
the solidarity, sharing, generosity, 
sense of the collective that charac­
terize our way of life are rapidly 
corroded.
Do you see risks in terms of 
“human security”? 
“Human security”… It’s a good thing 
this notion emanating from UNESCO 
is being imprinted on people’s minds, 
because security is linked not only 
to the fight against organized crime 
or terrorism, but also to life in gene­
ral and to the future. Yet a complete 
uncertainty about the future is pre­
cisely the most deeply rooted feeling 
in young Africans. It produces a fear 
of tomorrow, and this fear can in 
turn give rise to ethnic or religious 
fragmentation. In addition, the run­
down and overburdened state of the 
institutions supposed to forge the 
future, such as schools and universi­
ties, adds to human insecurity and 
adds to democratic disenchantment.
You sa id “democ rat ic  d is -
enchantment”?
The daunting question that our 
societies must answer today is: what 
degree of poverty is compatible with 
normal democratic development? 
Senegal often serves as an example 
of democracy in Africa. 
It ’s true, elections are organized 
there regularly, and   
Focus
towards an “inter-Human paCt”  
Disenchantment with democracy, despair 
among African youth – a diagnosis from 
Souleymane Bachir Diagne, Senegalese 
philosopher known for constantly seeking 
new perspectives. He rejects the ideas of 
“new frontier” and “co-development”, 
advocating a “cosmology of emergence” as 
a world view. 
A former vice-dean of Cheik Anta Diop University, 
Dakar, Senegal, he is also a founding member of 
CODERSIA, the Council for the Development of 
Social Sciences Research in Africa and currently 
teaching at Columbia University in New York. 
Souleymane Bachir Diagne answered questions from Gabrielle Lorne, journalist for RFO-A.I.TV. With this interview, the 
UNESCO Courier joins in the celebration of World Philosophy Day (20 November 2008). 
Bachir Diagne at UNESCO (2007). © UNESCO/Michel Ravassard

Because they have this conscious­
ness, they have the responsibility for 
supporting this evolution, towards 
the positive, towards sustainable 
development. It’s a responsibility we 
must imbue ourselves with to per­
petuate the movement. 
You suggest establishing the pact 
of our responsibility towards 
nature in an “inter-human pact”.
I don’t much like the expression 
natural contract, or with nature. 
Nature is not a legal entity, we can’t 
sign a contract with it. It is between 
ourselves, we humans, that we make 
contracts. And our duty towards 
nature is a duty of humanity. It is 
because we are humans that we have 
the duty to safeguard the earth for 
future generat ions. And to be 
modern is to link a constantly emer­
ging cosmology with the political 
work of broadening an open 
society.  
  those in power admit defeat 
and congratulate the winner. But is 
that enough? The prevailing level of 
poverty produces a despair that com­
pels young people literally to throw 
themselves in the water to get 
away. 
For a long time, we analyzed emigra­
tion as the search for greater eco­
nomic and soc ial  wel l­being 
somewhere else. What is troubling is 
that today everybody knows this 
elsewhere is not paradise! They know 
it! On the other hand, they know that 
where they live, that’s hell. When a 
continent’s youth thinks its future 
lies elsewhere, we are forced to take 
notice. 
Can the pan-African ideal, which 
you say is resurgent, perhaps pro-
vide impetus against this despair? 
The failure of the African state has 
already been noted. The African 
nation state is much too small to 
provide a real space for develop­
ment. So the idea of an African 
union seems good to me, because it 
can offer larger spaces by decentra­
lizing, by giving an expression to all 
differences, including the smallest 
ones that exist at a regional level. 
An integrated Africa can stand up to 
the trend towards fragmentation 
that we see here and there. 
The consolidation of States is the 
best response to young people and 
to the outside pressure of globaliza­
tion. That’s why I sometimes use the 
very American expression of “new 
frontier”. We have to imagine some 
form of future opportunities for the 
youth of our continent.
Do you believe that the international 
community and the donor countries 
will think it is in their interest to 
support this integration?
These outside communities do indeed 
realize that in helping us they are 
helping themselves. Our emigrants 
are their immigrants, af ter all. 
Recently we’re talking about “co­
development” again. It ’s time to 
flesh out that concept. If it consists 
of sprinkling a little money on our 
countries, it’s ineffective. In con­
trast, if the necessary measures are 
put into it, to help us build viable 
spaces of development, it takes on 
its full meaning. 
The African states and the European 
states can coordinate to allocate 
development aid to the creation of a 
physical space for integration. They 
can say to themselves – let us build 
together the infrastructure for devel­
opment and leave the development 
for the people’s initiatives. That’s 
what helping means to me. If the 
continent’s young people feel this 
space exists and it is open to their 
imagination, their spirit of enter­
prise, we will see their initiatives 
blossom. 
In Making peace with the earth 
(UNESCO, 2007), you advocate a 
“cosmology of emergence”. How 
should this be understood? 
The cosmology of emergence means 
the cosmos is alive, it evolves 
constantly. This theory of evolution 
must be a way of thinking about the 
world and of ourselves in the world. 
It can make us conscious of our res­
ponsibility to bring the whole earth 
into being, which is at the same time 
humanity and nature. 
Humans are conscious of the world’s 
direction, while other living beings 
are subjected to this evolution. 
Cover of “Making peace with the earth” 
(UNESCO, 2007). © UNESCO
