 
Marin Držić wrote for only ten years and left behind 
ten plays, all in the Croatian language. Only a few 
letters and official documents have come down to us 
from the period before 1549, year his first play 
“Tirena” was published. He was past 40 when he 
began to write. 
Landmarks
marin držić, ingenuous genius
Considered one of the most important 
Renaissance playwrights, Marin Držić from 
Croatia (1508-1567) saw the Mediterranean 
as a theatre, where the laughing mask of 
comedy can quickly turn into a cynical and 
terrifying grimace. 
Scorned by his contemporaries, admired 
by his compatriots today, he proved to 
be one of the most remarkable authors 
of his region and his time, unjustly 
unknown on the international scene. 
In honour of the 500th anniversary 
of his birth, a date UNESCO 
commemorates, the Courier presents an 
abbreviated version of the rebellious 
dramatist’s sad and peculiar life.
4
© All rights reserved
Marin Držić medal.
Like many talented and penniless writers, Držić 
did his best to please the public. His writing style 
was light, never pompous, and respectful of the rules 
of the literary genres he chose. 
Everything he penned was new, original, modern 
– clearly to excess, because his countrymen failed to 
understand him and he was mocked. He must be the 
only writer ever to have maintained such an ambiva-
lent relationship with Dubrovnik, which was one of 
the era’s most flourishing Mediterranean coast city-
states, though it never became more than marginally 
influential. The “Slav Athens” surrounded by power-
ful neighbours like Turkey and Italy nonetheless man-
aged to keep its independence for centuries, thanks 
to the skilful if not always virtuous diplomacy of its 
government. 
As the years went by, his frivolous farces grew 
more complex, highlighting the tragic dimension of 
his characters. The naïve old man, for instance, 
victim in the early plays of all sorts of intrigue, 
© All rights reserved
Scene from «Dundo Maroje,» Marin Držić’s most famous play.

becomes a victim of his own illusions, not to say the 
author’s alter ego.
Unpopular celebrity
By criticizing the society he lived in, he hoped to 
improve it, to rouse spirits, to shine a light on cer-
tain political dysfunctions. But the petty bourgeoisie 
is unforgiving when it feels threatened. Constantly 
criticized and even accused of plagiarism, Držić 
refused to be intimidated. His vitriolic rebuttals, 
however, only made him all the more unpopular. 
Since the mid-19th century, Marin Držić is a clas-
sic in Croatia. He is considered a writer brimming 
with talent but also with human weaknesses, a man 
oppressed by the daily tedium of the small society he 
sprang from, incapable of finding his place within it, 
constantly fleeing it and coming back, a victim of his 
own genius but also of others’ jealousy, and incapa-
ble of keeping his mouth shut. 
In Yugoslavia in Tito’s time, he was hoisted to the 
summit of the cultural and historical pantheon, 
© UNESCO/Ariane Bailey
« Pred dvorom », one of Dubrovnik’s squares where the yearly 
theatre festival takes place.
4
embodying the sort of figurehead that could help 
forge a Yugoslav cultural identity. Not a single year 
of the famous Dubrovnik theatre festival goes by 
without one of his plays being staged in front of an 
elite audience – the same audience he aimed for 
when he was alive, except larger.
The grand illusion
Born into a family of tradesmen who had lost their 
aristocratic titles due to the treachery of a distant 
ancestor, Držić trained to be a priest. But at age 30, 
he was still living with his parents at their expense, 
until they went completely bankrupt. This financial 
ruin is said to have drastically altered, for the rest of 
his life, his outlook on high society, which he both 
craved and condemned. 
The Dubrovnik senate then paid for him to study 
church law in Italy. He lived the good life in Sienna, 
keeping company with the nobility and briefly taking 
up the position of rector at the university. Returning 
to Dubrovnik, he entered the service of an Austrian 
adventurer count, traveling with him to Vienna and 
Istanbul before returning home to start writing plays 
– “Dundo Maroje” being the most famous. He also 
acted on stage, did menial work for the municipal 
government and squandered his small inheritance. 
In 1562, three years after his last play “Hecuba”, 
tired and disappointed, he left Dubrovnik and his 
debts behind and moved to Venice. Fortunately, he 
knew how to play the organ, which allowed him to 
survive, but his resentment ran deep. 
He traveled to Florence, writing four letters to 
Cosmo di Medici urging him to overthrow the 
Dubrovnik senate, “this 20-headed monster tyranniz-
ing the people” and to establish a just government. 
The letters are of great literary quality, but politi-
cally absurd. “We have nothing to fear,” he tells the 
Florentine duke, forgetting that Dubrovnik’s continu-
ing stability was what interested the period’s great 
powers, not whether its government was just. 
Did Cosmo ever read the letters? No one knows. 
Držić waited in vain for his answer and finally 
returned to Venice where he died. 
Ines Sabalić, journalist (Croatia) 
