Spôjmaï Zariâb was ten years old when 
the compulsory veil was abolished in 
Afghanistan in 1959. The future novelist 
led a happy life in Kabul, surrounded by 
books. Then, the Taliban seized power. In 
1990, she took refuge in France with her 
two daughters.
You ask me what exile is… 
Years ago, in a quiet corner of Kabul, I read the 
Persian translation of The Man from Kabu, a short 
story by Rabîndranâth Tagore. 
With his magical words, this talented Indian writer 
made me discover the pain of exile… but it was an 
economic exile: an Afghan flees misery, leaving his 
wife and eight-year old daughter behind, and gets 
lost in the vastness of India in search of work. 
His path crosses that of a little girl. She reminds 
him of his own daughter and he feels great affection 
for her. Nostalgia and memories often compel him to 
visit her, his pockets full of candy and small change. 
But exile’s meanders and to life’s surprises ends 
up leading him to jail, where he spends 15 years. 
Once he regains his freedom, his heart beating 
and his pockets full of candy and small change, he 
heads off in the hope of finding the little Hindu girl 
he once knew. Arriving at her doorstep, he is sur-
prised by the crowd’s uproar and the hubbub of the 
music. Dazzled by spangles and lights, he looks for 
the girl and is brought before the bride. 
Gaping, he ponders over the tyranny of time, and 
thinks of his own daughter who, in his absence, has 
spôjmaï Zariâb : the man from Kabul
© UNESCO/Dominique Roger
History turned every Afghan into Tagore’s The Man from Kabul.
© Mercedes Uribe
“I was young and had no concerns other than to accompany 
Don Quixote in his adventures.”
4

also become a woman. He thinks of her childhood, 
stolen from him, and of his fatherhood forever lost.
This short story shattered me, but I was young at 
the time and did not know what poverty was. I had 
no concerns other than to accompany Don Quixote in 
his adventures, share Renée’s melancholy, and laugh 
with Molière, discover the enamoured Madame de 
Raynal, sit by the lake with Lamartine and by the 
peaceful Don river with Cholokhov, share the pains of 
the old Goriot, follow the Count of Monte-Cristo’s 
ploys for revenge, cry with Fantine and Cosette, scru-
tinize the noble words of Tolstoï, shed tears upon 
Werther’s death… Haunted by Dostoïevski, I would 
visit his house of the dead, change into an insect 
with Kafka, and wander behind the walls of his castle, 
listen to the works of Sartre and hear Hemingway’s 
bell toll, search for things passed with Proust, admire 
Kazantzakis’ Christ re-crucified, and experience hun-
dred years of solitude of Garcia Marquez, all the while 
forgetting the man from Kabul and his suffering in 
exile. 
I, who was sheltered from misery and who had 
only known war in books, saw myself also sheltered 
from exile… until the end of my days. 
At the time, I ignored that one day, alas, history’s 
unfair hand would turn every Afghan into the man 
from Kabul by Tagore. That history’s folly would 
divide an entire nation and disperse the Afghans to 
all four corners of the world, far from their fathers, 
mothers, children, sisters and brothers. 
Around me, I do not know of a single family that 
was spared the torment of exile, and that, although 
without having read Tagore, did not live the story of 
the man from Kabul and did not feel his pain within.
You ask me what I am thinking of… 
What could I be thinking of when I see developing 
countries, still struggling to free themselves from 
the claws of misery, fall victim to the devastation of 
war? What could I be thinking of when I hear poor 
people being condemned for knocking on distant 
doors to save themselves? What could I be thinking 
of when I see that, throughout the centuries, neither 
religion, philosophy, literature, art, science or tech-
nology have been able to appease the hunger in the 
World’s belly and to find a remedy for the insanity we 
call ‘war’? 
Why have they not appeased it…? Why have they 
not found it…? 
This time, I am asking you. 
Do you have an answer…? 
Spôjmaï Zariâb, Afghan novellist living in Paris 
© UNESCO/Neguine Zariab
Spôjmaï Zariâb : “Where is the remedy for the insanity we call 
‘war’?”
4
