Babylon reconquered
a brutal separation from one’s linguistic 
and cultural context evokes in my mind 
the image of a tree cut down one fine 
day to be planted in different earth. 
the tree that until that day had run its 
roots in its own soil and stood firm and 
solid on its roots found itself suddenly 
uprooted, and made an effort to put 
down its roots again in other soil and to 
remain standing.
the image of this tree in its earth and in 
this different earth inflames my heart and 
I think of the tree’s distress and solitude, 
and I know very well those who at some 
point in their lives were forced to leave 
their linguistic and cultural territory, to 
establish themselves in another linguistic 
and cultural territory, know very well this 
distress and solitude. they fully conceive 
the wrath of god and they live the story 
of Babylon and its tower. the story of 
those people who wanted to be god and 
devoted themselves to building a tower. 
From day to day the tower took shape and 
gained in height, it approached the sky and these people became god… so god became 
angry and took away the unity of their language. No one could understand the other’s 
language. the tower remained unfinished and the desire to become god even more so. 
every language became a wall and people found themselves alone and powerless. Behind 
the wall, they isolated themselves and the desire to become god left them. 
Possibly it was these same cries of solitude, this absence of anyone to speak to intelligibly, 
that took form and gave birth to poetry and literature… and each language became a 
treasure of unconfined unlimited riches. 
While god took linguistic unity away from humans, they on the other hand created the 
diversity of translation. every translation opens a door in the wall, a door that gives onto 
another language, another culture, another existence and another wealth, so that every 
reader of another language may go through these doors, forget Babylon and divine wrath; 
so that another language may become their language, another culture their culture, 
another existence their existence and another wealth their wealth.
Spôjmaï Zariab, Afghan novelist
© UNESCO/Fiona Ryan
