Morning – if there is a morning – of deceptive 
light because morning is forbidden to those most 
dislocated beings: promised to a cruel fate 
according to the holy will of the privileged… 
Oppression, permanent through definite absence 
of good and wellbeing for those women and men 
struck by who knows what unexplained and 
equally inexplicable curse… 
Reverie, never dreamed, of freedom to say simple 
words like I am like you, with you, I am you and 
to make gestures not always the gestures of gen-
uflection and prostration… 
Never cry with joy, never! But burn ceaselessly 
burn with the fire of bitter tears because nothing 
– day or night – sings or enchants… 
End by giving up on life rather than enduring: that is 
what the word Morne can inspire in the horrible 
vocabulary of forbidden places and doomed 
desires…
Moreover! 
4
© UNESCO/Anwar Janooi



Le Morne was a place of refuge for runaway slaves.
le morne, spelled out
Morning, Oppression, Reverie… with these words Mauritian poet Édouard J. Maunick begins 
to write “Le Morne”, a name charged with emotion, a mountain laden with memory, a sacred 
place in the history of the maroon - runaway slaves - of Mauritius, and now a World Heritage 
site.
Only light can vanquish all the night of the fate 
imposed on the disinherited. Thus Le Morne instead 
of source of solitude forms an island extension, a 
front garden instead of a place of torture from which 
the victim, drunk with despair, leaps into the void to 
die somewhere on the murderous slope. From which 

too the fake dive into the ocean (a fable), an impos-
sible take-off for the most able of athletes and even 
less proper to those half-dead three-quarters 
exhausted by hunger, thirst and pain… From which 
in particular the light, now returned into time, incar-
nated in the house of the Morne. 
Order and counter order of time’s tragic isolation, 
clarity taking the guise of the commonplace, the pla-
teau of the Morne assuming the value of heritage. 
History gets involved, all the better: no longer is it a 
question of a geographic hill but a place telling its 
truth, albeit so tragic. The narrative is worth a stop. 
Le Morne is no longer solitude but symbol of 
liberation. 
Reverie finally touching reality, the Morne Brabant 
like the doleful on other islands rejoins the world in 
its integrity. No longer a corner of an island however 
picturesque, but part of humanity that not naming 
would be a fault if not a sin. 
None can contradict the whole world. Obliterating Le 
Morne Brabant of Mauritius is like forgetting the 
work of Mahatma Gandhi, the struggle of Martin 
Luther King Jr., the epic of Nelson Mandela, to cite 
only these few examples. The misadventure lived by 
Le Morne’s two thousand slaves is as present in 
memory as any other closer to us. 
Ending, the inclusion of the Morne Brabant on the 
World Heritage List is like the image of the trochetia, 
the native flower of Mauritius, ennobling the whole 
island. 
Édouard J. Maunick, Mauritian poet. 
4
© UNESCO/François Odendaal
To reach the summit of Le Morne, a crevasse hundreds  
of metres deep must be crossed.
© UNESCO/François Odendaal
An idyllic spot with a troubled past.
