Six major conferences on literacy 
have been organized by UNESCO since 
March 2007, to determine strategies 
to reinforce the fight against illite-
racy. This pace is being maintained 
with the preparation of the next 
International Conference on Adult 
Education (CONFINTEA VI), which will 
be held in Brazil from 19 to 22 of 
May.
The last of the series of regional and sub-
regional literacy conferences, serving Latin 
America and the Caribbean, is taking place in 
Mexico City this month. It comes at the heel of 
the Doha (Qatar) conference for the Arab 
States, March 2007; Beijing (China) for East 
and Southeast Asia and for the Pacific, July – 
August 2007; Bamako (Mali) for Africa, in Sep-
tember 2007; Delhi (India) for South, Southeast 
and Central Asia, November 20007; and Baku 
(Azerbaijan) for East and Central Europe and 
the Caucasus, May 2008. 
These meetings follow the Conference on 
Global Literacy, organized by the White House 
in New York on 18 September 2006 under the 
aegis of Laura Bush within the framework of 
the United Nations Literacy Decade (2003-2012) 
and of UNESCO’s Literacy Initiative for 
Empowerment (Life, 2005 - 2015). 
Laura Bush, Honorary Ambassador for the 
United Nations’ Decade of Literacy, has set an 
example to other first ladies, ministers and 
UNESCO Goodwill Ambassadors who have fol-
lowed in the footsteps of the First Lady of the 
United States of America, leading increasingly 
vigorous campaigns in favour of literacy. 
But conferences are not enough, important 
though they may be. As Mark Richmond, Direc-
tor of the Division for the Coordination of 
United Nations Priorities in Education explains: 
“It is capital that follow-up actions be under-
taken in the aftermath of each conference.” 
Only measures that have a real impact on peo-
ple’s lives can contribute to sustainable human 
development and to poverty reduction. 
The theme of the forthcoming conference in 
Mexico - From Literacy to Lifelong Learning: 
Towards the Challenges of the 21st Century – 
blazes new trails. It will be matched by the 
first preparatory meeting for the next Interna-
tional Conference on Adult Education (CONFIN-
TEA VI). 
Since their beginning, in Denmark in 1949, the 
CONFINTEA conferences have been among 
UNESCO’s major initiatives concerning adult 
education and training, bringing together lea-
ders and experts: Canada (1960), Japan (1972), 
France (1985) and Germany (1997).  
Organized by UNESCO’s Institute for Lifelong 
Learning in Hamburg (Germany), CONFINTEA is 
an international forum for the promotion and 
development of strategies for non-formal lear-
ning and education for adults. 
From Literacy to Lifelong Learning
