  , Worl . 
Shotwer 1 by ugh Text At the Prague Seminar 
This re- 
was 'revis- 
ed in 1947 and 
published in 
[Ruth Benedict, world-renowned social anthropologist, was one of the participants at the Unesce- 
sponsored Seminar en Childhood Education, held in Podébrady, Czechoslovakia from July 21 to August 23, 
    
   
    
" n , Shortly after her return to the United States, Ruth Benedict suddenly died on September ith. fier 
Textbooks and French by Lhe books “Patterns of Culture” and “The Races of Mankind’ have been read and discussed in many 
ing Materials mm the: Services Frun- countries. 
We publish below the partial text of one of the last talks by Ruth Benedict, dclivered at the 
Pedébrady Seminar this summer. Readers wishing te receive the full text of this Simulating Jecture 
can do so by writing to the Education Department of Unesco for document Sem.III Lec./10 
Department  0f 
Education. 
¢ais d’Informa- 
tion under the 
title Les livres 
Unesco   shapers of at-   titudes, .it still Dr. Quillen is serving on , the de classe et la 
H Unesco Secretariat while on leave découverte du 
contains much from Stanford University waere | = 
truth to - day. he is professor of educa- y seminar have therefore an opnortunity to con- WY a Unesco drew up its programme of 
  
However, not tien. In the United Siates pe Unesco is not work it stressed the need for “an enquiry tribute to the research which is necessary, and 
only history rte to ieprove textbooks ana working oo a into the distinctive character of the various jt is well to say a few words about methods of 
textbooks, but |g oC TC itional understand. Aspects of (he national cultures and ideals, with the aim of  yraining for such work. 
also geography, irfg. Among the recent publications improvement of stimulating the sympathy and respect of nations 3 
literature, lang- | of which he is author or co-author | lextbooks and for each other’s ideals and aspirations and the Comparative study of human culture was not 
uage, science, | are: Textbook ImprovementandIn-| teaching ma- appreciation of national.problems. One focus of possible before the development of certain cli- 
mathematicy | lcinational Understanding written | gerjals but such an enguiry would be the study of ways mates of opinion, and ne student of the subject 
and other text- 
books and 
teaching ma- 
terials affect 
the understand- 
ing and atti- 
tudes of youth concerning other 
mations, peace and war. is to 
Understandings and attitudes 
formed in childhood persist into 
adulthood, and the epinons and 
attitudes of most literate adults 
have been conditioned by the 
textbooks and teaching materials 
  for the US, National Commission 
for Unesco and the American 
Council on Education ; Living in 
our Communities: and Charting 
Intercultural Education, 1945-55,   
standing and 
report 
is restricting 
its activities (o 
their improve- 
ment as aids 
to interna- 
tional under: 
Its aim 
on what has 
been and is bcing done, to mahe 
limited 
and, above 
recommendations, 
assistance on 
all, to provide an 
opportunity for those interested 
in the improvement of textbooks 
and teaching materials in various 
to provide 
request, 
they studied in schoel. 
This fact was recognized by the 
parts of the world to work to- 
gether in a common cause. 
by which the young are trained to become res- 
ponsible participants in the national culture”. 
Unesco has in this statement of policy stated 
its belief that recognition of cultural differences 
among civilized nations can promote internation- 
al co-operation. Usually, in most nations. the 
attitude has been quite different. Usually people 
who hope for world co-operation ar€ the very 
ones who minimize fundamental 
differences among the nations ; 
they emphasize the similarity 
of human virtues and motives, 
uo matter what the differences 
in cultural practice and behav- 
iour. 
Those who oppose interna- 
can do excellent work whe finds this climate of 
opinion personally distasteful. 
Students of comparative cultures have usually 
been trained by acquainting them with a wide 
range of the diversities of possible social insti- 
tutions which are traditional in various parts 
of the world and then sending them to fairly 
small simple communities very different from 
their own. These are often pre- 
literate tribes. 
Because the social arrange- 
ments and motivations of 
these communities are entirely 
unfamiliar to the student, he 
has to observe and record every 
detail of their lives in order 
to understand them. The “cult-

must accept the virtues and 
practices with which they are 
familiar in their own culture 
before it will be possible to 
make a peaceful world. This is 
an attitude which is centuries 
old. It has not made for world 
peace. 
Now Unesco proposes that 
social scientists should take the 
lead in promoting a new and 
different attitude, studying na- 
tional differences even down 
into such fundamental things 
as the way we bring up our 
children. 
Unesco is saying, in effect. 
that it is part of wisdom to 
recognize that human commun- 
- ities are not all alike, and is 
suggesting that we cultivate psychologically heal- 
thy attitudes also among the nations and that by 
greater study and understanding of national diff- 
erences we could promote a more co-operative 
world. 
Ne Nation Can Live To Itself Alone 
This programme of Unesco’s is especially neces- 
sary ir the world today. No nation any longer 
lives by itself alone. In the modern world it is 
absolutely necessary that each nation take some 
attitude about other modes of life than its own. 
. Any study of national differences is a study 
of comparative cultures. This is the special field 
of social anthropology, and it is necessary to 
stress a few of the principal conclusions which 
have been derived from such study 
The way of life among people, the virtues. 
they exhibit and the aggressiveness they show is 
learned in their experience in that social order; 
it is not racial ; it 1s not instinctive. in the sense 
that human beings everywhere are born with a 
set of instincts which account for their aggres- 
sions and their cruelties. 
The cultural patterns which men in all societies 
invent for themselves and transmit down the 
generations have in each community a cons:der- 
able degree of consistency within them- 
selves. These patterns of learned behaviour have 
to be taught anew to each generation. No matter 
how distinctively French France seems over 
several centuries, or how Dutch Holland seems, 
with each new generation the personnel of 
France and Holland changes completely. One 
generation dies and another 1s torn. In the way 
in which parents handle their babies, in the 
way in which older children treat younger 
children, in the way in which teachers reward 
and punish their pupils, emotions are selected 
and cultivated in them which fit them to be 
members of their own community and nation. 
Cultural study of national differences is just 
beginning to be accepted. The members of this 
38 
 
The Jate Ruth Benedict 
Genetic Study 
of National Character 
This Unesco seminar is de- 
voted to the study of childhood 
education, and Dr. Chen's study 
group has as its subject “Child- 
hood Education in Different 
Nations”. In line with Unesco’s 
programme, seminar members 
are interpreting their assign- 
ment, not merely as the child's 
school education, but as his 
home and community exper- 
iences as well, “the ways in 
which the young are trained to 
become responsible participants 
in their national culture”. 
It is hoped that some of the 
delegates to this seminar will 
be stimulated by the discussions here, (0 go back 
to their countries te record observations and mn- 
terviews, and thus contribute to mutual knowledge 
among nations of the world. R 
Genetic study of different cultures is: precisely 
the study of how each generation is conditioned 
* to become responsible participants”. in the way 
of life which 1s traditional in the community 
into which it is born. The technical development 
of such study is possible today because of 
knowledge that has been‘ acauired in several 
sister sciences, all of which are volved in such 
genetic studies: (a) the study of the physical 
maturation of the child; (b) medical studies in 
the field of psychosomatics; (c) psychiatry. 
Training The Young 
As Responsible Participants 
- In National Cultures 
Aided by the development of these related 
sciences, the time is ripe for the study of the 
“ways in which the young are trained to become 
responsible participants in national cultures”. Ii 
is only necessary to collect the observations and 
record the attitudes upon which understanding 
can be based. 
Thus when all European naticns have madi¢ 
systematic records of observations of child life 
and have gathered data from pareats and from 
educators can adequate understanding I 
obtained of the ways in which children in differ 
ent areas of Europe are fitted “to become res 
ponsible participants” in national life. 
If we are to accept the different ideals an 
alternative social arrangements of the nations o 
the world, those of us who are professionall: 
concerned with childhood education have s tas 
which extends far beyond problems of curricu 
lum revision. We need the clear-sightedness ane 
the tolerance which will help us to appreciat 
the different kinds of strengths which differen 
nations could contribute to the world in whicl 
we desire to live.
