NATIT TALIM® 
THE GANDHI METHOD 
of ° Education for Life’ 
HUMAYUN 
KABIR, 
Joint Educational 
: Adviser to the Gov- 
) J ernment of India 
i y ’ and author of “Man 
and Rivers”. 
| BEET of illiteracy is perhaps 
  
the most stupendous problem 
that faces India on the aitain- 
ment of her independence. Her decision 
to become a secular democratic state adds 
to the urgency of providing for the 
adequate education of her teeming mil. 
lions. 
The importance as well as the difficulty 
“of the task may be measured by the fact 
that almost 85 So of the Indian people are 
illiterate, and yet the future safety, 
welfare and progress of the State depend 
on the decisions which they may take 
In its task of liquidating illiteracy, the 
National Government faces, on the one 
hand, the problem of the education of 
children of school-going age. This would 
train the citizens of the future. 
Of even greater immediate urgency is 
the education of the adult illiterates. For 
them, mere literacy is not enough as they 
must exercise the rights of citizenship 
even while they are undergoing instruc 
tion in the letters. 
Fer children of school-going age, the 
Government have adopted a programme 
of basic education. The aim is to provide 
free compulsory education for all children 
between the ages of 6 and 14. The magni- 
tude of the problem can be realized when 
we remember that such children number 
about 45 millions. There are the prob- 
lems of school build.ngs and of providing 
funds for the expenses of education. 
Besides, the lack of trained teachers 
makes it impossible to bring all these forty- 
five millions under immediate compulsory 
education. 
Three 5-Year Plans 
HE Government have, therefore, fram- 
HT ed three 5-year plans for achieving 
this end. The first 5-year plan aims 
at bringing about 50 “% of the children 
between the ages of 6-11 under compulsion. 
At this stige, only the more populous 
villages will be taken in hand and com- 
pulsion will be extended by age groups 
from year to year. Thus, in the first year, 
all children of six plus in villages with 
a population of 1,500 or more will be 
brought under compulsory education. The 
‘next year compulsion will be extended to 
children of seven plus and so on. The 
second 5-year plan will extend compulsion 
in the same manner in the scattered and 
less populous villages. The third 5-year 
plan will extend compulsion to all children 
between the ages of 11-14. 
For adult illiterates the government 
programme aims at providing instruction 
of a somewhat different type. Experience 
has shown that adults are not attracted 
by a merely literary training. Instruction 
for the adults is, therefore, conceived as 
‘Social Educaticn. Such education will, in 
addition to the introduction of literacy, 
‘aim at the production of an educated 
mind among the adult illiterates. 
As befits citizens of a democratic State, 
the instruction will seek to inculcate in 
them a lively sense of the rights and 
duties of citizenship. There will also be 
instruction in the laws of personal and 
public health. The adult responds most 
quickly to an economic incentive. His 
economic interest will be roused by offer- 
ing him information that may enable him 
to increase his earning capacity. Social 
Education also aims at training and 
refining his emotions through art, litera- 
ture, music, dancing and other recreative 
activities. Most important of all, it will 
emphasize the principle of human brother- 
hood and seek to impress on the adult 
the necessity of toleration as essential to 
democracy and peace 
  
  
HE programme of social education 
will, in the first instance, be con- 
fined to people between the ages of 
15 and 45. Special emphasis will be placed 
on the education of women and grown-up 
girls. Educated mothers are the surest 
guarantee to the education: of the next 
generation. The target is the achievement 
of 50 per cent literacy in this age-group 
within the next five years. 
In order to prevent a relapse into 
illiteracy, the interest of adult literates 
will be maintained through clubs, discus- 
sion-groups, summer schools and similar 
agencies. The aim will be to make the 
village scheol not only a place of instruc- 
tion for children but the centre of com- 
munity life. On certain days in the week 
the school would be reserved exclusively 
for girls and women. 
Emphasis on Activity 
HE essential feature of both basic 
1} education for children and social 
education for adults is the emphasis 
on activity. 
It was Gandhiji who first tried to apply 
on a large scale this principle of teaching 
through activity. He went further and 
held that the activity must be social in 
significance, This is the essence of craft. 
He said that craft must be used in the 
education even of the child. Education 
based on a craft would not only help to 
develop his faculties but give him a 
consciousness of performing a social func- 
tion from the very beginning of his life. 
In addition, learning through a craft 
would help in making education accessible 
to all. Qur present economic backwardness 
cannot be denied. We cannot afford an 
expensive system of education, however 
desirable it may otherwise be. Basic edu- 
cation would help to solve the problem of 
finance, as it is at least partly self- 
supporting. The very small child may not 
produce objecis that are useful, but the - 
product of the older children would have 
some social use. Even if they have no 
marke! outside, they can be used by the 
school itself. - 
“A Danger To Be Avoided 
" =a-HERE is, no doubt, a danger that 
such a system may turn the school 
into a factory for exploiting child 
labour. This, however, would be an abuse - 
of basic education and there is no system 
in, the worid which cannot be abused. 
Whether for the child or the adult, the 
activity is a means to education. Educa- 
tion is, therefore, the end and the craft 
the means, but as Gandhiji would say, 
the means and thz ends are distinct but 
not separate. Provided it is remembered 
that it is a school training citizens of the 
future and not a factory turning out 
goods for current consumption, there is 
nothing wrong in insisting that the pro- 
ducts even of children must be good. In- 
sistence on quality is, in fact, a part of 
education itself. If a thing is to be done 
at all, it ought to be done well. 
In the New Indian Education great stress is put on handicraft training—insg 
Gandhi (shown above with Pandit Nehru), 
