
tions built on oral traditions is just 
as rich as that found in societies 
which use writing. The oral tradi-
tion does not say any old thing in 
any old way – it is a form of the 
spoken word that is organized, 
developed and structured. It is an 
immense repository for knowledge 
acquired by the community, follow-
ing well-defined conventions. This 
is knowledge reproduced with a 
rigorous methodology. 
And there are specialists of the 
spoken word, whose role is to 
preserve and transmit things from 
the past – the griots (see box). In 
West Africa there are entire villag-
intErviEW With djibril tamsir nianE
“Words fly, writing remains,” as 
we say in the West. Can you ex-
plain how the oral tradition has 
become a legitimate source for 
the history of African cultures? 
This saying comes down to us 
from the Romans and has helped 
perpetuate the opinion that oral 
sources are not to be taken seri-
ously. But the culture of civiliza-
(•••)
es of griots, like Keyla, in Mali, with 
its 500 inhabitants. These are like 
schools of the spoken word, where 
children as young as seven are 
taught the history of their lineage, 
learning it by heart. This memory is 
then reactivated by the rhythm of 
songs and musical instruments like 
the tamani, the koni or the khalam. 
The griot’s words are “spoken hi-
eroglyphs”, as my friend and com-
patriot, Joseph Ki-Zerbo has put it. 
What is the role of the griot in 
today’s society?
In Africa today, the Western edu-
cational model is encouraging a 

rd Djibril Tamsir Niane is an expert on the history of the Malian Empire. 
His major literary work, Soundiata, ou l’épopée mandingue [1960; 
Sundiata: An Epic of Old Mali] was compiled from the tales told to him 
by Mamadou Kouyaté and other griots (traditional story-tellers). He is 
editor of the fourth volume of the General History of Africa : Africa from 
the 12th to the 16th Century. This was the period of the great empires 
and dynasties of Mali, Songhay, Almohades, etc,  
which played a crucial part in the continent’s history.
Interview by Monique Couratier (UNESCO),  
editor for this special issue. 
Gathering of Bambara griots (Mali). 


Djibril Tamsir Niane. 


an Ear for thE past 
 Can the spoken word be used as a historical source? guinean historian 
        djibril Tamsir niane argues that written records are not the only stewards 
of history. as Burkinabe writer, Joseph ki-zerbo, put it, oral traditions 
         are living museums, giving flesh and blood to the skeleton of the past. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8

move away from oral culture to-
wards the written word. And, in-
deed, traditional schools are losing 
their strength in terms of transmis-
sion. Even so, the griot continues 
to play his role within the commu-
nity, in keeping with his socio-pro-
fessional caste, and he continues 
to preside at all ceremonies. 
Can he be seen as a historian?
Thanks to the knowledge passed 
down from his elders, the griot pos-
sesses a corpus, which makes up 
the basic narrative. But, according 
to circumstances, he might decide 
to relate just one part, or a con-
densed version. He can also add 
knowledge that he has acquired by 
speaking to others on his travels. 
These deletions and additions do 
not alter the validity of the narrative 
that is passed on from one genera-
tion to the next, as they are clearly 
indicated in his tale. As he tells the 
story, the griot puts things into per-
spective - in other words, yes, he 
acts as a historian, if you accept 
that history is always an arrange-
ment of the facts by a historian!
Isn’t there a danger of oral 
traditions becoming corrupted 
through transcription and  
translation? 
Naturally, stories are gathered in 
the griot’s own language, using a 
tape recorder, before they are tran-
scribed into this same indigenous 
language. The story is then trans-
lated into a Western language – 
which suffers from the same limita-
tions as any other translation! The 
historian can always go back to 
the original recordings and hear 
the “dot-dot-dots” and “brackets” 
inserted by the griot. 
Did you use oral sources when 
preparing the General History 
of Africa? 
Absolutely. The oral tradition is 
more than a matter of spoken his-
tory; it also deals with cosmogony, 
legends, and so on. To make sense 
of all of this, the historian has to 
compare and cross check sourc-
es. But this is also true for written 
sources. 
In order to fill in some of the miss-
ing details in the oral versions, we 
made comparisons with docu-
ments from the 14th century left by 
Ibn Battuta (born in Tangiers) and 
Ibn Khaldun (born in Tunis). This 
made it possible for us to give an 
exact date for the battle of Kirina, 
where Sundiata defeated his en-
emy, the sorcerer king, Soumaoro. 
We also cross-checked with oth-
er oral variants of the epic, particu-
larly from Keyla in Mali, Fudama in 
Guinea and Bangul in Gambia. It 
is interesting to note that the epic 
has been passed on in various 
languages, which makes the histo-
rian’s task even more fascinating.
Africa is known for its extraordi-
nary linguistic diversity. At least 
six of the 16 linguistic families 
documented in the world are 
African. Does this make  
it possible to talk of a conti-
nent-wide cultural identity? 
 Africa has always been a model 
of cultural diversity. Let’s come 
back to Sundiata’s Empire. It was 
made up of a number of ethnic 
groups, each with its own culture, 
language and traditions. This was 
not a Jacobin from of rule. It was a 
model of decentralised rule, which 
allowed diversity to flourish. And 
its linguistic diversity was not at 
Recording of stories from oral tradition, 
Senegal, 1969. 

Take the epic of Sundiata. This 
is the oldest African epic, tracing 
the formation of the great Malian 
empire through the journey of its 
founder, Sundiata Keïta. He lived 
in the 13th century and unified the 
Sahel region from Niger to Sen-
egal. His story has been passed 
down to us via the oral tradition, 
but the historical facts are also 
confirmed by written records.
Old map of Guinea.

an Ear for thE past 
all a hindrance, if the freedom of 
movement enjoyed by the great 
traditional healers is anything to 
judge by, travelling from village to 
village, from Dakar, in Senegal, to 
Conakry, in Guinea.
It is worth remembering that there 
was freedom of movement through- 
out West Africa as a whole. In 
1236, Sundiata declared what has 
become known as “The Charter of 

Kurukan Fuga”, a kind of state con-
stitution, and established a docu-
ment that acted rather like a pass-
port, with regional, not national, 
validity.
This variety of languages, then, 
does not necessarily imply a paral-
lel variety of values. 
