T
A Matter of 
Choice 
            by Amartya Sen
Amartya Sen, born in 1933, is a distinguished Indian economist  
and philosopher who was awarded the Nobel Price in Economics, in 1998. 
Famous for his writings on development and globalization,  
he is Professor of Economics and Philosophy  
and Lamont University Professor at Harvard University (U.S.A).
here are two ways of looking at development in the contem-
porary world. One, deeply influenced by growth economics 
and the values that underlie it, regards development as es-
sentially a rapid and sustained expansion of gross national 
(or domestic) product per head, perhaps qualified by some 
requirement that the fruits of this expansion reach all sec-
tions of the community. I shall call this ‘the opulence view of 
development.’ In this approach, values and culture have no 
foundational place. 
A second, contrasting view sees development as a process 
that enhances the freedom of those involved to pursue what-
ever objectives they value. In this, which I shall call ‘the effec-
tive freedom view of development’, the importance of eco-
nomic opulence is left to the values of the people involved, 
and is thus culturally conditioned. 
In line with this view of development, the expansion of hu-
man capability may be described as the central feature of 
development. The concept of a person’s ‘capability’ can be 
traced back to Aristotle, for whom the life of a person could 
be seen as a sequence of things the person does, or states 
of being he or she achieves, and which constitute a collection 
of ‘functionings’. ‘Capability’ refers to the alternative combina-
tions of functionings from which a person can choose. Thus, 
the notion of capability is essentially one of freedom – the 
range of options a person has in deciding what kind of life to 
lead. Poverty, in this view, lies not merely in the impoverished 
state in which a person may actually live, but also in the lack 
of real opportunity – imposed by social constraints as well 
as personal circumstances – to choose other types of living. 
Even low incomes, meagre possessions, and other aspects 
of what are standardly seen as economic poverty are relevant 
ultimately because of their role in curtailing capabilities (that 
is, in severely restricting people’s opportunities to lead valu-
able and valued lives). 
The application of this broader view of development thus 
involves specific hypotheses about the values people have 
reason to cherish. Economists who have studied this prob-
lem have been particularly attentive to indicators of quality of 
life such as longevity, good health, adequate nutrition, basic 
education, absence of gender-based inequality, and basic 
political and social freedoms. 
This approach, which is based on people’s values, differs 
from the radical a priori judgement implicit in the ‘opulence’ 
view of development. If, given the choice, people would rather 
have longer and more disease-free lives with more autonomy, 
than a higher level of GNP per head, then the ‘effective free-
dom’ view of development can be applied to their case, but 
not the ‘opulence’ view of development.
In the opulence view of development, the focus is uncom-
promisingly on the growth of incomes. However, while classi-
cal economic theorists from Adam Smith to John Stuart Mill 
did indeed write a great deal on the growth of real income 
per head, they saw income as one of several different means 
to important ends, and they discussed extensively the nature 
of these ends – very different as they are from income. 
Smith, Mill and other classical authors were deeply con-
cerned with the idea that we value many things other than 
income and wealth, which relate to real opportunities to lead 
the kinds of life we would value living. Their writings reveal 
great interest in the foundational importance of our ability to 
do the things we value, and have reason to value. They com-
mented fairly extensively on the connection between these 
matters, on the one hand, and income, wealth, and other eco-
nomic circumstances, on the other, and they had much to say 
on public policies that support and promote the more basic 
ends on which we may choose to concentrate. 
Evaluating economic growth
In the opulence view of development, the role of culture is 
purely instrumental, helping in particular to promote rapid 
economic growth. The question thus arises as to whether 
economic growth can be valued for its own sake, thus lead-
ing to the treasuring of those things (including culture) that 
promote growth? Or is economic growth itself an instrument, 
with less claim to a foundational role than cultural aspects of 
human life may have? It is hard to think that people have good 
reason to value goods and services irrespective of what they 
do to our freedom to live in a way we would value. It is also 
difficult to accept that culture can have a purely instrumental 
role. Surely, what we have reason to value must be itself a 
matter of culture, and in this sense we cannot reduce cul-
ture to a subsidiary position as a mere promoter of economic 
growth. How can we make our reasoned valuing completely 
valueless?
It is thus important to acknowledge the far-reaching instru-
mental functions of culture in development but also recognize 
that culture cannot be reduced to these functions. Culture 
also plays, for example, an intrinsic role in evaluating the pro-
‘The tree of life’, a collective work made by children, UNESCO, 1979.

“Education is important not just for the help that it might give to economic 
growth but because it is an essential part of cultural development.” 
Vietnamese schoolchildren enjoy a break from classwork.

cess of economic development, as well as in making room 
for less immediate objectives such as sustaining the environ-
ment and preserving the diversity of species. 
Some cultural parameters can help, and others will hinder, 
the fulfilment of these objectives, and we have grounds for 
valuing those cultural attitudes and features that foster this 
fulfilment. But, when we turn to the more basic question, 
namely, why concentrate on these objectives, culture must 
appear not as a servant of ends, but as the social basis of 
those ends themselves. We cannot begin to understand the 
so-called ‘culture dimension of development’ without taking 
note of each of these two roles of culture.  
A foundational role
Since the language of ‘sustaining’ has become common 
in the literature of development, it is not surprising that the 
phrase ‘culturally sustainable development’ has made its ap-
pearance. Is this the right direction to take, in moving away 
from a purely instrumental view of culture in development?
There are two major drawbacks in using language of this 
kind. First, it ignores the constitutive role of culture. If culture 
is only to do the ‘sustaining’, we still have to ask what is to be 
sustained? Focusing on ‘culturally sustainable development’ 
is to alienate culture from its foundational role in judging de-
velopment, and to treat it just as a means of sustaining ‘de-
velopment’ – no matter how that is defined. This is, in other 
words, an ornamental debasement of culture to the status 
of a glorified instrument in sustaining ‘development’, defined 
independently. 
The second problem comes from a different direction. Cul-
ture admits of dynamism, evolution and refinement. Culture 
in every country in the world has changed over the centuries. 
The rhetoric of ‘sustaining’ – as opposed to having freedom 
to grow and develop – frames the cultural debate in prema-
turely conservationist terms. There is a dis-analogy with the 
environment, here. When it comes to the natural environ-
ment, we don’t try to improve the best that nature gave us; 
we try to ‘conserve’ what we have got, and perhaps return 
to what we had earlier. But culture is the foundation of our 
creativity and progress. Sustaining is too feeble a role for it 
to play in development. Once we shift our attention from the 
purely instrumental view of culture and accept its construc-
tive and creative role, we have to see development in terms 
that include cultural development as well. 
The three roles of culture
Culture comes into development in three quite distinct  
– though interrelated – ways.
Constitutive role: Development in the broadest sense 
includes cultural development. Cultural development is a 
basic and inseparable component of development in general. 
If people are deprived of the opportunity to understand and 
cultivate their creativity, then that, in itself, is a hindrance to 
development (not just because it may hurt economic growth, 
or some other externally specified objective). Basic educa-
tion is thus important, not just for the help that it might give 
to economic growth, but because it is an essential part of 
cultural development. 
Evaluative role: What we value may, ultimately, be influ-
enced by culture. There is no externally sanctified impor-
tance to economic growth or any other such objective, and 
the things that we intrinsically value reflect the impact of our 
culture. Even if the same things are valued in many different 
societies (if, for example, longer and happier lives without ill-
health are sought in many quite different societies), this does 
not make them independent of values or cultures, but only 
indicates the congruence of valuational reasons in distinct 
societies. 
Instrumental role: No matter what objectives we value, 
their pursuit is, to some extent, influenced by the nature of our 
cultures and ethics. While there is more to culture than this, 
we must not ignore the fact that cultural parameters do inter 
alia have strong instrumental roles. This applies not merely to 
the promotion of economic growth, but also to the achieve-
ment of other objectives such as raising the quality of life. 
Central to culture is freedom, and in particular, the free-
dom to decide what we have reason to value, and what lives 
we have reason to seek. The instrumental, the evaluative 
and the constructive roles of culture all relate, ultimately, to 
this freedom. 
(The UNESCO Courier, 1996 - 9)
“In a view of development deeply influenced by growth economics, values 
and culture have no foundational place”.  
A child working in a hill tribe village above Chang Mai, (Thailand).
