This thought seems all the more con-
vincing as one gazes upon a world on the 
verge of becoming a space of integrated 
diversity. Fading are the juxtapositions of 
countless so-called differences. The Earth 
we live in today holds only one humanity, 
perhaps only one living kingdom compris-
ing all the species. And the concept that 
enables us to reflect on the planet’s critical 
state of affairs is that of diversity.
It alone derives from universality and ac-
counts for all singularities, treating them as 
an ensemble – and thus offers to the “the 
minds of men” a novel approach to their 
shared condition: one that befits the reality 
of their common destiny and can replenish 
their intelligence of the world. 
UNESCO has been devoted to this pur-
suit since the adoption of its Constitution 
and increasingly, of late, in the wake of the 
2001 Universal Declaration on Cultural 
Diversity and of the 2005 Convention on 
the Diversity of Cultural Expressions. The 
Festival of Diversity, launched this year 
simultaneously in various countries and 
at UNESCO Headquarters, is an oppor-
tunity to experience the primordial affinity 
between culture and diversity. 
This issue of the UNESCO Courier 
echoes the Festival of Diversity and sup-
ports its aims. 
Françoise rivière, 
Assistant Director-General for Culture, 
UNESCO 
this year, unesco’s celebrations of world Day for cultural Diversity (21 May) were quite exceptional. 
throughout the month of May, dozens of artists came from all over the world to demonstrate the wealth 
of humanity’s cultural diversity, as part of the first international festival of cultural Diversity.  
the festival was held simultaneously in several countries, as well as the organization’s headquarters, 
and was clear evidence of the fundamental bond between culture and diversity,  
as this month’s UNESCO Courier shows.
Editorial
the relationship between culture and di-
versity is one of mutual foundation. Culture 
refers both to one’s original way of being, 
recognizable through one’s arts, one’s 
signs, and the rightful pride one takes in 
being akin to no other. Yet culture is also a 
gateway to all that is profoundly dissimilar, 
to the enchantment of the unknown. And 
as such, it is at once enhancement of diver-
sity and continual construction of univer-
sality, and in both cases always incomplete 
and inexhaustible. 
Thus it is simply a function of diversity – 
the one which gives it its simultaneous ex-
plicitness and profusion. This is the sense 
in which one might say that there is no di-
versity without culture and no culture with-
out diversity. 
Young man from the Celebes Islands, in Indonesia.
