Brazilian theatre director Augusto Boal is known internationally as the 
founder of the Theatre of the Oppressed.
solutions. And we, the victims of their 
decisions, have remained specta-
tors in the last row of the balcony. 
Twenty years ago, I staged Racine’s 
Phèdre in Rio de Janeiro. The stage 
setting was poor: cow skins on the 
ground, bamboos around. Before 
each presentation, I used to say to my 
actors: “The fiction we created day 
by day is over. When you cross those 
bamboos, none of you will have the 
right to lie. Theatre is the Hidden Truth”. 
When we look beyond appear-
ances, we see oppressors and op-
pressed people, in all societies, eth-
nic groups, genders, social classes 
and castes; we see an unfair and cru-
el world. We have to create another 
world because we know it is possible. 
But it is up to us to build this other 
world with our hands and by acting 
on the stage and in our own life. 
We are all actors: being a citizen is 
not living in society, it is changing it. 
Augusto Boal
t
heatre is not just an 
event; it is a way of life! 
Even if one is unaware 
of it, human relation-
ships are structured in 
a theatrical way. The use of space, 
body language, choice of words and 
voice modulation, the confrontation 
of ideas and passions, everything 
that we demonstrate on the stage, 
we live in our lives. We are theatre! 
Weddings and funerals are “spec-
tacles”, but so, also, are daily rituals 
so familiar that we are not conscious 
of this. Occasions of pomp and 
circumstance, but also the morn-
ing coffee, the exchanged good-
mornings, timid love and storms 
of passion, a senate session or a 
diplomatic meeting - all is theatre. 
One of the main functions of our 
art is to make people sensitive to the 
“spectacles” of daily life in which the 
actors are their own spectators, per-
formances in which the stage and 
the stalls coincide. We are all artists. 
By doing theatre, we learn to see 
what is obvious but what we usually 
can’t see because we are only used 
to looking at it. What is familiar to 
us becomes unseen: doing theatre 
throws light on the stage of daily life.
Theatre is  
the Hidden Truth
Last September, we were sur-
prised by a theatrical revelation: we, 
who thought that we were living in a 
safe world, despite wars, genocide, 
slaughter and torture which certainly 
exist, but far from us in remote and 
wild places. We, who were living in 
security with our money invested in 
some respectable bank or in some 
honest trader’s hands in the stock ex-
change were told that this money did 
not exist, that it was virtual, a fictitious 
invention by some economists who 
were not fictitious at all and neither 
reliable nor respectable. Everything 
was just bad theatre, a dark plot in 
which a few people won a lot and 
many people lost all. Some politicians 
from rich countries held secret meet-
ings in which they found some magic 
We are all actors

Popular theatre, radical theatre, interactive theatre, edu-
cational theatre, legislative theatre, therapeutic theatre…
in other words, augusto Boal. this world-famous Brazilian 
theatre director is the author this year of the international 
message issued by the international theatre institute (itt) 
for World theatre day on 27 March. 
the inventor of “theatre of the oppressed” and that 
special character, the “spect-actor”, invites us to get up on 
life’s stage and create a world that abolishes the duality of 
oppressor-oppressed.
