Most racial prejudices about Afri-
cans can trace their origin back 
to arguments justifying the slave 
trade and colonization, which have 
perpetuated a belief that Africa is 
a continent without history or civi-
lization. An example of the persis-
tence of this belief can be seen in 
a statement, made as late as 1963, 
by Hugh Trevor-Roper, an eminent 
professor of modern history at Ox-
ford University. “Nowadays,” he 
wrote, “students want us to teach 
them about the history of black Af-
rica. Perhaps in the future there will 
be some African history to teach. 
But at present there is none, or 
very little: there is only the history of 
Europe in Africa. The rest is largely 
darkness […] and darkness is not 
the subject of history.” 
One can understand why intel-
lectuals from Africa or of African 
descent involved in the liberation 
of black people have been fight-
ing since the early 20th century to 
‘decontaminate peoples’ minds’, as 
some put it, and why African states, 
a soon as they acquired indepen-
dence in the 1960s, called on 
UNESCO to help them rise to the 
challenge.
When, in 1964, UNESCO decid-
ed to produce a General History of 
Africa, it was, above all, to remedy 
the widespread ignorance about 
the continent’s history and to break 
free of discriminatory prejudices. 
The best way to do this was to give 
Africans the opportunity to rewrite 
their own history, with the neces-
sary scientific support. 
An international scientific commit-
tee of 39 specialists was therefore 
set up, representing different dis-
ciplines within the social and hu-
man sciences. Two-thirds of the 
members were African, in order to 
encourage an African standpoint, 
while nevertheless remaining open 
to challenges from outside special-
ists, with other perspectives.
Within the framework of this proj-
ect, Cheik Anta Diop (Senegal), 
Hampaté Ba (Mali), Joseph Ki-Zerbo 
(Burkina Faso), Ali Mazrui (Kenya) 
and Théophile Obenga (Republic of 
Congo), to cite just this era’s more 
illustrious members, held seminal 
discussions with their peers from 
other regions of the world, which 
were to transform ideas about 
Africa and black people. 
These discussions were lively, 
even stormy at times, especially 
when, for historiographic purposes, 
use was made of African oral tradi-
tions and the Ajami — the African 
language archives, transcribed us-
ing the Arabic alphabet, which are 
still relatively unknown (see box). 
The more passionate discussions 
were to be taken up in volume II.
A global approach
The scientific committee aban-
doned any ambitions of producing 
an exhaustive history, opting instead 
for more condensed overviews 
showing the current state of knowl-
edge and the main contemporary 
research trends. It also decided to 
emphasise the history of ideas, civi-
lizations, societies and institutions, 
as well as favouring an interdisci-
plinary approach that drew on all 
available sources. These included 
oral traditions and the Ajami, as well 
dEcolonizing 
history
Head of statue from Taharqa (Karnak), 25th dynasty (circa 670 B.C.).
(•••)
     once african countries had won 
         their independence in the 1960s, 
     the challenge taken up by a group 
      of intellectuals from africa, or of african 
           descent, was to rid people’s minds 
      of prejudice by remedying a widespread 
          ignorance of african history.


as disciplines such as linguistics, 
musicology and even the physical 
and natural sciences. The commit-
tee also chose a continent-based 
approach, which considers Africa 
as a whole and abandons the usual 
dichotomy between North Africa 
and sub-Saharan Africa. 
The eight volumes in the collec-
tion, which were published between 
1980 and 1999, traverse the entire 
continent, which is recognized as 
the cradle of civilization, from the 
appearance of hominids over three 
million years ago, to the eve of 
the new millennium. The collection 
passes through ancient Egypt, the 
Fatimid dynasty, the Swahili civili-
zation, the kingdoms of the Horn of 
Africa, the slave trade, independence, 
etc. Some 6500 pages in all.
The collection also departs from 
some preconceived ideas, like the 
continent’s isolation. It demon-
strates that the Sahara, far from 
being a barrier, has always been a 
place of exchanges and that Africa 
has maintained enduring contacts 
with Asia, the Middle East, Europe 
and the Americas. 
Long before UNESCO’s “Slave 
Route” project, launched in 1994, 
the General History of Africa helped 
to break the silence over the slave 
trade and its impact on the diffi-
culties encountered in Africa ever 
since. It devoted an entire volume 
to the subject in its ‘Studies and 
Documents’ supplement series. 
Over 20 supplementary publica-
tions, often on controversial sub-
jects, such as sources for writing 
history, the populating of ancient 
Egypt and the decolonization of 
Africa, add to this monumental un-
dertaking, which involved over 230 
specialists. 
As soon as its first volumes were 
published, the General History of 
Africa had a phenomenal impact 
in scientific and academic milieus, 
both on the African continent and 
elsewhere. The entire collection 
was published in Arabic, English 
and French – and parts of it in 
Mandarin, Korean, Spanish, Italian, 
Japanese and Portuguese. It is con-
sidered to have made a major con-
tribution to our understanding of 
African history and historiography.
An educational tool
However, the collection has re-
mained largely inaccessible to 
the general public and has not 
sufficiently been used in African 
schools, even though an abridged 
version was published in English, 
French and three African languages 
(Hausa, Kiswahili and Pulaar). 
(•••)
Very few history textbooks pub-
lished in African countries have 
turned to the collection for source 
material and the teaching of African 
history still reflects a Eurocentric 
viewpoint. Worse still, there is a 
clear tendency for these textbooks 
to offer a nationalistic vision of his-
tory, which exaggerates the impor-
tance of the colonial partition of 
Africa. 
This is why UNESCO has once 
again been approached to make 
greater use of the collection as 
the basis for educational material. 
Cape Coast (Ghana), point of departure for the slave trade.

(•••)
dEcolonizing history
Yered and the king. Detail from a mural in the Azuwa Maryam church (Lake Tana, Ethiopia).

The series is targeted at the very 
young – primary and second-
ary school children — who will be 
offered teaching materials that are 
standardized across all of Africa, 
aiming to reconcile, on the one 
hand, themes that promote unity, 
such as cultural identity and pan-
African citizenship, and, on the 
other hand, national differences. 
The main collection, along with the 
abridged version, will also be made 
A $2 million project was launched in 
2008, financed by Libya. “Study the 
past if you would know the future” is 
the principle behind a set of educa-
tional materials due to be published 
at the end of next year. 
The aim is to remind us that, despite 
its diversity, Africa shares a com-
mon history and values, upon which 
the African Union should be able 
to construct the United States of 
Africa. 
Founding fathers of the Organisation of African Unity: Mural, 1963,  
Africa House in Addis Ababa (Ethiopia).
