Born on November 12, 1932, John 
Marshall grew up in Cambridge, 
Massachusetts and on his family’s 
farm in Peterborough, New Hamp-
shire. Almost as remarkable as the 
footage he shot is the story of how 
his entire family, prosperous Bos-
tonians, forged such a close bond 
with the Ju/’hoansi (prononced “ju-
wansi”) Bushmen of the Kalahari, a 
tribe of hunter-gatherers in the Nyae 
Nyae region of North-East Namibia, 
that they returned to Africa again 
and again. 
Marshall first picked up a camera 
in 1950, at age 18, when he ac-
companied his father, Laurence 
Marshall, a top American industri-
alist, on the first of many expedi-
tions to the Kalahari Desert. The 
entire family accompanied them on 
a second trip in 1951, staying for 
a month and a half. It was a trans-
formative experience for them all – 
they returned in 1953, staying for a 
year and a half this time. 
Lorna Marshall, an English litera-
ture teacher, became an anthro-
pologist only to be able to unravel 
the intricacies of the Ju’/hoan clan’s 
familial ties. Gaining acclaim in the 
academic world, Lorna worked on 
many films, including “First Film,” 
which allows viewers to see some 
of John Marshall’s earliest footage. 
John’s sister, Elizabeth Marshall 
Thomas, is the author of several 
books, including “The Harmless 
People” and “Warrior Herdsmen,” 
about the Dodoth people of Ugan-
da, whose pastoral life was very dif-
ferent from that of the Ju/’hoansi. 
                  when John Marshall accompanied his father on an expedition to namibia in 1950, 
      he was just a teenager, and had no idea that he was embarking on the first of many fascinating 
journeys that would make up his life’s work. His six-hour series “a Kalahari Family”, the product 
               of five decades of filming, takes us across thousands of years of history.  
The John marshall Ju/’hoan  
bushman film and video collecTion, 
1950 – 2000

N!ai, a nine-year-old Ju/’hoansi, holding her little cousin.  
She is one of the characters in John Marshall’s films.

“It’s so wonderful that UNESCO 
has given John the recognition he 
so richly deserved,” Elizabeth Mar-
shall Thomas said on the occasion 
of the inscription of John Marshall’s 
collection of films into the Memory 
of the World Register in July of 
2009. “But recognition didn’t mean 
as much to him as getting done 
what he did – he would have pro-
duced what he did whether or not 
he got any recognition at all.”
Shattering the myth
Much of Marshall’s work focuses 
on one particular extended family, 
that of Toma Tsamko. Marshall met 
Film archivist Karma Foley, who 
has worked closely with Marshall 
and now works on the Collection, 
describes what it was like to work 
with the filmmaker. “Working with 
John was a wonderful experience. 
It was a very formative time in my 
life, having just graduated from col-
lege, and it was incredible to have 
the opportunity to work with such 
rich and beautiful material, and to 
learn from someone who was so 
talented and so passionate. John 
was very demanding of himself and 
of those who worked with him. He 
cared about the craft of filmmaking, 
of course, but he was also keenly 
The John marshall Ju/’hoan bushman film and video collecTion, 1950 – 2000
working with John, I quickly learned 
that it was much more than that. 
He used film as an advocacy tool, 
he used it to educate. There was a 
great deal of purpose and commit-
ment behind his work.” 
Those who worked with Marshall 
stress that despite his significant 
aesthetic and theoretical contribu-
tions to documentary, he believed 
that the people in front of the cam-
era were more important than the 
filmmaker himself. Throughout his 
career, he battled “the Myth”, the 
popular notion among Westerners 
that the Bushmen didn’t know what 
was best for them and needed help 
from “developed” society.
A cinematic activist
Marshall saw himself as a reporter, 
not a spokesman for the Ju/’hoansi, 
often allowing them to describe 
their lives in their own words. 
“John was extremely committed 
to helping the Ju/’hoansi. He basi-
cally gave up his filmmaking career 
in 1980 to do grassroots develop-
ment and advocacy work in Namib-
ia. He dedicated so much of his life 
to trying to help,” says Foley, who 
has accompanied Marshall on trips 
to Africa and returned since. “That 
kind of commitment is very rare. Per-
sonally I think it comes from love, a 
very deep love and respect that he 
had for the people he considered 
his second family. And that’s what 
I see in so much of the footage he 
shot over all those years - tremen-

Toma Tsamko greeting John Marshall, after a long absence, in 1978.
Toma Tsamko (in suit and tie) taking part in a political rally  
for the SWAPO party before Namibia’s first democratic elections.  
Tsamko was the first president of the Nyae Nyae Farmers’ Coop  
and entered politics in 1980.

Toma under a baobab tree on his first 
visit to /Gautcha, an area with a large 
salt pan and a permanent waterhole. 
It was the start of a mutually enrich-
ing relationship, one that would span 
nearly half a century. 
“John fell in love with these people, 
and once they got to know each oth-
er – learning the language so quickly 
helped – it was like a wonderful 
dream for him, the hunting trips, and 
the different way of life. They literally 
became his family,” his wife, Alexan-
dra Eliot Marshall reminisces. “He 
was never condescending – the way 
John perceived it, and documented it 
and lived with it, he never glamorized 
these people. He told their story with 
an intimacy that came from years of 
knowing them, both in good times 
and bad times, and across four gen-
erations of the Ju’/hoansi.” 
aware of the power of the moving 
image and he felt a great respon-
sibility to represent the Ju/’hoansi 
accurately. For me, working in video 
production was very exciting, but 

dous love and respect.” 
It was probably due to this close 
relationship with the Ju/’hoansi that 
Marshall was forced to leave South 
West Africa in 1958 after his visa 
expired, and was not allowed to re-
turn for twenty years. 
Meanwhile, Marshall became well-
established as a cinema vérité film-
maker in the 1960s and 1970s. 
In 1968, Marshall and American 
filmmaker Timothy Asch, who had 
filmed the Yanomamo Indians in 
Venezuela, founded Documentary 
Educational Resources, a nonprofit 
that produces and distributes an-
thropological films for classroom 
use. 
In 1978 Marshall was allowed to 
return to Nyae Nyae, only to find his 
Ju’/hoan friends had lost much of 
their land to the South African gov-
ernment and could no longer sur-
vive as hunters. Virtually abandon-
ing his filmmaking, Marshall started 
a foundation to bring the Ju/’hoansi 
closer to self-sufficiency. The fund 
allowed them to establish water 
access, learn subsistence farming, 
and establish a local government. 
Marshall’s epic five-part series, 
“A Kalahari Family,” is culled from 
more than a million feet of footage 
shot between1950-2000. “In the 
course of six hours, you actually tra-
verse thousands of years of history,” 
says documentary filmmaker Jayas-
inhji Jhala, associate professor of 
anthropology at Temple University, 
Pennsylvania, and a close friend 
of Marshall’s. According to Jhala, 
there is nothing that remotely com-
pares to this remarkable body of 
work. Besides being a comprehen-
sive record of the Ju/’hoansi, the se-
ries charts Marshall’s evolution from 
filmmaker to activist. 
Marshall’s final visit to Nyae Nyae 
was in 2004. He died due to com-
plications from lung cancer in April 
2005.
Shiraz Sidhva, 
Indian journalist, correspondent for 
the UNESCO Courier
