Last year, the 3rd World Congress of 
Biosphere Reserves (Madrid, Spain) 
adopted the Madrid Action Plan for Bio-
sphere Reserves (2008-2013) recog-
nizing the need for developing models 
for global, national and local sustain-
ability. This provides the framework for 
biosphere reserves to become training 
grounds where global principles of sus-
tainable development are translated into 
locally relevant praxis, particularly when 
it comes to addressing the major global 
challenges such as loss of diversity and 
ecosystem services, climate change and 
rapid urbanisation. 
Natarajan ISHWARAN, 
Director of the Division of Ecological 
and Earth Sciences (UNESCO)

the concept of biosphere reserves was 
created in 1974 within the framework 
of UNESCO’s Man and the Biosphere 
(MAB) Programme. The network was 
born two years later. While the concept 
originated in the protected areas realm 
during the 1980s it increasingly encom-
passed the idea of sustainable devel-
opment. Understanding people as inte-
grated in the biosphere, it promoted a 
beneficial interaction between societies 
and their environment. 
Following the 1995 Second Interna-
tional Congress on Biosphere Reserves 
in Seville, Spain, three overarching goals 
of the biosphere reserves were clearly 
defined in the Seville Strategy and the 
Statutory Framework of the World Net-
work of Biosphere Reserves. These in-
clude conserving both biological and 
cultural diversity, fostering innovative 
approaches to sustainable economic 
and human development and providing 
logistic support by facilitating research 
and monitoring, as well as education and 
training.
In order to meet their goals, the bio-
sphere reserves are divided into three 
zones: one or more core areas dedicated 
to conservation of genetic diversity of spe-
cies and of the ecosystem; a clearly iden-
tified buffer zone used for co-operative 
activities compatible with sound ecologi-
cal practices; and an adaptable transition 
area that promotes the creation of part-
nerships for sustainable development. 
Woongarra Coast coral, Great Sandy  
Marine Park, Australia.

This issue of the UNESCO Courier focuses on these  
new reserves which have been called to play a role  
in the battle against the erosion of biodiversity  
and the loss of natural ecosystems,  
the impact of climate change and rapid urbanisation. 
