(•••)
dEcolonizing history
more readily available in higher 
education establishments. The 
series will also be tailored for use by 
teachers, providing them with man-
uals, educational CD-ROMs and a 
Historical Atlas, bringing them up 
to date with advances in historical 
research and improving the way it is 
taught. There is also, of course, the 
general public, which will have ac-
cess to a wealth of information on 
the UNESCO web site.
The anticipated outcome of this 
endeavour is a better-informed 
African public regarding the history 
of their continent and the contribu-
tion their cultures have made to the 
progress of mankind, thus aiding 
them to respond more appropri-
ately to the novel challenges of the 
modern world. A new task, no less 
difficult than publishing the General 
History of Africa.
ali Moussa iye, 
Chief of the Intercultural 
Dialogue Section, in charge of 
the Histories Projects (UNESCO)
What arE thE ajami ? 
Contrary to what is usually thought, African sources 
of history are not exclusively oral. There are hundreds of 
thousands of written documents, called Ajami, that re-
cord the medieval history of the continent. The origin of 
the word comes from “a`jamiyy” which means “non-Arab”. 
This odd etymology can be explained by the fact that these 
documents are, for the greater part, written in African lan-
guages and transcribed using the Arabic script. When Arabic 
is used, the margins invariably contain notes and comments 
in African languages. 
As Islam spread across the continent, Arabic script was 
adopted by ten or so African languages, including Bambara, 
Fulfude, Hausa, Malinké, Mandinka, Somali, Songhay, Swa-
hili, and Wolof. 
The oldest known Ajami were discovered in Timbuktu (Mali), 
and date from the 14th century. The Ahmed Baba Centre in 
Timbuktu, founded with support from UNESCO, now houses 
over 18,000 manuscripts, most of which have been restored 
and digitized. Tens of thousands of others are preserved in other centres,such as the library of Sankore University (Timbuktu) and 
various private collections in the region. The Ajami found in Niger are more recent, dating from the 16th century. But others have 
been found in Chinguetti, Ouadane and Koumbi Saleh (Mauritania), as well as Kano and Sokoto (Nigeria). The subjects treated 
in these documents cover a variety of areas, including Koranic exegesis, law and jurisprudence, astronomy, botany, medicine, 
chronicles, genealogies and literary forms.
Mohamed Ziadah 
(UNESCO)
Ajami manuscript:  Jazaa’a Shakur : Bo Yoonu Geej gi (Reward to the 
grateful: on the way to the Ocean). 
