Housed in the Human studies Film archives at the smithsonian’s 
national Museum of natural History in washington dC,  
the John Marshall Ju/’hoan Bushman Film and video Collection, 
1950 – 2000 was recently added  
to unesCo’s Memory of the world register.
John Marshall in the Nyae Nyae region, 1989.

he recognition has been welcomed by 
the Smithsonian’s archivists, and col-
leagues, friends and family of the Ameri-
can anthropologist and acclaimed film-
maker who documented 50 years of the 
lives of the Ju/’hoansi of the Nyae Nyae 
(Namibia). 
Pamela Wintle, senior film archivist at 
the Smithsonian’s Human Studies Film 
Archives and a long-time advocate of 
film preservation, hopes UNESCO’s 
recognition “will raise the profile of this 
specific archival collection, making it 
well-known throughout the world, as 
well as the profile of the Human Studies 
Film Archives, within both the National 
Museum of Natural History, and the 
Smithsonian.” 
Considered one of the seminal visual 
anthropological projects of the 20th 
century, Marshall’s work documents 
the traditional lives of these once-inde-
pendent hunter-gatherers and their ties 
to the land. He goes on to record the 
Ju/’hoansi’s fight against dispossession, 
disease, and war, and their struggle to 
establish farming communities and re-
claim their lands as hope for Namibian 
independence and the end of apartheid 
grew. 
“The career of John Kennedy Marshall 
spanned a remarkable 50-plus years 
during which he became an innovator in 
the technical production of films as well 
as a leading voice in the ethics of ethno-
graphic filmmaking,” said Jake Homiak, 
director of the museum’s Anthropol-
ogy Collections and Archives Program. 
“During his lifelong association with the 
Ju/’hoansi (Bushmen) he became an ad-
vocate for those he documented, using 
his films as tools for education and em-
powerment.” 
The Marshall Collection contains 767 
hours of unedited film and video footage, 
as well as edited films and videos, audio 
tapes, still photographs, maps, study 
guides for edited films, published and 
unpublished writing by Marshall and oth-
ers. It also houses production files that 
include letters, shot logs, translations, 
transcriptions, editing logs, treatments 
and proposals spanning from 1950 to 
2000. The collection also includes sev-
eral books and numerous journal articles 
that have been written about Marshall’s 
films and methods.
S. Sidva
The founding  
of eThnographic film
