The inscribed property is locat-
ed some 30 kilometres north-
east of Kermanshah (Iran) on 
the main trade route leading 
from Kurdistan and the Mesopota-
mian region to the Iranian Central 
Plateau. The archaeological site 
includes remains dating from pre-
historic times through the history of 
ancient Persia, associated with the 
sacred mountain of Bisotun and the 
Bisotun Monument, i.e. the inscrip-
tion and bas-relief by Darius I the 
Great, dating from the time when 
he rose to the throne of the Persian 
Empire (521 B.C.).
The monument is carved in an in-
accessible recess in the cliff, ap-
proximately 100 metres above the 
plain. The bas-relief portrays Darius 
standing and facing right. He wears 
a Persian garment, the ‘royal’ shoes, 
a bracelet and a crown. In his left 
hand he holds a bow as a sign of 
sovereignty. His right hand is raised 
at face level. With his left foot Darius 
is treading on the chest of a figure 
who lies on his back before him and, 
according to the legends, repre-
sents Gaumata, the Median Magus 
and pretender to the throne whose 
assassination led to Darius’s reign.
Gaumata, also dressed in Per-
sian attire, is raising his arms as a 
sign of submission. On the right, 
rebel leaders are walking towards 
the king. Their hands are tied be-
hind their backs and a long rope is 
bound around their necks. Below 
and around the bas-reliefs, there are 
some 1200 lines of inscriptions tell-
ing the story of the battles Darius 
had to wage in 521-520 BC against 
the governors who attempted to take 
apart the Empire founded by Cyrus. 
Apparently, the decisive battle took 
place on this site. 
The key to cuneiform 
script
The Bisotun inscription is one of 
the most remarkable documents 
of human history. The inscription is 
repeated in three languages: Elam-
ite, Babylonian and Old Persian. 
This is the only known Achaemenid 
monumental text to document the re- 
establishment of the Empire by 
Darius I. The last phase of the in-
scription is particularly important, as 
it is here that Darius introduced for 
the first time the Old Persian version 
of his res gestae or achievements. 
Darius states that he had the Old 
Persian cuneiform script specifically 
made for the purpose of composing 
this inscription. In addition to Bisotun, 
this Achaemenid writing was used for 
other royal monumental inscriptions, 
such as those in Persepolis and Susa. 
This cuneiform writing is referred to 
the ancient Mesopotamian system. 
However, in Bisotun, it is partly al-
phabetic, partly syllabic. Each word is 
separated by a special symbol.
Another “Rosetta Stone”, the in-
scription was the key evidence for 
deciphering cuneiform script. Al-
though the German scientist, Georg 
Friedrich Grotefend, had partially de-
ciphered the Old Persian cuneiform 
writings in 1802, it was Sir Henry 
Creswicke Rawlinson who in 1835 
copied the inscription and began the 
tedious and rigorous work of its deci-
pherment.
Bisotun is an outstanding testimony 
to the important interchange of human 
values on the development of monu-
mental art and writing. The symbolic 
representation of the Achaemenid 
king in relation to his enemy reflects 
traditions in monumental bas-reliefs 
thE rosEtta 
stonE of  
bisotun
an emergency protection plan has just been launched to safeguard Bisotun, iranian World heritage site,  
threatened by erosion. Bisotun contains an exceptional document of human history:  
an inscription repeated in three languages — elamite, Babylonian and old persian — that provided  
the key to deciphering cuneiform script.
This inscription was the key evidence for deciphering cuneiform script.

that date from ancient Egypt and the 
Middle East, and which were subse-
quently further developed during the 
Achaemenid and later empires. 
Conservation: first 
steps and challenges
Taking note of the outstanding uni-
versal value of this document, one 
of the most remarkable of human 
history, the World Heritage Commit-
tee, at its 30th session, decided to 
inscribe Bisotun on the World Heri-
tage List in 2006. But the property 
is subject to various types of threat.
The first of these is urban develop-
ment. The plain of Bisotun is agricul-
tural land with sporadic villages and 
small industries. The biggest indus-
trial agglomeration is a petrochemical 
plant. The current studies have not so 
far ascertained any chemical impact 
on the inscription. The visual impact 
of the portal frame industrial build-
ings in the plant demand serious at-
tention, however. Second, Bisotun is 
located in a seismic region. As a re-
sult of previous earthquakes, there is 
a transversal fissure across the whole 
inscription. Precipitation water seeps 
through these cracks and causes fur-
ther erosion. The inscription is carved 
directly on the rock and is thus subject 
to physical, chemical and biological 
erosion.
To urgently address further erosion 
of the inscription, UNESCO mobi-
lized necessary funding for an interna-
tional expert mission. The mission was 
undertaken by Professor Costantino 
Meucci, a specialist in stone conser-
vation, at the end of 2008. As a result 
an emergency protection plan is now 
being implemented. The plan calls for 
establishing emergency scaffolding, 
reducing seepage by leading the wa-
ter away from the inscription surface 
through pipes and conducting further 
studies for long term conservation of 
the property. 
Iranian authorities are now imple-
menting these urgent conservation 
measures. Iran’s Cultural Heritage, 
Handicrafts and Tourism Organiza-
tion (ICHHTO) also plans to draft 
a proposal for significant expan-
sion of the protective boundaries. 
Nevertheless, the implementation 
demands rigorous monitoring. The 
development of a long term con-
servation plan is the prerequisite for 
further interventions. Owing to the 
sensitivity of the property, the plan 
should be drawn up with adequate 
technical input at international and 
national levels. This demands further 
international assistance.
Junko taniguchi, UNESCO Office in 
Tehran, and farzin fardanesh, 
consultant at UNESCO
