
                                    The water we drink is less of a problem than the water we eat. agriculture absorbs
              70% of this resource, which is both omnipresent and scarce. growing plants that are resistant   
                to drought and salt, desalination and storage are among the solutions 
                                 recommended by experts to deal with water shortages.
the water we eat
1960. In 2006 the figure was over 
80 million. According to the Institute 
for Water Education, 3000 litres of 
water are required to produce one 
kilogramme of rice, 16,000 litres for 
a kilogramme of beef.
Wanna fill up –  
or drink?”
Automobile production is booming 
too. Between 20,000 and 300,000 
litres of water are needed to make 
a car. Bio fuel has become increas-
ingly popular over the last few years. 
Cars need fuel, too. Ethanol, made 
from maize or sugar cane, has be-
come a profitable source of income 
for farmers in Mexico and Brazil, ag-
gravating not only the problem of 
food, but that of water, too. About 
2500 litres of water are required 
to produce one litre of ethanol. Ac-
cording to World Energy Outlook 
2006, biofuel production is increas-
ing at the rate of approximately 7% 
per year. This may not present so 
much of a problem in rain-laden 
he Earth really ought to be called 
‘Aqua’, because more than two-
thirds of our planet is covered by 
water. It’s where life evolved, and, 
even four billion years later, life still 
needs it. 
Paradoxically, though, water is a 
commodity in short supply — 97.5% 
is actually salt water, making it un-
usable for humanity. And most of 
the fresh water is not obtainable, 
either, being frozen in glaciers, inac-
cessibly deep beneath the earth’s 
surface, or in swamps. Only about 
0.0075% of total water is acces-
sible fresh water – and even that 
is very unevenly distributed around 
the world. 
Water shortage is a big problem, 
particularly in developing coun-
tries, since these countries are 
mainly arid and dependent upon 
agriculture, which swallows up 
most of the water used world-
wide. According to the United Na-
tions Water Development Report 
2009, this is approximately 70%, 
and could even double by the year 
2050. 
Asia is the thirstiest of all. Admit-
tedly, the continent – according to 
the UN Food and Agriculture Orga-
nization — holds the second larg-
est stock of fresh water on earth, 
but this is also the site of 70% of 
total irrigated agricultural areas 
world-wide. The four billion Asians, 
however, consume only about 6% of 
the water, and industry 10%. A good 
84 % is swallowed up by agriculture. 
Things are moving swiftly on the 
Asian continent. It’s estimated that 
about 9 billion people will be living 
on Earth in 2050, 5 billion of them in 
Asia. But it’s not just the population 
figures that are rising; the economy 
is growing and prosperity increas-
ing, bringing with it a change in 
consumer behaviour. The produc-
tion of rice – which is extremely wa-
ter-intensive anyway – will be joined 
by the increasing demand for meat. 
Approximately 2.5 million tons of 
meat were produced in China in 
(•••)
Traditional irrigation around Mopti, Mali.

Brazil, but biofuel could well be-
come one in the China or India of 
the future. 
Just as you can already hear peo-
ple in Mexico sometimes saying 
“Wanna fill up – or eat?” you may 
one day hear people in Asia asking 
“Wanna fill up – or drink?” 
It’s agriculture, then, that’s the 
main water-waster. It is estimated 
that about half the water used is 
wasted. That translates to 30% 
of the Earth’s total available fresh 
water. This gives rise to a huge 
potential saving. There are sev-
eral ways to go about it. “Irriga-
tion is very inefficient”, says Jan 
Olof Lundqvist from the Stock-
holm International Water Institute. 
“And there is quite a big loss of 
food during production. That is 
what we call the loss from tree to 
fork.” About half of all food is lost 
in harvesting, storage and trans-
portation. “All the food produced 
needed water – and that means: 
if we lost the food, we also lost 
the water.” 
But savings can be made at the 
beginning of the production chain 
as well. Surface irrigation is main-
ly used in developing countries, 
usually by damming methods, also 
used for the cultivation of rice. It is 
cheap and technically simple. The 
drawback is that a large propor-
tion of the water is lost by seepage 
and evaporation — approximately 
half of it. 
It would be easy to make savings 
here by using drip irrigation. By 
means of hoses or pipes laid above 
(or better, below) the ground, small 
amounts of water are directly aimed 
at the plants. This method is eco-
nomical, but also costly. In addition, 
technical know-how is necessary for 
laying the pipes and, once installed, 
cultivation is no longer flexible. 
“And it needs very much energy”, 
says Lundqvist. “You need pumps 
to get the water everywhere. The 
investments are fairly high – so it 
is not suitable for every crop, es-
pecially not for rice production. It’s 
simply too expensive.”
New strategies
Lundqvist can see other avenues 
for improvement: “For rice produc-
tion and not so high-value crops you 
could improve the situation simply 
by working on the coordination be-
tween water supply schedules and 
farming operations.” The problem is 
simple: there’s usually not enough 
water there when it’s needed, and 
vice-versa. In Lundqvist’s opinion 
there is an urgent need for farm-
ers to improve their water manage-
ment. 
And one final point: “There is a 
need to utilize more ‘green water’ 
in agriculture – which means rain-
fall”, Lundqvist says. “It should be 
captured and stored, probably by 
underground storage systems.” 
But what should be done in areas 
where it rarely rains? “There, it would 
be a good thing to have drip irriga-
tion – however, it wouldn’t make 
any sense to grow water-intensive 
crops there.” One solution for these 
regions – albeit controversial — 
might be genetically modified plants 
resistant to drought and salt. “But 
still: farmers won’t use them if they 
can’t sell them”, says Lundqvist. 
One possible alternative here 
could be the production of biofuel. 
Jatropha curcas is a spurge plant, 
the seeds of which contain 30% 
oil. The plant requires little water, 
and the oil can be processed to 
make bio diesel. It does, however, 
the water we eat

About half the water used in agriculture is wasted.

rainfall better and to store it under 
the soil.” This is a big challenge, but 
he believes it can be done. “I’m a 
born optimist.” 
Jens Lubbadeh, 
journalist for Der Spiegel Online, 
Germany, correspondent 
for the UNESCO Courier
the water we eat
contain toxicants as well. “In India 
and parts of Africa, Jatropha can 
be grown without competition with 
water and food production”, says 
Lundqvist. “But it depends on the 
scale. And I suppose the scale 
will be fairly modest, compared to 
the amount of energy that will be 
needed.” 
Apart from saving water, the exploi-
tation of new water sources could 
be the solution, particularly for the 
other regions. The huge amounts 
of water in the oceans, for example. 
But the desalination of water re-
quires lots of energy and money. 
Which is why, in numerical terms, 
it doesn’t play a big role yet. Only 
one% of desalinated water is used 
for agriculture. “Thanks to modern 
membrane technology, the prices 
for water desalination have come 
down,” says Lundqvist. “Fifty cents 
(in US$) per thousand litres – but 
that‘s still too expensive for the 
amounts of water that you need for 
food production.” This is why Lun-
dqvist regards desalination more 
as an option for producing drinking 
water and possibly for the produc-
tion of premium foodstuffs. 
If one were to succeed in further 
reducing the cost of desalination, 
the water problem could be largely 
resolved . The Desertec consortium 
has concepts for linking concen-
trating solar thermal power (CSP) 
plants – mirrors that concentrate 
sunlight and produce cheap elec-
tricity on the coast of North Africa 
and the Middle East - with desali-
nation plants. These regions are 
the most arid in the world, so their 
problems could thereby be solved 
in one fell swoop. 
Climate change will also aggra-
vate the water crisis in the future. “It 
will bring big changes in the rainfall 
pattern”, says Lundqvist. “Therefore 
it is important to have a strategy to 
combine irrigation and supplemen-
tary irrigation systems with local 
The Jathropha curcas represents a green alternative for biofuel production, needing little water.
