A “language nest” in which the Maori language  
is transmitted to children (New Zealand)..



                          australian linguist christopher Moseley explains the crucial importance
                  of preserving languages and presents the main innovations 
                     of the UNESCO Interactive Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger.
Each languagE  
is a uniquE world of thought
Interview by Lucía Iglesias Kuntz (UNESCO). 
time aware of just how many lan-
guages there are in the world, and 
are coming to a better understand-
ing of the forces that are attacking 
them and exterminating them, and 
of ways to control those forces. It’s 
very difficult and complex, and it 
would be naïve and oversimplifying 
to say that the big ex-colonial lan-
guages, English or French or Span-
ish, are the killers, and all smaller 
languages are the victims. It is not 
like that; there is a subtle interplay 
of forces, and this Atlas will help or-
dinary people to understand those 
forces better. 
But to answer in one sentence: 
why do we have to care? Because 
each language is a uniquely struc-
Why should we care  
about language preservation? 
We as human beings should care 
about this in the same way we 
should care about the loss of the 
world’s variety of plants and ani-
mals, its biodiversity. What is unique 
about present-day language revival 
movements, which didn’t exist be-
fore, is that linguists are for the first 
(•••)
Christopher Moseley, editor in chief of the UNESCO  
“Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger”,  
at the launch on 19 February at Paris headquarters.

tured world of thought, with its own 
associations, metaphors, ways of 
thinking, vocabulary, sound system 
and grammar – all working together 
in a marvellous architectural struc-
ture, which is so fragile that it could 
easily be lost forever.
Can you tell us a few projects 
or initiatives you know that 
have helped to safeguard  
a language?
Projects and initiatives exist at all 
levels – from local grassroots cam-
paigns from the bottom up to get 
people to read in their own language 
and thus pass it on to younger gen-
erations, up to big state–supported 
plans. 
In Australia, for instance, there are 
active and successful campaigns 
to revive the use of languages that 
were regarded as dead for gen-
erations, but turned out to be only 
‘sleeping’. In New Zealand, the 
Maori language has been rescued 
from near oblivion through the 
scheme of ‘language nests’ – nurs-
eries where the language is passed 
on to young children. 
But the biggest success stories 
are the ones that are operated with 
state support and infrastructure, 
such as the reclaiming of Welsh 
in Wales or Catalan in Catalonia 
– two regions of Europe that have 
seen success in our own lifetimes – 
or, of course, the revival of Hebrew 
as a national language in Israel. 
What is new in this edition  
of the Atlas? 
This third edition of the Atlas is 
new in at least three important 
ways. Firstly and most obviously, it 
is being published in two different 
formats: an on-line version as well 
as a printed version. The on-line ver-
sion is an important new develop-
ment, and is based on Google Earth 
maps, with the location of each 
endangered language, no matter 
how small, pinpointed as exactly as 
possible on the maps, which can 
be filtered to any desired scale and 
level of detail. 
Secondly, for the first time we 
are giving a comprehensive cover- 
age of the whole world. The pre-
vious two editions gave only a 
sample from some continents of 
the state of threatened langua- 
ges, but this time we have been 
careful to cover every language, 
and, as before, to show the level 
of endangerment, from “Unsafe” 
down to “Moribund” with a sys-
tem of colour coding. 
And thirdly, we are making 
the Atlas available in three lan- 
guages: English, French and 
Spanish, with possibly more 
translations to come later.
You are the general editor  
of the Atlas. Can you explain 
how the work for this Atlas  
was done?
It was a worldwide collaborative 
effort by a team of linguists, all of 
them experts in the field of endan-
gered languages and linguistics. As 
in the previous editions (published 
in 1996 and 2001), we had Re-
gional Editors in charge of collect-
ing data for each continent, writing 
the regional essays for the Atlas, 
and entering the language points in 
the maps. 
For some areas, local knowledge 
of the situation came from special-
ists in several countries. Of course 
the contributors needed help and 
guidance from technical experts at 
the Section for Intangible Heritage 
of UNESCO as well. The Web Edi-
tor from UNESCO provided help 
and guidance for the editors at 
every step of the way while the on-
line version was being created, be-
cause this was a pioneering experi-
ment for all of us; and meanwhile 
the commissioning editors and my-
self as general editor were oversee-
ing the preparation of the texts. The 
whole project has been done to a 
tight schedule, in just under a year 
from start to finish.
Each languagE is a uniquE world of thought
(•••)
Amazonia (Brazil): indigenous languages are today threatened with extinction, although Tupi, 
for one, was spoken as much as the official Portuguese until the mid-18th century.
