At the beginning of this year, 
UNESCO published the final vol-
ume in its General History of Latin 
America, bringing to a close a mas-
sive undertaking that offers a global 
vision of the history of an immense 
region, covering some 22 million 
square kilometres. The scale of this 
General History  – which fills some 
5600 pages – is exceptional, both 
in terms of its size and the number 
of contributing authors. For the 
Venezuelan historian and Chairman 
of the editorial committee, Germán 
Carrera Damas, this reference col-
lection is the first attempt to write 
the history of the societies – and 
not nations – of the Latin-American 
continent.
“This book consolidates the efforts 
of Latin American societies to un-
derstand themselves, on their own 
terms,” says Carrera Damas. And 
that is what makes it so original. 
“There have already been General 
Histories of Latin America. But they 
focus much more on the States 
and nationalities than on the soci-
eties. And it is precisely the latter 
that interest us.” While a chrono-
logical national history follows the 
time-line of a given country, the col-
lection just published by UNESCO 
adopts a thematic approach, which 
is not confined by national borders. 
For example, the chapter on Latin 
American dictatorships after 1930 
looks at them as a whole, without 
being limited to a single country or 
part of the continent. 
One of the innovations of this col-
lection, explains Carrera Damas, 
is the integration of the history of 
Brazil in a global vision of the con-
tinent’s history, while also devoting 
specific chapters to it. 
But he also emphasizes another 
peculiarity of the collection – its uni-
versal approach.  “Not so long ago 
the history of the world was written 
in France, in Britain, and so on. But 
today we are trying to move towards 
a genuinely universal history.”  In-
deed, the nine volumes comprising 
this history are the result of a col-
laboration between 240 historians 
from Latin America, Europe and the 
USA. Carrera Damas recalls a judi-
history sEEn  
through sociEtiEs 
(•••)
Aztec gods, from the Florence Codex (16th century).  
(Source : L’Amérique de la conquête, Éditions UNESCO/Flammarion, 1991)

           a world first: the General History of Latin America focuses on the societies and civilizations
     that have inhabited the central and southern american continent, more than on the nations. 
                    even so, the lack of historical sources on indigenous and african-latin american peoples
                                                  has posed some problems.
cious remark by a Chinese historian 
during the writing of UNESCO’s 
History of the Scientific and Cul-
tural Development of Humanity. 
“Well, you talk about ‘The Renais-
sance’”, he said, “but by the time 
that Renaissance was happening in 
Italy, we Chinese had already had 
four Decadence periods and three 
Renaissances!”
For the Venezuelan historian, 
UNESCO has played a key role 
in the success of this marathon 
scientific endeavour. “No other 
organization could have taken on 
such a task, while guaranteeing 
the scientific freedom, the time and 
the human, scientific and material 
resources it required. The task of 
writing and editing this work would 
have been beyond the capabilities 
of a private enterprise and would 
have been extremely demanding, 
even for a university.”
But, paradoxically, the more posi-
tive aspects of this project – such 
as the multicultural composition of 
the editorial team and its funding by 
an international organization - were 
not without their own challenges. 
Several authors, including some 
of the most illustrious, died before 
completing their contributions. And 
the project suffered from inevitable 
financial ups and downs, the physi-
cal distances between authors, too 
few meetings between contributors 
and technological constraints (at 
the beginning, communication was 
uniquely by post and fax!). 
History: questioning 
the past 
There have been suggestions that 
the work is ‘Eurocentric’, because 
of the small amount of space de-
voted to indigenous peoples - and 
even its title. After explaining that 
the term ‘Latin America’ is simply 
the most common one, the Chair-
man of the editorial committee 
added, “You shouldn’t forget that 
this general history has been writ-
ten with the aim of being commu-
nicated. Any use of language that 
cannot translate reality, cloisters 
knowledge, rather than disseminat-
ing it.” Also, the introduction to the 
collection emphasises that writing a 
history of Latin American societies 
has, historically, meant endorsing 
the hegemony of the Latin Ameri-
can Creole peoples.
(•••)
ists on the history of indigenous 
peoples – and the even greater lack 
of research on Afro-Latin American 
societies by Afro-Latin Americans 
– is a reflection of the way things 
really are, and which this collec-
tion cannot ignore. “We knew from 
the outset that a disproportionate 
amount of space would be devot-
ed to mixed-race history, given the 
paucity of sources of information 
about indigenous societies. So, 
as much as this may be criticized, 
this work does present a history of 
the continuity of Creole peoples in 
Priestess of Candomblé, 
blend of Catholicism and African animism.
San Ignacio de Loyola 
baroque church, Quito 
(Ecuador).

Latin America, through the simple 
fact that there are no other writ-
ten historiographic approaches to 
the Latin American reality. Neverthe-
less, the General History does offer 
some insight into the more recent 
reality of indigenous and Afro-Latin 
American peoples.” 
And as far as the presumed Cre-
ole-centrism of the General His-
tory of Latin America, is concerned, 
Enrique Ayala Mora, a member of 
the editorial committee, points out 
that historiography only translates 
the real situation. For him, the lack 
of research by indigenous special-
(•••)
history sEEn through sociEtiEs

history sEEn through sociEtiEs
tinent between 1880 and 1930!” 
The General History will therefore 
be able to claim to have served 
as a ‘school’, by raising the aware-
ness of historians to Latin American 
subjects, inciting them to carry out 
research on common processes in 
the countries of the continent.
Finally, Ayala Mora underscores 
another important aspect of the 
collection. “This General History,” 
According to the Ecuadorian his-
torian, the choice of devoting a sin-
gle volume to the Pre-Columbian 
period and the eight others to the 
period since the arrival of Europ- 
eans, should not be interpreted as 
ascribing too much importance to 
the Creole world. “The questions 
multiply as we approach the pres-
ent,” he says. “For example, we 
have devoted two volumes to the 
Colonial period and four to the Re-
publican period. Each volume on 
the Colonial period covers more 
than 100 years, while the average 
period covered by each volume 
on the Republican period is about 
sixty years. The volume on the Pre-
Columbian peoples covers a period 
lasting two thousand years. History 
is a questioning of the past.” 
For Enrique Ayala Mora, it is less 
important to know how many vol-
umes are devoted to the history 
of indigenous peoples than to ask 
which are the volumes of the Gen-
eral History  that deal with the post-
Conquest period, which also men-
tion indigenous peoples still living 
on the American continent. “In sev-
eral volumes,” he says, “indigenous 
peoples occupy an important place, 
whereas in others, the space given 
to them is more limited. Once again, 
this is because of the absence of 
previous research on the subject. 
Nevertheless, the rule was to make 
sure that authors dealt with themes 
that had hitherto hardly been stud-
ied, or even not at all.”
A pan-American spirit
Writing this history, then, has helped 
to train “general” Latin American 
historians, as Ayala Mora explains. 
“Before, we only had national 
monographs, or at best compara-
tive research on two or three coun-
tries. Historians have a tendency 
to avoid general subjects. They 
prefer to study specific questions, 
like, for example, mining in Potosí 
in the 17th century. It was not easy 
to find a historian who could write 
on industrialisation across the con-
he says, “is in some ways the echo 
of pan-American aspirations, which 
are currently in fashion in certain 
countries of Latin America.” But, 
he adds, these aspirations are not 
recent. The birth of an indigenous 
identity as such can be traced to 
the 1781 Tupac Katari indigenous 
uprising in what is now Bolivia, an 
identity that was to become a real-
ity during the independence era. In-
terest in a common Latin American 
history also received a boost by the 
integrationist ambitions that were 
popular in the 1960’s among econ-
omists of the Economic Commis-
sion for Latin America (ECLAC) and 
dependency theorists, including the 
future Brazilian President, Fernando 
Henrique Cardoso [1995-2002].”
niels Boel, 
Danish correspondent for the UNESCO 
Courier, travelled to Venezuela and 
Ecuador to meet germán carrera 
Damas and enrique ayala Mora, 
 respectively Chairman and Member of 
the editorial committee of the 
General History of Latin America
Rigoberta Menchu, winner of the Nobel peace prize in 1992,  
for her efforts to promote the rights of indigenous people.
