refugees of the future  
will be ‘climate refugees’
land-use change can have even larger effects than greenhouse gas warming,  
believes the italian climatologist filippo giorgi.  
member of ipcc, the intergovernmental panel on climate change  
(nobel peace prize 2007), mr giorgi is also the head of the earth system physics section  
in unesco’s ‘abdus salam’ international centre for theoretical physics (trieste, italy).
Interview by Jasmina Šopova.
will climate change increase the divide  
between rich and poor?
Climate change will not be felt by all countries in the same way. 
Developing countries are more vulnerable because of their lower 
capacity to respond to climate change. This will likely enhance 
the large imbalances across countries we see today and increase 
friction. In some cases, expected changes such as sea level rise 
and widespread increase in drought conditions might lead to mas-
sive population migrations, the so called climate refugees, and 
this will of course increase tension. 
However, the solution to the climate change problem requires 
a probably unprecedented global co-
operation effort across countries, so it 
offers a great opportunity for interna-
tional collaboration and coordinated 
action. All countries will have to sit at 
the same table to solve the problem. 
according to the ‘Climate Change 
index’ you published  
in September 2006, the mediterra-
nean and north-eastern european 
regions are the most prominent 
‘hot-spots’? why? 
The index is based on changes in 
the averages and the variability of 
temperature and precipitation. The 
Mediterranean and North-eastern Eu-
rope emerged as the most prominent 
hotspots, but not for the same rea-
sons. 
For the Mediterranean the main 
problem, indicated by model projec-
tions, is important warming and a 
marked reduction in precipitation in 
the spring and summer seasons. This 
is due to a northward shift of the storm track (storms increasingly 
travel north of the Mediterranean) and the intensification of lo-
cal soil moisture-precipitation feedbacks (decreased precipitation 
leads to drier soil and warmer conditions, which in turn inhibit 
precipitation etc.). The models also project an increase in vari-
ability during the warm season, which implies a relatively large 
increase in the occurrence of extremely warm and dry seasons 
(even warmer and drier than the summer of 2003). This would 
lead to severe increased aridity and perhaps even desertifica-
tion, especially in the southern Mediterranean countries. 
In North-eastern Europe, the main effect is a large increase 
in precipitation related to higher frequency and intensity of 
storms, conditions more prone to flood events, and important 
warming in the cold season. The 
latter is due to the melting of snow, 
which decreases surface reflectivity 
and induces a higher absorption of 
solar radiation, thereby intensifying 
warming.
You seem to be particularly  
concerned by the effects  
of land-use changes. 
The problem is that current model 
projections of climate change do not 
include land-use change and for 
some regions this is an important 
source of uncertainty that needs to 
be better addressed in the future. 
We have indications that land-use 
change can have large effects, 
even larger than greenhouse gas 
warming in particular in some 
specific regions, for example West 
Africa. But at the global scale the 
effect of land-use change is minor 
compared to that of greenhouse 
gases. I also think the effects of 
atmospheric aerosols and dust may be important at the regional 
scale and need to be better addressed in the future.
Drawing by Francisco Ferreira de Campos 
(Brazil), one of the laureates of the student 
contest organized by the International Year  
of Planet Earth (2008).
Excerpt from an interview published in  “Planet Hot-Spot”,  
an issue of the UNESCO Courier (n°3-2008) devoted to the International Year of Planet Earth (2008).
