in Forton Lake, are also part of the 
UK’s underwater heritage and have 
recently been the focus of a three-
year archaeology project, with local 
volunteers working alongside pro-
fessionals.
Nothing  
earth-shattering, but…
In fact, Forton Lake is not really a 
lake, but a tidal inlet off Portsmouth 
harbour, now flanked on two sides 
by housing estates. “At high tide, 
some of the wrecks are completely 
submerged, while others are par-
tially visible,” says Mark Beattie-
Edwards, Programme Director of 
the Nautical Archaeology Society 
(NAS). “They can be seen by any-
one riding past on their bikes or on 
the ferry, on their way to work.” But 
this made the site a perfect candi-
date for a community-based heri-
tage project. In 2006 the NAS and 
the Hampshire and Wight Trust for 
Maritime Archaeology (HWTMA), 
The hulks 
of forTon 
lake
You need only Wellington boots to go explore the Forton Lake shipwrecks.
 The Mary Rose, favourite ship of 
King Henry VIII and now one of the 
world’s most famous wrecks, sank in 
1545, defending England against a 
massive French invasion. The wreck 
was discovered in the late 1960s, 
over 400 years later, using state-of-
the-art sonar and divers working in 
near-zero visibility. It was brought 
to the surface in 1982 and is now 
housed in a purpose-built museum 
in Portsmouth, United Kingdom, a 
few kilometres from where it sank, 
attracting some 600,000 visitors a 
year. 
Meanwhile, across the harbour in 
Forton Lake, the less glamorous 
wrecks of a 1950s Gosport to Ports-
mouth ferry, the Vadne , the Second 
World War minesweeper M293, 
and a scrapped chain ferry from 
the Isle of Wight can be reached 
on foot at low tide by anyone with 
a good pair of boots and are never 
going to be on a tourist itinerary. Yet 
they, and some 24 other wrecks 
(•••)
                    They do not draw crowds and guide books ignore them, but they have 
           old stories to tell. no need for special equipment to explore the hulks 
        of forton lake, near portsmouth in the united kingdom – you simply wait for low
              tide. These modest, easily accessible shipwrecks are stimulating memory 
                        and initiative in the local community.
both based in Portsmouth, were 
awarded a grant to carry out the 
research, using volunteers to help 
excavate the wrecks, take measure-
ments and gather data. With field-
work completed last year, the or-
ganisers are now writing their final 
report, preparing an exhibition and 
a book. 
Starting with a survey conducted 
ten years earlier, the project teams 
identified 27 wrecks, including 
World War II landing craft, mine-
sweepers and gunboats, a sail-
ing barge and two ferries. “These 
wrecks aren’t earth-shattering dis-
coveries,” admits Beattie-Edwards, 
“and none are either worth preserv-
ing or restoring under the terms of 
UK legislation on scheduled monu-
ments. But they do show that heri-
tage can be what’s on your door-
step. What, for one person, might 
be considered an eyesore is, for 
someone else, of historical interest.” 

Indeed, the UK National Register of 
Historic Vessels currently has no 
examples of some of the kinds of 
vessel found in Forton Lake, such 
as the minesweeper. And, unlike the 
Mary Rose, local people remember 
playing on the wrecks and have 
been contributing valuable eye-wit-
ness information to the project, as 
well as old photographs.
A chance for amateur 
archaeologists
Volunteers, including some sixth 
form students at St Vincent Col-
lege, which overlooks Forton Lake, 
received training in survey methods 
from NAS, both in the classroom 
and on the site. Dan Karmy, a young 
local amateur photographer, joined 
in the fieldwork as a volunteer in the 
summer of 2008. “I used to go fish-
ing a lot at Forton Lake,” he says, 
“but I didn’t really take much notice 
of the wrecks. After working on the 
The hulks of forTon lake
(•••)
project, I now know things that I 
wouldn’t have had a clue about be-
fore.” Since the project started he 
has taken over 700 photos of the 
Lake and its wrecks (http://www.
flickr.com/photos/dank147/). 
“I am fascinated by Gosport’s 
history” says a contributor to the 
World Naval Ships Forums , “but 
the wreck of the minesweeper is a 
particular favourite. I grew up living 
in Grove Road and, at that time, it 
was visible from my bedroom win-
dow.” His memories of climbing on 
the wreck as a child have provided 
valuable detail for historians, while 
a local 90-year-old even served on 
a sister ship during the war. Oth-
ers have charted the demise of a 
1950s Gosport-Portsmouth ferry, 
the Vadne, which, after it had been 
taken off service, was used as the 
clubhouse for the local yachting 
club, before being left to rust in the 
mud, its funnel gathering graffiti. 
“Part of the Forton Lake initiative 
was to encourage people to set up 
their own projects,” explains Mark 
Beattie-Edwards. Accessible re-
mains like these can be ideal for the 
amateur archaeologist. They can be 
visited whenever tidal conditions 
permit, without the need for expen-
sive boat hire or special diving con-
ditions. And they can yield some 
surprises. When another project by 
the Hampshire and Wight Trust for 
Maritime Archaeology investigated 
the remains of what, at first, was 
thought to be a simple coaster on 
the banks of the nearby River Ham-
ble, it turned out to be the wreck of 
an elegant schooner, the Norseman. 
Built in 1881 in the USA for a multi-
millionaire, it fell on hard times and 
was converted to a floating brothel, 
then a houseboat, before going up 
in flames at Swanwick. 
Peter Coles, 
 British journalist 
Some wrecks are submerged at high tide; 
others remain visible.

This wrecked wooden boat has become part of the local scenery.
