D
Adios  
to the snowy heights 
the retreat of glaciers in the andes region is a clear indicator of climate change.  
vulnerable tropical glaciers now melt away at a much faster rate than anticipated by scientists a few years ago. 
combined with changing precipitation patterns, this leaves millions of people exposed to an unstable  
and insufficient water supply for drinking, irrigation and hydropower.
By Ebbe Sønderriis, Danish journalist
r. Edson Ramirez heads a team of scientists that has moni-
tored several glaciers in the Andes since 1990-91, among 
them the famed Chacaltaya, close to Bolivia’s capital La 
Paz.
No need anymore. The 18,000 year-old glacier that de-
lighted thousands of visitors has gone, leaving the ski hut 
and other remnants of what was once “the world’s highest 
ski resort” utterly misplaced on barren stones.
The melting of Andean glaciers has gone on for many de-
cades, but the recent acceleration of the process has taken 
scientists by surprise. Ten years ago, Ramirez and his col-
leagues concluded that the glacier would survive until 2015. 
But in March this year he had to face the facts: “Chacaltaya 
has disappeared. It no longer exists.”
“The vulnerability is far greater than we expected,” he says. 
“The retreat of glaciers in the Andes has accelerated in re-
cent years. It is now three times faster than it was before. 
We expect many other relatively small glaciers to disappear 
in the coming decade.”
“In our region the glaciers perhaps are the best indicators 
of climate change. However, the impacts of changing pre-
cipitation and the profound changes of many other ecosys-
tems, like wetlands for example, may be even more severe.”
Ninety-nine percent of the world’s tropical glaciers are lo-
cated in the Andes: Peru (71 percent), Bolivia (22 percent), 
Ecuador (4 percent) and Colombia (3 percent). Since many 
rivers originate from these glaciers, their melt waters con-
tribute to the water supply of the capital cities La Paz, Quito 
and Lima and other large Andean cities. 
The glaciers and their water basins provide a large part 
of the power used in the region, since 70 percent of the 
region’s power generation is hydroelectric.
Irrigation water, essential for the particularly arid Pacific 
basin, is primarily of glacial origin.
Glaciers act as regulators of the hydrological system in 
almost all of the Andean areas. They play the role of gigan-
tic reservoirs, capturing the precipitation in the wet season 
and releasing freshwater throughout the dry season.
Since the mid-1970s, surface temperatures in the region 
have increased by 0.32 – 0.34 degrees Celsius per de-
cade. In the same period the shrinking of glaciers has ac-
celerated. Many of them have lost more than half of their 
previous area and volume.
Water scarcity and unpredictable rainfall
At first the melting of glaciers means more water running in 
the rivers. In the absence of adequate water storage reser-
voirs the surplus water is wasted – or even causes flood-
ing. 
In the long term, however, as the glaciers diminish and 
melt away, the volume of water resources is drastically re-
duced. According to a World Bank report earlier this year, 
Peruvian glaciers have lost more than a fifth of their mass in 
the past 35 years, reducing by 12 percent the water flow to 
the country’s costal region, where more than half the popu-
lation lives.
Perito Moreno glacier, in the Los Glaciares national park, Argentina.

Dr. edson ramirez  is an experienced glaciologist  
and the assistant director of the Institute of Hydraulics and Hydrology  
of the Universidad Mayor de San Andrés in La Paz.
The destabilisation and the eventual disruption of wa-
ter supply aggravate the already existing conflicts about 
scarce water resources, as clearly illustrated by the case 
of Bolivia’s capital La Paz and its adjacent slum city El Alto. 
Water for the city mainly comes from a reservoir at the base 
of the glaciated mountain cluster Tuni Condoriri. Since the 
mid-1950s the glaciers there have shrunk by 40 – 50 per-
cent. Ramirez and his team have projected the Tuni and the 
Condoriri glaciers to be extinct by 2025 and 2045 respec-
tively.
People from all over the country are migrating to the capi-
tal in hopes of a better life. As a result, the population of El 
Alto has grown from 200,000 to about 900,000 in less than 
20 years - without any urban planning.
Several years ago, Ramirez published a study warning that 
water shortage would soon begin in El Alto and the out-
skirts of La Paz. Today, he says, supply in some periods is 
only 40 – 50 percent of demand.
heavier rainfalls have important impacts on agriculture and 
the management of dams, increasing the need for water 
storage and water saving.
The effects of climate change in the Andes region are 
closely related to the ENSO (El Niño-Southern Oscillation, 
most commonly referred to as El Niño) – a periodic tem-
perature increase in the Western Pacific occurring every 
few years. 
“The El Niño events are more frequent and more intense 
now than they were in the past. We know from analyses of 
ice cores that the frequency of El Niño events in the past 
has been up to 12 years. Then it fell to 7 years, 4 years and 
now it seems to be less than two years. Whether this is a 
natural variability or a consequence of global warming is 
difficult to say. It is one of the big questions in the scientific 
community,” Ramirez says.
Anyhow, in years with El Niño conditions the melting of 
glaciers in Bolivia and southern Peru is intensified not only 
“Climate change restricts water resources. In my opinion, 
however, the water shortage in El Alto and La Paz is not 
only a problem of climate change. It is also a problem of 
water management,” he says. “In the medium term, we need 
to solve the problems of net distribution of water, and maybe 
we need to control the population density of the city.”
“We may also need to construct other types of infrastruc-
ture, such as dams and reservoirs,” he says.
Uncertainty is the keyword of climate change impacts in the 
Andes region, as it is in other parts of the world. 
“One of the most important factors is the rainfall,” Ramirez 
says. “Big problems can be expected if in the future the 
quantity of precipitation decreases. After all, the quantity of 
water coming from glaciers is relatively small, compared to 
the 80 percent coming from rainfall. However, while climate 
models can reproduce temperature increases with some ac-
curacy, it is very difficult to say if precipitation will increase 
or decrease. That is the big question.”
No more seasons
“We are observing changing patterns of precipitation. The 
distribution in time has changed since the 1980s,” he says.
Shortening of the rainy season and more concentrated, 
by higher temperatures, but also by less precipitation.
Large investments are needed for Bolivia to adapt to pres-
ent and future water shortages: water reservoirs and stor-
age tanks, dams, canals, efficient drip-irrigation, refurbish-
ment of municipal water systems to avoid leaks etc.
“The responsibility for climate change is unequally dis-
tributed. Obviously many regions emit more greenhouse 
gases than South America. In the case of Bolivia, the CO2 
emissions are very low, but the impacts of climate change 
are bigger than in other regions. Countries like Bolivia and 
Colombia do not have the tools necessary for adaptation 
programmes. We need financial budgets to access the nec-
essary technologies.” 
“So, the outcome of the Climate Conference in Copenha-
gen is very, very important. We need to consider the Earth 
as one system – and the cooperation of the developed 
countries towards developing countries is very important,” 
Edson Ramirez concludes.

Building a road on the high plateaux of Bolivia.
