I
Shah Jahan’s Heaven and Hell: 
the Red Fort in Delhi
           by Appasamy Murugaiyan 
f there be a paradise on earth, it is here, it is here, reads the 
inscription at the entrance of Qala-a-Mubarak’a’. The couplet 
by the Persian poet Amir Khusrau reveals the intention of 
Shah Jahan’s architects. They designed a citadel to match 
the Koran’s description of paradise, not unlike Ispahan in 
Iran.   
Shah Jahan is known as the man who so loved his favourite 
wife, Mumtaz Mahal, “light of the palace”, that after she died 
in 1631, he put 20,000 builders to work on the famous Taj 
Mahal in Agra; the mausoleum in her memory was inscribed 
on the World Heritage List in 1983. He was also a mighty 
emperor who brought the greatest glory to the Mughal em-
pire, founded in the 16th century by Babur, “The Leopard”, 
descendant of the fierce warlord Tamerlane – to whom we 
owe another fabulous World Heritage site, the 14th century 
Samarkand, now in Uzbekistan.   
Shah Jahan will undoubtedly be remembered as the dy-
nasty’s greatest art lover and builder. His legacy, the Qala-
a-Mubarak’a’, known as the Red Fort, was a citadel at the 
heart of the capital, serving as both imperial residence and 
government headquarters.
Appasamy Murugaiyan is professor of comparative and historical  
linguistics at the École Pratique des Hautes Études and researcher  
at the Centre national de la recherche scientifique, in Paris. He is the author 
of ‘The Great Indian Temple of Tanjavur’ (The UNESCO Courier 1995 - 2)  
and ‘The Indian Dilemma’ (The UNESCO Courier 2008 - 1).
The new red capital
When he decided to move the capital from Agra to Delhi 
in 1638, the emperor gave orders to build his “paradise on 
earth” on the banks of the river Yamuna, just like the Taj Ma-
hal. Today it is called Old Delhi, but then it bore the name of 
its founder: Shahjahanabad.   
Begun in 1639 and completed probably in 1648, the Red 
Fort accommodated some 3000 people. It is the first Mughal 
palace fort designed according to an octagonal grid pattern, 
which later became an architectural characteristic of the dy-
nasty. Made primarily in brick, clad with sandstone or red 
marble, it represents a harmonious fusion of Persian, Timurid 
and Indian elements, yet it is based on Islamic prototypes. 
The unique style, also distinguished by its complex geometric 
compositions, is named after the emperor: Shahjahani.   
Shahjahanabad’s Red Fort (Old Delhi), a World Heritage site since 2007. 

Connected in the north to Salimgarh, an earlier fort built 
by Isma Shah Sur in 1546, the walls of the Red Fort stretch 
out for more than two kilometres. Their height varies from 16 
metres on the river to 36 metres 
on the town side. Two entrances 
allowed access to the citadel: the 
Delhi and Lahori gates. The first 
was used by soldiers and servants 
of the court. The second, facing 
the town of Lahore and giving 
onto the Chatta Chowk (palace 
market) was reserved for visitors 
and the emperor himself. A wide 
north-south road ran alongside the market. It set the border 
between the military camp to the west and the palace in the 
east.
When the powerful and inconsolable Shah Jahan arrived 
for a public audience in the hall designated for that purpose, 
the Diwan-i-Am, he passed by the drum house (naubat khana 
or naqqarkhana), a three-storey rectangular building for the 
musicians. In the audience hall stood the throne, incrusted 
with semi-precious stones, as elaborate and majestic as Solo-
mon’s if not an actual copy.   
But an even more sumptuous throne awaited him in the Diwan- 
i-Khas, the hall for private audiences, where he met his minis-
ters and courtiers. More than 100 rubies and the same num-
ber of emeralds enhanced the splendour of the two peacock 
effigies standing behind the royal seat, as well as countless 
diamonds, sapphires and rare pearls. The famous Peacock 
Throne had been taken as war booty from Iran by Nadir Shah. 
It was in 1739, a century after construction of the Red Fort had 
begun, when the “Persian Napoleon” had devastated Delhi 
with fire and sword.   
Having disposed of affairs of state, Shah Jahan retired to the 
Khas Mahal, his private pavilion with bedrooms, prayer rooms 
and a tower from which the emperor would speak to the peo-
ple. The Khas Mahal was part of a series of royal pavilions in 
white marble giving onto the Yamuna, linked one to the other 
by a channel whose sparkling waters justified its name of Nahr-
i-Behisht, the stream of paradise.   
To relax, Shah Jahan would retreat 
to one of the hammams, where hot 
and cold water flowed through pipes 
and the walls’ floral motifs created the 
impression of a garden. And at the 
southern end of the alignment was 
the ultimate paradise: the zenanas, 
or women’s quarters, consisting of 
one-storey pavilions also linked with channels and pools. His 
wives and mistresses lived in the Rang Mahal pavilion (palace 
of colours), with ceilings adorned with gold and silver motifs 
reflecting the water and white marble of the magnificent lotus 
pool, a favourite ingredient of Mughal architecture. 
  
Symbol of power   
Shah Jahan lived less than 20 years in earthly paradise and 
ten years in hell, in the very same place. When he fell ill in 1657, 
he was deposed and imprisoned in the fort until his death in 
1666, by his own son Aurangbzeb.   
Thanks to the latter we have the Moti Jasjid, the Pearl Mosque, 
which he built for his own use in 1659, to the west of his father’s 
hammams. The white marble mosque’s prayer room floor is in-
laid with the outline of a prayer carpet in black marble. To the 
north of the mosque is laid out the splendid Hayat-Baksh Bagh, 
the life-giving garden, its sections also separated by water.   
But little remains of the heavenly gardens. Since its construc-
tion, the fort has undergone much modification, the British in 
particular considerably changing its structure. In 1857, when the 
British crown took command of the Raj, it made the fort the Brit-
ish Indian Army’s headquarters. As a result, pavilions were torn 
down and colonial style military buildings replaced them, while 
Mughal gardens were transformed into English ones.   
In 1947, after India declared its independence, the Indian army 
took over the Red Fort and turned it into the symbol of the British 
colonial power’s defeat. The proof: the first Independence Day 
celebrations took place there, on 15 August 1947. And since 
then, every year, the Prime Minister gives his Independence Day 
speech on this historically significant site.
(The UNESCO Courier, 2007 - 6)The Red Fort’s walls hide unexpected treasures.

The Red Fort’s walls are more than two kilometres long.
