Literacy Prize. Their participatory 
approach engages communities, 
using any of five local languages 
and offering numerical and literacy 
lessons as well as practical 
lessons about farming, gender, health, 
hygiene and human rights. Their in-
novative approach has made striking 
changes to the daily life of villagers, 
from enabling farmers to manage 
food production better at the village 
level, by taking measures to stock 
cereals in order to avoid speculation 
in times of famine for example, to 
training health workers, notably in the 
field of maternal health. Staff also say 
that girls who follow the programme 
are less likely to accept forced or 
early marriage. Tin Tua is now shar-
ing its experience with organisa- 
tions in Benin, Togo, and Niger. 
Khabar Lahariya was a project 
doomed to failure: a newspaper writ-
Throughout the years, these prizes 
have rewarded over 450 literacy 
projects and programmes under-
taken by governments and NGOs 
around the world. The theme for this 
year’s Prizes was “Literacy and Em-
powerment.” 
The pashai Language Develop-
ment project is a community-
owned initiative that has defied war, 
cultural hostility to female educa-
tion and a lack of an existing writing 
system for the dialect concerned, to 
provide education to about 1,000 
participants a year. Founded in 
1999 by SERVE Afghanistan, a 
British NGO, in response to com-
munity requests for an adult educa-
tion program, the project is a winner 
of this year’s UNESCO Confucius 
Prize for Literacy. The organisation 
expanded its work in 2006 with sup-
port from the provincial government 
to include classes for girls and now 
provides literacy, livelihood, public 
health and nutrition education to the 
Pashai minority, some of whom were 
completely excluded from the exis-
ting education systems. Participants 
learn to use written material in their 
local language as well as in Pashto, 
one of the country’s two official lan-
guages, the other being Dari. 
tin tua is an NGO in eastern 
Burkina Faso working to educate 
communities that have some of the 
lowest literacy rates in the world. 
In the Gulimancema language Tin 
Tua means “let’s help ourselves 
develop”, a principle their Literacy 
Programme has been putting into ac-
tion since 1986 across 750 villages 
and hamlets. They now reach 40,000 
learners annually and in recognition 
of their work they are a winner of 
this year’s UNESCO King Sejong 
focus
“The Thief of Words” (2008)  
by Jaume Plensa (Barcelona, Spain), one of the most 
important international sculptors.



“Gross National Happiness”  
through literacy  
innovative literacy projects in  
afghanistan, Burkina faso, india and the philippines  
are the winners of this year’s  
unEsco international Literacy prizes,  
while a programme in Bhutan received  
an honourable mention. 
since 1967 unEsco  
has awarded annual international Literacy prizes  
to outstanding efforts in the field of literacy and non-formal 
education. the current prizes are  
the unEsco King sejong prize  
(supported by the republic of Korea)  
and the unEsco confucius prize for Literacy  
(supported by the people’s republic of china).

ten, produced and sold by poor, “low-
caste,” rural and barely literate wom-
en, in a local language in the region 
Uttar Pradesh, northern India. Seven 
years later, however, the newspa-
per which means “news waves” in 
English, has a fortnightly readership 
of over 25,000 and has just been 
awarded a UNESCO King Se-
jong Literacy Prize. The newspaper 
was started by Nirantar, a women’s 
organisation founded in 1993 with 
the aim of promoting literacy and ed-
ucation for women’s empowerment. 
In 2002 the organisation began se-
lecting women from marginalised 
backgrounds and training them as 
journalists. Two years on, Nirantar 
and Khabar Lahariya began collec-
the municipal Literacy coordi-
nating council of the municipa- 
lity of agoo, La Union, Philippines 
has developed a holistic education 
system that aims to encompass all 
within their community. From basic 
literacy and numeracy, to computer 
skills, farming techniques and indig-
enous crafts – the entire local popu- 
lation has the chance to become 
literateor upgrade their skills. It is 
this vision and ethos that has earned 
them a 2009 UNESCO Confucius 
Prize for Literacy. The very old, mar-
ginalized and neediest in all 49 villag-
es in the area are served by travelling 
teachers and mobile libraries that en-
sure the unreached are reached. The 
programme is also distinguished by 
its unique funding arrangement, with 
the government, NGOs, the private 
sector and international donors all 
contributing. 
the continuing Education pro-
gramme of the Ministry of Educa-
tion of Bhutan was launched in 1992 
and has since reached over 135,000 
learners, 70% of whom are women, 
and established 700 non-formal 
education centres. Its approach is 
community driven, flexible and par-
ticipatory with courses ranging from 
literacy and numeracy to health, hy-
giene, forestry, family planning, ag-
riculture and the environment. This 
year’s recipient of the Honourable 
Mention of the UNESCO Confucius 
Prize for Literacy emphasises edu-
cation as an integral part of the 
country’s guiding principle, “Gross 
National Happiness”, which aims to 
improve the life of all its citizens. 
The experience of last year’s winners 
highlights the positive impact that 
being awarded a UNESCO 
International Literacy Prize makes. 
Since the Adult and Non Formal 
Education Association (ANFEAE) 
in Ethiopia won a 2008 UNESCO 
Confucius Prize for Literacy, 
their voice is being clearly heard by 
the Ethiopian Ministry of Education. 
They are acting as government ad-
visors to implement adult education 
and are helping to guide national 
adult education curriculum. Similarly, 
the KwaNibela Project, Operation 
Upgrade of South Africa, which 
also won a 2008 UNESCO 
Confucius Prize for Literacy, has 
gone from strength to strength since 
the award. Their raised profile with 
the government has built confidence 
in donors - some have actually 
contacted them asking for funding 
proposals. They are being consult-
ed more frequently by the Ministry 
of Education, and have also helped 
the Namibian government review 
their literacy curriculum. 
David Jackman, 
UNESCO Courier
Khabar Lahariya is an Indian newspaper,  
written and sold by poor women.

tively offering journalism courses for 
neo-literate and semi-literate women. 
The result has been the only wom-
en’s media collective in the country, 
a newspaper from, about and for the 
village that has raised the voice of vil-
lagers. Its easily replicated example 
of transformative education is a mod-
el for women fighting caste, gender, 
traditional role models and lack of 
education. The independent journal-
ist and women’s activist Farah Naqvi, 
who has recently written a book 
“Waves in the Hinterland, the journey 
of a newspaper” about their story, 
states that Khabar Lahariya has “not 
only redefined the very male notion of 
citizenship but turned the very notion 
of women in India on its head.”
A wall on the metro in Lisbon (Portugal).
