Vandana Shiva  
                         talks to Judithe Bizot
You are a physicist  
who abandoned your country’s 
nuclear energy programme  
to devote yourself to nature 
and to halting its destruction. 
How did you reach  
your present position?
Ever since I was a child, love and 
knowledge of nature have given me my 
deepest satisfaction. I was very lucky 
to have been born the daughter of a 
forester in India and to have grown up 
in the Himalayan forest. Then I studied 
physics. The real bases of nature, as 
defined in the reductionist scheme of 
things, are understood through phys-
ics, the foundation of all the sciences. 
I had the opportunity to study biology 
and chemistry too, but real, profound 
understanding of nature was supposed 
to be reached through physics. Then I 
went into nuclear physics, where I ex-
perienced massive disappointments. It 
was only when I was doing my mas-
ter’s degree that I realized how unthink-
ing nuclear scientist were about the 
question of radiation hazards. We were 
taught how to create chain reactions in 
nuclear material and we knew all about 
energy transformations, and so on, but 
nothing about the interaction of radia-
tion with living systems. I learned about 
radiation impacts from my sister, who 
is a doctor. When I was working in a 
nuclear reactor in India she kept say-
ing: “Promise me you’re never going to 
go back there!” “But why?” I’d say and 
she would reply, “but you could have 
babies with mutations. You don’t know 
what’s going to happen to you.”
When I was groping my way and ex-
ploring these issues, senior physicists 
would say, “You don’t need to know 
these things.” Again, this was an ex-
clusion and a violation of my search 
for knowledge. If science means to 
know, then I had no scientific training. 
So I went to Canada and enrolled on 
a Foundations of Physics programme, 
where some of the basic questions 
about science that were troubling me 
were being asked. 
I knew that if I continued studying the 
foundations of quantum theory I should 
be marginal to my situation and I decid-
ed that I must do something to relate 
myself to the Indian context. I shifted to 
science and technology policy issues. 
In the meantime, the Chipko movement 
had been created and because this had 
happened where I was from, I kept go-
ing back and doing volunteer work and 
writing for them. Before I knew where I 
was, ecology had become my primary 
concern. 
What is the Chipko movement? 
In your book Staying Alive you 
talk of the forest, for instance, 
not as a product for the market 
but as ‘prakiti’ – a life-giving 
force. You talk of the impor-
tance of women in the struggle 
against the massive consump-
tion of natural resources. 
I responded to the destruction of the 
forest first because I was a child of the 
Himalayan forests. They were my iden-
tity and my sense of being. The erosion 
of the forests hit me very hard. Just be-
fore I left for Canada, I wanted to go 
back and visit a favourite spot of mine, 
a place where the British had built lovely 
rest houses from which the foresters 
managed the forests. There was one I 
particularly loved, near a stream in the 
beautiful oak forest. I went back there, 
and the oak forest had become a mere 
sprinkling of trees, and the stream was 
no longer gushing with water. When I 
talked to the people in the area I found 
that the stream had disappeared be-
cause they had cut the oak forest down 
to plant apple orchards, an enterprise 
which had never really been successful. 
(Apple trees need very fertile soil and 
virgin forest is usually cut down for this 
purpose.)
As for my involvement with Chipko, a 
movement of Himalayan women dedi-
cated to the protection of the environ-
ment, I first got to know a leading fig-
Vandana Shiva is an Indian physicist and feminist militant,  
who works with many community action groups fighting against environmental destruction.  
In this interview she examines the links between the ecological crisis,  
the marginalization of women and the dominant model of economic development. 
Hindi edition of this article in The UNESCO Courier, March 1992.

ure in the movement, named Sundarlal 
Batinguna, who was a great inspiration 
to people like myself. But at a second 
and more lasting level, my involvement 
was with the ordinary women who form 
the bedrock of Chipko. It was their per-
ceptions and their beliefs that were the 
really rich foundations of my knowledge 
of ecology. They offered me a new sensi-
bility about relationships. Ordinary peo-
ple don’t theorize. They have visions and 
beliefs. The germ of an idea or insight 
that I have developed has always been a 
phrase or an action from a person com-
mitted to act in a concrete situation. All 
my theory-building has come out of this 
nature-centred and women-centred ac-
tion. The special relationships women 
have with the environment are due to 
this. In my book Staying Alive I attempt-
ed to explain why my insights came from 
women who were considered ignorant 
and marginal, who were not given a plat-
form of any kind by society.
Why is it that women sense destruc-
tion faster and are more persevering in 
the struggles against destruction? Why 
do they carry on, when everyone else 
is cynical and hopeless? The reason is 
that women have a distinctive percep-
tion of what life is, a sense of what is 
really vital, which colours their view of 
what is at stake in the world. 
Can women lead the way  
in the new concern  
for the environment?
I think women are taking the lead today. 
The important thing is that their leader-
ship should be taken seriously. For us 
in India, Chipko marked the reawaken-
ing of an ecological consciousness, in 
a movement stretching from the villages 
of central India to the western Ghats. 
This new ecological consciousness is 
as old as our civilization, but what is new 
is its re-emergence as a political force 
in response to destruction, a force like 
Chipko in which ordinary women define 
the issues. 
It doesn’t take much effort to say, ‘let’s 
bring women in’. The crucial issue is 
let’s not push women out. Because of 
its very specific nature, the relationship 
between women and the environment 
differs from one place to another. The 
movements that have led me towards 
my own commitments and decisions 
originate in the most marginal sectors 
of our society, in the so-called backward 
communities and specifically among the 
women of those communities. 
If societies have succeeded in repro-
ducing themselves for centuries, they 
are examples of sustainability. Today, 
unfortunately, these are the societies 
that are labelled backward, whereas 
the societies that give up too quickly 
traditional ways of doing things are 
called progressive. That definition, of 
course, is biased. It is in countries like 
India that you find groups of women 
who are embedded both in nature and 
in sustainable cultures. Perennial civili-
zations, not ones that burst into growth 
and collapse, have something very spe-
cial to offer. They enshrine the capacity 
to regenerate, the capacity to heal, the 
capacity to give and take, to build and 
create. 
But I believe that women in the North 
are also intimately linked to the environ-
ment. Even in the most advanced soci-
eties, women have been left to care for 
children, homes and health. A wonderful 
study was carried out in Helsinki which 
showed that, whatever yardstick you 
take – time, energy, work – women are 
running Finnish society and the Finnish 
economy. It’s wrong to say that women 
are unproductive, that they don’t 
work. It is often said that women 
who stay at home do not work, 
but in fact they work harder 
than anyone else. 
Nature for me comprises 
the life-giving forces, the life-
support systems, the ecological 
systems that make life possible. 
These things are violated in the 
cities and in the country through 
nuclear hazards, toxic wastes, 
contaminated water 
and polluted air. We need those life- 
giving sources of pure air, pure water, 
pure food, no matter where we are. 
Are we not in the process  
of amputating something  
from ourselves by rapidly  
diminishing our powers  
of regeneration?
The term ‘feminine principle’ is basi-
cally just an English translation of prakiti, 
a force in nature and life which exists 
all round us, in women and in men. To 
me, the rise of modern patriarchy tend-
ed to kill the feminine principle in all its 
fullness, and in particular to annihilate 
it totally in man. In a sense, the rise of 
the masculine mode of knowledge, pro-
duction and governance was a way of 
crushing something essential to soci-
ety as a whole – to males and females. 
Fortunately, however, whereas the patri-
archs considered that they were ruling 
over passive creatures (women and 
nature), they could never fully take that 
life away. They could distort and stifle it 
but they couldn’t destroy it entirely. 
I can’t imagine any recovery or 
flowering of these creative forces 
of nature, of women coming into 
their own, that would leave men 
untouched. Men will do one of 
two things. Either they will react 
violently because this flowering cre-
ates a new kind of insecurity and 
inadequacy. Or, hopefully, more 
men will sense that they have im-
poverished themselves, and the 
feminine principle will emerge as 
A woman carrying water (1962).

a creative force which values nurture 
above domination, sustaining above de-
struction, rooted and experienced con-
crete knowledge above abstract, irrele-
vant knowledge. Surely these values are 
important enough for men to recognize 
and support them. 
Are you saying that  
male-dominated knowledge 
should be thrown out?
Every society except contemporary 
industrial society has had criteria as to 
what it should say ‘no’ to. Industrial so-
ciety is the only one which believes that 
if you have the power to do something 
you must do it. Indian philosophy is built 
on the concept that ‘yes, you might have 
the power, but it is important that you use 
your discrimination in the exercise of that 
power’. A society should be able to make 
choices and judgements about means, 
to have values as ends. 
I feel that plurality of choice creates an 
opportunity to decide what is needed 
and desirable, and what is not, and what 
is good and what is not. If that kind of 
opportunity is honestly and scientifi-
cally made available to society, with 
the idea of maintaining quality of 
life, with participation by people, then 
it will undoubtedly be taken. It should 
also be recognized that scientists 
are as fallible as anyone else and that 
science and its institutions are more 
often that not prostituted to eco-
nomic interests, since the structure 
of power is so closely married to the 
structure of knowledge. Many technolo-
gies are used to serve the economic 
interests of the powerful, not choices 
based on ecology and ethics. Women 
have already made their choices on 
these issues. 
Does the exploration of other 
planets have a place in a 
world-view that is concerned 
with improving the quality of 
life, joy, sharing and meeting 
basic needs?
It’s all right to explore. What is wrong is 
to justify the exploration of outer space 
in terms of solving the problems of this 
planet. I believe it is immoral to use peo-
ple and their needs as the reasons for 
outer-space programmes, which should 
be seen as what they are: the indulgence 
of a group of very privileged people and 
countries. Everyone has a right to explore, 
but to use that right as an imperative into 
which everyone must fit is another mat-
ter. It’s hiding the other agendas which 
go along with space programmes, which 
In what specific ways do local 
communities understand or 
use planetary knowledge? 
Traditional systems of agriculture in every 
society have been based on the relation-
ships between planets, which have pro-
vided the basis for deciding which is the 
right time to sow and which crops should 
be grown together. For example, many 
peasants possess a kind of scientific 
knowledge which enables them to rec-
ognize certain types of insect behaviour 
which indicate impending floods, so that 
they move out in time. But all this is a thing 
of the past because pesticides have killed 
these living indicators. We create systems 
which seem more reliable than traditional 
systems but are actually more vulnerable. 
I see two ways in which industrial soci-
ety has been impoverished. Ethically, it is 
the only society which cannot distinguish 
between good and bad, which does not 
provide a chance to say no, which has 
no restraining criteria, values or limits to 
action. Secondly, it seems to lack any 
realization that its systems are increas-
ingly based on highly vulnerable forms of 
organization. There is no comprehension 
of how these systems break down when 
most needed. If my relationship to nature 
provides me with knowledge and a fee- 
ling for what’s happening to the world and 
what changes are coming, it helps me 
guide and protect my animals, myself and 
others. I have certain indicators available 
to me without risk of breakdown by which 
I can act in informed ways. Satellites, 
computer networks and so on are made 
to replace what is considered reliable, 
but they are actually more vulnerable. 
What influence can women 
have? How can they make 
a difference? How can 
they improve their lives 
and their environment?
The first thing is that they should not 
lose faith in the knowledge they have 
and that they should trust in them-
selves. I also believe that when those 
Himalayan streams were disappear-
ing women knew that deforestation is 
linked to desertification and stood their 
ground, even though the foresters said 
that forests have no link with watershed 
management. Women’s instruments of 
resistance are standing their ground, 
believing in their knowledge, having faith 
in their values, not losing confidence, 
not feeling inferior. The dominating sys-
tem imposes its choice on people by 
transforming every multiple choice into 
a tragic last possible one. Things are not 
black or white. I think that in our time it is 
very important to be able to turn around 
and say, no matter how powerless one 
is, well things could be different, could 
they not? I don’t think that merely in-
creasing the number of choices neces-
sarily enriches people’s lives. The criteria 
of choice are what really count. Merely 
to increase the number of choices is to 
adopt a supermarket mentality of con-
sumer choice. It is essential to know 
when a choice is not a real choice, and 
that is impossible unless people have 
a sense of discrimination within them. 
Relating to nature, being embedded in 
it, provides the ethnical framework for 
choice between different scientific and 
technological options. 
(The UNESCO Courier, 1992 - 3)
These oak trees 
save and worship them, 
because their roots store water, 
their leaves have milk and fodder, 
the breeze blows cool
over the beautiful rhododendron flower. 
                             A song of the Chipko movement
are not simply pursued for their own 
sake but for military and other ends. 
What is your attitude to global, 
planetary, management and 
the question of local versus 
global ecologies?
So-called ‘primitive’ peoples have always 
had a planetary cosmology, and for them 
the planet has existed in every action 
that they have taken. The most isolated 
communities have had a view not just of 
this planet but of how it relates to others 
and of how balance must be maintained. 
The planetary has always existed in the 
local. Any attempt to disenfranchise lo-
cal communities of their planetary con-
sciousness is unethical. 
