                                     a small sphere at the centre of a much larger sphere: this is how the earth
                           and the universe were imagined in greek antiquity. this image of a closed world
          was shattered by a gadget sold in shops. 400 years ago, galileo observed the sky 
                               with a telescope he made himself. the world would never be the same.
A closed world
The closed world view has its ori-
gin in Greek philosophy. For most 
Greek astronomers and philoso-
phers, from the 4th century on, the 
earth is a small sphere (the most 
symmetrical surface) occupying the 
centre of another much larger rotat-
ing sphere, which carries the stars. 
Different cosmological devices are 
added during the nearly twenty 
centuries which separate the 4th 
century B.C. from Galileo’s time, 
in order to account for the move-
ments of the sun, moon and planets 
(wandering celestial bodies) in the 
intermediate space between the 
two spheres. The point here is that 
outside of the celestial sphere there 
is no space, no matter, nothing. The 
whole world is enclosed, or, so to 
speak, encapsulated, inside this 
second sphere; a sphere where, 
large as it may be when compared 
to the size of his earthly residence, 
man is imprisoned.
Cosmology  
and Astronomy
A second point: cosmology (as a 
set of conceptions about the struc-
ture of the universe) and astronomy 
(defined as observation of the ap-
pearances of the heavens) are inex-
tricably combined in such a model. 
Thomas Kuhn (American philoso-
pher and historian of science, 
1922-1996) sees in this combina-
tion the origin of the “unreasonable 
effectiveness” of western science. 
According to Kuhn’s view, the re-
quirement that cosmology should 
supply both a world-view and an 
explanation of observed phenom-
ena has channelled the universal 
psychological compulsion for being 
part of the universe into a drive for 
scientific explanations – thus en-
hancing the power of cosmological 
thought. The devastating result is 
that “the astronomer may on occa-
sions destroy, for reasons lying en-
tirely within his speciality, a world-
view that had previously made the 
n 1639, nearly thirty years after 
the discovery we are celebrating 
today, Galileo, then aged 68, lost 
the use of his right eye. A year 
later, he became totally blind. In 
despair, he then wrote to his most 
faithful friend Elie Diodati, “Alas, 
honoured Sir, Galileo, your dear 
friend and servant, has become 
by now irremediably blind. Your 
Honour may understand in what 
affliction I find myself, as I con-
sider how the heaven, the world, 
the universe, which by my ob-
servations and clear demonstra-
tions I had amplified a hundred 
and a thousand times over what 
had been seen and known by the 
learned of all past centuries, has 
now reduced to the space occu-
pied by my person.” 
An agonizing statement of a man 
to whom blindness had given the 
ability to “see”, with the eyes of the 
mind, the position he would for-
ever hold not only among worldly 
things but in the history of man. 
As if physical blindness had given 
him the power to adopt what 
would be posterity’s point of view 
on his achievements, namely, as 
Alexandre Koyré (French philoso-
pher and historian of science, of 
Russian origin, 1892-1964) has so 
justly coined it: going from a closed 
world to an infinite universe.
From closed world  
to inFinite universe

Portrait of Galileo painted by Justus Sustermans (1636).
This article is an extract from the lecture From Galileo to Einstein, de-
livered by Françoise Balibar at the launch of the International Year  
of Astronomy at UNESCO, 15 January 2009. 

universe meaningful for the mem-
bers of a whole civilization, special-
ist and non specialist alike”. This is 
precisely what happened in 1609: 
Galileo’s astronomical observations 
destroyed the world-view, common 
to both the educated and the “man 
in the street.” 
Both the Copernican and Ptole-
maic systems, which clashed in the 
17th century, are cosmological and 
astronomical at the same time. This 
is explicit in the title Galileo gave 
to his first Dialogue: “Dialogue 
Concerning the two Chief World 
Systems”, where the two systems, 
Ptolemaic and Copernican, appear 
on the same footing, alternative 
systems within the same intellec-
tual framework, where any change 
in astronomical explanation (as that 
proposed by Copernicus in 1543, 
in his De Revolutionibus Orbium 
Coelestium) entails a change in 
man’s cosmological conceptions 
about the structure of the world.
The earth is no longer 
the centre  
of the universe 
No wonder then that the dispute 
surrounding the Copernican (1473-
1543) heliocentric explanation was 
itself felt to be not a mere controver-
sy restricted to scientists (astrono-
mers) but a threat to the estab-
lished general order, relying as this 
latter did on a geocentric world-
view. No wonder too that Galileo’s 
observations and interpretations of 
evolving bright spots as evidence 
of mountains on the Moon, some-
thing anyone could understand in 
relation to his own experience of 
the sun rising on the top of a moun-
tain before it illuminates the valley, 
were much more threatening to 
the established world-view than 
the other important scientific event 
of that same year 1609, Kepler’s 
(1571-1630) Astronomia Nova 
[1571-1630]. All the more so in-
asmuch as Galileo’s observations 
involved an instrument derived 
from a gadget sold on the open 
market, an instrument of such sim-
plicity that anyone might believe he 
could build one himself. But who 
could read Astronomia Nova apart 
from specialists? Who would care 
about the elliptical planetary trajec-
tories exhibited by Kepler? 
Such an achievement as Kepler’s 
could be interpreted as a change 
in world-view only by astronomers 
themselves, while the disclosure 
of mountains on the moon had the 
effect that anyone looking at the 
Moon could no longer see it as a 
perfectly polished celestial body, 
radically different from the earth. 
Once the Moons of Jupiter (“which 
had been invisible to everyone un-
til now”, writes Galileo) had been 
seen (even if Galileo was for a time 
the only one who had really seen 
them, with the exception of Kepler 
who, as a professional astronomer, 
was clever enough to adjust the in-
strument Galileo had sent to him, 
to his own eyes), the thought that 
their movement around Jupiter itself 
should take them outside the celes-
tial sphere “behind” the spherical 
surface on which Jupiter was sup-
posed to be located, could occur 
to anyone willing to think seriously 
about it. As a consequence, the 
world could no longer be restrict-
ed to the space inside the celes-
tial sphere. Even worse: the earth 
could not be located at the centre 
of the universe (this is what Sig-
mund Freud later called the first of 
three humiliations inflicted upon hu-
man narcissism, the other two be-
ing Darwinian evolution and Freud’s 
own discovery of the Unbewusst).
The infinite universe
The “closed world” picture had lost 
its coherence and does not con-
form to observation. But what about 
the “infinite universe” Koyré alludes 
to? That the closed world has been 
burst open does not necessarily im-
ply an infinite size for the universe. 
The question here is that of the 
physical reality of infinity. It is well 
known that Kepler objected to the 
idea of an infinite universe on the 
ground that such an entity would ac-
commodate regions devoid of mat-
ter – which was pure non-sense ac-
cording to his views: space without 
matter is nothing, it simply does not 
exist. Galileo is more subtle and am-
bivalent on this matter. He refuses 
From closed world to inFinite universe
Ptolemy, 2nd century Greek geographer  
and astronomer.

The Copernican system.

From closed world to inFinite universe
to identify the inertial movement 
(the one which is comme nullo) with 
translations at uniform speed, on the 
ground that the mobile would then 
be taken to infinity, which he finds 
unrealistic. At the same time, by 
destroying the idea that the cosmos 
is structured by a hierarchical order 
(the perfect and eternal heavens 
as opposed to the corruptible and 
instable Earth), he introduces the 
idea of a universe whose spatial 
structure is uniform, free of any natural 
hierarchy, and without any reference 
to a world of values, a world where 
all points are on the same footing. 
In other words, a Euclidean geome- 
trical space, including infinity in its 
definition, on which the mathemati-
zation of physical world, i.e. modern 
physics, relies. 
No doubt we would not be cel-
ebrating Galileo’s astronomical dis-
coveries with such ceremony had 
they not led to the foundation of 
“modern science”. By replacing the 
hierarchical structure of space by 
the uniformity which characterizes 
geometric spaces, Galileo made 
it possible for geometry, and more 
generally speaking, mathematics, 
the application of which had been 
up to then (from the time of Greece 
on) restricted to understanding the 
movements of perfect celestial ob-
jects, to become part of the expla-
nation of terrestrial phenomena, no 
longer considered less perfect than 
celestial ones. 
Three centuries later, in 1919, Ein-
stein, Galileo’s direct heir, not so 
much as concerns his astronomical 
discoveries as his project for the 
mathematization of nature, having 
painfully worked out his so called 
“general theory of relativity”, came 
to realize that this physico-mathe-
matical theory, intended as a theory 
of gravitation, was in fact a theory of 
the universe itself – therefore a cos-
mology. The entanglement of as-
tronomy and cosmology, which had 
been crucial to the birth of modern 
science, ended in the absorption of 
cosmology by science: cosmology 
had become a branch of physics. 
Françoise Balibar, 
Professor Emeritus of Physics 
at the University of Paris – Diderot
Author of 
Galilée: Le messager des étoiles 
(with Jean-Pierre Maury), 
Gallimard, 2005 and 
Einstein : Decoding the Universe, 
Abrams, 2001. 
Kepler’s model of the universe, based on five regular polyhedra.
The Serpents star cluster, at some 8,484 light years 
from Earth. Photo taken with the infrared  
Spitzer Space Telescope.
