world herItage sItes and bIosphere  
reserves – 85 sItes In coMMon
Fraser Island, a World Heritage Site, is at the centre  
of the new Great Sandy Biosphere Reserve (Australia).

W orld Heritage sites and 
biosphere reserves share 
a number of common chal-
lenges – such as climate 
change and the worldwide loss and 
degradation of services provided by 
ecosystems, notably those related to 
preserving biodiversity. To respond 
to these common challenges, stra-
tegic coordination of activities of 
the Man and the Biosphere (MAB) 
Programme and the World Heri-
tage Convention is needed for bet-
ter management of some 85 sites 
that are both biosphere reserves 
and World Heritage sites. This pro-
cess must combine the different 
mechanisms and approaches of-
fered by the two instruments, and 
use them as complementary tools 
for the benefit of both the environ-
ment and local populations.
The main differences between 
biosphere reserves and World 
Heritage sites (including natural, 
cultural or mixed sites and cultural 
landscapes) are their objectives, 
legal status and management prin-
ciples. During the first years of bio-
sphere reserve designations, the 
traditional conception of national 
parks weighed heavily. In a major-
ity of cases, therefore, these old 
designations (from the 1970s and 
early 1980s) involve sites that do 
not really fulfil the three functions 
of biosphere reserves (the conser-
vation, development and logistic 
functions including research, and 
monitoring and education) nor have 
the proper zonation scheme (i.e. core, 
buffer and transition areas) or coopera-
tive management structures. In these 
cases, biosphere reserves coincide 
with the respective natural World 
Heritage sites (such as Dja in Camer-
oon, Yellowstone in the United States 
and Macquarie Island in Australia). 
However, in the majority of sites 
with twin designations, and particu-
larly since 1995, the World Heritage 
site represents the core area or a part 
of the core area of the respective bio-
sphere reserve. An example is the 
Pantanal Biosphere Reserve in Brazil. 
Indeed, the Pantanal Conservation 
Complex, a natural World Heritage 
site, represents one of the 15 core 
areas of the biosphere reserve. But 
biosphere reserves can include not 
only natural heritage sites, but also 
cultural heritage sites. Like the Pays 
de Fontainebleau Biosphere Reserve 
in France and Tonle Sap in Cambodia. 
As for El Vizcaino Biosphere Reserve 
in Mexico, two sites – one natural and 
one cultural – are part of the same bio-
sphere reserve
Ana Percić, Division of Ecological and 
Earth Sciences (UNESCO). Excerpts 
from the article “World Heritage Sites 
and Biosphere Reserves - Building on 
complementarities”, World Heritage Re-
view, n° 49 – April 2008. 
