Maybe they’re out there. We can’t 
say because we don’t know how 
life began on earth, so we don’t 
know how probable it is. And of 
course even if simple life is com-
mon, we don’t know whether it 
always evolves into complex life, 
so there could be another planet 
where there are just bugs, or ants, 
nothing else. 
I think it’s stupid to have convic-
tions about a topic where we have 
no idea. I think we should not be 
surprised either way. It could be 
that we are the only life in the galaxy. 
It could be that there’s a lot out 
there. But it’s a very important 
question and probably this century 
we will settle it. 
It’s important, but I wouldn’t want 
                   Does the discovery of extrasolar planets mean the discovery of extraterrestrial life? 
                       During a unEsco conference marking the international Year of astronomy three world 
  renowned scientists, Lord martin John rees (united Kingdom), Jonathan p. gardner (united states) 
                    and françoise combes (france), tackled the question from different perspectives.  
extraterrestrial liFe: 
surprises in store?

Lord Martin John Rees at UNESCO for the launch of the International Year of Astronomy 
(January 2009).
The search for extraterrestrial life is a fascinating  
aspect of the work of Martin John Rees,  
Baron of Ludlow, whose current research deals 
with cosmic structure formation, 
especially the early generation of stars and galaxies 
that formed relatively shortly after the “Big Bang”. 
The Astronomer Royal, President of the Royal Society, 
Master of Trinity College and Professor  
of Cosmology and Astrophysics 
at the University of Cambridge  
believes we will soon answer the question  
“Are there other forms of life in the universe?”,  
as he told Cathy Nolan (UNESCO).

everyone to work on it, because it 
may be impossible. If you’re a sci-
entist, I think it’s best to work most 
of the time on a topic where you are 
sure to make some progress. Main-
ly, it is certain that we will discover 
lots more planets around stars, even 
if we don’t know if there’s life on 
them. That’s a very important sub-
promises to be just as exciting! 
Recently, a couple of planets 
were detected through direct im-
aging, which is very exciting. Most 
of the planets discovered to date 
are big ones like Jupiter. A small, 
rocky planet like the Earth is a 
lot harder to detect. Future tele-
scopes will be able to find small-
extraterrestrial liFe: surprises in store?
sphere of an Earth-like planet that 
is warm enough to have liquid wa-
ter on its surface. That would be 
a good indication that the planet 
has life: bacteria, plants, and 
maybe animals. We don’t know if 
Webb can do that. We’ll try. 
In 1995 two Swiss astronomers, 
Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz, 
made one of the most remarkable 
discoveries of the century. They 
detected a celestial object orbit-
ing a star that was not our Sun. It 
became known as 51 Peg b – the 
first extrasolar planet. Suddenly, 
the search for extraterrestrial life 
seemed more promising. “Not so 
fast!” warns Françoise Combes, 
an astronomer at the Paris Obser-
vatory and member of the French 
Academy of Sciences. “There 
could be thousands of solar sys-
tems neighbouring the Sun, but 
that does not mean we can see 
them.” She tells the UNESCO 
Courier’s Katerina Markelova 
about some of the questions at 
the centre of current research into 
exo-planets.
If we were anywhere else in our 
galaxy, on a distant celestial ob-
ject, we would never have been 
able to detect Earth with the ob-
servation facilities available to us 
at present. Our instruments are 
simply not sensitive enough to see 
small telluric [rocky] planets like 
ours. Of the 353 exo-planets, or 
extrasolar plants, that have been 
Image taken by the CFH telescope (Canada-France-Hawaii)  
of the star around which CoRoT-Exo-7b orbits.

ject. And we’ll understand galaxies 
more, we’ll find even more distant 
galaxies and do better calculations. 
We’ll understand much better what 
happened (at the very beginning to 
create life on Earth), that’s the main 
thing. As a bonus, we may find 
some real surprises! 
Galileo’s telescope measured 
only a few centimeters in 
diameter - that of some modern 
telescopes reaches up to 10 meters. 
What discoveries do they hold 
in store for us? According 
to NASA’s project manager 
Jonathan P. Gardner, the launch 
of the space telescope James 
Webb in 2013 may herald an 
entirely new phase in aerospace 
research. 
In just the last 10 or 20 years, us-
ing large new telescopes on the 
ground and Hubble and other tele-
scopes in space, we have made a 
tremendous number of discover-
ies that have revolutionized what 
we know about the universe. With 
upcoming missions like James 
Webb, the next 10 or 20 years 
er planets and tell us a lot more 
about them. 
The next big step will be the 
James Webb Space Telescope, 
which is Hubble’s successor. 
After it is launched in 2013, it will 
be able to study the atmospheres 
of transiting rocky planets. 
What astronomers really want to 
do is to find “biomarkers” such as 
ozone and methane in the atmo-

The future James Webb Space telescope.

discovered so far, the majority are 
“hot Jupiters”, large gaseous plan-
ets that orbit very close to their 
stars. The time it takes them to 
make a complete orbit is there-
fore very short. Planets that are 
further out can take hundreds of 
years to travel the full distance 
around their stars. It would take 
several human lifetimes to see 
them. 
A series of methods can be 
used to detect exo-planets. 
There is the transit method: 
when the planet passes in front 
of its star, it obscures it slight-
ly. Some 59 planets have been 
discovered this way, to date. Seven 
other planets have been disco- 
vered using so-called ‘gravita-
tional lensing’, where light rays 
from a star are deviated by the 
gravitational field of a massive 
celestial object on the same 
visual axis as the star. But most 
exo-planets have been detected 
using the Doppler effect, which 
allows us to measure the distur-
bance of the speed of the star as 
its planet passes close by. 
In 2006 the French Nation-
al Centre for Space Studies 
(CNES) put the Corot (Con-
vection, Rotation and Planetary 
Transit) satellite into space with 
the mission of finding exo-plan-
ets similar to Earth. This Febru-
ary, Corot discovered what was 
then the smallest exo-planet 
ever observed - Corot-Exo-7b. 
Its diameter is barely1.8 times 
that of Earth, its period of revo-
lution is just 20 hours and it has 
a temperature of between 1000 
and 1500°C. Its density has not 
been determined precisely, but it 
is without doubt a rocky object 
like Earth. 
The European Space Agency 
(ESA) is currently studying 
the possibility of launching the 
Darwin satellite, which will 
mostly be used by ‘exo-biologists’, 
as it is designed to detect traces 
of water and oxygen in the 
atmosphere of exo-planets.
