The great scientific discoveries 
are often the result of chance. 
Was this the case for the first 
planet discovered outside  
of our solar system? 
No, it wasn’t a stroke of luck if 
that’s what you mean. It was the 
outcome of a long process of re-
search and the development of 
instruments to accurately mea-
sure the speed of stars. The 
spectrograph called ELODIE 
at the Provence Observatory 
[France] allowed us to detect the 
first exoplanet and was designed 
precisely in order to look for planets 
outside of out solar system. 
Where we were lucky was in dis-
covering some planets that revolved 
around their orbit very quickly. The 
orbital period of 51 Pegasi b is only 
4.2 days. To give you an idea, by 
contrast the orbital period of Jupiter 
is 4332.71 days - approximately 10 
years. It is without doubt that ob-
jects with a shorter orbital period 
are easier to discover and observe. 
In a few nights you can make obser-
vations that in other cases would 
take you 10 or 20 years.
What is your most important 
current research?
In the short run, I would say that 
the research follows three main 
themes: comparative planetology, 
the detection of lighter planets and 
planetary imaging. 
The first field combines data from 
satellites and ground instruments 
to determine the average density of 
planets. These studies aim to know 
the physics of planets. This is very 
important since we have no reason 
to believe that the planets in our solar 
system represent every type of planet. 
In theoretical terms we can predict 
that, for example, there are planets 
made of melted ice. This would 
be the case with Neptune. If it ap-
proached the sun its surface would 
be covered with oceans. But this 
sort of ocean would have nothing 
to do with the type of ocean we 
have here on earth because it 
wouldn’t have a rocky bottom 
Regarding the search for lighter 
planets, you must know that until re-
cently we’ve been able to detect extra 
solar planets that are as small as 
four times the mass of Earth. That’s 
already almost 100 times lighter 
than Jupiter! In our jargon, we call 
                  we have no reason to think that the planets in our solar system represent every type 
     of planet in existence, according to the swiss astrophysicist michel mayor, who discovered 
               the first extrasolar planet with Didier Queloz in 1995. Last april, his team 
                              at the geneva observatory discovered the smallest exoplanet known today.
astronomy :  
the three tiers of research

An image of 51 Peg b, the first exo-planet discovered by Michel Mayor  
and Didier Queloz in 1995.
Interview by Marie-Christine Pinault-Desmoulins (UNESCO). 

astronomy : the three tiers oF research
them “Super-Earths”. But thanks to 
new instruments we have discov-
ered a telluric exoplanet only two 
times the mass of earth. [Note, the 
Geneva Observatory announced 
the discovery of Gliese 581 E on 
the 21 April.] 
These discoveries are made by in-
direct measures. At the same time, 
planetary imaging that allows us to 
see the exoplanets directly is taking 
off. At the end of last year, we had 
great success in obtaining images 
of some very large young planets. 
But please note this doesn’t mean 
we will now be flooded with im-
ages, because the vast majority of 
exoplanets cannot be seen easily: 
either they are already cold, or they 
are too close to their stars. 
Currently, the Geneva Observatory 
is in the process of developing, in 
collaboration with partners, a tool 
called SPHERE for direct imaging 
of exoplanets, which will allow us to 
see these tiny planets. It should be 
operational in 2011. More than 200 
people have been working on it for 
over 5 years.
Is there much international  
collaboration in the field  
of astrophysics?
Currently the most common collab-
oration is person to person. There 
isn’t any real international collabora-
tion. It must be said that in certain 
areas it isn’t necessary or even de-
sirable: competition is positive. How-
ever, the search for life in the universe 
necessitates international collabora-
tion. This field requires consider-
able resources and it is probable 
that the existing organizations aren’t 
adequate for promoting this type of 
mission effectively. 
This ambitious mission has largely 
been put on hold for budgetary 
reasons, both from ESA (European 
Space Agency) and NASA (National 
Aeronautic and Space Administration 
of the United States). Some re-
searchers dream of a type of insti-
tution which could coordinate these 
studies on a global scale, but for the 
moment this is wishful thinking.
Planet imaging is a priority of current research. This image of the Rosette 
Nebula, situated 4500 light years from earth, was taken by the infrared spatial 
telescope Spitzer.

Michel Mayor, who discovered the first extra 
solar planet, participated in the launch of the 
International Year of Astronomy (UNESCO, 
January 2009).
