tributed to this issue of The UNESCO 
Courier published with a view to popu-
larise astronomical knowledge within the 
IYA2009 framework.
In terms of scientific research, the main 
topic discussed was that of dark matter 
and dark energy. “Ninety-five percent of 
the total energy of the universe is not vis-
ible in the sense we usually understand 
it, so we nicknamed it “dark matter” 
and “dark energy”, said Nobel laureate 
Physics George F. Smoot. Françoise 
Combes of the Paris Observatory added 
“Scientists invented the notion of dark 
energy to explain a phenomenon disco-
vered 10 years ago – the acceleration of 
the expansion of the universe. According 
to the theory most widely accepted up 
until then the universe has been expand-
ing since the Big Bang and will contract 
in a “Big Crunch”. Today we know this 
theory is false, yet it is still unclear what 
causes the acceleration.” 
In terms of popularising science, the 
main concern for experts is educa- 
ting youth and teaching astronomy in 
schools. “In my opinion, we should start 
teaching astronomy in primary school” 
declared Beatriz Barbuy, a Brazilian 
astronomer and recipient of the 2009 
L’Oreal-UNESCO award for Women in 
Science. Interviewed during the prepara-
tion of this issue by the Brazilian journalist 
Dênio Maués Vianna, Barbuy explains: 
“The mysterious world of stars and 
galaxies greatly intrigues children. 
Astronomy is an excellent way to teach 
children not only about cosmic pheno- 
mena, but also mathematics, physics, 
optics, chemistry and even computer 
science and biology.” She believes that 
the reason why astronomy appears inac-
cessible is because it’s not sufficiently 
featured in school curriculums. The 
resulting lack of knowledge has a negative 
impact: “scientists are often frustrated 
to note that obscurantism sometimes 
prevails over the facts established by 
science” ». 
Jasmina Šopova
400 years ago galileo took the dark 
stains on the surface of the moon  
to be seas. he was wrong. today,  
we send missions to the moon  
in search of water. technological  
advances have been extraordinary: 
in the past 20 years 350 planets have 
been discovered outside of our solar 
system and several months ago  
the first images of them reached us 
via satellite. telescopes on earth  
and in space explore the universe 
24 hours a day, yet it is still remains 
largely unknown.
Editorial
to help us penetrate his secrets the 
United Nations declared 2009 the Interna-
tional Year of Astronomy (IYA2009). Sub-
mitted by Italy, the homeland of Galileo, 
the initiative is lead by the International 
Astronomical Union and UNESCO. 
With the motto “The Universe – yours to 
discover” the IYA2009 aims to stimulate 
interest in astronomy among the gen-
eral public and especially youth. Activi-
ties are underway around the world and 
UNESCO has organised a series of events 
designed to both stimulate research 
and disseminate scientific knowledge. 
Exhibitions for young and adults have 
been organised, as have scientific sym-
posiums and debates with the wider 
public featuring many of the world’s lead-
ing astronomical experts. 
Among these, Françoise Balibar, Fran-
çoise Combes, Julieta Fierro, Zhao 
Gang, Jonathan P. Gardner, Michel 
Mayor, Lord Martin John Rees, George 
Saliba et Georges F. Smoot have con-
This view out the aft windows on Endeavour’s flight deck was one of 
a series of images recorded by the STS-123 crew during the first full 
day in space.

Children at Katha public school (Govinpuri slums, south Delhi, India),  
during an astronomy class.
