This summer, the fourth Green Pas-
tures Festival in Rize (Turkey) will 
be featuring foreign musicians - 
from France. But not the France of 
the tourist brochures and embassy 
crusades that have taken over the 
Turkish media in recent years. They 
come from that other France, home 
to lovers of traditional music. A 
France that is trying to mend the 
fabric of a society torn apart by 
years of rural exodus. 
The effects of urbanization, indus-
trialization and celebrity culture are 
being felt in Turkey, just as they are 
in France. The art of song is being 
drowned out by excessive technol-
ogy, the glitter of globalization and 
the glamour of stardom. But both 
countries have managed to pre-
serve a few islands of authenticity, 
like Brittany, in the extreme west of 
France, on the Atlantic coast, and 
the province of Rize, in the far north-
east of Anatolia, on the edge of the 
Caucasus.
The Breton  
renaissance
Over the past fifty years, in France, 
Bretons have started to revive 
their traditional music, dances and 
festivals. Cut off from its past by 
urbanization, the new generation 
has been exploring its ancestral 
heritage. The trend started in parts 
of the region where Breton is spo-
ken, and is now turning to another 
linguistic area, Gallo, which is 
closer to French. Meanwhile, the-
ory and practice have evolved. 
In the past, “revivalism” was the 
preserve of researchers, whose 
principal goal was to collect, 
analyze, understand and publish. 
Today, as ethnomusicologist, 
Yves Defrance, points out, while 
continuing in this tradition, song 
and dance collectors also “want 
to claim back this repertoire and 
bring it up to date, without altering 
its character, turning it into a con-
temporary means of expression.” 
                                    the folk traditions of Brittany are making a remarkable comeback after being consigned 
                to oblivion for decades. and, 2500 kilometres away, traditional song is returning to anatolian
      homes, having almost disappeared. today, a non-profit association called “a Bridge over the Bosporus” 
      is linking musicians from france and turkey who share a similar passion and concerns.
Gallo songs were in danger of 
being forgotten, unable to find a 
place in today’s world. But with the 
renewal of interest they are leav-
ing the archives, and are no longer 
esoteric party pieces, brought out 
on special occasions for a hand-
ful of culture buffs. Every day, new 
songs are re-emerging in annual 
contests, local gatherings in homes 
and cafes, village festivals, outings, 
schools and in music workshops 
in small villages and market towns. 
And, at the same time, in rural ar-
eas, young and old, those in work 
and the unemployed, both men and 
women, are renewing social bonds 
thanks to this revival of singing. 
Among the singers travelling to Rize 
this year are some of those spear-
heading this renaissance. Some, 
like Charles Quimbert or Vincent 
Morel, come from the community of 
song collectors: they have univer-
sity degrees and work at DASTUM, 
(•••)
Travelling music
Hiking and singing in Rize (Turkey).

of having preserved Laz, a rare lan-
guage belonging to the Georgian 
or South Caucasian group. 
The same passion, the same ap-
proach, but still an improbable 
meeting – after all, who has heard 
of Bovel, or Rize? But as they were 
made for each other, “A Bridge 
over the Bosporus” has helped 
bring them together. This French 
not-for-profit association for cultur-
al exchange with Turkey is respon-
sible for a wonderful love story, told 
in song, and which shows all the 
signs of lasting. 
Françoise Arnaud-Demir, 
performer of popular Turkish songs 
and researcher/lecturer at the Institute 
for Oriental Languages and Civiliza-
tions (INALCO) in Paris, is president 
of the association A Bridge over the 
Bosporus that she founded in 2004
the regional cultural organization 
responsible for collecting and pre-
serving Breton intangible heritage. 
In 1996 they launched the “Festival 
of Traditional Song”, held in Bovel, 
a little market town near Rennes in 
Brittany, featuring folksongs from 
Brittany and elsewhere. Others, 
who have grown up with traditional 
song, are veritable living treasures - 
villagers who still carry and pass on 
local history. 
It was torrential rain that brought 
them together, in the summer of 
1997. The festival-goers were start-
ing out on a hike in the countryside, 
singing as they walked, when a 
sudden downpour sent them scur-
rying to Bovel’s only cafe. Here, 
they came across the generation of 
“Masters of the Tradition”, gathered 
around the café’s owners, Léone 
and Louis Bernier. For them the 
festival “was for young people.” But 
when these ‘young people’ started 
to sing, they recognized their own 
songs. Since then, this little café 
has become the symbol of recon-
ciliation between the generations. 
On the first Friday of every month, 
the café plays host to local school-
children, teenagers, teachers and a 
crowd of others from the region - 
and even Paris – who come to stay 
up all night singing.
Songs of every colour 
and flavour
In Turkey, the first signs of a return 
to the homeland, in song, came 
from Birol Topaloglu, someone else 
in search of his roots. Combined, in 
his case, with a strong ecological 
awareness. As in other regions of 
the country, the very banks of Ana-
tolia’s overburdened rivers, flowing 
heavily towards the Black Sea, are 
in danger of disappearing if planned 
dams are built. Meanwhile, these 
lands are gradually being deserted 
by country folk looking for the prom-
ise of an easier life in town. 
Once, community songs and 
dances echoed out in the magnifi-
cent wood and stone houses. Little 
by little they have fallen silent. So, 
Travelling music
(•••)
when Birol started to collect, pub-
lish and revive the traditional rep-
ertoire, it was with a broad vision, 
simultaneously preserving cultural 
heritage, the land and oral tradition. 
And he makes no bones about us-
ing his fame as an established mu-
sician in Istanbul or the friends he 
has made abroad. 
In Storm Valley, where white 
minarets rise above the luxuriant 
green slopes of Rize, the annual 
August Festival is aimed at every-
one. As in Bovel, it hopes to bring 
together young and old, those 
who have left and those who 
stayed behind. Songs are on of-
fer in every shape and size - while 
dancing, walking, or eating. But, 
out of respect for tradition, folk-
tales are still collected, there are 
lessons in traditional cooking, and 
outings to gather wild plants. And 
there is little effort to mask the pride 
Typical architecture of the Black Sea amid the tea gardens.

A night of songs at the café in Bovel.
