All the traditional medical practic-
es of our country are cited in the 
Donguibogam and it is also their 
source. This is how Hwang Kyeo-
ng-sik, professor of philosophy at 
the University of Seoul, began his 
presentation at an international sci-
entific conference devoted to this 
exceptional book, held on 3 Sep-
tember 2009. The conference, at 
Korea’s National Library, marked 
the 400th anniversary of the Don-
guibogam, which had just been in-
scribed on the UNESCO Memory 
of the World Register. It is the first 
medical text to appear on this pres-
tigious list. 
It was compiled by a court phy-
sician, Heo Jun (1546-1615), on 
orders from the king, Seonjo de 
Joseon. It took 16 years of continu-
ous effort, not even disrupted by 
a change of reign or the Japanese 
invasion. Thus was born a genuine 
medical encyclopaedia in 25 vol-
umes, which has continued to in-
spire thinkers and artists alike over 
the centuries. 
The Donguibogam is one of the 
classics of Korean culture. Apart 
from its value for the medical world, 
it also offers a philosophical vision of 
Eastern Asia at the beginning of the 
17th century. The underlying mes-
sage of the encyclopaedia is that it 
is possible to keep a body in good 
health by maintaining its energies – 
which are like those found in nature 
– in balance. Indeed, it starts with 
a chapter on cosmology, where the 
workings of the body are compared 
to those of the universe. 
This principle is still accepted to-
day and continues to spread, thanks 
to the success of “deep ecology”, 
which considers humanity to be 
an integral part of the planetary 
ecosystem. It can trace its origins 
to Taoism and the concepts of not-
acting and not-being. Hoe Jun was 
convinced that all illnesses arose 
from an imbalance. For him, the 
most effective remedy was medita-
tion, not medication.
The pulse,  
a celestial energy
If the Donguibogam were not useful 
in healing the sick, its value would 
have remained limited despite its 
philosophical interest. Using the 
teachings of oriental philosophy, 
the encyclopaedia identifies, clas-
sifies and lists all the medicines 
and medical practices known at the 
time. In the chapters on pharma-
copeia, acupuncture and moxibus-
tion, Hoe Jun describes appropriate 
treatments in detail. He specifies 
exactly when during the year to col-
lect a given plant, what to do with it 
and how long it remains effective. 
In the volumes on internal medi-
cine, Heo Jun describes the inter-
actions of the five viscera. “The liv-
er, the lungs, the kidneys, the heart 
and the spleen all interact with one 
another,” explains Kim Nam-il a re-
                  For four centuries, the Korean medical encyclopaedia known as donguibogam has been 
      a source of inspiration for thinkers and artists alike. its 25 volumes contain a colossal amount 
                    of medical knowledge and philosophy along with some unusual prescriptions.
donguibogam : 
precious book of medicine

Volumes of Donguibogam, considered a classic of Korean culture.

donguibogam : precious book of medicine
searcher in oriental medicine at the 
University of Kyeonghui. “A given 
organ acts differently according to 
its links with the other viscera. The 
Donguibogam explains this prin-
ciple clearly.” 
The section on external medicine 
deals with the five body elements 
that enable it to maintain its form 
and capacity for movement: the skin, 
the muscles, the blood vessels, the 
tendons and the bones. Here it is 
explained that the pulse represents 
celestial energy. In oriental medi-
symptoms of illnesses, as well as 
the remedies. Among these is a 
strange illness entitled yukjing : 
“The patient is tormented by an in-
satiable hunger for meat. If he is not 
made to vomit, he will die.” 
Even more peculiar is a formula in 
the chapter on Diverse Remedies , 
which tells us how to make our-
selves invisible: “Dry and reduce 
to a powder the gall bladder of a 
white dog, a kudzu vine stalk and a 
pinch of cinnamon. Mix all of these 
together with some honey. Roll the 
paste into balls. This preparation 
makes you invisible. The gall blad-
der of a blue dog is even more ef-
fective.” 
“The Donguibogam is an excellent 
treatise, and most of its principles 
are still valid four centuries after it 
was written,” writes Yi Sang-bong, 
communications officer for the As-
sociation of Practitioners of Orien-
tal medicine (Joseon Ilbo, 29 Au-
gust, 2009). He adds, “Master Hoe 
Jun was determined to compile all 
the popular Korean remedies, with-
out exception,” as if to justify the ap-
pearance of some that may appear 
outlandish to us. Yi Sang-bong also 
suggests interpreting the magic 
formula for invisibility as a means of 
practising the way of the heart. 
In his encyclopaedia Hoe Jun did 
indeed present a compilation of 
the traditional remedies passed 
down from generation to genera-
tion throughout Asia, and especially 
China. But he was not shy of ex-
pressing his own convictions and 
experiences as a doctor. The title 
of the work is, itself, an expression 
of his libertarian spirit: literally, the 
word Donguibogam designates a 
precious book on oriental medicine, 
objective and independent.
An accessible treasure
Heo Jun’s wisdom and art, as well 
as his colourful life, have inspired 
generations of artists in South Ko-
rea. The novel by Yi Eunseong, en-
titled Donguibogam, was a great 
success, as was its adaptation 
into a television soap opera. “This 
is not most people’s idea of what 
it means to be a doctor. Most doc-
tors are proud of their art and how 
it relieves the sufferings of their pa-
tients, but hardly any of them write 
down the treatments they use for 
the guidance of future generations. 
Unfortunately,” writes Yi Eunseong 
in his novel. 
The Korean National Library, 
which holds the original edition of 
Donguibogam, is producing an an-
notated translation into modern Ko-
rean. And, from 1 to 25 September 
2009, it put on an exhibition entitled 
The Donguibogam in Words and 
Images . “We showed 176 works 
of literature and art centred on the 
original edition of this work, which 
appeared in 1613 and is now in-
scribed on the UNESCO Memory 
of the World Register,” explains Mo 
Taek-min, head of the Library. 
But what makes the Donguibogam 
so precious is not just to be found 
in the display cabinets of the Na-
tional Library. It has also given us, 
in the 21st century, access to the 
oriental worldview at the beginning 
of the 17th century, people’s daily 
lives at the time, and Asian popular 
medicine. The work builds a bridge 
from the present to the past. Often 
we are oblivious to readily available 
marvels. Fortunately, this one has 
not escaped our notice. 
Yeon Kyung, 
The original volumes of Donguibogam are kept in the Korean National Library

An encyclopaedia of traditional remedies 
passed down from generation to generation 
throughout Asia.

cine, the pulse is essential. “Tak-
ing the pulse” is a time-honoured 
expression that means “to make a 
diagnosis”. The Donguibogam lists 
precisely the different methods of 
taking the pulse and the various in-
terpretations. 
Heo Jun devoted 11 volumes to 
the description of the causes and 
