MAHATMA Gandhi was the foremost leader of the Indian 
independence movement, and one of his great qualities 
was to secure and retain the devotion of persons of differing 
temperaments, but all of very great distinction. Of these, three 
leading figures were Jawaharlal Nehru, Sarvepalli Radhakrish-
nan and Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. 
Educated in Britain, Nehru was drawn to Gandhi because 
he felt that, while others talked, Gandhi was primarily a man of 
action who was making a dent in British rule. Nehru accepted 
Gandhi’s method of non-violence, first as a useful weapon 
against the British and then, after the atom bomb of 1945, as a 
means without alternative. He saw the validity of Marx’s analy-
sis of historical change but did not believe that such change 
can only be brought about by force. The class war could not 
be denied, but it could be resolved by persuasion. In the free-
dom movement, Nehru realized that, while Gandhi had brought 
the peasants into the political campaign, to retain their inter-
est and support, the Indian National Congress should have an 
economic programme. In this sense he is a pioneer of modern, 
twentieth-century nationalism. 
Once Gandhi had brought other classes into the indepen-
dence movement, it became Nehru’s task to hold the various 
classes together by taking account of the basic economic 
needs of the vast majority of the Indian people. So Nehru 
promised that, when freedom had been won, the free govern-
ment of India would give priority to economic development and 
the promotion of social justice. Even before the departure of 
the British, Nehru made the Indian people conscious of the 
importance of planning. 
Nehru’s other great contribution to the independence move-
ment was that he gave it an international perspective. He saw 
that fascism, militarism and imperialism were partners and 
against them were ranged popular and national movements all 
over the world. So the independence movement in India was 
part of a universal struggle and its allies were the peoples fight-
ing for freedom and dignity in Europe, Asia and Africa. 
Nehru’s policies as India’s first prime minister, from 1947 till 
his death in 1964, continued to be influenced by these ideals. 
An emphasis on civil liberties and a search for a socialist pat-
tern of society inspired all his efforts within India; while abroad, 
he followed an active policy of support for anti-colonialism and 
anti-racism. He was particularly committed to Africa, which 
he regarded as India’s neighbour. He supported the national 
movements in Kenya, Algeria, Ghana and Nigeria and never 
compromised in his resistance to apartheid. Above all, he was 
a supporter of the United Nations and its agencies, sent Indian 
troops as part of United Nations contingents to Gaza, Suez 
and the Congo and worked to promote total disarmament. 
The contribution of Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan to the indepen-
dence movement was of a different order. Imperialism dam-
aged the identity of the Indian people by assuming that West-
ern civilization was superior. In reply Radhakrishnan turned to 
Makers of Modern India
                     by Sarvepalli Gopal
Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of independent India,  
René Maheu, Director-General of UNESCO, and Indira Gandhi,  
member of the Executive board. UNESCO, 21 September 1962.

Mahatma Gandhi and Julian Huxley, Director-General of UNESCO, 1947.

Sarvepalli Gopal (1923 - 2002) 
was Hemeritus Professor of Contemporary History  
at Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi,  
and a Fellow of St. Antony’s College, Oxford (UK).  
He was a member of the Executive Board of UNESCO from 1976 to 1980.  
Among his many published works are Modern India (1967)  
and a 3-volume biography of Jawaharlal Nehru (1975-1984).

years in Delhi, first as Vice-President for ten years and then for 
five years as President, he gave the lead in improving the qual-
ity of life and promoting character. Even while holding these 
high offices and carrying out his duty to his own people, Rad-
hakrishnan continued to travel round the world, advocating the 
emergence of a new civilization based on the unity of mankind 
and common truths of the spirit and animated by a religion not 
founded on dogma but on the deepening of the individual’s 
awareness and compassion for all fellow beings. 
If Radhakrishnan was by birth a Hindu, Abul Kalam Azad was 
born in Mecca of pious Muslim parents; but they both had a 
strong sense of religion based on rationalism and common val-
ues of all humanity transcending creeds and denominations. 
Fluent in Arabic and Persian and a scholar in Islamic studies, 
Azad gave a broad and liberal interpretation of the Qur’an. To 
him religion was a guide to proper action and his scholarship 
led him into public life. From 1912 his primary objective was 
to draw the Muslims in India into the struggle for freedom. 
A steadfast follower of Gandhi, he was elected a number of 
times President of the Indian National Congress and suffered 
long terms of internment and imprisonment. From 1920, po-
litical differences between Hindu and Muslim organizations 
increased; but the Congress insisted that nationalism had no 
connection with religion and the presence of Maulana Azad 
in the ranks of the nationalist leadership was the highest testi-
mony of this. Azad’s pride in being an Indian was strengthened 
by his commitment to what he termed the Islamic spirit, and 
he never accepted that a good Muslim could not be a good 
Indian.  From 1947 till his death in 1958 he served as 
India’s first minister for education and was a key figure in 
the formulation of national policies in all fields. With his be-
lief that true religion brings all peoples together, Azad also 
took much interest in the promotion of international under-
standing and was the president of the General Conference 
of UNESCO at its session in Delhi in 1956.
(The UNESCO Courier, 1989 - 2)
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (1888-1975) was a scholar and  
philosopher of international repute, noted for his work on Hinduism.
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad (1888-1958), the architect of India’s  
post-independence education policy.

the sources and, in his writings on Indian philosophy, showed 
that the thought of his people was second to none in logic and 
rationality. This enabled them to hold up their heads. But Rad-
hakrishnan did more. He argued that philosophy was related 
to life and, while interpreting Indian thinkers at their best, also 
called on Indians to discard what was outmoded and to rid 
themselves of obscurantism and superstition. Their long and 
rich tradition had been arrested and required innovation and 
further evolution. Truth should not be allowed to be smothered 
by the dead past. The speculative and scientific thought of the 
West should be incorporated into the Indian heritage. 
Moreover, by expounding Indian thought in terms that related 
to the Western tradition, Radhakrishnan made Indian culture a 
part of world civilization. He, like Nehru, accepted a national-
ism that was a brick in the structure of internationalism and 
his philosophical efforts were intended to build understand-
ing between East and West. A member before the Second 
World War of the International Committee for Intellectual Co-
operation, he was active in UNESCO from its foundation in 
1945. He was a member of UNESCO’s Executive Board, 
served as its chairman, was elected president of the General 
Conference in 1952, and was associated with the opening of 
UNESCO’s Paris Headquarters in the Place de Fontenoy, in 
1958. To him UNESCO was, as he described it, “the priest-
hood of the spirit”. 
Radhakrishnan’s main activity, after India became free, was to 
help in the reconciliation of mankind on the basis of the com-
mon ground among all the religions of the world. He believed 
that a global community was emerging and that humanity 
should be educated to recognize its purpose and destiny. Ap-
pointed by Nehru as India’s ambassador to the Soviet Union, 
Radhakrishnan stood nearly thirty years ago for negotiations 
and peaceful settlements between the two sides in the Cold 
War. In 1952 he came back to India and, for the next fifteen 
