You were one of the principal 
architects of COBE, the first 
satellite to observe the CMB  
in 1989. What are your 
thoughts, 20 years later,  
on the Planck mission? 
I recall that as soon as we had made 
the COBE discoveries and made 
the announcement, I was already 
thinking about what was next. I had 
colleagues Nazzareno Mandolesi 
and Marco Bersanelli from Italy 
visiting for a month. We met together 
and outlined possible missions. We 
eventually proposed what became 
COBRAS (COsmic Background 
Radiation Anisotropy Satellite). At 
the same time the French people 
here, mostly from Orsay, but some 
others as well, proposed SAM-
BA (Satellite for Measurement of 
Background Anisotropies).
                                    on may 14, 2009 the planck satellite was launched into space aboard 
         the ariane 5 rocket from the Kourou aeronautical base in french guyana. this European space
           agency (Esa) mission will help us to improve our understanding of the universe. 
                      a 2006 nobel Laureate in physics, professor george fitzgerald smoot, explains more.
Later on they merged and eventu-
ally it became COBRAS-SAMBA 
and then it became Planck. Once 
we made the discovery that the 
radiation was sure and that there 
were these fluctuations in the early 
universe to map, then the fluctua-
tions became this tool where you 
could discover the geometry and 
constituents of space and check 
to see if the laws of physics re-
towards a map  
oF the universe
The Nobel Laureate George Fitzgerald Smoot,  
at UNESCO in July 2009..

George Fitzgerald Smoot was awarded  
the Nobel Prize in Physics along  
with John C. Mather for their discovery  
of the blackbody form  
and anisotropy of the cosmic microwave  
background radiation. Their discovery follows  
a quarter of a century after the initial discovery  
of Cosmic Microwave Background radiation (CMB) 
by Arno A. Penzias and Robert W. Wilson.  
Mr. Smoot began his scientific career  
by obtaining dual bachelor’s degrees  
in Mathematics and Physics from  
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). 
It was there, after obtaining a doctorate in particle 
physics, he first began to turn his attention towards 
cosmology. He subsequently started working  
for the Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory in the early 1970s where 
he collaborated with Luis Walter Alvarez,  
a 1968 Nobel Laureate in Physics. 
Professor Smoot took part in the UNESCO  
sponsored international symposium,  
“The Invisible Universe”, held at UNESCO 
in Paris from June 29 to July 3. During his visit  
he gave an interview to French science journalist 
Dominique Chouchan.

main constant over time and valid 
over all of space time. What was 
needed was to make a much more 
precise set of maps using these 
fluctuations. 
Therefore, one of the objectives 
of the Planck mission  
is to make these more precise 
maps of the early universe? 
Its objective is to make a beauti-
ful map to measure very precisely 
the embryo universe by using the 
light from the beginning of the uni-
verse. In order to accomplish this 
task the detectors and the cooling 
system had to be very high-tech 
and the way to send the data back 
is also very complicated. 
In order to explain the importance 
of measuring with such precision 
the radiation and its fluctuations, I 
will use an analogy. If you have two 
bells that you hear are struck, you 
can tell which one is bigger. If they 
are made of the same material, the 
bigger one will be the lower fre-
quency because the wavelength 
is longer. If you have two bells, 
one made of iron and one made 
of brass, and you strike them both, 
you can tell the constituents of the 
bell by the harmonics you hear. It’s 
the same for the early universe, 
it’s a precise analogy. The sound 
speed is affected by what the ear-
ly universe is made out of and by 
measuring precisely you can tell 
what the universe is made out of. 
When will astrophysicists 
receive the first data from 
Planck? 
We’re already getting some data, 
but it takes at least 6 months before 
you have seen even the sky and it 
takes 14 months before you have 
seen the whole sky enough times 
so that you have a complete sky 
map. Nothing will be released to 
the public for some time because 
it’s going to take a while to analyze 
the data and the team is so large 
(400 scientists) and they have a lot 
of comments to make. So, I think it 
will be 2 to 3 years.

Will the results from Planck  
definitively confirm the Big 
Bang Theory?
The thing about science is that 
you never prove anything, you only 
support it. It’s like the theory of evo-
lution. Do you know how strong 
the evidence is for evolution? You 
can map DNA, and so forth. It’s a 
theory. But it is very, very accurate 
and has very many cross-checks. 
For the universe, 20 years ago we 
used to not have as much evidence, 
now we’re getting much more. The 
predictions so far have been check, 
check, check. The fact that I am still 
talking about the Big Bang Theory 
and putting checkmarks down tells 
you so far, so good. But the fact that 
there are so many checks means 
that now we have it really, really nar-
rowed down. 
When pondering to such length 
the secrets of space and time, 
do you feel more like  
a scientist, a poet,  
a philosopher, or all three? 
Sometimes I have to become more 
of an artist and philosopher be-
cause that’s what people relate to 
and not to the technical details. All 
they care about is the real struc-
ture of space and time and what’s 
possible and what’s not possible. 
What we know today probably 
tells you that time travel is not 
possible. Is that philosophy or is 
that science? Well, it’s a mixture. 
It’s like people who cook. Are they 
chemists or are they artists? Well, 
a good cook is both. And so a re-
ally good scientist will be a scien-
tist, artist and a philosopher. 
But you remember the Greek 
word for science is “natural phi-
losophy”. It’s only because sci-
ence has been so extraordinarily 
successful that philosophy is now 
the domain about what we don’t 
know and science is the domain 
about what we do know. There 
are just so many incredible and 
beautiful places on earth. It’s hard 
when you go into the forest and 
you see all these interconnected 
species to not see the hand of 
God. But when you step back 
and you see evolution, then it be-
comes very natural. But it doesn’t 
mean it’s still not beautiful. If you 
see a rainbow and you know how 
the rainbow works, it still doesn’t 
mean it’s not beautiful. I was once 
asked “Are you reducing man to a 
jiggling string of corks? Isn’t that 
dehumanizing? Doesn’t that take 
away the soul?” I said, “Not nec-
essarily. Sometimes there is even 
more beauty in understanding 
how the machine works.”
towards a map oF the universe
Drawing of the constellations in the Southern hemisphere by Joannes Janssonius(1661).

COBE was the first satellite to observe cosmic radiation in 1989.
