Ideology 
Clashing 
with History    
               Romila Thapar talks 
               to Shiraz Sidhva
You have strongly opposed the attempt to use 
history in support of an ideology of religious 
nationalism by the right-wing Hindu Bharatiya 
Janata Party (BJP), which was in power from 
1998 to 2004. There was an attempt at the time to 
rewrite Indian textbooks. How does the rewriting 
of history to endorse recent political ideology  
affect human rights? 
Let me clarify here that my fight was against the BJP-led 
government and the Hindutva view of Indian history, and not 
against other governments in India. The Hindutva lobby that 
insisted on the changes in Indian textbooks endorses a Hindu 
right-wing ultra-nationalism – often described as Hindu funda-
mentalism – and is trying to propagate a revisionist history in 
classrooms and political discourse. The parent organization in 
India, known as the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), has 
a distinctly religious fundamentalist political agenda. The RSS 
and its political arm, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), gained 
power defeating moderate secular Indians by exploiting Hindu 
nationalist sentiments. The RSS has been involved in several 
high-profile incidents of religiously motivated violence over the 
last twenty years. 
The controversy on my work involved some textbooks I had 
written for middle schools, where I had talked about the lives of 
Aryans as we knew it from the Vedic texts. I had mentioned, for 
instance, that the early Indians ate beef – the references in the 
“The best way to understand the correlation between culture and democracy 
is to examine the manner in which individuals or groups choose their identity  
and perceive the differences between themselves and others”.
One of the posters that was designed for UNESCO’s 25th anniversary.

Vedas are clear, and there is archaeological evidence for this. 
The Hindu right wing extolled the Aryans as the great model 
society for ancient India, and were opposed to any criticism 
of them. When they objected to this and other statements of 
mine, I provided evidence from the texts as proof. But they 
insisted that children should not be told that beef was eaten in 
early times. My reaction was that it was historically more cor-
rect to explain to school children why in early times beef was 
eaten, and why later a prohibition was introduced. 
Though the attack on me was vicious, I was not the only his-
torian attacked. There were about six of us, who had authored 
the earlier textbooks, and others who spoke up against the 
changes in school curriculum and textbooks by the (then) 
government, made without consulting educational bodies that 
would normally have been consulted. The government then 
described us as being anti-Hindu, and therefore anti-Indian, 
and therefore anti-patriotic, and therefore, traitors. 
The deletion of passages from our books and the ban on any 
discussion of the deleted passages raised a number of issues 
of various kinds pertaining to the rights of individuals and the 
ethics of government institutions.
There was also a virulent protest by some  
Indians living in the United States when the US 
Library of Congress appointed you as the first 
Kluge Chair in Countries and Cultures of the 
South in 2004. What became of these protests 
and were textbooks revised when the Congress 
government replaced the Bharatiya Janata Party 
in New Delhi?
The Library of Congress rejected without any hesitation the 
demand from the Hindutva lobby, particularly Indians living 
in the United States, to reverse my appointment, therefore 
the demand was slowly silenced. The abuse online and 
through e-mails continued unabated. 
When the Congress reclaimed power in 2004, it decided 
to do away with all the previous textbooks, written by us as 
far back as the 1960s and 70s, as well as those produced 
by the BJP government just prior to its fall. A new set of 
books was commissioned, which are now in use. They are 
different from the ones we wrote and reflect some of the 
new interests in history as a discipline, and do not push a 
Hindutva hard line. 
The worrying thing is, what will happen if the Bharatiya 
Janata Party returns to power in the next election, which will 
be held within 12 months? Will they change the textbooks

The restored Hindu temple of Somnath. (see page 58)

again? I worry for the school children who have to be exam-
ined in the subject and depend on textbooks. 
Once we accept one religious group’s agenda and beliefs 
to be taught in the public schools, it opens the door for every 
other group to do the same thing. As educators, we have to 
make a distinction between history on the one hand, which 
involves questioning existing knowledge about the past where 
necessary, and faith on the other hand, where even myths are 
acceptable. The two have to be kept separate. The first is the 
domain of the historian and the second that of the priest.
On a wider international level, many human 
rights atrocities in recent years have sought to 
draw legitimacy from history, using the pretext of 
setting right the wrongs of the past. How can this 
be avoided?
Political parties today draw heavily on ideology and also on 
history, because a lot of the current politics is determined by 
imagined identities – either imagined racial identities, or imag-
ined religious identities, or whatever the identities may be, 
there is a construction of identities. They are projected back 
into the past, but in effect really arise out of concerns of the 
present. And these imagined identities that go into the making 
of political ideologies are very likely to grapple with history. The 
grappling also takes the form of creating the notion of what is 
believed to be a national culture, THE national culture. This is 
never questioned, because if you question it, you become a 
traitor to the nation. And it is usually a single, carefully selected 
strand from the broader culture which is drawn out and exag-
gerated, and this facilitates the potential exclusion of some citi-
zens on the basis of either religion or race or language or what-
ever identity is conveniently within reach. This is very harmful 
to issues of human rights, because it gives priority to certain 
groups and their cultures over others. 
But isn’t it a dangerous notion, for those in 
power to believe they can set right the wrongs of 
the past? 
This is a commonly made claim. We have an example, in the 
Indian case, where a Hindu political faction led by BJP leaders 
destroyed the (16th century) Babri Masjid at Ayodhya (in North-
ern India) in 1992, and claimed that they were avenging Mahmud 
of Ghazni’s attack on Somnath (a Hindu temple) and thereby set-
ting right this wrong of the past. 
First of all, did it have to take a thousand years before this act (of 
Ghazni) was avenged if indeed the idea was to avenge it? More 
important, how did it set right the wrongs of the past? What 
was the result of the destruction of the Babri Masjid? It made 
not the slightest difference to our reading of the past. What it 
did was that it resulted in a massacre of Muslims in (the West-
ern Indian state of) Gujarat, and since then, a continued series 
of bomb explosions in the major cities of the country. So what 
is argued as setting right the wrongs of the past cannot be set 
right in this fashion. And in any case, it’s a rather silly argument, 
because the past is that which has happened. It cannot be 
changed, and therefore, it’s much more important to set right 
the wrongs of the present, rather than harping on what might 
have been the wrongs of the past. 

