Fu Zhiping, a professor of ecology 
at Mianyang Normal University, Si-
chuan. 
The Yangtze river system produc-
es 40 percent of the nation’s grain, 
a third of its cotton, 48 percent of 
its freshwater fish and 40 percent 
of the total industrial output. How-
ever, it is also a depository for 60 
percent of the country’s pollution, 
making it the single largest source 
of pollution in the Pacific Ocean, 
water schools shed light  
on yangtze pollution
Primary school students conduct a survey among villagers in Piankou Town,  
Beichuan County, Sichuan Province.
Foul-smelling “rubbish mountains” 
consisting of piles of polystyrene, 
cardboard cups, food scraps, plas-
tic bags, medical needles and other 
debris pollute the Baicao River, 
which provides drinking water to 
the 6,600 inhabitants of Piankou 
Town, Beichuan County, in south-
west China’s Sichuan Province. 
In the 1980s, this tributary of the 
Yangtze, China’s biggest river, was 
“so clear that you could see to the 
bottom”, recalls Zeng Wenjun, a 
town resident in his forties. “The 
Qingbo (Clean Water) Fish exclu-
sive to the river was unmatchable 
in taste, but it is now regrettably 
extinct.” 
The run-off from private gold mines 
and sandstone collectors adds to 
the filth. The mushrooming small 
and medium-sized hydropower sta-
tions also pose an ecological risk to 
the livelihoods of the people living 
nearby. 
The 1,000-plus towns along the 
upper reaches of the Yangtze pump 
the numerous tributaries with waste, 
causing a huge environmental prob-
lem at the Three Gorges Dam, says 
(•••)
                                the yangtze river system produces 40 percent of china’s grain, 
            a third of its cotton, 48 percent of its freshwater fish and 40 percent of the country’s total   
                 industrial output. It is also, alas, a depository for 60 percent of the country’s pollution. 
                      A plan to save the river was launched by schoolchildren in Sichuan province 
                              and has taken on national scope.
.
according to the Shangri-la Insti-
tute for Sustainable Communities 
(SISC), a Chinese non-governmen-
tal organization.
Fifty thousand  
schoolchildren  
to the Yangtze’s rescue
In the spring of 2008, both profes-
sor Fu Zhiping and Sun Yao, prima-
ry school student in Piankou, took 
part in the Water School for a Liv-

Primary school students conduct a survey among villagers  
in Piankou Town, Beichuan County, Sichuan Province.

ing Yangtze under the International 
Water School Program sponsored 
by Austria’s Swarovski company, a 
program that also includes the Nile 
in Egypt and India’s Ganges. 
The Chinese program, supervised 
by the SISC, with the Ministry of 
Education and UNESCO as its 
partners, has involved more than 
50,000 students from 27 middle 
and primary schools in Sichuan and 
the adjacent provinces of Qinghai 
and Yunnan, as well as Shanghai, 
where the Yangtze meets the East 
China Sea. 
Under the guidance of teacher 
Tang Ming, Sun and his classmates 
at Piankou Central Primary School 
began to monitor water quality by 
using graduated cylinders and test 
papers, which they had never used 
before. 
The preliminary test result con-
firmed Sun’s concerns: the PH in-
dex stands at 5.8 at the lower reach-
es of Baicao River, with the turbidity 
reaching Grade IV, showing that 
the water has already been pol-
luted to an alarming extent. 
Based on further investigations 
in and around Piankou Town, 
Sun and his classmates wrote 
a letter proposing that munici-
pal authorities re-arrange the 
15 dustbins along the two major 
streets “in a more scientific way” 
and establish a rubbish disposal 
system. 
To their great surprise, the town 
government approved their pro-
posal, and a sewage treatment 
plant based on the scientific prin-
ciples of a biological wetland is also 
under discussion. 
The students went on to dissemi-
nate questionnaires to the commu-
nities of Piankou, and 89 percent 
of the respondents believed it was 
necessary to treat the river pollution. 
“The project provides a platform for 
effective environmental protection 
around the branches of Yangtze, 
and it is a model for shifting away 
from the exam-focused educational 
system,” says Fu, who has 14 years’ 
experience in the field of environ-
mental education.
Tibetan lamas  
joining in
The water schools on the Yangtze 
have gone beyond the boundaries 
of campuses to complement local 
social, economic and cultural condi-
tions. 
For instance, the lamas of Dong-
zhulin Temple, in Deqing Tibetan Au-
tonomous Prefecture in Yunnan, are 
invited to contribute to water protec-
tion through their religious teachings 
that link nature and man. 
“We encourage the process of 
learning by doing, so that a change in 
mindsets and behavior will impact the 
policy-making of government, which 
promotes wider public participation 
in long-term environmental protec-
tion,” says Dorjie, SISC program co-
ordinator. 
In 2009, the project will expand to 
China’s capital Beijing, a city notori-
ous for its scarcity of water. Besides 
the Education for Sustainable Devel-
opment on the Tibet Plateau project 
surrounding the Yalu Tsangpo River, 
the SISC is also aiming to carry out a 
similar environmental education proj-
ect along China’s second longest 
river, the Yellow River, says Dorjie. 
Gong Yidong, 
journalist, China Features
water schools shed light on yangtze pollution
(•••)
China has its share of polluting factories, such as this one on the Yangtze.
