The word “Nibelungentreue”, de-
noting the unquestioning loyalty 
unto death displayed by the Nibel-
ungs, tends to have rather negative 
connotations in German. It is often 
used to refer to politicians who re-
main unbendingly loyal to their par-
ty– even when the consequences 
of this are ultimately detrimental. 
The term was coined by a chancel-
lor, Bernhard von Bülow, who used 
it in 1909 in connection with the 
allegiance of the German empire 
to Austria-Hungary. And it was pre-
cisely this “Nibelungentreue” that 
culminated, five years later, in the 
catastrophe of World War I – and 
ended in Germany’s total defeat. 
Von Bülow himself probably did not 
realise the portent of his remarks: in 
the Song of the Nibelungs, too, the 
heroes all end up dying. 
                                    sung since the 5th century, transcribed in about 1200, the medieval epic poem
                  “song of the nibelungs” has had a troubled history. it inspired wagner, Fritz Lang 
                             and perhaps tolkien, but it was also appropriated by Hitler. its inscription 
             in unesCo’s Memory of the world register 2009 should help to restore its honour.
UNESCO has now inscribed the 
three oldest preserved manuscripts 
of the medieval epic poem, dat-
ing back to the 13th century, in its 
Memory of the World Register. 
The historic roots of the Song of 
the Nibelungs reach back to the 
times of the Migration Period, in 
the 5th century. The Song of the 
Nibelungs was written some time 
around 1200 and combined cycles 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9



rehabiliTaTion  
for The  
“song of The nibelungs”
Ute Obhof of the Land Baden-Württemberg Library in Karlsruhe,  
presenting “Manuscript C” of the Song of the Nibelungs.

of sagas which had been passed 
on orally for centuries. The author 
of the Song of the Nibelungs is un-
known, says Claudia Fabian of the 
Bavarian State Library. Nor has the 
very first version been preserved, 
“but from the manuscripts that have 
come down to us we can deduce 
that it must have existed”. 
One subject covered by the epic 
poem is the crushing of the Bur-
gundian kingdom by the Romans 
and the Huns. Scientists believe 
that the King of the Huns, named 
Etzel in the manuscript, is in fact 
the historic emperor Attila, and 
that the dragon-slayer Siegfried 
was modelled on the Cheruscan 
chieftain Arminius. The latter led 
the Germanic tribes against the 
Romans and inflicted a devastating 
defeat upon the occupying forces 
in the year AD 9 in the legendary 
Varus Battle. Never again did the 
Romans manage to bring the Ger-
manic tribes completely under their 
control. The dragon Fafnir, slain by 
Siegfried, who afterwards bathed in 
its blood in order to become invul-
nerable, is thought to symbolise the 
Roman occupiers. 
Nevertheless, the Song of the Ni-
belungs is not a historic document. 
Ute Obhof, who looks after the 
manuscript in the Regional Library 
of the State of Baden in Karlsruhe, 
notes: “It brings together various 
different events and persons from 
different periods.” The other two 
manuscripts are located in the Ba-
varian State Library in Munich and 
in the Abbey Library in the Swiss 
town of St. Gallen. The abbey itself 
was declared a UNESCO World 
Heritage Site in 1983. 
Thrilling stuff, and yet it sunk into 
oblivion in the 16th century. We can 
only speculate about the reasons: 
Claudia Fabian speculates that 
“perhaps it simply didn’t agree with 
the popular taste at the time.” 
It was not until 1755 that it was 
resurrected, when one of the manu-
scripts was rediscovered by acci-
dent. This time, it struck a strong 
chord with the awakening national 
sentiments of the German people, 
rehabiliTaTion for The “song of The nibelungs”
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9


who built it up into a national epic. 
Romantic painters a little later re-
garded it as the rediscovery of the 
Middle Ages and the germ cell of 
the Germanic identity. Goethe, too, 
was extremely taken by the drama 
about the dragon slayer; and the 
poet Friedrich Hebbel based his 
play “The Nibelungs” on it in 1861. 
It serves as the foundation for sev-
eral dramatic productions, as well 
as the Nibelungen Festival, held an-
nually in Worms since 2002.
Art as propaganda
The story, however, has repeatedly 
been instrumentalised for political 
ends too. Fundamental German vir-
tues could allegedly be identified in 
the invulnerable dragon slayer Sieg-
fried, the Burgundy king Gunther, 
the sly Hagen, the beautiful and 
vindictive Kriemhild and the strong 
Brunhilde. More than anything, the 
story served as a screen on which 
the increasingly pronounced nation-
al aspirations of the Germans could 
be projected – initially in response 
to their oppression by Napoleon; 
later in support of the Wilhelminian 
Empire’s ambition to become a ma-
jor power (1871-1888). And then 
it was hijacked by the Nazis. Thus 
in 1943 Hermann Göring drew 
parallels to the Nibelungs with the 
intention of motivating the German 
soldiers surrounded at Stalingrad: 
“And of all these gigantic battles, 
Stalingrad now stands out like a 
huge, monumental structure: the 
Battle of Stalingrad. One day this 
will be seen as the greatest heroic 
battle ever fought in our history. [...] 
– We know a tremendous, heroic 
song about an unparalleled battle, 
called ‘The Battle of the Nibelungs’. 
They too stood in a hall full of fire 
and flames, and quenched their 
thirst with their own blood – yet 
they fought, and fought to the last.” 
“It was the mutilation of a medieval 
text”, says Ute Obhof. It would seem 
that Göring did not read the Song 
of the Nibelungs very carefully, be-
cause its tragic end does not make 
it particularly suitable for generating 
confidence in an ultimate victory. As 
we know, the battle of Stalingrad 
ended in the disastrous defeat of 
the German army. 
The Song of the Nibelungs is not 
suitable for rousing German patrio-
tism either. It deals with amorous af-
fairs and petty jealousy at the court 
of the Burgundians, with deceit and 
murder, and ultimately ends with 
Kriemhild taking bloody revenge on 
the murderers of her beloved Sieg-
fried. Apart from this, the story is 
set in places scattered across all of 
Europe. The people of the Nibelung 
are identified in the song as com-
ing from Norway, Brunhilde is the 
queen of Iceland and Etzel is the 
leader of the Huns, who resided in 
what is today Hungary. 
So how German is the Song of the 
Nibelungs anyway? 
“It is not really German at all,” says 
Ute Obhof, “it’s European”. As it is, 
Germany did not actually exist in 
its present form in the fifth century. 
“What does make it German, how-
ever, is the fact that it was handed 
down in the German language.” 
It was presumably not so much the 
Song of the Nibelungs itself that led 
to its becoming so charged with 
nationalism, Ms Fabian believes. 
This was promoted in particular by 
the musical interpretation of the 
material by the composer Richard 
Wagner – although that was not in 
fact the effect he intended. Wag-
ner was in fact more interested in 
depicting human nature – torn be-
tween the competing interests of 
love and power. Over a period of 
almost thirty years, Wagner created 
rehabiliTaTion for The “song of The nibelungs”
Initial on the manuscript.

a four-part, sixteen-hour magnum 
opus which he called the “Ring of 
the Nibelung”. It was first staged 
in 1876, and since 1896 has been 
performed regularly in Bayreuth. 
It is hardly surprising that Hitler, 
seeing the work as a nationalistic 
celebration of Germanic ideology, 
became a permanent visitor of the 
Bayreuth festival from 1933 on-
wards. Winifred Wagner, Richard 
Wagner’s daughter-in-law, directed 
the festival at the time and was also 
a close friend of the dictator. Even 
thirty years after the war she would 
continue to profess a glowing admi-
ration of Hitler. 
All this did severe harm to the image 
of Wagner and the Song of the Nibe-
lungs. And it stuck in people’s minds. 
In one of his films, Woody Allen puts 
it this way: “I can’t listen to that much 
Wagner. I start getting the urge to 
conquer Poland.”
The Eddas :  
a universal inspiration
Unfortunately, the medieval epic poem 
has never been able to free itself en-
tirely from this long period of abuse. 
The inclusion of the manuscripts in 
the UNESCO list of cultural heritage 
could mark an important step in its 
rehabilitation. Their inscription puts 
them alongside numerous other Ger-
man works, including Beethoven’s 
Ninth Symphony, documents from 
the estate of Goethe and Schiller, 
a Gutenberg Bible and Fritz Lang’s 
classic silent film “Metropolis”. 
Fritz Lang would certainly have been 
pleased by the decision, because he 
too was fascinated by the medieval 
heroic epic. Indeed, he was the first 
to make a film of the story, in 1924. 
Along with “Metropolis”, Lang’s five-
hour production is considered one of 
the milestones of silent films. 
Richard Wagner’s descendants 
have also done a great deal to shake 
off the nationalistic connotations of 
the music. Aside from Bayreuth, a 
regular Nibelungen Festival has also 
been held in Worms since 2002 – 
the town in which most of the story in 
the Song of the Nibelungs is set. 
The festival was revived by Dieter 
Wedel, and this triggered a come-
back on the silver screen too: in 
2004, Uli Edel filmed a star-studded 
new version of the Nibelungs. That 
too made every effort to avoid any 
form of German pathos. Perhaps too 
much so: Edel turned the story into 
a globalised fantasy fairy tale, which 
could have taken place anywhere – 
in Germany, Denmark or the Shire. 
This is not entirely surprising either, 
because the Song of the Nibelungs 
gives the impression of having had a 
formative influence on Tolkien’s “Lord 
of the Rings”. Although Tolkien de-
nied having copied from it, he did, like 
Wagner, draw inspiration from Ger-
manic and Norse sagas when writing 
his epic novel – from the “Edda”, for 
example, a collection of Germanic 
and Norse epic poems about gods 
and heroes, which contains parts of 
the Nibelung legend. So Tolkien’s 
Ring and the Song of the Nibel-
ungs ultimately spring from the same 
source.
Jens Lubbadeh, 
journalist at Spiegel Online (Germany), 
correspondent for the UNESCO Courier 
rehabiliTaTion for The “song of The nibelungs”
Manuscript of the Song of the Nibelungs, an illumination.
