Cover of The UNESCO Courier dedicated to Rabindranath Tagore, 
in December 1961.



Portrait of a Man
                                       by Satyajit Ray
n August 7, 1941, in the city of Calcutta, a man died. His mor-
tal remains perished, but he left behind him a heritage which 
no fire could consume.  
It was a heritage of words and music and poetry, of ideas 
and ideals, and it has the power to move us today and in the 
days to come.   
We, who owe him so much, salute his memory.  
Founded in the year 1690 by an Englishman named Job 
Charnock, the city of Calcutta, one hundred years ago, was 
a thriving metropolis. As the capital of India Calcutta was the 
seat of government.  
In the northern part of this sprawling city, in the area known 
as Jorasanko in Chitpore, was the family residence of the Tag-
ores. The Tagores had an impressive lineage. It dated back 
to the first group of learned Brahmins that came from Kanauj 
and settled in Bengal in the 8th century. One thousand years 
later, Panchanan, a descendant, came to the new city of Cal-
cutta and found a lucrative position with a British shipping 
company. His grandson Nilmoni added considerably to the 
family fortune and built the house at Jorasanko in 1789.  
The peak was reached, however, with Nilmoni’s grandson, 
Dwarkanath, one of the most brilliant and colourful figures of 
the 19th century. Dwarkanath Tagore combined cultured so-
phistication with largeness of heart and a rare degree of busi-
ness acumen. Coal, sugar, indigo, export, banking, newspa-
pers, there was no end to his enterprise – and he succeeded 
in all. If his earnings were fabulous, so was his spending.  
Although a Hindu and a Vaishnab, Dwarkanath defied the 
ban of Brahmin orthodoxy and twice went to England. There 
he had an audience with Queen Victoria, discussions with 
Gladstone, and dinner with men like Dickens, Thackeray and 
Max Muller. 
Before his death in England, Dwarkanath had written a let-
ter to his eldest son Debendranath reproving him for neglect-
ing the family’s business affairs. For some years past, young 
Debendranath had been developing tendencies which might 
well have distressed his father. 
It began in a burning ‘ghat’. The last rites were being admin-
istered to Debendranath’s grandmother. Not far away, on the 
river bank, sat Debendranath. Like many a rich man’s son, he 
had been leading a wayward life. But tonight, he was over-
come by a strange feeling. Worldly possessions seemed to 
lose their meaning for him.  
This led to a period of profound disquiet, followed by a 
ceaseless quest for the meaning of existence in the great 
source books of the East and West. He read the materialist 
philosophers of modern Europe – Locke, Hume, Bentham 
and others – whose ideas were so much in vogue among 
the students of the time. Then he learnt Sanskrit and read 
the Mahabharata. But peace of mind would not come until 
one day he chanced upon a torn page of a Sanskrit book. 
There was a ‘sloka’ in it, which said: “God is supreme and 
all-pervading. Be content with what He gives. Do not covet 
another’s wealth.”  
This happened to be a page of the Ishopanishad, edited by 
Raja Rammohun Roy. Rammohun had been a close friend 
of Dwarkanath’s. As a boy, Debendranath had a deep and 
silent admiration for the man. But the greatness of Raja’s vi-
sion and the magnitude and nobility of the tasks he had set 
before himself, were beyond the boy’s comprehension. The 
Raja lived in times when India’s spiritual heritage was being 
submerged in ritual and superstition. 
Growing up in  
a family of scholars and artists
Rammohun advocated Western education for Indians be-
cause he wanted the new ideas of the West to spread in 
the country. But he also wanted to us to respect what was 
old and true in our own heritage. His own study of the Upa-
nishads had led him to the monotheistic bases of Hinduism, 
which he sought to spread through writings and lecturers. 
His work was left unfinished by his death in England. And 
now Debendranath, inspired by the two lines of Sanskrit 
text, went on to prove to be his true spiritual son and heir. 
Debendranath suffered social ostracism for preaching the 
monotheistic faith that he called Brahmoism, but to his fol-
lowers – and there were many – he was Maharshi, the Great 
Sage.  When Rabindranath was born, the Maharshi was 45 
years old. His wife Saradamoni was 33. Rabindranath was 
Satyajit Ray (1921 - 1992)  
was one of India’s leading film directors.  
In 1961 he made a documentary film on Rabindranath Tagore  
on the occasion of the poet’s birth centennial.

the fourteenth child. The eldest was Dwijendranath – poet, 
philosopher and mathematician. The second son, Satyen-
dranath, was a Sanskrit scholar who translated the Gita and 
Meghdoot into Bengali verse, went to England and returned 
as the first Indian member of the Indian Civil Service. The fifth 
son, Jyotirindranath, was a born musician, translated Molière 
and Sanskrit dramas into Bengali, and wrote and staged 
some of the most popular Bengali plays of his time. Among 
the daughters was Swarnakumari, the first woman novelist 
and the first woman to edit a literary journal in India. Indeed it 
was a household which hummed with activity.  At the age of 
seven, Rabi was sent to school. He went to four schools and 
hated them all. But to say that he lacked education would be 
wrong, for his third brother, Hemendranath, saw to his stud-
ies at home, and it was all done by the clock.  Rabi was 13 
when his first book of verse, ‘Kabikahini’, came out. When 
Rabi was 16, Dwijendranath brought out a literary magazine 
called ‘Bharati’, and Rabi found an admirable platform for his 
literary activities. His essays included pieces on European 
poets like Dante and Petrarch whose acquaintance Rabi had 
already made in the library of his elder brother Satyendranath. 
Satyendranath’s wife, Gnanadanandini, who had been stay-
ing in England with her two children, was a remarkable wom-
an, who had been persuaded by her husband to come out of 
orthodox seclusion. Tabi set out for England in the summer 
of 1879 and joined Gnanadanandini at Brighton. If the plan 
was to provide the boy with a proper education, it came to 
nought. For Rabi returned a year later without completing his 
course of studies at London University. 
While in England, Rabi had become acquainted with West-
ern music. Some of the tunes he had learned found their way 
into the enchanting opera ‘Valmiki-Prativa’. There were other 
tunes, however, which had their origin in classical Indian ra-
gas, used for the first time in an operatic context. 
Watching life  
through the window
‘Valmiki-Prativa’ was performed in the Tagore residence 
with Rabindranath himself in the role of the bandit-turned-
poet. The rest of the cast, too, was composed of members 
of the Tagore family, all gifted with varying degrees of talent. 
Among those who saw and praised this performance was the 
greatest literary figure of the time, Bankim Chandra Chatterji. 
A year later, when Rabindranath’s Sandhya-Sangeet was 
published, Bankim Chandra personally congratulated the 
poet and acknowledged his pre-eminence among the rising 
writers of the day.  At the age of 22, Rabindranath married 
Bhabatarini Devi; the old fashioned name was later changed 
to Mrinalini. Two months before the wedding Rabindranath 
had received a letter from his father in which he was asked to 
prepare himself to look after the family estates. After a period 
of initial training in the Estates’ Offices in Calcutta, Rabin-
dranath found himself in the very heart of rural Bengal, in the 
area of the river Padma.  With a worldly wisdom unusual in a 
poet, but characteristic of the Tagores, Rabindranath in later 
life set out in a practical way to improve the lot of the poor 
peasants of his estates and his varied work in this field is 
on record. But his own gain from this intimate contact with 
the fundamental aspects of life and nature, and the influence 
of this contact on his own life and work are beyond mea-
sure. Living mostly in his boat and watching the life through 
the window, a whole new world of sights and sounds and 
feelings opened up before him. It was a world in which the 
moods of people and the moods of nature were inextricably 
interwoven. The people found room in a succession of great 
short stories, and nature, in an outpouring of exquisite songs 
and poems. Dominant was the mood of the rains, exultant and 
terrible.  In 1901, Rabindranath was 40 years old. His already 
enormous output of poems and plays had been gathered in 
one big volume. It comprised 21 books and included Sonar 
Tari, his first masterpiece.  The same year, 1901, marked an 
event of a somewhat different nature. In 1862, one year after 
Rabindranath was born, the Maharshi had acquired some 
property in Bolpur, in the district of Birbhum in West Ben-
gal. The property was made over to a board of trustees, 
and the deed specified that the place was to be used for 
meditation on the Supreme Formless Being. According 
to the Maharshi’s wishes, a seat of prayer and a temple 
of worship had been built, and close to the temple, a 
residence which was called Santiniketan – the Abode of 
Peace.  Rabindranath had been worrying about the edu-
cation of his children, and he decided to start an experi-
mental educational institution in Santiniketan. It was to 
be a school, but not like the schools that had been the 
nightmare of his own childhood. It was to be like the forest 
hermitages of classical India.  But to bring it into being 
was not an easy task. For one thing, it cost money and 
Rabindranath had to sell, among other things, the copy-
right of his books. His wife added her bit by selling her 
wedding ornaments. Three months after the school was 
opened, she was taken ill. Two months later, she died. For 
Rabindranath it was the beginning of a series of personal 
tragedies. Nine months after his wife’s death, his second 
daughter Renuka passed away. The hardest blow of all 
came four years later. The youngest son Sami, who took 
after his father in many ways, fell a victim to cholera when 
he was only 12.  It was in the midst of these bereave-
ments that Rabindranath participated in one of the great-
est political upheavals in the history of India. In December 
1903 was published the decision of Governor-General 
Lord Curzon to split up Bengal into two provinces. The 
idea was to create a separate province with a Moslem 
majority, which would induce a rift between the two main 
religious groups and thus avert the possible growth of a 
united front against the Government.  But in proposing 
the Partition, Curzon merely fanned the flame of patrio-
tism that had been smouldering in the minds of certain 
visionaries all through the period of the renaissance in 
Bengal. These men now came to the fore and led the mil-
lions to rise in a protest. 
Poetic politics
The series of stirring patriotic songs which Rabindranath 
composed for the occasion were sung in processions in 
the streets of Calcutta with the poet himself in the lead. 
On 27 October, 1905, the Partition became an accom-
plished fact. In a form of protest that only a poet could 
conceive, Rabindranath turned the Black Day into a mass 
festival of Rakhibandhan – the tying of the band of friend-
ship.  But the Swadeshi movement was fated to grow 
and assume a character which was not possible to fore-
see in its early stages. While admitting the bravery and 
patriotism of those who killed or were killed in a reck-
less bid for freedom, Rabindranath could not condone 
terrorism. He stated his credo in clear terms. The path 
of violence was not for India. Good could come only out 
of constructive work carried out in a spirit of tolerance. 
He had himself followed up his retirement from the po-

litical scene by undertaking the work of rural welfare in 
his estates. And there were other activities: he was teach-
ing at school, editing journals, and engaging himself in 
almost every conceivable form of literary activity.  That his 
own countrymen now regarded him as their leading man 
of letters was proved by his 50th birthday celebrations in 
Calcutta. Sponsored by the Bengal Academy of Letters and 
attended by thousands, it was a unique literary manifesta-
tion in India. But to the outside world, Rabindranath was 
still an unknown name.  The object of Rabindranath’s visit 
to England in 1912 was to study the educational methods 
of the West and also to acquaint the West with his work 
at Santiniketan. He happened to carry with him on this 
occasion a notebook containing his own English trans-
lations of some of his poems, mainly from Gitanjali. He 
showed these translations to the English painter, William 
Rothenstein, who had met the poet on an earlier visit to 
India. Rothenstein was so impressed that he sent a copy 
of the translation to the great Irish poet, William Butler 
Yeats.  Introducing the poems to a gathering of English 
writers and intellectuals, Yeats said: “I know of no man in 
my time who has done anything in the English language 
to equal these lyrics. Even as I read them in these lit-
eral English translations, they are exquisite in style and 
thought.” Gitanjali was published in England in the same 
year. There has rarely been another instance of a poet 
gaining world fame in like manner. The Nobel Prize came 
in 1913 and knighthood in 1915, while war was raging 
in Europe. Touring the United States and Japan in 1916, 
Rabindranath made eloquent appeals for peace. He felt 
that world peace could only be achieved through intellec-
tual co-operation between nations. He said, “The call has 
come to every individual in the present age to prepare 
himself for the dawn of a new era, when man shall dis-
cover his soul in the spiritual unity of all human beings.”
Pursuing this noble idea of international co-operation, 
Rabindranath gave the school at Santiniketan a new sta-
tus and a new name. ‘Yatra Visvam Bharati Ekanirham’ 
Page drawn from The UNESCO Courier dedicated to Rabindranath Tagore, in December 1961.

– Where the world makes home in a single nest – this 
was the motto of Visvam Bharati, the World University, 
which was inaugurated in December 1918, with the 
aged philosopher Brijendranath Seal presiding.   
Dominating the Indian political scene at this time was 
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi. As a barrister in South 
Africa, Ghandi had fought for the rights of the Indians liv-
ing in that country. As a protest against the Rowlatt Act, 
Gandhi launched a movement of passive resistance. But 
the masses misinterpreted the movement and, following 
a rumour of Gandhi’s arrest, violence broke out in many 
parts of the country. As a result of this the Government 
started taking repressive measures out of all proportion to 
the magnitude of the violence.  
In the Punjab, martial law was declared. In charge of the 
troops at Amritsar was Brigadier General Dyer. On the first 
day of the month of Vaisakh, a crowd gathered in Jallian-
wallabagh, as it had done every other year. It was a peace-
ful crowd. But Dyer was taking no chances. Machine guns 
rattled.  
The news of the Amritsar incident was suppressed by the 
Government, but details of it filtered through to other parts 
of the country and even to the Abode of Peace.  
Rabindranath rushed to Calcutta. But the Defence of India 
Act was still in force and no leaders would support him in a 
plea for a meeting of protest.  
No nation can be proud  
of isolating its life & culture
At four o’clock on the morning of May 30, Rabindranath fin-
ished writing a letter. It was addressed to the Viceroy, Lord 
Chelmsford, and it was published in the newspapers. Con-
demning the Government for the killing at Jallianwallabagh, 
Rabindranath concluded by saying: “And I for my part wish to 
stand, shorn of all special distinctions, by the side of my coun-
trymen who for their so-called insignificance are liable to suffer 
degradation not fit for human beings. And these are the reasons 
which have painfully compelled me to ask your Excellency to re-
lieve me of my title of knighthood.”
The next ten years of Rabindranath’s life were filled with cease-
less activity. The urge to travel, and the necessity to collect funds 
for his university, took him to all parts of the world and the West 
as much as the East, welcomed him with open arms.  
Wherever he went, he spread the message of peace and 
stressed the importance of intellectual co-operation between 
nations. He said: “We ought to know that isolation of life and 
culture is not a thing of which any nation can be proud. In the 
human world, giving is exchanging, it is not one-sided.” 
His great humanist ideas found an echo in the best minds of 
Europe, and some became his close friends.  
In the meantime, the institution at Santiniketan had come 
a long way from its modest beginnings. Its scope for studies 
had greatly increased. There was Kalabhawan for the study of 
painting, under masters like Nandalal Bose, who was himself 
a pupil of Abanindranath, a nephew of the poet. The Sangeet 
Bhawan, which neglected no brand of Indian music, had also 
grown under Dinendranath, another of the poet’s nephews. Spe-
cial provisions had been made for conducting oriental studies, 
and scholars came from abroad and stayed to lecture for study 
and research. Such men were Moriz Winternitz from Austria, 
Sylvain Levi from France, Victor Lesny from Austria, and Sten 
Konow from Norway.  
But there were some Europeans who did even more than 
that. Charles Freer Andrews, a missionary who was present at 
Yeats’ reading at Gitanjali, and William Winstanely Pearson, 
who had also met the poet in England, came to the Ashram in 
its early days – drawn by the poet’s personality – and stayed 
on until their death, working with a selfless devotion to the poet 
and his cause that few Indians could equal. Leonard Elmhirt, 
another Englishman who was drawn by the poet’s personality, 
came over to Santiniketan and took charge of the Santiniketan 
at Surul, two miles away.  
The poet’s last European tour began with a visit to Oxford, 
where he delivered the series of Hibbert lectures which were 
later published as ‘The Religion of Man’.  
It was also on this last tour that Rabindranath went to 
Soviet Russia for the first time. On the eve of his departure 
from Moscow he told his hosts: “You have recognized the truth 
that in extirpating all special evils one has to go to the root, and 
the only way to it is through education.” In Russia as well as 
in other places that he visited on this tour, Rabindranath held 
exhibitions and had found a new outlet for his creative urge.  
In 1931, the leading citizens of Calcutta united in an appeal 
to observe the poet’s 70th birthday. It was celebrated in a 
manner that was truly worthy of the occasion. The Golden 
Book of Tagore was a testimony to the love and reverence 
that the intellectuals of the world bore for the poet. Its spon-
sors consisted of three Europeans and two Indians. There 
was Romain Rolland from France, Albert Einstein from Ger-
many, and the poet Kostes Palamas from Greece. One of the 
two Indians was the scientist Jagadish Chandra Bose, the 
other was Mahatma Gandhi.  
The last years of the poet’s life were spent largely in his 
beloved Santiniketan. He had a choice of small houses built 
for him, for he never liked to stay in the same house, or even 
in the same room for long. It was in a way symbolic of the 
refusal to get into a rut which had marked his whole life. In 
his writings he was now producing some of his most mature, 
original and striking works, and these included text books and 
nonsense rhymes for children, not an unusual occupation for 
someone who had loved and understood children all his life 
and had done so much to mould them for a better future. His 
health was failing, but calls of duty, which he was ever ready 
to answer, gave him little rest.  
On May 7, 1941, Rabindranath was 80 years old. Three 
months later, he was to leave the Ashram, never to return. He 
would be taken to his ancestral house in Calcutta, fatally ill.  
Rabindranath attended his 80th birthday celebrations in 
Santiniketan in spite of his failing health. For the occasion, he 
had composed a message – his last message to the world. 
It was called ‘Crisis in Civilization’. It concerned itself with the 
state of the so-called modern civilization, a civilization that 
was being shaken to its very roots by barbaric wars of ag-
gression.  
In the course of the message, Rabindranath said: “I had at 
one time believed that the springs of civilization could issue 
out of the heart of Europe. But today, when I am about to leave 
the world, that faith had deserted me. I look around and see the 
crumbling ruins of a proud civilization strewn like a vast heap 
of futility. And yet, I shall not commit the previous sin of losing 
faith in Man. I shall wait for the day when the holocaust will end 
and the air will be rendered clean with the spirit of service and 
sacrifice. Perhaps that dawn will come from this horizon, from 
the East, where the sun rises. On that day will unvanquished 
man retrench his path of conquest, surmounting all barriers, to 
win back his lost human heritage.”
