Tevfik Esenç in 1982. Last speaker of the Oubykh language 
(Turkey), he died in 1992.
of many forms of intangible cultural 
heritage, especially the invaluable heri-
tage of traditions and oral expressions 
of the community that spoke it – from 
poems and legends to proverbs and 
jokes. The loss of languages is also 
detrimental to humanity’s grasp of bio-
diversity, as they transmit much knowl-
edge about the nature and the universe.”
The work carried out by the more than 
30 linguists who worked together on the 
Atlas, financed by Norway, shows that the 
phenomenon of disappearing languages 
appears in every region and in very vari-
able economic conditions. In Sub-Saha-
ran Africa, where approximately 2,000 
languages are spoken (nearly one third 
of the world total), it is very probable that 
at least 10 % of them will disappear in 
the next hundred years. The Atlas further-
more establishes that India, the United 
States, Brazil, Indonesia and Mexico, 
countries that have great linguistic diver-
sity, are also those which have the great-
est number of endangered languages. 
However, the situation is not univer-
sally alarming. Thus, Papua New Guin-
ea, the country which has the greatest 
linguistic diversity on the planet (more 
than 800 languages are believed to be 
spoken there), also has relatively few 
endangered languages (88). Certain 
languages that are shown as extinct 
in the Atlas are being actively revital-
ized, like Cornish (Cornwall) and Sîshëë 
(New Caledonia), and it is possible that 
they will become living languages again.
Furthermore, thanks to favourable lin-
guistic policies, there has been an in-
crease in the number of speakers of 
several indigenous languages. It is the 
case for Central Aymara and Quechua 
in Peru, Maori in New Zealand, Guarani 
in Paraguay and several languages in 
Canada, the United States and Mexico. 
The Atlas also shows that due to eco-
nomic factors, different linguistic poli-
cies and sociological phenomena, a 
given language may have varying de-
grees of vitality in different countries. 
For Christopher Moseley, an Australian 
linguist and editor-in-chief of the Atlas, “It 
would be naïve and oversimplifying to say 
that the big ex-colonial languages, Eng-
lish, or French or Spanish, are the killers, 
and all smaller languages are the victims. 
It is not like that; there is a subtle interplay 
of forces, and this Atlas will help ordinary 
people to understand those forces better.”
Lucía Iglesias Kuntz, UNESCO
A subtle interplAy
of forces
With the death of Marie smith Jones, the eyak language of 
alaska (united states) died out last year and ubykh (turkey) 
vanished in 1992 with the demise of tevfik esenç. some 200 
languages have become extinct in the last three genera-
tions, according to the new edition of the “unesCo atlas of 
the World’s languages in danger”.
Papua New 
Guinea boasts 
more than 800 
languages and 
allows children 
to start their 
schooling in 
their mother 
language.
EditOrial

the interactive digital version of the At-
las of the World’s Languages in Danger 
provides updated data about approxi-
mately 2,500 endangered languages 
around the world and can be continually 
supplemented, corrected and updated, 
thanks to contributions from its users. 
It enables searches according to sev-
eral criteria, and ranks the endangered 
languages that are listed according to 
five different levels of vitality: unsafe, 
definitely endangered, severely endan-
gered, critically endangered and extinct. 
Some of the data are especially worry-
ing: out of the approximately 6,000 ex-
isting languages in the world, more than 
200 have become extinct during the last 
three generations, 538 are critically en-
dangered, 502 severely endangered, 632 
definitely endangered and 607 unsafe. 
For example, the Atlas states that 199 
languages have fewer than ten speakers 
and 178 others have 10 to 50. Among 
the languages that have recently be-
come extinct, it mentions Manx (Isle 
of Man), which died out in 1974 when 
Ned Maddrell fell forever silent, Aasax 
(Tanzania), which disappeared in 1976, 
Ubykh (Turkey) in 1992 with the de-
mise of Tevfik Esenç, and Eyak (Alaska, 
United States of America), in 2008 
with the death of Marie Smith Jones. 
As UNESCO Director-General Koïchi-
ro Matsuura stressed, “The death of a 
language leads to the disappearance 
