Peter Coles is a British journalist specializing in scientific  
and environmental issues.  
Lyla Bavadam is a Bombay correspondent  
of the Indian bi-monthly Frontline. 



V
A Barrage  
of Protest            
      by Peter Coles and Lyla Bavadam
A San Francisco mural dedicated to the protest against the Sardar Sarovar 
Project (SSP) in the Narmada valley. 

adaj is a desolate place about 40 km from the historic city 
of Baroda in India’s Gujarat state. During the summer months 
the baked earth cracks in the heat. When the monsoon comes, 
villagers perch on the furniture like chickens to avoid the ris-
ing waters. After the floods have subsided, the waterlogged 
clay soil is impenetrable, trapping cattle and people alike. For 
the past four years, the tin shacks of Vadaj have been home 
for dozens of families forced to leave their ancestral village to 
make way for the giant reservoir of the controversial Sardar 
Sarovar dam on the Narmada river.
These ‘oustees’ could even count themselves lucky. Ac-
cording to a report by Narmada Bachao Andolan (NBA), a 
pressure group fighting the Narmada project, when the Bargi 
dam was finished in 1990, over 1000 km upstream in Mad-
hya Pradesh, the 114,000 people from 162 villages in the 
path of the floodwaters were simply jettisoned with nowhere 
to go. The government, says NBA, offered no resettlement 
land and only minimal cash compensation. Many of these vil-
lagers, says the report, now have menial jobs in the slums of 
Jabalpur, the main city in the region.
 The plight of the Vadaj oustees could be shared by over 
300,000 others as construction moves slowly ahead on the 
30 large dams, 150 medium and 3000 smaller dams in a 
vast project that will transform the Narmada into a staircase 
of reservoirs and turbines. For the past 15 years, the backlash 
of opposition from NBA, a coalition of local people’s move-
ments opposed to the different dams, has been challenging 
the view of development that these dams promote. NBA ar-
gues that the beneficiaries of the project will be city dwellers, 
not the rural communities forced to leave their homes in the 
flooded valley.
 Over 80 per cent of India’s rural households have no elec-
tricity – and little hope of ever being connected to the elec-
tricity grid – according to Arundhati Roy, the acclaimed In-
dian author who has recently championed NBA’s struggle. 
She says the increased food that the dams’ irrigation canals 
may produce will be destined for export, doing little to feed 
the nation’s poor. In 1995, she says, some 30 million tons 
of unsold grain were stockpiled in state granaries, while 350 
million Indians still live below the poverty line. What is more, 
most of the people affected by the Narmada project, says 
NBA, are tribal communities, fishing villages and Dalits (the 
so-called ‘oppressed’ lower stratum of the Hindu caste sys-
tem), who already benefit least from India’s prosperity.
 The notion of dam building as a prime technology solution 
to development is not new. Back in the 1940s, just after Inde-
pendence, Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru saw dams as ‘the 
Temples of Modern India’. The Narmada Valley Development 
Project was to be a showcase for this vision. Although this 
particular project stayed on the drawing board for over 30 
years, mostly because of disputes over water rights between 
the three states – Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Gujarat 
– through which the Narmada flows, India went on to build 
some 3600 dams.
 Coupled to the Green Revolution of the 1960s, these dams 
provided massive irrigation systems that have underpinned a 
fourfold increase in food production. And similar prospects 

are being heralded for the Narmada dams. According to of-
ficial figures, the Sardar Sarovar dam, the last and largest of 
the dams before the river reaches the Arabian Sea, will pro-
vide water for 20-30 million people all year round, especially 
in the arid areas of Kutch, Saurashtra and the state of Rajas-
than. At the same time, the 138.6 metre multi-purpose dam 
is scheduled to produce 1450 MW of hydroelectric power, 
while its reservoir should smooth out the yearly seesaw of 
floods and droughts, protecting some 400,000 people.
NBA contests just about all the official statistics on the fu-
ture benefits of the project. It 
also questions the very princi-
ple of the dams from the point 
of view of development. Led 
by Medha Patkar, a sociologist 
originally from Bombay, NBA 
argues that the benefits will 
never justify the irreversible 
loss of forest, fisheries, farm-
land, culture and livelihood for 
the hundreds of thousands of 
displaced people. Some 30 
million people depend directly 
or indirectly on the 1312 km 
long river and its valley, with its 
fertile farmland, historic tem-
ples and pilgrimage routes.
World Bank withdrawal 
In 1986, a year after the World 
Bank lent $450 million to cons- 
truct Sardar Sarovar, NBA com- 
missioned a series of impact as-
sessment studies that, it claims, 
exposed crucial flaws in the of-
ficial cost-benefit analyses for 
the entire project. But at the 
heart of NBA’s campaign is the 
apparent lack of resettlement 
provision for oustees. With 
mounting international support, 
NBA was able to force a review 
of the Narmada project. In 1991 
the World Bank commissioned 
an independent inquiry, whose 
report essentially endorsed the 
NBA claims, saying that there 
had been “no proper appraisal” 
of the project’s impact. Two 
years later, in an unprecedent-
ed about-turn, the World Bank 
withdrew from the scheme.
 In 1994, India’s Supreme 
Court upheld a case presented by NBA, freezing all con-
struction on the Narmada dams until the state govern-
ments carried out adequate impact assessments. NBA 
insists that there must be no displacement if there are 
no realistic plans for resettlement. With the exception of 
Sardar Sarovar, none of the dam projects had any reset-
tlement plans, says the organization. NBA is adamant that 
it is not opposed to the development that the dams prom-
ise. It is also looking for a compromise solution, calling for 
the final height of the dams to be reduced. The lower the 
final height, the fewer people will be forced to move to 
make way for the reservoirs and the less land will be lost.
Although it now seems unlikely that NBA’s actions will stop 
the dams, the organization has brought the issue of resettle-
ment to the fore. In 1998 the Madhya Pradesh government 
set up a task force to look at resettlement possibilities. It 
found that not only was there no land in Madhya Pradesh to 
house oustees, but that the land promised by Gujarat either 
did not exist, or was of too poor quality. Madhya Pradesh 
has now called for a new evaluation. The state of Gujarat, how-
ever, has dug in its heels. Not only did it refuse to allow the in-
dependent World Commission 
on Dams, set up by the World 
Bank, to visit the Sardar Sarovar 
site, it also challenged the Su-
preme Court’s earlier ruling. In 
February 1999, after a four-year 
moratorium, the Supreme Court 
reversed its earlier decision, al-
lowing construction to begin 
again at Sardar Sarovar, adding 
a further 5 metres to the 80 me-
tres already built. 
Rally in the valley
NBA has now reinforced its 
struggle, organizing a series 
of passive sit-ins and hunger 
strikes. At the end of July last 
year Arundhati Roy organized 
a ‘Rally in the Valley’, marching 
with 400 other public figures 
and supporters from village 
to village in the affected area. 
An estimated 10,000 oust-
ees joined the rally in the 
fertile Nimad region of Mad-
hya Pradesh, where the local 
farmers will lose their land if 
construction goes ahead. And 
when the monsoon rains be-
gan in August 1999, Medha 
Patkar and other NBA mem-
bers took up positions in the 
village of Domkhedi, refusing 
to move as the flood waters 
rose up to their shoulders. Po-
lice in boats finally removed 
them. At the end of last year, 
Arundhati Roy published a 
closely documented essay en-
titled ‘The Greater Common 
Good’ in Outlook magazine, 
criticizing the Narmada Valley 
project both in principle and in its application.
As the mud flies between NBA and supporters of the proj-
ect, the withdrawal of the World Bank could have unpre-
dictable effects in the longer term. With most international 
aid programmes now unwilling to be associated with the dams, 
the developers are looking for private sector funding. This could 
be much harder to influence than an institution such as the 
World Bank, which has a ‘worthy’ image to protect.
(The UNESCO Courier, 2000 - 4)
Indian women and child at work, taking water from a fountain.
