arnamagnæan manuscripT  
collecTion
a life’s collection of early scandinavian manuscripts,  
including icelandic sagas of viking explorations to north america 
and mythological poems have been added to the Memory  
of the world register this year.
Testimonial letter written on vellum by Bishop Jon Eiriksson (1358-1390)  
with his seal (left).

The Icelandic scholar Arnas Magnæus 
(1663-1730) devoted himself to build-
ing up what is now regarded as the 
world’s most important collection of 
early Scandinavian manuscripts. Mov-
ing to Denmark at the age of twenty to 
study at the University of Copenhagen, 
Magnæus began to collect principally 
Icelandic, but also Danish, Norwegian 
and Swedish historical texts. The col-
lection grew throughout his career as 
secretary of the Royal Archives and 
professor of Danish Antiquities at the 
University until the Great fire of Copen-
hagen in 1728 which destroyed many 
of his printed books. Upon his death, 
a short time after, he bequeathed his 
life’s work to the University, along with 
an endowment from his private estate. 
The collection consists of almost 
3 000 items, the most important of 
which portray the birth and growth 
of the Icelandic people. Dating as far 
back as the 12th century the collection 
contains many of the unique Icelandic 
narrative – the legendary sagas. Tales 
of Viking conquest and adventure to 
the shores of Greenland and North 
America are widely considered some 
of the world’s most significant litera-
ture and express the emergence of a 
distinct identity. They also illuminate 
the transition from pagan Nordic be-
liefs to Christianity and the tensions 
that heathendom brought to Rome. 
Other works such as Landnámabók, 
(The Book of Settlement) and Íslend-
ingabók, (The Book of Icelanders) rep-
resent a country solidifying its sense 
of origins and place in explaining the 
development of law and governing in-
stitutions. 
The collection is also unique for an-
other reason. Even before constitu-
tional separation from Denmark in 
1944 Iceland had began petitioning 
for the return of many of the manu-
scripts which represent an invaluable 
part of their cultural heritage. In 1965 
the Danish Parliament agreed to divide 
the collection in two, with just over half 
(1666 items) moving to the University 
of Iceland. By 1997 the transfer had 
taken place exemplifying a successful 
dispute resolution over cultural trea-
sures.. 
David Jackman,
The UNESCO Courier
