or from remote regions, ethnic mi-
norities, immigrants, and disabled 
persons may have lower participa-
tion rates. Some education authori-
ties have sought to improve equity 
and inclusion with such measures as 
student loans, grants for low-income 
students, culturally targeted pro-
grams, and quotas for members of 
minority groups or lower castes.
Troubling trends
Higher education is increasingly 
seen as an engine of economic de-
velopment. But as student numbers 
expand, government tax revenues 
typically cannot keep pace with the 
rising costs of public systems. The 
result is often increasing austerity: 
overcrowded classes and lecture 
halls, outdated library collections, 
declining funds for research and a 
deterioration of facilities. The prob-
lem has been most crippling in sub-
Saharan Africa, but is felt across the 
developing world and in countries in 
transition as well. 
Public institutions, once largely de-
pendent on state funding, have been 
forced to generate an increasing por-
t
hese trends were discussed 
at the 1998 UNESCO World 
Conference on Higher Edu-
cation. But they have all inten-
sified over the last decade, 
bringing both new opportunities and 
challenges for participants attend-
ing the 2009 World Conference on 
Higher Education, which took place 
at UNESCO’s Paris Headquarters 
from July 5-8. 
The issues are often complex and 
the solutions fraught with controver-
sy. When public systems are over-
whelmed by galloping enrollments, 
how should the money be found to 
reverse overcrowding, to maintain or 
improve standards? Should higher 
education be considered a public 
good, essential for economic devel-
opment and financed by public bud-
gets? Or is it more a private good, 
allowing personal advancement, 
and able to thrive only if students are 
required to pay for it? Will access to 
higher studies depend on wealth rath-
er than merit? 
The shift to post-industrial economies 
has led to mass demand for higher ed-
ucation. Enrollments are increasing at 
breakneck speed. There were 152.5 
million tertiary students worldwide in 
2007, a roughly 50% increase com-
pared to 2000. 
Only a half-century ago, post-second-
ary studies were reserved for a small, 
mostly male elite in most countries. But 
today, participation rates of 40 or 50% 
of young people are often considered 
vital for economic growth. Globally, the 
percentage of university-aged young 
people enrolled in tertiary education in-
creased from 19% in 2000 to 26% in 
2007. Women now account for a slight 
majority of students and their predomi-
nance is expected to increase. 
Yet the average rate masks stark re-
gional differences. Participation was 
71% in North America and Western 
Europe, 26% in the East Asia/Pacific 
region, 23% in the Arab States, 11% 
in South and West Asia and, despite 
rapid growth, only 6% in Africa. A child 
in sub-Saharan Africa today still has 
less chance of reaching the end of 
primary school than a European has 
of entering university. 
Within countries some groups do 
not have equal access to higher stud-
ies either. Those with lower incomes 
focus
Cambridge, United Kingdom:  
students lined up to receive their degrees.

Higher Education 
Shaken by Change 
around the world higher education is being shaken by profound changes. 
exploding enrollments over the last decade are putting severe financial 
strains on tertiary systems. at the same time, computers and the internet 
have allowed previously unimaginable forms of global knowledge trans-
fer. institutions are becoming increasingly competitive, vying for scarce 
resources at home and for the rapidly growing numbers  
of students studying outside their own countries. universities, including  
a rapidly growing number of private universities, are making international  
partnerships, and opening academic programs and even branches  
in other countries as never before.

tion of their costs. The most common 
way has been with tuition fees, which 
have been introduced in a number of 
countries with formerly free or nearly 
free higher education (e.g., China in 
1997, the United Kingdom in 1998, 
and Austria in 2001). Fees are being 
introduced across Europe, long the 
bastion of free higher education. In 
addition, a number of African coun-
tries have substantially raised stu-
dent charges for dormitories, food, 
and other services. 
Institutions have become more en-
trepreneurial. They do paid research 
for companies or administrations, 
and develop paying courses to meet 
the needs of local businesses. This 
is sometimes raising concerns. Too 
much emphasis on income genera-
tion can undermine traditional univer-
sity activities. Courses and research 
in the humanities typically have no 
commercial applications. Campus 
theatre groups, journals, and non-
commercial radio and television sta-
tions generally produce no income. 
But such activities make universities 
centers of intellectual life. 
Public authorities are also increas-
ingly replacing budgeted funding for 
research with competitive grants. All 
these developments are fostering 
competition, and growing differen-
tiation among institutions. Many uni-
versities now pay close attention to 
their place in international rankings. 
The impact is especially evident in 
predominantly public systems where 
until recently universities were sup-
posed to be all more or less equiva-
lent. 
Some institutions and some national 
systems are introducing more techni-
cal and professional programs. This 
is a crucial issue in developing econ-
omies, which need both more gradu-
ates trained in technical disciplines, 
and also professionals and leaders 
with general knowledge, creativity, 
and critical thinking. There is also a 
pressing need for research focused 
on local development needs.
Globalisation  
and privatisation
Institutions, especially in the indus-
trialized nations, are competing for 
the growing numbers of international 
students. More than 2.8 million stu-
dents elected to study outside their 
own country in 2007. The largest 
number came from China (421,100), 
India (153,300), and the Republic of 
Korea (105,300). Their main des-
tinations were the United States 
(595,900), the United Kingdom 
(351,500), and France (246,600). 
Globalization is impacting tertiary 
education in other ways. The last de-
cade has seen a veritable explosion 
of programs and institutions oper-
ating internationally. Several coun-
tries are developing themselves as 
international higher education hubs. 
(Qatar, Singapore and the United 
Arab Emirates are prime examples). 
Regional agreements are emerging 
to promote higher education coop-
eration and exchange. The Bologna 
Process, adopted in that Italian city 
in 1999, is harmonizing what were a 
myriad of distinct degree systems in 
over 40 European countries. Similar 
efforts are underway in Latin Amer-
ica, Africa, Southeast Asia and the 
Asia-Pacific region. 
A major challenge is how to com-
pare institutions and degrees from 
different countries. New national 
quality assurance mechanisms rely 
on peers, not government agencies. 
And the focus is now on outcomes 
– the skills and knowledge graduates 
have acquired – rather than inputs, like 
faculty qualifications and library collec-
tions. Education leaders have begun 
work on ways to compare evaluation 
results across borders. 
A striking development has been the 
rapid expansion of private higher edu-
cation. While private institutions have 
traditionally played an important role in 
East Asia and the United States, today 
they account for 30% of global enroll-
ment. Private institutions have been 
central to the rapid expansion of enroll-
ments in such countries as Brazil, Chile, 
and a number of African countries, 
where demand far outstrips the number 
of study places at state institutions. 
Many for-profit private providers are 
raising concerns about quality assur-
ance and the emergence of fraudu-
lent diploma mills. The growth of dis-
tance education adds to the need for 
increased international cooperation, 
since the Internet allows such programs 
to cross borders effortlessly. 
Tertiary enrollments are expected to 
continue expanding rapidly. Student 
populations will continue to diversify, 
counting more people already in the 
workforce, part time students, and 
those from other countries. 
But while this expansion is widely 
welcomed, it is bringing serious chal-
lenges, especially in low-income de-
veloping countries. The need for an 
ever-expanding number of teachers will 
mean that their qualifications will tend 
to remain low. And authorities will be 
hard pressed to ensure that access 
is not just for the more affluent, but 
for all those who could benefit from 
further studies. 
Burton Bollag, 
American journalist
Students at Lycée Lamine Guèye in Dakar 
(Senegal). Lack of funding for higher education 
is most flagrant in Africa, but the problem  
affects all developing countries.
