Clea Koff, forensic anthropologist.

Bones never lie 
Clea Koff: 
Forensic anthropologist Clea Koff 
wrote “the Bone Woman” in 2004, 
to chronicle her experiences during 
seven un missions to unearth the 
mass graves of rwanda, Bosnia, 
Croatia and Kosovo. her grueling 
investigations helped bring some of 
the perpetrators to justice.
To mark International Women’s Day on  
8 March, an interview by Shiraz Sidhva,  
Indian journalist based in the United States, 
with a special interest in human rights.
FOrum
excavated bodies. How did you 
manage to override the sadness 
and get the job done? 
As time passes from when I was 
involved in the work as intensely 
as I was, it’s actually harder to find 
that balance. From the moment 
we’d start clearing away the soil 
and finding clothing and human re-
mains, I felt a true sense of happi-
ness because we were uncovering 
not only something clandestine, but 
people who should have never been 
in that grave in the first place. I knew 
that we were undoing as much as 
could be undone about the crime. 
When I think about the work from 
a greater distance, and when I’m 
not actually at the site, I feel inad-
equate putting into words what we 
You have chronicled some of 
the world’s worst massacres. 
What sparked your interest in 
forensic anthropology and how 
were you able to forge a link be-
tween that science and human 
rights? 
Forensic anthropology was a young 
science in the late 1980s. I was 
drawn to bones even as a child and 
by the time I went to university to 
study archaeology and anthropology, 
I knew I was really interested in the 
human skeleton. Then I went on an 
archaeological dig in Greece, and re-
alized I didn’t want to exhume ancient 
graveyards for research purposes. 
One of the books my father had 
given me to read that summer 
was “Witnesses from the Grave: 
The Stories Bones Tell”. Written 
by Eric Stover and Christopher 
Joyce, the book chronicles the cre-
ation of the Argentine Forensic 
Anthropology team, which tried to 
identify the remains of Argentines 
“disappeared” during the military 
junta of the 1970s and 1980s. 
That was my introduction to foren-
sic anthropology. I loved the fact that 
forensics could not only help restore 
someone’s identity, but could actu-
ally play a role in achieving justice. 
Your book is a hard-hitting and 
honest account of what you 
went through on your UN mis-
sions. You’ve described the 
odors permeating your clothes, 
the hard physical labor, and 
yet talked about the inordinate 
satisfaction you felt as you 

as forensic scientists should do. By 
our very definition, we arrive after 
the crime has been committed, and 
the strange evolution I went through 
was that though I was a scientist, 
I wish we could have just brought 
people back to life. Because we 
could see these people didn’t 
have to die. This was not a natu-
ral disaster, a tsunami or an earth-
quake, beyond our control. There 
were clear signs that these were 
planned executions, that policies 
had enabled these things to hap-
pen, that this was preventable. 
And you wish you could reverse 
the deaths – it’s a completely un-
scientific emotion, and yet, that’s 
the distilled emotion I have after all 
this time. Obviously I had to turn 
that around, to find something that 
I could do to feel useful, otherwise 
I wouldn’t be able to get out of bed 
every day. That’s why I’ve come to 
focus on the prevention of these 
types of crimes - how forensic evi-
dence and the bodies of the victims 
themselves play a role in the truth 
that they bring forward, and help 
prevent these crimes in the future.
You’ve talked about bones 
speaking, that you could actu-
ally tell stories from them later, 
and that they never lie. Is what 
we can dig up after it’s all over 
rather limited, especially when 
there is an effort to cover up 
evidence?
The wonderful thing about the hu-
man skeleton is that it’s recording 
something of our lives every day. 
The bones are able to tell intrinsic 
details, such as a person’s sex, age, 
height, ancestry and pathology. 
We are able to interpret marks and 
changes on the bone to discern dis-
eases or trauma they suffered dur-
ing life and at the moment of death. 
We are able to make that distinc-
tion, and also determine the cause 
of death. Teeth are a particular in-
terest of mine – they tell us a lot. 
You’ve said that people are es-
sentially the same everywhere, 
and how the bodies unearthed 
from supposedly different con-
flicts on two continents tell a 
single, very similar story. Could 
you explain the real issues of 
sustainability and power that 
you say are at the root of orga-
nized violence? 
This perspective of mine came 
about because of the particular 
sites where I had worked. There 
was a perception that Rwanda and 
countries of the former Yugoslavia 
experienced spontaneous outbursts 
of violence, brought about by old ha-
treds, ethnicity, tribes, and religion. 
But I don’t believe these were the 
real issues. Evidence from within 
the graves definitely suggests that 
the violence was not at all spontane-
ous. As we went to different coun-
tries, or different areas in the same 
country, we noticed similarities be-
tween the graves, and similar kinds 
of behavior on the part of the killers. 
We started asking what was to be 
gained from civilians being killed, 
what was worth violating the Gene-
va Convention or other humanitarian 
laws for, and who was benefiting? I 
did not believe that the states and 
the apparatus they were using to 
carry out these killings were deeply 
moved by ancient battles or religious 
issues, because ultimately that’s not 
how the economy of a state works. 
That was when I began to see the 
majority of the graves were located 
in sites of strategic value – a river 
bank, a port, treasured agricultural 
land, or any place where trade was to 
be done. I realized that people were 
often eliminated from areas in order 
to gain control of them. I remain open-
minded about other reasons for the 
killings, but for me, this has remained 
the most powerful reason, which 
seems to crop up in areas of conflict, 
whether in Rwanda, Serbia, Darfur, 
Iraq or Chechnya. Ancient hatreds are 
not passed along genetically. Power 
can use peoples’ sense of discrimi-
nation as a proxy agent of violence. 
I believe the main reason these 
graves were hidden was because 
the killers knew just how danger-
ous it is for people at large to find 
out that this wasn’t about sponta-
neous violence, but an organized 
killing to eliminate a particular 
group from a particular region.
F O r u m
Evidence of the genocide in Rwanda.

Bosnia-Herzegovina: a family visiting the Potocari memorial, where victims  
of the 1995 Srebenica massacres are buried.
Do you believe that internation-
al tribunals act as a deterrent to 
those who may commit crimes 
against humanity and are you 
happy with the outcome of the 
tribunals your work contributed 
to?
Yes, the tribunals certainly had a 
huge impact in Rwanda and the for-
mer Yugoslavia. Mass killings had 
taken place in other parts of the world 
prior to these crimes that caused the 
tribunals to be established, and it 
had taken a long time for details of 
these crimes to emerge. There had 
been no attempts at accountability, 
and therefore it was easier for the 
perpetrators to present a distorted 
version of what had happened. The 
establishment of a criminal tribu-
nal is an important step, quite apart 
from people’s estimation of the value 
of these two tribunals. The fact that 
the killers attempted to hide the evi-
dence showed some awareness of 
what forensic evidence within a pros-
ecution setting could actually do. 
The bodies could tell stories, which 
could be used in a witness stand. 
For instance, when the Serbian 
police were getting bodies out of 
Kosovo in trucks and trying to hide 
them behind police stations, there 
are physical traces that these are 
not legitimate targets during a legal 
war, but people who should have 
been protected by law. There will 
always be the risk of killings in dif-
ferent places, but what changes is 
that people are less likely to agree 
to be co-opted into mass killings, 
making it more difficult for them to 
be carried out successfully. That is 
the main impact of the tribunals, to 
act as deterrents for future crimes. 
I am very proud of having been 
a part of these trials, which have 
mostly used the forensic evidence 
we provided to corroborate the 
surviving witness testimonies.
(•••)

Clea Koff was born in 1972 of a Tanza-
nian mother and an American father, both 
documentary filmmakers focused on hu-
man rights issues, and spent her childhood 
in England, Kenya, Tanzania, Somalia and 
the United States. Fascinated by bones 
from an early age, Koff earned a bachelor’s 
degree in anthropology from Stanford 
University and went on to study forensic 
anthropology at the University of Arizona.
Between 1996 and 2000, she worked 
as a forensic expert for the United Nations 
International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda 
and the former Yugoslavia. During those 
seven missions, Koff meticulously kept a 
diary because, as she explains, she had 
things to say about how she was feel-
ing, which she couldn’t say out loud as a 
forensic scientist. Those memoirs formed 
the basis of her bestseller, “The Bone 
Woman”, first published in 2004 and now 
available in nine languages in more than 
14 countries. 
In 2006, Koff worked with the United 
Nations Committee on Missing Persons in 
Cyprus, on behalf of the Equipo Argentino 
de Antropologia Forense. She is now 
based in Los Angeles, where she founded 
the non-profit Missing Persons Identifica-
tion Resource Center (MPID) to help 
identify the enormous backlog of bodies 
in US coroners’ offices – an estimated 
40,000 nationwide. 
Koff believes that “a disappearance is a 
disappearance, whether it occurs in peace 
or wartime.” Her experiences with the living 
people related to the bodies she exhumed 
in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia 
inspired her to help families of missing 
persons in the United States.
