Grand Prismatic Spring, Yellowstone National Park, United States.

The eArTh in close-up
in 2000 unesCo sponsored  
yann arthus-Bertrand’s project 
earth from above featuring his 
photographs of the world’s most 
beautiful landscapes.  
it was tremendously successful:  
130 million people saw  
the travelling exhibition and over 
three million copies of the book 
were sold in 21 languages.  
But the experience had no follow 
up. will the organization  
and the photographer team up 
again to help the planet?
Foresight
has been in the news lately. “Listen-
ing to the carbon tax discussions,” 
Arthus-Bertrand says, “you get the 
impression something is being im-
posed on people. But on the con-
trary, people should be proud of 
paying the carbon tax. They should 
be thinking, ‘I’m helping, too’. When 
I drive my car I produce CO2 but at 
least I pay a tax that will help fight 
climate change. I admit that I con-
sume carbon, but I try to offset it by 
raising people’s awareness. All the 
participants in December’s World 
Climate Change Conference in Co-
penhagen will take a jet to get there. 
That’s a bit ridiculous, isn’t it? Let’s 
hope this big meeting will produce 
results that will offset the amount of 
carbon they consume.” 
Is offsetting CO2 emissions enough 
to solve the problems? “Offsetting 
isn’t what matters, it’s being aware 
what you consume. When you rea-
lise that flying from Paris to New 
York and back consumes as much 
carbon as two French people con-
“It is the duty of all of us today to 
safeguard the planet,” says French 
artist and ecologist Yann Arthus-
Bertrand, whose photos of the earth 
have dazzled viewers around the 
world. “The human population is 
steadily rising and biodiversity de-
creasing. We’re ruining the planet’s 
equilibrium. We’ve tamed the Earth. 
The Earth is at our service. Animals 
are at our service. It’s as if we still 
don’t realize that we need animals to 
live, that animals are part of our life, 
because they’re our cousins and we 
owe them respect.” 
How does Arthus-Bertrand recon-
cile art and action? Can a picture be 
political? “Can art change things?” 
he asks, smiling. “Of course it can! 
Otherwise I wouldn’t be doing what 
I do. First, what is art? Am I an art-
ist or a journalist? I use pictures to 
show what scientists say. I didn’t 
become an ecologist by accident. 
It happened gradually, over time, by 
working. And today I’m an activist 
doing my best to be convincing. I do 
what I know how to do, which is to 
make beautiful images, and I enjoy 
it. But I’m not interested in a beauti-
ful image for its own sake. It has to 
make people think. I try to give my 
work meaning.” 
Since the current financial and 
economic crisis began, some coun-
tries have shifted their orientation 
to a green economy. What lessons 
can be drawn from the downturn? 
“Right now,” Arthus-Bertrand says, 
“it’s clear that people in the rich 
countries must learn to live with less, 
waste less, eat less meat, throw less 
away, use less oil. We can live better 
with less, despite those who think 
that’s a step backwards.”
Offset? Tell us more…
To coincide with the United Na-
tions Climate Change Conference 
in Copenhagen, the Courier is de-
voting its December 2009/January 
2010 edition to the topic of global 
climate change.
The debate about carbon taxes 

Interview by Linda Tinio (UNESCO Bureau of Strategic Planning). 
This column, launched by the Foresight Section of UNESCO’s Bureau of Strategic Planning,  
tackles topics of interest to the general public and the Member States of the Organization.  
It features intellectual opinions likely to foster UNESCO’s reflection, programming  
and action in its various fields of competence. 

sume in a year, you understand 
something’s wrong! I have a lot of 
faith in individual consciousness. 
Politicians aren’t the ones who have 
the power to convince people. Even 
in the democracies, if strong public 
opinion isn’t built up it won’t work. 
Nothing can be imposed by force. 
You have to convince people – the 
richest as well as the poorest – that 
they must change their lifestyles. 
The UN should launch a campaign 
to raise the awareness not of politi-
cians but of the world’s citizens.”
Come work with me!
In September 2008  Arthus-Bertrand 
said, “It’s too late to be pessimistic”. 
What did he mean by that? “When 
you care about the planet and read 
increasingly gloomy reports every 
day about the state it’s in, you can’t 
help noticing there are two kinds of 
people in the world: those who fret 
and those who try to change things. 
Personally, I want to be on the side 
of the people who are fighting for 
change and who believe in it. So it’s 
too late to be pessimistic. The indi-
cators do look rather grim, but we 
have to move forward.” 
In 2000 UNESCO sponsored 
Arthus-Bertrand’s project Earth from 
Above, in which he photographed 
the world’s most beautiful land-
scapes. It was tremendously suc-
cessful: 130 million people saw the 
travelling exhibition and over three 
million copies of the book were sold 
in 21 languages. But the experience 
had no follow up. Would it be worth 
reviving such a positive collabora-
tion? Arthus-Bertrand is ready for 
new adventures with UNESCO. 
The photographer would like the 
UN to help with his latest project, 
Six Billion Others. “It’s a subject 
that really should interest interna-
tional organizations,” he says. Six 
Billion Others is an exhibition of over 
6,000 video testimonials by people 
around the world talking in their na-
tive languages about the issues af-
fecting humanity. The project started 
in 2003 and was presented at the 
Grand Palais in Paris in January and 
February 2009. 
His parting words: “Come work 
with me. Let’s set up a big project. 
We can do terrific things together!” 
An opportunity not to be missed.
Foresight

Well, Fatehpur Sikri, Uttar Pradesh, India.

Pink trumpet tree on Kaw Mountain, French Guiana.

Yann arthus-Bertrand : some projects
yann arthus-Bertrand, born in 1946, 
founded the aerial photography agency 
altitude in 1991. in 2005 he set up 
goodplanet, a foundation with the aim 
of raising public awareness concer- 
ning environmental issues. it includes 
six programmes: six Billion others, 
Carbon action, goodplanet post-
ers, goodplanet Junior, goodplanet 
info and goodplanet Conso. in april 
2009 the united nations environment 
programme (unep) appointed him 
goodwill ambassador. His show vu du 
Ciel (earth From above), a documentary 
series about the planet, airs in 34 coun-
tries. His film Home, screened in 126 
countries on world environment day 
(5 June 2009), illustrates our planet’s 
condition and the challenges that must 
be met to protect it.Yann Arthus-Bertrand.

To coincide with the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen,  
the Courier is devoting its December 2009/January 2010 edition  
to the topic of global climate change.
