As demand for clean water grows 
worldwide, so do concerns about 
corruption in the water sector. Not 
least in South Africa, where a gov-
ernment unit that combats water 
crime is getting a much-needed 
boost. 
Water corruption in Southern 
Africa hit the headlines earlier this 
decade when the chief executive of 
a US$8 billion construction project 
was found guilty of having accepted 
more than US$2 million in bribes 
from multinational construction 
companies to secure contracts. 
Masupha Ephraim Sole was in 
charge of the Lesotho Highlands 
Water Project, an ambitious pro-
gramme to build dams and canals 
for water transfer from the highlands 
of Lesotho, a country the size of Bel-
gium which is entirely surrounded 
by South Africa, to the dry Gauteng 
area around Johannesburg. 
Despite limited assistance from 
the international community, Leso-
tho succeeded in bringing the err-
ing parties to justice — the chief ex-
ecutive was sentenced to 18 years 
in prison in 2002 and some of the 
companies involved received multi-
million fines and have been de-
barred from receiving World Bank 
contracts.
Fighting corruption
Since the incident, the govern-
ments of both Lesotho and South 
Africa have stepped up their fight 
against corruption in the water sec-
tor. Such corruption can take many 
forms, from petty bribing to avoid a 
pollution fine to multi-million payoffs 
to secure large contracts. 
In South Africa, compliance with 
water regulations is monitored and 
enforced by a special unit in the 
Department of Water Affairs and 
Forestry (DWAF). The unit is nick-
named the “Blue Scorpions” after 
the country’s elite anti-corruption 
force, the Scorpions. 
The Blue Scorpions, set up in 
2005, fight a range of water-related 
crime, from pollution to unlawful 
abstraction of South Africa’s water 
courses. The funding increase will 
increase the unit’s number of staff 
from a handful to, eventually, over 
100. It is also going to get access 
to better technology, including sat-
ellite imaging, to track down wrong-
doers. 
Corruption is one part of the murky 
activity the unit unveils, says Nigel 
Adams, its director. “If you get to 
a place and there’s just a big hole 
in the ground, but 50 million rand 
(nearly US$5 million) has been 
spent, then you know something 
strange has happened,” he says. 
His unit’s success depends on 
three things, he says. First, its close 
working partnership with other gov-
ernment agencies and the South 
African police. Second, its open 
door policy that welcomes anyone 
Blue ScorpionS  
againSt water corruption
(•••)
                 zero tolerance is the motto of the ‘blue Scorpions’, a special unit created 
within the South african department of water affairs and Forestry (dwaF) to fight 
water-related crimes. with severe water shortages, South africa is susceptible to water 
corruption, but is tackling it more effectively than most of its neighbours.
Dam in Swaziland.

“If you get to a place and there’s just a 
big hole in the ground, but 50 million rand 
(nearly US $5 million) has been spent, then 
you know something strange has happened,” 
says Nigel Adams, director of the Blue 
Scorpions.

econcerned about their compliance 


with water regulations to come in 
and talk to the unit. The third, how-
ever, is a zero-tolerance policy for 
those who refuse to comply with 
the law. “To those people, I am hard 
as steel,” Adams says. 
Adams and his team are likely to 
have their work cut out for them. 
Last year, South Africa dropped in 
the corruption index compiled by 
Transparency International to 54th 
place, down from 43rd place in 
2007. There is corruption on many 
levels in South Africa’s water sec-
tor, said a representative of a water 
NGO who refused to be named. 
Some of the most common forms 
of dodgy dealings are fast-tracking 
procurement contracts and giving 
consultancy jobs to pals, she said. 
South Africa has many ‘risk fac-
tors’ that make it susceptible to 
water corruption. It is a dry country, 
with some regions facing critical 
water shortages. Urbanisation and 
industrial growth are putting pres-
sure on the water supply. In addi-
tion, the country’s Institution for 
Civil Engineering 2006 infrastruc-
ture report card identified the need 
for extensive refurbishment of the 
country’s dams and sewage sys-
tems, meaning more tenders, which 
can be corruption-prone. 
Still, South Africa is tackling cor-
ruption more successfully than 
most of its poorer neighbours on 
the continent. The poor gover-
nance structure and large funding 
flows that characterise the water 
sector in the rest of Africa provide 
fertile growing grounds for abuse, 
according to the 2008 Global 
Corruption Report. The report es-
timates that due to corruption, the 
cost for reaching the Millennium 
Goal on drinking water and sanita-
tion in developing countries could 
increase by as much as with US$48 
billion over the next decade. 
Such money-loss will have a direct 
effect on all Africans. Consumers 
will pay more and water quality will 
deteriorate (when pollution is over-
looked in exchange for a bribe, for 
example). Meanwhile, restricted ac-
cess, lower economic growth (be-
cause companies need water) and 
water shortages could spark unrest, 
damaging national security.
A range of actions
But few studies investigate the 
situation on the ground, says Piers 
Cross, a consultant who is investi-
gating water corruption in drought-
stricken Ethiopia for the World 
Bank. Ethiopia is currently investing 
heavily in water infrastructure, such 
as dams and bringing water to rural 
areas. 
With a large number of contracts 
being offered to improve access to 
clean water across Ethiopia, there 
are question-marks both over how 
contracts are being handled, both 
for large infrastructure projects and 
smaller-scale borehole drilling, says 
Cross. He’s going to Ethiopia in 
April to take photos of new equip-
ment. “We’ll try to compare if what 
is built equals what is being paid 
for,” he says. 
Some countries are addressing the 
problem. In Zambia, following the 
re-organisation of the water sector 
to allow more local control, commu-
(•••)
nity-based Water Watch Groups 
were set up to monitor water pro-
viders’ performance. The onus is on 
communities learning about their 
rights and raising awareness of in-
fringements. A 2008 study by S. 
Kayaga and R. Franceys, two UK 
academics, found that NWASCO, 
the Zambian regulator, had made 
“commendable progress” towards 
better accountability and transpar-
ency in the water sector. 
Due to the relatively short time 
water corruption has been in the 
spotlight, there is little information 
on what interventions work, says 
John Butterworth from the Interna-
tional Water and Sanitation Centre. 
“What has been shown is that a 
quick fix just pushes the corruption 
into a different area. If you sort out 
a particular aspect of your procure-
ment, the people who were engaged 
in corrupt practices will just shift to 
another part of the process. It needs 
a whole range of actions.” 
Something that seems to work is to 
raise the awareness of communities 
of the problem and how it affects 
them, he adds. “It’s called social ac-
countability. Involving communities in 
looking at the quality of construction, 
making sure all material is delivered, 
that sort of thing.” 
Nor is the problem unique to 
Africa. Water corruption by cartels 
in South Asia inflated prices be-
tween 15 and 20% between 2001 
and 2002, according to a survey. 
Recent member countries of the 
EU, such as Romania and Bulgaria, 
are, for example, ranking lower on 
Transparency International’s corrup-
tion perception index as compared 
to some African or Asian countries, 
says Håkan Tropp, chairman of the 
Water Integrity Network, set up in 
2006 to improve transparency and 
governance in the global water sec-
tor. “So it is also problem we in de-
veloped countries have to deal with 
in our own back yard.” 
Linda Nordling, 
Swedish journalist 
living in South Africa 
Blue ScorpionS againSt water corruption
