Opening of the Future Forum at UNESCO (2 March 2009).

ON lIvING wITH less,  
from thrEE points of viEw
how to protect the poor from  
a crisis caused by a few of the rich? 
this was the main question raised 
at the unEsco future forum  
held last march.  
the debate is summarized  
by one of the moderators,  
alison smale, in a presentation  
of three different perspectives  
on the crisis and its effects.
forum
‘’What to do to protect some of the 
poorest from a crisis created by 
some of the richest.’’ 
In his presentation, Watkins coined 
an acronym new to the alphabet 
soup of international institutions: 
ITYBL. In The Year Before Lehman, 
i.e. 2007, he noted, aid to poorer 
countries was already falling. Now 
that foreign investment in the devel-
oping world has slowed to a trickle, 
trade has shrunk, commodity prices 
have fallen, and remittances sent 
home by immigrants in richer coun-
tries are declining sharply, Watkins 
asked how poor and middle-income 
countries could avoid a drastic fall 
in already meager or subsistence liv-
ing standards. 
He estimated that the poorest 70 
countries needed about $400 bil-
lion a year - or about 1 percent of 
the total gross domestic product 
of the 30 (mostly rich) countries in 
the Paris-based Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Devel-
opment. In the lingua franca of his 
world, that’s what it would take to 
maintain hope of realizing the eight 
MDGs, or Millennium Development 
Goals, to which 189 countries com-
mitted in 2000. Several now look 
truly unrealizable by the target date 
of 2015. 
The message arrived one recent 
weekend with a glossy thud: a 
300-plus-page edition of Madame 
Figaro, the French daily’s weekly ode 
to women and beauty, dedicated to 
the first Paris ready-to-wear fashion 
shows since the advent of ‘’la crise’’ 
in the luxury industry. 
Madame Figaro, like all such maga-
zines, had been somewhat crisis-
starved of ads and thus pagination of 
late, but fashion week - and fashion 
houses determined that the shows 
will go on - bulked it up again. None-
theless, “fashionistas” could not miss 
the main point: times are tough, or at 
least much tougher, as evidenced in 
the 10 detailed tips for ‘’recessioni-
stas’’ » about maintaining cool and 
chic even on diminished budgets 
(mostly this seems to involve trawling 
Web sites that will offer you slightly 
used couture on the cheap). 
To get readers in the right mood, 
the French designer Jean-Charles 
de Castelbajac kicked off the edito-
rial offerings with musings on what 
he called ‘’the democratization of 
beauty,’’ or ‘’low cost luxury.’’ 
‘’We are moving irredeemably,’’ he 
proclaimed, ‘’to this new El Dorado.’’ 
‘’Today,’’ wrote Castelbajac, ‘’fash-
ion, luxury and creation must reinvent 
themselves.’’ A young generation 
of designers, he insisted, has this 
transformation in hand. ‘’Nothing will 
be the same again, and that’s for 
the best. Our renaissance will equal 
the measure of our conscience,’’ he 
added, because ‘’we carry within us 
a treasure beyond value: imagina-
tion.’’ 
French ingenuity at pleasing the 
senses - whether through food, wine, 
fine clothes or graceful buildings - 
has survived and indeed thrived for 
many centuries, and Castelbajac, 
himself a veteran of invention, can 
doubtless bank on it safely once 
more.
Impact of the crisis on 
the developing world
Across town, a few days earlier, 
sounded a cri de coeur that was just 
as timeless and true: the indignation 
of international aid workers, labor 
officials and others about the ever 
quickening, ever harsher impact of 
the global crisis on the developing 
world. 
UNESCO had summoned a day-
long conference on this theme, and 
the conclusions of one panel (at which 
I moderated) were sobering. Kevin 
Watkins, director of UNESCO’s 
Global Monitoring Report on Edu-
cation for All, summed up the task: 

If anyone had any doubt that broken 
promises like this leave a great deal 
more than a bitter taste, he had only 
to hear the passion of another speak-
er, Aminata Traore, a West African 
activist and former minister of 
culture and tourism for Mali. Hers 
was a howl of outrage at the many ills 
bestowed on Africa by the outside 
world, and particularly colonial pow-
ers. She was loudly applauded. And 
this was before the G-20 meeting in 
London, which while pledging to do 
more for the poorest -- a pledge fol-
lowed by an energetic push for the 
poor from U.N. Secretary General 
Ban Ki Moon in a meeting of all U.N. 
agencies, the World Bank and the 
International Monetary Fund in Paris 
the following weekend -- sets the 
developed world up for yet another 
test that it may flunk in the eyes of 
the poorest. 
At the UNESCO gathering, José 
Manuel Salazar, a Costa Rican who 
heads the employment sector at the 
International Labor Organization, 
was also blunt about the effects of 
crisis on Africa. ‘’It is very clear that 
the crisis will reverse the modest 
gains,’’ he said. ‘’The effects will out-
last the crisis.’’ 
The impact of the crisis on develo- 
ping countries has made few head-
lines in the Western news media 
compared to the attention heaped 
upon the swindler Bernard Madoff, 
the high-flying investment bankers 
of Wall Street, London and Hong 
Kong, or the trans-Atlantic dispute 
over what to do first to get out of the 
nosedive: spend, or regulate. 
One interesting aspect of that chat-
ter was the fall in global markets af-
ter Moody’s Investor Service wrote 
in February that the indebtedness of 
Eastern Europe, and particularly its 
weak banks, would drag down their 
owners, mostly large banks in West-
ern Europe.
etary Fund or other institutions for help. 
And so to a third scene of the world in 
crisis, Warsaw. A 24-hour visit in March 
-- around the 10th anniversary of the 
first opening of the West’s most exclu-
sive club, the entry of Poland, the Czech 
Republic and Hungary into NATO - 
found a country calmly determined to 
relay that it is not, thank you, in crisis. 
From the president on down, ac-
forum
A man from Jaipur (India), the crisis particularly hurts the poor.

Europe after the crisis
The crisis has exposed many rifts 
and weaknesses in the European po-
litical structure so painstakingly assem-
bled since World War II. But the coun-
tries that most recently benefited - the 
ex-Communist nations which regained 
liberty in the 1990s - are not uniformly 
glum, nor are all going hat in hand to the 
European Union, the International Mon-
knowledgement of the crisis was plain, 
but gloom was not, as in New York or 
London these days, setting the tone of 
the conversation. 
Indeed, Pavel Swieboda, a former 
diplomat who now heads a think tank, 
the Center for European Strategy, 
jauntily revealed over breakfast that he 
was off to the first of a series of discus-
sions under the title ‘’Europe After the 
Crisis.’’ 
And, yes, maybe the anniversary and 
the satisfaction of the political elite at 
having spent 10 years in NATO and al-
most five in the European Union tinted 
the mood. But it was surely refreshing 
to hear people who 20 years ago were 
waging politics underground extolling 
not the joys or woes brought by mon-
ey, but, at a packed Warsaw Univer-
sity forum, the many ways in which to 
guard very jealously its best guaran-
tor – democracy. 
Alison Smale, 
Executive Editor, 
International Herald Tribune A disused office in the wake of the bankruptcy of a company.
