All Men Are Brothers
U
UNESCO’s Tribute to Mahatma Gandhi 
NESCO is paying a special tribute to Mahatma Gandhi. It renders hom-
age to both the person and the writings of a man whose spiritual influence has 
extended throughout the world in a new book entitled All Men Are Brothers, which 
presents the life and thoughts of the great teacher as set down in Gandhi’s own 
words. The aim of the texts is to illustrate and make better known the different 
aspects of Gandhi’s personality and writings. The English edition will be followed 
by French and Spanish versions. On pages 10, 11 and 12 we publish a section of 
Gandhi’s thoughts taken from All Men Are Brothers. The complete introduction 
to the UNESCO volume specially written by Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, is 
presented on the opposite page.

A 
great teacher appears once in 
a while. Several centuries may 
pass by without the advent of 
such a figure. He is known by 
his life. He first lives and then 
tells others how they may live like him. 
Gandhi is such a teacher. These selec-
tions from his speeches and writings 
compiled with great care and discrimi-
nation by Sri Krishna Kripalani will give 
the reader some idea of the workings of 
Gandhi’s mind, its development and the 
practices he adopted. 
Gandhi’s life was rooted in India’s 
religious tradition, with its emphasis on 
a passionate search for the truth, a pro-
found reverence for life, the ideal of non-
attachment and the readiness to sacrifice 
all for the knowledge of God. He lived his 
whole life in the perpetual quest of truth: 
“I live and move and have my being in the 
pursuit of this goal.” 
A life which has no roots, which is lack-
ing in depth of background is a super-
ficial one. There are some who assume 
that when we see what is right, we will 
do it. Even when we know what is right, it 
does not follow that we will choose and 
do right. We are overcome by powerful 
impulses, we do wrong and betray the 
light in us. “In our present state we are, 
according to the Hindu doctrine, only 
partly human; the lower part of us is still 
animal; only the conquest of our lower 
instincts by love can slay the animal in 
us.” It is by a process of trial and error, 
self-research and austere discipline that 
the human being moves, step by painful 
step, along the road to fulfilment.
G
andhi’s religion was a rational 
and ethical one. He would not 
accept any belief that did not 
appeal to his reason, or any in-
junction which his conscience 
did not commend. If we believe in God, 
not merely with our intellect but with our 
whole being, we will love all mankind 
without any distinction of race or class, 
nation or religion. We will work for the uni-
ty of mankind. “All my actions have their 
rise in my inalienable love of mankind.” 
“I have known no distinction between 
relatives and strangers, countrymen 
and foreigners, white and coloured, Hin-
dus and Indians of other faiths whether 
Musulmans, Parsees, Christians or Jews. 
I may say that my heart has been in-
capable of making any such distinc-
tions.” “By a long process of prayerful 
discipline I have ceased for over forty 
years to hate anybody.” All men are 
brothers and no human being should 
be a stranger to another. The welfare 
of all, ‘sarvodaya’, should be our aim. 
God is the common bond that unites 
all human beings. To break this bond 
even with our greatest enemy is to 
tear God himself to pieces. There is 
humanity even in the most wicked. 
This view leads naturally to the adop-
tion of non-violence as the best means 
for solving all problems, national and 
international. Gandhi affirmed that he 
was not a visionary but a practical ide-
alist. Non-violence is meant not merely 
for saints and sages but for the com-
mon people also. “Non-violence is the 
law of our species, as violence is the 
law of the brute. The spirit lies dor-
mant in the brute and he knows no law 
but that of physical might. The dignity 
of man requires obedience to a higher 
law – to the strengths of the spirit.”
Gandhi was the first in human 
history to extend the principle 
of non-violence from the indi-
vidual to the social and politi-
cal plane. He entered politics 
for the purpose of experimenting with 
non-violence and establishing its validity. 
“Some friends have told me that truth and 
non-violence have no place in politics and 
worldly affairs. I do not agree. I have no 
use for them as a means of individual sal-
vation. Their introduction and application 
in everyday life has been my experiment all 
along.” “For me, politics bereft of religion 
are absolute dirt, ever to be shunned. Poli-
tics concerns nations and that which con-
cerns the welfare of nations must be one 
of the concerns of a man who is religiously 
inclined, in other words, a seeker after 
God and Truth. For me God and Truth 
are convertible terms, and if any one told 
me that God was a God of untruth or a 
God of torture I would decline to worship 
him. Therefore, in politics also we have to 
establish the Kingdom of Heaven.” 
In the struggle of India’s independence, 
he insisted that we should adopt civilized 
methods of non-violence and suffering. 
His stand for the freedom of India was not 
based on any hatred for Britain. We must 
hate the sin not the sinner. “For me patrio-
tism is the same as humanity. I am patri-
otic because I am human and humane. I 
will not hurt England or Germany to serve 
India.” He believed that he rendered a ser-
vice to the British in helping them to do 
the right thing by India. The result was not 
only the liberation of the Indian people 
but an increase in the moral resources of 
mankind. 
In the present nuclear context, if we wish 
to save the world, we should adopt the 
principles of non-violence. Gandhi said: 
“I did not move a muscle, when I first 
heard that an atom bomb had wiped 
out Hiroshima. On the contrary I said 
to myself: unless now the world adopts 
non-violence, it will spell certain suicide 
for mankind.” In any future conflict we 
cannot be certain that neither side will 
deliberately use nuclear weapons. We 
have the power to destroy in one blind-
ing flash all that we have carefully built 
up across the centuries by our endeav-
our and sacrifice. By a campaign of pro-
paganda we condition men’s minds for 
nuclear warfare. Provocative remarks fly 
about freely. We use aggression even in 
words; harsh judgements, ill-will, anger, 
are all insidious forms of violence. 
In the present predicament when we 
are not able to adjust ourselves to the 
new conditions which science has 
brought about, it is not easy to adopt 
the principles of non-violence, truth and 
understanding. But on that ground we 
should not give up the effort. While the 
obstinacy of the political leaders puts 
fear into our hearts, the common sense 
and conscience of the peoples of the 
world give us hope. 
With the increased velocity of mod-
ern changes we do not know what the 
world will be a hundred years hence. 
We cannot anticipate the future currents 
of thought and feeling. But years may 
go their way, yet the great principles of 
satya and ahimsa, truth and non-violence, 
are there to guide us. They are the silent 
stars keeping holy vigil above a tired and 
turbulent world. Like Gandhi we may be 
firm in our conviction that the sun shines 
above the drifting clouds.
W
e live in an age which is 
aware of its own defeat 
and moral coarsening, an 
age in which old certain-
ties are breaking down, 
the familiar patterns are tilting and cracking. 
There is increasing intolerance and embit-
terment. The creative flame that kindled the 
great human society is languishing. The 
human mind in all its baffling strangeness 
and variety produces contrary types, a 
Buddha or a Gandhi, a Nero or a Hitler. It is 
our pride that one of the greatest figures of 
history lived in our generation, walked with 
us, spoke to us, taught us the way of civi-
lized living. He who wrongs no one fears 
no one. He has nothing to hide and so is 
fearless. He looks everyone in the face. 
His step is firm, his body upright, and his 
words are direct and straight. Plato said 
long ago: “There always are in the world a 
few inspired men whose acquaintance is 
beyond price.”

“I have nothing new to teach the world. Truth and non-violence 
are as old as the hills.”
“It has always been a mystery to me how men can feel them-
selves honoured by the humiliation of their fellow-beings.”
 
“Hate the sin and not the sinner is a precept which, though 
easy enough to understand, is rarely practised, and that is why 
the poison of hatred spreads in the world.”
 
“You have to stand against the whole world although you may 
have to stand alone. You have to stare the world in the face al-
though the world may look at you with bloodshot eyes. Do not 
fear. Trust that little thing in you which resides in the heart and 
says: Forsake friends, wife, all; but testify to that for which you 
have lived and for which you have to die.”
“God has created different faiths just as He has the votaries 
thereof. How can I even secretly harbour the thought that my 
neighbour’s faith is inferior to mine and wish that he should give 
up his faith and embrace mine? As a true and loyal friend, I can 
only wish and pray that he may live and grow perfect in his own 
faith. In God’s house there are many mansions and they are 
equally holy. Let no one even for a moment entertain the fear that 
a reverent study of other religions is likely to weaken or shake 
one’s faith in one’s own. The Hindu system of philosophy regards 
all religions as containing the elements of truth in them and en-
joins an attitude of respect and reverence towards them all. This 
of course presupposes regard for one’s own religion. Study and 
 “The World is sick of hatred”  
 Mahatma Gandhi
appreciation of other religions need not cause a weakening of 
that regard; it should mean extension of that regard to other re-
ligions.”
“Non-violence is the greatest force at the disposal of mankind. 
It is mightier than the mightiest weapon of destruction devised by 
the ingenuity of man. Destruction is not the law of the humans. 
Man lives freely by his readiness to die, if need be, at the hands 
of his brother, never by killing him. Every murder or other injury, 
no matter for what cause, committed or inflicted on another is a 
crime against humanity.”
“My experience, daily growing stronger and richer, tells me that 
there is no peace for individuals or for nations without practising 
Truth and Non-violence to the uttermost extent possible for man. 
The policy of retaliation has never succeeded.”
“My love for non-violence is superior to every other thing mun-
dane or supramundane. It is equalled only by my love for truth 
which is to me synonymous with non-violence through which and 
which alone I can see and reach Truth. My scheme of life, if it 
draws no distinction between different religionists in India, also 
draws none between different races. For me A man’s a man for 
all that.”
“My non-violence does not admit of running away from danger 
and leaving dear ones unprotected. Between violence and cow-
ardly flight, I can only prefer violence to cowardice. I can no more 
preach non-violence to a coward that I can tempt a blind man 
to enjoy healthy scenes. Non-violence is the summit of bravery. 
And in my own experience, I have had no difficulty in demonstrat-
ing to men trained in the school of violence the superiority of 
non-violence. As a coward, which I was for years, I harboured 
violence. I began to prize non-violence only when I began to shed 
cowardice.” 
“Not knowing the stuff of which non-violence is made, many 
have honestly believed that running away from danger every time 
was a virtue compared to offering resistance, especially when 
it was fraught with danger to one’s life. As a teacher of non- 
violence, I must, so far as it is possible for me, guard against such 
an unmanly belief.” 
“I am not a visionary. I claim to be a practical idealist. Religion 
of non-violence is not meant merely for the rishis and saints. It is 
meant for the common people as well. Non-violence is the law 
of our species as violence is the law of the brute. The spirit lies 
dormant in the brute, and he knows no law but that of physical 
might. The dignity of man requires obedience to a higher law, to 
the strength of the spirit.” 
“Often does good come out of evil. But that is God’s, not man’s 
plan. Man knows that only evil can come out of evil, as good out 
of good… The moral to be legitimately drawn from the supreme 
tragedy of the atom bomb is that it will not be destroyed by coun-
ter bombs, even as violence cannot be by counter violence. Man-
kind has to go out of violence only through non-violence. Hatred 
can be overcome only by love. Counter hatred only increases the 
surface, as well as the depth of hatred.” 
“It is impossible for one to be an internationalist without being 
a nationalist. Internationalism is possible only when nationalism 
becomes a fact, i.e., when peoples belonging to different coun-
tries have organized themselves and are able to act as one man. 
Young Gandhi. Photo reproduced from  
The UNESCO Courier, October 1969.

It is not nationalism that is evil, it is the narrowness, selfishness, 
exclusiveness which is the bane of modern nations which is evil. 
Each wants to profit at the expense of, and rise on the ruin of, 
the other.”
“Interdependence is and ought to be as much the ideal of man 
as self-sufficiency. Man is a social being. Without inter-relation 
with society he cannot realize his oneness with the universe or 
suppress his egoism. His social interdependence enables him to 
test his faith and to prove himself on the touchstone of reality. If 
man were so placed or could so place himself as to be absolutely 
above all dependence on his fellow-beings he would become 
so proud and arrogant as to be a veritable burden and nuisance 
to the world. Dependence on society teaches him the lesson of 
humanity.”  
“What is the cause of the present chaos? It is exploitation, I will 
not say of weaker nations by the stronger, but of sister nations by 
sister nations. And my fundamental objection to machinery rests 
on the fact that it is machinery that has enabled these nations to 
exploit others.” 
“My notion of democracy is that under it the weakest should 
have the same opportunity as the strongest. That can never hap-
pen except through non-violence.”
“The true source of rights is duty. If we all discharge our duties, 
rights will not be far to seek. If leaving duties unperformed we run 
after rights, they will escape us like a will-o’-the-wisp. The more 
we pursue them, the farther will they fly.” 
“To me political power is not an end but one of the means of en-
abling people to better their conditions in every department of life. 
Political power means capacity to regulate national life through 
national representatives. If national life becomes so perfect as to 
become self-regulated, no representation becomes necessary. 
There is then a state of enlightened anarchy. In such a state every 
one is his own ruler. He rules himself in such a manner that he is 
never a hindrance to his neighbour. In the ideal State, therefore, 
there is no political power because there is no State. But the 
ideal is never fully realized in life. Hence the classic statement of 
Thoreau that government is best which governs the least.”  
“I value individual freedom but you must not forget that man is 
essentially a social being. He has risen to his present status by 
learning to adjust his individualism to the requirements of social 
progress. Unrestricted individualism is the law of the beast of the 
jungle. We have learnt to strike the mean between individual free-
dom and social restraint. Willing submission to social restraint for 
the sake of the well-being of the whole society enriches both the 
individual and the society of which one is a member.” 
“The golden rule of conduct is mutual toleration, seeing that we 
will never all think alike and we shall see Truth in fragment and 
from different angles of vision. Conscience is not the same thing 
for all. Whilst, therefore, it is a good guide for individual conduct, 
imposition of that conduct upon all will be an insufferable interfer-
ence with everybody’s freedom of conscience.”
 
“Differences of opinion should never mean hostility. If they did, 
my wife and I should be sworn enemies of one another. I do not 
know two persons in the world who had no difference of opinion, 
and as I am a follower of the Gita, I have always attempted to 
regard those who differ from me with the same affection as I 
have for my nearest and dearest.”
Gandhi at 45, shortly before leaving  
South Africa. Photo reproduced from  
The UNESCO Courier, October 1969.

“We must be content to die, if we cannot live as free men 
and women.” 
“Even the most despotic government cannot stand except 
for the consent of the governed, which consent is often forc-
ibly procured by the despot. Immediately the subject ceases to 
fear the despotic force, his power is gone.” 
“The true democrat is he who, with purely non-violent means, 
defends his liberty and, therefore, his country’s and ultimately that 
of the whole of mankind.”  
“I do not want my house to be walled in on all sides and my 
windows to be stuffed. I want the cultures of all lands to be blown 
about my house as freely as possible. But I refuse to be blown off 
my feet by any. I would have our young men and women with liter-
ary tastes to learn as much of English and other world-languages 
as they like, and then expect them to give the benefits of their 
learning to India and to the world.” 
“I am not sure that it is not better for the children to have much 
of the preliminary instruction imparted to them vocally. To impose 
on children of tender age a knowledge of the alphabet and the 
ability to read before they can gain general knowledge is to 
deprive them, whilst they are fresh, of the power of assimilating 
instruction by word of mouth.” 
“I would develop in the child his hands, his brain and his soul. 
The hands have almost atrophied. The soul has been altogether 
ignored.” 
“A wise parent allows the children to make mistakes. It is good 
for them once in a while to burn their fingers.” 
“To call woman the weaker sex is a libel; it is man’s injustice 
to woman. If by strength is meant brute strength then indeed, is 
woman less brute than man. If by strength is meant moral power, 
then woman is immeasurably man’s superior. Has she not greater 
intuition, is she not more self-sacrificing, has she not greater pow-
ers of endurance, has she not greater courage? Without her man 
could not be. If non-violence is the law of our being, the future 
is with woman… Who can make a more effective appeal to the 
heart than woman?”
“I believe in the proper education of women. But I do believe that 
women will not make her contribution to the world by mimicking 
or running a race with men. She can run the race, but she will not 
rise to the great heights she is capable of by mimicking man. She 
has to be the complement of man.”
 
“I am not at all concerned with appearing to be consistent. In 
my pursuit after Truth I have discarded many ideas and learnt many 
new things. Old as I am in age, I have no feeling that I have ceased 
to grow inwardly or that my growth will stop with the dissolution 
of the flesh. What I am concerned with is my readiness to obey 
the call of Truth, my God, from moment to moment. Music means 
rhythm, order. Its effect is electrical. It immediately soothes. Unfor-
tunately like our shastras, music has been the prerogative of the 
few. It has never been nationalized in the modern sense. If I had any 
influence with volunteer boy scouts and Seva Samiti organizations, 
I would make compulsory a proper singing in company of national 
songs. And to that end I should have great musicians attending 
every congress or conference and teaching mass music.” 
“I love music and all the other arts, but I do not attach such value 
to them as is generally done. I cannot, for example, recognize the 
value of those activities which require technical knowledge for 
their understanding… When I gaze at the starsown heaven, and 
the infinite beauty it affords my eyes, that means to me more than 
all human art can give. That does not mean that I ignore the value 
of those works generally called artistic; but personally, in com-
parison with the infinite beauty of Nature, I feel their unreality too 
intensely… Life is greater than all art. I would even go further and 
declare that the man whose life comes nearest to perfection 
is the greatest artist; for what is art without the sure founda-
tion and framework of a noble life?”

August 15, 1947 marked both the liberation of India and its partition  
into two separate nations: the Indian Union and Pakistan. Although aged 78,  
Gandhi went barefoot from village to village in the regions ravaged by conflict between 
Hindu and Moslem. Photo reproduced from The UNESCO Courier, October 1969.
