Time has started to yellow the pag-
es and the blue ink is already fad-
ing. A few letters have gone, leav-
ing some words missing a vowel or 
a consonant. But overall the text is 
still legible, and the erratic grammar 
of the Malagasy language, only be-
ginning to adapt to the Roman al-
phabet, in no way dulls the pleasure 
of discovering a whole culture and 
civilization. 
The registers of the village chiefs 
(sakaizambohitra), as well as the 
notebooks, records and bound 
correspondence that comprise 
the Royal Archives open the door 
on a whole panorama of daily life. 
The kingdom of Madagascar be-
gan in 1810 and ended in 1897, 
with French colonization, when the 
island’s new General Governor, Jo-
seph Gallieni, abolished the mon-
archy. These precious documents, 
now kept in the main island’s Na-
tional Archives, cover the period 
from 1824 to 1897. They give an 
important account of the nascent 
history of a hitherto oral culture, 
revealing the secrets and intrigues 
of the court, as well as the difficul-
ties central government envoys 
sometimes encountered in the con-
quered lands. 
Until the accession of King Ra-
dama I (1810-1828), Madagascar 
was divided into a multitude of king-
doms. Radama I, from the Merina 
clan, was recognized by the British 
as King of Madagascar in 1817. He 
continued the policy of island uni-
fication that his father had initiated 
in 1795, but with greater openness 
towards the developed world. He 
welcomed the Protestant mission-
aries, who went on to build schools, 
adapt the Roman alphabet to the 
Malagasy language and teach the 
aristocracy to read and write. This is 
how, from 1824, the first Malagasy 
archives gradually took form.
History behind  
the scenes
Did the Prime Minister buy arms 
without consulting his Cabinet, and 
even though the State coffers were 
empty? The Rainilaiarivony Journal 
–written minutes of the twice-week-
ly cabinet meetings as transcribed 
by secretaries – gives a detailed 
account of how, after failing to se-
cure a loan from the queen and 
now faced with a ‘fait accompli’, the 
government decided to involve the 
people in the purchase. Since the 
arms had already been delivered, 
they had to be paid for somehow! 
The royal ‘kabary’ (speeches), which 
informed subjects of the decision to 
raise new taxes for the “good of all”, 
are more or less faithfully recorded 
in the records. 
Did the queen appoint a disrepu-
table character as head of criminal 
justice? Once again, the Rainilaia-
rivony Journal relates, in full detail, 
how the cabinet tried to dissuade 
her from choosing this “womanizer”. 
But management of public affairs is 
not all that is recorded. There are 
also references to the private lives 
of the courtiers in the queen’s and 
the prime minister’s palaces. Here 
we learn, interspersed among more 
serious debates, how so-and-so 
got divorced and such-and-such 
has been cheating on his wife. 
And this aspect of court life is 
not only the preserve of the cabi-
net records. Essays by erudite 
Malagasies on the history of the 
nation, correspondence between 
provincial governors, and even the 
                  the royal archives of Madagascar, written in Malagasy, are a unique, 
   living testimony of daily life in the 19th century and the meeting of two cultures, 
    as seen by Malagasy people themselves. in July 2009, the archives were inscribed 
                       on the unesCo Memory of the world register.
in The blue ink  
of malagasy arisTocraTs

These royal archives are not available to the public.

English language exercise books of 
the Prime Minister, all offer titillating 
details of the daily life of a Malagasy 
courtier. 
But, besides the gossip, the Royal 
Archives provide historians, the only 
ones to have access, with material 
to better understand life in Mada-
gascar in the 19th century, and not 
just from the perspective of political 
history. Thanks to these records, re-
search has been carried out on the 
costumes, cuisine, lifestyle and fes-
tivals of the island. And this insight 
into the habits of the people also 
sheds light on the entire social and 
economic history of the period.
From ‘lovan-tsofina’  
to written archives
These documents are all the more 
interesting because they reflect the 
Malagasy point of view on a period 
which turned out to be crucial for 
the country, because of its encoun-
ter with Western, Christian cultures. 
With the adopttion of the Roman 
alphabet, tales of daily life were no 
longer confined to the lovan-tsofina 
(oral transmission of traditions and 
customs) but were also written 
down. And these written records 
were not produced only by the for-
eign missionaries, soldiers and ex-
plorers, but also by the Malagasy 
people themselves. 
“The Madagascar Royal Archives 
provide a very explicit account of the 
opening of the island to the western 
world and the contact between the 
two cultures,” explains Sylvie Andri-
amihamina, Director of the National 
Archives. And between the two re-
ligions. From the 1820s onwards, 
Protestant missionaries gradually 
established Christianity. Up until 
then, Malagasies worshipped their 
ancestors, seen as mediators be-
tween the living and the one god, 
Zanahary. He was then integrated 
with the new religious practises and 
assimilated to the Christian God of 
the Bible. 
The archives are currently held 
in the Archives of the Republic 
of Madagascar, in Antananarivo. 
“They are still very well preserved 
despite several moves,” says Sylvie 
Andriamihamina. “But we do need 
to find a way for them to be con-
sulted without damage to the origi-
nal documents. We have been able 
to digitize the correspondence be-
tween missionaries and the central 
government, thanks to a partner-
ship with the Centre for Technical 
and Economic Information (CITE). 
Other records are available on the 
Internum Aristhot website.” In the 
interests of conservation, access to 
the documents is strictly controlled. 
“Conventions and agreements have 
been signed with the research de-
partments that want to use them,” 
she adds. 
Inscription of the Royal Archives 
on the UNESCO Memory of the 
World Register in July 2009 came 
just at the right time. “Thanks to 
this inscription, we can learn more 
about our own heritage and share 
this with the rest of the world,” says 
Ms Andriamihamina. 
Lovasoa Rabary-Rakotondravony 
and Isabelle Motchane-Brun, 
L’Express de Madagascar
in The blue ink of malagasy arisTocraTs

Sylvie Andriamihamina, Director of the National Archives of Madagascar.
.
Example of Malagasy diplomatic correspondence 
before French colonisation.
