F
India’s ‘Hidden Apartheid’
 by Gopal Guru, with Shiraz Sidhva
Gopal Guru is a professor of social and political theory  
in the Center of Political Science at Jawaharlal Nehru University.  
In 2001, Shiraz Sidhva was a UNESCO Courier journalist.
or centuries, the untouchables of Paliyad, a nondescript vil-
lage in western India’s Ahmedabad district, have known their 
place. Many of them are manual scavengers, cleaning the toilets 
of upper-caste villagers or toiling the land, sometimes for less 
than a handful of rice a day. 
“We’ve known that we must stay away from them [upper-caste 
people] since the day we were born,” says Rajesh, who is going 
on 19. “At the tea stalls, we have separate cups to drink from, 
chipped and caked with dirt, and we’re expected to clean them 
ourselves. We have to walk for 15 minutes to carry water to our 
homes, because we’re not allowed to use the taps in the vil-
lage that the upper castes use. We’re not allowed into temples, 
and when I attended school, my friends and I were forced to sit 
just outside the classroom […] the upper caste children would 
not allow us even to touch the football they played with […] we 
played with stones instead.” 
More than 160 million people, a sixth of India’s population, 
continue to bear the burden of a 2000-year old caste system 
sanctioned by Hindu theology, which locks people into a rigid 
role by virtue of their birth.
Codes to suit the upper class
Though the term ‘untouchables’ was abolished in 1950 under 
India’s constitution, the ‘oppressed people’ or Dalits as they are 
now referred to, continue to be discriminated against. They are 
denied access to land, forced to work in humiliating and degrad-
ing conditions and are routinely abused by the police and upper-
caste groups, which enjoy the state’s protection. 
Though India has sought to overcome the inequities of caste 
and discrimination through affirmative action — reserving quo-
tas in education, government jobs and political bodies — these 
policies have benefited only a few. The highest office in the land, 
that of the largely ceremonial President, is today held by a Dalit, 
K.R.Narayanan. But all the horrors of India’s caste system per-
sist at the grassroots; attempts to defy this rigid social order 
invariably result in violence or economic retaliation. 
Perhaps the world’s longest surviving social hierarchy, India’s 
caste system entails a complex ordering of social groups on the 
basis of ritual purity. Attributed to the law-giver Manu, the system 
was spelt out over 2000 years ago in the Dharma Shastra, the 
cornerstone of the Hindu religion. 
According to Manu, every individual is born into one of four 
principal varnas, or large categories, and must remain within that 
caste until death, although the particular ranking of that caste 
may vary among different regions in the country and over time. 
In order of precedence, the Brahmins are the priests and teach-
ers, presiding over knowledge and education; the Kshatriyas 
are the rulers and soldiers; the Vaishyas, merchants and trad-
ers; and the Shudras, the peasants, labourers and artisans. The 
untouchables fall into a fifth category outside the varna system, 
and were often assigned tasks too ‘ritually polluting’ to merit in-
clusion within the traditional varna system. 
Clearly, caste discrimination was an ideological construct that 
was deployed by the upper castes to create and maintain their 
monopoly over cultural capital (knowledge and education), so-
cial capital (status and patriarchal domination), political capital 
A street sweeper. “Dalits, as they are now referred to, are forced to work in humiliating and degrading conditions”.

ney general and a member of the UN Subcommission on 
Prevention of Discrimination. India, a vigorous campaigner 
against apartheid, claims that it has done everything pos-
sible to grant equality to India’s lowest castes. A fifth of 
the seats in parliament are reserved for members of the 
scheduled castes (the official term for Dalits), and some 
states are governed by powerful political parties based on 
alliances with the lower castes.
Campaigns to end the stigma
Quotas and job allocations, however, have not brought equality, 
dignity, or even safety for India’s ‘broken people’. In villages, the 
social stigma remains too strong to obliterate by laws alone.
Official figures speak for themselves: recorded crimes and 
atrocities against the lowest castes averaged 26,000 a year 
between 1997 and 1999 (the latest figures available). Con-
sidering the police are often reluctant even to record claims 
against the upper castes, these figures expose just the tip of 
the iceberg. 
About two-thirds of the Dalit population are illiterate, and 
about half are landless agricultural labourers. Only seven per-
cent have access to safe drinking water, electricity and toilets. 
And a majority of the estimated 40 million bonded labourers 
(who work as slaves to pay off debts), including 15 million chil-
dren, are Dalits. 
A national campaign to highlight abuses against Dalits was 
spearheaded by human rights groups in eight Indian states in 
1998, and caste has been taken up as an issue internation-
ally for the first time by organizations including Human Rights 
Watch. While some Dalits have resisted subjugation and dis-
crimination by armed struggle, these are invariably quelled by 
more powerful upper-caste private militia like the Ranbir Sena 
in Bihar, which has been held responsible for a series of mas-
sacres of poor Dalit peasants and landless labourers. 
Macwan agrees that including caste discrimination in the 
conference’s final resolutions would be only a symbolic vic-
tory, changing nothing in reality. “The only solution is to change 
people’s minds,” he declares.

(power), and material capital (wealth). The codes were often per-
nicious, and rules were bent to suit the upper castes. In northern 
India, for example, untouchables were forced to use drums to 
announce their arrival, and even their shadows were thought 
to be polluting. In the south, some Brahmins stipulated that the 
lower castes would have to maintain a distance of 65 feet (22 
metres) from them in order not to contaminate their betters. 
Yet this caste-based discrimination also had a pragmatic di-
mension. The untouchables, excluded from the education and 
books of the Brahmins, were nevertheless allowed to develop 
their own stores of knowledge, in agriculture or midwifery for 
example. But there was a catch — this knowledge was only al-
lowed because it benefited the upper castes. 
A case of racism?
Caste is still frequently used as a cover for exploitative eco-
nomic arrangements. Even today, most Dalits are not permitted 
to cross the invisible ‘pollution’ line that divides their part of the 
village from that occupied by the higher castes. And yet a Dalit 
woman, whose very shadow is polluting, is allowed to mas-
sage the body of the upper-caste woman she serves. Upper 
caste men, meanwhile, think nothing of raping Dalit women or 
consorting with lower-caste prostitutes, even though touching 
them by accident in the street is a sacrilege. 
One of the main reasons why the caste system has survived 
is because the hierarchical notion of social good it perpetu-
ates is legitimized by the lower castes themselves. They rep-
licate this hierarchy by imitating the cultural values of the up-
per castes, imposing discrimination on castes even lower than 
their own. Sociologists claim there are more than 2000 castes 
and sub-castes within the five categories. These are called 
jatis, endogamous (inter-marrying) groups that are divided 
along occupational, sectarian, regional and linguistic lines. 
Even as outcasts, the Dalits divide themselves into further 
castes. This proliferation allows for discrimination both hori-
zontally and vertically, thus making social relations all the more 
rigid and impermeable. 
The plight of India’s untouchables and the regular hu-
man rights abuses against them elicits short-lived public 
outrage, leaving the state under little pressure to engineer 
large-scale social change. This is why a coalition of Dalit 
groups and activists has lobbied 
hard for their plight to be on the 
agenda of the UN World Confer-
ence against Racism. 
“Caste is India’s hidden apart-
heid,” says Martin Macwan, 41, 
convenor of the National Campaign 
on Dalit Human Rights. He argues 
that like racism, caste discrimina-
tion is “based on descent.” 
Their demand has sparked off a 
national debate about the nature of 
caste discrimination and whether 
other countries should be allowed to 
interfere in what the Indian govern- 
ment considers “an internal mat-
ter.” 
The government has opposed the 
inclusion of caste on the UN con-
ference’s agenda on the grounds 
that caste and race are not synony-
mous. “Race and caste are distinct,” 
insists Soli Sorabjee, India’s attor- Transplanting rice in Tamil Nadu.
