over the moon
Veillée funéraire.
the Lunar reconnaissance orbiter (Lro),  
and its sister mission Lcross, launched by  
national aeronautics and space administration (nasa) last June, 
are the first in a series of unmanned missions scouting  
for the return of astronauts to the moon.  
tantalizingly, in 1998, nasa’s Lunar prospector found  
an excess of hydrogen in the frigid, permanently shadowed craters 
at the moon’s poles, indicating the possibility of water ice.
“The only way you’re going to know if it’s water ice is by stick-
ing your finger in it,” says Alan Binder of NASA. That’s exactly why 
LCROSS won’t be around for long. Having hitched a ride with LRO, 
LCROSS is currently in an unusual orbit around both the Earth and 
Moon, and is set to impact the lunar south pole on 9 October 2009. 
But why the wait? 
One reason is to give LRO time to remote-sense the lunar south 
pole, where ancient comets and asteroids might have deposited 
water. Data from LRO will help decide which exact crater to ex-
cavate. Another reason is to drag LCROSS’s impactor, called 
Centaur, in space long enough to rid it of residual fuel (containing 
both hydrogen and oxygen), which could contaminate results. Yet 
another reason is to time the impact so that observatories in Hawaii 
(USA), with their sophisticated water detecting capabilities, can 
tune in. “The goal is to muster as many eyes and instruments as 
possible,” says LCROSS Principal Investigator Tony Colaprete. 
In fact anyone in Hawaii, up to the Mississippi region, with a 10 
to 12 inch diameter telescope or larger, should be able to witness 
the event! If everything goes according to script, Centaur will hit 
the lunar south pole with an energy equivalent to what you get from 
100 million 60 Watt light bulbs in a second, kicking lunar debris 
that has not been exposed to sunlight for billions of years, more 
than 2 kilometers up, enough to clear the crater’s rim. LCROSS will 
then fly through the ejecta cloud looking for watery spectroscopic 
signatures in the dust-dimmed sunlight, before plunging into the 
Moon’s south pole four minutes later. 
Discovery of bits of ice hidden at the lunar poles could be invalu-
able for any sustained human presence in space. For one thing, 
transporting water from Earth into space is highly costly. And the 
fact that the Moon’s gravity is only one sixth of Earthly gravity means 
that you need smaller rockets to launch space missions from the 
Moon that go the same distance. The implications of LCROSS 
could therefore be, quite literally, far reaching. If future astronauts 
could extract lunar water for human consumption and for making 
rocket fuel, perhaps the ‘one giant leap’ of setting foot on Mars will 
become, sooner than we imagine, ‘one small step’ away. 
H. S. 
Launch of LCROSS and LRO on 18 June 2009.
