Coming to terms  
with climate change
T here is an important similarity between the pre-
sentation of Darwin’s theory of evolution and the 
discovery of human influence on climate change: 
both advancements in scientific understanding challenge 
the contemporary human ‘self-identity’. In the case of evo-
lution, the reluctance of society to embrace Darwin’s work 
had its roots in an unwillingness to accept the idea that 
humans were ‘just another species’. In the case of climate 
change, many people find it hard to accept that our species 
really is powerful enough to 
alter the course of something as 
mighty as the planet Earth.
A recent study in the United 
States actually indicated that a 
smaller percentage of Ameri-
cans believe that humans have 
a role in climate change than 
was the case a few years ago. 
One of the reasons for this 
may be that 2008 was a rela-
tively cold year and newspa-
per headlines have abounded 
in 2009 suggesting that 2008 
temperatures may signal a 
global ‘cooling’ or, at the very 
least, can be taken as evidence 
that climate scientists present 
a very uncertain case for glob-
al warming.
Such headlines merely un-
derscore the fact that few non-
specialists understand what 
the climate system is and how 
it works. Humans experience 
climate through the part of 
the atmosphere that touches 
the Earth’s surface. Therefore, we (wrongly) assume that 
changes in surface atmosphere temperature reflect chang-
es in the climate system as a whole.  
In fact, the climate we experience is a function of the 
amount of energy stored as heat and the redistribution of 
this heat on the planet. Only a very small amount (<5%) of 
the heat stored on Earth is found in the surface atmosphere. 
In contrast, about 85% of it is stored in the ocean. Thus, 
temperature changes in the ocean are a more robust indi-
cator of change in the climate system than changes in air 
temperature.  One of the more worrying scientific results 
that has emerged since the 2007 Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC) Report is that temperatures in 
the upper ocean (700 m) are 
increasing about 50% faster 
than was previously thought 
and an increasing trend in 
ocean temperature has been 
recorded since the mid-1970s. 
Thus, the fact that global air 
temperature was lower in 
2008 than in the immedi-
ately preceding years does 
not give climate scientists 
reason to doubt their under-
standing of the climate sys-
tem or global warming! 
It is, of course, true that 
not all scientists agree on 
the role of human activities 
in causing climate change. 
However, 100% agreement 
among scientists is almost 
never achieved. Doubt is 
an indication of a healthy 
scientific process: Science 
only advances as long as we 
continue to ask questions. 
Most studies show that well 
over 90% of scientists from 
relevant disciplines find the scientific facts convincing 
and believe that human activities are influencing the glob-
al climate. The chances that this vast majority of climate 
scientists is wrong are very small indeed.
only very occasionally do scientific discoveries evoke such a dramatic – and emotive - public  
and political response as that elicited by the last decades’ research documenting global climate change  
and identifying human activities as its likely primary cause. probably the last time such a debate  
occurred was when darwin published “the origin of species”.
Katherine richardson Christensen  
is Vice Dean at the Faculty of Science at the University of Copenhagen and a professor 
in biological oceanography. She was chairman of a large scientific congress “Climate 
Change: Global Risks, Challenges and Decisions” held as a part of the preparations for 
the UN Conference on Climate Change in Copenhagen from 10-12 March 2009.
Melting ice in Iceland
