What is the status of Central 
Andean languages, in terms  
of their viability? 
In the Central Andes (Ecuador, 
Peru, and Bolivia) the estimate is 
that one hundred indigenous lan-
guages are still alive. Determining 
exactly just how alive they are is 
not easy. This varies not only from 
one language to another, but also 
within a given language, depend-
ing on where it is spoken, the age 
of the speaker, their vocation, gen-
der, level of education, etc. 
For example, in Ecuador, Quechua 
is widely spoken in certain regions 
of the country, while it is rapidly 
disappearing from others. In this 
heterogeneous context, and even 
if certain languages continue to be 
used by the new generations, the 
general trend for all languages in 
the region is constant regression. 
How do you explain  
this situation? 
Several factors are involved, such 
as the living conditions of native 
speakers, whether or not they re-
ceive institutional and social aid, 
the extent to which the language 
continues to function in all modern 
communication contexts, and in-
deed, the interest and pride of the 
people who speak it. 
In terms of viability, the number 
of native speakers can be a rela-
tive concept. Some languages are 
spoken by a small number of peo-
ple but are very much alive, such as 
A’i cofán in Ecuadorian Amazonia. 
And, on the contrary, the number 
of speakers of some trans-national 
languages, such as Quechua, is 
dwindling every day. 
Some indigenous languages 
maintain their vitality because of 
the isolation of native speakers, 
who find they have around them all 
they need to live comfortably. But 
isolation should not be a condition 
for the survival of one of these lan-
guages; the ideal situation would 
be that they cohabit with the pre-
dominant languages and societies 
and that they gain in strength, de-
spite the homogenizing trends of 
globalization.
Why do languages disappear?
Over the last decades, a complex 
set of circumstances has acceler-
ated the disappearance of indig-
         some languages are spoken by very few people but are still very much alive, 
       while others have been preserved by the isolation of their speakers. 
           Marleen haboud from ecuador explains these apparently paradoxical phenomena.
(•••)
Marleen Haboud, a specialist in Andean languages, talks to Lucía Iglesias Kuntz (UNESCO). 
an EpidEmic is thrEatEning  
indigEnous languagEs
Detail of poster for International Mother Language Day.

enous languages, including con-
tacts with other peoples, the death 
of native speakers, radical chang-
es in their way of life, loss of land, 
massive migrations, and so on. 
Only joint actions integrated with 
global society can curb this kind of 
epidemic, which is making indige-
nous languages and their speakers 
vulnerable. This presupposes that, 
first of all, society as a whole gets 
to know these languages and their 
speakers, and learns to respect 
and help keep them alive, so that 
we achieve the ideal of a truly multi- 
cultural society. 
Another very important factor for 
keeping a language alive is the 
image that both its speakers and 
non-speakers have of it. A person 
who is proud of his or her language 
will be more likely to keep it going.
Could you give examples  
of some national or regional 
initiatives that have helped  
to revitalize languages  
in the region?
There have been several initiatives 
in our countries to help maintain 
minority languages. On one hand 
there have been government ini-
tiatives. In Andean countries, 
constitutional reforms have given 
indigenous languages an official 
status. The linguistic and educa-
tional policies of these countries 
are quite well defined and, even if 
they are still not always widely ap-
plied, their aim is to preserve the 
languages, culture and identity of 
their speakers, as well as respect 
and equality between peoples. 
At the same time there are the 
efforts being made by speakers 
themselves, both collectively and 
individually. For example, thanks 
to the creation of specific fam-
ily- and community-based edu-
cational programmes, families are 
trying to regain or consolidate their 
languages. Indigenous movements 
in Latin America have turned a cor-
ner in their campaign for the rights 
of indigenous peoples, with the 
creation of new bilingual, inter-
cultural educational programmes 
at all levels of formal education, 
specific health programmes and 
the creation of official services for 
speakers of certain languages. 
In some countries more than oth-
ers, the media have also taken 
initiatives to encourage the public 
use of certain languages, espe-
cially those with the greatest num-
ber of speakers. Bolivia is a prime 
example of this. 
Throughout history, new lan- 
guages have been born while oth-
ers have died out, why should we 
be concerned about the disap-
pearance of languages? 
Just like humans themselves, 
languages are born and die, but 
we have never before seen them 
die at such a rapid rate as during 
the past decades. This means not 
just the loss of words and expres-
sions, but also a store of knowl-
(•••)
an EpidEmic is thrEatEning indigEnous languagEs
edge and ways of understanding 
the world and communicating with 
others, of constructing history, 
of exchanging with other human 
beings, with elders and younger 
generations, and of conceptualis-
ing time, space, the living world, 
life and death. Each language is a 
universe. And, every time a word 
dies, unique and irreplaceable 
stories disappear with it. 
Marleen Haboud from Ecuador is an Andean language specialist.

For a language to survive it must be passed 
on to the next generation.
