mEssagEs from islam
                                     The faith of islam in god and mankind has enabled it to play a significant part in 
                    the edification of human civilization. But its strength emanates not so much from the ‘fixism’ 
                        of an imposed order, but from the durability of a model that is always ready to be reinvented, 
                                starting from divine inspiration and the demands of the moment.
he Muslim world displays an ex-
traordinary cultural and doctrinal 
diversity – it is a veritable linguistic 
Tower of Babel, an ethnic patch-
work, geographical mosaic, and a 
political kaleidoscope. This is re-
flected in UNESCO’s collection 
entitled The Different Aspects of 
Islamic Culture. While Allah may be 
unique, Islam is multi-faceted, vary-
ing from one country to another and 
changing over the course of time.
It would be wrong to think that 
Islam has fulfilled its mission once 
and for all, and can now only be 
proud of its past achievements. Is-
lam has made major contributions 
to the edification of human civiliza-
tion in such diverse fields as phi-
losophy, geography, mathematics, 
astronomy, medicine and the arts, 
but its mission is still active, and is 
continuously being renewed. It is 
also important to ensure that the 
meaning of Qur’anic faith is up-
dated, as verse 148 of the second 
Surah reminds us: “Every one has a 
direction to which he turns. So has-
ten towards all that is good.”
Faith in Islam  – like all other faiths 
– has no meaning unless it is rooted 
in the present. Faith is as much an 
interior practice as an openness to-
wards others. It is true that, in Islam, 
man is an “object” within nature, but 
a special object, in that he is also a 
subject  — of God, of course – but 
also an autonomous subject, able 
to make choices and therefore to 
be responsible for his actions. 
Integration of religious 
and social life 
Some of our best writers were in-
vited to contribute to a book, which 
I edited, entitled “The Different 
Aspects of Islamic Culture: The 
Individual and Society in Islam”. In 
sixteen chapters, they attempted 
to show how the — sometimes fal-
tering — quest to achieve a fragile 
equilibrium between rights, respon-
sibilities and freedoms has liberated 
the individual in Islamic societies. A 
priority has been to calm our fears 
and anxieties, despite the rigour of 
certain key texts and 
the imperious inter-
ests of an often closed 
society.
Drawing on a mass 
of historical and re-
cent information, we 
tackled some funda-
mental issues, taking 
account of the subtle, 
but determinant po-
lemics concerning the 
principles expounded 
within the Qur’an and 
the Sunnah [the set of 
declarations made – or tacitly ap-
proved – by the Prophet] and the 
burdens of everyday life.
Rather than presenting an exposi-
tion of Islamic doctrine, we decided 
to trace its penetration of the his-
tory of civilization, in an attempt to 
understand its influence — how it 
constituted a powerful and unifying 
force across a vast geographical, 
social and cultural area, and how 
Qur’anic teaching has been inter-
preted and translated into actions.
Al-Azhar University, founded in Cairo (Egypt) in 969.

 Cupola of Sheykh Lotfollah mosque in Ispahan (Iran). 

The Alhambra, Granada (Spain),  
symbol of the glory of Al Andalus,  
from the 8th to the 15th century. 

A living religion  
and culture
From the Middle Ages to today, the 
Qur’an has been used as the refer-
ence not only when defining laws, 
but also the collective attitudes 
and individual behaviour of peoples 
that have embraced Islam, from the 
China Sea to the Atlantic coast 
of Africa. The two specificities of 
Islam are, then, its creative continu-
ity and its mission to bring peoples 
together. 
We know that the creation of val-
ues and their integration with reality 
has had a vast sphere of application, 
ranging from law to psychology, 
society, politics, economics and the 
arts. We should also remember that 
this organizing force of Islam does 
not emanate from the “fixism” of 
an imposed order, but from the 
durability of a model that is always 
ready to be reinvented, starting from 
divine inspiration and the demands 
of the moment. The image of an Is-
lam fossilized in its medieval form is in 
stark contrast with a living Islam, able 
to find new solutions, like Life itself. 
The notion of Islamic fraternity 
leads to a more universal fraternity, 
which is necessary for the defence 
and education of man, of all men: 
preparing the child for its tasks as 
an adult, serving human rights, or-
ganizing relations between commu-
nities, confronting deviancy, injus-
tice, inequality and oppression. In 
other words, the mission of Islamic 
faith is to bring all mankind togeth-
er, regardless of beliefs, language 
or ethnicity. 
In contrast to the caricature of 
Islamic culture, our book shows just 
how the law has been – and contin-
ues to be — the object of dialectic 
debate, providing the means to 
live by one’s religion and also to 
live in today’s world, while facing 
and overcoming ever renewed 
challenges. And it reminds us 
that the spiritual vacuum we suf-
fer from today cannot be filled by 
fanaticism, by abdicating or by 
denigrating others.
abdelwahab Bouhdiba, 
sociologist, is president of the 
Tunisian Academy of Sciences, 
Literature and Arts 
(Beït el Hikma)
