
Mulberry cultivation and silkworm farming in Thailand have been 
recorded since the 13th century.


around 
The world 
on a silk Thread
          By the first half of the 20th century, the silk tradition in thailand was on its last legs, 
  only to spring back in the 1950s, thanks to an american, Jim thomson. as an ally he had 
     a young thai woman - none other than Queen sirikit. this secular art form, which, 
      today, combines traditional craft and industrialization, is passed down 
              from generation to generation and has contributed to the country’s development.
people, he decided to settle there 
when he was demobilized. 
As soon as he arrived in the coun-
try, Thompson began collecting 
pieces of Thai silk. He was seduced 
by the surprising combinations of 
colours and the uneven texture, 
which distinguish Thai silk from the 
softer Chinese or Japanese silk. The 
difference comes from the quality of 
the silk worms themselves. 
A Chinese diplomat recorded the 
Siamese tradition of growing mul-
berry trees and breeding silk worms 
as far back as the 13th century. But 
it was the American architect who 
gave Thai silk its pedigree. When he 
settled in Bangkok, weavers were 
few and far between - the tradition 
was only being kept alive by a hand-
ful of Muslims in the Benkrua quar-
ter. Thompson decided to market 
Thai silk and contacted them. Most 
were suspicious, but one head of 
family was intrigued, and decided 
to go into business with him. It was 
the start of a great adventure. 
In 1947 Thompson left on a flight 
for New York, his suitcase stuffed 
with samples of silk. A fashion edi-
tor fell in love with the cloth samples 
and offered her backing straight 
away. Back in Thailand, he set up 
a company, becoming its director 
and holding the majority of shares. 
His management style was original, 
employing mostly women, and al-
lowing them to work from home, so 
as not to disrupt their family life. He 
n Easter Sunday, 1967, a young 
American businessman who had 
been living in Thailand disappeared 
in the jungle in circumstances that 
were never to be cleared up. The 
mystery caught the attention of the 
public and media in Asia, as well as 
the USA and elsewhere, because 
this man was by no means un-
known. In those days, one only had 
to address a letter to “Jim Thomson, 
Bangkok”, and it would reach him, 
out of the three million inhabitants 
of the Thai capital 
In the twenty years before his fa-
tal trip to Malaysia, Jim Thomson 
achieved what others had been 
unable to in an entire life. Special-
izing in an art that he knew nothing 
about, he created a vast silk indus-
try in Thailand. His house in 
Bangkok, itself a work of art, 
is filled with art treasures 
from the region. 
His life story reads like a 
novel, not just for his per-
sonal accomplishments, but 
for the thousands of lives 
he changed. The name Jim 
Thompson is, today, synony-
mous with a booming Thai 
industry, known the world 
over, whose silk products 
fill the windows of leading 
stores and grace the best 
hotels and restaurants ev-
erywhere.
Bangkok silk
Jim Thompson trained as 
an architect, discovering 
Thailand in 1945 when he 
was posted there as an of-
ficer in the US army. At that 
time there were few modern 
buildings or cars in Bangkok, 
and the canals still played a 
major role. Attracted by the 
markets and the smiling 

Scene from the Thai performance on 18 May  
at UNESCO, as part of the International Festival  
of Cultural Diversity.

Despite industrialization, making Thai silk  
depends to a large extent on the nimble fingers 
of peasants and women workers.



around The world on a silk Thread
introduced innovations in manufac-
turing techniques and replaced the 
old plant-based dyes with chemical 
colours, while respecting the tradi-
tional colours of Thai silk. 
In the early 1950’s Thompson 
opened a store in Bangkok, which 
was immediately a huge success. 
Soon after, he received a visit from 
Queen Sirikit, who was a tireless 
promoter of Thai crafts and cultural 
heritage. She became his most fa-
mous and influential client. On her 
official trips abroad, she would wear 
outfits made of traditional Thai silk, 
and did not fail to be noticed by the 
celebrated French couturier, Pierre 
Balmain. On the other side of the 
Atlantic, Irene Sharaff, costume de-
signer for the musical comedy, The 
King and I by Walter Lang, decided 
to use Thai silk, the first of a whole 
series of films that helped spread 
its fame. Orders flooded in from all 
corners of the world.
Maintaining tradition
From the 1970’s, silk manufactur-
ing became established in the prov-
ince of Khorat, in the north-east of 
Thailand. It was while touring this 
hot and poor region of farmers that 
Queen Sirikit realized how difficult 
life was for the peasants there and 
offered to help them turn to silk 
weaving and traditional dying. In 
1976, the queen set up the SUP-
PORT foundation, which aims to 
develop craft activities in rural areas 
and to preserve ancient production 
techniques. Now, about a thousand 
families have their own mulberry 
plantations and breed their own silk 
worms. The cocoons, which take 
23 days to mature, are then sold to 
Jim Thompson’s farm. 
Nowadays, weaving, which is the 
central step in the process of silk-
making, is carried out by about 600 
weavers, both men and women, 
who continue to pass their skills on 
from generation to generation. The 
cloth is printed using both wooden 
stencils and digital printers, recon-
ciling traditional and modern prac-
tices. Great emphasis is placed on 
quality control and hand finishing, 
ensuring a happy compromise be-
tween craft and industrial manufac-
turing. 
The American businessman’s vi-
sion turned out to be right – this 
great Thai silk adventure would 
bring prosperity to the country. To-
day, 90% of shareholders in Jim 
Thompson’s company are Thai na-
tionals, a third of them the children 
and grandchildren of the first Mus-
lim weavers from Benkrua. 
From a presentation at UNESCO given 
by eric B. Booth, of the 
“Jim Thompson Thai Silk Company”, 
during the International Festival 
of Cultural Diversity, in May this year
