“I   t looks like a lake that has been 
whipped into waves and then sud-
denly petrified,” says Syrian re-
searcher, Jamal Abou Jahjah, de-
scribing the precipitous landscape 
of Lajat - 120 km2 of rolling basalt 
hills, with peaks 600 - 900 metres 
high. 
Lajat lies some thirty kilometres 
south of the Syrian capital, Damas-
cus, in the province of Sweida, on 
the border with Jordan, at the inter-
section of two very different regions 
- one with a mild climate, the other 
semi-desert. Recently added to the 
World Network of Biosphere Re-
serves, it is marked on the map as a 
‘biogeographical crossroads’. 
The plateau of Lajat has been in-
habited for thousands of years, and 
today has a population of 16,500, 
spread across 13 villages. Like their 
ancestors, they continue to live es-
sentially from farming. This is clearly 
visible from the crop terraces and 
hundreds of pastures enclosed by 
kilometres of stone walls, that also 
provide a haven for lizards and 
birds. The ancient practice of crop 
rotation, which is the reason behind 
these enclosures, has proven to be 
essential for the sustainability of the 
land. 
Blessed with reserves of water 
and renowned for the quality of its 
soil, Lajat is one of the most fertile 
regions in Syria. One third of the 
country’s plant varieties are found 
here. There are olive trees, date 
palms, figs – the so-called ‘Koranic’ 
plants, because they are mentioned 
in the sacred book – alongside or-
chards of pistachio, almond and 
other fruit trees – a rare mix of Medi-
terranean and Irano-Turkish species 
due to the unusual geography. 
                                    lajat, in the far south of syria, offers some of the region’s most impressive 
          scenery. With its farming traditions and archaeological ruins, this new biosphere reserve 
                   is an example of the interdependence between cultural and biological diversity.
Growing these fruits has long 
provided work for the local people. 
Olive and pistachio presses dating 
from the Roman era are evidence 
of the long tradition of oil and soap 
production. Now, research is being 
carried out to find ways to exploit 
the wild bitter almonds, pears and 
various endemic plants known for 
their medicinal virtues.
Roman ruins
Lajat’s rich natural resources are 
not the sole attraction, though. The 
region is also scattered with the 
ruins of ancient villages, the oldest 
dating back to the third century. 
Despite the devastation caused by 
an earthquake in 749, it is still pos-
sible to see the remains of great 
fortified farms and houses, with 
separate living spaces and spaces 
set aside for farming activities, all 
(•••)
laJat: where nature 
Meets hIstory

Lajat is scattered with village ruins, the most ancient of which  
date from the 3rd century.
© Permanent Delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic to UNESCO

By awarding Lajat the status of 
UNESCO biosphere reserve, it 
should be possible to develop a 
management plan that regulates 
both logging and grazing, thus re-
storing ancient traditions that were 
more respectful of the environ-
ment. 
Hala Kodmani, 
Franco-Syrian journalist.
made out of the same material - ba-
salt. 
Between 2003 and 2007 a team 
of French experts recorded no 
fewer than 700 ancient and ar-
chaeological sites in the region. 
Some thirty of the sites have been 
excavated, revealing the existence 
of Greco-Roman settlements, near 
to the village of Shahba, as well as 
monasteries and houses from the 
Byzantine era. 
There is, then, a promising future 
for tourism in Lajat. Its vast panora-
mas, wild plants and animals and its 
pastoral traditions are ideally suited 
to ecotourism, while history lovers 
can find plenty to satisfy their curi-
osity.
Restoring a balance
The development of ecotourism 
is one of the main objectives of a 
management plan for Lajat, drafted 
in 2006 by the Syrian Ministry for Lo-
cal Administration and the Environ-
ment, when the site was designated 
as a national nature reserve. 
Projects have been developed to 
renovate the ancient houses and 
ruins, which have repeatedly been 
abandoned and then rebuilt over 
the years, only to be used by semi-
nomadic peoples, since the 1970s, 
for grazing animals, or as watering 
places and crafts workshops. 
The national authorities take a dim 
view of the current situation and are 
seeking solutions to preserve the his-
torical ruins by turning them into tour-
ist hostels. As part of this plan, local 
people from various villages on the 
plateau are to be trained as guides 
and interpreters. 
In the meantime, observation towers 
have been built for bird-watchers, in 
collaboration with the Sweida Re-
search Centre, the General Com-
mission for Agricultural Science and 
neighbouring universities, which 
have also developed other projects 
aimed at improving the lives of local 
laJat: where nature Meets hIstory
(•••)
people, while respecting the envi-
ronment. 
Today, the main threats to the en-
vironment of Lajat are uncontrolled 
logging and grazing. Local opinion 
is divided, with those who support 
protection of the forests, but are 
against designated grazing areas, 
while others want grazing controls 
but unlimited logging rights. 
Some 700 historic and archaeological sites have been identified in Lajat.
© Permanent Delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic to UNESCO
Lajat is promoting its cultural tourism.
© Permanent Delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic to UNESCO
