Children at Katha public school (Govinpuri slums, south Delhi, India), during an astronomy class. 

applications shouldn’t be expected 
to produce immediate practical re-
sults. Even Einstein’s theory didn’t 
have immediate effects. Today it is 
the basis of almost all space technol-
ogy, an application nobody imagined 
at the time it was conceived.
What are the main challenges 
facing science education today? 
One of science education’s greatest 
challenges is to reach the broadest 
possible public, in particular young 
people, who usually have a more in-
How can science education play 
a strategic role for the  
international community?
Scientific knowledge today is the 
result of an accumulation of thou-
sands of years of knowledge that 
has shaped our era. Possessing that 
knowledge increases the ability to 
create techniques and technologies 
and imagine worlds in step with mo-
dernity. From a strategic standpoint, 
I think it’s absolutely fundamental for 
as many people as possible to have 
access to that knowledge, precisely 
to be able to look ahead, understand 
what is happening around us, tap 
into our world’s potential forces and 
dream of possible futures.
How can science education be 
promoted among policymakers?
By convincing them of two obvious 
things. The first is that technology 
and scientific knowledge have ap-
plications in industry and the work-
place in general, and that they have 
an impact on the economy. The sec-
ond, which is subtler, is that those 
Teaching science: child’s play
people cannot be educated by forcing them to memorise formulas, says french physicist  
Christophe galfard, who has vowed to make the general public, and young people in particular,  
love science. in his view, science is a cornerstone of modernity and science education  
a strategic goal for the future.
Interview by Linda Tinio (UNESCO Bureau of Strategic Planning)

nocent and more wonderstruck view 
of the world than grown-ups.
But people cannot be educated 
by forcing them to memorise formu-
las. The American physicist Richard 
Feynman said that science formulas 
are the guardians of the memory of 
what we know today. To draw young 
people’s attention to the sciences, 
they must be presented in an excit-
ing way. We must tell them a story, 
raise their awareness of the beauty 
of our world, of the beauty of sci-
ence, and capture their imagina-
tions… Science education must 
have a fun, playful aspect. In any 
case, that’s my approach. 
We’re incredibly lucky to be the 
first people since the dawn of hu-
manity to see pictures of distant gal-
axies and hear sounds coming to us 
from the other end of the universe. 
Those scientific discoveries open 
our minds up in the same way art 
does, don’t they?
How can science education 
spread ethical values?
Science in itself conveys ethical val-
ues. The British physicist Stephen 
Hawking told me that, despite the 
political roadblocks, British, Ameri-
can and Russian scientists never 
stopped communicating during the 
Cold War. Science remained united 
in the bipolar world of that period, 
illustrating, in my view, its universal 
and humanistic aspect. 
Science education instils values 
inherent to the search for truth in 
our world, values that bring people 
together whatever their political or 
religious views. 
Do you think the present eco-
nomic crisis will have a harmful 
impact on science education?
I really hope governments will not cut 
funds for fundamental research on 
account of the economic downturn. 
That would be a huge mistake be-
cause industries and economies rely 
mainly on scientific breakthroughs to 
rebuild themselves. A thoughtless 
reaction like that would have a nega-
tive long-term effect. 
In what direction should science 
education develop in the future? 
I think there are three directions for 
the future that meet the needs of 
students, researchers and the pub-
lic at large. 
First, it’s important to make stu-
dents aware that science lets us 
look at the world through modern 
eyes and to show them why it’s im-
portant to know about science even 
if they have no intention of following 
a science career.
As for research, I’m delighted to 
note that more and more universi-
ties integrate new scientific knowl-
edge into their curricula every year. 
If that could be expanded to all the 
universities in the world, it would re-
ally be a good thing for humanity.
As for the general public, it’s im-
portant to popularise science so 
that everybody can have access to 
it. Let’s imagine you want to share 
the joy of reading a poem in Russian 
with somebody who doesn’t speak 
that language. Well, you’re not go-
ing to force him or her to learn the 
Cyrillic alphabet, are you? You’re 
going to translate the poem into a 
language he or she can understand. 
The same goes for mathematical 
equations. 
This column, launched by the UNESCO Bureau of Strategic Planning, tackles forward-looking topics  
of interest to the general public and the Member States of the Organization. It features intellectual  
opinions likely to foster UNESCO’s reflection, programming and action in its various areas of competence.
Born in Paris, France in 1976, 
Christophe Galfard has a Ph.D. 
in theoretical physics from Cam-
bridge University (United King-
dom) where, under the direction 
of Stephen Hawking, his work 
focused on black holes and the 
origins of the universe. His latest 
novel, Le Prince des Nuages 
(Prince of Clouds), which reads 
like an adventure story, looks 
into the fundamental problems 
of our planet and its climate. 
