After a decade of encouraging
advances, progress towards the
Education for All goals could stall, or
even be thrown into reverse, as poverty
rises, economic growth slows and
pressure mounts on government
budgets. The 2010 Education for All
Global Monitoring Report argues that
urgent action must be taken to avert
that danger. Even before the global
economic crisis hit, many of the poorest
countries had already been under
pressure from sharp rises in
international food prices. The lethal
cocktail of high food prices and
economic recession has left a deep
imprint on the lives of millions of
vulnerable people. It has also worsened
the economic environment for
achieving the 2015 development
targets, including the Education for All
goals. 
Growing malnutrition and
deteriorating prospects for reducing
extreme poverty have far-reaching
consequences for education. Hunger
undermines cognitive development and
can lead to irreversible losses in
education achievement. According to
the Food and Agricultural Organization
of the United Nations, high food prices
left an additional 175 million people
malnourished in 2007 and 2008.
Increased malnutrition among pre-
school and primary school age children
has been reported from several
countries, including Guatemala. And
rising food prices have had
consequences for household spending
on education. In Bangladesh, for
example, about a third of poor
households in one survey reported
cutting spending on education to cope
with rising food prices.
By 2010, it is estimated that the
economic recession will have edged
another 90 million people into extreme
poverty. More poverty means parents
have less to spend on children’s
education and in some cases this can
push children out of school and into
employment.   For example, in the
Democratic Republic of Congo rising
unemployment in the copper mining
sector has reportedly forced households
to withdraw their children from school. 
Economic slowdown threatens
education financing
The importance of economic growth for
education financing is not widely
recognized. In sub-Saharan Africa,
government spending on primary
education rose by 29% from 2000 to
2005. These increases were instrumental
in the progress the region has made in
primary education. Around three-
quarters of the increase was directly
attributable to economic growth. 
Deteriorating economic prospects
may therefore hurt public education
spending, translating into fewer
classrooms built, fewer qualified
teachers recruited and more children
out of school.
What does the economic slowdown
mean for education financing in sub-
Saharan Africa, home to just under half
the planet’s out-of-school children?
Estimating levels of future government
revenue with economic growth
forecasts conducted before and after
the onset of the crisis provides an
insight into the impact of the crisis. One
scenario estimates a potential loss in
total education spending of $4.6 billion
per year in 2009 and 2010. While only an
estimate, these figures illustrate the
budget pressures that many countries
face as a result of the global slowdown. 
Rich countries have responded to
the financial crisis by investing  heavily
in programmes aimed at restoring
economic growth, protecting
vulnerable citizens and maintaining
vital social infrastructure. Education has
frequently been a priority: the American
Recovery and Reconstruction Act makes
available an estimated US$130 billion
for education-related expenditure.
Programmes of this kind have led to
rising levels of public debt in many rich
countries.

Education at Risk – 
the impact of the
financial crisis
by Samer Al-Samarrai
While many of the world’s banks are showing healthy
signs of recovery after one of the biggest global
economic crises of the last century, the aftereffects are
still being felt in some of the world’s poorest countries. 
Fo
cu
s 
Pakistani youth at work. J

In contrast, the space low-income
countries have had to respond to the
economic downturn has been much
more limited. In many of the world’s
poorest countries, tax revenue ratios are
likely to decline or remain stagnant, and
increasing government borrowing is
unlikely to be a viable option. For many
low-income African countries, that
means turning to international aid.  
The education finance gap
Even before the global downturn, recent
trends in aid for education were giving
rise for concern. Though here had been a
rise in aid to education during the first
half of the decade, overall commitments
to education have recently stagnated. In
2007, reported commitments stood at
US$12.1 billion, around the same level as
in 2004. Basic education remains an area
of particular concern. While aid
commitments rose sharply during the
first half of the decade, the period since
2004 has been marked by a standstill
punctuated by episodes of steep
decline. In real terms, the US$4.3 billion
reported in 2007 represented a cut of
22%, or about US$1.2 billion, from its
2006 level. The decline in commitments
to basic education was far greater than
that for education as a whole.
The financial crisis is putting aid
budgets under pressure. Some donor
countries, notably Ireland, have been hit
hard by the crisis and plans announced
in 2009 will see the aid budget cut by
22%, reversing a rapid expansion.
However, in others, such as the United
Kingdom, the United States and Japan,
commitments have been made to
maintain or increase levels of aid. 
The 2010 Global Monitoring Report
estimates that greater prioritization of
education in national budgets and
annual aid commitments of US$16
billion a year will be required to achieve
universal primary education, develop
early childhood education programmes
and act to reduce the number of adult
illiterates (a staggering 759 million
adults worldwide– or 16% of the global
adult population) by 2015 in the world’s
poor countries. Current aid to basic
education for forty-six low-income
countries – around US$2.7 billion – falls
short of what is required. 
While this price tag appears
considerable, it represents only a
fraction – about 2% – of the amount
mobilized to rescue just four major
banks in the United Kingdom and the
United States. Of course, governments
point out that securing the financial
assets and balance sheets of banks
represents an investment. But the same
is true of international aid for education,
which is an investment in poverty
reduction, shared prosperity and a more
equitable pattern of globalization.
As UNESCO’s Director-General, Irina
Bokova, states in the foreword to the
2010 Global Monitoring Report, “In
response to the financial crisis and its
aftermath, governments urgently need
to create mechanisms to protect the
poor and vulnerable. They must also
seize the opportunity to build societies
that combat inequality, so that all may
benefit and prosper. Education is at the
front line.” 
Samer Al-Samarrai, is an economist
specialised in education and the senior
Policy Analyst for the Education For All
Global Monitoring Report 2010.

Education under threat.L
