Holding a spade, Jean Sprumont works with
vigorous gestures. After a few minutes, in the
courtyard cluttered with sieves and moulds for
concrete blocks, a crater of cement, sand and
water has taken form. Showing the greyish paste,
Sprumont speaks in Creole to the 15 Haitian
construction workers attending the training
course in earthquake-resistant methods: “Sa se
béton kalité. Kalité do kibon pouli é lyben brasé”
(This is good concrete. It has the right quantity of
water and it is well mixed).
Jean Sprumont stands out among the
trainers. The Belgian project manager has been
living in Haiti for 44 years. He was in Port-au-
Prince on 12 January and saw entire buildings
collapse in a few seconds. “The city was built
using concrete in a completely haphazard way,”
he says bitterly. “We saw the tragic result.”
According to Sprumont, “It was buildings that
killed people. Too much water and the presence
of clay and loam in the concrete caused the
collapse of more than 50 % of the buildings in
Port-au-Prince during the tremors.”
To correct bad construction habits that
amplified the disaster’s magnitude, the technical
training centre at Camp Perrin, near Les Cayes in
southwest Haiti, has set up a ten-day intensive
training course for Haitian masons, steel fixers
and foremen, in partnership with UNESCO.  “It’s a
good training course, but you can’t learn



How to use earthquake-resistant methods in building
– this is what Haitian masons are learning from the
pilot project in Camp-Perrin, southwest Haiti, which
UNESCO launched in March 2010.  The project will
train some 500 masons in techniques that will help
save many lives in case of an earthquake.
Training
brings
concrete
contribution to
reconstruction
by Mehdi Benchelah French-Algerian journalist

everything about earthquake-resistant
construction in ten days,” points out Hébert
Montuma, who runs the centre.
Michel Raoul, 40-year-old mason from Camp
Perrin, is attending this training course so he can
“avoid repeating the same mistakes they made in
the past. But the problem is often caused by the
owner. He tells us, “Protect me for the cement” (do
not spend too much on the cement). But instead
of protecting him, this can kill him.”
This is why, says Montuma, “Besides the
techniques we are teaching here, we have to make
builders aware that when they are working on a
site, it is their duty to be professional and ethical.”
The third group of builders will soon begin
taking the course (with 10 to 15 participants per
session). The project will train a total of about 500
masons in techniques that will help save many
lives in case of an earthquake. To train a
maximum number of builders and pass on the
skills more effectively, the best students in each
group are encouraged to become trainers
themselves. 
At the end of the training project, a book in
French and Creole containing explanations
illustrated with diagrams will be published and
distributed to building professionals around the
country. 
