Long before the magnitude 7.0
earthquake struck Haiti on January 12
and leveled the metropolitan capital
city of Port-au-Prince and its
surrounding areas, that city was already
a disaster in the making.  In 1950, Port-
au-Prince had a population of 150,000.
It reached 732,000 by 1982 and
between 2 and 3 million by 2008.  The
problem, however, is that the city’s
infrastructure did not expand
commensurably with this phenomenal
growth in population.  What few
services were provided were poorly
administered or primarily served the
needs of the wealthier districts or
suburbs.  Consider, for example, that
only about 28 percent of Haitians have
access to health care, 54 percent to
potable water, and 30 percent to
sanitation services.  In short, the Haitian
state long ago abdicated its
responsibilities to the majority of
Haitian citizens, both urban and rural,
and at least since the Duvalier era has
deferred to bilateral and multilateral aid
donors and nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) to provide
services to the population.  More NGOs
per capita operate in Haiti than in any
other country in the world, and they
provide 70 percent of health care and
80 percent of public services in rural
areas.  This, in turn, has reinforced the
state’s laisser-aller practices and led to
the near total privatization of basic
services.  Unfortunately the turn to
democratic rule has not changed that
basic reality.   
Estimates put the death toll at 250
to 300,000.  The Inter-American
Development Bank (IDB) estimates the
total damage and losses caused by the
earthquake at between $8 and $13
billion, thereby making it the costliest
disaster in recent recorded history.
More than 1.3 million people have been
rendered homeless, and only 50 to 60
percent of them have received some
emergency shelter.  Haitian geologists
had warned of the probability of an
earthquake for years, but, as with
previous massive destruction and loss of
lives caused by hurricanes and tropical
storms (in 2004 and 2008), the
government took no measures to
prepare for that eventuality.  The
capacity of the Haitian state to respond
to a crisis of this magnitude (or even to
less severe ones) is nonexistent
primarily because of shortsighted
practices and policies that always
prioritized the interests of the few.
Along with Bolivia, Haiti has the highest
income inequality in the hemisphere.
The richest 10 percent of the population
control 47 percent of national income,
and 2 percent hold 26 percent of the
nation’s wealth.  By contrast, the poorest
20 percent receive 1.1 percent of
national income; 76 percent of the
population live on less than US$2/day,
and more than half live on less than
US$1/day.     
The dominant economic and
political classes of Haiti did not create
these conditions alone but did so in
close partnership with foreign
governments and economic actors with
long-standing interests in Haiti,
principally those of the advanced
countries (the United States, Canada,
and France) and their international
financial institutions (the World Bank,
the International Monetary Fund, and
the Inter-American Development Bank).
These institutions pursued a twofold
strategy that succeeded in transforming
Haiti into a supplier of the cheapest



The four pillars
of Haitian
reconstruction

and long term that calls for
decentralizing power, population, and
industry from Port-au-Prince, and
investing billions of dollars in
infrastructure, construction, tourism,
environmental protection, government
services, and agriculture.    
No doubt, many of the
recommendations of the plan must be
included in any meaningful
reconstruction of the shattered
economy.  But, given the government’s
incapacity to take effective action after
the devastations caused by hurricanes
and tropical storms in 2008, it is
doubtful it will do anything different
this time around, especially since its
mandate will soon expire. The
international community issued its vote
of no confidence on the government by
insisting that an Interim Development
Agency and a Multi-Donors Trust Fund
be created and administered by a
steering committee comprised of 17
voting members.  Of those 17 members,
eight will be representatives from the
principal international donor
community (i.e., the United States,
Canada, France, Brazil, the European
Union, the IDB, the World Bank, and the
United Nations), one from the CARICOM
[Caribbean Community], one from other
financial donors, and seven from Haiti..
It is clear, then, that the representatives
from the international community will
have a majority vote in what is being
labor for foreign and domestic investors
in the export assembly industry and one
of the largest importers of U.S. food in
the hemisphere.  These outcomes were
achieved through a series of “structural
adjustment” policies that maintained
wages low, dismantled all obstacles to
free trade, removed tariffs and
quantitative restrictions on imports,
offered tax incentives to the
manufacturing industries on their
profits and exports, privatized public
enterprises, reduced public-sector
employment, and curbed social
spending to reduce fiscal deficits.
At the same time, reducing tariffs
and quantitative restrictions on food
imports since the 1980s was detrimental
to agriculture.  Whereas in the 1970s
Haiti imported at most 10 percent of its
food needs, currently it imports nearly
60 percent and is spending 80 percent
of its export revenues to pay for it.  Haiti
went from being self-sufficient in the
production of rice, sugar, poultry, and
pork to become the fourth-largest
importer of rice from the United States
in the world and the largest importer of
foodstuffs from the United States in the
Caribbean.  Trade liberalization, then,
essentially meant transferring wealth
from Haitian to U.S. farmers and the few
firms in Haiti that control food imports.
As the economy continued to decline,
Haiti became increasingly dependent
on remittances from its emigrants,
which in 2008 represented 20 percent of
Haiti’s gross domestic product.  
Pressure is mounting on bilateral
and multilateral aid donors to cancel
Haiti’s debt.  In 2009, the international
financial institutions cancelled US$1.2
billion of Haiti’s debt, but another
US$1.2 billion remains. The United
States and the IMF said that they would
work again with the other multilateral
and bilateral aid donors to provide debt
relief to Haiti.  However, as significant as
these measures are, they do not change
these institutions’ overall policies or
repair the damage their policies have
done to the Haitian economy over the
past four decades.  
International community again takes
charge of Haiti’s fate
What, then, needs to be done?  New
parliamentary elections were scheduled
for February and March of this year, but
they have been postponed.  President
Préval and Edmund Mulet, the new UN
Mission chief in Haiti, have renewed
their demands for elections to be held
as soon as possible.  Presidential
elections were to be held also in
November, but it is unclear when they
will be scheduled. In the meantime, the
government released the “Action Plan
for the Reconstruction and National
Development of Haiti,” also known as
the “Post-Disaster Needs Assessment”
(PDNA) plan drafted with members of
the international agencies and financial
institutions.  The plan estimates the cost
of reconstruction at $11.5 billion, and
lays out a vision for the short, medium,

presented as a Haitian development
and reconstruction plan.  
What’s more, whereas the PDNA is
vague on the specific industrial and
agricultural policies it proposes, the
international community had already
decided what they will be long before
the earthquake.  In 2009, UN Secretary-
General Ban ki-Moon commissioned
former World Bank economist Paul
Collier to lay out a development plan for
Haiti, and appointed former US
President Bill Clinton to spearhead it.  In
a language similar to the PDNA’s,
Collier’s report calls for decentralizing
investments, building road and
communication networks, and creating
clusters of industrial and agricultural
production in different parts of the
country.  The latter, however, consist
essentially of establishing free-trade
zones for garment production beyond
the two that currently exist in Port-au-
Prince and Ouanaminthe, and similar
clusters for the production and export
of selected agricultural products. 
Rethinking the paradigms
From my perspective, then, if Haiti is to
be rebuilt on a different foundation that
prioritizes the needs and interests of the
impoverished majority, it will be
necessary to rethink the paradigms that
have become a doxy for the major
powers and accepted uncritically by
Haiti’s compliant governments.  Such a
rethinking has been taking place
among rural and urban grassroots
organizations and various sectors of civil
society that have been systematically
ignored and marginalized in the
formulation of the official plan.  The
alternative agenda  
1. Reject or renegotiate all the different
versions of the structural adjustment
policies of the international financial
institutions.
2. Launch an immediate large-scale and
national public works project to
rebuild and expand Haiti’s
infrastructure, communication,
transportation, public schools, public
health facilities, and public housing.  
3. Prioritize Haiti’s food security and
sovereignty by subsidizing
production for the local market, and
promote the development of small
and medium-size industries that use
domestic inputs to produce
consumer and durable goods for the
national market, and, where
appropriate, for export, such as, for
example, handicraft production.
4. Protect the rights of all workers,
including the right to form trade
unions, the right to collective
bargaining, the right to strike, and the
right to a living wage.  
It is obvious that these goals cannot be
implemented all at once or immediately,
but they must serve as the basis for a
large-scale popular mobilization to hold
the government to account and to
renegotiate Haiti’s relations with the
international community.   One can also
hope that the next time around, a
mobilized population will not surrender
its fate to false prophets. 
Professor of Sociology at Wesleyan
University (USA), Alex Dupuy has
published broadly on social,
economic, and political
developments in Haiti and the
Caribbean. He is the author of Haiti in
the World Economy: Class, Race, and
Underdevelopment Since 1700 (1989),
Haiti in the New World Order: The
Limits of the Democratic Revolution
(1997), The Prophet and Power: Jean-
Bertrand Aristide, the International
Community, and Haiti (2007).
