“I was born with a pen in my hand,” he
says. “I don’t remember any specific
moment when I tried calligraphy for the
first time,” he adds. “There were a lot of
reeds growing in the neighbourhood
where I was born, the kind used to make
pens.” Ghani Alani started working at an
early age. “My first job was with the
railway company in Baghdad. I would
clean the coaches during the day, and
then go home and study in the evenings,”
he explains. “On Friday, the day of rest, I
spent my time studying and practising
calligraphy.”
“My teacher was called Hachem
Mohamed, better known as Baghdadi.
He was a pupil of one of the greatest
masters of calligraphy, whose lineage
goes right back to the Abbasid tradition,
twelve centuries ago. I was thirteen
when I first met him. For three years I
submerged myself in the study of
writing. Once I had finished the first
phase of study, the second seemed
easier. Forming one letter leads to
making two, and these two letters go on
to make a word, and then a sentence.”
But this master of calligraphy was not
happy just teaching him how to form the
letters with his pen; he also encouraged
him to see the link between man and
letter. “Calligraphy has something to do
with the soul,” he feels. The calligrapher’s
pen is an extension of his arm, of his
whole being. “My master never told me
how to trace my letters. Instead, he drew
my attention to the link between the
body and the letter. ‘Our hands,’ he said,
‘are different, and their size affects the
letters, so the letter is a reflection of the
man.’
“I learned this art from Hachem al
Baghdadi, just as he, in turn, had
inherited it from the founders of the


Ghani Alani: 
“Calligraphy is the link
between man and the
letter”
Interview by  Bassam Mansour, UNESCO
“In the beginning, there was Baghdad,” says Ghani Alani,
as he evokes the role his city has played in the history of
Arabic and Islamic calligraphy. It was the starting point
for the other styles and different schools. But he
recognises that the art of calligraphy has also developed
in other great capitals of the Arab-Islamic world, from
Andalusia to Bukhara.

Calligraphy by Ghani Alani. L

Baghdad School. One day, he presented
me with a diploma, which none of his
other pupils had ever received. When a
calligraphy master gives a certificate like
this, he authorises his pupil to sign his
works with his own name. The diploma
becomes an ‘official’ paper, recognising
that the pupil has truly attained expert
status.” The document reads: “When it
became apparent that the recipient of
this magnificent certificate had
assimilated the rules of Arabic calligraphy,
had explored all the forms of this art and
had excelled at them, I awarded him the
right to affix his signature beneath his
beautiful writing …”
Ghani Alani left Baghdad for Paris in
1967. “In Paris, I followed postgraduate
studies in law and received a doctorate,”
he explained. “I wanted calligraphy to
remain a hobby, but my passion got the
better of me. The lawyer hung up his
robes and made a sharpened reed the
tool of his trade. When the Dean of the
Faculty of Law handed us our degree
certificates, he said: ‘today you are ready
to start studying law.’ What he meant was
that our studies had given us the means
to think. In the end, that is exactly what
Master Hachem al Baghdadi had told us
about calligraphy.”
“Once I had finished with Law, I went
to the Art Institute in Baghdad, following
the wishes of my teacher, Hachem al
Baghdadi,” he explains. “In my first year at
the Institute, a great Turkish master of
Islamic illumination, Hamad al Amidi, had
been invited. His teachings were very
important for me. Indeed, I now practice
both calligraphy and illumination, which
is unusual.”
“From the outset, I tried to grasp the
essence of writing in Arab civilisation.
Starting with my own experience, I
worked on the ideas of unity and
continuity that calligraphy is able to
express. It is rather like a river that the
other arts feed into, like tributaries.”
For Ghani Alani, calligraphy did not
develop in Arab civilization – as is often
thought – because pictorial representation
was forbidden. “This hypothesis is false,” he
insists. “There are drawings in Islamic
civilization, particularly in Turkey and Iran.
And calligraphy can incorporate figurative
images. The climax of calligraphy in Arab
civilization is more because it is a society
based on the word, and has been since
pre-Islamic times, when poetry was the
only art and the poet was the pride of his
clan. And where there is the word, there is
writing….”

Explaining the formal origins of
calligraphy, he says “the straight line and
the curve are found in every style of
writing in the world and always have
been, from pictograms to ideograms via
‘phonetic’ writing, which gave cuneiform
script its syllabic structure. Since the
invention of cuneiform, scripts have used
the straight line and the curve. There are
several illustrations in Mesopotamian
writing, like the inscription of the Codex
Hammurabi, where the characteristic of
the letters is their straightness, contrary
to what was usual at the time.”
Ghani Alani also gives us his opinion
on Kufic writing. “I have never thought of
Kufic script as being straight. Those who
call it straight are making a major
mistake, saying that all straight and
angular writing can be called Kufic. The
truth is quite different. This script can be
traced back to before the building of
Kufa, the town that gives it its name,
during the Mu’aalaqat era (the seven
most beautiful poems of the pre-Islamic
era are inscribed in the entrance to the
Kaaba, in Mecca). I, myself, prefer to
describe this script as angular. It is true
that the Kufi trend brought
improvements and led to it being used
more widely, both in manuscripts and in
“Arab civilization is based on the word”. L

President Nujoma, you are known as a
veteran freedom fighter in the struggle
of African nations for independence.
You are also a proponent of gender
equality and we would like to hear
your insights this subject.
Gender equality is a matter of urgency,
particularly in the developing countries.
In the past, women and men adhered to
specific gender roles, but now, with
modern day information technology, all
that has changed. Women are now doing
a lot of the jobs that only men used to do,
but much more still remains to be done.
We need more skilled men and woman in
order to fully reap the benefits of our
country’s natural resources. It is obvious
architecture. The School of Baghdad then
created cursive script, which takes
several forms, thuluth, diwani and naskhi
which was used for printing.”
Although Ghani Alani cites the
example of the Mu’allaqats, there are
doubts about the very existence of these
famous poems. “There will always be
someone who doubts the veracity of
these Mu’allaqats,” he explains. “But it is
certain that, since the pre-Islamic era,
there have been texts written using the
Arabic alphabet. Documents, treaties
and agreements have been found,
inscribed on stone tablets dating back to
well before the Islamic period. And, in
some archaeological sites, texts have
been found inscribed on stone, the most
famous being at Mada’in Saleh,” in Saudi
Arabia. (This site is inscribed on the
UNESCO World Heritage List.)
Ghani Alani has been living in Paris
for over 40 years. Speaking of his
relationship with the West, he confides
that “I live in Europe, and the exchange
that I have had with western society has
been very productive, in both
directions. And this, despite the
difference between Arab and Western
ways of thinking. Arab thought is based
on the verb, whereas Western thought is
based on the image. But the verb
includes the image. The best example of
this is poetry, which the ancients called
‘the register of the Arabs’.”
Receiving the UNESCO-Sharjah
prize for Arab culture means a great
deal to him. “Above all, it is a full
recognition of calligraphy as an art, one
which is part of the soul of Arab
civilization, and forms the skeleton of
this culture. But what is even more
important is that the prize has been
awarded to me as an Iraqi artist. This
enables me to show another side of
Iraq, unlike the images of war and
violence that have filled our screens.” 
Ghani Alani and  Polish publisher and
academic Anna Parzymies were the
laureates of the 2009 UNESCO-Sharjah
Prize for Arab Culture. The prize was
created in 1998 at the initiative of the
United Arab Emirates. Every year it
honours two people – one from an Arab
state, the other not – who have
contributed to the development and
promotion of Arab culture.
Contact for more information: Jeannette
Tchilinguirian 
(j.tchilinguirian@unesco.org). 
