“When a habitation dies, a warehouse of
memory perishes with it,” says Wole
Soyinka, winner of the Nobel Prize for
literature. He calls for restoring the spirit of
Haiti, a country fallen prey to political
contradictions and the victim of blind
forces of nature.
At one
with Haiti 
by Wole Soyinka

If ever there was an ill-starred island, it is that
isle once known as Hispaniola, whose western
half is named Haiti, a land of profound
contradictions that symbolize at once the loftiest
aspiration of the human spirit – freedom - and its
eternal adversary, tyranny. Even the spirituality of
the African continent that sustained its peoples
through generations of human degradation has
not escaped a tyrannical conversion. Voodoo
became part of the negative face of folklore,
turned into an agency of superstitious and
political terror that shrouded the nation in an
opaque, diabolical subjugation, meat and drink
to the cinematic arts. Now it would appear the
much abused mystic forces of Nature have
turned palpably brutal, joined in the spiral of
reprisals and left a people stunned into a
condition that evokes that very image of dread –
the zombie, or the living dead.  All too painfully,
the process of resuscitation lumbers on.     
‘When a book is lost,’ goes a familiar African
saying, ‘it can be replaced. When a village elder
dies, however, an entire library has vanished’.
Societies steeped in the tradition of the griot,
and other oral custodians of a people’s heritage,
may be forgiven this touch of hyperbole.
Nonetheless it is a sentiment that is based on
truth. Elders have died in Haiti, so have youth. 
So have habitations. The scale of destruction
provokes a variation on that African saying,
instructing us that when a habitation dies, a
warehouse of memory perishes with it. Such a
loss is the world’s, however, not merely that of
the stricken locality.
More than physical libraries have been lost in
Haiti!  Yes indeed, those also, and the records, the
physical structures, the priceless archives that
guard a people’s history have ended in rubble,
mush and ashes. In addition to these however, so
have the venerated spots and landmarks, the
patina of ancestry on familiar walls, the
communal spaces such as market squares,
arbours, ageless trees under whose shade a
community is renewed as the griot spins out
narratives of a people’s antecedents and society’s
coming-in-being, where knowledge of identity
passes from the old and is embedded in the
young. These are the palpable threads in the
fabric of continuity of our species, linking
generation to generation. For Haiti, much of this
is entombed in the insatiable maw of Nature.
Even cobbled pathways, evocative of time past,
the mementoes and monuments of both
triumphant and hostile faces of history have not
been spared. Heritage transcends mere
monuments however. The very soil on which
both the seeds of tyranny and resistance were
sown, the earth that is soaked in the blood of
despots and martyrs alike are part of a people’s
narrative, all eloquent chapters, annotations and
bookmarks that line the daily passages of a
people even as they pursue their most mundane
activities. These have been crushed, mangled
into indecipherable mounds, shorn of their
communal associations. The bulldozer has been
accorded the last word. Hallowed spaces of
Legend have become one with earthworks, the
guaranteed bequest of a blind catastrophe.     
How often has the world of letters been
moved, irrespective of race, to indulge in the
celebration of the victory of Haitian resistance
under General Desallines1 over the forces of re-
enslavement dispatched by Napoleon Bonaparte
in his imperial obsessions!  Haiti tested and
shredded the claims of Europe as the nursery of
the Age of Enlightenment. Beyond the clash of
arms, however, Haiti proved the manifestation of
a people’s supreme will that resulted in the
establishment of the first independent black
republic on the globe, an event whose heroes –
such as Toussaint Louverture2 – have been
rhapsodized by poets and dramatists,
Heritage
transcends
mere
monuments
however. The
very soil on
which both the
seeds of
tyranny and
resistance were
sown, the earth
that is soaked
in the blood of
despots and
martyrs alike
are part of a
people’s
narrative.
Fallen statue of Toussaint
Louverture, hero of the
Haitian revolution, outside
presidential palace, 
Port-au-Prince. J

immortalized in statuaries, on canvases, murals
and tapestries from impassioned brushes,
weavers and carvers. They range from schooled
masters of the arts in formal galleries to the
roadside, ‘naive’ painters all the way from Harlem
to South Africa! But these figures are the
survivors across time, today we are confronted
by the needs of survivors in present time, the
direct heirs of that proud history, the living
repositories of their attainment, and inspiration
of our creativity.
Their burden is now ours, their agony ours,
the hope of their survival ours. If we fail them, we
deny them, we endorse the victory of blind
Nature over human resilience and
resourcefulness and thus, we fail ourselves. We
master Fate only when we disperse the stench of
death and anguish with the magic wand of faith
in the future, planting a kiss of life on the faces of
orphans, the wounded, and the bereaved. 
Haiti casts a net of historic evocations that is
totally disproportionate to her size, at once an
aspiration and a warning.  Haiti embodies both
the glory and tragedy of the black race. Never
before, however, have her people confronted a
challenge of such dimensions – and opportunity.
Haiti exists beyond mere symbol, being, for its
time, a unique testing ground of human destiny
in the eternal struggle between domination and
liberty, between power and freedom. Haiti is a
lesson, not merely for the African world but for
humanity. Nature has thus dealt a cruel, near
irreparable blow, firstly to the African peoples
everywhere, but more widely to a world
community wherever freedom is valued, and
history, heritage and memory are understood as
the cohering fabric of communal existence.
Thus, Haiti cannot be permitted to die,
stagnate, or degenerate. Opportunities
sometimes exact a costly price, and this, Haiti has
paid several times over, in one fell swoop! Now is
the time to milk that opportunity in turn and
assist her own visionaries to recreate Haitian
society morally, socially and intellectually.  Much
has been done, and we salute the humane
response of the world. But we cannot be
complacent. We do not know how much of Haiti’s
humanity — which is ours — is  still, even now,
roaming directionless, foraging with canines and
rodents for food, crouched under crude shelters,
mothers with the future cradled in their arms,
starving, listless, with large bewildered eyes in
mute appeal to unseen, would-be providers. As
the healers of the world rush to the aid of the
wounded and the traumatized, reviving hospitals
and clinics, ferrying drugs and nourishment,
writers, artists and intellectuals must join hands
for the restoration of the mind. Libraries must be
re-stocked, galleries replenished, and schools
resuscitated. Writers can help by donating theirs
and other books, painters their canvases,
architects their skills, and teachers all forms of
instructional aid.  It is clear – Haiti will never again
be the same island we once knew, nor Port-au-
Prince exude her faintly decadent redolence of a
troubled past.  Nonetheless, we can recreate from
its rubble a totally new and vibrant social entity
that becomes a  beacon of universal solidarity, an
affirmation of the human spirit, an enduring
outpost of a mother continent whose stolen
children wiped out the ignominy of enslavement
and transformed a mere labour stockade into a
citadel of defiance, and a vision of liberty. 
1. Jean-Jacques Dessalines
(1758-1806), a leader of the
Haitian revolution, was Haiti’s
first emperor (1804-1806)
under the name Jacques I
2. Toussaint Louverture (1743-
1803), emblematic figure of
the Haitian revolution and
governor of Saint-Domingue
(Haiti’s former name)
As the healers of the world rush to the aid of the
wounded and the traumatized, reviving hospitals
and clinics, ferrying drugs and nourishment, writers,
artists and intellectuals must join hands for the
restoration of the mind.
Wole Soyinka (Nigeria), Nobel Prize in
Literature 1986, is a member of the High Panel
on Peace and Dialogue among Cultures
created in 2010 by the Director-General of
UNESCO, Irina Bokova.
The novelist and playwright is the founder
of two theatrical groups, the 1960 Masks and
Orisun Theatre.
He is currently emeritus professor at
Obafemi Awolowo University, emeritus
member of the Black Mountain Institute at the
University of Nevada (USA), and professor in
residence at Loyola Marymount University in
Los Angeles, California. 
