Ten days after the earthquake, which killed 17
students and staff at Quisqueya University,
you had organized a volunteer system. How
did this begin? 
First the medical students set up in a tent on the
parking lot. They were supervised initially by
their teachers, then by a team of Slovak doctors
who arrived with medicine and equipment
looking for somewhere to work. Then the
students set up a mobile clinic. After that came
fresh water distribution points. The engineering
and environmental students went out into the
streets, helped people organize themselves into
committees to manage the improvised camps as
well as introducing work on zoning, sanitation
and waste management. The university became
a giant volunteering machine!  
Eleven more tents went up. Education
students were given a crash course in
psychosocial support and put it into practice
almost at once again on the streets. They also
became involved in running art therapy
workshops for children at the weekends, 150 at a
time, in one of the tents. I said to them: “The
street is your university now”. 
At the weekend students gathered with their
teachers to formalize the non-formal education
they had been getting during the week, or to put
theory on the practice. We are working on a
system to give them academic credits for this
work. It changed the paradigm of education for
them. They realised that further education
doesn’t have to be one-way, that it doesn’t have
to take place within four walls with an all-
knowing teacher dispensing knowledge. With the
volunteering initiative, knowledge is acquired in
the street and the teacher accompanies the
process. We are de-institutionalising knowledge.   



A new model of education has emerged from the ruins of Haiti’s Quisqueya University,
which was entirely destroyed by the earthquake on 12 January 2010. Driven by skills-
based volunteering and emphasizing partnerships, it was initiated by rector Jacky
Lumarque. These are excerpts from an interview he gave to Jean O’Sullivan of EduInfo.
Street 
university

Were students able to continue studying?  
We wired up one of the tents. We call it “the
digital tent”. Videoconferences were held with
sister universities in Montreal and Paris for
students doing master’s degrees. We are looking
into online classes to enable students who have
almost finished their courses to graduate.    
What is the next step? 
Given that 400 to 500 new students were not
able to begin the second semester that was due
to begin at the end of January. We are now
giving them a basic grounding or foundation
course of 15 weeks’ general education combined
with short courses in basic management,
logistics, first aid, risk prevention, community
organization, etc. 
The big challenge is to get the university up
and running in a sustainable way by setting up a
system of sponsorship by which donors support
individual students to the tune of $200 a month.
This enables them to meet their basic living
expenses while they continue volunteering, but
also to pay tuition costs and thus contribute to
the running and staffing of the university. We
badly need this sponsorship as we are a private
university and get nothing from the state
Has the earthquake changed your view of
what needs to be done to rebuild Haiti’s
education system?  
Completely. In the light of the devastation of the
education system, I have redrafted proposals for
a National Education Pact for the Haitian
Government. Today the question is not so much
getting pupils “back into school” as to get all
Haitian children into school – including the 25
per cent of five-to-eleven-year-olds who did not
attend school before the earthquake hit. I have
consulted a wide cross-section of parents,
teachers, students, and education NGOs on this
issue. The education budget is currently 9 per
cent of Haiti’s GDP. I would like to see it rise to 25
per cent in 2015 and 30 per cent in 2025. The
objective would be 100 per cent enrolment, free
education, textbooks, materials and a hot meal
daily for each child. Accelerated teacher training
is essential for this to work. The proposals are
ambitious but we can’t afford to have a two-
speed system any more. 
Jacky Lumarque a mathematician, has been the rector of Quisqueya University since 2006. The
university was founded in 1990 by professors in partnership with a group of Haitian businesses. A
former head of the financial management firm Capital Consult, he is currently serving as chairperson
of the Presidential Commission for Education in Haiti.
Jacky Lumarque, rector of
Quisqueya University,
shows UNESCO Director-
General Irina Bokova, (to his
left) around the ravaged
campus. J
“Now your university
is the street.” K
