The relationship between culture and
development is the subject of a debate
that is far from exhausted. Let us define
the two concepts. What do we mean by
culture? As the French-Lebanese writer
Amin Maalouf said, the cultural
endowment of an individual or a
community is composed of a vertical
dimension, which we inherit from
ancestors and traditions, and a horizontal
one, shaped by our times and our
contemporaries. And what about
development? It requires more than a
decent standard of living and political
freedom, as the 2004 Human
Development Report from the United
Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) reminds us. Cultural liberty is now
recognized as a human right and an
important aspect of human development. 
There is however no clear
relationship between culture and
development. Waves of cultural
determinism emerge recurrently,
attributing the failures of growth and
democratization to inherent flaws in
cultural traits. To fight such dangerous
theories, we should consider that culture
is not uniquely critical in determining our
lives and identities. Gender, class,
profession, politics, human and material
resources are also hugely important.
Cultures evolve, hence a society's culture
may determine very little of its future
development. In short, I believe there is
no grand cultural theory of
development. 
Haitian people and artists possess a
formidable creativity that creates magic,
poetry, paintings, and music and “allows
exploration of the eternity of the
unknown”, to borrow an expression from

Cultural determinism can
lead to dangerous theories
that the failures of growth
and democratization are
due to inherent flaws in
cultural traits. The concept
of cultural identity must be
demythologized for
culture to be an asset in
social development.
Culture 
and development: 
two sides of the coin
by 
Antonio Vigilante
The cultural and creativity
capital should be
channelled through
incentives and policies
aiming to strengthen
people’s social capital.
National Art Centre, Port-au-Prince, after the 12
January 2010 earthquake. J©

Bolivian writer Eduardo Scott Moreno.
Yet, in the words of one of his characters,
a Haitian intellectual in the novel La
Doncella del Baron Cemeterio (The
Servant of Baron Cimetière1),
“notwithstanding this, I see no social and
political future”.
The obvious contradiction indicates
that culture alone is not necessarily a
crucial factor of development, especially
if interpreted only as individualistic
artistic creativity and expression. Culture
can however be a potentially powerful
asset, which if appropriately stimulated
and encouraged also by public policies,
can lead to an enhanced social capital for
reconstruction. 
Another storm
Haiti represents the perfect storm2 of
development challenges, brought
about by two major causes: alienation
of the population and lack of
legitimate, functioning institutions. At
the centre of the storm is the lack of a
legitimate, valid social contract
between the government and citizens.
The recent natural disasters have
tragically aggravated the consequences
of such a storm and the Haitian people’s
suffering.
It is now generally acknowledged
that what Haiti needs more than
reconstruction is “re-foundation”. This
great challenge requires
accommodating cultural identity and
facilitating evolution, while avoiding
making it a myth, since it can hardly be
achieved without significant
transformational changes in political
leadership, institutional capacity and
social movements and without a shared
understanding of what constitutes the
national sustainable development goal.
The cultural and creativity capital
should be channelled through
incentives and policies aiming to
strengthen people’s social capital, i.e.
the value, mechanisms, trust and
interactions that enable the
maximisation of the country’s
development potential.
The Action Plan for national
development prepared by the
Government points to some promising
paths, such as decentralization,
territorial poles of development and
investments in culture. Understandably,
those who wrote it were focused on
people’s suffering, and had despair and
urgency in mind. But for a vision to
come true it cannot be determined top-
down, as it is the case for the Plan. 
The first re-foundational task is
therefore to create a national political
leadership capable of using
decentralization as a vehicle for people’s
genuine participation in determining
local and national priorities. This
leadership must be able to devise
implementation and political and
financial accountability systems that
allow Haitian citizens to be engaged
actors and not just supposed
“beneficiaries”. 
I believe that the opportunity ahead
for Haiti is to make a fresh start by
defining a vision, a national economic
and social project with which all citizens
can identify, for which their culture and
creativity can serve as an essential tool
linked to all domains of life. 
Antonio Vigilante (Italy), is the
director of the United Nations and
UNDP office in Brussels (Belgium). He
was formerly UN Resident
Coordinator and UNDP Resident
Representative in Egypt, Bulgaria and
Bolivia; he has carried out other UN
assignments in New York, Barbados,
Ethiopia, Honduras and Bolivia.
1. Baron Cimetière is a Voodoo spirit of death, like
Baron La Croix and Baron Samedi.
2. “The Perfect Storm” is the title of a novel by American
writer Sebastian Junger and its film version by German
director Wolfgang Petersen. The expression refers to a
combination of circumstances that aggravate a
situation catastrophically.

In the 1970s, Haiti
imported 10% of the
food it needed; now
that figure stands at
60%. The state has
handed over
responsibility to non-
governmental
organizations, which
provide up to 80% of
public services. 
What is wrong?
Painting by Haitian artist 
Préfète Duffaut.L
