In Port-au-Prince on 12 January, after the second
tremor had ended, I was waiting, anxiously, for the
third. That’s when I heard shouting. It was coming
from the Després and Pacot Hills. There were cries
from every street in the Bas Peu de Chose quarter:
Jesus! Jesus! Mary! Armageddon!
For the next three nights, all these people –
crowded in the streets to escape the crumbled
houses that hid the bodies of their loved ones –
prayed to Jesus, chanted prayers, read the Bible.
Revelation 6: “And I saw when he opened the sixth
seal, and there was a great earthquake; […] and
every mountain and island were moved out of their
places.” Revelation 16: “For they are the spirits of
devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the
kings of the earth and of the whole world […] 
Animism, voodoo and fundamentalist Christian beliefs prevent a
number of Haitians from taking their destiny into their own hands.
Superstition has contributed to the country’s fall into the trap of
victimhood. A rational analysis of Haiti’s past and its present situation is
the key to salvation. 
by 
Michèle Oriol
This Haitian couple, starting
over, have already planted
trees in front of their
makeshift home. L

Haiti’s new start will
not be from zero

And he gathered them together into a place called
in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon. […] And there
were voices, and thunders, and lightning; and there
was a great earthquake, such as was not since men
were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and
so great. And the great city was divided into three
parts, and the cities of the nations fell […] And
every island fled away, and the mountains were not
found.”
Everything was interpreted as a sign: if the
churches had collapsed, if the Palais National had
gone up in smoke, it was because the politicians
had shown themselves unworthy of God.
Revelation 18 (9-10): “And the kings of the earth,
who committed fornication and lived wantonly
with her, shall weep and wail over her, when they
look upon the smoke of her burning, standing afar
off for the fear of her torment, saying, Woe, woe, the
great city, Babylon, the strong city! For in one hour
is thy judgment come.”
I saw people using their bare hands to pull
their brothers, sisters, fathers, mothers or
neighbours out of the rubble. I saw dead bodies
being shovelled up with bulldozers, tipped into
skips and buried in common graves, dug into
refuse dumps. I saw an endless column of people
filing up the hills to Pétion-Ville and Kenscoff,
leaving the lower quarters to the looters. This
unnamed thing, this goudougoudou drove tens
of thousands of terrified Haitians out to the
provinces, to the Dominican Republic, USA or
Canada. Revelation 6 (15): “And the kings of the
earth, and the princes, and the chief captains, and
the rich, and the strong, and every bondman and
freeman, hid themselves in the caves and in the
rocks of the mountains.” 
And ever since, by word of mouth, on the
radio and television, in gatherings of believers, all
one can hear are inspired voices declaring the
end of a 25-year cycle, ending in 2011, with the
total destruction of Haiti! Revelation 11(14): “The
second Woe is past: behold, the third Woe cometh
quickly.”
We are in the kingdom of deep-seated fears,
which sometimes reverberate through an entire
society and demand an explanation.
An eternal
victim does not
see himself as
master of his
own destiny

Women praying in front of
a statue repainted for the
visit of Pope John Paul II,
Port-au-Prince cathedral,
1982. I
Carmo church in Lisbon 
( bottom right), destroyed
by the 1755 earthquake and
preserved in its ruined state,
resembles the Port-au-
Prince cathedral today (top
right).  II

buildings were destroyed. Under the ruins of the
Royal Palace, the 70,000 books and priceless
archives of the national library lay in fragments. 
We are told that the very pragmatic Prime
Minister, Sebastião de Melo, Marquis of Pombal,
simply said: “What now? Bury the dead and feed
the living.” And he immediately sent troops to
put out the flames and gather the bodies,
publicly hanged looters as a warning, and
prevented able-bodied inhabitants from leaving
the city … Barely a year later the city had been
cleaned up and reconstruction could begin. 
This catastrophe shook all of Europe and
even influenced Enlightenment philosophers.
Humanity felt alone in the Universe. It was no
longer possible to speak of Providence without
thinking of Lisbon. 
How will the 2010 earthquake change Haitian
thinking? 
For an animist society, an earthquake is not a
natural phenomenon, but the result of some
malicious intervention. Biblical references, within
the context of Protestant fundamentalist
churches and integrated by Voodooists and
Catholics, only exacerbate the trauma suffered
by the people. This phenomenon has a
considerable hold over people’s minds. Those
who are imagining a Haitian nation should think
about this. 
Haiti was considered to be the poorest
country in the Northern hemisphere; now it sees
itself as the unluckiest, even cursed. We have
long been subject to incessant victimisation by
our leaders, but also by many Haitian and foreign
intellectuals. Victimhood is the greatest trap
before us today. In our very fragile institutional
context, the world’s kindness and generosity
In eight days I did not see a single uniformed
person in the streets. Not a Haitian policeman, nor
a soldier from the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti. It was four weeks before the Head
of State addressed the nation. The State seemed
to have collapsed along with its symbolic
buildings. Even today, we are still waiting for
decisions and directives that never come.
Another time, another place – a detour
through history
On 1 November 1755, at 9.40 a.m., that is, on the
morning of the Catholic All Saints Day, a terrible
earthquake struck Lisbon, devastating it in the
space of a few minutes. And then an enormous
tsunami engulfed the centre of the city. What the
sea spared was devoured by fire. A quarter of the
inhabitants lost their lives and most of the

may undermine our capacity to look after
ourselves. We must banish victimhood and
rediscover our self-esteem. An eternal victim
does not see himself as master of his own
destiny.
Over these past decades, as Haitian
institutions gradually started to go under, as the
economy floundered, as the spectre of civil war
loomed closer and closer, as the State lost its
sovereignty – as much the fault of interventions
by armies of foreigners as of uncoordinated
international aid – our identity crisis only
deepened. And we were entirely focused on the
past, so confused was the present, while the
future seemed a dead-end. 
But what have we inherited from this past?
The images of Toussaint Louverture and Jean-
Jacques Dessalines, these two former semi-
illiterate slaves who were able to lead Haiti
towards independence, to establish a republic,
create a nation and thus remain a source of
pride. But also, and especially, a sinister refrain
which is constantly being beaten out: for 200
years, all Haitian Heads of State have been
despots, murderers and corrupt; for 200 years,
the administration has been a mess; for 200
years, the country has been torn apart by civil
wars and social inequalities. 
Trying to start from zero again
This denigration of the past is harmful for the
future. And it is not innocuous: it lets those in
power off the hook and, with them, the
international community that supports them. We
cover our ancestors with curses in order to cast a
puritanical veil over what is happening under our
noses today, namely, an increase in the rate of
population growth that the economy cannot
support and that politicians ignore; a
dehumanising form of urbanisation, born of the
destruction of the peasant economy; the
trivialisation of the impact of the presence of
foreign armed forces; and an ecological disaster
that is largely the responsibility of timber
exporting companies.
The capital had become a monster, with over
two million inhabitants. The population doubled
every ten years between 1970 and 1990. It
tripled between 1990 and 2000. And as a result,
62% of its housing was built between 1995 and
2000. 
In other words, it was not our ancestors who
built the houses in Port-au-Prince that killed over
200,000 people. The responsibility for these
buildings lies with Haiti’s present-day politicians
and the countless foreign aid missions, which, for
the past 16 years, have been sharing power with
our leaders. 
Rather than condemn the past, why not
study recent history and the present day? Since
the Americans arrived under the flag of the
United Nations, in 1994, political authority has
been, at best, ambiguous: we are neither a
trusteeship, nor entirely independent.
Governments on artificial life-support succeed
one another, leading the State towards a
bottomless precipice. So the question of political
power clearly needs to be posed, as it is central
to reconstruction.
Wanting to restructure the Haitian state
seems like a dream of starting from zero again.
The Haitian state has existed for 206 years. It is
not a matter of restructuring it, but, on the
contrary, of creating links between the past and
the present, reconnecting with history and
considering what it has to teach us. This is the
way to return meaning to the lives of the Haitian
people, and with it a sense of dignity and self
esteem. 
A Haitian sociologist and anthropologist,
Michèle Oriol one of the creators of the
Foundation for Iconographic and
Documentary Research in Port-au-Prince. She
is a member of the Haitian National
Committee for the Memory of the World, a
UNESCO programme devoted to the
preservation and dissemination of archive
holdings and library collections around the
world. An independent consultant for a range
of national and international institutions, she
has contributed to many rural development
and environmental protection projects and
has directed an international research team on
the Haitian property situation. She lectures on
family sociology at the Faculty of Human
Sciences at the Haitian State University.
We cover our ancestors with curses in order to cast a
puritanical veil over what is happening under our
noses today.
