Since Toussaint Louverture in 1801, every Haitian
government, with the exception of that of
Alexandre Pétion (1806 – 1818) has had a political
and administrative body responsible for education.
Article 19 of the Constitution of 1805, signed by
Emperor Jean Jacques Dessalines, made education
a matter of State concern. King Henry I, better
known as King Henry Christophe – who formed a
separatist government in the north of the country
(1807 – 1820), while the south was under the
control of Alexandre Pétion – was ahead of his
time with regard to education, including higher
education, and in the practice of arts and crafts. 
All constitutions from 1843 to 1987 confirm
the right of every Haitian child, boy or girl, to basic
education that is “free and common to all citizens,”
as a priority and an obligation. However, the
country has never been able to implement an
education system that follows the cardinal values
set out in the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. And, long before 12 January, it was obvious
that the education system needed to be
overhauled. 
Instead of instilling a respect for human rights
and basic freedoms, Haitian schools have tended
to perpetuate a society based on inequality and
injustice. A society comprised of individuals with


On paper, quality education has been a
priority in Haiti for 200 years. In reality, the
system is stagnating and helps sustain a
society based on inequality and injustice.
A new ideological choice is necessary.
Reform instead
of repetition
by Jean Coulanges

by reforming, for example, the inspection
system. We have to do everything we can to
ensure that the Haitian government’s efforts to
set up a national educational system are
respected, without taking sides. Existing
curricula must also be revised so that they are
better adapted to the needs of industry, to
environmental concerns and citizenship values.
Meanwhile, resources have to be allocated for
higher education reforms. There is a pressing
need to establish adequate infrastructure, while
upgrading teachers’ career prospects so that they
earn a decent living. 
Any overhaul of the Haitian education system
has to favour the emergence of a new generation
of citizen-producers who are able continuously
to improve physical conditions in Haiti and to
create wealth, while helping the country’s
cultural, moral and spiritual values to flourish.
The new education system must be capable of
fostering a national consciousness, a sense of
responsibility and a community spirit by
incorporating in its content the facts of Haitian
reality 
no sense of national conscience, scant regard for
their fellow citizens and who exclude and
dehumanize others. Our system has been unable
to eradicate the defects of the country’s colonial
heritage. 
Haiti has become a backward country, slipping
further into illiteracy and poverty every day. 
A catastrophic state of affairs 
Just one university, a few teacher training
institutes and a single college offering basic and
continuous training for those working in
education. Out of 60,000 teachers, just 10.64 %
have basic professional qualifications. Teachers
are also recruited from other professions, with no
specific pedagogical training. Worse still, some
teachers have had no higher education at all. But
even when teachers are qualified, their
effectiveness is limited by having to teach over
40 hours of lessons a week. 
Another influence on the quality of
education is the dilapidated state of school
buildings, which often do not comply with
official norms.
Access to primary education can hardly be
called free, as about 82 % of schools belong to
the private sector (according to a 2003 census of
schools).
Secondary education has been waiting for
reforms since 1980, but virtually no studies on
the subject have been conducted. Meanwhile,
reforms of higher education in general and of the
Haiti State University in particular have been
stagnating since 1997. Research and publications
are very rare, apart from student dissertations.
How did this situation come about? The main
reason is a lack of vision. The State education
budget is small, with government manipulated
by an old-fashioned oligarchy with little ambition.
A serious problem of governance and corruption
is an added complication. The Ministry of
Education has no real control over the system and
certain projects hardly get off the ground. 
The country’s political instability also has a
negative impact on education. Ministers have
very little time to draft, revise and implement a
proper national education policy. Over the past
162 years, there have been 216 successive
Education ministers – an average of 9.4 months in
office per person. This situation is responsible for
an almost total lack of continuity in the sector.
A new ideological choice
How to overhaul this system without getting
stuck in the same vicious circles, with the same
causes producing the same effects? We need to
make a new ideological choice, one that
considers quality education as a prerequisite to a
flourishing society. We have to establish other
mechanisms of governance, leaving party
politics and vote-catching considerations aside,
Jean Coulanges is Secretary-General of the
Haitian National Commission to UNESCO. Acting
as agencies of consultation, liaison and
information, and mobilizing and coordinating
partnerships with the civil society, the National
Commissions make also substantial contributions
in the advancement of UNESCO’s objectives and
in the implementation of its programme. Having
joined the UNESCO in 1946 November 18th, Haiti
is one of the oldest member states of the
organization.
Scene from Jacmel Carnival L
Child in poor district of 
Bel Air wishing he could go 
to school. Port-au-Prince, 
1982. J
