The day starts early at the primary
school in Aqualaar, a village in Kenya’s
arid northeast. By 5 a.m., when the
children arrive, their teacher, Ibrahim
Hussein, 18, is waiting by his blackboard
to give a lesson on arithmetic.
‘School’ in Aqualaar is a sandy patch
of ground under an acacia tree. Mr.
Hussein’s blackboard hangs from the
branches. There are no desks or chairs.
But around 30 children sit listening with
rapt attention, following the lesson by
scratching numbers with sticks in the
sand.
Classes start before dawn for a
reason. By 8 o’clock the children will
have started their day jobs. The boys will
be out herding goats and cattle with
their parents. The girls will be collecting
water with their mothers from a stream
10 kilometers away. But they’ll be back
at 5 p.m. for another two-hour class.
Welcome to the world of education
for ethnic Somali pastoralists in Garissa.
This is one of the most disadvantaged
areas in Kenya. Fewer than one in three
children make it through primary
school. And just 10 percent of Somali
girls finish their teenage years with
more than two years of education.
Lacking support from the
government, parents are taking matters
into their own hands. The villagers pay
Mr. Hussein, a high school graduate, a
small fee to teach their children. And
they make time for their kids to attend
his classes. For Khadija Ali, whose
daughter Fatima, 7, and son Hassan, 9,
attend the school, the choices are
straightforward: “Of course it’s hard. But
an education will give my children a
better life and chances that I never had.”
If only governments around the
world demonstrated the same resolve
and sense of urgency. Ten years ago, at a
global conference in Dakar, Senegal,
they pledged to make sure that by 2015
all of the world’s children were getting a
basic education. They are not delivering
on that promise.
Less than five years from that target
date, school registers tell their own
story. The world’s economy is
increasingly based on knowledge and

We’re breaking our
promise to teach all
the world’s children
by Kevin Watkins
At the World Education Forum in Dakar (Senegal) 
in 2000, States pledged to provide the world’s
children with basic education within 15 years. 
Five years from the deadline, 72 million 
school-age children are still excluded.
Fo
cu
s
Classroom in a poor neighbourhood 
in Karachi (Pakistan). L
Pupils at Begum Hajra school  during 
seasonal overflow of sewers, Karachi. J©

skills, but 72 million children of primary
school age are not in school. Millions
more drop out before finishing primary
school. And many who do finish school
lack basic literacy and numeracy skills –
a testimony to the poor education they
have received.
Of course, it’s not all bad news. Some
of the world’s poorest countries have
made extraordinary advances in
education. But as any school kid will tell
you, a promise is a promise – and the
promise of education for all will be
broken if we carry on as we are. New
figures released this week by UNESCO
show that, on current trends, 56 million
children will still be out of school in 2015.
Changing these trends should be at
the top of the international agenda.
Governments in developing countries
need to take the lead by putting in
place the policies and investments
needed to reach the most
disadvantaged children. 
Obstacles in the road
Too often, those with the most to gain
are the last in line when it comes to
public education. In urban slums from
Manila to Nairobi, the absence of decent
public schools means that some of the
world’s poorest families have to pay for
a private education that is often second-
rate – and many can’t pay. 
Disadvantages in education don’t
operate in isolation, of course. They are
linked to wider problems of poverty and
discrimination against girls and women.
In Pakistan, girls from poor rural
backgrounds average just two years in
school – less than one-third of the
national average. 
It’s not just governments in
developing countries that need to up
their performance grades. Donor
countries are failing to keep their promise
to the world’s school children. Ensuring
that all kids get a basic education will
require dedicating an extra $13 billion a
year from now to 2015. Yet after several
years of stagnation, aid commitments for
basic education were cut last year. 
Contrasts with health care are striking.
Global funds for AIDS and immunization
have served as a focal point for political
attention, attracting finance and increasing
the flow of aid to those who need it. 
The Fast Track Initiative, a global
framework operating under the
auspices of the World Bank, was meant
to play a similar role in education.
Instead it has overseen a low level of
financing and long bureaucratic delays,
with some countries waiting two or
three years for support.
Of course, there are many obstacles
to delivering on the promise of
education for all, including shortages of
schools and teachers, deeply ingrained
prejudices, discrimination against girls,
grinding poverty and inadequate
teaching. But such barriers can be
broken down — by fairer public
spending, targeted support for the most
disadvantaged, and policies that attract,
train and retain effective teachers.
Good schools are a potent weapon
in the fight against poverty, social
prejudice and extremism. They are an
investment in economic growth,
shared prosperity and security. It is
time for governments to put education
where it belongs: at the heart of the
national and international policy
agenda. 
Kevin Watkins is director of the 2010
Education for All Global Monitoring
Report, published by UNESCO, released
on Jan. 19.  

Schoolyard in Liberia. L
