We are going to have to accept that it will be
impossible to reconstitute the social, cultural and
intellectual fabric of Haiti. Contrary to what has
sometimes been claimed – that the social, cultural
and intellectual fabric of Haiti was torn apart on 
12 January 2010 – it was in tatters long before this
fateful day.
Twenty years of populism had already
polarized Haitian society, deepening the class
divide and accelerating a brain drain that has
begun under the François Duvalier regime. “Over
83% of the best qualified workforce produced in
Haiti ends up by leaving the country to live
abroad,” says the World Bank, adding that the USA
is the preferred destination for the great majority
of expatriate professionals. Canada is another. 
Following the 12 January earthquake, this
haemorrhaging out of the country has already
increased and could well get worse if concrete
and urgent action is not taken very soon. With
unemployment running at 90%, Haiti’s economy
was already in the red long before the earthquake.
It would be better not to dwell on the figures here,
to avoid even more self-flagellation. 
Brain drain, cultural destitution, social decay, irresponsibility,
corruption – these are key words in this harshly critical portrait 
of Haitian reality, followed by proposals for rebuilding a new 
Haiti founded on science, intelligence, competence, humanism 
and humility.
by


Nancy Roc
Building 
a new Haiti 
Desperate gesture. 
Port-au-Prince, 
12 January 2010. L

As a country, Haiti is lagging behind in everything.
The world’s first black Republic has become the
pariah of the American continent – 
a country that has never been able to lift itself to
nation status and which is, today, more than ever,
dependent on international charity. Charity, and
not aid for sustainable development, which,
instead of helping our country get on its feet, has,
for the past 20 years, dragged it into the dark
depths of misery. Of course, Haitians are the first to
blame for their social decadence, but donors
should also accept their share of the responsibility.
And that is why the next governments need to
make enlightened choices and turn to the Haitian
diaspora, which provides three times more money
each year than the international community – 
$1.8 billion compared to $500 million, respectively. 
Successive governments since 1986 have
claimed that Haitian culture is our greatest asset.
Yet nothing has been done to show this culture
off. If it were not for the vitality and talent of our
artists and creators, this culture would also
probably be moribund today. How is it that, in
the 21st century, Haiti does not have a single
theatre worthy of the name? Last August, the
capital’s only cinema announced that it was
closing, seriously threatening the survival of
Haiti’s nascent film industry. The National Theatre
and National School of Arts buildings have long
been ruins, or used for political ends far removed
form any artistic vocation. Even if Haitian culture
is still alive, there is absolutely nowhere that it
can be appreciated. The destitution of Haitian
culture is shameful: not a single theatre or
cinema, no museum fit for the country’s art, local
publishing enterprises with no resources, no
newspapers or magazines, no cultural radio
station, no cultural policy, no real school of art.
What has happened to the country that seduced
French Culture Minister and intellectual 
André Malraux.
All is not lost
The time has come to “reshuffle the cards” and all
may not be lost. In its Plan of Action for Recovery
and Development presented to the United Nations
on 31 March, the Haitian government recognises,
for the first time, that culture is “an element whose
marginalisation has, for many years, led to the
failure of development support programmes in
almost all countries.” Obviously, this presupposes
that the State sends clear signals that it is willing to
help to make the cultural sector economically both
viable and enviable. 
Haitians try to leave 
Port-au-Prince by boat. L

It is worth noting that while Haitians are
quick to blame the inefficiency of the State, it is
also hard to believe that not a single
organisation, company or businessman in Haiti is
interested in investing more in culture. Last
August, in an article entitled “The case for a real
theatre in Haiti”, published in the Le Matin
newspaper and reprinted in the Courrier
International under the headline “The Show is
Over”1, I tried to attract the Haitian public’s
attention to the economic potential of the
culture sector. In 2007 alone, culture brought in
almost $25 billion in taxes to Canada’s Federal,
provincial and municipal government coffers.
That is almost three times more than the $7.9
billion invested in culture and the arts by these
three levels of government put together2. But to
understand and strive towards this, mediocrity
has to be abandoned. When will we see real
Haitian patrons and philanthropists with a sense
of social commitment and dignity? When will we
see less philistine entrepreneurs? Why is it that,
for several years, the biggest sports and cultural
events in Haiti have mainly been sponsored by
foreign mobile phone companies? What does
this say about the vision of Haitian businessmen?
These questions are still unanswered.
In intellectual terms, too, Haiti raises some
unsettling questions. How has this State with no
idea of being a nation become a country without
government? It seems to us that the motto of
“everyone for themselves”, together with a very
jealous mistrust of its neighbours, can find its roots
in the country’s history, where the State has never
really embodied anything of any value. Haiti’s elite
has never worked for the development of the
country or the common good. First, because it
looks down, disparagingly, on the “illiterate
masses” and also because of its greed for power.
And the lingering odour of slavery in Haitian
society has not encouraged a sense of
responsibility, at any level of society. The
expression “sé pa fot moin” (it’s not my fault) has
become a national slogan. 
But if Haiti is not responsible... obviously,
someone else is. It is only a short step between
calling on foreign organisations to intervene and
then immediately denouncing the “interference”
of foreigners in Haitian life. The bankruptcy of the
country’s elite can be seen in the following
observation: for 200 years, as the Haitian
sociologist, Laënnec Hurbon, put it “the feeling of
being a citizen of this country has not been clear.
The mentality of the citizen has not evolved
much.” The question of skin colour, often utilized
by political parties in power, has widened the
social divide in a society of apartheid and has not
helped Haitians to find consensus around the
notion of “living together”. And, because
populism has exacerbated contempt for
intellectuals, they have been relieved of their
social responsibilities. The global success of Dany
Lafferière, Frankétienne, Lionel Trouillot, Gary
Victor, Yanick Lahens, Louis Philippe Dalembert,
to name but a few, proves that our writers are
able to conquer the world. What is more, some of
them took part in the “new social contract
movement” launched in 2004 by the Haitian
political collective known as the “Group of 184”,
which called on the Haitian people “to rise to the
challenge of overcoming the historical obstacles
that have hindered Haitian unity, blocked
development and, even today, led to the political,
social and economic decline of our country.” But,
once its “political leaders” abandoned the
movement, so did they.
Identity: one or many?
According to the Cameroonian sociologist, Axelle
Kabou, “every society is, in the first and final
analysis, responsible for the entirety of its history,
without exclusion.” It is therefore necessary that
our intellectuals urgently raise the issue of Haitian
identity. What, really, is it today? Is there one Haiti
or are there only fragments of a Haitian identity
scattered across the world? Can we speak of a
common Haitian stock that holds true for all
Haitians living in Haiti, the Dominican Republic,
Miami, Boston, New York, Paris and Montreal?
What is the best way to structure reflection on the
question and come up with different approaches? 
In the light of these points, which are only the
main strands of the problems inherent in the
tattered social, cultural and intellectual fabric of
Haiti, how to mobilise social knowledge and skills
in order to revitalise Haiti today?
I certainly do not claim to have THE answer to
such a complex question, given the context I have
just outlined. Nevertheless, it does seem possible
to set out some proposals, some of which are
already being implemented. 
The role of the diaspora 
Recently, Amos Cincir, my colleague at the
newspaper, Le Nouvelliste, wrote: “the country is
facing a significant exodus, especially of its elite.
No less than 10,000 Haitians, among the best
qualified, have been leaving the island every year
since 2000. But illegal migration often ends in
tragedy, with 1000 would-be emigrants dying
every year on the high seas. Those who do
succeed in leaving become the breadwinners for
the families who stay behind. Almost 40% of
Haitian homes depend on money sent home
from the diaspora. In 2008, family money
transfers reached $1.8 billion, or almost one third
of gross domestic product. Unfortunately, with
the global economic crisis, this source of income
is also decreasing, falling by at least 30% between
2008 and 2009. This hemorrhaging of manpower
and minds is just as much a catastrophe as a
second earthquake. Because the Haitians who are
Successive
governments
since 1986 have
claimed that
Haitian culture
is our greatest
asset. Yet
nothing has
been done to
show this
culture off. If it
were not for the
vitality and
talent of our
artists and
creators, this
culture would
also probably
be moribund
today.

leaving are those who represent the best hope for
rebuilding the country.” 
This exodus unfortunately only adds to the
83% of professionals already exiled from Haiti. So
it is clear that there can be no reconstruction or
reestablishment of Haiti without the active and
sustained participation of the Haitian diaspora.
The Prime Minister, Jean Max Bellerive, and the
minister for ex-patriot Haitians, Edwin Paraison,
clearly accepted this principle at the Montreal
Conference on 25 January this year, and during
the “Rebuilding Haiti – Horizon 2030” symposium
held at the École Polytechnique in Montreal by
the Study and Action Group for a New Haiti
(GRAHN), on 4 and 5 March. But we also know
that Haitians in Haiti have always been reticent
when it comes to their compatriots abroad. The
constitution of the Republic does not allow dual
nationality, and this has forced the majority of
the best Haitian brains, often against their
wishes, to opt for the nationality of their
adoptive country. Even so, without its diaspora,
Haiti would have disappeared long ago. 
Projects that UNESCO can support
The reconstruction of Haiti today has to be based
upon a mixture of science, intelligence,
competence, humanism and humility, too, in
order to build a fairer and more equal society. In
other words, Haitians need to design and build a
completely different country, with the prime
objective being the common good. To do this, it
will be indispensable to include the diaspora and
all the Haitian social networks.
The symposium on “Rebuilding Haiti –
Horizon 2030”, which attracted over 600
participants from Haiti and the four corners of
the its diaspora, clearly showed that Haitian men
and women can make concrete proposals to the
bodies concerned with the reconstruction of
their country, using ideas derived from a
participatory approach, as well as the expertise
and sensitivities available, both on the island and
abroad. 
Some 45 preliminary proposals3 came out of
this historic conference. 
Some education projects are already
underway, including establishing a permanent
structure for those in the diaspora working in
education and for friends of Haiti; a distance
learning structure capable, in the long term of
turning into an open or distance learning
university, covering the entire country; an
internship programme for Haitian students in
enterprises where members of the diaspora
occupy senior positions; skill sharing networks in
the disapora, aimed at knowledge transfer and
economic development. 
Concerning culture, GRAHN suggests, among
other initiatives, the creation of a fund for
heritage conservation and the development of
cultural enterprises across the country, as well as
launching a programme of travelling exhibitions
and other methods for disseminating culture
using new technologies.
Here, then, are a few projects that UNESCO
could support. I would also like to act as
spokesperson for artists and young Haitians by
asking UNESCO to help my country to find
partners to fund a real multi-purpose theatre
venue in Haiti.
Finally, it goes without saying that a new Haiti
must absolutely rid itself of the demons of
corruption at all levels. Let us not forget the
words of the French journalist, Edwy Plenel: “Once
exposed, financial corruption can be combated
and sanctioned. The corruption of ideas is more
insidious, more subtle and, in this respect, more
inherently dangerous”.4 
This article is an extract of Nancy Roc’s
presentation at the Forum on “Rebuilding the
social, cultural and intellectual fabric of Haiti” held
by UNESCO, on 24 March 2010. The entire text
delivered at UNESCO headquarters, as well as an
audio-visual recording, are available at:
www.unesco.org/new/fr/media-services/single-
view/news/unesco_forum_on_haiti/back/18256
1.  See the article:
www.courrierinternational.com
/article/2009/09/03/le-
spectacle-est-termine
2. Michel Girard, “La culture
rapporte gros aux
gouvernements”, La Presse,
Montréal, 24 September 2008. 
3. For further information see
the GRAHN conference
summary: www.haiti-
grahn.net/public/?s=194
4. Edwy Plenel, Secrets de
jeunesse, Stock, 2001.
Nancy Roc is a freelance journalist and
campaigner for human rights. She is a member
of the Professional Federation of Quebec
Journalists (FPJQ), and was awarded its North
South Prize in 2008. She has worked for CBC,
Radio Canada, TV5, and was the first Haitian
woman to become a CNN World Report
correspondent. She was cultural attaché for
the Haitian Delegation to UNESCO, from 1991
to 1994, and, on her return to Haiti, was
appointed Director of the Press office of the
Prime Minister, Smarck Michel, but resigned six
months later and returned to being a freelance
journalist. She currently hosts the Metropolis
broadcasts out of Montreal,
(www.metropolis.metropolehaiti.com).
The
reconstruction
of Haiti today
has to be based
upon a mixture
of science,
intelligence,
competence,
humanism and
humility, too, in
order to build a
fairer and more
equal society.
