respective communities and cultures,
often diasporic, multilingual, and
intercultural. 
Because humanism is no longer
solely the product of European
monarchies and empires whose colonial
projects grounded their ideological
imperatives in Enlightenment ideals;
because it no longer defines the nation
exclusively as a monocultural,
monolingual construct, it is “making a
comeback” as a “newer variant, one that
reprises an earlier humanism in which
what is common to humans is not
rationality but the ontological fact of
mortality, not the capacity to reason but
vulnerability to suffering.”3
human being and a certain kind of
society, namely that of western cultural
values. 
The discrepancy between the
promise of humanism and its
instrumental role in colonialism,
imperialism, and the slave trade,
generated a severe critique of humanism
and its ethically and politically
contradicting principles that reached a
climax in the 1960s. This systematic
deconstruction of humanism as an
incontestable universal1 (see pp. 6-9)
has intensified the need to reconfigure
humanism from the perspective of
those who were “only recently
recognized as humans”2 and their
Two world wars, concentration camps,
sweat shops, and the other apparatus of
global capitalism whatever their
qualifying differences, are defining
events of the twentieth century as
having a very dark history. The victims
of anticolonial and civil wars must also
be factored in. This sombre tableau is
evidence of the destructive potential
that was lurking beneath the cloaks of
Enlightenment philosophers once their
humanistic discourses were
transformed into an ideological
privilege of only a certain kind of
An ongoing series of crises and a growing number of refugees have transformed the socio-
cultural landscape of the contemporary world.  To address the challenges these changes
have wrought, a new kind of humanism is required– one capable of responding to the
needs of communities made up of different cultures that are forever multiplying.



What happened 
to hospitality?
ASIMINA KARAVANTA 

J Demonstration in support of illegal migrant
workers. France, 2009
cultures. These ideas prompted heated
debate after they appeared in his
posthumously published Humanism and
Democratic Criticism. For Said, as for
others, humanism, “as the exertion of
one’s faculties in language in order to
understand, reinterpret, and grapple
with the products of language in
history, other languages, and other
histories,” […] “is not a way of
consolidating and affirming what ‘we’
have always known and felt, but rather a
means of questioning, upsetting, and
reformulating so much of what is
presented to us as ‘commodified’,
packaged, uncontroversial, and
uncritically codified certainties.” 
The need to engage the ‘complexity
of history’ by learning how to remember
the forgetting of those constituencies
and their heretofore marginalized and
rejected cultures has become an
imperative in the present age. If the 20th
century is the “age of exilic
consciousness,” as Said avers at the end
of Culture and Imperialism,5 the 21st
century is the age of anthropos, that is,
of the human species. Anthropos means:
having a human face.
Intercultural society 
The ancient Greeks believed the human
being’s specificity in relation to other
species was that he lived in a society
ruled by law, in other words, in a city
state (polis, in Greek). The philosopher
Aristotle [4th century BCE] developed
the idea of human beings as “political
animals” dwelling in the city [bios
politicos in Greek]. Closer to our time
the German-born American
philosopher Hannah Arendt has
depicted the modern day refugee as a
bios politicos par excellence, but one
bereft of a polis.
Humanism as a necessity
In view of the growing number of
refugees and stateless people, of the
successive economic and political crises,
the rise of fundamentalisms,
xenophobia and new forms of racism,
and the subsequent revolts of masses
demanding democracy, humanism
emerges as part of the “need” – in the
words of the Palestinian-American
writer Edward Said (1935-2003) − for
“deintoxicated, sober histories that
make evident the multiplicity and
complexity of history without allowing
one to conclude that it moves forward
impersonally, according to laws
determined either by the divine or by
the powerful.”4
Said is known for having analyzed
the historical, philosophical and literary
values of Western humanism; he has
studied Western humanism’s violent
ideological impact on non-Western
Today, the political and economic
crises raging in the world are not only
rapidly increasing the numbers of
refugees but also stripping those
recognized as citizens of a long-
established right to work and a right to
education. The citizen now becomes an
a-polis citizen, one who is being
deprived of rights. In the squares of
Madrid, Cairo and Athens, to mention
only a few recent cases of mass revolt,
the stateless refugee meets the a-polis
citizen. Even if their demands are
different, they are bound by their shared
claims to a democratic ideal that
recognizes the anthropos as its first and
most fundamental principle. Despite the
differences in their political and
economic positions, both the stateless
refugee and the a-polis citizen require
that a new polis be configured. In this
new polis, where diversity of languages,
traditions and myths constitute a daily
reality, the practice of translation and
transculturation are practices of survival.
One of humanism’s current
challenges is how to develop conditions
favourable to intercultural societies. In
other words, how to create societies
1. See Judith Butler, Ernest Laclau and Savoj Žižek,
Contingency, Hegemony, Universality. London & New
York: Verso, 2000.
2. See contribution of Joan Anim-Addo, “Towards a
Post-Western Humanism Made to the Measure of
Those Recently Recognized as Human.” Edward Said
and Jacques Derrida: Reconstellating Humanism and
the Global Hybrid. Eds. Mina Karavanta and Nina
Morgan. Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Press,
2008. 250-274. 
3. Honig, Bonnie. “Antigone’s Two Laws: Greek
Tragedy and the Politics of Humanism.” New Literary
History, 41.1 (2010): 1-33.
4. Said, Edward, Humanism and Democratic
Criticism, New York: Columbia University Press,
2004.
5. Said, Edward, Culture and Imperialism, Vintage
Books, 1993.
K Exercise in a Lebanese secondary school to teach
about dialogue, tolerance and peace, in 2003.
Photo : Bassam Jamalelddine © UNESCO/Aspnet

6. Derrida, Jacques. Of Hospitality. Trans. Rachel
Bowlby. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2000.
7. Butler Judith. Precarious Life. The Powers of
Mourning and Violence. London & New York: Verso,
2004.
Asimina Karavanta holds a
doctorate in comparative literature
and teaches at the University of
Athens.  She is specialized in
postcolonial literatures and theories,
and is the co-author with Nina Mogan
of Edward Said and Jacques Derrida:
Reconstellating Humanism and the
Global Hybrid, Cambridge Scholars
Publishing, 2008.
that will allow both the refugee and the
native born citizen to establish exchanges
that are at once durable and productive.
When viewed as a common field shared
by multiple alliances and potential
affiliations, this intercultural society
presupposes a radical reconfiguration of
the institutions and social, educational
and political discourses that should be
addressing the needs of expanding
intercultural communities in the nation-
states and their supranational formations. 
Interculturality is a condition, both
ontological and political, that has
already transformed the nation-state
from within. But for human beings to be
socially and politically recognized as
singular yet also equal, it is necessary to
reform education so as to enable the
blossoming of an intercultural learning
and living that is − in the words of
French philosopher Jacques Derrida −
continuously opening the laws of
hospitality to the foreigner to whom
“hospitality is due.”6
Building this kind of humanism,
hospitable to the one who remains a
foreign anthropos, and which by
reconstituting its laws and discourses,
speaks to her/his often radically
different ontological and political
condition is the task of the humanities
today. According to the American
feminist scholar Judith Butler, this task is
“no doubt to return us to the human
where we do not expect to find it, in its
frailty and at the limits of its capacity to
make sense.”7 In other words, it is to
think of the human as the anthropos
always already at stake, always already
at risk, the face whose gaze is fixed on
us in an open and persistent invitation
for justice on a planetary scale. ■

