Are legal systems becoming
progressively more humanized with
globalization, or are they staying
much the same? 
At first sight, legal humanism seems to
be gaining in strength with the
multiplication of legal instruments and
international bodies monitoring the
observance of human rights, as well as
through the appearance of
humanitarian law and the emergence
of universally applicable criminal
justice. And in terms of the economy,
the global market should create jobs
and increase prosperity. 
So, on the surface, everything
seems to be for the better, in the best of
worlds… But globalization acts like a
kind of magnifying glass and is
revealing a series of contradictions,
raising a whole host of questions. How
can we reconcile the concept of
security with the principle of freedom?
Economic rights and protection of the
environment, etc? Globalization can
even makes the situation worse when,
for example, it separates already
globalized rights such as economic
rights, from social rights, which are the
preserve of States, themselves
weakened by constraints imposed by
financial markets. We could even
Making use of the ‘envisioning force’  of the law to forge a form of legal humanism that is
both pluralistic and open, in areas as diverse as lasting peace, global warming or the
regulation of new digital and biomedical technologies – in these times of rampant
globalization, this is the credo of the French lawyer, Mireille Delmas-Marty.
MIREILLE DELMAS-MARTY 
interviewed by Jasmina Šopova
I Work by the artist Najah Zarbout (Tunisia)
www.najahzarbout.blogspot.com

the notion of equitable development
has not been integrated, this synergy
will remain an illusion.
By modifying man’s fate, aren’t new
technologies adding to the
paradoxes?
Technologies have always been ‘new’.
What has changed is the rate at which
innovations are being made. So, for
digital technologies, French law is
unable to keep pace. By the time the
Constitutional Council has given its
ruling on a law, actual practice has
already moved on and escapes the
legislation!
Information technologies can help
strengthen democracy, as we have
seen recently in certain Arab countries,
but, at the same time, they encourage
a move towards a surveillance society. 
This ambivalence is equally marked
in the field of biotechnology, which
can be used to counteract sterility,
through artificial procreation, as well as
to select embryos using pre-
implantation genetic diagnosis, thus
moving towards eugenics, which is
considered a crime.
The widespread use of such
practices would reduce the
randomness of genetic selection – the
element of chance – and thus the
biological diversity of human beings.
And this is where the paradox arises –
in the name of individual liberty (being
in control of one’s body and one’s
offspring), our societies run the risk of
provoking a kind of artificial shaping of
the human species (see pp. 39-40).
Another paradox is that the more
we come to depend on digital
technologies, the more we lose our
autonomy; yet at the same time we are
making increasingly autonomous
robots. Robots can help the elderly and
the sick and contribute to general
wellbeing. But in both the USA and
France, programmes have been
launched to develop robots to replace
flesh and blood soldiers to carry out
‘clean wars’ and reach military
objectives without harming civilians.
This would mean entering ethical rules
into the robot’s programme, with all
the risks of error involved in
interpreting such a programme. The
most important ethical choices are
extremely subtle and difficult to
anticipate with mathematical
precision. 

wonder if there is not a contradiction
between the universalism laid down by
the 1948 Declaration on Human Rights
and the 2005 UNESCO Convention on
the Protection and Promotion of the
Diversity of Cultural Expression, which
qualifies cultural expression as the
common heritage of mankind.
How do these contradictions
translate into reality?
One of the most marked contradictions
concerns migration. Borders are open
for trade and capital but closed to
human beings. The trend is even
towards a tightening of control and
repression in many countries, to the
point of merging immigration and
crime together. But, by opening their
borders to the global market, these
same countries destabilize local
markets and encourage people to
leave. Basically, the same players are
simultaneously manufacturing
immigration and repressing it.
At the same time, the dissociation
of economic and social rights restricts
growth to economic and monetary
profit, while doing nothing to limit
increasing vulnerability and social
exclusion, whether in terms of
unemployment or poverty. As
prosperity increases, the gap between
the highest and lowest incomes
widens.
Finally, multinational companies
are often a driving force in the natural
resources sector and are behind a large
number of conflicts across the world,
notably in Africa and Latin America.
This is why war crimes, genocide,
crimes against humanity and crimes of
aggression continue, despite the
creation of an International Criminal
Court  (ICC).2 It is true that it only came
into force relatively recently (2002), but
there are also structural reasons – the
statutes of the ICC do not cover the
responsibility of legal persons,3 and so
enterprises go unpunished when they
commit a crime. This undermines the
dissuasive role of the ICC, which was
written into its statutes. Unlike ad hoc
tribunals, which judge crimes already
committed, the ICC sits permanently. 
And what of the contradictions
between economic rights and
environmental rights?
The imperative for development and
competitiveness is discouraging States
from taking action to protect the
environment. And this raises the
question of how best to protect the
planet against the negative effects of
climate change, declining biodiversity
or water pollution (see pp. 34-35).
While industrialized countries are
aligning their own commitments to
those of developing or emerging
countries, these latter countries are
invoking the notion of historical equity
– if industrialized countries were
originally responsible for the pollution
of our planet, they now need to join in
the general effort to preserve the
environment, while allowing others to
develop. The expression ‘sustainable
development’ is supposed to stimulate
synergy between economic rights and
environmental rights, but so long as

All of these examples demonstrate a
process of dehumanization. What can
the law do?
Its role is difficult because, in a world of
accelerating change, we cannot return
to a static concept that we might call
‘legal humanism’, but need to establish
more dynamic processes of
humanization. Rather than repeatedly
affirming principles, we need to try to
reverse the movement towards
dehumanization in reality. Only through
the effective upholding of human rights
can we avoid some of the aberrations of
totalitarian politics, such as market
totalitarianism, notably in the financial
market. 
What resources does the law have?
The law does not offer a response to
each of the challenges I have
mentioned. But certain current legal
processes do offer the beginnings of a
response in order to humanize
globalization. For example, to create a
multi-tiered form of citizenship – it is a
slow and difficult process, but it does
respond to problems of immigration as
well as to those of the environment. 
The idea of global citizenship is a
dream that dates back to Antiquity. But
more recently, in the Germany of the
late 18th century, Emmanuel Kant
dreamed of perpetual peace between
nations,4 just as, Kang Youwei,5 in China,
dreamed of the age of great world
peace at the end of the 19th century.
This ‘Dream of the two Ks’ could
gradually become reality. We are already
seeing that the creation of European
citizenship tends to complement
national citizenship, rather than
undermine it. And on a planetary scale
the Global Forum on Migration and
Development6 is gradually instigating a
global approach, integrating a concern
for humanization alongside economic
constraints. While we wait for the
emigration countries to ratify the United
Nations Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of Migrant Workers (signed in
1990!), we can see the beginnings of a
process of recognition of certain rights
that foreshadows global citizenship. 
It is by looking towards the future,
to global risks, that we begin to see
humanity as a community with a shared
fate. But it is only by referring back to
the history of humanity that UNESCO
can help to establish, disseminate and
construct intercultural forms of
have neither the means nor the will to
pursue them, for fear of losing the jobs
they provide. And the parent countries
are rarely competent (and do not wish to
be) to pursue deeds committed abroad
against foreign victims. 
There is a very old text (Alien Tort
Claims Act, 1789) that empowers the
federal legal system in the USA to
prosecute anyone who has violated
human rights, even abroad and against
foreigners, which has been used recently
against multinationals. But sentences are
rare. And, in fact, I am not in favour of this
principle of ‘universal competence’ if it
transforms superpowers into judges
presiding over the whole world. In the
absence of a world court, we will soon
need an international convention which,
when multinationals violate human
rights, assigns competence to the parent
country and, if this country does not
prosecute the perpetrator, would provide
the country in which the corporation is
established with the resources (in terms
of personnel and logistics) to take the
matter to court. 
Could such a case not be referred to
the International Criminal Court? 
Even if we were to extend its range of
competence to include corporate bodies,
the multinationals would only be judged
for the most serious crimes – such as
genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes, etc. On the other hand, the ICC
can prosecute an incumbent Head of
State, which is something of a political as
well as a legal revolution. Unfortunately,
without a police force, it has no means to
citizenship  – that is intercultural rather
than multicultural, since it is not enough
to juxtapose cultures, but important to
aim for the more ambitious objective of
reciprocal humanism (see pp. 14-16).
Is it utopian to imagine global
governance founded on humanist
principles? 
At present it is still utopian. The unequal
distribution of power, shared between a
few States and multinational
corporations, renders the organization of
this kind of global governance extremely
difficult. In cases where human rights are
violated we need to be able to hold all
those in power to account. For States,
this kind of process is beginning to
operate within the Council of Europe
(with the Convention for the Protection
of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms and the European Court on
Human Rights in Strasbourg), as well as
in Latin America (with the Inter-American
Convention on Human Rights not having
been ratified by Canada and the USA)
and more recently in Africa (with the
African Charter on Human and People’s
Rights). In the absence of a World Court
of Human Rights less restrictive
mechanisms are being established, but
they are inadequate and scattered.
And multinational corporations?
So-called ‘social’ responsibility is limited
to a few small islands of hard law7 in an
ocean of soft law (guiding principles,
codes of conduct, etc). In the case of
serious violations, the countries where
the multinational firms are established

Both generations are concerned
about the dangers arising from
technological innovations, which you
have cited as one of the challenges
facing modern humanism.
We obviously cannot ban all
technological innovation. That would be
absurd, given that throughout history,
mankind has become humanized by
developing technologies and globalizing
them. We globalized the wheel, then the
wheel-barrow, the compass, etc. But this
does not mean that just because
something is possible it should be
allowed (as innovations are unavoidable,
it would be pointless to resist them). It is
therefore important to adapt the legal
responses to technological innovations. 
Relations between scientists and
politicians also need to be revised –
between knowledge and power –
because there is also a gap in global
governance there. States defend national
interests, corporate and private interests,
and, apart from a few international
organizations with few means of action,
noone is responsible for defending the
general interest. Experts fill the gap. In
principle, they do not have the power to
make decisions but in practice they often
play a key role regarding scientific
innovations and their applications. While
expertise still has no global status,
various scattered bodies are beginning
to guarantee the independence and
impartiality of experts in order to avoid
conflicts of interest. 
1. La Force imaginante is the title of a book by
Mireille Delmas-Marty not yet available in English
2 .Established by the Rome Convention of 17 July
1998, the International Criminal Court, which
entered into force in July 2002, is the first
permanent court set up to judge, according to its
preamble, the perpetrators of “…unimaginable
atrocities that deeply shock the conscience of
humanity.”
3. A legal person (persona ficta) is an entity, other
than a natural (human) person, with a legal
existence and, as such, has rights and
responsibilities.
4. In a 1795 text, Zum Ewigen Frieden (Perpetual
Peace), Kant summarized Enlightenment thinking
on peace and the idea of the federation of free
nations. 
5. Kang Youwei, Datong Shu, trad. L.G Thompson,
The One World Philosophy of K’angYu-wei, London,
1958. 
6. The Global Forum on Migration and
Development (GFMD), which held its first meeting
in Brussels in 2007, is a platform for exchanging
practices and experiences in an attempt to define
the means to use international migration to best
effect for development and to reduce its negative
effects.
7. Hard law refers to a traditional form of law, while
soft law is a norm that is not legally binding.
K "Borders are open for trade and capital but
closed to human beings," says Mireille Delmas-
Marty. This idea is illustrated in the "New World
Climax" installation by Cameroonian artist,
Berthélémy Toguo. 
make an arrest. At present it appeals to
States, as well as UN and NATO forces, to
cooperate, but with very unsatisfactory
results. The link between the law and the
forces of order still needs to be organized
on a global scale.
And the links between the law and
peace?
Ordinarily, lasting peace is not
considered possible if justice has not
previously been seen to be done. But
examples like the South African Truth
and Reconciliation Commission show
that peace can be re-established without
all the criminals being brought to justice,
but just those who refuse to recognize
their guilt. And in this respect, the
developed world has probably a great
deal to learn from Africa if it is to avoid
what I call ‘legal fundamentalism’, which,
like religious fundamentalism, means
limiting and rejecting any plurality of
interpretations. The exigency of the law
has to be reconciled with the need for
peace. And the refusal to let the guilty
go unpunished must not itself become
overly rigid. 
What do you think about our
responsibility vis-à-vis future
generations, which is already written
into the French Charter on the
Environment?
It is true that references to future
generations are beginning to appear in
legal texts, especially this charter, which
has constitutional validity. In practice, a
certain amount of imagination is
needed to introduce future generations
into the law. Who can represent their
interests? What is one responsible for
and for how long? How can we
compensate those who have not yet
been born? etc. I personally am
reluctant to speak about the ‘rights’ of
future generations, or the ‘rights’ of
nature or animals, because there can be
no reciprocity. But as responsible
beings, humans do have duties towards
their future descendants, and indeed
towards non-human living beings. 
But we still need to be careful,
because, for a long time, the notion of
‘human duties’ was part of the
argument used to legalize State tyranny,
whereas the expression ‘human rights’,
when attached to States, enables limits
to be placed on the abuse of power, and
to make it possible to ‘rationalize’ the
reasons (or lack of reasons) of State. On
the other hand, when relations are not
reciprocal, duties still need to be
recognized. The right balance has to be
found, because the duties that we have
with respect to future generations must
not obliterate the rights of present
generations. 

But adapting the law to encompass
practices arising from new
technologies, or trying to anticipate
the risks to come, is not enough…
Quite true. Ambivalences also have to be
taken into account. Technologies
engender dehumanizing effects, like the
emergence of a surveillance society or
shaping of the species, which we need to
resist if we are not to lose what we have
gained from humanization, on the
grounds that globalization would wipe
out the history of all peoples. 
What would be the components of this
human community of values? 
It is hard to tell in advance. They gradually
emerge through reciprocal humanization,
as cultures intermingle. Even the notion
of human dignity, which we might think
has been defined once and for all, still
needs to be consolidated, especially
regarding the status of women.
Even so, the list of crimes against
humanity, or prohibitions like torture
and inhuman or degrading treatment,
implicitly allow the common
components of humanity to appear,
such as the uniqueness of every
individual and their equal membership
of the human community. And the risks
created by new technologies suggest
that a third component needs to be
added – indeterminism. Human beings
are not determined in advance, this is
their share of freedom and the basis for
their responsibility. 
It is by referring to these three
components that the law could play its
real role – to resist, to render
responsible and to anticipate. Resisting
dehumanization, holding those who
hold the reins of global power
responsible for their acts, thinking
ahead about future risks. This could be
the instrument for a new form of
humanism, which would not be a fixed
dogma but conceived as a dynamic
process of humanizing practices. ■
Elected member of the French
Académie des Sciences Morales et
Politiques in 2007, Mireille Delmas-
Marty (France) has, since 2002, been
chair of ‘Comparative legal studies and
the internationalization of law’ at the
Collège de France where her course
on ‘Sense and nonsense in legal
humanism’ questions the
humanization of legal systems, at a
time when it seems more than ever
necessary. She is the author of several
seminal books, some of which have
been translated into English, including
Towards a Truly Common Law
(Cambridge University Press, 2002) and
Ordering Pluralism (Hart Publishing,
2009). She is noted for her
monumental work comprising several
volumes, entitled La Force imaginante
(Seuil), the latest volume of which will
be published in 2012. 
L Portrait of Mireille Delmas-Marty by Emmanuelle Marchadour.
