The newly-created route is immediately
given its name: ciclovía ciudadana, or
citizens’ bike lane. The cost of the
installation, about US$1000, came out of
the young activists’ pockets. Though
traced without permission, the new bike
lane does not remain illegal for long. By
the very next day, Jalisco state’s
transport authority rules in favour of the
initiative. It pledges not only to improve
the bike lane and enforce respect for it
but also to recognize all such citizens’
initiatives in future, as long as they
conform to the Non-motorized Mobility
Master Plan.
What Master Plan? The story begins
in 2007, in Guadalajara, second largest
city in Mexico and capital of Jalisco state.
Citizens organized a protest against a
municipal decision to turn López Mateos
Avenue into an expressway. Paulina
drives to her classes at the university and
could have benefited, but she felt the
decision, made without consulting the
local community, was against her
interests. It happened to be the subject
she was studying at the time,
governance and transparency in public
action. As for Jesús, a philosophy
student and avid cyclist, he could only
be against an urban development
project that favoured the use of
automobiles. Today, at age 24 and 27
respectively, they have become full-
fledged experts in urban planning and
sustainable development. They speak
like professionals, negotiate with
authorities and give interviews to the
media. “We had to learn how to debate
and present our arguments to political
decision-makers,” explains Jesús. All the
more because their first protest
concerning López Mateos Avenue did
not have the results anticipated. But it
did make a lasting contribution to the
community by creating the citizens’
group Ciudad Para Todos (City for all).
Dialogue had thus been ongoing for
several years between the young
members of Ciudad Para Todos and the
Jalisco state authorities, with the former
doing their best to persuade the latter of
the importance of establishing a
network of bike lanes in the urban area
of Guadalajara, which comprises eight
municipalities including Zapopan. The
dialogue produced a Non-motorized
Mobility Master Plan, a document of
nearly a thousand pages written by a
firm of consultants with the
participation of civil society. But just as
the battle seemed to be won, a new
government came to power, one less
sensitive to the issue. Patiently, the
RUTH PÉREZ LÓPEZ
Photographer Gerardo Montes de Oca Valadez, 33,
is  a Mexican psychologist and artist and a member
of Ciudad Para Todos. 
See also: http://gmove.wordpress.com/  
Early one fine morning at
the beginning of 2011, a
group of 30 young people
invade the Avenue Santa
Margarita in Zapopan, a
town in Mexico’s Jalisco
state. They attach a line-
marking device to a tricycle
cart and off they go! By
noon, a five-kilometre
stretch of the avenue is
bordered by a white stripe,
bicycle pictographs are
painted on the tarmac and
road signs are attached to
poles.



Life in th   ©

young people started again from zero.
They approached the new government
with requests to allocate funds to
implement the Plan. To no avail. So they
decided to take matters into their own
hands and trace their own bike lane. “We
had no legal means to force them to put
the Plan into action,” recalls Jesús. “So we
decided we had to take charge.” Having
received a thumbs-up from authorities,
they created another bike lane in
Zapopan last March, using the same
method.
Conviviality and safety combined
But the battle waged by the young
members of Ciudad Para Todos does not
end there. In the last few years, they
have started numerous projects aimed
at reclaiming public space in different
city districts. Opposed to the
construction of an expressway on
Inglaterra Avenue, they launched, with
community support, the project “Linear
park” to make the central strip that
divides the avenue’s two lanes into
something beautiful. They transformed it
into a park and meet there every
Saturday to participate in all kinds of
activities, planting trees, designing
flower beds and putting on shows for
children. “Nomadic park” is another
project, which consists of occupying
space that is normally reserved for cars
by taking over one or two traffic lanes
and setting up games, playing music,
organizing races or football matches.
The object is not to block car traffic but
to slow it down and make up for the lack
of recreational space in the city. At night,
they organize open-air screenings of
films and documentaries.
In other words, these young people
do not simply protest. Brimming with
enthusiasm, they propose alternative
forms of urban development in a
dynamic and playful way. According to
Gerardo, a Ciudad Para Todos activist
who took the photos for this article,
public space must be laid out so it
encourages people to interact. It should
“be an invitation to conviviality, reinforce
community ties and preserve the
identity of neighbourhoods”. As Gerardo
also underlines, the group’s attempts to
transform the city and modes of social
interaction in public space help reduce
urban crime. On top of that, they
contribute to good citizenship and the
development of participative decision-
making. The young people’s actions thus
not only have an impact on public space
and residents’ lifestyles, they also
influence the city’s politics. ■
Ruth Pérez López, 34, is a Spanish
socio-anthropologist and member of
Bicitekas A.C., a group that champions
bicycles and sustainable transportation
in Mexico. She is the author of several
books and articles on poverty, youth,
public space and social change.
http://bicitekas.org/

Scene from the “Nomadic park” project
© Gerardo Montes 
de Oca Valadez, Guadalajara
