Afraid of
Bangladesh will be celebrating its 40th
anniversary of liberation this year.
How has life changed for women over
these decades?
Lots of things have changed in the last
40 years. To begin with, generally
women are much more conscious of
their rights now. They are much
stronger on demanding their rights and
also very vocal on the political and
social scene.
Of course it is not the same
everywhere in the country, and it could
have been much better, if not for the
interruptions in the democratic process
or the rise of fundamentalism. But in
general, the people have never ever
endorsed the orthodox type of religion.
Sultana Kamal was interviewed by
Anbarasan Ethirajan, Indian
journalist for the BBC in Bangladesh.
That is why women always benefited
from a very liberal atmosphere that
gave them the leverage to debate and
to take part in lots of things.
The prime minister of Bangladesh,
Sheikh Hasina, and the opposition
leader, Khaleda Zia, are women, which
is quite unusual for a Muslim majority
country. 
I like the way you put the question – you
think it is very unusual for a Muslim
majority country. Yes, Bangladesh is a
Muslim majority country but we do not
call ourselves a Muslim country. It is a
country where people of many religions
live, many cultures are alive in
Bangladesh and very well loved and
Women may hold top political posts in Bangladesh, yet discrimination because of gender is
institutionalized, says women’s rights activist Sultana Kamal. In this secular country where
Islam remains the state religion, the rise of fundamentalism and disruptions in the democratic
process are having a direct impact on women’s status.

respected. But we have to be very
honest about the women we see at the
top. They are not there because they are
women or because they have come
through a process which has actually
supported women’s emancipation. They
are there because they bear a legacy.
I would be very honest here - when
we vote for Sheikh Hasina, we in fact
vote for her late father Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman, the first president of the
country. When we vote for Khaleda Zia
we vote for her late husband, General
Ziaur Rahman, the former military
dictator. People still bear the images of
these two very well known leaders.  
But then again the very fact that the
two women are there, running the
nothing

country and really taking control of
situations, gives other women a sense of
confidence, a belief that women can do it. 
Which identity is dominant in
Bangladesh? Bengali identity or
Islamic identity? 
Many people wonder whether they are
Muslim or Bengali first. This struggle has
its roots in the Pakistani period. The
main challenge to the people of East
Pakistan from the Pakistani military
rulers was that you had to prove you
were a loyal Pakistani. You had to prove
you were a true Muslim. They actually
merged two identities together. 
But people in Bangladesh generally
believe that we can have multiple
identities. Yes, I am a Muslim or born to
a Muslim family, I am also a Bengali, a
woman, a human rights activist. I am
known by many different names. So
likewise, there will be Hindus and
Christians who will have multiple
identities. The people of Bangladesh
basically believe in pluralism, they
believe in Sufism. Their way of relating
to nature, to God, to whatever mysteries
of life, is dependent on their own
perception of self and nature. 
People’s love of Bangladesh is mixed
with love of the rivers, trees and nature.
It is very much related to the basic
harmony that they want to see
everywhere. It is not a confrontational
culture, but one was created artificially,
constantly supported by forces in the
society that have been able to capture
power and influence through the
economic system, educational system
and cultural inputs.
Have Islamist fundamentalist forces
changed social and cultural life within
Bangladesh?
The fundamentalists have captured the
main sectors of the society, like banking,
insurance, medical and education. And
the worst influence is on education
because they have changed all the
curricula, they have changed all kinds of
information methods in the country.
People must accept the lessons they
teach or surrender to what they think is
the correct path of religion. 
They get into power or stay in power
by using the tool of fear. Whatever
degradation in society we see in
Bangladesh was because they used
weapons. They use religion, which tell us
you cannot question anything, so it is
absolute surrender or nothing. It’s a
question of faith, nothing else.
They are using freedom of
expression, democratic opportunities, to
give religious orders. They keep saying
we want the head of this person or this
individual should be hanged because he
is a traitor, whatever this person has said
is sacrilegious. These tactics scare people.
But you also notice that not many people
actually support all these efforts. They
talk against them and make their
opinions known as soon as they know
there will be not be any repercussion or
retaliation by the fundamentalist forces.
But there are other forces in the society
which support them, give them courage
and will protect them when they are at
risk and that is what happens each time
we have an election.
There have been a number of court
rulings in recent years that no woman
should be forced to wear a burqa or veil.
But if you go outside the capital people
are still wearing traditional Islamic
dress. 
We have to remember women in rural
areas have little means of supporting
themselves economically or socially. All
these people probably belong to the
lower middle class or poor sections of
J Elections in 2008. In Bangladesh the lines of
women waiting to vote are almost always longer
than the men’s.
© Faizal Tajuddin, Kuala Lumpur
the society, so their struggle is very basic.
They are using these tactics to at least
get out of the house. As they tell us,
‘Unless I wear a burqa, my family will not
allow me to go out.’ So, only to go to
school, or work or a meeting, they have
to use the burqa. 
How does it happen? In the rural
areas the men are also denied
opportunities and bullied by the social
leaders. Unfortunately, the social leaders
are also connected to religious hierarchy
and push the men to control their
women in that way. And since for many
years this country was ruled by the
generals who had a very strong alliance
with the religious forces, all these things
were promoted, deliberately nurtured
and protected by the state. That is why
it will not be so easy for all women to
refuse from one day to the next to wear
the burqa. 
You see many more burqas now in
Bangladesh than we saw in the Pakistani
time.  This is an outcome of disruptions
in the democratic system where people
were forced to surrender to certain
powers, to be silenced so that they do
not revive the spirit of the liberation war
of 1971. There was a direct conflict
between hard line groups opposed to
our independence and the powers that
actually fought for the liberation of
Bangladesh. 
K Khaleda, 15 years old, Rohyngia refugee in
Bangladesh.
© UNHCR/S.Kritsanavarin/November 2008 )

Let’s talk about another major issue,
attacks on women that include throwing
acid on them and sexual harassment of
young girls, which lead to suicide in
many cases. Can these practices be
controlled only by enacting law?
It is a social problem and it has to be dealt
with by social forces. We should create an
atmosphere where women will get
enough confidence that they can fight it.
Also, the state, the society and the families
will have to be involved in protecting
women. We need to explain this to the
families. We have to make it clear that
women have equal rights and dignity in
the country and that has to be
maintained. There cannot be any
compromise there. There has to be a
social movement about it. But then laws
are also helpful because they give you a
kind of a power and confidence that you
can also fight these legally.
Gender bias and prejudice against
women – is it institutionalised in
Bangladesh?
I would say yes, if you look at the personal
laws that exist in the country. According
to these laws, people are governed by
their religious laws and those are very
clearly discriminating against women. But
the state is not doing anything about it.
We have been demanding since 1972 that
there should be a uniform civil code or
family code for everybody. The
government is not able to do anything
about that and we still have a very
confused view of what is positive
I got involved in public life during
the country’s liberation war. I was in
India for some months during the nine-
month war. With my sister, I set up a
hospital for the wounded freedom
fighters. Before then I was engaged in
helping people with information,
shelter, assisting them to cross the
border. 
After our liberation in 1971, I started
working with women affected by the
war, because many came to my mother
with a lot of problems. A number of
women had lost their husbands and had
difficulties with their in-laws. Many
women wanted to remarry and keep
their children. That is how I became
interested in law and became a lawyer. I
felt I could be useful to those people, to
help them realise they do have rights
and they can live with dignity.
You were threatened on many
occasions and there were attempts on
your life. Did you ever feel you were
ready to quit? 
Not really, because I learnt from my
parents that the minute you quit, that is
half the defeat. Why let others feel that
they have won and abandon the causes
you are fighting for? That is the strength
of life: you will only lose your life once.
The fundamentalists did not
approve of my marriage to a Hindu, or
to the people that I associated with, so
they set fire to my house in 1995. We
almost died. Later they threw a bomb.
But I never worried about my own well-
being or my own life. Yes, I have
responsibility towards my husband and
my daughter. They have a claim on my
life. But the way I was brought up and
the way I started understanding the
issues of life taught me that you should
never be afraid. Being afraid is not the
solution. 
Bangladeshi women’s rights activist
Sultana Kamal is Executive Director of
Ain-O-Shalish Kendra, a national legal
aid and human rights organisation.
Founded in 1986, the NGO is funded
notably by the Dutch embassy, the
German agency NETZ and Save the
Children. It also raises its own funds
through activities such as training and
publications. In 2010, ASK_a provided
free legal assistance to about 4000
women.
discrimination, what is equity, what is an
affirmative action? So there is a lot of
resistance within the society reflected in
the state policies.
There is controversy over how
Bangladesh is treating the Rohingya
ethnic refugees who fled alleged
persecution in neighbouring Myanmar.
What’s your view on this?
One impression I have is that these people
are also being used by supporters of
fundamentalist forces in Bangladesh.
That’s one thing. The other problem as I
heard from our foreign minister is
economic. The minute you recognize
them as refugees and you start dealing
with them according to the treaties, it
represents an economic burden
Bangladesh is not prepared for. 
Population is another problem.
Bangladesh is not being able to deal with
such a huge population.  
On the other hand, as a human
rights activist I would like to say yes, all
these problems are there. But there
should be a decent way of dealing with
them. I strongly feel that these people
also have certain rights and those rights
should be respected.
Tell us about yourself. What prompted
you to become a women’s rights activist? 
I was brought up among people who
were social activists, political activists.
My parents were deeply involved in the
anti-British movement. Then my mother
became the pioneer of the women’s
movement in Bangladesh. She took a
leading role in the language movement
and also in the 1950s and 1960s cultural
movements.  
K Sultana Kamal at the launch of a project to
build a school for disadvantaged and orphaned
children (2010)
© ASK, Dakha)
