On March 11, 2011, Japan experienced
an earthquake of a scale unprecedented
in the modern age, resulting in more
than 14,000 deaths and leaving 10,000
more people missing. Just 15 hours after
the quake, a 32-year-old web director,
Hironori Nakahara,  and his friends
launched a website, buji.me, to collect
and display victims’ safety status and
location information, city by city. Buji
means “safety” in Japanese.
“The first thing that came to me was
what I can do to save victims’ lives. In a
situation like this, a prompt reaction is
necessary to save as many people as
possible,” said Hironori.
He walked three hours from his
apartment in central Tokyo to his
girlfriend’s home near the trendy district
of Shibuya. He and his friends met there
to discuss what they could do to help
and take action. The idea of buji.me
emerged from their brainstorming.
“I began writing the first line of code
at 6:00 p.m., five hours after the quake,
and the site was up by 6:00 a.m. the
next morning. I spent the next five days
without much sleep, determined to
improve the website to accommodate
as much ‘buji’ information as possible.”
Had Hironori and his team ever
planned to charge a fee for this project,
he estimates the figure at around US
$50,000. But the reward they received
cannot be calculated in financial terms.
“Through this project, I have
received many warm messages,
thanking us for helping them find their
loved ones,” Hironori recalls. His attitude
to work and money has changed as a
result. “Ever since this moment, for every
project that I work on, I ask –– is this
project going to help someone? I have
realized the importance of a project is
judged by its impact on society, rather
than the size of its budget.”
Gross National Happiness
Back in 1968, in his famous 18 March
speech, American politician Robert
Kennedy had already mentioned the
flaws of money-driven benchmarks to
measure prosperity:
“Our Gross National Product, now, is
over $800 billion dollars a year, but that
Gross National Product … counts air
pollution and cigarette advertising, and
ambulances to clear our highways of
carnage.... Yet the Gross National
Product does not allow for the health of
our children, the quality of their
education or the joy of their play. It
measures neither our wit nor our
courage, neither our wisdom nor our
learning, neither our compassion nor
our devotion to our country, it measures
everything, in short, except that which
makes life worthwhile.”
Subsequently, in 1972, Bhutan's
former King, Jigme Singye Wangchuck,
came up with an alternative benchmark
index that measures a country’s
prosperity based on people’s happiness
and wellbeing –– the idea of Gross
National Happiness (GNH).
Much has been written on the
subject since and in today’s Japan, GDP
is no longer synonymous with
prosperity. In the last 10 years, and
therefore long before the earthquake, a
shift in values has occurred in Japanese
society, primarily among young people,
who tend to view Japan’s present
economic stagnation as a good sign.
I Shibuya district in Tokyo is a symbol of Japan's
consumer society.
For a number of years,
young people in Japan have
been questioning the
benefits of a society
obsessed by economic
growth. When the
earthquake and tsunami
struck the country last
March, voices were heard
calling for a radical shift in
the value system, to give
priority to social well-being
and solidarity.



An undeclared
revoluti n
HIROKI YANAGISAWA

“Our economic activity has been too
big and out of control. Plus, ever since I
was small, I have felt surrounded by an
excess of everything,” said Youki Amagai, a
23-year-old university student from Chiba.
“Though I admit money is necessary to
keep my day-to-day life going, it is not
something that fulfills my internal needs.
Instead of going out shopping, I would
rather go out and chat with older people
and share thoughts. My main interest is to
discuss what we can do to improve our
society, especially the environment, and
mobilize for action.”
Ever since the non-profit organization
law was enacted in 1998, Japan’s non-
profit sector has flourished. Many active
and socially-oriented people have begun
engaging in volunteer activities. “In terms
of materialistic needs, Japan has reached
heights that would be difficult to surpass.
But when we look at Japan’s social
system, it is incomplete and
dysfunctional. Many active youngsters
and non-profit sectors have been
focusing and working on this gap,” said
Ikuma Saga, the founder of Service Grant,
Japan’s leading pro bono worker and
non-profit organization matching agency.
With Japan’s population decreasing
continuously, there is a possibility that a
growing number of countries will
surpass the country’s GDP in the near
future. Not to worry: Japan is surely
becoming happier and stronger, thanks
to its youth. ■
Hiroki Yanagisawa, 33, is a freelance 
journalist and the founder of EDGY
JAPAN (edgyjapan.jp), a web media
featuring and connecting edgy
creative talents, products, and
locations from Japan. He is currently
based in Tokyo and Hong Kong.
