The
Philosophy of
Tout-Monde
“When I heard of the death of
Édouard Glissant a flood of
images came to me from a
long and fertile friendship.”
This is how the Guadeloupian
writer Ernest Pépin opened
his vibrant homage entitled
“An unquiet global soul!” We
publish an excerpt here, in
memory of Édouard Glissant,
Editor in Chief of the UNESCO
Courier from 1982 to 1988. 
In the frenzy of his poems, plays, novels
and theoretical works, it is sometimes
difficult to follow the thread of Édouard
Glissant’s thinking. Yet we find his ideas
alluring, like the ‘field of islands’ he
wanted to build at the tip of Tout-Monde1.
Endlessly expanding the concentric
circles of writing in a state of high alert,
he irrigated a proteiform ‘system’ of a
rare density […]
For Glissant, the idea of the Tout-
Monde did not mean kowtowing to the
humbug of globalization. On the
contrary, it meant substituting the
“trembling” of the world for the myth of
an immutable identity. It stood for its
unpredictability! Its ‘globality’! 



Tribute to 
Édouard Glissant
By investigating the world, in all its
incessant movement, Glissant taught us
to renounce the idea of a levelling and,
when all is said and done, imperialist
unity. 
He made it impossible to make
assimilations, encouraging us to
appreciate the frictions, the lightning
strikes, the variations of a
heterogeneous intellectual and cultural
effervescence. How a Frenchman can
become Chinese, a Chinese person
Caribbean, a Caribbean, Finnish,
without losing anything of their identity.
Glissant taught us about plasticity
versus rigidity. All one has to do today is
to watch or listen to some of the
younger generation to understand this
alternative way of thinking of the world
and oneself. Glissant taught us that
identity is not a rosary to be recited but
a risk that one faces up to with the
imagination of the world. Not a denial of
others but an opening to others. ‘A loss
of identity!’ cry those nostalgic for
‘purity’. ‘No’ replies Glissant, a
reorganization of the self within the
creative instability of the world! 
His legacy to us is no less than a
philosophy fit for the 21st century. All
ERNEST PÉPIN
others condemn the components of the
world to endless and pointless
confrontations. A way of inhabiting the
world, without putting up barriers! 
His more recent work consolidated
his thinking about the Tout-Monde.
Places defy national straitjackets.
Connections defy borders. Exchange
abolishes isolation, bringing in its wake
a global-identity. An identity without
cultural hierarchies, without
imperialism, which is neither exclusive
nor excluding, and which is able to
accept without begrudging unexpected
forms of creation of humanity by
humanity! 
Because that was the issue – the
humanization of a world that is
conscious of and responsible for its
diversity! 
What emerges from this work and
this examination is its indiscipline. 
What I call ‘indiscipline’ is the non-
respect for ready-made theories, rigid
writing, aesthetics by consensus. It has
not been said often enough that
Glissant’s is a philosophy of dissidence,
of rupture.
Breaking with European and
Eurocentric reasoning. Breaking with
rigid anti-colonialist reasoning. Breaking
with notions of identity as the hostage
of essentialism. Breaking with the
disguised hegemony of globalization.
Breaking with language gaps. Breaking
with the dictatorship of imperial
languages. Breaking, finally, with a
certain conception of literature! 
With each break there emerges an
adherence to other values, other ways
of knowing, other aesthetics of writing,
other functions of the writer and of the
human being. 
He did not invite us to follow the
world. He invited us to run ahead and
wait for it where it was not heading! He
invited us not to write but to produce a
work of writing. He invited us not to
look for transparency but to respect
opacity where it appears. 

1. First formulated in a novel in 1993, then in a 1997
theoretical work, “Tout-Monde” became a
fundamental concept of Glissant’s universalist
thinking. An institute devoted to it was founded in
Paris (French-only website: www.tout-monde.com).

Looking more closely, he stood,
alone, in defiance of that most deadly of
imperialisms – a mutilated and
mutilating vision of the world. That is
why he refused to be confined, while
always remaining loyal to his Martinique
and Caribbean. 
Before him stood the vast continent
of black identity, the sovereign empire
of a form of western philosophy whose
rebels he admired (like Rimbaud,
Breton, Arthaud, Segalen, etc.). While
refusing to be colonized, he chose to
build his own cathedral. And in his
honour, it was always built on the
foundations of human emancipation, as
can be seen with his creation of a
research institute in Martinique, setting
up a journal, Acoma, his constant
devotion to the Caribbean Carbet Prize
[Prix Carbet de la Caraïbe], launching the
Édouard Glissant prize, founding the
Institut du Tout-Monde, etc. 
Few have really understood him!
Many have admired him! Now the time
has come to read him! 
To me, a writer from Guadeloupe, he
has given the scope of his questions, the
fervour and generosity of his responses
and the exigency, devoid of all
chauvinism, of living in the world. 
May he be thanked for all of this! ■
