the origins of science to understand the
complexities of human behaviour and
advocated a synthesized philosophy of
science to bridge the gap between the
sciences and humanities, calling it ‘new
humanism’.
However, American literary critic
Irving Babbitt [1865 – 1933] is largely
New humanism is by no means novel
but rather a product of the evolutionary
path forged by humanity. Its prominent
emergence can be linked to George
Sarton [1884 – 1956], a renowned
Belgian-born American historian of
science, who redefined humanism
through a scientific lens. He turned to
considered a founder of the movement.
Shocked by a progressively materialistic
society in the United States, Babbitt
believed Western society had become
The Confucianists honour
benevolence, the Mohists
universal love, the Taoists
compassion, and the
Buddhists loving-kindness.
As society evolves at high
speed, the core values of
Chinese civilization can be
considered a blueprint for
the development of
universal harmony and,
thus, new humanism.
L "Love" an ink painting on rice paper pasted onto damask paper, by Zhen Ping Qiu. The artist donated this work
to UNESCO in 2006, on the 60th anniversary of the Organization. It is reproduced by kind permission of the artist.



For a world of 
Adapted from the speech, “Embrace the Era of New
Humanism”, delivered by Liu Ji at the 9th Euro-China
Forum on June 27-28 at UNESCO Headquarters.
LIU JI

conscience to normalize social
behaviour. In contrast, Western
civilization regulates social behaviour
by external powers based on scientific
reasoning, hence the rule of law.
The dichotomy between Western
and Chinese civilizations is much like
the two hemispheres of the human
brain: the logical left side and the
emotional right side. Only when these
two hemispheres are mobilized
simultaneously can their full potential
be realized. Thus, logic and affection
should be combined together to give a
full-scale representation of new
humanism.
Chinese people attach extreme
importance to “the debt of gratitude”
they owe others, repaying debt at any
price. 
They hold family affection sacred,
and try to avoid public conflict like
suing relatives. However, the challenge
is to simultaneously attain loyalty to
the nation and filial piety, which is the
respect a child should show his or her
parents.
Harmony instils “good-tempered”
individual behaviour in Chinese social
order. Families believe that if they live
in harmony, they will prosper. Business
etiquette is based on the notion that
“harmony brings wealth.” In country
governance, harmony is the ultimate
pursuit, whereas Western society
believes in the “survival of the fittest”
and ‘a law of the jungle’ where “the
weak are the prey of the strong.” 
Harmony also encompasses the
ideal relationship of oneness between
man and nature, whereby man is an
inherent part of nature and thus
should act according to natural laws. 
The Confucianists pay tribute to
benevolence, the Mohists to universal
love, the Taoists to compassion, and
the Buddhists to loving-kindness. Love
seems to be an omnipresent topic for
all schools of thought in China.
Confucian roots of humanism
The great Chinese philosopher
Confucius (551 BC – 479 BC) described
benevolence as “loving people”; “You
yourself desire rank and standing, then
help others get rank and standing,” he
said. “You want to turn your own
merits to account, then help others to
turn theirs to account.”
For Confucianists, the ultimate
goal is to develop a world of universal
harmony where people love all
equally. As a result, those who are less
fortunate in society, the aged, orphans
and people with disabilities would be
supported by the community. Material
resources would be used for goodwill,
and social wealth owned and shared
by all. 
According to notable Confucianist,
Meng Ke, known as Mencius [372  -
289 BC), man possesses four initial
senses just as he possesses four limbs.
“The sense of compassion is the
beginning of benevolence; the sense
of shame the beginning of
righteousness; the sense of modesty
the beginning of decorum; the sense
of right and wrong the beginning of
wisdom.” These four senses
differentiate man from animal, and
only with their integrated
development can man really be
considered human. 
The doctrines of Confucius and
Mencius have been the cornerstone of
traditional Chinese culture for
thousands of years and are still
dominant today. According to some
thinkers, it is under the influence of
Confucianism that the Enlightenment
philosophers of the 18th century
constructed the monumental
Declaration of the Rights of Man and
of the Citizen in 1789.
Thus, the substance of new
humanism can only be enriched with
the ingredients of Chinese culture. As
human society evolves at high speed,
the construction of a harmonious
world, which has long been the
universal ideal of mankind, calls for the
rise of new humanism. ■
Liu Ji is honorary president of CEIBS
(China Europe International Business
School) and former vice president of
the Chinese Academy of Social
Sciences. 
victim to emotional and individualistic
instincts and thus campaigned for self-
restraint. An opponent of Romanticism,
his key principles conflicted with the
intellectual trend of his time and were
deemed controversial, yet sparked a
great philosophical debate, which
shaped conservative intellectual
thinking post-World War II. 
Babbitt’s humanistic philosophy
entered China’s political and literary
consciousness through numerous
Chinese scholars who studied with him
at Harvard University. Inspired by
Buddhist and Confucian values, Babbitt
appealed culturally to his students who
later adapted new humanism locally as
a counter-reaction to the May 4th
movement, which called for a rejection
of Chinese traditional values, Marxism
and radical beliefs. 
Virtue, affection and harmony
The practices of Chinese ancient
culture can be considered a blueprint
for the development of new
humanism. Specifically, The Book of
Changes (also known as the I Ching),
one of China’s oldest classic texts, said
to have been written by Emperor Fu
Hsi (2953-2838 B.C.). It focuses on the
balance of opposites and the
inevitability of change. According to
this text, “By observing the ornaments
of the sky, we may understand the
principle of the transformation of the
four seasons; by observing ethical
human relations and teaching the
common people, we may transform
social traditions for the better.” Thus,
we should observe human nature to
learn how to improve it, and in doing
so, follow the fundamental values of
Chinese culture such as virtue,
affection, harmony and love.
Throughout China’s long
civilization, virtue, both personal and
social, has guided people in their day-
to-day living, relying on one’s inner
The dichotomy between Western and Chinese civilizations is much
like the two hemispheres of the human brain: the logical left side and
the emotional right side. Only when these two hemispheres are
mobilized simultaneously can their full potential be realized. Thus,
logic and affection should be combined together to give a full-scale
representation of new humanism.
