Do you see cinema as a space for
dialogue between cultures?
Yes, cinema has made the world a
smaller place. It’s part of the idea of the
global village – I might even say ‘global
emotion’. Whatever the director’s
nationality, and no matter where a film
was made, it is a means of sharing a
vision. And the viewer has the feeling of
being transported to a universe where
the sounds and accents are unfamiliar. I
feel that one of the virtues of cinema is
to bring people together. 
You talk about the global village. But
at the same time there is a growing
trend for societies to turn in on
themselves, and for misunderstanding
to increase.
This kind of ambivalence is there, there’s
no doubt about it. In the past 30 years I
have seen the major distributors
gradually turn away from African films.
The distributors seem to be afraid of
difference. In 1987, my film Yeelen was
shown in all the mainstream cinemas
in France and Navarre and won over
audiences from every social class! I
don’t think that would be possible
today. But I don’t think the audiences
have changed. It’s the decision-makers
who won’t take risks any more. Neither
the risk of showing differences, nor
the risk of discovery. And even less so,
financial risks. And paradoxically, in
the South, we only go to see Western
films. 
Can this imbalance be put right?
There has to be real political
determination to overcome this
tendency to turn inwards. Poor ticket
sales have an impact on both the
quality and the quantity of our work.
And, as African film-makers, we have
to draw the right conclusions, such as
turning towards our own natural
audiences, in our own countries. But
no matter how many people go to see
our films, the public can’t pay enough
to finance them. This is why, in Mali,
film-making is poorer today than 20 or
30 years ago. 
Why do you always film in Bambara,
Mali’s national language? 
I have often been criticized for not
filming in French, the only official
language in Mali. I have chosen to film
in Bambara, because it’s the main
language spoken by 80% of Malians. It
is understood by over 20 million
people in West Africa. It is the language
used for business. This carries a lot of
weight and is not a mere detail. 
At the same time, having directed
dozens of actors, I can assure you that
you don’t get the same results when
the dialogue is in French as when it is
in Bambara, which is the language of
intimacy for us… We have often been
told that no-one will understand our
films outside of Africa, and that puts
us at a disadvantage, but I think that’s
not true. Language is there to serve
the story of the film. How could I have
made Yeelen is in French, when it is
about the esoteric knowledge passed
down from one generation to another!

Postscript
Touki Bouki’s
new life
Filming in their own languages, helping African film-
makers, promoting their work, supporting contemporary
film and television, safeguarding Africa’s cinema heritage
— these are some of the objectives that the Malian director,
Souleymane Cissé, has set for himself. Here is a man of
spirit, with ambitions for his continent. 
Interview with  SOULEYMANE CISSÉ by Gabrielle Lorne, journalist from Martinique
J Souleymane Cissé at UNESCO, at the launch of the
International Year for the Rapprochement of Cultures,
on 18 February 2010. © UNESCO/A.Wheeler


You go even further and say that
African States should renounce
colonial languages in favour of
national languages, which are not
officially recognized.
National languages bring citizens
together, they are indispensable for
nation building. In Mali, we have 13
national languages, but just one
official language – French. I’ve said it
before and I’ll say it again – national
language won’t kill off English, French
or Spanish. But I do believe that if
Mali does not look after its own
languages, the civilization that they
have been carrying for thousands of
years will finally disappear. 
And if I may make one political
observation, since the State has
chosen to become independent, it
has to go the whole way, and not be
afraid of upsetting the
Administration. There is still time to
take up the task again of codifying a
written form of each of our languages
and to respect the ideograms left to
us by our ancestors.
You are also very committed to
promoting African cinema. 
Yes, since Waati, my film about
Apartheid in South Africa, came out
in 1995, I realised that financial
support for African films started to
disappear, especially in Europe.
African States do not have the money
to invest in our films, but they can at
least help film-makers and the film
industry by creating an appropriate
legal framework. 
It was time that we, as
professional film-makers, took a stand
together to protect our work. So, in
1997, I set up the West African Union
of Film-makers and Producers
(UCECAO). Our aim is to promote
African cinema and to encourage
those in Africa who have the means –
the private sector, for example – to
support it. 
You also set up film festivals? 
In 1998, UCECAO launched the
Bamako Film Festival (RCB). Then we
started the Nyamina International
Festival (FINA), in the countryside,
because culture cannot just be
reserved for those living in towns.
FINA is not just for young directors,
but also for video makers and even
photographers.
You are now involved with Africa’s
film heritage. 
That is true. In 2007, in Cannes, I had
the pleasure of participating in the
launch of Martin Scorsese’s World
Cinema Foundation (WCF). A few
months later, UCECAO invited Scorsese
to Mali and he decided to invest in
preserving our film heritage. At the
following Cannes Festival, I was able to
show the restored version of Touki
Bouki, by Djibril Diop Manbety, from
1973. It had been 20 years since
anyone had seen the film, as it had
become very damaged by time and
poor storage conditions. 
Touki Bouki was the first film from
sub-Saharan Africa to have been
granted a new life. I was delighted with
this choice, because, for me, it is a
prophetic film, about emigration, since
it tells the story of a young couple
fascinated by the West.  
Souleymane Cissé is the first African
film-maker to have received an award
at Cannes (in 1987) for his feature film,
Yeelen. He is one of the great names
of world cinema. Now, at 70, with
some 30 films to his name, he is a
member of the High-level Panel on
peace and dialogue among cultures
set up by UNESCO in 2010. The Panel’s
first meeting, on 18 February 2010,
marked the launch of the
International Year of the
Rapprochement of Cultures, which
comes to an end in March 2011.
Postscript
L Poster for the film, Touki Bouki by Djibril Diop
Mambéty in 1973. The film was recently restored by
WCF.
© WWW.trigon-film.org
