You lived in the United States between
2000 and 2008. You returned to Egypt
at the age of 22 and you were
immediately engaged in the socio-
political arena. Had you already been
an activist in the U.S.?
Yes, I was much more involved during
my stay in the USA in local issues such
as immigration laws. I joined a group
that was fighting for illegal immigration
rights because police officers were
enforcing immigration laws which were
discriminatory. I was also involved in
many activities that supported the
Palestinian cause. So whenever there is
a demonstration or an anti-war call, I
would be definitely a part of it. 
But to be honest, I was far from
being involved in what was happening
in Egypt at the time due to my rare visits
to Egypt. I also was not aware politically
enough because I lived abroad from the
age of 14 to 22. I was not aware of the
Egyptian opposition movement since it
was completely ignored in the
mainstream media. So, unless you were
living here and being part of it, you
would really know nothing about it.
Even people living nearby did not know
about it. Only close activists, journalists
and the political community knew what
was going on.
GIGI IBRAHIM was interviewed by Khaled Abu Hijleh
You can follow Gigi Ibrahim on Twitter at:
http://twitter.com/Gsquare86

Mobilerevolution
At the height of the revolution in Egypt in January 2011, a young woman mobilized crowds
on Facebook and Twitter, kept the internet community around the world informed,
organized street rallies and waved banners, her mobile telephone always within reach.
Gigi Ibrahim, 24, is a perfect example of the high tech generation Arab revolutionary. Not
all of Gigi’s compatriots who marched in the streets had computers at home – far from it –
yet social media played a crucial role in organizing this historical event that is changing
the world. And not just the Arab world. 
The 24 year old young Egyptian activist Gigi Ibrahim
during the Egyptian revolution in 2011.
© Al Jazeera English

I got in touch with the Egyptian
activists the first time when I got back
from the USA in 2008. Then, I took a
course on social mobilization under the
authoritarian regime at the American
University of Cairo (AUC). I started
learning politics and participated in the
protests in 2009 - 2010 where I met
many activists. This is how I got involved
in the framework of the revolutionary
socialists.
social youth group or a political group
to a popular movement with political
and economic demands. 
We started with 100 people, then we
became thousands and thousands of
people chanting against the regime.
People kept going in increasing
numbers to Al-Tahreer Square in the city
center.
When we arrived in the square,
people were chanting the same chants
the Tunisian people chanted, “People
demand the removal of the regime”. We
did not necessarily plan for this though
we hoped it would happen.
Sometimes, we made fun of what
we were doing, saying, “ooh, we are
planning for a revolution on Facebook!”
Nobody believed it would turn out the
way it did. But thankfully it did, because
people were fed up and so oppressed
they would do anything to get their
freedom.
What was the role of the social media
in these events in Egypt, and what was
the role of the young citizen
journalists? 
Before the revolution, social networks
played a really important role. They
were not the means of the revolution
but they were definitely the tools that
were used to communicate. 
Under an authoritarian regime,
every piece of news, every newspaper
and every mass media is of crucial
importance. Citizen journalism becomes
activism. Sorting out the truth,
providing information about the
subjects that the State tries to censor,
was very important.
It was our only means, before the
revolution, to expose and explain what
was happening on the ground. Many
people never heard of protests or strikes
that were going on. It was only through
the social networks, that stories reached
the independent media and the
international press like Aljazeera. These
tools were important to expose the
torture cases at the police stations.
Many of them were videoed by cell
phones. All these abuses were disclosed
by the means of Flickr, Facebook and
Twitter because they were uncensored
until the government began shutting
them down. 
It should be said that the people
who went into the streets and carried
out the revolution did not have access
to tools such as Facebook and Twitter or
even a computer. They went into the
streets and risked their lives to get good
healthcare, good education and a better
future for their children.
Although the people who carried
out the revolution had nothing to do
with these tools, social networks were
essential in mobilizing people and in
getting the attention of the
independent and international media.
As a young Arab woman, don’t you
think Egyptian women’s participation
in the 25 January uprising started
breaking down the wall of Arab
traditions? 
I disagree. Women have always been a
part of any mobilization or revolution
whether in the Middle East or anywhere
else in the world. 
This time in Egypt, women were
leading strikes, chants and protests and
getting arrested and being tortured. In
my experience in the Egyptian uprising,
there was no difference between men
and women within the mobilization
process or protests.
However, women struggle also for
their rights as women. But then they are
faced with a counterattack by people
saying this is not the right moment. But
when is the right moment then?* This is
not so unique to the Middle East: in the
United States, United Kingdom and
everywhere else, women struggle for
their rights too.
Do you think young people in other
countries may be inspired by the Arab
revolutions as a model of a peaceful
popular struggle to bring about
changes in their  own homelands?
We have already seen such youth
movements not only within the region
but also in other countries. There were
big marches in London on 26 March this
year. There were banners and slogans
similar to the Egyptian ones.
The Arab world has always been
stereotyped and defined as a backward
and violent region and a home of
terrorism. This time the Arab world was
held up as an example of democracy
that comes from the bottom up and
brings about real change through the
power of the people exerted in a
peaceful way. ■
* See our article on this topic ,“Now or Never”, about
the Italian demonstrations of 13 February 2011 in
the April-June 2011 issue of the Courier, “Women
conquering new expanses of freedom”.
Could you describe your role in the 25
January protests?
I had joined a handful of political
movement groups who called for mass
demonstrations on 25 January. We
coordinated the timing, place and the
content of the demands. 
Our major demand at that point was
the arrest of Habib Al-Adly, the Minister
of the Interior. We were calling for this
because of the death of Khaled Said on
6 June 2010 (Note, the young man was
beaten to death by police.) Other
demands were to dissolve the
Parliament, elected at the end of 2010,
and to establish a minimum wage.
Street protests were our way of bringing
those demands to the popular front. 
After the Tunisian uprising, Arab
people started to believe in their ability
to bring changes through street
protests and through a peaceful
revolution. This was also our intention:
to promote our movement from just a
L The mobile phone has become an essential tool in
the struggle for democracy in Egypt
