Chemistry:
how it all started Michal Meyer
In the very early 1700s the Elector of Saxony and
King of Poland, August the Strong, locked an
alchemist in his laboratory and told him to make
gold. The young alchemist, Johann Friedrich
Böttger, failed in his royally-appointed task.
Instead he helped create a substance far more
beautiful and useful than gold – porcelain.  And
in a happy fairy-tale ending, the king was
pleased. For this was no longer a feudal world,
but a growing commodity-driven society, and
until that time porcelain had to be imported at
great expense from a technologically more
advanced China to feed a growing European
appetite for beauty and luxury. Wealth flowed to
the king, for the new Meissen porcelain soon
proved popular and a grateful king made Böttger,
originally a pharmacist’s apprentice, a baron.     
One more story, this one beginning in the
gutter: Around 1669 Hamburg resident Hennig
Brandt believed he might have discovered the
fabled Philosopher’s Stone, which could turn
lead into gold and open up the secrets of the
cosmos. An ex-soldier with experience in making
glass, Brandt began with old urine and boiled it
up and heated the residue until glowing vapours
– white phosphorous reacting with oxygen –
filled his glassware. Within a few years, Brandt
sold his secret and soon phosphorous was well
enough known that the secretive alchemist Isaac
Newton could begin a recipe for it with the
instructions, “Take of urine one barrel.” (Though I
do wonder where one could easily procure a
barrel of urine).  From urine to art – another
transformation –the moment of discovery was
L James Gillray’s satirical
etching shows a public lecture
at London’s Royal Institution
in the early 19th century. 
© Courtesy of the Chemical
Heritage Foundation
Collections
Photograph by Gregory Tobias
Chemistry began
the moment our
ancestors became
human.

immortalized in the eighteenth century in a
painting by Joseph Wright of Derby, and
recorded again as a mezzotint by William Pether
in 1775 as “The Discovery of Phosphorous.”  In
this work, the alchemist kneels in awe before the
glowing wonder in his alchemical laboratory.
Many years later, in 1943, in another
transformation, Brandt’s city burned when
thousands of pounds of phosphorous fell in the
form of bombs.
Homo chemicus 
We turn clay into porcelain, urine into
phosphorous, phosphorous into bombs, flour
into bread, grapes into wine, minerals into
pigments. There is almost no limit to the ways in
which we transmute matter. Biological
anthropologist, Richard Wrangham (United
Kingdom), believes that it is cooking that made
us human -- by making more energy available to
feed our growing brains. If that is so, chemistry
L An alchemist presents
liquid gold to amazed
courtiers. The alchemist’s
dream of turning lead into
gold remained alive until the
18th century.
© Courtesy of the Chemical
Heritage Foundation
Collections
Photograph by Gregory Tobias
© DR

began the moment our ancestors became
human. Homo chemicus – to be human is to
transform matter. And the material
transformations we – being human – make will
reflect the best and the worst of us.   
We cannot go back to that first chemical
moment when raw food turned into cooked
food, but we can go back to prehistoric humans
and their desire for beauty. Philippe Walter, of the
Centre de Recherche et de Restauration des Musées
de France, studies chemical processes and
substances in the ancient and prehistoric world.
While he says these prehistoric peoples did not
have an understanding of how or why processes
worked, they still produced practical chemists
who could mix natural ingredients to produce
pigments – whether to adorn themselves or the
walls of caves.  Four thousand years ago the
ancient Egyptians, says Walter, synthesized new
chemicals to treat eye diseases. Their lead-based
cosmetics – think Cleopatra and her kohl eyeliner
[see box] – stimulated the wearer’s immune
system in an early health and beauty regimen. 
Al-kimia
In Hellenistic Egypt, the refining of metals was
known as chemia. With the rise of early Islamic
civilization, Muslim scholars translated many
Greek texts, including ones on chemia, which
they called al-kimia. How matter changed, how
to purify substances, how to colour metals, all
came under al-kimia. A side benefit of this new
fascination was the refinement in practical
knowledge such as distillation and


crystallization, still important skills in twenty-
first century labs. On a more theoretical level,
Muslim scholars built on earlier Greek
understandings of matter – the four elements
of air, earth, fire, and water – and its behaviour,
including the transmutation of one metal into
another. Al-kimia arrived in Europe in the
twelfth century, along with some knowledge of
al-iksir (elixir, which became known as the
Philosopher’s Stone). 
Unsurprisingly, alchemy ran into the same
kinds of problems that still occasionally plague
medicine – hucksters hawking miracle cures
and charlatans, etc. Even less surprising, this
caught the attention of both rulers and the
legal profession, if for different reasons. Later, in
England, it became illegal to succeed in turning
lead into gold, for this was considered as
debasing the currency. 
Some claimed that, since human
manipulation of matter was essentially inferior
to what nature does, naturally (an early version
of the still running natural versus artificial
debate – check back next century for an
update) human attempts at transmuting metals
were doomed. Despite such criticisms, there
were those who believed that human art was
powerful enough to transform the world. But
these were discussions for the elites at

L “An Alchemist at Work”,
Mattheus van Helmont,
Flemish, 17th century. Seated
in a disorderly workshop, the
alchemist appears as a figure
of folly.
© Courtesy of the Chemical
Heritage Foundation
Collections
Photograph by Will Brown
I Robert Boyle, by Johann
Kerseboom, 1689 (United
Kingdom).
© Courtesy of the Chemical
Heritage Foundation
Collections
Photograph by Will Brown
Every time you boil
an egg you
change the very
nature of matter,
in this case the
shape of the egg
proteins.

universities. And matter in all its manifestations
was on the move through all social strata. We
don’t know who first created kohl or a clay pot,
who first tanned leather or brewed beer, and
we don’t know the names of the medieval
artisans who mixed sand, wood ash, and metal
salts to create the great stained-glass windows
of medieval cathedrals. But these people all
transformed matter and our lives.  
By the early modern period, the status of
painters, goldsmiths and artisans with an
intimate association with matter, was on the
rise. Science, long associated with
understanding rather than doing, and with
elites rather than common folk, was now
turning to the practical makers of things for
knowledge and power.  Such an approach,
where matter was central, found its expression
in Sir Francis Bacon’s 1620 manifesto Novum
Organum, and the origins of modern science.
Doing – poking, prodding, changing the
material world – would now be allied with
understanding, and our world of art, science,
and the everyday, would never be the same.
Robert Boyle (Ireland), of Boyle’s Law fame –
which connects the pressure, volume and
temperature of a gas – epitomized this new
experimental approach.  An inheritor of the
alchemical tradition, (almost by definition,
alchemists were experimentalists and careful
measurers) and an aspiring alchemist, Boyle is
considered a founding figure of modern
chemistry, in the 17th century 
. 
A colourful science
Many chemists believe chemistry became a
proper science in the eighteenth century. The
investigation of air by Antoine Lavoisier (France),
the discovery of oxygen by Joseph Priestly
(England), and the new scientific language of
chemistry, all played a part. But chemistry, or at
least its results, could not be confined to the
world of scientific research. The craze for hot-air
and hydrogen ballooning in the late eighteenth
century and the ballooning-related fashions in
clothes, playing cards, and ceramics were only
part of the story. Priestley’s invention of
carbonated water, as the poor man’s alternative
to the sickly rich drinking the waters at expensive
spas, continued chemistry’s association with
health that had begun with alchemy. On the
other hand, the Victorian craze for green-
coloured (courtesy of arsenic) wallpaper helped
create what might be the worlds’ first recognized
(and reported as such) environmental hazard. 
In 1856, an eighteen-year old Englishman,
William Henry Perkin, tried to turn coal tar into
the malaria-preventative quinine (a material
transformation worthy of an alchemist). Like
Böttger, he failed, and in his failure he launched a
colour revolution and inadvertently helped
found the German dye and pharmaceutical
industry. Perkin had created mauve, the first of
the synthetic aniline dyes that brightened the
world from the 1860s. Queen Victoria, before her
black phase, wore the new chemistry and started
a fashion for that shade of purple.  A rapidly
industrializing Germany adopted the colourful
anilines and made them its own, incidentally
creating the first strong link between chemistry
as a modern science and industry. A German
physician, Gerhard Domagk, working for I.G.
Farben, found, in 1932, that a modified red dye
L The French hot-air
balloon, Le Tricolore, taking
off, on 6 June 1874, in Paris.
© Library of Congress
(Tissandier collection)

killed bacteria and so the first true antibiotics,
the sulfa drugs, came into use. The link between
fashion and medicine remained, for the skin of
patients sometimes turned red, an indication
that the drug was working. 
The very roots of the German chemical
industry lie in fashion, but the same industry that
began with the world’s brightest colours went on
to produce Zyklon B – the poison gas of choice in
the Nazis’ extermination plans. World War II is
known as the physicists’ war for the development
of the atomic bomb, but every war has been a
chemist’s war from the time humans learned to
smelt metal. Just before World War II, Lise
Meitner (an Austrian-born, later Swedish
physicist) showed that the alchemists were right
-- we can transmute one metal into another, in
this case via nuclear reaction, and, by the end of
the war, uranium 238 was transmuted into
plutonium.
The hallmarks of the old alchemists, the
grandiose goals and sometimes secrecy,
continue today in our chemical quests – the
creation of synthetic life, a cure for aging. At the
same time, every time you boil an egg you
change the very nature of matter, in this case
the shape of the proteins in the egg.
The rise of modern science and its growing
prestige, especially the professionalization of
science in the nineteenth century, pushed out
the non experts. We’ve lost that sense of
chemistry as the art and science of the
everyday, and of ordinary people. But we can
get it back. Recently, as part of the Chemical
Heritage Foundation’s museum programme, I
asked a glass artist to give a talk and
presentation of her work. She was a little
nervous at first, saying she had never studied
chemistry and didn’t know anything about it.
But after speaking about what she did -- her
tools, the furnace, how she pulled molten glass
about, the metals she added, what happened to
the glass at different temperatures – she turned
to me in surprise and said, “I am a practical
chemist.”
Near the beginning of this essay I wrote:  “To
be human is to transform matter.”  I’d like to end
it with a variation. To transform matter is to be

Michal Meyer was born in Israel. She has
worked as a meteorologist in New Zealand
and Fiji and as a journalist in Israel. She has a
Ph.D. in the history of science and has worked
for the Chemical Heritage Foundation since
September 2009.  She is the editor in chief of
Chemical Heritage magazine
(http://www.chemheritage.org/discover/mag
azine/index.aspx)index.aspx
© DR
