energy into any task where she could be
useful. In her diary, she wrote: “(...) we
recruited entire villages for the
revolution, the motherland. Women
made uniforms, others dyed the cloth
(...). We dragged children around with
us, asking them to gather scraps of iron
and tin so that we could melt them and
make rifles, cannons, nails, horseshoes,
etc. In a word, I was a real war
commissioner, and I didn’t rest for a
moment until our revolution was won.”
In 1824, after the decisive battle of
Junín for the independence of Peru, she
was made captain of the hussars, then
colonel of the army of Gran Colombia.
The tireless Ecuadorian died in exile, in
Paita (Peru) in 1856. 
Yet her story does not end there, as,
in 2007, many years later, she was
posthumously promoted to General of
the Republic of Ecuador by President
Rafael Correa. ■
By this time, this very beautiful woman
and admirer of Bolívar had already
taken up arms on many occasions. As
early as 1809-1810, while she was still a
teenager, she had supported the
uprisings in Quito, her birthplace, where
the struggle for independence started.
In 1821, she helped to liberate Lima
(Peru), where she married and received
the decoration “The Order of the Sun”
from General San Martín. Back home in
Quito, she joined the battle of
Pichincha, which established the
independence of Gran Colombia. It was
when the Liberator marched
triumphantly into the city on 24 May
1822 that our two heroes met. They
remained inseparable until Bolívar died
in 1830.
From 1823 she became his secretary
and official archivist. A wise advisor and
skilled politician, she worked behind the
scenes for the great man, acting as both
confidant and mediator for the military
chiefs, from Sucre to San Martín. 
But, above all, she performed
miracles on the battlefield, recruiting,
arming, providing supplies, organising,
caring for the wounded, putting her



Manuela
Sáenz
liberator 
of the
Liberator
The bicentennial commemoration of Latin American declarations
of independence (2009-2011) has given official historians a
chance to glorify the heroes of this era. Manuela Sáenz Aispuru
from Ecuador is one of them. Born at the end of the 18th century
and nicknamed “liberator of the Liberator” by her lover Simón
Bolívar, she survives in memoirs only for saving his life in an
assassination attempt in Bogotá, the Colombian capital, in 1828.
She did much more.
Lautaro Pozo is Ambassador and
Permanent Delegate of Ecuador to
