Since 15 May, Spain has been living in a climate of demonstrations and protests that have
taken most of the world by surprise. This “Movimiento 15-M” – or more simply, these
“indignados” – have left us wondering what exactly they might want? Isn’t Spain an
advanced, democratic country, not to be compared with Tunisia and Egypt? Yet on a closer
look, many Spaniards feel no one is listening to them and the established system is simply
denying them a future. And it is for this future that young Spaniards have decided to fight.

ALFREDO TRUJILLO FERNANDEZ

The Spring  
The protests broke out spontaneously.
“No one saw it coming”, admitted
Cristóbal Ramírez, a 27-year-old Madrid-
based journalist, born in Cadiz. It all
started on 15 May, with a
demonstration in Madrid organized by
the Democracia Real Ya (True Democracy
Now) and Jovenes Sin Futuro (Youth with
No Future) movements. Then they
started to put up tents, which spread
across the country. As the days went by,
the demonstrators, who called
themselves the indignados (indignant
ones), saw their essentially young
numbers swelled by pensioners,
workers of every sort, cleaners,
granddads with their grandsons and
families with toddlers. 
This indignation is the direct result
of the serious economic crisis hitting the
country. Unemployment in Spain has
reached record rates for Western
Europe: 20.6 % in the first quarter of
2011. And among the young, the figure
has skyrocketed to 44.3 %. In 2007,
before the crisis, just 8.3 % of the
population were unemployed.
Nevertheless, even in the years of
economic prosperity, there were some
J "Spring", collage and gouache, 2011, by
Slobodan K. Bijeljac, French painter born in Bosnia-
Herzegovina. Created specially for this issue of the
UNESCO Courier. Visit his website:
http://bijeljac2.free.fr/

through the forest of tents and
tarpaulins that have sprung up in the
city centre. “I am shocked to see how
hard it has become for citizens to get
themselves heard,” she says. “In my view,
all they want is to be listened to and
taken seriously...”  
Vitor Peiteado, a 32-year-old
political commentator from La Corogne,
sees the anger behind the wave of
protests. “There is a reaction of
indignation at the crisis, which the
workers did not cause, and yet, oddly,
they are the ones paying the price.”
Vitor, like hundreds of other young
Spaniards over the past few years, had
to go abroad to look for opportunities
and a salary he cannot get in his own
country. He is delighted at what is
happening: “For the first time, people
are saying that the problem is to be
found in the system itself, and that this
democracy, where we only get to vote
every four years, like the existing
economic system, just isn’t working.” 
Miriam also emphasises that the
main objective is to obtain “better
citizen participation, which could be
encouraged using the new
technologies.” Everywhere, in all the
meetings and debates, people are also
repeatedly saying that the politicians
have to represent the interests of the
people, not those of the banks and large
corporations. The movement is also
determined to keep the parties and
traditional unions away from their
protests, reinforcing their popular,
grassroots and, in a sense, “anti-system”
character.
The future will tell
But there has been no clear formulation
of the movement’s objectives, or of how
to go about meeting them. For Miriam,
this is because the process is still in its
early stages. “The question of ‘how’ is
still being worked out. We are in the
phase of realising that things have to
change, the reflection phase. By
discussing and debating the issues, we
will end by knowing what we have to
do,” she explains. Cristóbal thinks that it
is time to change a system, which at
present “is doing nothing about the
problems facing the poor.” Vitor admits
that many of the ideas are still “very
general” and that the demands remain
“vague”. But, he adds, “it is the first time,
for almost half a century, that a
movement this big questions the
legitimacy of the liberal partisan
democracy.” Olivia thinks that the
absence of detail and clarity is a
reflection of the crisis itself and the scale
of the problems facing Spain. And, she
concludes, “There are so many problems
to solve that we don’t know where to
start.”
In a sense, it is possible this lack of
definition is the outline of a movement
that will, in the near future, have clear
objectives and a well-traced roadmap
for reaching them. And, who knows, will
perhaps serve as an example for
‘indignados’ to follow in other European
countries also suffering from the crisis,
and sharing the same democratic spirit
as Spain. But if the energy of the first
weeks starts to fade, the Movimiento 15-
M could be lost in the sands of time, and
just become another anecdote in this
spring of hope and indignation, 2011. ■
It is the first time, for almost half
a century, that a movement this
big questions the legitimacy of
the liberal democracy founded
on particracy
warning signs that the machine was
grinding to a halt. In August 2005, in a
letter to the editor published in the
daily newspaper, El País, a young woman
from Barcelona coined the word
“mileurista”. It refers to the young
Spanish graduate, bristling with
diplomas, multilingual, usually with a
Master’s degree, and yet barely earning
1000 euros a month – the stigma of a
whole generation, better qualified than
ever before, that feels exploited in the
workplace and neglected by the system. 
In politics, before and after the 2008
economic crisis, the past few years have
been peppered with cases of corruption
involving members of the majority
parties. But almost none of them were
brought to trial. It is hardly surprising,
therefore, that in a survey carried out in
2009 by the Centre for Sociological
Research (CIS), six out of ten Spaniards
felt that corruption was somewhat or
very common among both Federal and
local politicians. And, in the same poll,
the majority of the sample admitted
they had little confidence in the political
classes or the system. 
Economic crisis, political corruption,
loss of confidence in the democratic
system – these are the main ingredients
of the cocktail that led tens of
thousands of indignados to take to the
streets across the country. 
At last, my country is waking up
On 15 May, Miriam Blanco, a 30-year-old
woman from Madrid, heard of the first
protest at the Puerta del Sol. “At last”,
she thought, “my country is waking up!”
With several degrees and speaking four
languages or more, Miriam has since the
very beginning been a member of the
committees that were formed. “They
told us: ‘you are the future’. But we are
neither the future nor the present,” she
says heatedly, trying to explain the
reasons for their indignation. “We are no
longer afraid. We have nothing left to
lose, as we have no future, and neither
do our children,” she adds. 
“People have had enough,” says
Cristóbal, who over these past weeks
has joined many of the indignado
demonstrations in the Puerta del Sol.
“We want a change in the system, so
that power comes from the citizens - a
true, more participative democracy,” he
says. And, every day, Olivia Waters, a 27-
year-old English woman who has been
living in the capital for five years, walks
L Spanish journalist Alfredo Trujillo Fernandez, 31,
works on the editorial team of UNESCO’s website
