Humanism did not arise in Europe in the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. This
period, known as the Renaissance, was
one period in the long history of
humanism, which began two thousand
years earlier in Athens and continued
during the Golden Age of Islam, from
the ninth to the twelfth century.
Renaissance thinkers referred
specifically to the legacy of ancient
Greece, which they revived and used as
a model. But they preferred to overlook
the Muslim period of humanism.
Those who make the same mistake
today do so because they believe that
the humanist approach is, by definition,
anti-religious. Yet for most of its history,
humanism developed within the
framework of religious thought, not
outside of it. Neither Leonardo da Vinci,1
Michelangelo,2 Shakespeare,3 Racine,4
Descartes5 or Newton6 ever questioned
the power of God.
Humanism objected to a certain
image of God: the image of an
inaccessible God, indifferent to human
suffering, who had determined the
personal fate of each and every person
for eternity. This was the image fostered
by the dogma of predestination,
according to which men and women
have no free will over their lives. Not
only does earthly existence have no
importance in and of itself—it is only a
Contrary to popular belief, humanism developed within the framework of religious
thought – first Greek, then Muslim and finally Christian. In the Golden Age of Islam from
the 9th to the 12th centuries, first the Mu’tazili, then the Falasifa explored the limits of
humanist thought and the concept of free will in a world dominated by a unique and all-
powerful God, anticipating the 18th century encyclopedic approach to knowledge.
MAHMOUD HUSSEIN
J The Abu Dulaf mosque in Samarra (Iraq) is one of
the most important works of architecture in the
Islamic world. It dates from the 9th century. The
Samarra archaeological city is inscribed on the
UNESCO List of World Heritage 

The Muslim phase 
of humanism

path to heaven—but mankind has no
control over its destiny. There is no free
will. On the one hand was the absolute
power of God; on the other, the
absolute powerlessness of mankind.
“We were … chosen from the
beginning,” wrote Saint Paul, “under the
predetermined plan of the one who
guides all things as he decides by his
own will.”7 One millennium later,
traditionalists and classical theologians
of Islam adhered to this same belief;
seven centuries after them, Luther8 and
Calvin9 would use the same words. It
was against this concept of the all-
powerful divine that humanism fought.
But how was ancient Greece used
as a model for those who, first in the
Muslim world and later in the Christian
world, would wage the fight against the
dogma of predestination?
A perimeter of intellectual freedom
In a context entirely different from that
of monotheism, Greece had already
confronted this concept of
predestination. In their view, the
cosmos was a finite space, with a
harmonious and hierarchical structure,
in which everyone’s place was defined
once and for all. Mankind was not at
the top of the cosmic structure; gods
stood above them. But cosmic laws
applied to everyone, gods and men
alike.
The latter therefore endured a dual
burden: first, the abstract, impersonal,
immutable one of the cosmos; and the
more personal, familial and capricious
constraints of the gods. 
Man was powerless against the
order of the cosmos; he could only try
to navigate his own way. Yet with the
gods, who had superhuman powers
but were riddled with human frailties,
mankind learned how to negotiate,
trick and cheat. Ultimately, man
discovered that nature operated
according to specific laws of the
cosmos, which lay beyond the power of
the gods, and that men could therefore
work to learn and master these laws. 
This was the context in which
humanism developed. The Greeks
invented a new, specifically human
environment: the polis. Within it, the
individual was no longer subject to the
traditional power of tribes and clans;
citizens were equal before the law and
personal merit could prevail over the
privilege of birth.
In the democratic city, debate was
widespread and speech ruled supreme.
To convince others, one had to reason.
The principles of abstract logic, valid
everywhere and for all, encouraged the
exploration of philosophy and
mathematics. And with it, man
developed powerful leverage over
aspects of his life. 
Humanism in ancient Greece
therefore formed a perimeter of
intellectual freedom and efficiency,
through which human life—without
challenging the overall global order or
the power of the gods—became a
valued enterprise in and of itself.
Qudra or the power of man
The monotheistic God changed the
situation. He not only took over the
partial power wielded by the Greek
gods, but also the universal cosmic force
that applied to these gods as well as to
mankind. The abstract, impersonal
power of the cosmos was replaced by
the omnipotent, personal, creative and
active power of God. He became both
the One and the All-Powerful.
From this point on, the believer had
to explore his own freedom within the
orbit of this Almighty. There was no
question of pitting the derisory power
of man against the infinite power of
God. More humbly, it involved
cultivating the intellectual, moral and
aesthetic realms where human initiative
could be expressed, as distinguished
from the will of God, but without
challenging His supreme authority.
This realm was conceptualized for
the first time in the ninth century in
Baghdad, under the Abbasid Caliphate.
Islam was by then an immense,
powerful and prosperous empire that
encompassed a multitude of different
people, religions and cultures. Its
capital, Baghdad, had a population of
one million, while Rome had 30,000
people, and Lutetia, barely 10,000. In
trade, trust was the rule, so that a bill of
exchange signed in India was honored
as far away as Morocco. 
The great caliphs decided to
embrace this power and diversity,
opting to encourage intelligent
thought. They supported efforts to
1. Leonardo da Vinci,  [1452-1519], Italian painter,
polymath and humanist philosopher.
2. Michelangelo [1475-1564], Italian Renaissance
painter, sculptor and architect.
3. William Shakespeare [1564-1616], one of the
greatest English playwrights and poets. 
4. Jean Racine [1639-1699], classical French
playwright. 
5. René Descartes [1596-1650], French
mathematician and rationalist philosopher.
6. Isaac Newton [1643- 1727], English physicist,
philosopher and theologian.
7. Epistle to the Ephesians
8. Martin Luther [1483-1546], German priest and
father of protestantism.
9 Jean Calvin, [1509-1564], French theologian and
scholar, one of the main architects of the Protestant
reformation.
K Miniature by Al-Mubashshir (Syria) from the early 13th century. It shows Socrates (left) with two of his students

revive ancient knowledge—including
secular knowledge drawn from the
legacy of Greek science and philosophy,
which would soon be translated into
Arabic.
This context fostered the
development of a theological movement
among religious scholars of the period;
these were the Mu‘tazili, who interpreted
the Quran from a viewpoint of rational
thought and inquiry. 
According to this interpretation, men
are distinct creatures, separate from the
rest of Creation, due to the fact that God
gave them an effective power (qudra),
once and for all time, by which they can
choose to act freely. 
This freedom allows them to act as
‘God’s lieutenants on earth.’ During their
time on earth, men are not supposed to
be self-effacing. Quite the opposite, they
are encouraged to be assertive, to display
a sense of initiative and to develop their
talents, all with the purpose of
constructing a fair and united Muslim
community.
Within this community, worldly
existence is celebrated for its own value. It
is recommended, insofar as is possible, to
improve the living conditions of others.
Beauty is prized, the body is honoured
and pleasures are encouraged, within the
limits of decency and moderation. 
“Allah is He Who made the earth a
resting place for you and the sky for a
canopy, and fashioned you and perfected
your shapes, and hath provided you with
good things ...” (Quran, Sura 40, verse 64).
On Judgment Day, each person will
have to personally answer for the good
and the evil they have done during their
lifetimes. As God has full knowledge of
their actions, He will reward or punish
according to a rational and moral justice. 
The Mu‘tazili approach was
supported and even imposed on the
religious elite by some of the greatest
Abbasid caliphs. But it was so bold and so
disturbing that, in the end, most of the
traditionalists, jurists and ultimately the
theologians themselves would unite
against it. 
All of them rejected the very idea of a
rational interpretation of the acts of God,
insofar as this placed limits on His all-
mighty power. Divine will is a mystery; it
is not subject to any limitation. Hence,
while having preordained the destiny of
each person, God reserves the privilege
of reward and punishment, according to
His unfathomable will.
This vision, which fully expressed the
dogma of predestination, may seem
unjust and immoral. What is required of
the believer is not understanding, but
rather acceptance and submission to God
through an unconditional embrace of
total faith. One is then allowed to place
one’s hopes in divine mercy and
compassion. 
Precursors of the Encylopedists
By the late ninth century, the
confrontation between the Mu‘tazili and
the traditionalists was decided in favor of
the latter. They not only eliminated the
concept of free will, but worked to flush
out and combat all the rationalist
movements that appeared in Muslim
thought.
They specifically targeted the Falasifa
(philosophers), who were pursuing an
encyclopedic approach that embraced
every sphere of knowledge. They
redeemed the secular disciplines
developed by the Greeks—medicine,
mathematics, astronomy and
pharmacology—and studied nature as it
was, and not as a reflection of the all-
powerful divine. 
Al-Kindi,10 al-Farabi,11 Ibn Sina
(Avicenna)12 and Ibn Rushd (Averroes)13
developed a new philosophy, through
which Aristotelian reason was reconciled
with monotheism; it would inspire
Maimonides14 and later, Thomas
Aquinas.15 There is no ontological
difference between the truths reached by
philosophers and those revealed by God
to His prophets. The prophets perceived
through instant illumination that which
philosophers discovered, step by step, via
rational thought.
The Falasifa therefore explored the
limits of humanist thought within a
monotheistic framework. Adopting the
argument of reason over that of
authority, even when the latter is based
on divine revelation, they heralded the
encyclopedic approach of the eighteenth
century.
The Falasifa had a longer, although
less specific influence than that of the
Mu‘tazili. They were in the forefront for a
time in Baghdad, Cordoba and Cairo, but
were also eclipsed for long periods. Their
doctrinal authority ended with the death
of Averroes in the late twelfth century.
In the meantime, the Islamic empire
split into two, then three rival empires.
Islam suffered major military defeats
against the Crusaders around Jerusalem
and the Catholic kings in al-Andalus.
Soon after, it was devastated by the
Mongol invasions. 
In various capitals, Islam was
undermined by doubt, and power shifted
from the hands of cultivated princes to
those of military leaders. The confident
quest for knowledge was replaced by a
cautious defense of well-established
beliefs. The concept of free will was lost in
the Islamic world. And with it, the
significance of a humanist approach. 
Yet the works of the Muslim Falasifa,
translated from Arabic into Latin, would
be taught in every European university.
For several centuries, they nourished the
great debates that would lead to
Renaissance thought. ■
10. Al-Kindi (Alkindus) [801- 873], one of the
greatest Arab philosophers, translator of many
Greek manuscripts. 
11. Al-Farabi (Alpharabius) [872- 873], Arab
polymath and commentator on the works of Plato. 
12. Ibn Sina (Avicenna) [980-1037], Persian
philosopher, writer, doctor, astronomer and
alchemist.
13. Ibn Rushd (Averroes) [1126-1198], Andalusian
philosopher, lawyer, mathematician, doctor and
Islamic theologian .
14. Moïse Maimonides [1138-1204], doctor,
philosopher and Andalusian rabbi.
15. Thomas Aquinus  [1224-1274], one of the
principal masters of scholastic philosophy and
Catholic theology.
Mahmoud Hussein (Egypt) is a
political scientist and Islamic scholar. His
latest book (in French), “Penser le Coran,”
is published by Gallimard, Paris: 2011.
L Avicenna as "Princeps Abinsceni" with crown and
sceptre, woodcut, Venice 1520
