International Women’s Day this year is focusing on the right
to a decent job.  Here, The UNESCO Courier looks at the case of
Algeria, which has seen a rapid expansion in job
opportunities for women since the 1990s. Today, Algerian
women are entering the job market armed with diplomas,
but they still come up against either job insecurity or the
glass ceiling. 



Conquering
the job market
FERIEL LALAMI 
“My name is Hassiba. I am 38. Married,
three children. I work as a technician in
a private sector company. To get to
work, I have to take two buses and start
out at least an hour and a half before
the office opens to be sure to get there
on time. I don’t want to risk getting
fired. It’s so difficult to find a job these
days. I can’t afford to lose my salary –
our family couldn’t survive on my
husband’s salary alone. The cost of living
is very high and you have to add what I
pay to the neighbour who feeds the
L Algerian women training to teach English, a
project funded by the United States State Department.
© Ruth Petzold, Alexandria
children when they come out of school.
My mother finds it hard to accept that I
have a job – in her day, women only
worked at home. But, despite the
difficulties, I am happy to have a
professional activity, to have colleagues
and to contribute to the family budget.” 
The story of this young Algerian,
from the Aïn Naaja district of Algiers,
which I documented in November 2010
as part of a research study on changes
in the family, shows that despite the
obstacles women in Algeria have
entered the jobs market sustainably. A
trend that has been confirmed slowly
but surely over the past three decades,
even if the results are not yet conclusive.
Indeed, with women making up only
15% of the entire workforce (a figure
that remained steady between 2007
and 2010), Algeria lags far behind its
neighbours Tunisia and Morocco, which
have 25% and 28% respectively. 
Even so, the proportion of working
women increased by 10% between the
1980s and the early 2000’s. Why? Above
all because of the sad episode in history
that some call the “Algerian tragedy of the
1990s” or “the second Algerian war.”
And also, the ending of State price
controls, public sector cuts and rising
unemployment that followed pushed
families into poverty. Women started
looking for work, with their families not
daring to throw the weight of tradition on
their shoulders – after all, they had to eat. 
Added to all of this is something
specifically Algerian – women who work
are better qualified than men. Over half
of working women, in 2003, had at least
secondary school qualifications,
compared to only one fifth of men. This
is essentially due to a deliberate policy
of democratising education developed
by the State, which from the end of the
colonial era saw a rapid progression in
the numbers of girls in school. So much
so that in 2010 girls made up 57% of the
student population. 
Another observation is that, up until
the 1990s, the majority of active women
were aged between 19 and 24 and were
unmarried. In most cases, marriage or
the birth of a child would put an end to
their career. Today, there has been a
considerable increase in the number of
married women working, with almost as
many (18%) as single women (20%).
But these statistics do not tell the
whole story. There is also a wider range of
jobs. Although their preferred sectors are
still teaching, health and administration,
women are now entering other areas,
such as journalism. At present 60% of
media workers are women. 
The glass ceiling and lack of job
security
These jobs also allow women to gain a
certain degree of visibility in the public
arena. Even so, there is no escaping the
fact that, as they move up in their
careers, including those that are
‘feminized’, women come up against the
glass ceiling – senior positions of
responsibility are reserved for men.
While women make up half of school
staff, in 2005 they held only 9.15% of
head teacher posts and 5.6 % of basic
education inspector positions.

On top of this, unemployment hits
women harder than men – 19.1 %
compared to 8.1 % respectively in 2010,
according to the National Office of
Statistics. Even worse, among those who
are most qualified, three times as many
women as men are unemployed – 33.6
% versus 11.1 %. Faced with a saturated
jobs market, women often choose to set
up their own small business in sales,
service or cottage industries. According
to the National Chamber of Commerce
(CNRC), between 2006 and 2007, the
number of small traders rose by 4%.
While these are often micro-enterprises,
the proportion of women employers
rose from 3 to 6 %. And a new finding is
that an increasing number of women
are becoming estate agents, travel
agents or agricultural managers. 
The regular increase in the number
of women in paid employment has also
led to the creation of informal jobs, such
as child minder or domestic cook. This
informal economy, generally reserved
for women, is also spreading to small
businesses and the private sector.
Creating yet more unstable, badly-paid
jobs without social security benefits. 
Women’s access to the job market is
also affecting family dynamics, bringing
women greater independence. The
model of “man as breadwinner” is slowly
becoming obsolete. But where in the
past women had to tackle a patriarchal
culture to gain paid employment, they
now face another obstacle, just as hard
to overcome – the extreme scarcity of
jobs. ■
An Algerian political scientist, Feriel
Lalami teaches at the University of
Poitiers (France). 
