Gender Equality has long been of central
importance to UNESCO. Since 
its inception over 60 years ago, UNESCO
has been at the forefront of efforts to
support women’s and girls’ rights,
women’s empowerment, and gender
equality through all its domains. Starting
with the promotion of girls and women’s
right to education, UNESCO’s work to
promote this goal has extended to all
levels and aspects of education, the
natural and social sciences, the
information and communication sector
and the complex and rich field of culture. 
In a landmark decision taken by
UNESCO’s Member States in 2007,
UNESCO made its greatest commitment
to the achievement of these goals by
designating “Gender Equality” as one of
its two global priorities for the 2008-2013
period.  
What is Priority “Gender Equality”?
For UNESCO, gender equality is a
fundamental right, a commonly shared
value and a necessary condition for the
achievement of all internationally agreed
development objectives. Gender equality
is not only central to efforts to fight
extreme poverty but it is also related to
the global quest to limit the spread of HIV
and AIDS, mitigate the effects of climate
change and achieve sustainable
development and peace.
UNESCO’s approach and selected
initiatives
In its Member States and within the
Organization, UNESCO pursues gender
equality through a dual approach: on the
one hand, it is engaged in actions that
specifically seek to redress inequalities by
targeting women and girls or men and
boys alone and, on the other, it ensures
that all of its programmes support gender
equality goals through gender
mainstreaming. 
In the area of Education, UNESCO
strives to redress gender inequalities at all
levels in terms of access, retention,
completion, and quality. This includes the
promotion of women’s increased
participation in science, technology,
innovation and research, as well as in
areas such as the ethics of science, culture
and human rights.
UNESCO’s Communication and
Information programme aims to address
the stereotyping of women and
inequalities in women’s access to and
participation in all communication
information systems. It raises awareness
among professionals regarding the need
to include a gender equality perspective
in media content. 



Gender
Equality
UNESCO’s
Global Priority

The Organization also works
towards the promotion of women’s
empowerment and gender equality
through the integration of these
considerations into its normative work
in areas such as the ethics of science,
culture and human rights.
Within UNESCO, the Division for
Gender Equality in the office of the
Director-General is the key contact for
ensuring the implementation of
UNESCO’s Global Priority Gender
Equality. The Division aims to raise
awareness of gender equality issues
within the Secretariat - and among its
Member States. 
UNESCO formulated a Priority Gender
Equality Action Plan (GEAP) for 2008-2013
as a road map to translate its commitment
to gender equality into practice, to ensure
that UNESCO programmes and initiatives
contribute fully and actively to the pursuit
of women’s rights, women’s
empowerment and gender equality.
The road to gender equality may yet
be long and there is still a lot of hard work
to be done, but on this 8 March 2011, we
wish to celebrate women and the
creation of the historic new UN Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment
of Women – UN Women. 
Saniye Gülser Corat,  Director of Division
for Gender Equality
1. Irina Bokova on the occasion of her installation as 
Director-General of UNESCO, 23 October 2009
“Gender Equality concerns and affects us all. (…) Ensuring women’s full and equal participation in
development and in peace-building processes is a sure way of building stable and open societies,
and ensuring sustainable development.” 1
