Chemistry, and our ability to master its secrets, is
fundamental to our understanding of the
material world. The chemical elements are at the
core of all known matter. They are involved in all
living processes. We owe most of the 20th
century’s advances in medicines, the food
industry and technology to modern chemistry.
This science has revolutionized the manufacture
of drugs, clothing and cosmetics, as well as the
distribution of energy and the manufacture of
technological equipment. Chemistry is
everywhere in our daily lives – and if we are to
make the best use of it, we have to understand it
better.
At the initiative of Ethiopia, the United
Nations declared 2011 International Year of
Chemistry (IYC 2011) and entrusted its
organization to UNESCO. It provides a special
opportunity to improve our knowledge of this
science and the contribution it has made to our
ability to understand, control and transform
matter. It is also an opportunity for UNESCO to
further its efforts in its areas of competence,
namely, development and diplomacy through
science, strengthening the research capability of
Member States and quality science education for
all – where chemistry is an essential component.
IYC 2011 also celebrates the centenary of the
award of the Nobel Prize in chemistry to Marie
Curie, providing us with the perfect framework
for paying homage to and promoting the
contribution of women to science. And this
homage starts the same day the International
Year is launched, with a visit to UNESCO
headquarters by Hélène Langevin-Joliot, scientist
and grand-daughter of Marie Curie and daughter
of Irène Joliot-Curie, to speak at a conference on
the role of women in chemistry.
The latest World Science Report, published by
UNESCO in November 2010, demonstrated the
importance of science and science diplomacy for
peace and development. Basic research on the
building blocks of matter requires colossal
resources and the participation of a great many
researchers, from all over the world. This calls, in
particular, for a strengthening of international
cooperation and a more even global distribution
of research resources. Through initiatives such as
the SESAME research centre in the Middle East,
where chemistry is a major component, UNESCO
is endeavouring to help meet this need.
The future science of chemistry must, above
all, be responsible. It will undoubtedly be playing
a major role in the development of alternative



Editorial
Irina Bokova
I Irina Bokova, Director
General of UNESCO with the
Canadian astrophysicist
Hubert Reeves, at a
conference on the loss of
biodiversity, at the
Organization’s headquarters
on 3 November 2009.
© UNESCO/M. Ravassard
It provides a
special
opportunity to
improve our
knowledge of
this science and
the contribution
it has made to
our ability to
understand,
control and
transform
matter.

energy sources and in feeding an ever-growing
global population. Discoveries made in chemistry
can help to meet the challenges raised by global
climate change – without chemistry there would
be no solar panels, no biofuels… These
discoveries can also help provide access to non-
polluted water supplies. The International Year of
Chemistry follows on from the International Year
of Biodiversity (2010) and takes on its full
meaning within the context of the United Nations
Decade of Education for Sustainable
Development  (2005-2014).
The chemistry of the future must also be a
science that is more evenly shared. The quasi-
absence of a “general culture of chemistry”,
compared to the culture of astronomy or
mathematics, prevents the general public from
having access to aspects of the world that affect
our daily lives and hampers our collective ability
to have a say in this. This lack of understanding
also fuels the public’s stereotyped view of
chemistry as diabolical, toxic and dirty. We need to
improve and to accelerate the teaching of
chemistry, training the chemists of tomorrow and
giving everyone, everywhere, the possibility of
understanding chemical processes and measuring
their impact. Interest in this fascinating science is a
resource for development. It is up to us to make
good use of it.
In order to attract young people to take an
interest in chemistry, UNESCO and the
International Union of Pure and Applied
Chemistry – its main partner in organising the
IYC, celebrating its centenary this year – are
launching a global experiment, the first of its
kind, to help schoolchildren gain a better
understanding of our most precious resource –
water. All across the world, schools will be testing
water for its quality and purity and will then be
able to share their results.
It is a priority for the years to come that we all
improve our understanding of science in general
and of chemistry in particular. As the United
Nations agency specializing in education, science
and culture, UNESCO will do its utmost to see that
this is achieved. It is our collective duty to make
decisions that are fully informed if we are to act
responsibly on the world around us. 
