To what do you attribute Saudi
Arabia’s progress in moving toward
the Millennium Development Goal of
achieving universal primary
education?
It has always been planned with
forethought and according to the
country’s need. We had no problem
asking for help from UNESCO or the
United Nations to do some of the
planning for us. It is our will to do so. As
for the goal of having perfect education,
I don’t think anybody will reach it.
Hopefully we (Saudi Arabia) have
reached the point that we are aiming
for, supplying efficient service to the
nation and meeting the needs of the
country. 
What are the prospects for giving
Saudi education a more international
character?
Exchanges have always existed. If you
go back in our educational history since
the time of King Abdelaziz (founder of
the kingdom in the 19th century),
students have been sent to acquire
specialties all over the world. It is an
international system. I think the future is
being made at the moment in a lot of
areas in education. It is a very exciting
time for us in Saudi Arabia. We have
great examples like the King Abdullah
University. We are concentrating on
research now. And this is an area that
has been given a boost by the creation
of the King Abdullah University, which is
based on research. 
Interview by LINDA TINIO, UNESCO Bureau of Strategic Planning
What is the role of Saudi Arabia in the
dialogue of cultures?
The King is the one who launched the
whole idea of dialogue, both in Saudi
Arabia and outside. He has been behind
it all the way from the very beginning.
Saudi Arabia has always believed in
dialogue. It is very important. You
cannot do anything without dialogue. I
think that all the projects that the king
has put forward, all include dialogue –
in religion, culture, personal life, even
the way he is doing politics… Hopefully
everybody will follow his example.
How do you see the future of UNESCO-
Saudi Arabia relations?
Collaboration with UNESCO is not only
with the Arab Thought Foundation.
There are many areas in which we are
cooperating. I hope the university I’m
responsible for (Effat College) will also
collaborate with UNESCO. Not enough
people have either contributed to it, or
used the wonderful work that UNESCO
has done for the world. The dialogue
area is where UNESCO is well-known.
The whole policy of Saudi Arabia is
dialogue. I’m sure it will get better and
better.
What is the value of the younger
generation today in Saudi society?
They are our wealth. It is not the oil.
Youth is the wealth of our country. So
they are the people we need to
concentrate on. I was born in a
generation that was doing everything
for the country. The generation before
me who built the country did
everything for the country. Hopefully
the generations after us, we need to
give them that opportunity to serve
their country. ■
This column, launched by the Foresight
Section of UNESCO's Bureau of
Strategic Planning, tackles topics of
interest to the general public and the
Member States of the Organisation. It
features intellectual opinions likely to
foster UNESCO's reflection,
programming and action in its various
areas of competence.
Her Royal Highness Princess
Loulwah Al-Faisal is dedicated to
promoting women’s education and
social and family welfare. Since 1994,
Princess Loulwah has been the
President and Chair of the Board of
Trustees of Al-Maharat Cognitive and
Skill Development Center, Jeddah.
Since 1999, she has served as Vice
Chair and General Supervisor of the
Board of Trustees of Dar-Al-Hanan
School and Effat College, both
institutions reserved for women. 
Postscript
They are our wealth. It is not the
oil. Youth is the wealth of our
country. So they are the people
we need to concentrate on.

Foresight
Youth is our
country’s wealth
Seeing the present as  “a very exciting time”  for Saudi Arabia,
Princess Loulwah evokes youth – and not oil – as the country’s
wealth.
