Bioethics did not arise through some
accident or sudden illumination on the
part of a clairvoyant thinker. Its
emergence can be explained by
historical, scientific and social factors.
Over the past fifty years, spectacular
progress in medical science has opened
up unforeseen possibilities for scientific
research, and has brought irrefutable
improvement in public health, while
raising unanticipated challenges in
terms of ethics and morals.
Each new breakthrough in biology and
the health sciences, such as organ
grafts, which have saved countless lives,
or assisted reproduction techniques,
which can solve fertility issues for
couples, has faced social and
psychological obstacles, and raised
religious and ethical questions. The
same is true of research on human
embryos—a particularly sensitive
subject as it touches on the origins of
life, and involves moral concepts as well
as scientific and even financial
interests—from pre-implantation
genetic diagnosis (a technique that
permits babies to be born who are free
of incurable inherited diseases), to the
use of stem cells (which can transform
into a wide range of specialized cells
and are crucial for the future of
regenerative medicine).
Faced with the major dilemmas raised by progress in bioscience and biotechnology,
bioethics needs to provide new ethical solutions, aimed at reconciling greater acceptance
of the potential of these disciplines with a vigilance and responsibility that is crucial for
protecting the values of humanism in all circumstances.



Bioethics: 
unimagined challenges
1. American scientist Van R. Potter was the first to
use the term “bioethics”, in an article published in
1970.
SALVADOR BERGEL
Bioethics has to find the right
balance between medical
progress and respect for
human life.©

These are not isolated or limited
discoveries. We are witnessing a genuine
biological revolution. In just a few
decades, scientists have managed to
decode the chemical basis of heredity,
the genetic code shared by all living
beings, and to lay the foundations for
molecular biology and a new genetics.
This has led to genetic engineering, in
other words, a ‘technoscience’ that can
manipulate and exchange genes
between members of a single species
and between different species. Mankind
can now manipulate and modify genetic
information for practical purposes, and
can even act on his own biological
nature as a species—which is certainly
the most disturbing aspect from a
bioethical point of view.
This progress in the life sciences has
repercussions for the very concept of
what it means to be human, and raises
ethical, social and legal issues that go
beyond science. This is where bioethics is
called upon, to arrive at a fair and
insightful balance between medical
progress and respect for human life.
Bioethics must recognize the
benefits of these scientific
breakthroughs, while remaining
constantly alert to the risks and dangers
they may present. While this progress
can lead to promising new ways of
eradicating diseases that have long
affected human health, it also raises
justifiable fears about undesirable effects
and possible misuse, such as genetic
manipulation and its various
applications, the return of eugenic
doctrines—which now have a range of
sophisticated tools at their disposal—or
experiments on vulnerable populations.
The appearance of bioethics
coincided with the widespread outcry
raised by the horrors of the Second
World War, a reaction that culminated in
the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights in 1948. The overriding goal of
bioethics is based on this humanist
principle, of affirming the primacy of the
human being and defending the dignity
and freedom inherent in the mere fact of
belonging to the species, in the face of
the shifting and constantly evolving
context of the life sciences.
Dialogue, consensus and tolerance 
Bioethics stands as a bulwark of
humanism both in terms of its goals as
well as its multidisciplinary nature. To
provide appropriate solutions to new
scientific challenges, for which
traditional ethics has proven to be
insufficient, we have had to find ways
for the natural sciences and social
sciences to communicate with one
another, each with its own
methodologies and specific viewpoints,
and to bring together different fields of
knowledge, ranging from philosophy,
medicine and biology, to law, sociology
and anthropology.
Bioethics also integrates the values of
humanism in its methods and practices,
aiming to achieve consensus through a
constructive and intelligent dialogue
with all the various sectors concerned.
Society is no longer content to look on
passively when faced with choices that
threaten its survival and compromise its
moral responsibility. Bioethics therefore
has to impose an attitude of openness
and tolerance, geared toward the
adoption of standards and laws that
respect the realities of multicultural
communities, with their own unique
traditions and beliefs. 
But these humanist values do more
than just encourage theoretical thought;
they also apply to specific issues in
everyday life, such as problems raised by
hospital practices. The field has also
expanded to include the social
dimensions of health, such as poverty,
food and access to safe drinking water, to
health services and drugs. 
Bioethics has sparked a global
militancy that is helping to turn the
ideals of world justice into reality,
through the initiatives of national ethics
committees and hospital committees, as
well as through teaching and research. It
should also be noted that, almost
without exception, medical schools now
include bioethics in their teaching
programmes, demonstrating its essential
role in medical practice. 
Hospital bioethics committees have
been set up in virtually every health
service, and there is not a single country
without a national bioethics committee
or an equivalent group of ad hoc experts.
Codes, standards and protocols
addressing bioethics have been adopted
everywhere, and UNESCO considered it
essential to create a forum for reflection
and debate—the International Bioethics
Committee—and to strengthen the
discipline by drawing up guidelines
based on human rights, as set out in
three Universal Declarations.
This alliance between bioethics and
human rights heralds a new form of
humanism that is in tune with the
expectations and challenges of our
times. This renewed humanism
recognizes the biological and ethical
components of human nature, whose
dignity must be safeguarded here and
now, while assuming the responsibility
and the duty to protect life in all its
manifestations, for generations to come
and ultimately, to guarantee the survival
of the species. ■
2. An example, among others is the aberrant
pseudo-scientific experiments to which prisoners in
the Nazi concentration camps were subjected. 
Salvador Bergel (Argentina) holds a
law degree, is a specialist in bioethics,
and occupies the UNESCO Chair in
Bioethics at the Universidad de Buenos
Aires.
L Flasks of liquid nitrogen containing paillettes
used in assisted reproductive technology. 
