In the 1960s social movements all around
the globe started to modify their
agendas. Instead of looking for universal
solutions — which were increasingly
identified with totalitarian ambitions —
they began to pay more attention to the
recognition of cultural, ethnic and sexual
differences and identities. The student
protests were perhaps the most
emblematic sign of a profound
reassessment of the role that culture
plays in human life that was also being
played out in theoretical debates and in
politics throughout the 1960s and 70s.
Simultaneously, intellectual and
academic debates began to be interested
more in culture and initiated what today
is widely recognized as a ‘cultural turn’ in
the social sciences and humanities.1
This ‘cultural turn’ strengthened and
propagated a number of values,
including cultural pluralism and an
awareness that, in our modern world, it
is important to reflect upon the
coexistence of distinct cultures and
forms of life, while at the same time
resisting the temptation to reduce this
plurality once more to an artificial,
abstract unity dominated by one set of
interests. And this provides us with a
glimpse of the critical potential of the
‘cultural turn’. In contrast to the idea that
all human cultures are being propelled
towards the same evolutional end-goal
(telos) — an idea that was promulgated
by the influential ‘modernization
theories’ in the first decades after World
War II — the cultural turn rescues the
idea that processes of civilization and
culture – and their results – do not
follow a logical, predetermined path.
But, however important the cultural
turn may have been, I also believe that
culturalism has given rise to a climate of
cultural relativism that is not only
dangerous but also incorrect. The errors
in these positions, though evident, have
been ignored for a long time. One of the

Instead of looking for the universal in biological nature, a
recent humanist turn in the social sciences and humanities
is focusing on what all human beings around the globe
share, without neglecting their differences. And instead of
thinking that a universal humanist culture has to be
invented or imposed on other cultures, the new approach
believes that universal ideas and values are already present
in all cultures. It also acknowledges that people
everywhere on the planet are sharing dehumanizing
experiences – which should encourage us to consider what
it means to live a humane and dignified life.

Towards a
Humanist 
turn  
OLIVER KOZLAREK 

most obvious is that different cultures
are incommensurable and cannot be
reconciled, while in fact they share
many affinities and similarities. 
The work of the German
anthropologist, Christoph Antweiler,
gives a spectacular account of how
many ‘norms, values and ideals’
different cultures share2. Antweiler
suggests that we often do not see these
similarities because we do not want to.
However, he also suggests that if only
we looked for similarities we would find
them. With the right attitude, Antweiler
tells us, we are able to see formulations
of human rights not only in the ‘West’
but also in Confucianism, Buddhism
and Islam. Antweiler’s main argument is
that the idea of the ‘Clash of
Civilizations’ — put forward by Samuel
Huntington, and which proposes that
different cultures are profoundly
incommensurable — is wrong.
Antweiler’s ideas seem to have hit a
nerve. We can already see signs that
culturalism is losing its energy. Many
authors feel the need to look for
normative tendencies across cultures,
not so much to deny the reality of
cultural differences, as to oppose
cultural relativism. The question then is:
with what can we identify, as human
beings, beyond the cultural and
national differences that separate us?
Many are looking for a new orientation
in some form of humanism. They seem
to think that the simple fact of being
human grants us a new form of global
solidarity. However, I do not believe
that this shared humanity is sufficient; it
is too abstract.
Instead, we must engage in a
dialogue between cultures to discuss
what it means to live a dignified life as a
human being. It is within and through
culture that we learn how to perceive
ourselves as human beings. By studying
and comparing different cultures we
can see just how much they share. The
‘humanist turn’ and the ‘cultural turn’
must complement one another. This
means that humanism must be
intercultural and involve dialogue.
Lessons from traditional humanism
All cultures and civilizations have
humanist traditions. But the ‘humanist
turn’ is not a return to traditional forms
of humanism. One of the problems with
traditional forms of humanism is that
they are inspired by historical
experiences that are no longer ours.
The humanism that accompanied the
European Renaissance, for instance,
cannot be detached from ambitions to
challenge the authority of the Church.
Another problem is that many
traditional forms of humanism are
overly linked to naturalism. Again, the
humanism of the European Renaissance
could be quoted as an example. It was
interested in discovering the ‘nature of
Man’ in accordance with the ‘nature of
the universe’. This tradition of naturalism
is still very much alive today in various
scientific ideas that tend to reduce the
human condition to biology. In contrast
to naturalism, a new humanism needs
to understand that we become human
in and through culture.
But it would be equally mistaken
simply to forget about the traditional
forms of humanism that can be found
in the legacies of many different
cultures. It is in these traditions that we
can find clear evidence for the fact that
human beings share, and have always
shared, very important ideas about
what it means to be human. But
learning from other traditions of
humanism does not only mean to
reaffirm what we already know. In his
book on Humanism in East Asian
1. Doris Bachmann-Medick, Cultural Turns.
Neuorientierungen in den Kulturwissenschaften,
Rowohlt Verlag: 2006.
2. Christoph Antweiler: Mensch und Weltkultur [Man
and World Culture], Transcript Verlag, 2010.
L "Study of the proportions of the human body according to Vitruvius" by Leonardo da Vinci at the end of
the 15th century, as reworked by Sri Lankan photographer, Janaka Dharmasena

Oliver Kozlarek is professor of political
and social philosophy at the Institute
for Philosophical Research, Universidad
Michoacana de San Nicolás de Hidalgo
(Mexico). He was a member of the
research project on ‘Humanism in the
Age of Globalization’ from 2007 to 2009.
Since 2010 he has also been director of
the research project ‘Modernity, Critique
and Humanism’ in Mexico. He is
currently co-editor of a major book
series on Intercultural Humanism. His
books include: Humanismo en la época
de la globalización: Desafíos y horizontes
(2009) (with Jörn Rüsen), Octavio Paz:
Humanism and Critique (2009).
3. Chun-chien Huang, Humanism in East Asian
Confucian Contexts, Transcript Verlag, 2010.
4. Erich Fromm (1900-1980), German-born
American humanist psychoanalyst, and author of
Escape from Freedom, 1941; The Art of Loving, 1956;
The Sane Society, 1955.
5. J.M Coetzee, South African writer, Nobel Prize in
Literature, 2003
6. Rubem Fonseca, Brazilian born writer
7. Octavio Paz (1914-1998), Mexican writer and
essayist, Nobel Prize in Literature, 1990
8. Theodor W. Adorno (1903 – 1969), German-born
sociologist, philosopher and musicologist
9. Jörn Rüsen/Henner Laass (eds.), Humanism in
Intercultural Perspective. Experiences and
Expectations, Transcript Verlag, 2010.
Confucianism3 Professor Chun-chieh
Huang explains brilliantly that East
Asian Confucianism was very much
concerned with the harmonious
relationship between human beings
and the social and natural world that
they are a part of. One cannot help
thinking that a strong sense of ‘world
harmony’ such as this could guide us
through the ecological and social
disasters accompanying the modern
destruction of the natural world as well
as the devastations of our social worlds.
Questions like this have to be discussed
within an intercultural perspective. And
I am convinced that the social sciences
and humanities provide excellent
spaces in which this kind of intercultural
dialogue among different traditions of
humanism can be cultivated.
Shared experiences of
dehumanization
An idea expressed by Erich Fromm,4
among others, supports the possibility
of a common humanist understanding,
despite differences. Humanism is always
a consequence of experiences of
alienation. It is an outcry from people
who feel that the conditions for living a
humanely dignified life are withering
away. In a world like ours, individual
experiences may vary greatly. In our
global, modern world, chances are
unevenly distributed, and economic,
political and military powers are
unevenly concentrated. However, it is
also a world in which certain
experiences of alienation seem to
transcend these differences. We are all
suffering from the destruction of our
natural environment; we are all living in
societies where social relations suffer
from a growing sense of mistrust. Those
who are better off may try to
compensate for the lack of satisfying
social relations through consumption,
while those who do not have the means
experience a desperate longing for
consumption. In most parts of the world
people are exposed to old and new
forms of violence and injustice. Political
and economic institutions behave in
ways that people can hardly identify
with.
Again, despite considerable local
and social differences, the experiences
of human beings under these
dehumanizing conditions tend to be
very similar all over the planet. And this
must surely be something we can learn
from, if we compare contemporary
cultures on a global scale. J. M.
Coetzee’s5 South Africa resembles
Rubem Fonseca’s6 Brazil; Octavio Paz’7
critique of modernity is similar to that
found in the writing of Theodor W.
Adorno8. Comparative research in the
social sciences and humanities could
extend our understanding of the
dehumanization that people all over the
planet are suffering.
Humanism in everyday life
By the same token, the ‘humanist turn’
should not be seen as an endeavour
confined to academic or intellectual
circles alone. Some time ago, the
German historian, Jörn Rüsen, explained
that humanism has to have ‘practical’
ambitions as well: “The idea of
humanism must always be put into
social contexts in order to make it
plausible and give it its place in real
life”9. What Rüsen expresses here seems
to me to be of fundamental importance.
It is only if humanism comes to
constitute a central influence on the
ways we think and act in everyday life
that it can hope to begin to foster a
humanist culture that is not only
theoretical and abstract. It is my
contention that this ‘translation’ of
humanist ideas and values into
everyday political, social and economic
practices represents above all a task for
political and economic institutions. But
again, the social sciences and
humanities can play an important role.
At least a part of their endeavour should
be dedicated to the cultivation and
promulgation of a humanist culture
beyond the ivory tower.
To sum up, the current humanist
turn that is starting to appear in many
academic and non-academic arenas,
seems to be motivated by the need to
move beyond the awareness of cultural
differences and to look for that which all
human beings share, without
neglecting the differences. Instead of
looking for the universal in biological
nature, or thinking that a universal
humanist culture has to be invented or
imposed on other cultures, the current
humanist turn presupposes that
universal ideas and values are already
present in all different cultures. At the
same time, the new humanism seems to
recognize that global modernity needs
normative orientations that all human
beings can agree upon. And last but not
least, it is a result of common
experiences of alienation that global
modernity has provoked in different
parts of the world. The most important
task, however, is to translate the ideas
and values into everyday practices. ■
L Painting courtesy of Indian artist, Ananya
Banerjee.
