From a distance, Kawempe division in
Kampala (Uganda) looks like any shanty
town: a sea of tiny shacks with mud and
wattle walls. But getting closer, the
stench of disease and despair hangs
about like the angel of death. Children’s
eyes glint warily as they peer at a visitor
walking past. But gallantly, they play
about joyfully. They have probably never
used toothpaste in their short lives, but
that is of no consequence. Their
haunting voices echo in the distance as
you move further into the swampy
slums. Kawempe is characterized by
swampy slums where most people are
not sure of their next meal. 
Unemployment rates are high, with
low family incomes and high
dependence on those who can earn,
increasing levels of poverty and the
inability to afford health services. Most
women here are involved in prostitution
or commercial sex to make a living. Such
is the condition that a few years ago
moved James Tumusiime,  a young
psychologist now 30, to tears. A recent
graduate, James was working as a
volunteer counselor at a local clinic in
Kawempe when he met the 19-year-old
mother. “She looked frail, and she said
her children were always falling sick. She
thought it was malaria. I advised her to
test for HIV,” James recounts and pauses.
The pause is so long that you are afraid
the interview is over. “The test was
positive. I felt bad. She cried so hard.
Although I tried to counsel her to live
with a positive mind, I never saw her
again. I tried to reach her on her cell
number in vain…I pray she did not
commit suicide,” he says. Even now as
James tells the story, his face darkens.
But that incident was the turning
point for this psychology graduate.
Together with seven other young people,
he set out to “break the ice” and reach
out to such vulnerable single mothers in
the area, most of whom were making a
living through commercial sex. Despite
the fact that in Uganda, commercial sex
is illegal under the constitution.
Getting the project going
Another 30-year-old man, who prefers
anonymity, recalls that he was also a
community worker when James
approached him. “There had been a
project before by Plan UK, a charity
organization which was only catering for
children. But in most cases when you
met children and asked who their
parents were, they did not know. So we
felt we needed a project targeting sex
workers that could help them live
responsibly.” Another young man in his
late 20s tells heartrending stories of
prostitutes fighting over “clients.” Once,
he says, his sister was beaten by a
prostitute who thought she too was
competing with her.
“I remember the day we started the
‘breaking the ice’ project. We went there
for a week, every night, to see for
ourselves. It was sad seeing even
policemen on night patrol demanding
sex from the girls. That strengthened our
will to do something to change lives,” he
says. “There were so many teen mothers
with children whose fathers they did not
know. Some of them were as young as
13. And most of them were in the age
group of 13 to 25. Some of them were
students, others barmaids and
waitresses,” James recalls.
In 2007, the ‘breaking the ice’ project
was launched. “We began with a group
of about 10 mothers we had interacted
with who had told us they were sex
workers. We asked them to identify
others,” says James, the project
coordinator. “We wanted the girls to
protect themselves from HIV/Aids and
other sexually transmitted diseases.
(STDs) We finally got 60 mothers whom
we trained as peer educators. It is easy
for the mothers to be listened to from
their experiences. Even for the men
involved in prostitution, they tend to
listen to a woman demonstrating the
use of a condom, for instance, rather
than to another man,” James says. 
By 2009, the number of beneficiaries
had swelled to 3,000 sex workers. At this
point, Reproductive Health Uganda
came in with  financial support from the
Japanese government to set up
Moonlight Stars Clinic, which offers free
counseling and testing services for
HIV/Aids and other sexually transmitted
infections.“We called our clients
Moonlight Stars because we did not
want a name that would marginalize
them,” James says. The beneficiaries are
given cards for identification, to avoid
having non-beneficiaries storm the
clinic for free treatment.
A call for donations
Florence Kyeswa,  head of the clinic, says
they receive on average about 70 clients
in a week from the slums in Kawempe
Division, most of them suffering from
STDs. The funds from the Japanese
government have also been used to
train the “moonlight stars” in tailoring,
bakery, arts, crafts and mechanical work.
Africa, unemployment, slums: a lethal combination leading Ugandan adolescent girls to
prostitution and ruin. Until a group of young people decided to take things in hand.

Moonlight
stars CAROL NATUKUNDA

James says the beneficiaries are divided
in groups of about 20, and each group
given 5 million shillings (about US
$2,500 dollars) as start up capital. And
the majority of those who have been
equipped have a story to tell.“I am now
able to fend for my children, without
having to give in to sex. I feel confident
and happy that I am laying a good
foundation for my daughter,” says a 17-
year-old mother of one, who bakes
pancakes for a living. Another 21-year-
old HIV-positive mother chips in: “There
was a time I felt I wanted to die. I did not
see any point facing the next day
because of my status. But now, I have
access to treatment and condoms,and a
sewing machine. I make about 5 dollars
on a good day from tailoring.”The one
challenge, according to James, is that
some sex workers are tempted to fall
back on vice. Also, he says, they rely on
donor funds, and the Japanese funding
is now finished. The moonlight stars are
looking for new donors. The project has
drawn several partners including the
United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA), which has identified  sex
workers as a high risk group in the
spread of HIV. and hence is calling for
more attention to be paid to the
group.“HIV is not only spread through
married couples, as we tend to think.
Commercial sex workers are a forgotten
lot,” observes James.
Other partners are Uganda Youth
Development Link, an organization
which provides guidance and
counseling to street children and other
young people, and Beads for Life
Uganda, a non-profit organization that
empowers Ugandan women who make
handcrafted beads from recycled paper
and turn them into necklaces, bracelets,
and earrings. The two organizations are
Carol Natukunda, 28, is a Ugandan
journalist and the 2008 laureate for the
prestigious African education
journalism award organised every year
by the Association for the
Development of Education (ADEA).
L Solitude, light and shadow, somewhere in Africa. 

now actively involved in sensitizing
young people across the country in
responsible living. ■
