Zhan Yufeng works 12 hours a day, seven
days a week. The 24-year-old is leading
the non-profit China Youth Climate
Action Network (CYCAN). “I’m quite busy,
managing climate-focused activities,
training volunteers, fundraising, and
meeting program partners,“ he says.
“Sometimes I stay overnight in my office.”
Zhan earned his degree in art and
design from the Beijing Institute of
Fashion Technology last year. He had few
ideas about climate change until he was
invited to help the CYCAN prepare a
campaign for United Nations Day, Oct.
24, 2009.
Zhan designed the logo, posters and
brochures for this campaign that
attracted student groups from 200
universities from across the country and
some 50 NGOs. It reached an estimated
population of more than 5 million. “I
worked hard for a month along with
many volunteers. I got addicted to the
work. It was like love at first sight,” Zhan
says. 
In December 2009, in
Copenhagen, Denmark,
strange doctors accosted
people on the street,
offering them check-ups
and prescriptions. Their
comportment was at odds
with the image of wise old
Chinese physicians, whose
traditional garb they wore.
No wonder: they were no
more doctors than the
people they accosted were
patients. Yet their diagnosis
of the planet’s condition
was all too accurate.            
Prescriptions
More than 30,000 young people
directly participated in the campaign,
which was supported by United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) and
other organizations. There were various
performance techniques: youngsters
used fans to melt mountains of snow,
they painted their upper bodies blue to
remind people of the rising sea levels due
to global warming, they traveled by
bicycle and skates instead of driving, etc. 
“My peers were devoted and
energetic. I felt their passion,
perseverance, and power,” Zhan says,
adding that the opportunity showed him
another side of a commercialized society,
a side where young people are working
hard for a greener planet and a cleaner
future.
Upon the completion of this
campaign, CYCAN leaders began to
recruit candidates to attend the 15th
United Nations Climate Change
Conference COP15 in December 2009 in
Copenhagen, Denmark. This would be
the first time a delegation of Chinese
youth participated in international
climate talks. 
Chinese CYCAN got the idea when
they noticed that only one young
Chinese participated in the climate
negotiations in 2008 at Poznan, Poland.
Hundreds of youth leaders from the
United States, Europe, and countries
from other parts of the world
participated in the talks.
Zhan had hesitated: “My English was
not good enough for an international
conference. I was afraid I could not help
the team on such an important
occasion.” But finally he joined the
delegation, working as photographer
and program planner.
In addition to designing slogans, T-
shirts, and posters and photographing
events, Zhan and his partners managed
performances such as “Diagnosis for a
sick globe”, for example. Dressed as
traditional Chinese doctors, they gave
check-ups to participants. Those who
signed petitions against global warming
got “prescriptions” for fighting climate
problems.
The team also talked to Chinese and
international officers, media reporters
and climate negotiators, including
China’s Vice Minister of the State
Development and Reform Commission,
Xie Zhenhua, and U.S. Secretary of
Commerce Gary Locke.
Their slogan was No Other Way
(NOW), calling for immediate action on
cutting carbon emissions to save the
world from global warming.
Listening is not enough
COP15 showed Zhan the limits of the
Chinese young people’s capabilities.
Language was the main challenge. Most
of Zhan’s peers understood the
speeches, but only a few were able to
articulate opinions in fluent English.
Zhan was deeply impressed by the
professionalism of foreign young
delegates at the meeting. “They were
experienced, fully aware of the

for a sick
planet
ZHAO YING

mechanisms and policies of the
conference. They came up with
illuminating proposals and we listened,”
Zhan says. 
Few courses specializing in climate
issues are available at Chinese
universities, nor do young people have
frequent opportunities to exchange
relative information with their foreign
peers. 
In 2009, the CYCAN arranged
training programs before COP15 on
mechanisms of the talks, climate change
issues, fundraising, public relations and
event management. This was not
enough, Zhan points out. It is necessary
to arrange constant training to update
young people’s knowledge and skills.
Soon after he returned to China, he
joined the CYCAN as a full-time
employee.
The NGO, founded in 2007 by seven
Chinese youth groups, now has just
three full-time workers, and a large
portion of its operation relies on 51
volunteers in Beijing and nine core
members living or studying abroad.
Zhan became head of the
organization after being responsible for a
series of large-scale campaigns including
the International Youth Summit on
Energy and Climate Change held in July
2010 in Shanghai, and the clean energy
competition of Great Power Race that
attracted some 1,000 universities from
China, India and the United States.
Zhan, a native of the coastal
province of Guangdong in southern
China, used to roam Beijing’s art
galleries, watch stage shows and
movies, or play billiards with friends
after school. But his new work schedule
will not allow such habits.
If he had chosen to be a professional
designer after his graduation, his
income could have tripled, but “I’m not
in a hurry to make money,” he says. “At
my age, the priority is to improve my
overall abilities and the CYCAN is a place
where I keep learning things by meeting
people from all walks of life.”
What worries him are fundraising
and training volunteers. For three
months last year, the CYCAN workers
did not get paid due to lack of funds. “It
was hard but we managed to survive by
presenting constructive plans to
foundations and sponsors,” Zhan says. 
Additionally, some leaders left the
CYCAN to start new careers or study
abroad, forcing the organization to
recruit new members and train
L Zhan Yufeng demonstrating at the United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP15) in Copenhagen (Denmark), holding up the banner of his organization..
© Courtesy of Zhan Yufeng
Zhao Ying, 34, covering Shanghai's 
2010 World Expo for Xinhua News
Agency, which she joined in 1999. She
is a journalist for China Features, part
of Xinhua's network.
amateurs. “There are many youth
organizations active in China, but it’s a
pressing task to improve their expertise
so that their voice will get heard,” Zhan
says. ■
