In the 2008 film Kassim, The Dream,
where you were Executive Producer,
the hero is a former child soldier who
cannot forgive himself for the crimes
he committed.  Who is he?
The tragic story of the young Ugandan,
Kassim Ousama, is a good example. He
is a beautiful man, a great boxer who
was famous as a light middleweight in
the early 2000’s. But the demons from
his past caught up with him, preventing
him from realizing his dream. He quit in
the middle of training for the world
championship. In the film you see him
go back to Uganda and visit the grave of
his father, who was killed because of
him. Kassim has lost his self-esteem and
watches himself deteriorating from
within, as he tries to reconcile – not just
with the world, but with himself, with
the things he did as a child soldier.
Have many of the former child
soldiers that you met managed to
forgive themselves?
No. But I met a lot who still have
nightmares.  Some of those who had
committed atrocities had come to some
form of self-forgiveness, but it was not
complete. The most difficult part for
them is rejoining their own
communities, where they may have

Child
soldiers:  
Recently appointed UNESCO
Goodwill Ambassador, the
American actor and
director, Forest Whitaker, is
doing his utmost to help
child soldiers. He uses every
available opportunity to
help them find a voice, to
rejoin the communities they
have been banished from, to
get an education, to forgive
themselves and regain their
self esteem.
FOREST WHITAKER interviewed by Katerina Markelova

a new life ahead

J  Forest Whitaker at UNESCO in June, 2011.
carried out acts of violence against their
own neighbours. It’s one thing to know
that these children were taken away and
forced to kill, but a killer remains a killer
in the eyes of society. How, under these
conditions, does one forgive oneself?
How to heal oneself of such suffering? It
needs the most extraordinary efforts.
These young people need to find
activities that occupy them completely.
Otherwise it’s hard for them to move on.
I’m convinced that education
provides a way out for them. Education is
an opening of the mind, so that people
can see the possibilities that are available
to each of us. Education can bring
understanding, and then, hopefully, we
can move to a form of compassion. And
this, hopefully, can lead us to forgiveness,
which in turn leads to love – a love of
ourselves and a love of others. This is
something that child soldiers continue to
work through with the tools that they’ve
been given. And some are more
successful than others. 
What do the gangs in the USA and the
civil wars in Africa have in common?
That is precisely the question I look at in
the documentary “Common Destiny”
that we are working on right now. We
interviewed a Ugandan child soldier
and a member of the Blood gang in Los
Angeles. We started to compare their
stories and realized that they were
extremely similar. They were both
forced into violence. And they’re both
fighting people from their own
neighbourhood, even their own family. 
As a child, I grew up watching the
birth of the gangs in the United States,
particularly the Crips and the Bloods in
Los Angeles. I watched them as they
first named themselves and then
became international gangs. I lived in
the Blue or Crip neighbourhood, and my
cousin lived in the Red or Blood
neighbourhood. My cousin joined the
Bloods, and if I had joined the Crips, we
would have been enemies and might
have killed each other. In the conflict
zones of Africa, where armed rebels
kidnap children and turn them into
Why did you decide to support the
cause of child soldiers? 
I began working with child soldiers
four or five years ago. Before that, I’d
been campaigning against malaria in
Africa and working with organizations
dealing with physical abuse. I’ve also
worked with gangs in the USA. I see
parallels between the child soldiers in
Africa and some of the people I have
known in gangs. 
I don’t divorce myself from the rest
of the world. I see these young people
as parts of myself. I strongly believe
that we are part of a single entity and
that ultimately we want to connect as
one. Trying to understand and help
these young gang members and child
soldiers is, for me, not an intellectual,
or even an emotional choice. It’s a
spiritual choice. It doesn’t need to be
explained or justified, it’s in the natural
order of events. It’s the way I see the
universe and the way I perceive God.
K Child soldier with his family, Angola, 2004.

soldiers, don’t young cousins become
enemies in just the same way?
So there are similarities between the
gangs and child soldiers. They both
slowly get caught up in the world of
smuggling, trafficking drugs and arms,
even if they’re not always visible.
In ‘Common Destiny’ you are going to
show the mechanisms that can bring
peace to communities torn apart by
conflict. How do you intend to do this? 
We’re going to follow a number of
individuals around the world living in
conflict zones. With the support of
UNESCO, we will be following their
journeys, their struggles, their successes.
And at the same time there will be
interviews about what people feel peace
is. We will be talking to people from
government and to NGOs. The
documentary will allow people’s voices to
be heard, while giving examples of how
we come to peace.  
We haven’t yet decided which
countries we will be going to. I’m in the
process of doing that right now and was
in discussions earlier, here at UNESCO. 
I can just say that I think we will be looking
at different types of conflict, such as those
linked to the environment, migration, and
xenophobia. I think I will be working on
this project for about two years. 
Do you have any other projects as a
new UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador?  
I have a few. I’m going to be working on a
training process with youth on conflict
resolution. We’ll help child refugees to
move back to their countries of origin,
and will train others to support them on
their return. We will also set up an
Internet space, so that they can be
connected to the rest of the world and
each other. 
My own production company is
presently making about six
documentaries, most of them on peace
and reconciliation. We are also making a
feature film called ‘Better Angels’ with a
French company, Studio 37, on the same
subject. This film is about a war reporter
who goes to Uganda to interview Kony,
chief of the Lord’s Resistance Army,
which includes child soldiers. 
You are going to play that journalist,
aren’t you?
Yes, we went to Uganda a few months
ago to do some more research, to
interview some more soldiers and to
make sure that we were completely
accurate in what we were portraying.
Meanwhile we are doing a piece just on
compassion, and what compassion
really means. We’ve just started working
on a documentary about the Rwandan
cyclists who were caught up in the civil
war in the early 1990s. It’s an uplifting
film. And we shouldn’t forget that the
2012 Olympics in London will be the
first time a Rwandan cyclist has
competed. ■

L Poster for the film, 'Kassim, the Dream', for which Forest Whitaker was executive producer in 2008.
