Interview with MÓNICA
GONZÁLEZ MÚJICA by Carolina
Jerez and Lucía Iglesias UNESCO
Do women do journalism differently?
As a woman journalist, what were your
advantages and the obstacles you had
to overcome throughout your career?
Let’s talk first about the advantages of
being a woman, because there are
some. We have a particular sensitivity,
which I think is very useful for
investigative journalism – a greater
capacity for perceiving who is telling the
truth, who is lying, who is hiding behind
a shield, a mask or a disguise. I also feel
that when women undertake
something, we are more persistent and
we only ease up when the work is done.
We’re hard-headed! And I say that
without being a feminist.
Of course there are obstacles,
particularly when aggressors, torturers,
attack us sexually in order to destroy us. I
discovered under the dictatorship that
rape is primarily intended to break us. No
one could enjoy raping a woman. The
pleasure is to humiliate a woman and rob
her of her identity. But in my case, on the
contrary, it made me stronger.
What do you consider your greatest
professional success? 
The most important accomplishment
for me was to be able to go from
dictatorship to democracy without
giving up journalism. I never gave it up
during the dictatorship, not in jail, not
tyranny
K Plaza Italia in Santiago, Chile, on 10 December 2006, day of General Pinochet’s death.
© Eduardo Aguayo, Santiago
under torture, not when my friends
were killed, or when I had to be
separated from my daughters, or when I
shared the pain of so many people in
this country. When democracy came, I
felt that there was so much to build.
What I did right was not to give up
journalism and I found a new way to
continue every time I was unemployed.
I managed to do this thanks to the
assistance of many people - I am not a
Superwoman. I am grateful to have met
people who supported me and
encouraged me to persevere when I was
the most afraid. In this profession, you
are put to the test every day and I want
this to go on until I die. 
What is the situation of investigative
journalism today? 
It is without any doubt the type of
journalism most severely under attack
If we do not speak out, we are accomplices, says Mónica González Mújica, laureate of the
2010 UNESCO/Guillermo Cano World Press Freedom Prize. Jailed and tortured during the
dictatorship in Chile, she never relinquished her right to free speech. Denouncing injustice
is what counts for her, beyond gender barriers.



Standing up to

everywhere. Investigation was the first
victim of the economic crisis of 2008. It
was the most expensive journalists that
were laid off first, those who were
dedicated to investigation. As the
investigation’s journalism often is source
of problems and conflicts, the crisis was
a wonderful excuse to get rid of the
desk best equipped to investigate the
real, pressing issues that were decisive
for the lives of citizens. 
However, I must stress that the
quality of investigative journalism in
Latin America is at least as high as that
of investigative journalism in English-
speaking countries. And not only today,
because we also did this type of work
under dictatorships. In Chile, for
example, journalists denounced the
Pinochet regime crimes under his
dictatorship, running incredible risks.
Either journalists have to denounce
crimes and atrocities or they become
accomplices. And it is true that
investigative journalism always involves
great personal sacrifices and the use of
the journalist’s own funds, because, let’s
face it, no media organization will pay
journalists for months so they can carry
out an in-depth investigation into an
issue and reveal it to the world. 
Basically, I think that Latino-
American investigative journalism is
facing a major problem: the drug cartels
are eroding our societies. Their final
objective is to deprive us of pleasure,
happiness and life. This is why it is so
important to attack them, and it is also
why it is so important to guarantee that
journalists can investigate and inform,
contrary to the current practice in most
countries’ regions.
What is your view of the media
landscape in Latin America? 
Two problems pose an increasingly
urgent threat to the right of society to
be informed. First:  the formidable
concentration of media ownership.
Groups take control of several media
companies thus consolidating
television, radio and the written press,
while they maintain interests in other
sectors of production, such as
agriculture, mining, services, real estate,
etc. A media company cannot provide
objective reporting on corporations of
which its owner has shares. This is very
serious. Journalists are losing their
independence, their dignity and
essential skills.   
L Journalists demonstrating in Mexico City against attacks and kidnappings targeting them in the country. 
© Raul Urbina, Mexico
Mónica González Mujica is one of the
most committed and tenacious journalists
in Chile. Exiled in France after the coup
d’état in 1973, she returned to Chile in
1978, but was not able to practice her
profession again until 1983.  She has
managed the Centro de Información e
Investigación Periodística (CIPER) since May
2007. This journalism and investigation
centre is an independent non-profit
institution specialized in investigative
reporting. 
j Mónica González Mujica speaking at the
international conference on freedom of expression
held at UNESCO on 26 January 2011.
© UNESCO/Danica Bijeljac
The second threat comes from
authoritarian governments, which,
although they came to power
democratically, make journalists their
enemies and submit them to constant
threats. Here, once more, there is
unfortunately no opposition able to
defend freedom of information properly.
Because freedom of information is not
about supporting the government or
the opposition, it is about providing
quality journalism. Just as it is intolerable
that organized crime cartels go to war
on journalists, it is unacceptable for
democratically elected governments to
engage in authoritarian practices.
All this to say the Latin-American
landscape of media industry is,
objectively speaking, discouraging; it
shows the precariousness of journalism.
This is having a deep effect on society. 
It is democracy as a whole that is
undermined, because a badly informed
citizen easily becomes prey to petty
tyrants. We who lived through
dictatorships and who regained
freedom only at the cost of people’s lives
consider that we cannot let democracy
get weak and be manipulated by
authoritarian powers again. ■
