“I’m only a child and I don’t have all the
solutions, but I want you to realize,
neither do you!”
In 1992, Severn Cullis-Suzuki was only
12 years old when she gave her now
famous speech at the United Nations
Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro. “You don’t
know how to fix the holes in our ozone
layer,” she said. “You don’t know how to
bring salmon back up a dead stream. You
don’t know how to bring back an animal
now extinct. And you can’t bring back
forests that once grew where there is now
desert. If you don’t know how to fix it,
please stop breaking it!”
Nearly 20 years later, her words have
not been forgotten. Her YouTube clip, The
Girl Who Silenced the World for Six
Minutes, has become a hit, and still brings
a lump to the throat.
Severn Cullis-Suzuki is Canadian but
she was speaking for all of the world’s
children and youth, especially those who
are not as fortunate to have grown up in a
rich country like hers. Young people make
up one third of mankind – 2 billion
people who for the most part have no say
in politics. Yet it is their future that adults
are debating. “You are deciding what kind
of world we will grow up in,” said Severn.
A mortgaged inheritance
This conflict is serious – young people
have realized that the older generation
is leaving them with an economic and
ecological debt. In 2010, the 27 Member
States of the European Union (EU))
owed some €8.7 billion. And we find it
hard even to imagine what one billion
represents. It is one thousand million, or
‘1’ followed by twelve zeros. Every child
on the planet is born with a deficit of
about €17,000 in its account. This debt is
the result of a form of political
cowardice that dumps the burden onto
those who cannot defend themselves
because they are too young or not yet
born.
The ecological debt that generation
after generation has been accumulating
for nearly a century is colossal. We are
now consuming more energy and fossil
resources than the planet can bear.
Since the beginning of the industrial
revolution, mankind has been releasing
more and more CO2 into the air.
Because of the greenhouse effect, the
planet is getting warmer – the average
temperature of the Earth has risen by
0.74 degrees Celsius since 1905. The first
decade of the 21st century has been by
far the hottest since records began. And
the effects of climate change are already
being felt – the Arctic ice sheet is
receding, the frequency of climate-
related disasters is increasing, sea level
is rising, glaciers are melting. 
“We did not inherit the earth from
our ancestors, we borrowed it from our
grandchildren,” it says on the
International Youth Climate Movement



with 
a cause
JENS LUBBADEH
Demonstration against the oil and mining industry
at the September 2010 World Energy Congress in
Montreal (Canada).

website (http://youthclimate.org/). This
American Indian proverb clearly sums
up the issue – it is the youth of today
who will end up having to pay for our
wasteful lifestyle. “As we move towards a
carbon-constrained world, it is the
youth that will fully experience the
future consequences of today’s actions
of humanity,” says the website. 
The International Youth Climate
Movement brings together young
people from all over the world, with
branches in countries on every
continent. Since the 2005 climate
summit in Montreal (Canada), each
national Member has been sending
delegates to the world climate meetings. 
“This generation understands that
everyone across the world will be
affected by climate change and so it is
the responsibility of us all to take
action,” explains 29-year-old Neva
Frecheville, who is International
Engagement Coordinator for the British
coalition. The youth of today does not
want to look on passively as adults
decide their future. “We are starting to
show we won’t stand for it. We will
create our own change,” adds Neva. 
In 2009, the national branches of the
Movement set up YOUNGO, which
represents all Youth NGOs and is
lobbying for an 85% reduction in CO2
emissions worldwide by 2050
(compared to 1990 levels). YOUNGO has
been officially recognized as a
Constituency representing the interests
of youth within the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC). This status is still
provisional, but should change. “2011 is
an exciting year for the YOUNGO
constituency of the UNFCCC,” explains
Christiana Figueres, Executive Secretary
of the UNFCCC, “as this is the year in
which their status will be considered for
formalization. The formalization does
not mean a ‘start’ of engagement, since
children and young people have been
participating in UNFCCC meetings since
the year 2000.”
At the climate conferences in
Copenhagen (Denmark) and Cancún
(Mexico), young people were able to
speak for the first time with a common
political voice. “Like the other
constituencies to the UNFCCC,
YOUNGO’s constituency function is
limited to observer status,” explains
Neva. “In essence, we can’t take part in
the negotiations but rather watch and
try to influence through lobbying and
actions. Being recognized as having a
legitimate stake in the proceedings
means that young people have more
access to the process, to the negotiators
and the secretariat.” Christiana Figueres
agrees: “The constituency status
provides a conduit for the exchange of
information between young people and
the secretariat, and helps to orchestrate
the active participation of youth
representatives in UNFCCC meetings.”
And, adds Neva, “Young people are also
invited to make interventions which
give voice to young people across the
world at the highest level of the
UNFCCC.” 
Notably, for the past six years, these
young activists have regularly been
holding their own conference a few
days before the world climate summit. 
Not that apolitical
We often say that young people today
are not political. But on closer
examination, things are more complex.
It is true that young people are not very
interested in traditional politics, and
L “Silent Evolution”, underwater installation by British artist Jason deCaires Taylor, shown during the 2010 United
Nations climate change conference (COP 16) in Cancun, Mexico. Young divers swam among 400 submerged
statues to highlight the threat of rising sea levels.

have little regard for politicians and
their parties – only around one third of
Europeans aged 16 to 29 trust them.
However, it should be pointed out that
this proportion is also low among older
people. Cécile Lecomte, a 29-year-old
Frenchwoman, campaigns for the
environment. She lives in Lüneburg, in
northern Germany and has attracted
attention for her spectacular stunts to
stop trains transporting nuclear waste
by hanging above the railway lines. For
her, “a lack of political interest is not just
the preserve of young people.” 
The now familiar lack of political
commitment by young people does
seem to be linked to this loss of
confidence in politicians. According to
Eurostat*, only 4% of young Europeans
are members of a political party. And
only 16% believe that parliament is the
best place to make oneself heard. 
In reality, their involvement in
politics takes a different form: “We’re
hugely political, and that’s increasing as
we become more disenfranchised and
disillusioned,” says Neva. Young
Europeans feel that non-parliamentary
political engagement is even more
effective – holding debates (30%),
taking part in demonstrations (13%) or
supporting a petition or NGO (11%).
Cécile agrees. She believes that there
has been an enormous increase in
protest actions by young people. 
This trend may be seen worldwide,
especially in countries where access to
traditional politics is tightly controlled,
in the absence of democracy. “As well as
the recent protests in the United
Kingdom over tuition fees, we also have
mostly youth-led movements in places
like Egypt and Tunisia,” says Neva. “And
youth in Europe are coming together to
bypass the ‘adult’ NGOs and get
together to influence EU policy.”
For Christiana Figueres, it is even
more important for young people to
become involved at national level than
internationally.  “I have constantly
encouraged youth to be actively
involved in the development of
negotiating positions and climate
friendly policies at home, at the
domestic level,” she says. “That is where
they can have the highest impact to
influence governments to take a long
term view in full recognition that it is
precisely the next generation that will
be most affected by climate change.”
It is interesting to see that young
people are more willing to trust political
institutions, like Parliament, than the
politicians themselves. And supra-
national institutions attract even more
support – 70% of young people have
respect for the European Parliament and
the United Nations. On this point, young
people set themselves clearly apart
from older people. They probably no
longer think in terms of national
frontiers and see networking and
cooperation as positive factors that
inspire confidence. Neva agrees: “Young
people have shown that it is possible to
place national interests to one side to
work together on a common good.”
The internet has certainly had an
influence. In 2008, 70% of young people
used the Web every day, and this figure
has increased in recent years. And there
is a real generation gap here, too –
young people have much greater
mastery of the possibilities of the
internet than older people. Social
networks, Twitter and chat rooms are
used much more and represent a new
style of relationships and contact.
“Compared to ‘older’ delegates at the
UNFCCC, we use new and social media
Jens Lubbadeh, 36, is a journalist for
Greenpeace Magazine, Germany. He
has been a correspondent for the
UNESCO Courier since 2009.

*The figures on youth in Europe cited in this article
are taken from Youth in Europe, A statistical portrait,
2009 edition, Eurostat, European Commission.
much more effectively,” explains Neva.
“We are more creative, innovative and
fun because we are not blinkered by old
campaigning styles and habits; we are
still setting the scene when it comes to
approaches. Our communications are
often much more positive – more ‘pro’
than ‘anti’ – because basically we are
trying to vision the future that we want
to live in.” ■
L A Boy Scout, under the Ticket to Life Project, helps clean Manila Bay, Philippines
