more imagination than money, I made
television programmes that went out
very late at night and were often in the
top ten most popular programmes,
rebroadcast all across Latin America.
This is not just a result of the vein of
magical realism that runs through Latin
American literature, with its spiritual
leader, Nobel laureate Gabriel García
Márquez,1 but also of a deep conviction
I am an incurable romantic who
admires the paper book, along with
ancient parchments and the cave art of
long-disappeared cultures. But that has
not stopped me from being one of that
species of writer that has not hated
television. For over ten years, and with
Since the turn of the 21st century we have been seeing a flurry of virtual libraries opening
on the Internet and eBooks getting off to a flying start. Are these new media likely to
dethrone King Paper, until now the unchallenged ruler of his kingdom? The Chilean
writer Antonio Skármeta, whose childhood experiences of radio started him on his career,
wagers that the ‘traditional’ book will survive the digital frenzy. 



A special place for 
ANTONIO SKÁRMETA
1. Colombian writer, who received the Nobel Prize
in Literature in 1982.

This article is taken from a paper presented by
Antonio Skármeta at the Second UNESCO World
Forum on Culture and Cultural Industries, Focus
2011, in Monza, Italy, 6 to 8 June 2011.   
'Book of Psalms, by painter and
sculptor,  Patrick Medrano and
photographer, Katy Anderson. These
two American artists work together in
Houston, Texas (USA) ©

since childhood that tales that are
written down shine more brilliantly
when they capture the primary joy of

spoken language. This conviction did
not come to me through reading
Foucault2 or anthropologists like Lévi-
Strauss,3 but from living in a rural
village at the age of eight with my
grandmother, and, at eleven or twelve,
with my friends in a neighbourhood of
Buenos Aires.  
My childhood was a long love affair
with radio, and my first experience of
stories told without using any kind of
equipment. After dinner, when my
grandmother sat down to knit her
endless cardigans, she would ask me to
sit next to her, while she listened to
episodes of horrible melodramas with
plaintive music. She was so engrossed
in these radio serials that she would get
cross if anyone asked her a question or
if the telephone rang. And she would
rant at the stupidity of the protagonists
who were more reluctant than her to
act. 
I remember one serial where,
episode after episode, two crooks tried
in vain to steal a million-dollar diamond
ring from an aristocrat. Every time they
were about to succeed, something
happened – the maid came into the
bedroom, her husband came over to
kiss her, the lady shut herself in the
bathroom to take a shower. One day
they poured a sleeping draught into
her soup, and, when their victim fell to
the floor, they went about removing
her ring. But it was so tight that, after
ten minutes of struggling, they had to
escape without the jewel.  “The fools!”
she said to me, beside herself, in her
Croatian-tinted Spanish. My
grandmother was a passionate woman.
“All they had to do was chop off her
finger with an axe!”
Getting started as a writer
The electricity supply in the village was
precarious. The frequent power cuts
meant that it was impossible to keep
the radio on. My grandmother used to
curse if the power cut out at the height
of the action. So she would turn to me
and say, “So, Antonio, what do you think
is happening right now?” And with a lot
of gesticulating and “um’s and ah’s,” I
would tell her the story, with completely
fantastic details, just as she liked it,
straight out of my imagination. My
grandmother would nod and continue
her knitting, her eyes fixed on the
ceiling, as if that were where my story
was coming from.  
One Saturday, when the electricity
was working and her thriller was blaring
out of the radio at full volume, my
grandmother turned off the set and said
to me  “Antonio, I prefer it when you tell
the story.” This, I think, was what got me
started in my career as a writer – with no
help whatsoever!
As you will understand, satisfying
the appetite for fiction of a grandmother
was a fabulous invitation to embrace the
fragile condition of writer. The glowing
report handed out by my forebear for
my dramatic ‘supplements’ turned out to
be more encouragement for me than a
PhD in Creative writing from Harvard.  
For a Chilean teenager at the time, to
be a writer obviously meant being a
North American writer. And in New York!
Climbing to the top of the Empire State
Building with a pretty blonde in the
palm of his hand like King Kong. There,
in that great global city, was all the
excitement anyone needed. I’d have to
go ‘on the road’ like Kerouac4 and the
Beat poets. 
Being a writer who learned to love
literature without any material – except
perhaps the human voice and the
silence of the desert – it didn’t much
matter in which airport stories landed.
For me, the problem that literature
poses lies not so much in what media is
used, but in the lack of readers. If I sing
the praises of the paper book, it is
because, until now it has been the
vehicle that enabled me to find readers
in over thirty languages. But that is also
the case for the films based on my
novels, and even the operas made from
them. 
So I am not afraid of
transformations. On the contrary, I
welcome them. I use them. I know that
the letters my postman will deliver to
Pablo Neruda will provoke the same
emotion, whatever medium or surface
they are presented on, be it a book,
iPad, eBook, film or even a theatre play.
Literature is much more than
information
When I looked at the statistics on the
number of people reading electronic
books I noticed that, up to now, the
market for them in my own language,
Castillian, is disproportionately far less
than that in English.  
But I would like to put forward the
following idea – that the medium of
paper when used in literature, in other
words the book, is so sophisticated an
object, at least in the field of art, that it
will always hold its place alongside the
new media. And I even wonder if it will
not do so to its own advantage, for one
very good reason – the screen has
become the basic working tool for
mankind. 
L "Box of books", painting by Dominique Mantel

Wherever we are, most of the
working day is spent between the more
or less strident flashes – according to
the quality of the machine – of
computers. The electronic world is
above all associated with work. It
intensifies our vision, and absorbs our
attention. It controls us.
Of course the computer also offers a
special place for communication
between individuals who feel
connected when they are using it. But it
is interesting that the most popular
form of expression between surfers on
the internet is the abbreviated, concise,
minimalist message. That of
information. Twitter.
whole days burning our retinas on the
movements of the stock market, and
then, in the evening, watch a superb
film where the beaches of Tahiti are
portrayed in three dimensions, with the
beauties painted by Gauguin. But what
we really want is to be on these
beaches, admiring the skin, enjoying
the breeze, swimming in the warm
cobalt waters of the sea, and not left
with a substitute. 
A sensible cohabitation between
media
In any discussion of the future of the
book, we need to remember that the
story carried by the paper – from
ancient parchments to modern print –
has created prestigious spaces for
communication, such as bookshops,
national and local libraries and book
clubs, and that these forms of
publication have joined with other arts,
transforming the printed and bound
story into an object like no other – with
2. Michel Foucault, [1926-1984], French philosopher
and Professor at the Collège de France.
3. Claude Lévi-Strauss [1908-2009], French
anthropologist and member of the Académie
française.
4. Jack Kerouac [1922-1969], American writer, is
best known for his novel On the Road. He belonged
to the Beat Generation (beatniks), young writers
and poets revolting against a society that they
considered to be materialistic and superficial.  
5. Pablo Neruda [1904-1973], Chilean poet, Nobel
laureate in Literature, 1971. In his novel, Burning
Patience, Skármeta tells the story of Mario Jimenez,
the postman on Isla Negra in Chile, where his only
client is Pablo Neruda, who went there to write in
peace and quiet.
I know that the letters my
postman will deliver to Pablo
Neruda will provoke the same
emotion, whatever medium or
surface they are presented on, be
it a book, iPad, eBook, film or
even a theatre play.
its graphic design, its illustrations, its
covers, and the people who flock
around them in public spaces. 
The publication of a good book
rapidly evokes collective admiration – it
is a cultural event. I doubt whether the
ghost-like publication of a story in the
private solitude of digital space ever
possessed the same enthusiastic grace
as the birth of a book printed on paper. 

But that is exactly the point.
Literature is so much more than
information. A scientific document is a
mine of information, and that is all that
textbooks are – information that has to
be understood, learned, mastered and
applied. 
Literature is far removed from these
pragmatic criteria. It is the pleasure of
words, conjuring images that transport
the soul to places that the language of
science has not yet codified. To be brief
but clear, creative literature, whether
narrative or poetry, belongs more to the
domain of pleasure than of work.  
I think that this psychological factor
– avoidance of the other – will protect
the book from the voracity of
information. From those who provide it
and those who ask for it. Obviously we
can buy a DVD and watch the latest film
to win an award at Cannes on a screen
at home. But we continue to go to the
cinema. We are apparently religious
enough that our intimate conversations
with God take place through prayer. But
we go to temples and churches and
take part in the rituals. We can obviously
speak words of love to a loved one by
telephone or by email – but we seek
them out so that our kiss can transport
us beyond their lips. We can spend
K "Blinking Transcendent" by American artist, Ruth Lantz

When we sit at home in front of the
TV, we have a whole range of
programmes to choose from, in several
languages. By zapping we can go all
over the world. But our initial inclination
is always towards local news, towards
the intimacy and sense of belonging
inspired by faces close at hand and the
events of our own country, which
provide the subject matter for our
everyday conversations and discussions. 
I do not see how the electronic book
could acquire this aura of admiring
simultaneity and collective attention
offered by the solid structure of the
publications industry and its networks of
distribution, from bookshops to
newspapers. What I am trying to say is
that the publication of a book using
existing methods is a cultural event that
puts the extravagant imagination born of
the writer’s fantasy onto the collective
agenda of the people. 
I wager that there will be a wide
cohabitation of many media – the digital
media will remain the faithful allies of
research, information, the ‘work’ of the
intellect, the ‘solitary’ contact with a story.
And print on paper will remain a special
place for the non-utilitarian imagination,
the combination of the arts that find
expression in the book as object. 
Meanwhile, the noble task that those
institutions concerned with universal
culture have set out upon – the creation
of virtual libraries  – deserves the highest
forms of praise. By making all the
magnificent knowledge of mankind
available to people, since stories were
first written down, is an event that we
welcome with joy, as it means that this
information will be distributed and will
influence the existence of millions of
people, who will, as a result, become
better informed, more sensitive and,
consequently, more free. 
Antonio Skármeta, is a Chilean writer
of Croatian descent. Between 1973 and
1989, he lived in exile, first in Argentina
then Germany, a country to which he
returned in 2000 as ambassador to
Chile. His novels include The Dancer
and the Thief (Norton, 2008), Burning
Patience (Pantheon, 1987), and I Dreamt
the Snow was Burning (Readers
International, 1985). His illustrated
children’s book, The Composition
(Groundwood Books, 2000), won him
the 2003 UNESCO Prize for Children’s
and Young People’s Literature in the
Service of Tolerance.
If the printed book is to survive
alongside the almost instantaneous
publication offered by the Internet and
the eBook, large bookstores and places
where books are sold have to become
more appealing. When someone likes a
book, they often think it would make a
good present. And a printed book is the
perfect choice. We are already familiar
with these large, communal spaces –
cinema has not killed off theatre,
television has not meant the end of
cinema, any more than the excellent
quality of reproductions has not sunk
museums and their originals... And there
is another aspect, which I have detected
as I move through various different
languages and continents – people
have a longing for intimacy, to be close
to the artist and the work of art, a wish
to flee all the ear-splitting braying, to be
in real life, at the heart of events. There
is a desire to by-pass the intermediaries.
This might be a minor trend now, but it
is on the increase.
Those who say that the book offers a
more intimate and less mediatized form
of communication with the reader are
right – there is no need to click on a
mouse to plunge in. May our dearest
dream be this intimacy with art, with
the artist and with the reflected silence
that comes from entering the world of
creation and coming away with the
inspiration to approach life with greater
joy and a bit more spice!
Today the printed book is still the
most intimate medium, the least
ephemeral, the most concrete, the most
sensual, the most visionary and even
the one that gives off the most
marvellous aroma – that of blessed ink
spread onto the page. ■
L The Open Book, temporary installation by Lithuanian sculptor Saulius Valius, exhibited at UNESCO in
January 2004 

Print on paper will remain a
special place for the non-
utilitarian imagination, the
combination of the arts that find
expression in the book as object.
