From 2012 onwards, ground stations in
South Africa, Canary Islands (Spain),
Egypt and Gabon will be able to
access data from an Earth
observation satellite being
developed by China and Brazil. This
will be the third CBERS satellite
designed and launched by the Sino-
Brazilian partnership since 1999. Up
until now, these satellite images of
the changing landscape have been
delivered only to users in China and
Latin America: more than 1.5 million
of them since 2004. Now, thanks to
the CBERS Africa
initiative, the list of beneficiaries has
been extended to Africa. Since a
satellite does not stop at borders in its
orbit of the Earth, it makes sense to
share the collected data with those
countries in the satellite’s path and
thereby forge new partnerships. The
space race of the last century has
been replaced by a new paradigm,
space diplomacy.
This example cited in the newly
released UNESCO Science Report
2010 illustrates a growing trend: the
use of space technologies for
environmental monitoring within



Science 
without borders
If there is one field where globalization seems to be doing
good, it is research. Everywhere, partnerships are being
developed, forging scientific, and even diplomatic alliances
between countries that may sometimes be poles apart
geographically or in terms of resources. By working
together, partners can capitalize on one another’s
strengths and save time and money. Here are a few
examples from the UNESCO Science Report 2010. 
Susan Schneegans, Editor, UNESCO Science Report 2010 
“Increasingly, international
diplomacy will take the form of
science diplomacy in the years
to come.”
Irina Bokova
Postscript
K 5 June 1999. The Student Tracked Atmospheric
Research Satellite for Heuristic International
Networking Experiment (STARSHINE) leaves the cargo
bay of the Space Shuttle Discovery near the completion
of the almost 10 day STS-96 mission. The satellite is
covered by hundreds of tiny mirrors that reflect
sunlight to observers on the ground, to help students
study the effects of solar activity on the Earth's
atmosphere.
© NASA/courtesy nasaimages.org 
L Image taken by the CBERS-2 satellite , on 10 April
2005, showing Florianópolis, the capital of the State of
Santa Catarina in southern Brazil.  
The full version of this
article is published in
Planet Science
January-March 2011

international collaboration. This trend is
one consequence of the growing
concern at the rapid degradation of the
environment and climate change. With
recognition of the interconnected
nature of the land, water and
atmosphere has come the realization
that data-sharing among countries and
continents will be crucial to improving
our understanding and monitoring of
the Earth’s environment. One
motivation for space diplomacy is thus
commonality of purpose. 
Space diplomacy is itself a subset of a
wider phenomenon today: science
diplomacy. Science diplomacy can span a
wide range of areas, including health,
information and communication
technologies and clean energy sources. In
June 2009, for instance, Sudan
inaugurated its first biofuel plant, built in
co-operation with the Brazilian company
Dedini. A second project in Sudan
involving Egypt at a cost of US$ 150
million ‘is producing second-generation
biofuels from non-edible crops, including
agricultural waste such as rice straw, crop
stalks and leaves’, according to the Report.
Under an agreement signed by the
two countries in 2003, Pakistan and the
USA now ‘contribute to a common fund
which is jointly managed by the National
Academy of Sciences in the USA and by
the Higher Education Commission and
Ministry of Science and Technology in
Pakistan,’ writes Tanveer Nair, who, as
Chair of the Pakistan Council for Science
and Technology, played a pivotal role in
securing this landmark agreement. ‘Each
year, proposals for research collaboration
are invited with at least one US and one
Pakistani scientist as principal
investigators,’ she explains. ‘The proposals
undergo peer review in both countries
and are selected on merit. This
programme has resulted not only in
capacity-building of Pakistan’s
laboratories’, she says, ‘but also in the joint
discovery of a vaccine to prevent a deadly
disease caused by tick bites which afflicts
those working with animal herds in the
southern region of Sindh in Pakistan.’
Cost-sharing 
Around the world, countries are
developing partnerships in science,
technology and innovation within a
wider policy to forge political alliances
and enhance their presence on the world
stage. But international collaboration is
of course also motivated by the more
pragmatic desire to pool resources in the
face of the escalating costs of scientific
infrastructure. The bill for one
international project to develop a clean
energy source by mastering nuclear
fusion has been estimated at no less than
10 billion euros. This is ‘the most
ambitious collaborative project in
science ever conceived’, writes Peter
Tindemans, a consultant who used to be
responsible for co-ordinating research
and science policy in the Netherlands.
The project is building an International
Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor
(ITER) in Cadarache, France, by 2018. 
That the project should involve not
only the traditionally dominant scientific
powers of the European Union, Japan,
the Russian Federation and the USA but
also China, India and the Republic of
Korea is a reflection of the growing
economic and technological might of
these countries. China, for instance, ‘will
assume 9.09% of the cost of
construction and spend over US$1
billion in total,’ writes Mu Rongping,
Director of the Chinese Academy of
Science’s Center for Innovation and
development, in the report. ‘Some 1000
Chinese scientists will participate in the
ITER project [and] China will be in charge
of developing, installing and testing 12
components,’ he explains. 
Winning new markets
The business sector has also been quick
to weigh up the advantages of
international scientific collaboration. In
addition to cost-sharing, international
consortia offer a tempting opportunity
to conquer new markets. The hugely
successful Airbus consortium is the
result of the merger of the formerly
independent aircraft manufacturing
companies of four European countries –
France, Germany, Spain and the United
Kingdom – and is a shining example of
what pan-European co-operation can
achieve.
Two decades after the fall of the Iron
Curtain, the Russian Federation is
witnessing a growing volume of
commercial contracts and joint ventures
in science and technology involving both
Russian and foreign companies. In 2010,
the joint-stock enterprise comprised of
the French company Alcatel-Lucent RT
and state corporation Russian
Technologies began investing in the
development, manufacturing and
marketing of telecommunications
equipment for the Russian market and
those of the countries of the
Commonwealth of Independent States.
Meanwhile, the jointly owned US–
Russian company IsomedAlpha has
begun producing high-tech medical
equipment like computer tomographs. 
International co-authorship
In addition to such factors as evolving
geopolitics and financial considerations,
the growth of international scientific
collaboration in recent years owes much
to the rapid spread of ICTs: Internet
access doubled between 2002 and 2008
from 11% to 24% of the global
population and even tripled in the
developing world from 5% to 17% of
the population. 
The past few years have not only
witnessed a surge in international co-
authorship but also a diversification of
research partners.  One of Australia’s top
three partners for scientific co-
authorship between 1998 and 2008 was
China, along with traditional partners the
United Kingdom and USA. In the
Philippines, top billing went to the USA
and Japan, followed by China. China was
even the number one partner for
Malaysia, ahead of the United Kingdom
and India. There are signs that the
growing role of China and India in
scientific authorship as a consequence of
their growing global influence is already
reshaping the scientific landscape in
Southeast Asia.
The closest neighbours do not
always make for the closest partners.
India, Iran and Pakistan all publish 20–
30% of research articles with scientists
abroad but most of their co-authors live
in Western countries. Just 3% of research
articles are published in collaboration
with scientists working in South Asia. In
Brazil, where international scientific
collaboration has remained steady for
the past five years at about 30% of the
total, ‘US scientists are the main partners’
write Carlos Henrique de Brito Cruz and
Hernan Chaimovich, respectively
Scientific Director of the São Paulo
Research Foundation and CEO of the
Butantan Foundation in Brazil. They cite a
2009 study which ‘found that 11% of
scientific articles written by Brazilians
between 2003 and 2007 had at least one
co-author in the USA and 3.5% a co-
author from the UK. Argentina, Mexico
and Chile combined represented just
3.2% of co-authors of Brazilian articles.’  
