Why is it necessary to look at climate
change from a gender perspective?
What do women contribute, in your
opinion? 
Men and women have a different
relationship to natural resources. So we
need to make use of both points of
view. Unfortunately when it comes to
finding solutions, the scales are tipped
in one direction. Strategies are all too
often implemented with a bias, only
from men’s point of view. It is also a
matter of defending women’s rights. We
have to remember that they make up
more than half of the world’s
population. So they should be included
when decisions are made, which has
not been the case up to now. 
Women are the guardians of crucial
knowledge for combating climate
change. For example, in many countries
and regions of the world, like Asia,
Africa, and South America, men have
opted for monoculture, while women
continue to cultivate a great variety of
plants in their gardens and plots.
According to the weather they predict
for the current year, they will choose
one kind of seed rather than another.
This diversity is a goldmine for
scientists who want to reintroduce
species that have disappeared in
certain countries because of farming
policies.  
In countries like Cuba, women have
sometimes kept up to 250 varieties of


Sowing the seeds 
LORENA AGUILAR was interviewed by Alfredo Trujillo Fernandez, Spanish journalist
of the future
As she speaks, Lorena Aguilar tosses her hair with the same energy she puts into every
word and emphatic hand gesture. For over 25 years, she has worked on developing public
policy on climate change, expanding knowledge on issues not yet addressed in terms of
gender equality.
bean, and 75 varieties of rice... In Peru,
there are as many as 60 varieties of
yucca. And in Rwanda, up to 600
varieties of rice! This is what the UN
Food and Agriculture Organisation
(FAO) claims, anyway. 
This wealth of diversity in seeds and
in the traditional knowledge linked to
them is both a treasure in itself and a
fantastic tool for combating climate
change. Firstly, because these kinds of
seed can adapt more easily to the
climatic conditions we are seeing today.
And then because this improved
capacity for adaptation means we will
be able to produce more and therefore
better deal with the food needs of the
world’s population. 
L Women working in the
fields in Kayanza, Burundi
© IUCN/Intu Boedhihartono 

How are women in particular affected
by climate change? 
Women are more vulnerable, especially
during natural disasters related to
climate change. Researchers at the
London School of Economics (LSE)
looked at 141 disasters around the
world, and found that in those countries
where gender differences were most
marked, four times as many women
died as men! This is not because they
are weaker but because they have less
education. When a woman who has
never gone to school hears on the radio
that there will be winds of 260 km/h,
this means absolutely nothing to her.
She does not have the tools or sufficient
knowledge to respond to the threat. 
The same problem arises in Muslim
countries where a woman is not allowed
out of the home unless a male
accompanies her. In Bangladesh, in
1991, a hurricane killed almost 150,000
people. No less than 90 % were women!
They didn’t want to leave their home
without a man, or they didn’t know how
to swim. 
The study also found that, in
countries where the gender gap is less
pronounced, a natural disaster causes
about the same number of deaths for
each of the sexes. Our work at the
International Union for Conservation of
Nature (IUCN) consists of emphasising
the fact that women are agents for
change, with special knowledge and
skills, and the right to participate in
decisions and political life. 
What are you doing to encourage this
change? 
For a start, we present things differently.
It is not a question of arguing that
women are more sensitive or better, just
because they are women, or that it’s in
our nature to hug trees. Sentimentality
will get us nowhere! Our argument is
about development, it is technical and
scientific, positive and preventative. It is
an argument based on rights with
universal relevance. The Arab League
has become one of our main allies,
alongside countries like Finland and
Denmark.
This year, we have developed three
strategies that link gender awareness
and adaptation to climate change – in
Mozambique, Jordan and Central
America. Our action mainly involves
visiting each of these regions to see
what has been accomplished in terms of
combating climate change, and from
that point developing strategies
adapted to each particular situation.
This is not a model to be applied
uniformly. We take into account regional
specificities. 
In Central America, for example, the
seven countries in the region (Belize,
Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama) have
developed a common strategy for
mitigating climate change and adapting
to its effects. Women have been
consulted and asked to share their
knowledge. By integrating their needs
within this new strategy, we are able to
incorporate the gender factor into the
mitigation measures to be
implemented. 
Over 25 countries want to develop
similar actions, which will enable us to
reduce the differences that lead to a
higher mortality rate for women.  
How do communities feel about these
new projects? 
Some indigenous tribes in Central
America have been actively involved,
both in sharing knowledge and in
building capacity. Their knowledge is
Lorena Aguilar from Costa Rica is the
first woman from Latin America to
hold the post of Senior Gender Advisor
to the World Conservation Union
(IUCN)). 

fundamental. But, even so, we still
encounter a certain resistance. People
are afraid of repeating past mistakes. We
know for example that 70 % of the
poorest people in the world are women,
but when we look to see who benefits
most from cooperating in projects, we
find that the resources almost never go
to the women. But when they do
benefit, 95 % use these resources to
improve living conditions for the family,
while only about 15% of men do this.
That is why they are afraid that these
projects will once again be just for men,
as was the case when financial
compensation was paid to rural
communities to combat deforestation.
We have fears, and so do communities.
Specifically, what are your fears for the
future? 
We have many fears, because most
development programmes have never
taken gender inequalities into account,
and that is what we want to put right.
The World Bank evaluated over 200
projects on water resources and
concluded that those that were most
effective were always those that
promoted gender equality. What we
want to do is to attract global attention
to this fact. To point out this is a battle
that must be won and that we will
campaign to see this happen. ■

L Woman carrying wood for construction in Papua
New Guinea ©IUCN/Intu Boedhihartono 
