Chemistry has a pivotal role to play, as much
because of its place within the natural sciences
and knowledge as a whole, as through its
economic importance and its omnipresence in
our daily life. But, because it is everywhere, we
often forget about it, and could even not
mention it at all. Chemistry doesn’t flaunt itself,
but without it, some truly spectacular
achievements would never have been made,
such as breakthroughs in the treatment of illness,
space exploration, and marvels of technology. It
makes an essential contribution to humanity in
food and medicines, clothes and housing, energy
and raw materials, transport and
communications. It supplies materials for physics
and industry, models and substrates to biology
and pharmacology, and properties and
procedures to the sciences and technology. 



Chemistry : 
the science and 
art of matter Jean-Marie Lehn
The science of chemistry is not just about discovery. It is also, and especially, about creation. It
is an art of the complexification of matter. To understand the logic of the latest discoveries in
nanochemistry, we have to take a 4-billion year leap back in time.

L Chemistry is intrinsic to life.
Original drawing by Sejung
Kim (Republic of Korea).
© Sejung Kim

A world without chemistry would be a world
without synthetic materials, and that means no
telephones, no computers and no cinema. It
would also be a world without aspirin or soap,
shampoo or toothpaste, without cosmetics,
contraceptive pills, or paper – and so no
newspapers or books, glues, or paints. 
And we must be careful to remember that
chemistry helps art historians delve into the
secrets behind paintings and sculptures in
museums, and helps forensic scientists to
analyse samples taken from a crime scene and
quickly track down the perpetrators, as well as
revealing the molecular basis of dishes that
delight our taste buds. 
While physics decodes the laws of the
universe and biology deciphers those of the
living world, chemistry is the science of matter
and its transformations. Life is its highest form of
expression. Chemistry plays a primordial role in
our understanding of material phenomena, in
our ability to act upon them, to change them
and control them. 
For almost two centuries now, molecular
chemistry has put together a vast array of
increasingly sophisticated molecules and
materials. This discipline has not ceased to assert
its power over structure and the transformation
of material, from the synthesis of urea in 1828 –
which started a veritable revolution, by
providing the proof that it was possible to obtain
an ‘organic’ molecule from a mineral component
– to the synthesis of vitamin B12 in 2006 after a
quest that had started in 1948.
The molecule as Troy horse
Above and beyond molecular chemistry there is
the vast area of what is called supramolecular
chemistry, which is not so much interested in
what happens within molecules, as what
happens between them. Its objective is to
understand and control the manner in which
molecules interact with one another, transform
themselves, bind to one another, while ignoring
other partners. Emil Fischer (the German Nobel
laureate for chemistry in 1902) used the image of
the lock and key. Today we refer to “molecular
recognition”. 
It is in the field of biology that the role of
these molecular interactions is most striking:
protein units group together to form
haemoglobin; white blood cells recognize and
destroy foreign bodies; the AIDS virus finds its
target and takes it over; the genetic code is
transmitted by reading and writing the alphabet
of protein bases. In the vivid example of the ‘self
organisation’ of the tobacco mosaic virus: no
fewer than 2130 simple proteins join together to
form a helical tower.
A chemist finds the efficacy and elegance of
these natural phenomena so fascinating that he
is tempted to reproduce or invent novel
processes to create new molecular architectures,
with a panoply of applications. Why not imagine
molecules that can transport a fragment of DNA
to the very centre of a target in gene therapy, for
example? These molecules would be “Troy
horses” which would, in turn, cross supposedly
insurmountable barriers, like cell membranes. 
A great many researchers around the globe
are patiently creating ‘designer’ supramolecular
structures. They observe how molecules that are
jumbled with no apparent order can find and
recognize one another and then gradually
assemble themselves spontaneously, but in a
perfectly controlled manner, to reach the final
supramolecular edifice. 
So, inspired by phenomena that nature has
presented to us, the idea was born of eliciting
and guiding the appearance of supramolecular
assemblages – in other words, “molecular
programming”. The chemist conceives the basic
building blocks (molecules with certain
structural and interactional properties), then
applies the “cement” (assembly code) to link
them together. 
This yields a superstructure via self
organization. The synthesis of molecular blocks
capable of self organization is much more simple
than synthesizing the final edifice. This line of
research opens vast horizons, notably in the field
of nanotechnology – instead of fabricating
nanostructures, we let the nanostructures
fabricate themselves by self organization, thus
moving from fabrication to self-fabrication. 
Even more recently ‘adaptive’ chemistry has
emerged, where the system, in order to construct
itself, makes its own selection among the
available building blocks, and becomes able to
adapt its objects to the demands of the
environment. This form of chemistry, which I call
“dynamic constitutional chemistry”, has
something of a Darwinian flavour to it!
From matter to life
In the beginning there was the original
explosion, the Big Bang, and physics reigned.
Then came chemistry, with more clement
temperatures. Particles formed atoms, which

united to form increasingly complex molecules,
which, in turn, grouped together in aggregates
and membranes, giving rise to the first cells, as
life emerged on our planet, 3.8 billion years
ago. 
From divided matter to condensed matter,
then organized, living and thinking matter, the
unfurling Universe is nudging the evolution of
matter towards increasing complexity through
self organization, under the pressure of
information. The task of chemistry is to reveal
the pathways of self organization and to trace
the paths leading from inert matter, via a purely
chemical, prebiotic evolution, to the creation of
life, and beyond, to living and then thinking
matter. In this way, it offers the means to
interrogate the past, to explore the present and
to build bridges towards the future.
Through its subject matter (the molecule
and material), chemistry expresses its creative
force, its power to produce new molecules and
materials, that never existed before they were
created by the rearrangements of atoms into
original and infinitely varied combinations and
structures. Chemistry is, in some ways,
analogous to art, through the plasticity of the
chemical object’s forms and functions. As artist,
the chemist imprints matter with the products
of his imagination. Just as stone, sounds and
words do not contain the work that the
sculptor, composer or author shapes with them,
so the chemist creates original molecules, new
materials and unknown properties from the
elements that make up matter.
The particularity of chemistry is not only to
discover, but to invent and, above all, to create.
The Book of Chemistry is not only to be read,
but to be written. The score of Chemistry is not
only to be played, but to be composed. 

Jean-Marie Lehn, is a chemist specializing in
supramolecular chemistry, Emeritus professor
at the University of Strasbourg (France), Nobel
laureate in 1987 with Donald Cram and Charles
Pedersen. Honorary professor at the Collège de
France and member of the French Academy of
Sciences, Jean-Marie Lehn founded the Institut
de Science et d’Ingénierie Supramoléculaires
(ISIS) in Strasbourg. http://www-isis.u-
strasbg.fr/
J Witherite in crystal form. The crystal makes it possible to shed
light on the relationships between the properties, chemical
composition and arrangement of atoms in materials. Chemists
“cultivate” crystals in order to study and visualize them and to
imagine new ones. This allows them to discover new materials,
with a wide range of applications. © SPL
