The misfortunes
of an over-
materialistic
alchemist
In 1603, Giraldo Paris had already been
living in Madrid for 33 years, as advisor
to Philippe II on Flemish affairs. He had
grown up in Anvers and made his
fortune in the spice trade. He
entertained all the Flemings at the Spanish court, surrounding himself
with ambassadors and dignitaries, as well as pharmacists, doctors and
scholars. Having retired from commerce with an immense fortune,
Paris maintained a passion for alchemy. He was interested in the skills
and knowledge of diamond cutters, apothecaries, distillers and
herbalists. 
That year, some known enemies of Paris denounced him to the
Inquisition, accusing him of heresy. During the ensuing trial, it was
claimed that the Fleming “extracted quintessences, flowers of metal
and herbal salts.” It was also claimed that he was a great natural
philosopher, being interested in the “secret art of chemistry”. Paris was
condemned to one year of seclusion in a monastery and made to pay a
heavy fine.
Told in this way, his story sounds like one of a man pursued by the
Spanish Inquisition because of his activities as an alchemist. But the
reality is more complex. The distillations, the experiments with metals
and the herbal extracts were not what his Inquisitors were really
concerned about. The reason for the sentence lay in the alchemist’s
explanations for certain religious questions. Giraldo Paris, for example,
explained the Virgin Birth by comparing it to an alchemical procedure
where a pure substance is mixed with another, finding, at the end of
the operation, that the former had remained intact “without having
lost any of its virtue […] immaculate as it was in the beginning.” 
So the Inquisition took issue with Giraldo Paris not for his occult
activities but for his “mistaken theses”. At the time, Madrid had many
alchemists who were not persecuted for their practices, but
nonetheless, many of their works turned up on the Index Librorum
Prohibitorum (list of banned books). Also on the list was the Theatrum
Chemicum, the most complete compendium of alchemical knowledge
in 17th century Europe. The work was so important that the Inquisition
had to lift its ban, but did not omit to censor it.  
So, unless proven otherwise, it seems the Inquisition did not
persecute alchemists for their acts, but for their convictions on
material affairs, which were contrary to the dogma. 
Tayra M.C. Lanuza-Navarro is a Spanish historian of science. She is
currently working on a project on books on alchemy at the
beginning of the modern era.
l “La Pharmacie Rustique”, 1775. The
famous Swiss medical practitioner Michel
Schuppach examines a patient’s urine in his
pharmacy.
© Courtesy of the Chemical Heritage
Foundation Collections
Photograph by Gregory Tobias
J The hanging alligator shown in this scene
was commonly found in alchemical
laboratories. 
© Courtesy of the Chemical Heritage
Foundation Collections
