Letter to a
young chemist
The 2010 Nobel prize in chemistry was awarded to
the American scientist, Richard Heck and to Ei-ichi
Negishi and Akira Suzuki from Japan, for their work
on organic synthesis, which paved the way for the
invention of one of the most sophisticated tools in
chemistry – cross coupling. One of the cornerstones
of this immense scientific endeavour is “Suzuki
coupling”, after the laureate we interviewed. In this
interview, Akira Suzuki talks about his research,
aiming above all at young people today, who are
deserting the sciences. He is encouraging them to
turn towards chemistry, with the idea of making it
into a new science.
AKIRA SUZUKI answers questions put by Noriyuki
Yoshida, journalist for Yomiuri Shimbun, Tokyo
What is cross coupling used for?
If I give you an example, you will understand
right away. After the Nobel I had so many
requests for interviews that my blood pressure
went right up! My doctor prescribed a drug to
bring down the pressure and the pharmacist
explained to me that it had been made by
“Suzuki coupling.” The procedure has also been
used to make certain antibiotics, as well as
drugs to treat cancer and AIDS. 
The process has also been used in the IT
and communications worlds to make liquid
crystals for television and computer screens,
and for organic electroluminescent displays,
which are widely used for small devices like
mobile telephones and so on.
How long did it take you to perfect this 
method?
The discovery of the coupling reaction only
took two or three years, at the end of the 1970s.
But I had worked on the chemistry of boron, a
metalloid close to carbon, since 1965, when I
returned from the USA, after finishing my
studies at Purdue University. That means it is
the result of over ten years of research.
What did other people think when you started
work in this field?
On the whole, they thought the chances of
success were zero. That is also why there were
so few researchers in this field, anywhere in the
world. But I am optimistic by nature and I
thought these disadvantages could become
advantages. I told myself that by overcoming
the difficulties, it would be possible to come up
with a stable synthesis procedure that would
be easy to use.
Some say that there is fair amount of luck in
research. What do you think?
At the outset, in research, one cannot rely on
chance. Research has, above all, to be rational.
Akira Suzuki, in Tokyo,
November 2010.
© Yomiuri-Shimbun

It is important to analyse the successes and
failures of experiments and to apply them in the
next phase. That is when chance can intervene.
Anyone can be lucky. But to attract luck, one has
to be attentive, to make an effort and remain
humble, above anything else. 
Were you interested in science as a child?
I was born in a small town called Mukawa, south
of Sapporo (in Hokkaido). Nowadays, the town is
called Shishamo. In primary school, I was just a
child, like all the others – I liked going fishing
with my friends and playing baseball. At that
time, the juku [private schools offering evening
classes] did not exist and I think that the children
were free and full of spirit. I was not especially
interested in science, but in junior high school, I
did like mathematics. Looking back, I think I did
like things that were clear.
Why did you choose to study chemistry at
university?
I entered Hokkaido University to study
mathematics. But during a chemistry class, I
stumbled on a manual, which had a great effect
on me. The author was a professor of organic
chemistry at Harvard. I had a dreadful time trying
to understand the English, but I found it very
interesting. And I ended up forgetting about
mathematics.
During my chemistry studies, I was very
influenced by Professor Harusada Sugino, who
taught me why chemistry was important and
what use it was. And Professor Sugino was not
just interested in chemistry. He was rector at
Hokkaido University, but was also president of
the Japanese national commission for UNESCO!
From 1963 to 1965, you studied in the USA. At
Purdue University, you also followed courses by
Herbert Charles Brown, 1979 Nobel laureate in
chemistry, who also had Ei-ichi Negishi as a
student.
When I was about thirty, I was assistant professor
at Hokkaido University, and I had to find a
research field. I went into a bookshop in Sapporo
and looked at books on chemistry. My gaze fell
on a book with a black and red cover – it looked
more like a novel – and I picked it up. It was by
Professor Brown. It was so interesting that I
stayed up whole nights reading it. I wrote a letter
to the professor, telling him that I wanted to
study with him, and that is how I left for the USA.
In the USA, I was a post-doc, but my salary
was four times higher than that of an assistant
professor in Japan. And meat and petrol were
cheap, too... I really noticed the difference
between the two countries. There were several
other foreign researchers and I was able to make
many friends. The discussions I had with them
opened up new worlds for me. When Japanese
people are together, they can understand each
other without saying anything, but I learned that
when one is immersed in another culture, one
has to say a lot to be understood. I also learned
English. I recommend young people to go
abroad, without hesitating. One learns a great
deal – and not just on a professional level or in
one’s specialized area.

L Akira Suzuki’s discoveries
have made it possible to
optimize the blue light in the
organic electroluminescent
diodes present in flat screens.
Shown here is a flat screen
made by Sharp. 
© Yomiuri Shimbun

What did you learn from Professor Brown outside
of your research?
Professor Brown often said: “Do something that
would be worth doing a class on”. That meant do
something new, which could be published in a
lecture. And which could also be useful. That is
not easy. But I also ended up by telling my
students not to clean your lunch box with
toothpicks, as we say in Japan, meaning avoid
getting bogged down in details. I tell them, on
the contrary, to fill the lunchbox with their own
products.
Is there a method of working that guarantees
success? 
Even if it did exist, one couldn’t expect someone
else to adopt it. Everyone has their qualities and
what they can do is to make use of them. In my
case I think it was optimism. When experiments
were not working out well, I went for a drink to
relax with the students and, the next day, I could
resume my experiments with a new frame of mind.
What do you think needs to be done to attract
new generations to chemistry?
Young people are moving away from science and
it is a very serious problem. This phenomenon is
particularly apparent in Japan. The only thing to do
in a country with no natural resources, like Japan, is
to use ingenuity to create something new.
It is up to young people and them alone to
find their hopes and ideals in science. But I would
like to lend my support as an “elder”. Thanks to
the Nobel prize, the term “cross coupling” is
beginning to be known, even by children. The
dissemination and popularization of science are,
for me, a great source of motivation.
What links do you think we will have with
chemistry in the future? 
Chemistry is not very fashionable at the moment.
It is associated with bad smells, dirtiness, and can
provoke aversion. It was already like that when
we were young, but at the time, the
petrochemical industry was booming and
several students chose to study chemistry. 
Today, some people see chemistry just as a
polluting industry, but that is a mistake. Without
it, productivity would drop and we could not
enjoy the life we know today. If there is pollution,
it is because we are releasing harmful
substances. Obviously, we have to adapt
treatment and management regimes and work
to develop chemical substances and
manufacturing processes that respect the
environment.
Chemistry is indispensible for the
development of Japan, and for the world. I hope
that young people will study chemistry, with the
idea of creating a new science. There have been
many discoveries and developments so far, and
an incalculable number of substances have been
manufactured. Chemistry will always remain
important in the years to come.
Which are the areas of organic chemistry where
you think developments will be needed in the
future?
As Professor Negishi said, I think that we have to
turn towards the industrialization of
photochemistry, based on carbon dioxide, as for
example in plant photosynthesis. The energy
produced in this sector is still very low. Nature
produces complex organic compounds from
carbon dioxide, using sunlight as the energy
source. And these reactions take place in the
temperature ranges in which we live, in an
environment where water exists. I hope we will
be able to shed light on the mechanisms and
apply them.
2011 has been proclaimed International Year of
Chemistry. Do you have any particular message
for readers of the UNESCO Courier, who live in
the four corners of the world?
Chemistry plays a very important role in our lives.
Most specialisms and technologies in chemistry
are aimed at the manufacture of products to
improve the well being of humanity. There are a
considerable number of substances
manufactured in the world and no-one knows
exactly how many, but almost all are organic
compounds. This is why organic chemistry is one
of the most important branches of this science,
and deserves more people to be interested in it
and to contribute to its development. 

L The Organic Light Emitting
Display (OLED) is one of the
many applications of “Suzuki
coupling”. 
© Yomiuri Shimbun
I recommend
young people to
go abroad,
without
hesitating. One
learns a great deal
and not just on a
professional level
or in one’s
specialized area.
