Justice

Despite the numerous treaties,
agreements and international summit
meetings of the twentieth century, and
the ongoing goal of combating poverty
and reducing inequality in the world,
one fact is clear: far from declining,
poverty continues to grow. According
to the World Bank, 1.4 billion people
were living below the poverty level in
2008, surviving on less than $1.25 per
day, per person. The planet now
supports nearly 7 billion people, which
means that 20 per cent of the world’s
population do not have sufficient
resources to meet basic needs; these
people suffer inhumane treatment and
are doomed to subsist in conditions of
social, economic and political exclusion. 
There is a theory in moral
philosophy that deals directly with
poverty and inequality: ‘distributive
justice’. This concept examines ways to
alter the principles governing the
distribution of goods and resources,
when these principles do not respect
the rights, worth and needs of each
person. 
The various facets of this theory
arise from the particular vision of the
human being that underpins one policy
of distribution rather than another. For
example, an approach that views the
most underprivileged people as
passive, unable to set goals for
themselves and determine their own
needs, gives rise to paternalistic
policies. Those receiving the distributed
benefits cannot voice their opinions nor
have any power over their essential
rights, as others are deciding in their
stead. This occurs frequently in many
countries. In Mexico, for example, as
part of a social housing programme,
the government decided to put a
laundry room into every house. But
women were used to taking their
washing down to the river. They turned
the laundry rooms into family shrines,
where their offerings ended up
blocking the pipes. 
Another version of distributive
justice defines individuals essentially as
economic agents seeking to ‘maximize
outcome,’ in other words, to boost their
income and/or their purchasing power.
Proponents of this theory, which
measures costs in monetary units and
results in terms of ‘units of outcome,’
push for policies geared toward
increasing the units of outcome for the
most impoverished, to improve their
well being and to mitigate their
poverty. In this case, priorities are set
according to their value for money. For
example, in the USA a decision was
taken regarding medical care that
favoured State funding for operations
to remove tonsils, rather than for renal
dialysis, even though dialysis patients
are far more seriously ill. The decision
meant reaching a larger number of
people at lesser cost.
If, however, we conceive of
individuals not only as means but also
as ends, the ensuing distribution
policies must foster better economic
and social conditions so that the
beneficiaries can work toward
achieving their life goals. This idea is
based on the concept of the human
being as an autonomous and worthy
individual, able to choose from among
the various options at hand. This is
certainly the most ethical and humanist
position offered by distributive justice.
The Mexican “Progresa” programme is
an example. Rather than offering food
handouts, it runs education and
information campaigns on health and
nutrition and allocates subsidies to
families, leaving them free to decide
how to use the money.
Global justice
That being so, should distributive
justice opt for the individual or the
social group as the unit of distribution?
This question pitches liberal thinkers,
who have adopted an egalitarian
position, against those who promote
more communitarian theories. The
latter maintain that individual-based
social policies are deficient in that they
fail to take into account the fact that
human beings do not live in isolation,
but are an inseparable part of a culture
or social group that defines their
identity. Hence the importance, for
communitarian theorists, of factoring in
the history and peculiarities of each
community — as each social group
Hundreds of millions of people suffer from hardship and
poverty throughout the world, a situation that sanctions a
philosophical approach promoting distributive justice. This
theory underpins a truly humanist intervention when it is
dispensed with respect for the dignity of the individual, his
or her autonomy and personal responsibility.


dignity
PAULETTE DIETERLEN 
and
J Outside the Brazilian Supreme Federal Court, in
Brasilia, 1998
© UNESCO/Ivaldo Alves
If, however, we conceive of
individuals not only as means but
also as ends, the ensuing
distribution policies must foster
better economic and social
conditions so that the
beneficiaries can work toward
achieving their life goals. This idea
is based on the concept of the
human being as an autonomous
and worthy individual, able to
choose from among the various
options at hand. 

develops specific forms of production,
redistribution and consumption of
goods and services.
Proponents of individual-based
distributive justice maintain that
communities are not uniform in nature
and that it is therefore impossible to
meet the criteria of distribution without
giving priority to the individuals who
form these communities.
Yet a third version of distributive
justice exists, known as ‘global justice.’
This theory transcends the traditional
concept of the nation-state, focusing
instead on the problems posed by
poverty and inequality on a worldwide
scale. Theorists of global justice support
a system of international institutions
responsible for redressing injustices
committed against individuals as
residents of the planet, rather than as
members of a community, or citizens in
a particular country.
From a humanist viewpoint, these
three theories — individual,
communitarian and global — share the
same goal: to implement policies of
distributive justice, by viewing people
as worthy individuals capable of
exercising their own autonomy. The
Mexican government is currently using
incentives as part of its policies to
combat poverty – people are able to
express their needs and choose what
seems to them most essential. This
helps to strengthen the beneficiaries’
sense of responsibility and their ability
to make decisions.
If the person, in and of him- or
herself, forms the cornerstone of this
philosophy, and if policies to improve
quality of life with decent conditions of
equality and respect for rights are
proposed, distributive justice can be
said to comply with the values of
humanism. ■

Paulette Dieterlen is a Mexican
philosopher and researcher, member
of the Instituto de Investigaciones
Filosóficas at the Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de México (UNAM), and an
expert on distributive justice and
public policy. She has published,
among other books, La pobreza: un
estudio filosófico (Poverty: A
Philosophical Approach), Fondo de
Cultura Económica/Instituto de
Investigaciones Filosóficas, 2002.
