How did you meet Prudence?
It was a friend from New York who told
me about her. I started writing to the
King George VI School for children with
disabilities that Prudence attends in
Bulawayo, Zimbabwe. The Headmistress
sent me some footage of the band
performing along with a three-page
text of Prudence recounting her life
story. It was so heart wrenching. What
ROGER ROSS WILLIAMS interviewed by Cathy Nolan
Prudence Mabhena does not have legs, but music has given her wings. Through singing,
this 22-year-old Zimbabwean has overcome several obstacles that hindered her journey: 
a congenital disease, amputation of both legs, family rejection, discrimination, poverty.
Together with seven other young people who shared a similar fate, she founded the group
Liyana (‘It’s raining’ in Ndebele), which inspired American film director, Roger Ross Williams
to produce the 2010 Oscar-winning short film, “Music by Prudence.” He tells us about his
encounter with Prudence that changed his life.
drama! Yet, such hope at the same time!
I then decided to make my first
independent documentary.
By Christmas Day 2008, a few
months later, I was already in
Zimbabwe. There, I followed and filmed
Prudence for two weeks. When I
returned to the United States and
watched the footage, I thought to
myself, “I have discovered a true star.”
Was Prudence cooperative with you?
Prudence took a little bit of convincing.
She didn’t really believe that I would
show up, since she was used to a life of
betrayal and disappointment. So, she
was amazed to see me.
Our first meeting was very intense
and emotionally charged. Never before
had Prudence been asked to talk about
what had happened to her. It was like a

L Prudence Mabhena at the Mountain Film Festival, in July 2010.

The Flight of 
Prudence

psychotherapy session. The words just
poured out of her. She was in tears. I was
in tears. The cameraman was in tears. I
knew then it would be one of the most
important stories of my life.
I was determined to make it all the
way, but met with many roadblocks.
Filming in Zimbabwe is a physical
challenge. We were never safe from a
power outage, so we had to be sure that
cameras and projectors were
consistently charged. And to make
matters worse, it’s literally not allowed
to film in Zimbabwe. It’s lucky that I
wasn’t arrested or shot during the
election, which was a very violent
period. Several times we almost got
thrown out, and I had to talk my way
out of it at the immigration office. But,
we were in Prudence’s world, a school
for disabled children. We weren’t doing
anything political, and the government
knew that.
How did the film change Prudence’s
life?
Prudence was already a star in her
community, performing concerts all
over town. But, she wasn’t known in the
rest of her country. Now, she’s certainly
one of the most famous women in
Zimbabwe. When she arrived back in
the country after the film received an
Oscar, she couldn’t imagine what to
expect. When the plane landed, she saw
hundreds of people, dozens of media
from all over Africa, and the mayor of
Bulawayo waiting to welcome her. As
she was carried off the plane, her father
was at the foot of its steps on his knees,
tears streaming down his face, and
begging for forgiveness.
At this time, the mayor declared,
“Prudence Mabhena has taught all of us
in Zimbabwe that disability does not
mean inability, and we must change our
attitude towards the disabled.” The
newspapers resonated this idea, and
praised Prudence for putting her
country on the map. One notable
headline read, “Prudence brings Oscar
gold to Zimbabwe.” I don’t know if the
political mentality towards people with
disabilities will change, but one thing is
sure: Prudence has touched the hearts
of many. 
What attracted you to this subject? 
I often think about outsiders and people
who are left behind, forgotten. I identify
with being a minority, I always have.
Mainly because I’ve usually been an
outsider, myself. So Prudence’s story
struck a personal chord with me. I was
abandoned by my father too, although
not to the same extent as Prudence.
Every one of us feels admiration for
people who succeed in triumphing
above their suffering. Prudence did it.
And today, she is sending her message
loud and clear through her song, ‘Never
give up’. She was always determined
and convinced that life would one day
get better. She believes you have to go
through the hard times to appreciate
your gifts in life.
And your film shows that outcasts
can have extraordinary gifts to share.
Disabled children, especially in
developing countries – and particularly
girls – are the last anyone will pay
school fees for, or anything else. They’re
at the bottom of the pecking order. 
And yet, every disabled child who is
abandoned and cast off represents
budding potential. They could grow up
to be singers, writers or even the
president of the United States. 
What has Prudence been doing since
the Oscars?
I connected her with Human Rights
Watch and several NGOs who support
people with disabilities. She has been
training, to travel around the world, as
an advocate for this cause.
What kind of impact did meeting
Prudence have on you?
An enormous impact. Getting close to
Prudence made me realise that the
things I complained about were
actually insignificant. Prudence, she
never complains. It put my life into
perspective. I’m much more thankful for
what I have and all that has gone right
for me. And of course, meeting
Prudence has had a profound effect on
my career. I’m not just speaking about
the Oscar. I mean, this film has given my
work a whole new dimension: it’s
become an opportunity to do some
good in the world. Hopefully, it will
inspire countries, families and
everybody to fully appreciate people
with disabilities. ■
Visit the website of Prudence Mabhena:
www.musicbyprudence.com/
J Roger Ross Williams  in the UNESCO Courier
offices in December 2010
