the centre of both movements. Our
activism started rather quickly.
What challenges did you face as a
woman human rights defender?
In the last five or six years, I have been
honoured with signs of recognition
internationally and also in my own
country. But if you ask people today
who do not believe that human rights
are universal, they will say that I am a
Westernized woman - though I never
studied or lived abroad; that I am anti-
religion - because I believe people must
have a right to have or not to have a
religion; and that I am anti-Pakistan -
because I believe Pakistan must live in
peace with its neighbours… 
But I also come from a society that is
full of dichotomy. You have violence
against women, women are looked
down upon, and yet Pakistan did
produce a very courageous woman,
Benazir Bhutto, to be the first woman
Prime Minister in a Muslim country. We
have people like me who are under
threat but also people who would stand
by me, protect and encourage me. So I
have learned a lot and I have a lot to be
thankful for.
As an activist, I have noticed three
things: you have to be thick-skinned;
you have to persevere; and you have to
constantly look for more solutions.
I recall when I started to work with
bonded labour workers – that is, slave
type practices. The judge would ask
them ‘Do you recognize her, is she your
lawyer?’ Those workers were so scared
they would say no. And I risked having
my license taken away because my own
clients said they had not engaged me.
But I had to persist because then the
litigant begins to have faith in you and
finally begins to speak. And that was
how the case of a woman bonded
labourer was taken up to the Supreme
Court and when that woman’s employer
accused her of lying, she put her hand
on her hip and said “Who is a liar - you
Interview with ASMA JAHANGIR by Irina Zoubenko-Laplante
On Human Rights Day - 10 December 2010 - Asma
Jahangir received the UNESCO/Bilbao Prize for the
Promotion of a Culture of Human Rights from
UNESCO’s Director-General, Irina Bokova, and the
Mayor of Bilbao, Iñaki Azkuna. She gave an interview
to the Courier on the day she received the Prize.
Irina Zoubenko-Laplante works for the  UNESCO
Division of Human Rights, Philosophy and
Democracy



A lawyer
with a
thick skin
You have spent your whole life
defending human rights.  What
inspired you to become a human rights
lawyer? 
I was brought up in a politically active
family. My father, Malik Jilani, was a
political leader who had always been in
the opposition and suffered all his life. I
saw how you had to go to court even
when you realize you are not going to
get any justice. Day after day I
understood the important work of
lawyers.
In the early 1980s, you set up an
NGO, the AGHS Legal Aid Cell, run
exclusively by women. 
Having finished my law studies and
obtained an LLB degree in law from
Punjab University, I realized that I was
not going to get a chamber to take me
in. To have one’s own firm appeared to
be the best solution. I worked this out
with two friends and my sister, Hina
JilaniThis was the time of absolute
oppression against women and side by
side the women’s movement was
coming along. There was also a lawyers’
movement. So we ended up being in
“It is the law that is delinquent,” retorts lawyer
Asma Jahangir when a judge tells her she is
always defending delinquent women. The
Pakistani militant stops at nothing in her efforts
to fight so-called honour crimes, to promote
women’s economic rights and, above all, to
defend the universality of human rights,
applicable to all without exception.

or me? I will tell this court you are not
only a liar but an exploiter too.” That day
I thought the case was won! Today
bonded labour has not been completely
discontinued but a large number of
people have won freedom.
We have to have a thick skin too. I
remember in 1983 when in the name of
Islam a law was proposed that the value
of a woman’s testimony would be half
that of a man’s. Many of us, mostly
upper class women, not realizing where
we were going, came into the street and
were suddenly beaten by the police, our
hair pulled out. Eventually a mullah
declared in the mosque that our
marriages were dissolved and our
husbands had to divorce us - actually
none of them did.  It was difficult but it
gave us courage - not only to those 150
women in the streets and beaten by the
police but to a much larger number.
Since then we continued to multiply the
number of activists. 
When I was in danger, one of my
children said to me “Mother, if you do
not fight for women’s rights, they will
come only a minute later than they are
supposed to come.”  But I think it is that
one minute that human rights activists
work for.
What in particular made you
concerned about the situation of
women? 
When I started as a lawyer many women
were put in prison because of a new
law: any sex outside marriage was
considered a crime – as it is still
regarded today but in a diluted form.
Even women who were victims of rape
but could not prove it were put in
prison. And whenever I went to court,
the judge would say: “Don’t you get any
other clients except these delinquent
women?” And I would reply: “My Lord,
the law is more delinquent to put them
behind bars.” 
Women do face huge problems in
many countries, including mine, starting
with security of life. Women are
expected to behave in a certain way,
and if they don’t, they are sometimes
killed, which is known as “honour
killings”. When I first raised this question,
some judges said they did not see what
I was talking about. Gradually our
movement against honour killings took
root not only in Pakistan but got the
attention of people and organizations
across the world. We now have a lot of
support against this practice, whereas
only a few decades ago politicians were
saying they could not support people
who were talking against honour
killings, because it was against accepted
social norms. Now those politicians are
ashamed of having said that.
What can be done to accelerate
positive change for women?
First, advance women’s economic rights,
which are very much missing in many
countries. Women do not have the same
status as men; even when they are
working, they do not get equal pay. And
violence against women is rampant. We
have to start is by making women
themselves more aware, which has
increased tremendously. And secondly
it is necessary to sensitize organizations

L This young woman is one of many displaced persons who fled fighting in the Swat Valley, Pakistan, in June 2009. © UNICEF/NYHQ2009-0931/Marta Ramoneda

and institutions like the judiciary, the
parliament, the media, in favour of
women’s rights. We have made some
advances but not enough.
Will we be able to meet the UN
Millennium Development Goals, in
particular to reduce poverty through
promoting gender equality? 
I think we should commend the
aspiration of the United Nations but
obviously these are not going to be met
by the anticipated 2015 deadline. That
does not mean that we have to give up.
I think the question of children and
poverty is particularly acute today.
Children in marginalized sections of our
societies, children who have been
abused for sex, for pornography,
children who are often now abused for
beggary, children who have been sold,
they, I believe, are the first victims of
poverty.
Based on your experience as UN
Special Rapporteur on Freedom of
Religion or Belief, what do you think
about human capacities for tolerance?
This very delicate and intellectually
challenging mandate taught me many
things. For example, there is no country
in the world where prejudices do not
exist and at the same time there is no
country in the world where people are
not fighting intolerance. But this must
be recognized in the echelons of power
that should be establishing policies to
eliminate intolerance. Education is
particularly important but it depends on
what kind. In our own part of the world
people have been radicalized and
militarized in the name of education. We
want quality education, not only
through textbooks but through
interaction of children from diverse
communities. Education should
inculcate a genuine respect for human
dignity and not just teach taboos. For
example, I do not see that children are
taught to that people may dress
differently, a man may be dressed as a
girl but that does not mean that you
should look down on them. A woman
may cover her head but it does not
mean she is different in her thinking. I
do not see that in any educational
books – West or East. 
There are countries, often because
of conflict, that get blocked inside and
there is no cross-border interaction,
which is very important. At the same
time, I believe the world must remain
diverse, with different ideologies also.
But we have to underline there are
some red lines people must not cross. I
cannot expect you to think like me at
the point of a gun, I can persuade you
within the limits, not through abuse or
threat. If I begin to do that, it is clearly
intolerance. And if I make discriminating
legislation, it is clearly intolerance. And
to give the justification of legislation
being based on your own social and
religious norms is something
governments will have to rethink. It is
an insult to your own people to say they
have less dignity than others in this
world. The question of dignity is
therefore everywhere. 
Human rights defender work is not
easy. In my own country, we have
conflict and Islamic militants killing
people. Even they have rights. But when
we human rights defenders have to talk
about their rights, people wonder
whether we are not Taliban supporters.
Of course not, but even if a man is a
suspected Taliban, you cannot make
him disappear.
What is the role of a State in ensuring a
society’s progress?
I think the State is the last to come on
board. It is the time of civil society, in
particular of activists’ groups and
movements such as we can see at
present in the Latin America, in the mass
media. It is they who have carried out
campaigns and taken up vital issues. For
example, civil society and activist groups
in the West were the first to talk about
arbitrary detentions after the September
11th terrorist attacks. This movement
received an input from lawyers, from
human rights defenders, from students,
so all this is the combination of civil
society actors. 
How are democracy and human rights
linked? 
You cannot have human rights flourish
in a country that is non-democratic: we
have seen this time and again. At the
same time, we cannot say if there is
democracy in a country, there will be
automatically human rights.
Democracy can exist in all societies
but cannot be transplanted from outside
– democracy has to come from within
societies. Democracy does not start and
end with the electoral process which
may be its very beginning but true a
democracy means much more:  it means
institution building, inclusiveness,
empowering people. These are all
ingredients of democracy linked with
human rights.
In fact, human rights movements
focus on deepening democracy because
we need that in every society. Over the
last decades, we have witnessed the
stagnation of democracy even in the
Western countries with a much longer
experience of it. Human rights activists
have to work to connect both civil and
political rights and social and economic
rights to make democracies effective.
Do you believe that things are
changing for the better? 
Changing mindsets is the most difficult
thing. If I look back 30 years, I think there
has been change. We have become
more honest and this accelerates the
change of mindsets and younger people
really come forward to the scene of
public life and give it a new colour. There
was a time when you could not talk
against the government and not risk
prison. Today we do not have political
prisons in our country. That does not
mean we do not have human rights
violations, but we have gone several
steps forward. 
But we have also gone a step
backward as the world is becoming
more complex with new challenges and
threats. We should all be looking for
solutions to common problems. We
need to talk not just about human rights
monitoring but also determine where
we need sustainability, where we need
to do better, and what strategies we
should follow. One civil society leader
said to me many years ago: “Asma, you
can’t simply be a human rights activist
with two feet running on the streets, you
must use your head too”. I am learning
now that the feet must move with the
head. ■
Asma Jahangir, a lawyer and
President of Pakistan’s Supreme Court
Bar Association, served as Chairperson
of the Pakistan’s Human Rights
Commission as well as United Nations
Special Rapporteur on Freedom of
Religion or Belief. The prize recognized
her advocacy for human rights,
especially those of religious minorities,
women and children.
