Different
dreams, yet...
They come from different countries, have different occupations, speak different languages,
yet they have much in common: youth, art, a desire to connect with other cultures. Until
recently, they’d never even met: UNESCO brought them together. They were awarded the
title of “Young Artist for Intercultural Dialogue between Arab and Western Worlds”. Among
them, Betty Shamieh (USA/Occupied Palestinian Territory), Merlijn Twaalfhoven
(Netherlands) and two members of the Talent 2008 project, Ingebjørg Bratland (Norway) and
Majd Shahin (Occupied Palestinian Territory) answered our questions to share their
convictions, projects and passions with our readers.
Interview conducted by Iris Julia Bührle and Khaled Abu Hijleh 
View of the Morro da
Providencia favela in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
with photos from JR's
August 2008 project
“Women are Heroes”
covering walls. 
© Courtesy of JR:
http://jr-art.net/ 

How can the artist contribute to
building peace and mutual
understanding between people around
the world?
Betty Shamieh: Artists illuminate the
common humanity that we all share.
What is wonderful about theatre is that it
shows us how similar we are, not only
across the globe but throughout
generations. It shows us not only how we
should coexist peacefully, but also why.
When one sees a work of art, particularly
a work of theatre where a story that was
written in the time of the Greeks still has
resonance today, it becomes clear that
we do have a recognizable but
indefinable human essence. 
Ingebjørg Bratland: I think that music is
the language of the heart and when we
do not speak the same language, we can
communicate through music. The world
can sometimes seem very violent, so it is
great to come together and play music,
which is something that we are
passionate about. It is a break from the
world that we are living in, a kind of free
space. 
Majd Shahin: Music is the language of
the nations. I think music is the way to
make other people understand what you
are and what you feel. 
Merlijn Twaalfhoven: In my projects, I
usually avoid to use the word “peace”
because the term is surrounded by many
expectations, but also by moments of
disappointment or even frustration.
However, you can reflect about what are
conditions for peace. In my opinion, one
condition for peace is contact between
people. Therefore, I wanted to stimulate
contact and make people curious. Art is
an excellent way to make people curious,
not to give answers but to create
openings. When something is open,
when something is not exactly fixed,
people want to continue because they
want to learn more and look for the
truth. And that is what I believe can be a
condition for a road to peace and
understanding. I am happy when I leave
a place and people have many questions.
What kind of difficulties you have
faced in your projects? How did you
overcome them?
B.S.: One difficulty when you deal with
challenging subjects is that you need to
be able to not fully articulate your
And by doing that it became clear. But I
made many mistakes on the road by
making it too complex and by
expecting others to have the same
dreams. Everyone has different dreams
but once you start realizing, once you
just start doing, then people get
inspired and feel connections. 
How do you define your role as an
artist in the social and political life of
your own country?
B.S.: I think the role of the artist in any
society is to inspire. What I hope to
inspire in the people in the country
where I live, which is America, is a real
desire to be a citizen of the world, a
desire to know about other cultures and
to see different perspectives. 
When you live between two
cultures, it is also very important to
show the similarities between them.
Many works of Western artists about the
Middle East, for instance, focus on the
plight of women. I live in America where
women also have little political,
economic and artistic power. Therefore,
I feel that one of the things I need to do
as an artist is to talk about how women’s
situations across the globe are similar
because it is very easy to look at other
cultures, but people sometimes forget
to look at their own. As I live in two
worlds, it makes me question how
different cultures really are at their base.
M.S.: My country, Palestine, has a lot of
messages and a lot of dreams that we
want to send to the whole world. I think
that in my music I can do this. Of course
the messages are different inside and
outside Palestine. Outside, you have to
clarify a lot of things about your
country; inside, you have to support the
people. The reactions to this have been
quite different, but I feel proud of my
country’s cultural richness which I can
show to the world.
I.B.: Outside we only hear about
Palestine in connection to war, and it is
great that we see that there is music
also and that people are living lives in
Palestine. I myself as a folk musician in
Norway think that it is important that
there are young people continuing the
tradition of Norwegian folk music
because folk music has to be kept alive.
M.T.: As an artist, I hope to confuse and
to break the surface. People have a
perspective. Sometimes artists avoid
controversial issues because they think
they have to have answers or that they
have to be able to speak in a way that
no one can find fault with. I think that
artists should feel free to be wrong from
time to time. 
The other thing that I often face is
that people just assume that they know
my politics. My dream is that one day
the Middle East will look like the
European Union. Of course most people
immediately say that this is impossible
and then I remind them of the situation
in Europe one hundred years ago –
within the last century, Europe has had
two World Wars and countries were
occupying each other and tearing each
other apart. I want to challenge the
belief that we cannot change in the
Middle East. 
I.B.: The only problem for me was the
language. Some of the artists from
Egypt and Palestine did not speak much
English, and it can be a bit tough to
come together and make music when
you cannot communicate with words.
So we just had to use the music and
play!
M.S.: I did not have any problems with
the language and to cooperate with
musicians from other parts of the world,
but the music was a challenge. I am a
percussionist and for me it is difficult to
play a Norwegian song because the
beats are totally different from the
Oriental beats I usually play. But it has
been a very good experience!
M.T.: The difficulty in my work is that
when you want to do something
unconventional and you want to
convince others to go with you to an
unknown territory, then people do not
have the same idea in their minds as
you. In Cyprus, for example, I talked a lot
about the unity of the island and about
connecting both sides (north and south,
which are separate states) by music and
people did not know what I wanted and
what was my political agenda… So
finally I abandoned all my theories and I
just said: let’s go on the rooftop and
play music and listen to the other side.

I think that artists should feel free
to be wrong from time to time. 
Betty Shamieh

strong need to make the world around
them very clear and to put labels, and
after that it is very hard to change their
minds. So I believe confusion is needed
so that people realize that the labels do
not always fit and start looking what is
behind them. 
It is a privilege that I can go to
places about which I am curious, but it is
also important that I let others follow
me. If I travel to Syria it is a great
experience for me, but I try to find ways
that through my projects people in the
Western world can also travel a bit to
Syria. I feel that I have to share this
curiosity; it is not only for myself. 
I meet many artists in Holland who
are very focused just on the quality of
making music, but most people do not
ask whether they could use their quality
as a tool for making the world better.
Thanks to UNESCO, I have met more
people who think not only about art,
but also about art inside the world and
what it might change.
What are your plans in the near future,
after having won the UNESCO award?
M.T.: This recognition is very important
for me because my work takes place
outside concert halls or festivals or
programmes of orchestras. I do it on my
own with a small organization or with
freelancers, and with hardly any budget.
Sometimes I obtain media attention and
that is important, but as it is not inside
the infrastructure of culture my work is
hard to label, and therefore it is difficult
to find support and partners. Such a title
gives some clarity to the fact that I am
doing this type of work and that it has
some positive results. I also hope that the
next years I can follow up on the projects
that I started – for instance Al Quds
Underground in East Jerusalem. What I
have done so far is just a beginning!
B.S.: This title was incredibly meaningful
for me. It was the first time in my life that
I felt that both my Palestinian and
American origin were recognized; thus,
UNESCO has acknowledged the
complexity of identity. In addition to
continuing to develop as an artist,
I would like to support the efforts of the
late Juliano Mer Khamis (Israeli actor and


An imam, a minister and a rabbi strike playful poses,
as part of the 2007 “Face 2 Face” project by
JR and Marco, who covered walls with portraits of
Israelis and Palestinians working at the
same jobs.© Courtesy of JR: http://jr-art.net/ 

theatre director, assassinated on 4 April
2011) who did wonderful work in Jenin.
We must not allow violence to scare us
away from continuing to do work and
continuing to aspire for the kind of future
that everybody deserves.
I.B.: I would love to visit other countries
and learn about their folk music. I think
that traditional music is a particularly
good way to learn about other cultures,
even better than classical music which
has become more universal. And in my
opinion, you have to visit the country
and to see how people live there and
how they play and use their folk music. I
also use some of the things that I have
learned from Arabic music and make
them a part of my own music.
Furthermore, as we have been in Egypt
and in Norway with the Talent project, it
would be great to visit Palestine as well
and do concerts there! 
Iris Julia Bührle, 29, is a German art
historian and also a specialist in
comparative literature. She has written
numerous articles and scholarly papers
on dance, literature and history
(including a thesis on France and
UNESCO from 1945 to1958). 
M.S.: I will also continue my path as a
Palestinian folk musician inside and
outside my country. The UNESCO title
encourages me and gives me a push to
take a step forward in my music life. It is
great to find people that understand
and appreciate your art. I was so
surprised when I met the other artists
who were attributed the title and saw
the other projects – you feel you are not
alone! There are people from
everywhere trying to do what you do. ■
