An act of survival
A scene from the
Tunisian revolution.
Tunis. Late January
2011.
In the eyes of student Emna Fitouri, the Tunisian youth uprising in January 2011 was more
than just a revolution – it was a matter of life and death for a whole generation.  
EMNA FITOURI
On 10 January 2011, I saw on Facebook
that people were getting ready to
demonstrate in Tunis. My classmates and
I arranged to meet outside the Ministry
of the Interior on 14 January. We
demonstrated for three days, on Avenue
Habib Bourguiba and in Place de la
Kasbah, in the city centre. We arranged
everything on Facebook, like most
young Tunisians. That is why a lot of
commentators have called ours a
“Facebook revolution”. But the reality
was much more complex. In fact these
social networks were just a tool that
young people used to get started, to
trigger a change in society, to fight
against unemployment and other forms
of humiliation, to stand up for human
rights and dignity. 
Having said this, it would be wrong
to play down the role of internet
completely, because it has proved to be
an awesome instrument in the
democratisation of Arab countries, while
reflecting the diversity of their politics
and culture. And a powerful weapon
against censorship. Now, no one can say
“It’s me. I’m in charge.” The internet will
stop them, by providing opportunities
for constructive debate. It is also
teaching us what “debate” really means. 
The previous revolution in Tunisia
ended with a “revolutionary
dictatorship”, with well-known results.
Today we are part of a non-violent,
“civilized revolution”, which is heading
towards democracy. 
But it is not all so civilized – the
media and analysts have made a lot of
the “peaceful” character of this
revolution, because young people took
to the streets unarmed. We need to
choose our words carefully. Peaceful, for
whom? For the people who crouched in
fear day after day, as the bullets flew?
For the soldiers and policemen who
were torn between their professional
duty and personal convictions? For the
young demonstrators who had never
seen so much blood flow?  The hell we
went through may not have been as
deadly as that of our brothers in Libya,
Yemen and Syria, but we still went
through some terrible moments.

Emna Fitouri, 21-year-old Tunisian, is
in her second year at the Preparatory
Institute for Literary Studies and
Humanities in Tunis, where she is
studying French. She is a scout captain
in Hammam Lif, a suburb in the south
of Tunis. 

I saw dead bodies; I was terrified; I
fainted because of the tear gas…
Hundreds of people from Sidi Bouzid –
the town where Mohamed Bouazizi set
himself on fire on 4 January, triggering
the revolution – came to the Kasbah in
Tunis, to join the demonstrations in the
capital. Some brought their wives and
children. They were cold, hungry and
miserable. I helped the scouts bring
them food and blankets and assisted
the doctor in charge of the scouts’
medical service.
But more than anything, I shouted.
For days on end. With all my might, I
shouted “GET OUT!” until Ben Ali left. I
wanted to put an end to a regime that
had made youth its most vulnerable
victims.
Instead of being the driving force
behind the economy, we had become
its scapegoat. That explains why we, the
young people, were the first to rise up.
In fact, we were trapped. On the one
hand we were receiving what was
supposed to be one of the best
educations in Africa, but, in reality, it was
not adapted to the needs of an ever-
changing market. Meanwhile, the
regime did not allow us to get jobs and
keep them. Continuing education, which
allows employees to keep their skills up
to date, does not exist in Tunisia. For
example, in the IT world, when the
technology changes, companies simply
get new software engineers and
technicians! Job insecurity has become a
disease, just as oppressive as the
impossibility for young graduates to find
work in the first place. I wonder if there is
a single family in the entire country that
doesn’t have at least one unemployed
graduate at home. 
The unstable education system and
the extremely cynical economic policy
made the younger generation feel
abused, exploited and suffocated. Our
first uprisings were acts of survival. Our
future actions will be part of a process
of building a new country. ■
