Humanism is, amongst other things, the claim or
intuition that all humans have something
fundamental in common, and that this
mandates equal entitlement to dignity and
respect. This, however, does not serve to
distinguish humanism from other doctrines and
understandings, including religious ones, which
treat all humans as sharing a commonality (an
immortal soul, etc) which commands respect. 
What historically distinguished humanism
from the many other affirmations of human
dignity and worth was the specific form that this
affirmation took; in particular, two supporting or
buttressing arguments which, in affirming
human equality and dignity, give this
affirmation its distinctively ‘humanist’ cast. These
are, first, that human worth is affirmed
independently of god(s), and more generally,
that ‘man’ replaces god as the measure of all
things. Second, that what all humans have in
common at once consists of, resides in, and can
only be discovered through, a singular
rationality. 
Thus understood, humanism is not simply a
Renaissance phenomenon, but something that
comes to full flower in the Enlightenment, in the
form of the idea of a universal humanity and a
singular Reason. 
In this essay, I ask whether the affirmation of
human commonality and worth is best secured
by an anthropological understanding of the
world, and by the search for a singular rationality.
In short, is the aspiration to affirm human
commonality and dignity best served by
humanism?
Man at the centre of the universe
Edward Said1 declares that the ‘core’ of
humanism is the secular notion that the
historical world is made by men and women, and
not by God, and that it can be understood
rationally. At the core of humanism, then, is a
philosophical anthropology, which in according
centrality to man diminishes (though it does not
necessarily eliminate) the role accorded to
god(s). Once the purposes and the acts of gods
explained the world of men; with humanism, to
understand the gods of men you have to
understand the men, for their gods are the
fantastical creation of their minds. 
If the centrality accorded to Man as maker of
meanings and purposes involves a diminution of
the role once accorded to god(s), it also involves
a separation, a distinction, between a human
world and a non-human one. There are two
worlds, one of impersonal processes and laws,
the other of human intentions and meanings. 
Nature is not a realm of purposes and
meanings, and so to gain knowledge of nature is
to gain understanding of the impersonal and
often lawlike forces that shape it; knowledge of
the historical or cultural world is knowledge of
purposes and meanings, for the historical world
is where the meanings and purposes of men are
apparent in the traces they leave behind.
Knowledge of nature, the preserve of the natural
sciences, can lead to mastery of natural forces;
knowledge of the historical world, the preserve
of the human and humanist sciences, leads to
self-knowledge. 
Humanism replaces a view of a single world
shot through with meaning and purpose, in
which the purposes and designs of nature are
prefigured and reflected in the social world, with
two worlds, one devoid of meaning and purpose,
and the other constituted of the meanings and
purposes humans have given their world in
different times and places.
humanism going?
SANJAY SETH 
At the heart of the notion of
humanism is that something that
we all share and which sanctions
our aspirations towards equality,
despite our differences. The
Enlightenment philosophers
looked for it in the crucible of a
singular rationality; today we
need to search at the crossroads of
different visions of morality.



Where is 

K Part of the cycle, 'Theoria
Sacra' by French painter and
sculptor Richard Texier,
reproduced with the kind
permission of the artist.
www.richardtexier.com
There have always been critics of these
presumptions, including Hamann2, Kierkegaard3,
Adorno4, Horkheimer5, and Heidegger6. In the
non-Western world, just as there were many
who accepted and celebrated the values that
were part of western humanism, there were also
always those, like Gandhi7, Césaire8 and Fanon9,
who were critics of a ‘civilisation’ that in
purporting to exalt Man frequently degraded
men.  Nonetheless, it is the account of the birth
of this philosophical anthropology delivered by
those who are the progeny of it that has been
dominant, and this account celebrates its
ancestry. 
I suggest, however, that circumstances have
changed such that a critical reconsideration of
this defining aspect of humanism is required.
What has changed is, above all, an
environmental crisis that calls into question the
absolute privileging of humans, as well as the
sharp distinction between man and nature, that
are characteristic of traditional humanism (see
pp. 34-35). It is not only and obviously that our
privileging of man may have something to do
with the despoliation of the conditions that
make human life sustainable, but also that the
very distinction between the world that men
make and the world that exists independently of
them is in the process of collapsing. With global
warming and the mass extinction of species,
humans have become geological, and not (as
before) simply biological agents.
‘What has changed is, above all, an
environmental crisis that calls into
question the absolute privileging of
humans, as well as the sharp distinction
between man and nature, that are
characteristic of traditional humanism.”
1. Edward Saïd [1935-2003], Palestinian American literary
theorist and founding figure in postcolonial studies. Author of
Orientalism (1978) and Humanism and Democratic Criticism
(2004.)
2. Johann Georg Hamann [1730-1788], German philosopher,
friend and intellectual opponent of Immanuel Kant. He was
convinced that faith and belief, rather than knowledge,
determine human actions.
3. Søren Kierkegaard [1813-1855], Danish Christian
philosopher, known as the Father of Existentialism.
4. Theodor Adorno [1903-1969], German philosopher and
social critic, and member, with Horkheimer and others, of the
Frankfurt School of social theory and philosophy. 
5. Max Horkheimer [1895–1973], German philosopher and
sociologist, best known for his “critical theory” that combined
Marxist-oriented political philosophy with social and cultural
analysis informed by empirical research. He co-authored with
Theodor Adorno Dialectic of Enlightenment (1947). 
6. Martin  Heidegger [1889-1976], German philosopher, known
for his phenomenological exploration of the question of being,
and for his critique of philosophical humanism. Read: The
Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays , Harper
Torchbooks,1977; “Letter on Humanism”, in Basic Writings, 1993.
7. Mahatma Gandhi [1869-1948], political and ideological
leader, father of the Indian nation. His philosophy of nonviolent
resistance inspired movements for civil rights and freedom
across the world.
8. Aimé Césaire [1913-2008], French poet from Martinique, one
of the founders of the Négritude movement. Read: Discourse on
colonialism, Monthly Review Press, 2000.
9. Frantz Fanon [1925-1961] French psychiatrist from
Martinique, active member of the Algerian struggle for
independence. Well known as a thinker on the issue of
decolonization.  Read: The Wretched of the Earth, Grove Press,
1963.©

The Enlightenment project
If anthropology (and a consequent division
between nature and society) is one defining
element of humanism, the conviction that what
all humans have in common resides in, and can
only be discovered through a singular rationality,
is another. The project to establish this was at the
heart of the Enlightenment.
In his “Was ist Aufklärung” Kant10 famously
defined Enlightenment as mankind coming to
maturity through the exercise of its reason. But if
the pre-modern notion of a morally ordered and
purposive universe had been (in Weber’s later
phrase11) ‘disenchanted’; if tradition and custom
no longer seemed the source of Reason, or
indeed, even reasonable; and if Hume’s sceptical
challenge12 raised the possibility of as many
reasons as there are persons; then what Reason
was this, and whose Reason? 
The most enduring answer to this puzzle was
offered by Kant. Its power lay, above all else, in
the argument Kant called ‘transcendental’.
Instead of ‘dogmatically’ asserting certain
propositions to be true, or seeking to identify, on
empirical grounds, a set of rational principles
common to all men, Kant instead asked what
sort of beings we had to be to have cognitions
and perceptions in the first place. The
transcendental question allowed Kant to deduce
universal categories of Reason which were not
derived from human experience, which is varied,
but was the basis for our having any experience
in the first place. Kant managed to make a
powerful argument for a Reason that was
universal, because notwithstanding the immense
variety of human experience, moralities and
notions of beauty, it was the precondition for
humans having any sort of experience, morality
or conception of beauty. 
Modern knowledge, as elaborated and
defended by Kant and by the Enlightenment
more generally, could now stake a claim to
having validated or proven itself, thus revealing
all earlier knowledge to have been speculation or
dogma. And of course this singular Reason,
which does not vary from culture to culture,
proved that all humans, irrespective of the
differences among them, were to be treated as
ends in themselves, and not means.
It is testimony to the vitality of the line of
argument initiated by Kant that the most
sophisticated contemporary attempts to salvage
or retrieve the Enlightenment project, while
acknowledging, as they must, that Reason is
inseparably bound with interests, culture and
power, all do so by returning to Kant. The
criticism that can be levelled at such arguments,
unsurprisingly, is similar to the criticism that was
levelled at Kant by his contemporaries and
immediate successors, namely that such proofs
presuppose what needs to be proven. 
The example of the political philosopher
John Rawls13 is especially instructive. In his A
Theory of Justice and some subsequent works
Rawls sought to draw upon Kant to develop a
theory of justice (see pp. 16-18) that would be
grounded upon a few rationally defensible
principles that would be acknowledged by
almost all. In later works, he acknowledges that
his theory of justice, and his defence of
liberalism, already presuppose a certain kind of
public political culture, one shaped by the Wars
of Religion in Europe, by the separation of
politics from religion thereafter, and so on. The
aim of his later theory is thus to elaborate a
pragmatic and procedural defence of a justice
which is acknowledged to be Western and
liberal, and cannot be passed off as ‘universal’.
(Rawls 1995 and 1996). 
That which Rawls reluctantly comes to
‘concede’ has been levelled as an accusation by
others, who have charged that Reason always
turns out to be not a placeless universal, but
European. Here are their arguments: What we
have learned to call Reason is not rationality as
such, but a historically and culturally specific way
of constructing and construing the world.
Moreover, treating this tradition as universal has
been an essential part of the story of, and
justification for, colonialism. Armed with the
certainty that it possessed nothing less than
universal Reason, Europe could proceed with its
colonial conquests, no longer principally in the
name of bringing the true word of god to the
heathen, but rather in the name of bringing
Enlightenment and civilization to the benighted.
What were being encountered were not other
traditions of reasoning and other ways of being
in the world, but unreason. The institutions and
practices that constituted colonialism, or came
in its wake, were now seen to be educating the
colonized, so that they too might one day reach
their maturity and be able to participate in and
exercise the Reason that was to be Europe’s gift
to them. 
Lest there be any confusion, let me be very
clear that I am not suggesting that the
intellectual and cultural tradition of modern
10. Immanuel Kant [1724-1804], German philosopher and a
pivotal figure in modern philosophy. “Answering the Question:
What Is Enlightenment?” is the title of an essay published in the
Berlinische Monatsschrift (Berlin Monthly), in 1784.
11. Max Weber [1864-1920], German sociologist and
economist.
12. David Hume [1711-1776], one of the most important
figures in the history of Western philosophy and the Scottish
Enlightenment.  Known especially for his philosophical
empiricism and scepticism.
13. John Rawls [1921-2002], political philosopher. His book A
Theory of Justice (1971), is considered as one of the primary
texts in contemporary political philosophy. Quoted works:
“Justice as Fairness: Political Not Metaphysical” in Philosophy
and Public Affairs, 1995; Political Liberalism, Columbia University
Press, 1996.
Modern
knowledge, as
elaborated and
defended by Kant
and by the
Enlightenment
more generally,
could now stake a
claim to having
validated or
proven itself, thus
revealing all
earlier knowledge
to have been
speculation or
dogma. And of
course this
singular Reason,
which does not
vary from culture
to culture, proved
that all humans,
irrespective of the
differences among
them, were to be
treated as ends in
themselves, and
not means.

Sanjay Seth (India), held teaching or
research positions in Sydney,
Melbourne (Australia) and Tokyo
(Japan), before joining Goldsmiths,
University of London (United
Kingdom) in 2007, where he is
Professor and Head of Politics and
co-Director of the Centre for
Postcolonial Studies.

J “Homo Mundo”, sculpture by French artist,
Richard Texier, reproduced by kind permission
of the author.
www.richardtexier.com
Europe was the only one to think that it was
right and all others wrong, or the only
one that has sought to impose its
vision on others. Neither the modern
age nor Europe has had a monopoly
on arrogance or dogmatism. What I
am suggesting is that the
Enlightenment heritage – the
European conviction in a context
and tradition-free Reason – made it
possible for Europe to conquer and
rule not in the name of a tradition
that claimed to be superior to all
others, but in the name of something
that did not see itself as a tradition at all.
This was a knowledge which claimed not
only to be true, but declared itself to be
deduced from nothing less than
Reason itself, rather than being
grounded in the ideals and practices
of real historical communities. 
In the era after decolonization,
it should however be all too clear
that what humans have in
common, and what may allow us
to ‘ground’ their claims to dignity
and respect, neither resides in nor
can be discovered by a singular
Reason. All attempts to do so have
ended up, whether wittingly or
unwittingly, by substituting ‘European’
or ‘Western’ for ‘human’. The idea of a
singular Reason, although deeply
rooted in Western culture and
thought, cannot be sustained, and
needs to be critically re-examined.
New avenues to explore
I began this essay by suggesting
that humanism consists of an
affirmation that all humans,
notwithstanding their many
differences, have something
important in common, and
thus that all humans should
be equally accorded respect
and dignity; and that this
rests upon two supporting
arguments/presumptions.
One of these is a
philosophical
anthropology, which
makes the ‘discovery’
that men are the source
of meanings and values,
not gods, and discovers
also a domain of
nature that is devoid of
meaning and purpose,
an inert object that is
subject to human
knowledge and manipulation. The second is
the presumption that the counterpart of a
common humanity is a singular Reason. 
I have gone on to argue that
neither of these arguments or
presumptions can be sustained; they
were never true, and are more
demonstrably untrue today than
ever before. These were not ‘truths’
finally discovered, but rather have
been a particular way of construing
and constructing the world. As such,
they have been the source of many
human achievements; but they have also
entailed great costs, costs which are
especially apparent today, as the exaltation
of man despoils that which is the very
condition for any sort of human life; as the
distinction between the human and the
natural collapses; and as it becomes
increasingly clear that what all humans
have in common neither resides in, nor is
to be discovered through, the search for a
singular Reason that abstracts from the
differences that characterise humankind. 
The affirmation of human commonality
and dignity is something that is no less urgent
today than at any time before. Because such an
affirmation can plausibly be seen as being, in
some sense, at the core of humanism, we
cannot reject humanism, but rather need to
re-found and to reinterpret it. I suggest that
a reinterpreted and viable humanism, will
be one in which our moral intuitions
regarding human commonality and dignity
no longer rest upon a questionable
anthropocentrism or on dubious claims to
a universal Reason. I further suggest that
such a reinterpretation will be the
product of a dialogue between different
civilizations and moral perspectives,
rather than a declaration that one moral
perspective (that of the modern West) is
the correct one. ■
