The main problem for newly
independent countries is
their identity, says Roza
Otunbayeva, first woman to
become President of
Kyrgyzstan. The country’s
Iron Lady has seen more
than one crisis come and go
and has overcome many
obstacles in the long career
that brought her to
leadership in July 2010. On
the brink of collapse, the
nation nearly split in two –
she did not let this happen. 
Reading your biography, we note a
number of ‘firsts’: first woman Minister
of Foreign Affairs in Kyrgyzstan, first
woman Ambassador to the USA and
then to the UK and, finally,
Kyrgyzstan’s first woman President.
What is the secret of your success? 
During Perestroika, when I was Vice-
President of the Council of Ministers in
the Republic of Kyrgyzstan, I was invited
to Moscow, to join the Soviet Union’s
National Commission for UNESCO. I
started as Executive Secretary, before
becoming President of the Commission.
It was no small thing to represent the
Soviet Union. The country was a
superpower at the time, and, because
the USA was not a member of UNESCO,
we were the main contributor. That is
how I came to join the Cabinet of the
Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs, where,
incidentally, I was also the first woman.
When the Soviet Union collapsed,
Askar Akayev [first president of
Kyrgyzstan, who was deposed by the
March 2005 revolution] invited me to
become Minister for Foreign Affairs. But
as the USA was very important to us at
that time, on the same level as the
World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund on which we depended,



on the map
Putting Kyrgyzstan

I was appointed Ambassador to the
USA, a post I held for two years, before
returning to Kyrgyzstan as Minister of
Foreign Affairs. 
It was three years later, in 1997, that
Askar Akayev became increasingly
authoritarian. We no longer saw eye-to-
eye. I spent my time criticising him; he
got irritated. In the end, I suggested we
go our separate ways. The idea was not
to go against him – people still trusted
him and wanted him to go through with
his reforms. So I became Kyrgyzstan’s
first Ambassador to Great Britain. That
was also a major pioneering effort, with
members of the UN Security Council. At
the time, our aim was to put Kyrgyzstan
on the map. 
In 2005, having united several
opposition parties, we staged the Tulip
Revolution. But Kurmanbek Bakiyev1
usurped our revolution. He took over
everything and installed a family
dictatorship. For the next five years, we
fought for our ideals, in opposition. I
was head of the opposition in
parliament. In 2010, finally, we took
control!
How do those around you, and
ordinary people, feel about having a
woman as Head of State? 
With the respect traditionally given to
elders, women and mothers. And
among my colleagues I am probably the
one with the most experience. After all, I
deserved this promotion. I have fought
all the way and made many sacrifices. As
for the Kyrgyz people, they also know
that I am not in politics by accident, I am
not someone’s protégé.
Of course there are some people
who think that a woman cannot govern
a country. And to them, I say: the year
2010 was one of the most critical in the
history of Kyrgyzstan. We almost
collapsed as a country and became a
divided nation. But we managed to save
everything. We got ourselves out of a
situation of utter chaos and back onto
dry land. Even though the rest of the
world stood by and did nothing. Let
someone else try to do that! 
The news is full of stories about
countries in turmoil, like Libya. In
Kyrgyzstan, those troubles are behind
us. Our young country still has many
challenges to overcome, but the worst is
over.
Your energy and enthusiasm were
rewarded this year with the
International Women of Courage
award from the US Department of
State. What does this mean to you?
I think the award is more for my country
than for me. The events in the Arab
world are showing that the whole world
is beginning to understand that the
movement of people, countries and
whole continents towards democracy is
unstoppable. What we have gone
through demonstrates that my country
is not out of step with the evolution of
the rest of the world. What my country
and my people have had the courage to
show is that they are motivated by a
love of freedom, and their faith in
progress and democracy. I was just
caught up in the wake of this
movement.
First woman Head of State in Central Asia,
Roza Otunbayeva was born in 1950. With
a degree in philosophy from Moscow State
University and a lecturer early in her career,
she was soon recruited to the party and
rapidly climbed the political ladder. She
played a key role in the overthrow of two
authoritarian regimes in Kyrgyzstan in
March 2005 and April 2010.In June 2010
when a referendum voted in a new
constitution, the people elected the single
candidate, Roza Otunbayeva, as president
of the country. 

Kyrgyzstan has already done a lot for
women’s equality. There is a 30%
quota for women in parliament. What
more needs to be done, in your
opinion?
Gender equality is a never-ending battle.
Making quotas part of the law, as we did
in the last term of office, is not enough.
These laws are not applied in daily life.
Today, the National Audit Office, which
also has a legal quota of 30% women,
expects three candidates to be
appointed by the President, three by the
opposition and three by the coalition.
The opposition and the coalition only
put forward men, leaving me to put
forward the women. This is just pure
cynicism! 
Women do hold some of our
important posts, though. Apart from my
post, which was the product of a
consensus of political forces, the National
Bank has a woman president, as do the
Supreme Court and the Academy of
Sciences. But, in the government, we
have just one woman, which is quite
simply unacceptable. And, in the
business sector, there is not a single
woman on the boards of any of our
major enterprises. 
This is a special year for Kyrgyz
women. First, because this is the
bicentenary of the birth of Kurmanjan
Datka. This woman, who governed Alai,
in the south, did a great deal to achieve
the unification of this region and to
annex it from Russia. She was progressive
and had prodigious strength and
determination. She is a figurehead for
women and for the nation as a whole.
And second, because my presidency is
coming to an end. This year will
undoubtedly see debates over the role of
women in our country come to a peak.
What would you say is the main
priority for the country?
It is difficult to give a categorical answer
to this question. But I would say that the
most acute problem facing newly
independent countries concerns their
identity. This is a vast, complex and
many-layered issue. All of us, all 200-odd
members of the United Nations, are
being swept along by the same tide,
called globalization. Yet the question of
identity is tormenting every nation and
every thinking person. This is a serious
obstacle to development. We are all
suffering from it and have to find a
solution. ■
1.  Brought to power by the Tulip Revolution,
Kurmanbek Bakiyev led the country from 2005 to
2010. He was relieved of his functions in April 2010
after a popular uprising in which 87 people died.
