Ouided Bouchamaoui receiving 
the Nobel Peace Prize on 10 December 2015.  
© ODD ANDERSEN / AFP Photo 

As president of UTICA, you played a major 
role in helping Tunisia resolve the political 
crisis of 2013, by initiating a “national 
dialogue” with three other organizations. 
How did you achieve this?
There were four of us [the Tunisian 
National Dialogue Quartet, winner of 
the Nobel Peace Prize, 2015] − UTICA, 
the Tunisian General Labour Union 
(UGTT), the Tunisian Order of Lawyers 
and the Tunisian Human Rights League 
(LTDH). After the politically-motivated 
assassination of the deputy [opposition 
party leader], Mohamed Brahmi, in July 
2013, barely six months after Chokri 
Bellaïd, leader of the Popular Front, 
was murdered, we decided to publish 
a joint statement calling for calm. 
We then used this [statement] as the basis 
for a road map, which, for us, reflected 
the aspirations of the vast majority 
of Tunisians. We submitted it to the main 
political parties and twenty-two parties 
agreed to sign it. Only the Congrès pour 
la République (CPR), one of the parties 
in the interim government at the time, 
refused to take part in the process. 
The Ennahdha party, which had 
also joined the interim government, 
finally signed the statement, without 
the amendments it had wanted.
For the first time in Tunisia’s history, 
relations between workers’ unions and 
employers were relatively good. Was 
‘dialogue’ the watchword for dealing with 
political and social issues?
Yes. Before entering into the political 
negotiations, there was a series of 
discussions to reach an understanding 
between UTICA and UGTT – on the 
initiative of UTICA, I should emphasize. 
We wanted to establish this initial 
milestone in social dialogue. There is 
nothing is more effective than getting 
together around a table when it comes 
to breaking down barriers between 
unions and employers. Businesses 
cannot function without their owners 
or their workers. In the interests 
of productivity, the best thing is 
to adopt the principle of “living together 
in peace” in spite of our differences. 
UTICA used to be an ally of the 
authoritarian government, but after the 
2011 revolution, it became one of the 
players in the democratic process. How 
did this change come about? 
It’s true, UTICA was not totally 
independent in its decision-making. 
We are expected to work with 
government, whatever its political colour. 
The capital is always fragile. Even so, 
certain burning issues had been tackled 
before 2011, such as parallel trade or 
fraud and corruption. Fortunately, we are 
now a democracy, which allows us to 
address even the most sensitive issues 
more frankly and openly. This greatly 
facilitates dialogue.
In your opinion, what role should 
the private sector play in upholding 
the democratic process?
The slogan created by the youth 
movement during the revolution was 
“Dignity and Work”. It’s true, there is no 
dignity without work. So our role is to 
invest in order to create jobs. And if we 
can achieve this objective, we will have 
resolved the country’s economic and 
social problems. 
Democracy is a major achievement. 
But it is not sufficient for the stability of 
the country. What good is talking if you 
don’t have enough to eat? So we have an 
important role to play in creating jobs. 
But the government has to follow through. 
There are several things holding back 
development. A number of laws need 
to be revised. The slow pace of the 
administration is discouraging investors. 
Foreign investors are not very motivated 
because they feel that existing laws 
are either not clear or not applied. 
Even we Tunisians, in spite of our good 
will, feel frustrated at not being able 
to act as quickly as we’d like because 
the administration and the laws aren’t 
keeping pace.

Prosperity springs 
from trust
Ouided Bouchamaoui 
Ouided Bouchamaoui, winner of the 2015 Nobel Peace Prize, makes a case 
for a strong state that can communicate with its youth, and for a private 
sector that encourages young entrepreneurs. According to the President 
of the Tunisian Confederation of Industry, Trade and Handicrafts (UTICA), 
there can be no democracy without economic development. 
Interview by Mounir Charfi, Tunisian journalist 

There are a number of obstacles today 
that we are all aware of. What is needed 
is the political will to overcome them 
and restore trust between all the 
stakeholders − a necessary precondition 
for any form of development. True, we 
have passed from being a dictatorship 
to a democracy. But this does not 
mean that the state has to be absent. 
A minimum of order is necessary, if only 
to apply the law. We do not want an 
authoritarian state again, but we do want 
a strong state. And the state derives its 
strength from the application of the law. 
The authority of the law provides rigour, 
and rigour leads to trust. And it is trust 
that brings investment and prosperity.
Terrorism and the recruitment of youth 
via the internet has become one of the 
major challenges of our time. In 2015, 
the Tunisian Quartet launched an appeal 
from the Nobel podium to combat this 
plague. What solutions does it suggest?
I believe that we haven’t yet addressed 
the problems of youth in a pragmatic 
manner. In Tunisia, six years after 
the revolution, young people have still not 
seen any concrete actions in response to 
their demands. They still have no work, 
no leisure, no adequate framework to fulfil 
their potential, and no cultural or sports 
activities. On the other hand, they have 
easy access to the internet. With no work 
and no one listening to them, they are easy 
prey for recruitment, especially if they are 
promised paradise and loads of money. 
We still haven’t realized just how serious 
this phenomenon is, especially in the 
interior of the country. Let’s not forget that 
terrorism is closely linked to smuggling 
− in other words, the informal sector 
− where young people find work. A whole 
education programme has to be put in 
place by the government to enter into 
dialogue with youth, to teach them about 
citizenship and to explain that the state 
alone cannot solve all their problems. 
To create employment, the state has to 
ensure that there is security, political 
stability and legislation to encourage 
entrepreneurship and foreign investment.
Employers are often called “businessmen”. 
But since 2011, they have had a woman 
as their chief representative. This is a first! 
How is this situation viewed? 
It has never bothered anyone. 
As a company director myself, I am 
no stranger to the family of employers. 
Also, no one thinks that just because 
UTICA has a woman as its president, 
it risks losing its authority or weakening 
its role. It is true that I was the only 
woman on the executive board and 
I was democratically and transparently 
elected, with a very clear majority 
over the other candidates. 
Public-private partnerships (PPPs) are 
recognized as a necessary element in 
achieving the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs). Where does 
Tunisia stand on this? 
The Tunisian parliament passed a law 
allowing public-private partnerships. 
But as it was formulated, this law has 
emptied the principle of any meaning 
in practice. We are now working to 
improve it. Promulgation of the law 
hasn’t been followed up adequately with 
information to explain the objectives 
underlying PPPs. With the exception 
of certain strategic sectors – where the 
state has to be present and where the 
private sector does not have the means 
or the authority to intervene – the private 
sector has to participate actively in 
investments, especially in the provinces, 
to develop the economy and particularly 
to encourage youth entrepreneurship. 
And I’ll take this opportunity to send out 
a message to young people: you can 
always start small and expand later.
Would you like to see radical solutions to 
get Tunisia out of the economic crisis it 
is in? What role could UTICA play in this 
process?
There are no miracle solutions. 
An advantage for Tunisia is that 
the economic ills are well-defined 
and known to everyone. The most 
urgent thing is to apply the law. 
We have to find a solution to parallel 
trade and the informal economy, 
which are undermining our entire 
economy. We need to have better 
control over our borders and make a 
serious effort to get youth into organized 
employment. We also have to convince 
people that paying their taxes is an 
act of citizenship. Finally, the Tunisian 
government, which previously did quite 
a good job, needs to restore the image 
it used to have, so that we can put 
our trust in it once again. 

The first woman to be president 
of UTICA, Ouided Bouchamaoui 
was designated “Best Businesswoman 
in the Arab world” by the Deauville 
Partnership, launched at the G8 
Summit in 2013. In 2014, she received 
the Business for Peace Award from 
the Oslo Business for Peace Foundation, 
and in 2015, was awarded the Golden 
Shield of Excellence by the Arab 
Organization for Social Responsibility.
I think that the choice was made on 
the basis of objective criteria, such as 
the programme, charisma, a sense of 
leadership and management skills. 
Frankly, I have never felt uneasy as a 
woman in this position.
Do the pressures of politics and union 
work interfere with your private life?
When one becomes a public figure, 
one no longer has the private life one 
used to have. It’s a choice I have to 
accept. I work without pay for the good 
of my country and the organization. I am 
prepared to endure all kinds of pressures 
and criticisms, so long as they stay within 
my official and professional sphere. 
What is regrettable is the interference 
with my private life. Some people 
unfortunately mix everything up. 
But I keep things separate. I respond 
seriously to all objective criticism 
concerning my professional and political 
activities, according to my convictions. 
But I simply ignore disparaging remarks 
about my private life. 
My father built up a family and 
businesses conscientiously and with 
hard work. He taught me to have a sense 
of responsibility, which has enabled me 
to manage my personal and professional 
life with the necessary serenity.

Photo from the West of Life series 
(2015) by Tunisian photographer 
Zied Ben Romdhane.
