We are seeing a crisis today in our idea 
of humanity, and philosophy can and 
must help us to think it through. A crisis 
in our idea of humanity: what do we 
mean by this? In the French newspaper, 
Le Monde, dated 30 April 2016, Nicolas 
Hulot – who was not yet environment 
minister (a post he has held since May 2017), 
but head of an environmental foundation 
– asked this question: “Concerning migrants, 
where has our humanity gone?”
I consider the way in which the question is 
asked to be crucial, because it shows that 
what is revealed by the “migrant crisis” we are 
experiencing – unmatched since the Second 
World War, they say – is our own isolationism, 
which is today calling into question 
the regulatory and ethical idea of humanity. 
We must think together about the migrant, 
a figure that highlights human distress, 
and the rise of what has been called populism. 
I prefer to use the term ethno-nationalism 
or tribalism, because I consider the accepted 
term of populism inadequate to describe 
what we are experiencing today.



Philosophy versus
tribalism
by Souleymane Bachir Diagne
The migrant crisis points 
to the tribalist isolationism 
that can be found at the origin 
of what the philosopher 
Souleymane Bachir Diagne 
calls the “crisis in our idea 
of humanity”. Diagne takes 
us on a philosophical journey 
through current issues, along 
the lines of Bergsonian thought.
This article is published to coincide 
with the International Day for Tolerance, 
16 November, and World Philosophy Day, 
celebrated each year on the third 
Thursday of November.
Tribulations, a pop-up installation 
at the  Réserve Malakoff (France) 
by graffiti and stencil artist Sir, 
and painter and “poster-slasher”  
Evazé-Nam, questions notions 
of migration and borders.

The best symbol today for 
this encounter between the migrant 
and the ethno-nationalist is the ship 
chartered by young Europeans of 
the far-right movement, Génération 
Identitaire (Generation Identity). They use 
the ship to intercept migrants’ boats, 
and non-governmental organization 
(NGO) ships helping migrants, 
in the Mediterranean − one wonders 
if they intend to sink them. 
Another image is that of the fishermen 
of Tunisia, opposed to the refuelling 
of what they consider a “racist ship” 
in the country’s ports.

The ‘migrant crisis’ we are 
experiencing is our own 
isolationism, which today calls 
into question the regulatory 
and ethical idea of humanity
The ethno-nationalist movements have 
brought to power − here and there, 
as we know − parties and personalities 
that have turned migrants into 
bogeymen. They have urged their 
constituents to rally against migrants, 
by forming a national front. They came 
close to making their ideology dominant 
in the Netherlands, a country that history 
– the history of philosophy, in particular 
– considers the very homeland of 
tolerance and the idea of humanity.
The primitive nature  
of the tribal instinct
Asking ourselves what gives tribalism 
its power requires an analysis to which 
philosophy − Henri Bergson (1859 to 
1941) in particular − sheds the most 
invaluable light. It teaches us that the 
radical refusal to hear Hulot’s question 
originates in the negation of the very idea 
of a “humanity in general”, on which the 
obligation of hospitality can be based.
Is there no humanity in general? It exists, 
for what Bergson calls the “soul that 
opens” or “the open soul”, the one at the 
heart of his thought in The Two Sources 
of Morality and Religion (Paris, 1932).
In this work, the French philosopher 
explains that the feeling of belonging 
to a tribe is an instinct within us. 
And because it is an instinct, there 
is no need to question its origin or 
its nature, but only to recognize that 
it exists and that it is inscribed primitively 
in our nature.
This, then, is the motive on which 
tribal policy and the rallying call 
for ethno-nationalism is based. 
It is therefore understandable that when 
this policy is given the appearance of 
common sense − and presents itself 
as immediately evident versus the 
complexities of what it condemns as 
the “political correctness” of openness 
to others − it is making the primitive 
nature of the tribal instinct its primary 
truth. What exists for me is the circle of 
closeness constituted by the community 
of those who resemble me, who have 
the same colour of skin or the same 
religion, and so on. It has therefore 
been proposed to sort asylum-seekers 
according to their religion!
If one wishes, then, to evoke an 
abstraction such as that of a humanity, 
it can only be a zoological totalization, 
a grouping obtained only by the 
addition of ultimately heterogeneous 
humanities. One cannot simply arrive 
at the idea of humanity starting from 
affiliations and gradually enlarging 
the territorial inscriptions. In short, 
one cannot stretch the tribal instinct 
into an instinct of the human.
Beyond instinct, 
openness
It is therefore necessary to be able to 
emerge from instinct, in order to find 
oneself, at once in touch with humanity, 
in oneself and in others. Then the 
question is this: how is it possible to 
open the soul beyond the tribe if it is 
originally established that we “naturally 
and directly love our parents and 
our fellow-countrymen, whereas love 
of mankind is indirect and acquired”, 
to quote Bergson? Where can we 
tap into a force that does not have 
the immediacy of an instinct? 
In other words, how is it possible to acquire 
something that goes against nature’s plan 
to enlist us in the community our “tribe” 
has built, with its own morality and its 
opposition to other tribes? This is possible 
because it is also in our nature, explains 
Bergson, to be able to “cheat” this same 
nature and to extend, through intelligence, 
“social solidarity into human fraternity”.
We thus acquire the meaning of 
this human fraternity through, on 
the one hand, religion (and it must 
be remembered here that one of 
the etymologies of this word gives it 
the meaning of that which connects) and, 
on the other, intelligence taking the form 
of philosophical reason. Thus, to open us 
up beyond instinct, there is religion and 
its call to love humanity “through God, 
in God”, and reason, “by which we all 
commune with one another”, and 
through which “the philosophers bring 
us to see mankind and thus show us 
the eminent dignity of the human 
person, the right of all to respect.” 

This love of humanity is not primitive 
like instinct. It is nonetheless primary. 
We experience it through charitable 
action or philosophical meaning: in one 
case as in the other, Bergson tells us, 
we arrive there in one leap, and not in 
stages that would go from the family to 
the nation, and so on.
“The open soul” is precisely the principle 
of this leap. It counters what one might 
call the stunted, closed soul, for which to 
love is to love against; which, to the idea 
of humanity, replies that its main concern 
is itself and what touches it most closely. 
And this is already a great deal, more 
than enough to deal with − it cannot take 
on all the world’s troubles.
Versus this stunted soul and its false facts, 
I recognize in myself an open soul that 
makes humanity immediately present 
to me – I can touch it – and allows me 
to be the neighbour of someone who 
is not close. As Bergson writes, I also 
recognize by this very fact that we have 
always to become human. In other words, 
we have to grow this open soul within 
us continually, and to found upon it a 
response to the migrant crisis, that is 
comprised of humanity and hospitality.
Souleymane Bachir Diagne (Senegal) 
is a philosopher and historian of 
mathematical logic. A professor at 
Columbia University in New York, he has 
written numerous books on the history 
of logic and philosophy, Islam and 
African societies and cultures. In 2011, 
he was awarded the Edouard Glissant 
Prize in recognition of his work.
An asylum seeker feeds doves 
and pigeons in the courtyard 
of the Pian del Lago CARA 
(Accommodation Centre for Asylum 
Seekers) in Caltanissetta, Italy, 2014.
