Her Kyungsuk, Hamo Jeju 2014. © Hyung S. Kim
Kim Julja, Dodu Jeju 2013
© Hyung S. Kim
Kang Sunok, Hamo Jeju 2014.
© Hyung S. Kim

The haenyeo:
living legends of Jeju 
Text: Katerina Markelova
Photos: Hyung-sun Kim and Haenyeo Museum
The photographs are amazing. 
Women divers over 60, wearing old-
fashioned diving suits stare at the 
camera lens. These rare images do 
not fail to raise questions: “Her face 
looks like she’s going to take a deep 
breath at any moment […]. The person 
is a haenyeo,” Hyung-Sun Kim says, 
not without emotion. He has long 
observed “the drops of water [falling] 
from the surface of her [the sea 
women’s] diving suit, which is greasy 
like the skin of marine animals”.
This South Korean photographer has 
been to Jeju Island — located just off 
the southern shores of the Republic of 
Korea — several times between 2012 
and 2014, to photograph the haenyeo. 
These women dive as deep as ten 
metres underwater without oxygen 
masks to gather seafood. This particular 
form of diving is called muljil. In the 
daily lives of haenyeo, the term refers 
to seven hours of free-diving per day, 
ninety days a year, all year round.
The photographer chose to take 
these women out of their context by 
presenting them in front of a white 
canvas. Their pictures were taken as 
they emerged from the water after 
the muljil. “There is no ocean [which] 
is their workplace, [or] shoreline 
where seafood is scattered from their 
net bags. There is just a haenyeo,” 
explains Kim. Free of any disruptive 
visual elements, the spectator is able 
to concentrate on the faces and bodies 
in the photographs which, according 
to the photographer, are authentic 
“illustrated guides to haenyeo”. These 
photographic guides testify to the 
difficult living conditions of these 
women who are seen as the symbols of 
Jeju Island.
This extraordinary phenomenon — which 
emerged in a Confucian society centred 
on men — the culture of Jeju haenyeo 
was inscribed on the UNESCO List of 
Intangible Cultural Heritage in 2016. 
Its inscription contributes to improving 
the status of women in the community 
and to ecology with its environmentally-
friendly fishing methods. The community, 
organized into fishing co-operatives, 
prohibits the use of modern technologies 
to avoid overfishing. 
While they were once drawn to the sea 
because of the island’s arid volcanic 
soil which was unfit for large-scale 
agriculture, the women are now turning 
towards other sectors, such as the 
booming tourism industry. Of Jeju 
Island’s 600,000 inhabitants, only 4,500 
women still practice underwater fishing. 
There are 2,500 divers who are still truly 
active and the vast majority of these are 
over the age of 60, according to the 
New Yorker. Since the 1970s, the work of 
the haenyeo is no longer an imperative; 
it has now become a conscious choice. 
With the intention of preserving this 
rich heritage, local authorities have put 
in place a series of measures, the most 
appreciated of which are free medical 
coverage since 2002 and the free 
distribution of diving suits.
“The sea’s water surface is a border 
between life and death. Haenyeo 
frequently cross over this boundary,” 
commented art critic Park Young-taik. 
Surprisingly, the haenyeo, who are as 
modest as they are intrepid, do not 
seem to be aware of the “importance 
of their contribution to the lives of 
their families and the local economy,” 
explains Lee Sun-hwa, a member 
of the Jeju Special Self-Governing 
Province Council, to the Korea Times 
newspaper. Through their inscription 
to the list of intangible cultural 
heritage, international recognition will 
undoubtedly restore their self-esteem 
and confidence.
 

The Jeju haenyeo warm themselves around a bulteok, an outdoor fireplace.
They change and prepare for the muljil here, returning to rest when the job is done.
© Haenyeo Museum
© Haenyeo MuseumThe Jeju haenyeo head to the sea to perform their job of muljil, or diving to harvest sea products without  
the help of oxygen masks.

Two Jeju haenyeo clean their goggles as they prepare to dive. © Haenyeo Museum
The Jeju haenyeo hold a shamanistic ritual, praying to the sea goddess to keep them safe. © Haenyeo Museum

The marine products harvested by the Jeju haenyeo contribute substantially to their household incomes.

Hyun Kyungchun, Onpyeong Jeju 2014. © Hyung S. Kim© Haenyeo Museum
