Generation Afropreneurs
by Ayoko Mensah
From Dakar to Nairobi, young people are 
at the heart of a digital media revolution 
that is unfolding across the African 
continent. With start-up incubators, 
fab labs (fabrication laboratories or 
small-scale workshops), sites and cyber-
services, and new collaborative work 
spaces, an ever-increasing number of 
youth — technophiles, hyper-connected, 
educated and inventive — are fully 
embracing the new digital economy.
This new generation has been 
nicknamed “Afropreneurs”. No matter 
how diverse their activities may be, 
they share a common DNA — the digital 
world, an approach that necessarily 
interconnects the local with the global, 
and a desire to contribute to improving 
living conditions throughout Africa.
Dakar-based Karim Sy, who 
founded Jokko Labs in 2010, is 
probably the best-known of these 
young entrepreneurs. His not-for-
profit organization is defined as a 
“virtual cluster committed to social 
transformation and based on a 
community of entrepreneurs and a 
network of innovation centres”. But 
there are many other examples, like 
the startup, Agendakar (the largest 
cultural web portal in Senegal’s 
capital). Here the young entrepreneur, 
Ousseynou Khadim Bèye, who created 
a smartphone video game called Cross 
Dakar City, uses the game to alert the 
general public about the sad fate of 
talibés — boys who leave their homes 
to study in Koranic schools and are 
exploited and reduced to begging in 
the streets of Dakar.
It’s a good bet that these innovators in 
cultural and creative industries will also 
be key players in Diamniadio, Senegal’s 
first Smart City. Located just thirty 
kilometres from Dakar, it is expected to 
grow substantially in the next few years.
Start-up incubators, fab labs, digital sites and services and 
participatory workshops — Africa’s youth have dived right into the 
information age and the idea of Smart Cities. Dedicated, media-
savvy Afrocentric entrepreneurs and artists are networking, 
innovating, and using creative and cultural industries as levers 
for development.

From Smart City to  
vernacular city
Diamniadio is not the only Smart City 
on the African continent. As witnessed 
by the revolution underway, the 
development of many urban projects 
and digital centres of excellence is 
taking off in other countries as well. 
In Nigeria, Yaba, a suburb of Lagos, is 
already Africa’s best-known technology 
hub, nicknamed Yabacon Valley. 
In Kenya, Konza Technology City is 
home to 250 startups and is known as 
the African Silicon Savannah. Similar 
examples exist in Benin, where the 
government has developed the Benin 
Smart City project; in Morocco, where 
the Casablanca Smart City Cluster, 
e-Madina, has been launched, and in 
Rwanda and South Africa as well.
Although these new urban hubs 
undoubtedly open up new 
opportunities for African youth, 
they also raise some questions. In 
2010, Senamé Koffi Agboginou, the 
independent Togolese anthropologist 
and student of architecture, founded 
the African architecture platform. 
He believes that African Smart Cities 
should not try to replicate Western 
examples, but should invent their own 
models derived from local contexts. He 
is developing this idea of “anchored 
modernity” in a district of Lomé, Togo’s 
capital city, where he has opened 
Woelab, which describes itself as 
“the first African space dedicated to 
technological democracy”. Its aim is 
to make leading-edge technology 
accessible to all local people, a “fab lab 
at the level of the street”.
“We must go beyond the Smart City 
to the vernacular city of tomorrow, 
the sharing city”, says S.K. Agboginou, 
who has developed his own theory of 
“low high-tech”, making technology 
accessible to the low-income 
consumer. He proposes a kind of digital 
democracy and collective intelligence 
that would make the area’s inhabitants 
autonomous: “We are the only ones 
in Africa to bring together designers, 
developers, masons, carpenters, 
fashion designers, and even homeless 
people, in one location for shared 
projects,” he explains in an article in the 
magazine Forbes Afrique. People all 
over are talking about Woelab — as an 
incubator for startups and a place where 
training and workshops are accessible 
to everyone. The team highlighted its 
technological prowess by inventing 
W.Afate, a high-tech 3D printer made 
entirely from electronic waste!
Culture with a strong  
social orientation
The emergence of an ever-increasing 
number of digital Afropreneurs should 
not overshadow the dynamism and 
WAZIHack Togo!, a two-day event (2017) aimed at accelerating the adoption of
IoT (Internet of Things) solutions in Africa.
© www.lafricainedarchitecture.com/  
www.woelabo.com 

creativity of young artists and cultural 
players in all African cities. These artists 
are working to make their voices heard, 
attempting to make a living from their 
art, and working to improve their cities 
in spite of limited resources and difficult 
circumstances. In Brazzaville, Kinshasa, 
Lubumbashi, Douala, Segou and 
N’Djamena, there are several prototype 
projects that link an artistic approach 
with social impact.
The Ateliers Salm, founded by sculptor 
Bill Kouélany in Brazzaville, supports a 
new generation of very talented young 
artists. The Lubumbashi Biennale, which 
held its fourth event in 2015, has gained 
international attention. In Kinshasa, 
already known for its music, there are 
more and more festivals that highlight 
the city’s exceptional cultural riches.
In Dakar, in addition to the renowned 
Dak’Art Biennale of contemporary 
African art, the Afropixel festival, 
organized by the Ker Thiossane 
Association, is gaining recognition 
as a platform for projects, events, 
debates, discussion, and artistic and 
social experimentation. Ker Thiossane 
intends to explore the potential of new 
media to encourage local development 
that is inclusive and sustainable, while 
observing what may define the special 
features of an African creative city. 
Thus, in 2016, the theme of the fifth 
Afropixel festival was “Shared City”, 
a vast subject giving rise to a busy 
programme of fab lab workshops, 
artists in residence, open studios, 
exhibitions, public installations, 
screenings of video mapping, and 
numerous exchanges.
Over the last ten years, a number 
of events linked to hip-hop have 
flourished throughout the continent. 
Remarkably, this has gradually 
given rise to a whole network of 
artists, producers and festivals 
which are today helping to drive 
artistic collaboration, solidarity and 
social transformation. Rappers have 
become very involved in community 
causes and social protest movements, 
such as the musical group Y’en a 
Marre (I’m fed up) in Senegal, Le 
Balai Citoyen (the Citizen’s Broom), 
a political grassroots movement in 
Burkina Faso, and the Iyina [which 
means “we’re tired” in local Arabic] 
movement in Chad.
In May 2016, Smockey [Serge 
Bambara], the Burkinabe rapper  
and activist and co-founder of 
Le Balai Citoyen, was the first 
recipient of the prestigious Music in 

Exile Fund Fellowship award in 2016. 
The annual award — from freedom 
of expression campaigners Index on 
Censorship and the producers of  
the 2015 award-winning documentary, 
They Will Have To Kill Us First — 
recognizes people from all over the 
world who have put their art at the 
service of freedom. Two months 
later, when Smockey’s studio in 
Ouagadougou was destroyed by fire, 
a huge international campaign was 
launched through social media to fund 
its rebuilding.
The young African artists and cultural 
entrepreneurs are creative and 
engaged, but they are also determined 
to put the considerable potential and 
resources of digital tools to the best 
possible use into building the future 
they dream of.

The video/dance performance, “Urban Matters”, by 
Tiziana Manfredi and Andreya Ouamba, explores 
the connection between daily life and urban space, 
DAK’ART 2016.
© Tiziana Manfredi

Ayoko Judith Mensah is a Franco-
Togolese journalist and consultant. 
After having founded and edited the 
magazine Afriscope, she worked as 
an expert in the European Union-
African, Caribbean and Pacific (EU-ACB) 
APCCultures+, at the ACP Secretariat 
in Brussels. She currently works as a 
consultant for the Africa desk of the 
Centre for Fine Arts in Brussels. 
