Current affairs
Chucho Valdés in concert at the White House, 29 April 2016, on the occasion of International Jazz Day. © 2016 Steve Mundinger

Chucho Valdés on the piano: 
“I explore every path there is!”
Interview by
Lucía Iglesias Kuntz 
Having participated in last year’s 
International Jazz Day, what 
memories do you have of the event?
It was incredible. It was the first time 
I went to the White House. I never 
thought I would ever have such an 
opportunity! The most amazing part 
is that, as jazz musicians, we form a 
sort of international family. Nearly 
each of us has had the opportunity 
to participate in the same festivals 
around the world but this time, it felt 
like a family reunion, and on a musical 
level, we all got along incredibly well. 
I played with a US bassist and an 
African guitarist, the trumpet player was 
Australian, and the percussionist Indian. 
It was an unforgettable experience, 
especially since Chick Corea, Aretha 
Franklin, Herbie Hancock, Al Jarreau, 
Marcus Miller and other big jazz artists 
were present too. It’s not something 
you see every day! We proved that 
jazz is so international that musicians 
from different parts of the world can 
come together to play music. It was 
an unprecedented moment, as if 
the parents of jazz came together to 
embrace its glorious universality.
You will be participating in this year’s 
celebration of the International Jazz 
Day which will take place in Havana. 
Are you expecting something 
in particular?
Yes, I am invited to Havana and I am 
extremely happy to once again find 
myself in the company of musicians 
from around the world. I expect what is 
always expected of jazz: its feeling of 
After Washington DC and the White House in 2016, International 
Jazz Day (celebrated on April 30) will travel to Cuba, turning 
Havana into the world capital of this music that knows no 
boundaries. As preparations for the 6th edition are underway, 
we caught up with one of its protagonists, the Cuban pianist 
Chucho Valdés, to learn more about this special event.
immediacy. We simply come together 
and decide on a theme on which to 
improvise. Based on this theme, each 
of us will present our own method and 
style. None of our styles will be identical 
to one another’s. You can rehearse 
thousands of times and each time it 
will sound different. That is what is so 
amazing about jazz. It constantly varies 
and the audience also always has its 
opinion to share. We do not know what 
we will play yet, and that’s great. As 
always, it will be spontaneous because 
improvisation is the specificity of jazz. 
We are set to play in the Alicia Alonso 
Grand Theater, where the acoustics are 
excellent and the piano is very good. 
It was presented as a gift by Steinway 
to the Ministry of Culture in October 
2015, when the great pianist Lang Lang 
and I played with Cuba’s Philharmonic 
Orchestra. We are all already very 
moved at the idea of what we will 
produce this time. And the public even 
more so!
You were nominated Goodwill 
Ambassador of the Food and 
Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the 
United Nations. What motivated you 
to accept this nomination?
It seemed important to me to make 
a contribution to the FAO, which 
intervenes where it is necessary, around 
the world. I composed the music for 
a documentary on the 2010 Haiti 
earthquake. I participated in the project 
because all profits from the release 
of the documentary went towards the 
reconstruction of the country.
How do you create your music?
As I mentioned, jazz mainly relies on 
improvisation, even though there are 
arrangements in which the music is 
written. It is what we call “pie forzado” 
in Cuban. It is a theme that is given to 
you and based on which you then start 
an improvisation. We also write the 
harmonies and several chord melodies 
that must be played, while still giving 
free reign to your creativity.
Personally, I practised every day 
to establish the rhythmic bases of 
my continuing experiences with 
Afro-Cuban jazz roots: a mix that 
includes Yoruba and Batá drums (of 
the Yoruba people of Nigeria, Togo 
and Benin), the Cuban conga. These 
polyrhythmic tones are perfect to 
define a rhythmic line on which to 
improvise, or a melodic line where the 
fusion of brass instruments, or even 
piano, can lead to improvisation. From 
there, all you need to do is dig deeper, 
because these musical arrangements 
are a written basis on which to then 
develop your improvisation.

Portrait of jazz giant Chucho Valdés. © Frank Steward
Do you always work with the 
same musicians?
I have worked with my band, the Afro-
Cuban Messengers, for a long time 
and on numerous occasions now, but 
I sometimes work as a solo pianist 
or with an orchestra, which is quite a 
different experience. I have just recently 
recorded an album in New York with 
Arturo O’Farrill’s orchestra. Basically, 
I do not limit myself to one musical 
direction — I tend to explore every path 
there is. I try not to attach myself, but 
rather to vary and continuously find 
new paths.
How did you learn to play the piano?
Let me tell you a little anecdote — I 
do not actually remember the event, 
but I was told that this is how I started 
playing the piano. My father was 
the pianist and assistant director 
of the orchestra of the Tropicana 
cabaret, Cuba’s main music scene that 
welcomed many great jazz artists in the 
1940s and 1950s.
When I was 3, my father returned home 
one day because he had forgotten 
the musical score of the second part 
of a show. There, he heard somebody 
playing a melody on the piano with 
both hands — it was me. He asked my 
grandmother and my mother who had 
taught me, and they both replied that I 
had not been given any lessons, that I 
just tried to imitate him and that when 
he left, I would sit in his place and try 
to play like him. That is how I started, 
apparently. He then gave me lessons 
and when I was 5, he hired a music 
theory teacher to teach me at home. 
When I was 9 years old, I started to 
attend a music school to study piano.
You then played music with your 
father. How did it feel to play with 
Bebo Valdés?
It was incredible — playing with your 
teacher and your father is emotional on 
two different levels. Since I also greatly 
admire Bebo’s art, I learned something 
new each time we played together. 
When I was 15, I started to perform 
live with him and we played on two 
pianos for the television. I think I was 
Bebo Valdés’ greatest admirer. He was 
a talented musician, an amazing father 
and an extremely demanding teacher. 
Sundays when I wanted to go to the 
cinema and I was dressed up and ready 
to go, he would stop me and say, “Your 
piano class is tomorrow, sit down and 
play me what you have worked on”. If 
what I played was not good enough, 
he would say, “Listen, there will be 
no cinema, get changed, sit down 
and work.” I am very grateful to him 
today because I studied as much as I 
could and I directed all my efforts into 
following in his musical footsteps.
Did you also teach your children to 
play the piano?
I have six children, they all play music 
and they are all very good musicians. 
It is not because I taught them music 
but because they are truly passionate 
about it. It is certain that the overall 
musical atmosphere of the house plays 
a role here. I have played with Chuchito 
and with my daughter Leyanis, who 
is an excellent pianist. She graduated 
from schools in Italy and Cuba and 
now plays and composes incredibly 
well. Emilio plays percussions and 
Yousi studied choir directing and plays 
the drums like Jessi. My youngest son 
Julián is 10 years old and I just gave 
him a music lesson.
In today’s era of electronic music 
and digital developments, how can 
we incite young people to continue 
playing jazz?
Since my first band, Irakere, in the 
1960s, to this day, I have collaborated 
with all sorts of new talents. For 
me, the world of electronics and 
computers are what the 21st century 
is about and it has led many people 
to use programmes that considerably 
facilitate orchestration. Arrangements 
are much easier to do now than 
they were in the 1950s. The young 
generation masters these new 
techniques perfectly, and I am sure 
that they are very useful. That’s where 
the future lies.
Winner of six Grammys and three 
Latin Grammy Awards, Dionisio Jesús 
Valdés Rodríguez, better known as 
“Chucho”, was born in 1941 in Quivicán 
(Cuba). He is a pianist, composer, 
arranger and conductor. Chucho has 
recorded more than ninety albums 
and collaborated on more than fifty 
albums. Some of his most notable 
albums include Lucumí (1986), Solo 
piano (1991), Pianissimo (1997), Babalú 
Ayé (1999), Boleros inigualables (2000) 
and Border free (2013). He is the son 
of Bebo Valdés, the well-known Afro-
Cuban jazz pianist (1918—2013).
