The UNESCO Courier visited 
Al Mahdi at the ICC Detention 
Centre in The Hague, Netherlands, 
and traced his journey – from his 
childhood in the desert of northern 
Mali, to his wanderings with 
his family in the Tuareg refugee 
camps of Mauritania and Algeria; 
his enrollment in the Libyan army, 
and his return to his home country, 
Mali. Here, he settled in Timbuktu, 
where he found the answer to his 
quest for stability and recognition 
– until rebellion broke out in the 
north of the country.
Having acknowledged the acts 
he was accused of, and for which 
he has admitted responsibility 
by pleading guilty, Al Mahdi 
goes beyond his own life story 
in this exclusive interview. 
He describes the complex 
social and cultural situation in 
northern Mali, where tensions 
and conflict have fermented for 
over fifty years. Here, radical 
independence movements 
with Islamic leanings 
continue to jostle alongside 
international jihadism.
Ahmad Al Mahdi and his lawyer, 
Mohamed Aouini on 17 August 2017, 
after the ICC had issued its ruling on the 
compensation for victims.



Ahmad Al Faqi Al Mahdi: 
I plead guilty
Interview by Anissa Barrak
Ahmad Al Faqi Al Mahdi was 
convicted of the war crime of 
having deliberately directed 
the attacks that, in June and 
July 2012, led to the destruction 
of ten religious and historical 
monuments in Timbuktu (Mali), 
a World Heritage site since 1988. 
This is the first time that the 
International Criminal Court (ICC) 
has been requested – in this case, 
by the State of Mali – to pass 
judgement on the destruction of 
cultural monuments, and the first 
time that it has categorized 
such acts as war crimes. 
On 27 September 2016, the ICC 
sentenced Al Mahdi, who was 
arrested in 2015, to nine years’ 
imprisonment. On 17 August 
2017, the court demanded that 
he pay €2.7 million to the victims 
as compensation.
What led this Malian teacher from 
the Tuareg Azawad tribe to turn 
against his compatriots and those 
who share his own faith? After all, 
having moved to Timbuktu in 2006, 
he had become a valued member 
of the community. How did an 
educated man, who had been 
taught the precepts of the Sufi 
tradition of Islam, come to commit 
such a crime against this same 
school of Islam? What prompted 
this shift towards radical political 
Islamism and violence? Where did 
the rupture occur?

Who took the decision on the 
destruction? Did you approve of it?
It was one of my duties to combat practices 
considered to be contrary to the precepts 
of Islam. With my soldiers, I personally 
scrutinized the behaviour of the people. 
I regularly visited the mausoleums, 
giving explanations and advice. I also 
preached the teachings on local radio. 
The order to destroy came from high 
up, from the commander of Ansar Dine, 
Iyad Ag Ghali, who made the decision on 
the recommendation of his entourage, 
notably the AQIM advisers. The aim of 
these groups is to impose their ideology on 
the people, which is derived from Wahhabi 
doctrine. In strategic terms, al Qaeda seeks 
to increase its visibility through spectacular 
actions in order to attract new adherents 
and provide the parties that support it 
with proof of its zeal and efficacy.
During his trial at the ICC on 
27 September 2016, Ahmad Al Mahdi 
appealed to “all the world’s Muslims 
never to carry out this kind of action, 
which has such terrible consequences, 
is unjustified and cannot yield 
any benefits.”
You have acknowledged your role in 
the attack and destruction of nine 
mausoleums and part of the Sidi Yahia 
mosque in Timbuktu in 2012, which 
you yourself organized and led. In what 
capacity did you act and why?
At the time, I was head of Hesba, one of the 
four command structures of the Ansar Dine 
group, which was linked to al Qaeda in the 
Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) and had occupied 
northern Mali in 2012. It had set up 
its headquarters in Timbuktu in April that 
year, having routed fighters of the National 
Movement for the Liberation of Azawad 
(known by its French acronym, MNLA).
It fell to Hesba – whose mission was 
to “promote virtue and prevent vice” 
– to combat all acts that, in its eyes, 
contravened the precepts of Islam. Hesba 
considered the mausoleums of Timbuktu 
to be the incarnation of such acts for two 
reasons – first, because the way that the 
faithful prayed was judged to be impious; 
and second, because of the buildings that 
had been constructed over the tombs. 
Once the leadership took the decision to 
destroy the mausoleums, I received the 
order to carry out the task, using troops 
placed under my command. I applied 
myself to the task rigorously, as with 
everything I do.

The majority of the population of 
Timbuktu was obliged to deal with these 
groups in order to survive. And I was 
more zealous than the others.
When carrying out the destruction, were 
you ever overcome by doubt? What was 
going through your mind?
I saw myself as a link in the chain 
of command and felt that the 
consequences should be the 
responsibility of those who made the 
decision and gave the orders. I knew all 
too well that if I did not carry out the 
orders, I would be dismissed. I didn’t 
receive any pay, but the group provided 
for all the needs of my family.
At the same time, I was aware of what 
the people were feeling. I knew the 
sites were historic and sacred. I visited 
the mausoleums just like the other 
residents of Timbuktu, but for my own 
reasons. In general, I feel that we have a 
duty to visit cemeteries – whether the 
graves are ordinary or have a mausoleum 
over them – because all the dead are 
equal in my eyes. I know the history of 
most of the saints who have given their 
names to the mausoleums, having read 
about it in the scriptures. These were 
wise and good men, whose good deeds 
shine wherever they are, even after 
their death. The Prophet recommended 
putting graves together in cemeteries so 
as not to abandon the dead in solitude 
and isolation.
Then there is the question of 
supplications. I reject the idea of asking 
a dead person to intercede with God on 
my behalf. Many rumours were going 
around about this: some claimed that 
the graves in these mausoleums were 
empty, while others insisted that Hassan 
and Hussein, the Prophet’s grandsons, 
were buried there, which is completely 
untrue. I believed that the mausoleums 
were built to take advantage of 
people’s naïveté. So, while  I knew that 
the destruction of the mausoleums had 
no basis in Sharia law, I did not see any 
objection to putting an end to these 
myths and destroying the buildings. 
However, I was totally opposed to 
any interventions in the interior of 
the mosque.
 The mausoleum of Mohamed 
Mahmoud at the Cemetery of the Three 
Saints, destroyed by extremists in 2012. 

In the discussion session that led to 
the decision to destroy the monuments, 
I openly said that I thought such an action 
was not appropriate, since it could cause 
more harm than good. I reminded them 
of the Sharia ruling that says that no vice 
may be suppressed if its suppression 
leads to another equal or greater vice. 
I warned them that the destruction could 
lead to greater misfortune for the people. 
I was thinking, in particular, that it might 
incite hatred among the local people. 
I imagined armed groups firing on them. 
I feared the worst.
I was convinced that the destruction of 
the mausoleums had no legal basis in 
Sharia law. It’s true that, according to 
a fatwa recognized by all traditions of 
Islam, tombs must not be erected more 
than one chibr (about ten centimetres) 
above ground. But this fatwa only 
applies to new tombs and not to those 
that already exist. I wanted to leave the 
mausoleums intact.

How did you gain the knowledge of 
Muslim theology that would qualify 
you to interpret the scriptures?
I have an eclectic background. As a child, 
I studied in the Koranic schools in 
my region, Agouni, near Timbuktu. 
My father taught me the Maliki Sufi 
doctrine, and then I continued by 
reading the books that the sheikhs 
gave me. By the time I was 12, I had 
learned the Koran and the exegesis 
– I had acquired a level of knowledge 
that allowed me to become an imam.
During my meanderings with my family 
from 1993 onwards – between the 
Tuareg refugee camps in Mauritania, 
and our exile in Libya and Algeria, 
with occasional returns to Mali – I read 
all the books I could find and struggled 
very hard to obtain qualifications 
recognized by the state, so that I could 
get a steady job. My ambition was to 
become a teacher. During our exile 
in Libya between 1996 and 2001, 
after the beginning of ethnic tensions 
and the quashing of the armed Tuareg 
uprisings, I studied for and obtained 
the certificate of primary education, 
but under a borrowed name, as I was 
never officially registered. 

It was with this certificate and under 
a false name that I enlisted in the Libyan 
army, where I served for four years 
and rose to the rank of officer. I had to 
earn a living and provide for my family, 
because my father had chosen to stay 
in the camps in Mauritania. During this 
entire time, I never stopped reading and 
learning on my own.
Seeing that there could be no future for 
me if I stayed where I was, I decided to 
return to Mali and settled in Timbuktu 
in 2006, where I started preaching in 
the mosques. I also set up a private 
educational organization to build the 
capacities of teachers of the Koran, 
which I directed for six years. I was 
actively involved in several religious 
and cultural youth associations, 
which performed a range of activities like 
cleaning the streets, and donating blood. 
This was a period of relative stability.
I couldn’t advance in my career because 
of this diploma, which was not in my 
name. So I had to start again from scratch, 
to obtain the certificate. This enabled 
me to attend the Pedagogical Institute 
in Timbuktu, where I received a diploma 
in educational psychology and was then 
able to pass the civil service exam. I finally 
obtained a position as head teacher in the 
east of Timbuktu. This was in 2010. I was 
working there when the rebels occupied 
the north in 2012.
Under what circumstances did you join 
the ranks of the rebels?
When the rebel troops invaded northern 
Mali, the people started to flee and seek 
refuge in Mauritania. They were afraid 
of abuse by the Malian army, which had 
happened with every rebel uprising. 
It was terror. I was considering asking to 
be sent somewhere in the interior of the 
country, when I learned that members 
of my tribe had been victims of abuse 
by the people of Bamako. They had 
been threatened and attacked and 
their pharmacy burned down, even 
though they had never lived in the 
north of the country. They were born 
and raised in the capital and were loyal 
and well-integrated.
So I decided to leave the country for 
Algeria, as I saw no other way to escape 
the inter-tribal racism. In fact, this racism 
was not an aspect of Malian state policy, 
but came from the people themselves, 
who believed that fair-skinned people 
were intruders from Arab countries. 
Historically, this is true – people from 
Arab countries did settle in Mali, but that 
was 400 years ago! That is why I was 
in Algeria when the rebels invaded 
Timbuktu in April 2012. I then decided 
to go back and take up my old job and 
help to manage the region.
Was this your first contact with Ansar 
Dine and al Qaeda? Why did you feel 
closer to them than to the people of Mali? 
At first, it was the MNLA rebels 
who occupied the region around 
Timbuktu. I had always supported this 
movement in its efforts to find justice 
for the Azawad tribe, to which I belong. 
But when I arrived in Timbuktu, Ansar 
Dine had already chased out the MNLA 
fighters. I knew Iyad Ag Ghali, the leader 
of Ansar Dine, from the time when 
he was commander of the Azawad 
rebellion. I admired him.

A few days later, Ag Ghali invited 
me to a  meeting with imams from 
the mosques and other prominent city 
figures. He arrived, accompanied by 
a group from al Qaeda. I was impressed 
by his speech and convinced by 
his ideas. I joined his movement right 
away. I was already aware of the Wahhabi 
teachings through the Saudi charities 
that were active in Timbuktu. One of 
them invited me on a pilgrimage to 
Mecca in 2006, after which I adopted 
the Wahhabi doctrine.
You have apologized to the inhabitants 
of Timbuktu, the citizens of Mali, and 
the descendants of the Saints. Do you 
think that acknowledging your deeds 
and conveying your regrets have been 
enough to gain their forgiveness?
Certainly not. My repentance is 
something personal, coming from 
the bottom of my heart. But I can 
only prove my sincerity by carrying 
out acts of reparation, when I get out 
of prison. UNESCO has ensured the 
reconstruction of the mausoleums, 
which is a remarkable achievement. 
But restoring trust will take longer than 
rebuilding the mausoleums. I have 
caused injury to the entire population, 
in all its diversity – whether Fula, 
Songhai, Tuareg or Arab. I hope that 
they will accept the hand that I am 
offering them to follow the path 
towards reconciliation. I want to write 
a memoir for them, which can restore 
their dignity and at the same time help 
protect the mausoleums.
When I have finished my sentence, 
I want to return to society and work 
towards restoring national harmony. 
The situation is even more urgent today, 
after the damage created by Ansar Dine 
and al Qaeda and the accumulated 
failures of the Azawad rebellion. It pains 
me to see the refugees confined in 
camps in Mauritania, Algeria, Libya and 
Burkina Faso. They will not be able to 
return to their homes unless there is 
national reconciliation.
The Alpha Moya mausoleum, 
reconstructed, in 2016.

Radical ideologies using Islam are 
attracting a lot of young people, as was 
the case for you. Based on what you have 
learned from this episode in your life, 
what can you do to protect them from 
these influences?
I think that Muslim countries should 
be governed according to the precepts 
of Islam, which have both a religious 
and a political dimension. Sharia has 
defined general values that are valid 
for all time, everywhere. These general 
values, which are derived from the 
sacred texts of the Koran and the words 
of the Prophet, make it possible to pass 
laws that are adapted to new contexts. 
Sharia has never called on the faithful to 
stick rigidly to rules that were made in 
ancient times, or to transpose them to 
the letter, to another time and place.
Islam demands a very high level of 
mastery of Sharia before a person can 
hold political office. I was very saddened 
and disappointed to discover that 
there was no one in the groups I joined 
who had a greater understanding of 
Sharia than I had, even though I was 
just a simple and modest student of 
the subject. How could I believe in the 
capacity of these organizations to found 
a  stable and strong state?
Having said this, I advise young people to 
concentrate on themselves, their ambitions, 
their country and their religion. Religion is 
a personal practice. Faith, trust and 
hope are the mainstays of a healthy and 
responsible youth, which is able to see for 
itself that there is no point in joining radical 
Islamic groups.
It does young people no justice to view 
them as a flock of ignorant sheep that 
need to be led. It is up to me to see in 
them a human treasure that is potentially 
mature and full of wisdom. If I present 
my vision to them, they will be able to 
decide which parts they find useful. 
This – with respect – is how I intend to 
behave with them, and with all others. 
Just as I reserve the right to criticize them, 
and others.
Mayombo Kassongo, the Legal 
Representative of the Victims, considers that 
the Al Mahdi trial was exemplary.
