The Koran, between text
and context
Why are Muslims not reacting more forcefully against those 
terrorist organizations that act in the name of an Islam they do 
not subscribe to? Mahmoud Hussein answers the question by 
analysing the premise of Koranic imprescriptibility.
by Mahmoud Hussein 
The vast majority of Muslims are 
horrified by the barbaric regression that 
the Islamic State (ISIS) represents, as 
well as by its claim to speak in the name 
of Islam — an Islam most Muslims do 
not identify with. But while condemning 
ISIS on both a moral and human level, 
they have difficulty confronting it on a 
theological level. They tend to reject 
the organization as existing outside of 
Islam, asserting that the ISIS discourse 
is not Muslim, and thus they wash their 
hands of it.  
But in truth, things are much less clear-
cut, because ISIS does claim its origin in 
Islam, and refers explicitly to the Koran 
and the Hadith. To refute the group’s 
argument, one has to begin by accepting 
an obvious fact — that Islam does not 
manifest itself in one single form. In 
the past, as now under our very eyes, 
it assumes many different, divergent 
guises, some of them opposed and even 
hostile to each other. In this way, we can 
see how ISIS promotes one particular 
vision, intended not to win people over 
but to provoke terror, not to convert 
souls but to arouse our most primitive 
and murderous instincts. The group 
offers a distorted vision of the Koran
and the Hadith.
ISIS must be condemned on two levels. 
On the one hand, for the manner in 
which it picks and chooses fragments of 
the original texts, and then rearranges 
them to conform to an anti-humanist 
agenda. On the other hand, for the 
way it translates sections of these 
texts (whose scope is relevant in the 
context of seventh-century Arabia) into 
commandments it claims are absolute 
and eternal. It is by this means that ISIS 
can sanctify woman’s submission to 
man and justify the practice of slavery. 
It is how it can forever stigmatize all 
Jews and all Christians, based on 
judgements imposed on certain Jews 
and certain Christians under conditions 
of conflict and at a time that no longer 
bears any relation to our own.
Restoring free will
Why do so many secular Muslims, who 
share this negative opinion of ISIS, 
not make their objections heard loud 
and clear? Because they would have 
to admit to a radical proposition. They 
would have to accept explicitly the 
fact that the Revelation contains both 
timeless teachings and circumstantial 
prescriptions. In other words, they 
would have to question the dogma of 
Koranic imprescriptibility.
This dogma is based on what seems at 
first to be irrefutable logic: the Koran 
being the Word of God, and God 
being infallible, all the verses of the 
Koran must necessarily have eternal 
and universal scope. Hence the crisis 
of conscience that confronts so many 
Muslims today when they come up 
against verses that are understandable 
in the context of seventh-century 
Arabia, but obviously out of sync with 
today’s moral requisites.

This crisis is unfounded. The dogma can 
be repudiated without betraying the 
Koran’s core truth. Better yet, the way 
to reach the Koran’s essential truth is 
to repudiate the dogma: because the 
dogma does not derive from the Koran 
itself, but rather from an ideological 
premise tacked onto the Koran since 
the ninth century — namely that the 
Word of God is consubstantial with God 
Himself, part of His divine nature, and 
eternal as He is.
But in fact this premise contradicts 
the Koran entirely. In the Koran, God 
and his Word do not enjoy the same 
status. God transcends time, yet His 
Word is implicated in time. The Word 
intertwines the absolute and the 
relative, the universal and the particular, 
the spiritual and the temporal. This 
is why the Koran cannot be read as a 
body of commandments to be adhered 
to literally, everywhere and forever.
Nervous system, from Persian philosopher Avicenna’s The Canon of Medicine, 
an encyclopedia in five books, completed in 1025.

How could such a dogma come to be 
accepted in the Muslim world for such a 
long time, when it so clearly runs counter 
to Koranic evidence? It prevailed only 
at the end of a long struggle, which 
dates back to the ninth century, in the 
Baghdad of the Abbasids.
That period was characterized by 
various exceptionally bold currents  
of thought. The Mutazilite theologians 
argued that human free will was not 
incompatible with absolute divine 
power. God endowed humans with 
the capacity for rational judgement 
and with creative strength, called 
qudra, thanks to which they can act 
freely. The Falasifas (philosophers) 
constituted another school of 
rationalism, which set itself up 
outside theological perimeters; their 
aim was to encompass all fields of 
knowledge, in keeping with the Greek 
philosophical tradition.
But the Mutazilites and Falasifas would 
be confronted with a growing and 
ever more powerful conformist tide. As 
the guardians of tradition, jurists and 
theologians became determined, in 
their respective disciplines, to destroy 
any notion of free will by asserting 
that it challenged God’s omnipotence. 
The decisive stand-off between the 
two currents finally hinged on how 
each faction viewed the nature of the 
Koranic text.
 
For the Mutazilites, the Koran was 
’created’ by God, meaning it is distinct 
from God and came into being at a 
particular moment of His creation. 
A temporal dimension is therefore 
implied, which leaves humans some 
latitude for interpretation. For their 
adversaries, however, the Koran 
is ’uncreated’. In other words, it is 
consubstantial with God and it shares 
in His eternity. From that point, it 
becomes less important to understand 
the Koran than to be permeated by it, 
to let oneself absorb its divine nature 
by means of a literal reading, repeated 
indefinitely. And thus the text acquired 
the status of absolute, intangible 
truth from which sprang the notion of 
Koranic imprescriptibility.
The tenets of the imprescriptibility 
argument were to emerge victorious 
from this confrontation. Thus for many 
© Wellcome Library, London/Wellcome Images
centuries the idea of free will lost out 
on Islamic soil, not to appear again until 
the end of the nineteenth century.
Led by pre-eminent Muslim 
intellectuals, reformist thinking 
sought to undermine the doctrine of 
imprescriptibility, deriving inspiration 
from the spirit of the Enlightenment 
and relying on the modern disciplines 
of history, anthropology and linguistics. 
Without questioning the divine origin 
of the Revelation, the movement set 
out to examine the historicity of its 
earthly manifestation. 
As a result, it ran up against the 
doctrinal guardians who discredited 
the new thinking by branding as 
illegitimate its methodological tool — 
critical reasoning — that prevailed in 
the humanities and social sciences. 
According to the guardians of the 
dogma, asserting that the Revelation 
of the Koran corresponds to anything 
other than the eternal will of God — 
and imagining that it could be linked 
in any way to some particular historic 
context — is an aberration invented 
by non-believers. It looks at the 
divine from an external viewpoint. 
The proof, the aberrant idea is based 
on arguments drawn from profane 
disciplines alien to Islam. 

In the light of  
ninth-century chronicles
The question for us now becomes: can 
we get around this objection? Can we 
show the necessary link between text 
and context, without having recourse 
to the secular sciences, but relying 
entirely on the religious texts, deemed 
indisputable by the most punctilious 
guardians of the dogma?
The answer is yes. There are 
indeed religious texts that permit 
this interpretation, and they have 
long existed. They arose out of a 
pressing need already recognized 
in the Koranic schools in the first 
century of Islam. Scholars needed to 
fathom numerous verses that were 
difficult, if not impossible, to interpret 
without examining the circumstances 
surrounding their Revelation.
They set about meeting this challenge, 
returning to the source of all available 
information concerning the time of 
the Revelation — the testimonials left 
by the Prophet’s companions. Most of 
these followers did not always grasp 
the meaning of the verses the Prophet 
recited to them. They would go alone, or 
in groups, to ask him to interpret them. 
And the Prophet would answer by 
explaining, commenting and illustrating 
the different verses. After his death, 
the task of transmitting what they had 
learned from the Prophet’s mouth to 
the growing ranks of new believers fell 
to his companions — their words now 
enriched by their own memories of when 
and where the verses had been revealed 
to them.
After the death of the Prophet’s last 
companions, people started to collect 
these testimonials and write them 
down. At the turn of the ninth century, a 
first compilation appeared entitled The 
Life of the Prophet Muhammad (Al-Sîra 
al-nabawîyya) and signed Muhammad 
Ibn Is’haq. That first compilation was 
followed by several others, notably 
those of four great chroniclers who 
worked during the Abbasid dynasty: 
al-Wâqidî, the author of Kitâb al-Maghâzî 
(The Book of History and Campaigns); 
Muhammad Ibn Sa‘d, who wrote Kitâb 
al-Tabaqât al-Kabîr (The Book of Major 
Classes, also known as The Book of 
Companions, Helpers and Followers); 
al-Tabarî (839-923), author of Kitâb al-
Rusul wal-Mulûk (History of the Prophets 
and Kings); and al-Balâdhurî, who wrote 
Kitâb Ansâb al-Ashrâf (Genealogies of 
the Nobles).
The main interest of these chronicles 
is that they tell us the story of the 
Prophet’s life, with the principal events 
following a rough timeline.
Thanks to them, we possess an 
approximate mapping of the successive 
moments of the Revelation, which 
allows us to situate hundreds of verses 
chronologically, each one relative to the 
other, and also to place each one into 
its proper context.
 
Reading the text of the Koran in light 
of these chronicles, we are struck by 
an obvious fact: nowhere in the Koran 
is it permitted to conflate God and 
His Word. At no time is it permitted to 
extrapolate the eternity of His Word 
from the eternity of God Himself. 
A reading that puts the text back 
into context leads us to draw three 
fundamental conclusions. The first: in 
the Koran, the Word of God adopts 
a language, a culture, and a way of 
thought that reflect concerns in Arabia 
in the seventh century. The second: 
in the Koran, the Word of God is not 
presented as a monologue, but rather 
as an interchange between Heaven 
and Earth. God is conversing in real 
time with the community of the first 
Muslims, through the intermediary of 

"Two Lovers, Three Words", a sculpture in neon lights, 60 x 100 cm, 2010. © Zoulikha Bouabdellah



the Prophet. The third: God does not 
always give His Words equal weight. 
The Koran enunciates different orders of 
truth, some absolute and others relative, 
some eternal and some circumstantial.
 
So true is this that God sometimes 
replaces certain truths with others, 
decreeing the abrogation of certain 
verses through subsequently 
revealed verses.
This was the principle of abrogation, 
formulated in the following verse: ’We 
do not abrogate a verse or cause it 
to be forgotten except that we bring 
forth [one] better than it or similar to it.’ 
(Verse II, 106). 
Thus, from that point, the concept of 
time in the Koran becomes unavoidable.
In fact, only the concept of time can 
restore the fullness of God’s power. It 
is precisely because God intervenes 
temporally that He can deliver 
relative truths, linked to different 
circumstances. And as situations 
change, relative truths change with 
them. So if God happens to say two 
contradictory things, that is because 
the truth has changed in the meantime. 
God is always right at the moment 
He speaks. To understand His relative 
truths, we just need to link each of 
them to the circumstances in which 
they were spoken.
No verse can be ’better’ than any 
other, if we remain in the realm of the 
absolute. In the absolute, everything is 
equal and no comparison is possible. 
For one verse to be ’better’ than the 
other, they must both exist in an ambit 
of relativity. And they cannot both 
be true unless they relate to different 
circumstances or, in other words, to 
changing times.
Thus there are successive moments 
in the Koran, times that are ‘before’ 
and ‘after’, and even moments that 
erase others — hence a truly temporal 
dimension. The conclusion is self-
evident: the Word of God cannot be 
confounded with God Himself. The 
Word cannot be assimilated into God’s 
divine essence. We cannot — we must 
not — read the Koran as if each one of 
the verses embodies God’s divinity, as 
if the slightest detachment represents a 
betrayal of Him.
Once the Word of God is separate from 
God, and once the Word is involved 
in human temporality, the postulation 
of Koranic imprescriptibility can no 
longer be defended. It not only fails to 
reflect the truth of the Koran, it even 
contradicts it. Believers are thus called 
upon by the Koran itself to make use 
of their reason and to exercise their 
free will, to decide for themselves 
which verses are binding, and which no 
longer concern them.
 
The Koran then ceases to appear to the 
believer like a set of commandments 
and interdictions, to be followed 
everywhere and forever. It becomes 
once again what it was during twenty-
two years for the Prophet and his 
companions: an open discourse about 
remaking the world; a call to think 
and to act in full responsibility; an 
opportunity offered to everyone to find 
God’s way in everyday life.
Mahmoud Hussein is the shared 
pseudonym of Bahgat Elnadi and Adel 
Rifaat, two Franco-Egyptian writers who 
have published a number of standard 
texts: Al-Sira (2005), Understanding the 
Qur’an Today (2009), and most recently, 
in 2016, Les musulmans au défi de 
Daech (Muslims challenged by ISIS).
