Elsewhere in the world, in African cultures 
for example, there is an equivalent to 
this learning of “the” classics. This is the 
moment of initiation, when young girls 
and boys receive the transmission of 
the heritage of ancient times, enabling 
them to live in present times. These are 
the times of the humanities. 
Every age, every culture has its classics, 
its essential texts. And, among these, 
poetry has always occupied pride of 
place. Always, that is, until now. In our 
disenchanted world, we have a tendency 
to forget that poetry exists. I would like to 
elaborate on this, precisely to challenge 
this oversight and show that poetry is 
an integral part of the humanities.
What poetry can do
No society exists without poets. Even 
if the act of creating is performed in 
solitude, poets do not live in a bubble. 
They are not hermits, shut away in ivory 
towers, but creators of a universe which 
they offer us to share. Whether their 
poetry is written down or sung, poets 
play a very important educational role. 
The philosophers of ancient Greece 
did not fail to notice this. In their eyes, 
poetry was the embodiment of an 
experience of learning, a general culture 
that preceded all specialized scientific 
or political learning.  
They knew to what extent learning 
Homer and other poets was important 
for shaping the minds of young free 
Greeks (those who were neither slaves nor 
metics). This is why Plato, in The Republic, 
was worried that Homer painted a bad 
image of the gods in his poems and ended 
up banishing poets from his city-state!
Plato’s reproach of Homer was no doubt 
as much a matter of what poetry is, 
as what it cannot be.
But, then or now, who can say what 
poetry is? For the Argentinian writer 
Jorge Luis Borges, a definition of poetry 
as “the expression of the beautiful 
through the medium of words artfully 
woven together” might be good enough 
for a dictionary, but remains rather 
“feeble”. “These realities are so deep 
within us,” he adds, “that they can only 
be expressed through the symbols that 
all men share.”



by Tanella Boni
Poetry, like any other form of artistic creation, is one of the pillars of 
the humanities. By following the paths of emotion, sensitivity and 
the imagination, the poem transmits knowledge and human values. 
Better still, it shapes the human being, body and soul.
The poet 
at the heart of society
Art does not reason. It belongs to the 
realm of emotions, of sensibilities and 
imagination. The artistic experience 
cannot be subjected to argument, 
verification or proof, as it is not a form 
of scientific knowledge. And yet, in its 
own way, away from the well-trodden 
tracks of the sciences, art plays a 
primordial role in shaping the individual. 
It transmits the human values and 
worldly knowledge that are essential for 
opening ourselves to the Other. Artistic 
creation, therefore, forges very strong 
links between humans − transcending 
beyond languages, beliefs and cultures. 
This is why art can be considered one of 
the pillars of the humanities.
The times of 
the humanities
The humanities are still very present in 
the English-speaking world − covering 
the disciplines of literature, linguistics, 
philosophy, history and art − in which 
openness of the mind and human life 
are emphasized within society.
In several French-speaking countries, 
though, the term has fallen into disuse, 
or almost, except in some academic 
circles. Yet there was a time in the French 
educational system, when one “did the 
humanities”. That meant learning “its” 
classics, studying ancient languages, 
reading Homer, Virgil and other classical 
authors − acquiring as broad a vision as 
possible by studying the ways of being, 
of living, and of speaking of human 
beings from other civilizations.

Shared in 
a sensitive way
Poetry is made to be shared in a sensitive 
way. That is how it shapes the human 
being, body and soul. By following the 
paths of emotion, of sensitivity and 
of the imagination, it is a vehicle for 
transmitting human knowledge and 
values − a sense of good and evil, history, 
the great deeds of men and women, 
ancient traditions, and links with nature. 
If this knowledge is an awakening 
of the senses by creating beauty in 
language and words, it is also the 
cultivation of imagination and memory. 
It is a performance of the body and all of 
its faculties. Because the form – of what 
is spoken or written – counts as much as 
the meaning or the “message”.
As the French poet and philosopher, 
Paul Valéry (1871-1945) says in his book, 
Ego Scriptor: “The goal of the poet is not 
to communicate a thought, but to give 
birth to an emotional state in the other 
which is similar (but not identical) to his 
own. The idea only plays a partial role (in 
himself and the other).”
Confronted with the realities of an 
incomprehensible world in which he 
finds himself “embedded”, the poet never 
ceases to “create dangerously”, in the 
words of the French writer, Albert Camus 
(1913-1960), in his essay, “The Artist 
and his Time” (Uppsala, Sweden, 
14 December 1957). It is by creating 
dangerously, to protect life against 
threats from all sides, or to express the 
joy of being in the world, that the poet 
regains his place − at the heart of society.
This portrait of Mahmoud Darwich 
(1941-2008) by French visual artist 
Ernest Pignon-Ernest, adorned 
the walls of Ramallah in 2009, where 
the Palestinian poet was living. 
His “alarm-bell words will never 
cease to resonate, inspire, mobilise 
and keep us on the alert,” insists 
French writer André Velter.

Poet, novelist, philosopher and author 
of children’s books, Tanella Boni 
(Côte d’Ivoire) is a lecturer at the 
Félix Houphouët-Boigny University 
in Abidjan and vice-president of the 
International Federation of Philosophical 
Societies (FISP). She is also a member 
of the Académie des sciences, des arts, 
des cultures d’Afrique et des diasporas 
africaines (ASCAD).
