Some of us were forced into journalism 
− we had little choice. In 1998, El Salvador 
was emerging from a long civil war and 
we were feeling our way forward, with 
no towering figure to guide us. But we 
were convinced that the post-war period 
needed a revitalised press, with a fresh 
perspective and independent voices. 
The country deserved a new journalism, 
and we provided it. 
El Faro [The Beacon] was started in May 
1998, with absolutely no funding. That’s 
why we launched it on the internet, at 
a time when barely two per cent to five 
per cent of the Salvadorian population 
had access to it. Our existence depended 
on new technologies, because we could 
never have afforded the expense of 
running a printed newspaper. Opting for 
the internet turned out to be a very lucky 
decision for us, given that at the time, we 
were a million miles away from imagining 
the influence the web would have on 
the future of humanity. 
In the beginning, we put El Faro together 
in our spare time. We were gradually 
joined by young talents who wanted 
to cut their teeth using this new media. 
For several years we made zero profit, 
but we also had virtually no expenses 
− each of us worked for free, from our 
homes. This also helped us to forge 
our independent spirit. When the 
industry started to take the internet 
seriously and readers started looking 
for news online, we were already firmly 
established on the web. 
We compensated for the absence of 
mentors and teachers by reading, and 
with healthy doses of self-criticism. 
Our paper matured as we learned from 
our mistakes – we constantly reflected 
on, debated and discussed what we 
were doing. 
Traitors to the nation
As the years went by, we eventually 
graduated to paid journalistic jobs and 
a proper office. Many of the journalism 
students who had worked with us 
from the start are now co-owners and 
shareholders of the newspaper. In our 
nearly twenty years of existence, we 
have become one of the most respected 
publications in Latin America.
Most of our efforts are concentrated on 
investigative and narrative reporting, 
covering six main themes: violence and 
organized crime, corruption, war crimes, 
culture, poverty and inequality, and 
politics. These are subjects which, in our 
view, are the least reported. But they are 
also central to any explanation of why, 
more than twenty years after the end 
of the war, El Salvador remains one of 
the most violent countries in the world, 
riddled with inequalities and poverty, 
and largely dependent on the two 
million Salvadorian expatriates – a third 
of the population – who send money 
back home. 



A beacon, 
thanks to the internet
El Faro and Salvadorian photographer 
Fred Ramos have launched the “The Last 
Outfit of the Missing” campaign, which 
involves publishing a series of photos to 
enable the families of missing persons 
to recognize their clothing and identify 
them. Ramos received support from the 
Institute of Legal Medicine to exhume 
bodies from unmarked graves.
by Carlos Dada
Journalism is going through a global crisis. The all-pervasive 
reach of the internet and social media have meant that rumours and 
false information are rife. But these very spaces can be used to create 
better journalism, as El Faro, the pioneering web-based Salvadorian 
newspaper, has illustrated, in its twenty years of existence. 

The paradox in this profession is that the 
better you are at it, the fewer friends you 
keep. We have been called traitors to 
the nation, protectors of gangs, enemies 
of private property, and of revolution. 
In a country polarized between the two 
extremes that waged the civil war, right-
wing governments accuse us of being 
left wing, and those on the left say we 
lean to the right. We have received some 
very unkind messages from drug dealers, 
war criminals, gang leaders, corrupt 
politicians, business executives, the army 
and the police. These threats have forced 
us to take legal action several times. 
These messages of discontent also come 
from readers sometimes. A few years ago, 
we published an article that denounced 
the massacre of young delinquents, 
carried out in cold blood by the police. 
Several readers complained that we 
were hampering the work of the police, 
because gangs are the main source of 
violence in El Salvador. We understand 
these reactions very well, but there is no 
question of us changing our reporting to 
satisfy our readers’ aspirations, or alleviate 
their anxieties − populist journalism 
would be irresponsible, harmful 
and immoral. 
A Central American 
forum
More recently, we have sought to extend 
our coverage to neighbouring countries − 
Honduras and Guatemala − which suffer 
similar levels of violence, corruption 
and social decay. Though we haven’t yet 
achieved the systematic coverage we 
would like, we have made good progress 
in setting up a network with journalists in 
the region, who can collaborate with us 
on investigative stories. 
After two decades of growth, many 
journalists at El Faro have published 
books. We also do radio broadcasts, make 
documentaries and hold exhibitions 
and conferences. This is because we 
feel the need to pass on our knowledge 
to future generations. 
In May every year, we hold the Central 
American Journalism Forum − a week of 
workshops, conferences and exhibitions 
with dozens of invited speakers from all 
over Latin America, the United States 
and Europe. The best journalists from the 
region and abroad lead workshops on 
investigative journalism, radio journalism, 
photography and reporting. More than 
a hundred journalists, mainly from 
Central America, took part in 2017.
The forum is the leading event in our 
permanent programme of training 
and conferences, aimed at improving 
the quality of journalism in Central 
America. This is the poorest region of the 
continent − putting our journalists in 
touch with their colleagues throughout 
Latin America opens up new possibilities 
for collaboration, to cover the issues that 
increasingly extend beyond the borders 
of our countries. 
A Salvadorian journalist, Carlos Dada 
founded El Faro in 1998. He has covered 
events in Iraq, Venezuela, Mexico, 
Guatemala and Honduras. His articles 
are published in Latin America, USA, 
Bosnia and Spain. He was awarded the 
María Moors Cabot prize by Columbia 
University, New York, in 2011. 
 
“It is impossible 
to photograph 
a subject with 
objectivity, but it 
is possible to show 
a story with truth,” 
says Salvadorian 
photographer 
Juan Carlos, who 
took this photo of 
a bench that bears 
traces of a murder 
in a public park 
in Chalchuapa, 
El Salvador.
