by Cable Green
The lack of universal access 
to effective educational 
resources remains a global 
problem. But, says Cable Green, 
the good news is that open 
education is increasing access, 
lowering costs and improving 
student learning. 
But how can educators share digital 
learning content without violating 
copyright law – how can they share 
legally? 
The key distinguishing characteristic of 
an OER is its open copyright licence and 
the legal permissions the licence grants 
the public to use, modify and share it. 
If an educational resource is not clearly 
marked as being in the public domain or 
having an open licence, it is not an OER.
The most common way to openly 
license copyrighted education resources 
– making them OER – is to add a Creative 
Commons (CC) licence to the resource. 
These licences are standardized, free-
to-use, open copyright licences that 
have already been applied to more than 
1.2 billion copyrighted works across nine 
million websites, according to the State 
of the Commons Report, 2015. When 
authors add a CC licence to their work, 
they keep their copyright and share their 
work with the public, for free, under 
the terms and conditions they choose. 



Sharing
legally and freely
for better learning
We live in an age of information 
abundance where everyone, for the 
first time in history, can access all the 
knowledge they wish. The key to this 
sea-change in education opportunity is 
Open Educational Resources (OER), freely 
available materials that can be legally 
downloaded, edited and shared to better 
serve all students.
For the last twenty years, the educational 
resources – textbooks, videos, courses, 
degree programmes, etc. – we use to 
teach people how to read and write, learn 
physics and think critically have been 
"born-digital". Even though we still use 
printed copies and employ non-internet 
delivery of learning materials, there 
exists a digital file. Thanks to the internet, 
inexpensive disc space and cloud 
computing, we can now store, distribute, 
and make copies of digital educational 
resources for the marginal cost of zero.
Cable Green, Director of Open Education 
at Creative Commons.
With this article, the UNESCO Courier 
marks the 2nd World Open Educational 
Resources Congress in Ljubljana, 
Slovenia, in September 2017. 

Leveraging 
the full power of OER
It is worth noting that “open” is not the 
same as “free”. All OER can be freely 
accessed, but not all free content is OER. 
Many Massive Open Online Courses 
(MOOCs), for example, are free but 
not open. While access to the MOOC 
content might be free, the MOOC is 
only considered OER if its contents are 
openly licensed or in the public domain. 
This becomes critically important if 
you want to translate an MOOC into 
different languages and/or modify it 
for a local context to meet the needs of 
your students. 
OER can be freely retained (keep a 
copy), reused (use as is), revised (adapt, 
adjust, modify), remixed (mash up 
different content to create something 
new), and redistributed (share copies 
with others) without breaking copyright 
law. Of course, if we want to leverage 
the full power of OER, educators and 
students also need access to Information 
and Communication Technology (ICT) 
infrastructure – computers, mobile 
devices and internet connectivity, in all 
spaces for all people.
In summary, OER are possible because: 
1) educational resources are digital (most 
OER are “born-digital,” though OER can be 
made available to students in both digital 
and printed formats) and digital resources 
can be stored, copied and distributed 
for near-zero cost; 2) the internet makes 
it simple for anyone to share digital 
content; and 3) Creative Commons open 
licences make it simple and legal to 
keep one’s copyright and legally share 
educational resources with the world.
Open resources make access 
to education easier. 

What difference 
does OER make? 
When colleges and universities shift 
to OER, they enable a series of positive 
education changes. The first thing that 
happens is that equitable access to 
educational resources goes up. Every 
single student can have access to all of 
the educational resources that have been 
designed for them to be successful in 
the class on day one. This might sound 
obvious, but even in the United States, 
two-thirds of college and university 
students don’t buy the textbooks 
prescribed for their classes because 
they cannot afford them.
The second positive impact is all students 
get access to relevant, contextualized 
education content that has been 
designed for them. A professor in 
Mumbai can download an openly 
licensed textbook that has been shared 
by the University of Barcelona, translate 
it into Hindi, and update the book with 
examples that will appeal to his or 
her students.
Third, learning outcomes go up or stay 
the same, while price falls to near zero. 
When all students in a class have access 
to all of the resources on day one, they 
succeed. A journal-published analysis 
of more than 16,000 students at public 
institutions showed that students using 
open materials perform as well, if not 
better, than their peers using traditional 
course materials (Lane Fischer, John 
Hilton, T. Jared Robinson, and David 
Wiley: A multi-institutional study of the 
impact of open textbook adoption on 
the learning outcomes of post-secondary 
students, Journal of Computing in Higher 
Education, 2015).
Fourth, it has been observed that 
course completion rates go up. In 
a controlled application of OER at 
Tidewater Community College in 
Virginia, US, students utilizing OER 
resources in a variety of course formats 
fared up to 11% better in both course 
completion and achievement. (Lane 
Fischer, John Hilton, David Wiley and 
Linda William: Maintaining momentum 
toward graduation: OER and the course 
throughput rate, The International Review 
of Research in Open and Distributed 
Learning, 2016). 
Students remain and succeed in courses 
that provide them access to all the 
educational resources they need to 
prosper. Because more students are 
completing their courses, time-to-
degree also drops. With OER, education 
institutions help students move through 
their educational opportunities with 
greater speed and success – a more 
effective public investment.
Fifth, once we have OER in our learning 
spaces, students and teachers can shift to 
open education practices – “collaborative 
practices which include the creation, 
use and reuse of OER and pedagogical 
practices employing participatory 
technologies, peer learning, knowledge 
creation and sharing, and empowerment 
of learners” (Catherine Cronin : Openness 
and praxis: exploring the use of 
open educational practices in higher 
education, The International Review of 
Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 
2017). According to Cronin, students 
become co-producers, generators and 
creators of knowledge; they can create, 
update and improve OER as they learn.
“Microchip synapses 29 – Between 
the now and the infinite”, by Italian artist 
Leonardo Ulian.

Policy support needed
One way governments can support open 
education is to adopt a simple policy 
– require publicly-funded educational 
resources are openly licensed.
Open education licensing policies 
insert open licensing requirements 
into existing funding systems (e.g., 
grants, contracts or other agreements) 
that create educational resources, 
thereby making the content OER, and 
shifting the default on publicly-funded 
educational resources from “closed” 
to “open”. This is a particularly strong 
education policy argument – if the public 
pays for education resources, the public 
should have the right to access and use 
those resources at no additional cost 
and with the full spectrum of legal rights 
necessary to modify the OER to meet 
their local needs.
This sounds obvious, but it is not the rule. 
Unfortunately, it is almost always the 
case that publicly- funded educational 
resources are commercialized in such a 
way that access is restricted to those who 
are willing to pay for them a second time. 
Why should a nation’s citizens be required 
to pay a second time for an education 
resource they’ve already paid for?
Governments, foundations, and 
education institutions can and should 
implement open education licensing 
policies by requiring open licences on 
the educational resources produced with 
their funding. Strong open licensing 
policies make open licensing mandatory 
and apply a clear definition for open 
licence, ideally using the Creative 
Commons Attribution (CC BY) licence 
that grants full reuse rights, provided 
the original author is attributed. 
The good news is, open education 
policies are happening. In June 2012, 
UNESCO convened a World Open 
Education Resources Congress at its 
Headquarters, and released the 2012 
Paris OER Declaration, which included a 
call for governments to “encourage the 
open licensing of educational materials 
produced with public funds”. I am pleased 
to say that many governments have 
followed this recommendation.
In conclusion, if we want OER to go 
mainstream, if we want curated sets of 
OER for all grade levels, in all subjects, in 
all languages, customized to meet local 
needs; if we want significant funding 
available for the creation, adoption and 
continuous updating of OER – then 
we need (1) universal awareness of 
and systematic support for OER, and 
(2) a broad adoption of open education 
licensing policies. When all educators 
are passionate about free and open 
access to their educational resources, 
when we change the rules on the money, 
when the default on all publicly-funded 
educational resources is “open” and not 
“closed”, we will live in a world where 
everyone can attain all the education 
they desire. 
Cable Green (USA) is Director of Open 
Education at Creative Commons, which 
includes over 500 researchers, activists, 
legal, education, science, museum and 
policy advocates, and volunteers who 
make up the CC global network in over 
eighty-five countries. 
