Today, most of us get our news through 
mobile telephones and from online 
platforms that have grown rich by 
exploiting people’s personal data, while 
at the same time, draining lucrative 
advertising from traditional media. 
Resonating with 
journalists worldwide 
Thousands of news outlets, mainly 
newspapers, have closed. Tens of 
thousands of journalists have lost their 
jobs. People’s access to reliable and 
trusted sources of news has narrowed as 
traditional news sources – particularly 
at the local and regional level – have 
contracted, even though the space for 
free speech has expanded dramatically.
The Ethical Journalism Network (EJN) 
was created five years ago, to strengthen 
journalism in the face of this crisis. 
As a coalition of more than sixty 
groups of journalists, editors, press 
owners and media support groups, EJN 
promotes training and practical actions 
to strengthen ethics and governance. 
Its work − whether it is developing a test 
for journalists to expose hate speech, 
guidelines on reporting conflict or 
producing reports on covering migration 
− resonates with journalists around 
the world.
Because the network has its roots within 
media, EJN’s multi-country reports 
and even those that lift the lid on the 
untold stories about the realities of 
how media work and the challenges of 
self-regulation, have credibility inside 
journalism. 
The EJN’s soundings in this period 
of uncertainty are that despite the 
increasingly hostile economic and 
political climate, journalists everywhere 
− from Turkey, Syria and Egypt to 
Pakistan, China and Indonesia − remain 
committed to truth-telling and ethics. 
by Aidan White
The core values of ethical 
journalism are more important 
than ever today, as we fight 
for quality and democracy 
in the media in the digital 
age. While new laws might 
lead to potential censorship, 
a commitment to ethics is 
essential to build public trust. 
“Tech giants that dominate the public 
information space, such as Google, 
Facebook, Amazon and Twitter 
circulate information in a value-free 
environment,” says Aidan White.



Ethical
journalism:
back in the news
Journalism is on the move like never 
before. Today the news business is faster, 
more pressurized, and infinitely more 
complex. The media have learned the 
hard way how the information revolution 
− for all its liberating qualities − is a 
double-edged sword.
While news media can deliver stories 
around the world in seconds and 
communications have the potential to 
build stronger, more informed and more 
engaged communities, the business 
models that paid for journalism in the 
past are broken, and in many cases, 
beyond repair.
With less money to pay for public-interest 
journalism, newsrooms struggle to 
maintain their ethical base. Problems that 
have always been on the radar − political 
bias, undue corporate influence, 
stereotypes and conflicts of interest 
− are now magnified.
The past fifteen years have seen a 
dramatic decline in news journalism, as 
technology has changed the way people 
communicate and the way the media 
business works. 

Building public trust
This commitment is a golden asset at 
a time of social transformation, when 
the global communications culture is in 
chaotic transition. To people inside media 
and anyone striving for the key to safe 
and secure communications in future, 
the defence and promotion of ethical 
journalism has become more important 
than ever. 
Fake news, political and corporate 
propaganda, and shameless online abuse 
threaten democracy and open up new 
frontlines for free-speech defenders, 
policymakers, and media professionals 
alike. A toxic mix of digital technology, 
unscrupulous politics and commercial 
exploitation of the new communications 
landscape is creating stress fractures 
across the wider landscape of public 
information.
With this in mind, EJN has promoted a 
new debate about the need to recognize 
why journalism, which is constrained by 
its framework of ethics, is essential for 
building public trust. 
We find that there is no widespread 
yearning for a new code of ethics 
among the media or the public. The 
core values of accuracy, independence 
and responsible reporting – which have 
evolved over the past 150 years – remain 
as relevant as ever, even in these digital 
times. 
What is needed, says EJN, is a new 
partnership with media audiences 
and policymakers to persuade them 
that ethical journalism should be 
strengthened, and that it can be used as 
an inspiration for new programmes to 
promote information literacy. 
Cardinal principles
Today, it’s not just journalists who need to 
watch their language and show respect 
for the facts; everyone with something 
to say in the public information sphere 
needs to show some ethical restraint.
The EJN argues that ethical values 
of journalism – such as fact-based 
communications, humanity and respect 
for others, transparency and owning up 
to errors – are cardinal principles which 
should guide everyone, including social 
media users and citizen journalists. But 
this should be a voluntary process and 
not driven by law.
Worried by online abuse and fake news, 
some governments, even in democratic 
countries, have threatened to fine 
technology companies that don’t act 
to remove malicious and dangerous 
information when it pops up on their 
platforms. This could limit legitimate 
dissent and free speech − this is 
increasingly more likely to happen, unless 
these companies act to support ethical 
communications. 
The problem is that the tech giants that 
dominate the public information space, 
such as Google, Facebook, Amazon and 
Twitter, circulate information in a value-
free environment. They give no priority 
to information as a public good, such 
as professional journalism. For them, 
journalism competes on an equal footing 
in their marketing with other information, 
even if it is malicious and abusive. 
Using algorithms 
to attract clicks
Using sophisticated algorithms and 
limitless databanks that provide access 
to millions of subscribers, this business 
model is driven by one simple objective 
– to encourage “viral information” that 
delivers enough clicks to trigger digital 
advertising. It matters not whether 
information is ethical, true or honest; 
what counts is whether it is sensational, 
provocative, and stimulating enough to 
attract attention.
No matter how sophisticated they are, 
digital robots can’t be encoded with 
ethical and moral values. The best people 
to handle ethical questions are sentient 
human beings – well-trained, informed 
and responsible journalists and editors.
After recent scandals – like the outrage 
over censorship of iconic photographs 
(see p. 16), the live-streaming of torture 
and murder, and major corporations 
complaining about their advertisements 
being placed on websites preaching 
terrorism, hate and child abuse – the 
technology companies have promised to 
act. But will it be enough?
On 3 May 2017, Facebook boss Mark 
Zuckerberg promised to employ 
3,000 content reviewers (to add to the 
company’s 4,500-strong “community 
operations team”), following outrage over 
the broadcasting of a spate of violent 
videos of murder, suicide, and gang rape. 
Facebook has a subscriber base of 
two billion, which means that there is 
one content reviewer per 250,000 or so, 
users. It’s a fraction of what is needed 
to monitor and control the growth of 
unethical, abusive content and the 
dangers posed by propaganda and 
fake news. 
Exploiting 
people’s privacy
One simple answer would be for tech 
companies to accept their role as 
publishers in the digital age and to draw 
upon the vast pool of informed and 
ethical journalists currently displaced 
by the information revolution. We know 
they can afford it – in early 2017, it was 
reported that Facebook was worth 
around $400 billion, and Google more 
than $600 billion. These are among the 
world’s richest companies.
While policymakers and technology 
moguls wring their hands over these 
issues, the use of technology by 
unscrupulous politicians to undermine 
democracy and to interfere in elections 
is growing. And fake news laced with 
malicious lies is all part of the strategy. 

The crisis was recently highlighted by 
Sir Tim Berners-Lee, inventor of the 
World Wide Web. The British scientist and 
academic warned that the online world 
is being overwhelmed by governments 
and digital corporations and that the 
exploitation of people’s privacy is 
squeezing the life out of the internet. 
His criticism highlights the disruptive and 
pernicious threat posed by the marketing 
of false information in politics. 
In an open letter (on 12 March 2017, the 
web’s 28th birthday), Berners-Lee wrote 
of the 2016 election in the United States: 
“... as many as 50,000 variations of adverts 
were being served every single day on 
Facebook, a near-impossible situation 
to monitor.  
And there are suggestions that some 
political adverts – in the US and around 
the world – are being used in unethical 
ways to point voters to fake news sites, 
for instance, or to keep others away from 
the polls. … Is that democratic?” 
Exposing fake news 
It’s a good question, and one that was 
also asked in France on the eve of the 
French presidential election in May 2017, 
when online hackers dumped thousands 
of confidential email files, many of them 
fake, concerning Emmanuel Macron, the 
eventual winner.
This information mountain couldn’t 
be examined, verified or debunked by 
journalists, because French law forbids 
public discussion of election information 
in the last hours before people vote. 
But it circulated freely on social media.

News reporting can be rough and 
ready, but ethical journalism owns up 
to its errors. More importantly, because 
it is fact-based and has civic purpose, 
it also provides a road map for policy 
to build a safe and reliable public 
information space.
Aidan White (UK) is Director of the 
Ethical Journalism Network, and 
the author of a book, To Tell You The 
Truth: the Ethical Journalism Initiative, 
a global review of ethical issues in the 
news (2008). He is the former General 
Secretary of the International Federation 
of Journalists, which he led for twenty-
four years until March 2011. He is a 
founder of the International News Safety 
Institute and the International Freedom 
of Expression Exchange (IFEX). 
