Our guest
Alphadi is designated UNESCO Artist for Peace by Director-General Irina Bokova, Paris, 2016. © UNESCO/P. Chiang-Joo

Alphadi: 
putting Africa’s creativity
on the world map
Interview by
Jasmina Šopova
You define yourself as “the most 
pan-Africanist of all pan-Africanists”. 
Where does this feeling come from?
I am a pan-Africanist by descent and 
conviction. I was born in Timbuktu, to a 
Moroccan mother and a Nigerien father 
of Arab descent. I grew up in Niger and 
I did part of my studies in Togo. I also 
have family in Morocco, Mauritania, 
and Côte d’Ivoire. All these countries 
are part of my mixed heritage that I 
hold proudly as a sign of African unity 
and dignity.
What brought you to the world 
of fashion?
I always had a creative urge, ever since 
I was a child. It is only when my parents 
passed away that I was able to express 
it. For them, it was out of the question 
for me to go into fashion! They believed 
it was a “woman’s job” and also 
incompatible with Islam.
I got a degree in tourism in Paris to 
respect their wishes. I studied by day, 
and by night I attended fashion shows. 
I ended up rubbing shoulders with 
some of the most renowned fashion 
designers of the time. Once I received 
my tourism diploma in 1980, I returned 
to Niger and worked for the Directorate 
of Tourism in the Ministry of Trade 
in Niamey.
And three years later, you presented 
your first collection in Niger…
Exactly. At the beginning, I wanted to 
set up an African textile project with 
the late Chris Seydou, a great Malian 
fashion designer. But I then found 
myself alone, so I gathered all the 
strength I had and created a weaving 
and embroidery workshop on my own. 
It was only later that I trained at the 
Atelier Chardon-Savard fashion school 
in Paris.
How did you finance the project?
At the very beginning, I invested what 
I earned working in a weaving mill in 
Niger. That is how I created the Alphadi 
fabric. Then I availed of the voluntary 
retirement support programme from 
the civil service, a support credit for 
setting up businesses, and a subsidy 
from the European Union. This enabled 
me to buy my first machines and hire 
my first employees. And that’s how the 
Alphadi brand was born.
The brand was recognized in Paris
in 1985.
It was at the International Tourism Trade 
Fair. Paco Rabanne, Yves Saint-Laurent 
and some other designers and models 
that I knew from my time studying in 
Paris, came to lend me a helping hand.
But my greatest moment will always 
be the second International Festival 
of Fashion that took place in Paris in 
1987. All the biggest names in the 
fashion industry were there. There 
were thousands of models and tens 
of thousands of spectators, and a 
billion television viewers around the 
world were watching! To present your 
collection on an open-air catwalk 
in the Trocadero gardens accompanied 
by griots [West African travelling 
poets and musicians]and camels is 
incredibly moving.
The festival served as a consecration 
of all your efforts as well as a nice 
way of recognizing the work of 
craftspeople.
Definitely. I work with very talented 
craftspeople. From the very beginning, 
I hired more than a dozen weavers 
and about twenty technicians 
specialized in sewing, embroidery 
and beadwork. Later, I created a team 
of jewellers in Niger and a team of 
tanners in Morocco.
In the 2000s, I launched a perfumery 
and cosmetics brand which used 
ingredients of African origin. And 
in 2005, I introduced a sportswear 
collection, including jeans, T-shirts, 
etc., at prices that are affordable for 
young people.
Convinced that “culture is the fundamental starting point for [...] 
development,” Alphadi is committed to supporting the textile 
industry and promoting traditional know-how throughout the 
African continent. The internationally-recognized designer, 
who created the International Festival of African Fashion, has 
become a symbol of the struggle for economic development. 
His latest dream is on the verge of coming true — creating a 
school dedicated to fashion and the arts in Niamey. We met up 
with this “Wizard of the Desert”.

I am fighting to create value for the 
African people, to offer them work, 
and to make sure their creativity is 
recognized. I manufacture my fabrics 
in different countries including Niger, 
Nigeria, Ghana, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali, 
Senegal, and Morocco and I am 
advocating for the reopening of textile 
mills in Africa.
How are you campaigning to reopen 
these mills?
To give you an example, in 2014, I went 
to the “Le pagne en fête [the Loincloth 
Festival]” fair that was organized in Togo 
to promote the recovery of the textile 
industry in the country. In Datcha, a 
village near Atakpamé, there used to be 
a factory that employed 3,000 people. It 
was shut down about fifteen years ago, 
and the workers were left jobless. The 
wax fabrics they produced have since 
been manufactured in the Netherlands. 
With all due respect, I believe that we 
are in a better position to produce 
African fabrics in Africa!
Revitalizing the African textile industry 
and enhancing traditional know-how 
have been at the heart of my project 
as a fashion designer, from the very 
beginning. All the approaches I take  
are geared towards these objectives.
How many people do you 
employ now?
Without counting the sub-contractors, 
I currently have between 150 and 200 
people working for me. In my opinion, 
a creator of fashion is also a creator of 
jobs. I have always been convinced that 
culture is the fundamental starting point 
for a country’s development.
Let me give you an example. Back when 
I started my fashion career, Niger was 
the world’s fourth-largest producer of 
uranium. I kept saying that fashion in 
Niger could be a much safer source 
of wealth than uranium, but people 
did not take me seriously. Since then, 
uranium stocks have plummeted and 
fashion has had the wind in its sails !
You have been president of the 
African Federation of Couture since it 
was founded in 1994. Can you tell us 
about your work there?
The Federation was founded in Ghana, 
and its headquarters have moved as 
political situations in African countries 
changed. I must admit that we do not 
have the means to match our ambitions, 
but I am doing everything I can to help 
develop African fashion and design 
in all its diversity. One of my main 
missions is to develop the protection of 
trademarks, particularly with the African 
Intellectual Property Organization — but 
also with the World Intellectual Property 
Organization — to encourage African 
countries to adhere to the international 
trademark system.
You created a fashion festival in the 
middle of the desert! Tell us a little 
bit about this adventure.
It is my biggest pride! The International 
Festival of African Fashion (FIMA) was 
born in the Tiguidit desert in Niger in 
1998. It is the culmination of many of my 
dreams — showcasing African creations, 
promoting young designers, enabling 
encounters, mixing cultures, cohesion, 
diversity, and peace. These are all values 
to which I attach the greatest importance.
Let’s not forget that during the first 
edition of the festival, the Touareg 
rebellion was still rampant in Niger. It 
is no coincidence that the logo of the 
festival is a stylized Touareg turban. 
I wanted to return the turban to its 
former glory, and transform it into a 
sign of peace, not war.
The 2016 edition of the festival was 
also characterized by peace.
Yes, our slogan was “Building a 
mixed and peaceful Africa” and we 
paid tribute to Nelson Mandela, an 
emblematic figure of peace. I presented 
a collection of haute couture all in white 
and organized a parade in the streets 
where everybody was dressed in white. 
That was also a very emotional moment!

Peace, culture and development are 
the keywords of each edition of FIMA. 
Every two years, the festival brings 
together designers from all over the 
African continent, as well as guests 
from Europe, the Americas and Asia. As 
much as it celebrates Africa, it dedicates 
the last day to bringing together the 
whole world on the same stage.
In December 2016, we organized the 
10th edition of FIMA in collaboration 
with the Chamber of Crafts and Trades 
of Niger in the traditional wrestling 
arena of Agadez, in the north of Niger. 
The theme was “Education and the 
Alphadi in Paris, May 2016. © Leonardo Džoni-Šopov
industry for a mixed and peaceful 
Africa”. I was particularly delighted that 
the event took place, since we had 
to cancel the festival scheduled for 
November 2015, because of the 
events that rocked the world and 
West Africa in particular. Since it is 
impossible to eliminate risk entirely, 
we felt that we were not in a position 
to ensure the security of the public 
and the participants.
Assoumana Malam Issa, Niger’s Minister 
of Cultural Renaissance, the Arts and 
Social Modernization, chaired the 
launch ceremony of the 10th edition. 
He announced that he would support 
FIMA in its mission to make the 
fashion and haute couture industry a 
permanent tool for development. 
Now that the festival has been qualified 
as a key cultural event in Niger, we will 
be able to organize it every year.

Do you have other projects aimed 
at promoting young designers
in Africa?
My big project at the moment is 
to create an international school 
dedicated to fashion and the arts in 
Niamey. I have been dreaming about 
this for ten years, and two years ago 
I was given the land for this. The 
government of Niger has provided us 
with 3,000 square metres. I am now 
waiting for other sources of funding to 
make this dream a reality.
The construction plans are ready. We 
are hoping to build a factory workshop 
that will welcome some thirty designers 
from Niger and abroad. They will 
be able to create their collections 
there, and, if necessary, make and sell 
their designs. We also plan to offer 
accommodation to designers and 
teachers from abroad and to create 
boutiques, a fashion museum equipped 
with a fabric library, and rooms that can 
be used for fashion shows.
The concept is partly inspired by 42, 
the [private, nonprofit and tuition-
free computer-programming] school 
created by Xavier Niel, the founder 
of Free[the French internet service 
provider]. His priority is talent and 
teamwork. The Atelier Chardon-
Savard in Paris is also helping us 
with this project.
Do young African designers find their 
place at the festival?
Actually, they have a privileged place at 
the festival! Every two years, since 2003, 
we have been organizing a competition 
for young stylists in collaboration with 
the Association Française d’Action 
Artistique and since 2010 we have been 
organizing it with the Institut français.
We receive between 250 and 300 
applications for the competition. An 
international jury comes together at the 
Museum of Decorative Arts in Paris to 
choose three winners. For the past five 
years, the prizes have been financed 
by the West African Economic and 
Monetary Fund.
We also have a prize for African models, 
which increases their chances of 
becoming top models.
Can you tell us a little about the 
“Alphadi caravans”?
The idea came from my nomadic spirit. 
After each edition of FIMA, a team of 
about forty people (designers, models, 
fashion specialists, sponsors, journalists) 
sets off across Africa to organize 
Alphadi shows. This enables us to 
meet talented young artists in different 
regions, who will then be selected by 
our jury to showcase their collections at 
the next edition of the Festival.
Alphadi celebrates African design at the
Black Fashion Week, Paris, 2013.
© Dou Matar Gueye

Glimpses from the first edition of FIMA held in the 
Niger desert, 1998.
With this interview, the UNESCO Courier is 
associated with Africa Day, celebrated on 25 May. 
© Laure Maud Photographer



We will build the school with the 
help of donors, but it will have to 
function independently. This is why 
modest tuition fees will be charged. 
The Alphadi Foundation will grant 
scholarships, and the students will be 
able to partially cover their costs by 
selling their designs in the school’s 
boutiques. The school will also include 
a “cultural nursery” that will offer six- to 
eight-month training grants to really 
young pupils aged 9 or 10, to teach 
them artistic creation and fashion.
What is the role of the
Alphadi Foundation?
I first created the Alphadi association 
in 2000. It is closely linked to FIMA 
and is particularly active in the field 
of education, though it is not limited 
to that. To give you an example, I 
organized several telethons, including 
one in 2012, for Malian refugees and 
it was a great success. We worked in 
collaboration with the United Nations 
High Commissioner for Refugees 
(UNHCR) to raise about €52,000 and 
nearly eighty tons of cereal.
Alphadi, whose full name is 
Sidahmed Alphadi Seidnaly and who 
has earned the sobriquet, “Wizard of 
the Desert”, was born on 1 June 1957 
in Timbuktu, Mali, into a family of 
tradesmen. He grew up in Niger with 
eight siblings. He is himself a father 
of six and divides his life between the 
United States, France and Africa.
Alphadi was designated UNESCO 
Artist for Peace on 25 January 2016. 
The same year, on 23 April, he joined 
the UNESCO Coalition of Artists for the 
General History of Africa.
I am currently creating the Alphadi 
Heritage Foundation (the by-laws of 
the foundation are ready). This will 
focus on training women and girls, 
and will be engaged in issues such as 
health and malnutrition.
I often jokingly say that I trust women 
more than I trust men. A woman who 
earns a living, feeds and looks after 
her children; a man usually uses the 
money... to buy himself a second wife!
