These events are evidence of 
an unprecedented development, 
which is also the result of UNESCO’s 
actions. The use of armed force is not 
sufficient to defeat a threat that thrives on 
ignorance and flawed readings of history. 
The battle against violent extremism is 
waged through culture and education. 
Lasting peace requires recourse to what 
the poet Aimé Césaire called “miraculous 
weapons” – education, culture and 
knowledge – which strengthen 
the defences of peace in the minds of 
each and every one.
It is in this spirit that UNESCO is 
seeking to raise public awareness of 
the values of tolerance and respect 
through creation. As Edouard Glissant 
(1928-2011), former Editor-in-Chief 
of the UNESCO Courier, pointed out, 
art has always served as a trigger for 
“the creative capacity of the individual 
and the community and [has] provided 
a mirror of identity”. Artistic creation is 
an initiation of intercultural dialogue, 
and building bridges amid the world’s 
rich cultural diversity. 
Many people, both young and 
not-so-young, want to transmit 
this discourse of peace, tolerance and 
respect for rights. The Unite4Heritage 
campaign (p. 11) that I launched in 2015, 
has since attracted a great many 
supporters across the world. The initiative 
has demonstrated its vitality in building 
peace, growing silently like the trees 
in a forest, even when our attention is 
focused on the tree that is being felled. 
Let us continue to invest in 
this “soft power” of UNESCO, and to 
continue to believe in the capacity 
of these “miraculous weapons” 
that humanity is forging patiently 
to establish lasting peace.
Irina Bokova 
Director-General of UNESCO.
Irina Bokova, 
Director-General of UNESCO. 
© Yulian Donov
From the very start, UNESCO has actively 
campaigned to emphasize the essential 
role that culture plays in global peace. 
The development of modern conflicts 
confirms the increased need for this form 
of “soft power” today.
The repeated attacks on heritage in Iraq, 
Libya, Mali and Syria have shown the extent 
to which the protection of cultural heritage 
cannot be separated from the protection 
of human lives. Violent extremists do not 
target only the general public; they also 
target teachers, journalists, schools, 
and historical monuments in an attempt 
to undermine and disrupt the societies 
they wish to subjugate. 
In response, we must do more to integrate 
culture in our strategies for security 
and peace, as a means to build long-term 
resilience, resistance and cohesion. 
This is why UNESCO has intensified 
its emergency programmes and 
initiatives to counter violent extremism, 
while continuing its political advocacy. 
Several resolutions recently adopted 
by the United Nations Security Council 
represent a historic recognition of the 
importance of protecting heritage for 
public security, such as Resolutions 2199, 
2354 and 2347 (see p. 7). For the first 
time, a UN resolution, Resolution 2347, 
unanimously adopted on 24 March 2017, 
covers the range of threats to world 
heritage – affirming that its deliberate 
destruction constitutes a tactic of war, 
which calls for suitable responses.
The conviction by the International 
Criminal Court of the militant leader 
responsible for destroying the shrines 
of Timbuktu (Mali) – in the very first 
international tribunal entirely devoted to 
the destruction of cultural heritage – also 
marks a decisive step towards an end to 
impunity for these war crimes (see p. 18). 
