Innovative partnerships 
for change
A new generation of partnerships between governments,
business and civil society is the best way forward to achieving
the strategic goals of the international community. Using
dialogue and fresh thinking, this inclusive platform of
partnerships would aid current goals, and address the
challenges of the future.
by Shiraz Sidhva
When global business leaders gathered 
at the World Economic Forum in Davos 
in January 2017, the most ubiquitous 
fashion accessory at this elite jamboree 
was a circular lapel pin depicting the 
colours of the United Nations’ seventeen 
Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs). Far from furthering short-term 
goals like increased profits and higher 
sales figures, a group of top business 
leaders are using their positions and 
their companies to combat climate 
change, end poverty, seek education for 
all, empower women, and reduce the 
spread of diseases. 
Kept at arm’s length by development 
agencies for decades, the private 
sector was roped in by the UN in 2015 
to partner with UN agencies, national 
governments, academia and civil 
society to help advance the ambitious 
global agenda by 2030. The universal 
agreement is the most inclusive 
blueprint for sustainable development 
so far. The ultimate goal of attaining 
greater sustainability, peace and 
prosperity for all could only be 
achieved if everyone helps to move the 
agenda forward. This idea is enshrined 
in SDG 17, partnerships for the goals.
“Fantastic increase in well-being”
In his remarks at a special session on 
“Co-operation for Peace: Tackling 
the Root Causes of Global Crises” in 
Davos, UN Secretary-General António 
Guterres said that in order to achieve 
sustainable and inclusive development, 
“we need to…agree to mobilize, not 
only governments, not only civil society, 
academia, but the business sector in 
order to take advantage of these [the 
Paris Agreement on climate change 
and the 2030 Agenda for SDGs] 
agreements and to be together in 
a new form of partnership aimed at 
transforming those agreements into 
areas of action that help to prevent 
conflicts and other dramas that we face 
in today’s world.”
 
Recent calculations have shown that the 
returns of investments that could be 
generated by the full implementation of 
the SDGs could be $30 billion per year, 
Guterres said. These new partnerships 
could lead to a “fantastic increase in the 
well-being of people,” he added.
 
In her first address as the UN Deputy 
Secretary General on 28 February 2017, 
hours after she was sworn in, Amina 
Mohammed underlined that “Success 
[in achieving the SDGs] will require 
a bolder approach to financing and 
partnerships. Nothing will be achieved 
without engaging all actors,” she said, 
urging all countries to rethink their 
systems and approaches.
 
The UN too would need “to be fit for 
purpose”, she added, to be able to help 
its member states implement the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
“We must innovate and revamp our 
approach to partnership and financing, 
with a focus on the long haul,” 
Mohammed said.
Roping business in
Paul Polman, the CEO of Anglo-Dutch 
multinational Unilever since 2009, is 
the best example of a growing tribe 
of business heads who spend a lot of 
time and energy evangelizing about the 
need for businesses to be involved in 
solving the planet’s most challenging 
problems. Addressing his shareholders, 
he talks convincingly about climate 
change: “We have already passed 
1 degree, and Mother Nature, 
unfortunately, is increasingly starting to 
send us the bill,” he warns. 
Speaking to students at the London 
School of Economics, he enthused: “We 
could be the generation, in the next 
fifteen years, that solves the issue of 
poverty, that solves the issue of climate 
change.” The room of eager students 
falls silent with his next statement: 
“I always say I represent one of the 
biggest NGOs.”
Not the usual stuff that business leaders 
say. But Polman walks the talk. Last year, he 
was appointed by the then UN Director-
General, Ban Ki-moon, to a group of 
eminent SDGs Advocates “to build on 
their unique standing and leadership” to 
help achieve the SDGs by 2030. 

The Sustainable Development Goals 
Fund, established in 2014 by the United
Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) on behalf of the UN, facilitates 
the convergence of public and private 
institutions to achieve development 
results. Its private-sector strategy has 
two goals — to involve businesses in 
each of their programmes in the field 
from the beginning, and to create a 
global business advisory council.
Road map for alliances
The SDG Fund’s Private Sector Advisory 
Group, made up of business leaders 
from major companies from various 
industries worldwide, is helping the 
Fund “build a road map for how 
public-private alliances can provide 
large-scale solutions for achieving the 
SDGs.” Besides providing assistance in 
developing business models, the group 
contributes by engaging in dialogue 
with public and private stakeholders; 
advocacy and awareness raising; 
providing expert consultancy services, 
and collaborating with the academic 
world to provide new ideas for joint 
solutions, among other initiatives. 
Through Public-Private Partnerships 
(PPPs), responsible businesses have 
earned a place at the negotiating table. 
On the business side, organizations 
like the Geneva-based World 
Business Council for Sustainable 
Development (WBCSD), a global, 
CEO-led organization of over 200 
member companies — with $8.5 trillion 
in combined revenues and 19 million 
employees — and seventy national 
business councils, are working to deliver 
high-impact business solutions to the 
most challenging sustainability issues. 
The Council’s executive committee 
includes Polman and Ana Botín, 
executive chairman of Banco Santander, 
who is the only woman on its fifteen-
member board. 
“With an annual $5—7 trillion needed 
to finance the SDGs alone (according 
to (United Nations Environment 
Programme) UNEP)…business has 
a critical role to play as a source 
of investments and as a driver of 
technological development and 
innovation, not to mention as an engine 
for economic growth and employment,” 
notes Peter Bakker, president and CEO 
of the WBCSD. 
According to Bakker, the SDGs present 
“a daunting task for any CEO to focus 
on 17 goals and 169 targets.” 
In a bid to point business in the right 
direction, the WBCSD has collaborated 
with the UN Global Compact and the 
Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) [an 
international independent standards 
organization that helps businesses, 
governments and other organizations 
to understand and communicate their 
impacts on issues such as climate 
change, human rights and corruption] 
to develop an SDG Compass. The 
Compass provides guidance to 
businesses on the SDGs and measures 
impact. It is complemented by the 
SDG Business Hub, “a dynamic online 
platform showcasing business insights, 
emerging tools and resources in this 
space,” adds Bakker.
Unlikely allies
As Unilever has demonstrated, 
the conglomerate’s commitment 
to sustainability and a new kind 

Shadows of hands interwoven. Niemeyer Centre, Avilés, Asturias, Spain. © Julio Calvo/Millennium Images, UK
of capitalism has actually paid off. 
“Constructive partnerships with 
smallholder farmers have helped to 
make the company’s supply chains 
more efficient and resilient,” writes Jack 
Nelson, an investment analyst at Stewart 
Investors, in the Financial Times. 
At the first-ever Global Festival of 
Idea for Sustainability held in early 
March 2017 in Bonn, Germany, UN 
SDG Advocate Alaa Murabit, the 
Canadian physician and founder of 
Voice of Libyan Women, underlined 
the importance of partnership and 
co-operation between “unlikely allies”, 
working together to achieve the global 
goals agenda for all humankind.
While the 2030 Agenda calls for a 
new and revitalized global partnership 
approach, traditional PPPs, a contractual 
collaboration between public and 
private actors, have been promoted 
by the World Bank for more than thirty 
years, typically to fill financing gaps for 
public infrastructure projects. “There 
is a need to progress from PPP to 
“ABC”, where Administration, Business, 
and Civil society are partners on an 
equal footing,” says Louis Meuleman, 
an academic and founding member 
of Public Strategy for Sustainable 
Development (PS4SD), along with 
Ingeborg Niestroy, his wife.
“SDG partnerships should have the 
serious and operational involvement of 
civil society,” stresses Meuleman. “ABC 
partnerships would therefore require 
a reorientation of goals of all three 
parties. For administrative partners, 
the goal could be to achieve concrete 
targets in alliance with societal partners 
while achieving mutual gains, instead of 
cost-saving or downsizing government. 
For business partners, Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) could become an 
integrated objective, besides creating 
added value,” he adds. 
According to Meuleman, “adding civil 
society to PPP as an afterthought is not 
enough; putting wings on a car doesn’t 
ensure that it will fly — it is still a car!”
Fresh approach needed
Critics of PPPs have warned that 
traditional PPPs will not work in the 
context of the 2030 Agenda, which 
calls for the inclusion of a fourth P, 
or “People-first” PPPs. The United 
Nations Economic Commission for 
Europe (UNECE)’s International 
PPP Centre of Excellence supports 

Three glass spheres reflecting the same reality. © Nilu Izadi/Millennium Images, UK
“People-first” PPPs, which includes 
engaging with stakeholders in a 
meaningful dialogue while building 
the capacity of the public and private 
sectors to deliver such projects. 
Besides being economically viable, 
the projects should have an economic 
transformational impact. 
“PPPs are not a simple panacea or a
“silver bullet” to fill the huge financial
gap in infrastructure investment,” insists
Anis Chowdhury, an Australian [born
Bangladeshi] academic, and former
chief of multi-stakeholder engagement
and outreach, UN-DESA (Department
of Economic and Social Affairs), and
co-author of a DESA working paper
on “Public-Private Partnerships and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development: Fit for Purpose?”.
“To ensure that PPPs are an effective 
instrument of delivery of important 
services, such as infrastructure, it 
is critical that countries have an 
institutional capacity to create, manage 
and evaluate PPPs, especially in 
relation to other possible sources of 
funding,” Chowdhury says. “For many 
developing countries, this would 
require assistance from the international 
community in the form of technical 
support and capacity-building.”
