It is nearly sixteen years since the 
journalist, playwright and author, 
Dawit Isaak, was imprisoned without 
trial in his native Eritrea. Isaak, who was 
awarded the 2017 UNESCO/Guillermo 
Cano World Press Freedom Prize, has 
become a household name in Sweden 
(of which he is a citizen and where his 
three children and other family members 
currently reside). A portrait of Isaak 
from the late 1980s has become an 
international symbol in the fight for press 
freedom and the freedom of expression. 
Isaak has been named a prisoner of 
conscience by Amnesty International, 
which has called for his immediate and 
unconditional release. 
Over the years, diplomatic initiatives 
by five administrations of his adopted 
country, international lobbying 
campaigns, civil-society efforts and 
celebrity-studded drives, have helped 
keep Isaak’s case in the spotlight. But the 
Eritrean regime has neither heeded calls 
to grant his release nor offered him a fair 
trial or any contact with the outside world, 
apart from a brief release from jail in 2005.
Born on 27 October 1964, in the early 
years of the thirty-year Eritrean War 
of Independence [September 1961 to 
May 1991], Isaak grew up in Asmara. 
His parents ran a small Italian deli, and 
he was one of five siblings. 
When Isaak was in his twenties, the 
fighting between the Eritrean People’s 
Liberation Front and the Ethiopian 
army intensified, and the Soviet Union 
withdrew its support of the Ethiopian 
government. Isaak fled the country for 
Sweden in 1987, where he first made 
a living as a cleaner.
Committed to democracy
Isaak stayed committed to fighting for 
a free and democratic Eritrea, according 
to his younger brother, Esayas Isaak. 
“I have few early childhood memories 
of Dawit since he is 10 years older than 
me, but when I was a teenager, he was 
my Tigrinya language teacher here in 
Sweden. He used to tell me over and over: 
‘Don’t forget your language, your country, 
your roots.’  



by Nathalie Rothschild
Dawit Isaak has become an 
international symbol in the 
fight for press freedom. He was 
awarded the 2017 UNESCO/
Guillermo Cano World Press 
Freedom Prize, which his family 
says has served to rekindle the 
hope that he will be freed soon. 
Dawit Isaak, 
a symbol of press freedom who 
must be freed
Photo of Dawit Isaak taken in 1987-
1988, soon after his arrival in Sweden.

Free-flowing information
“We wanted our newspaper to flow 
like a river without interruption,” Aaron 
Berhane, who co-founded Setit with Isaak, 
explained. 
Isaak became part-owner of Setit and 
was a prolific columnist, covering culture 
and local affairs. But it did not take long 
before fresh clashes broke out between 
Ethiopia and Eritrea, and Isaak was 
forced to leave for Sweden – his wife 
and children soon joined him. Though 
the political situation remained unstable 
in Eritrea in 2001, Isaak decided to 
return home. He stepped straight into a 
dangerous controversy, as Setit published 
an open letter to the Eritrean president. 
A few months later, all independent 
newspapers were banned – eleven of the 
letter’s signatories (which included top 
politicians) and ten journalists, including 
Isaak, were jailed. 
The arrests took place just weeks after 
the terrorist attacks of 9/11 in the United 
States. “The world has totally changed 
since then. He [Dawit] has missed out 
on so much,” Esayas said. “There are 
times when I feel like he is about to be 
forgotten, that there is a sense of fatigue 
around the efforts to free him. But then, 
other times, I feel like something just 
must happen. 
 “I also have a sense of renewed hope, 
now that my brother has been awarded 
UNESCO’s World Press Freedom Prize, 
which brings attention to his case at 
the United Nations level,” he added.
“I believe this award sends an important 
and significant signal against the 
treatment that Dawit Isaak has been 
subjected to,” said Cilla Benkö, Director-
General and CEO of Swedish Radio and 
president of the 2017 UNESCO World 
Press Freedom Prize jury. “He has been 
imprisoned without any contact with 
his near and dear ones and with no trial. 
It is a completely unacceptable state of 
affairs,” Benkö stressed. 
Renewed hope
Days before the UNESCO World Press 
Freedom Prize awards ceremony in 
Jakarta, Indonesia, which coincided with 
World Press Freedom Day on 3 May 2017, 
the African Commission on Human and 
Peoples’ Rights announced that it would 
take up Isaak’s case. 
Betlehem Isaak, Dawit’s daughter, at the 
celebration of World Press Freedom Day 
in Jakarta, Indonesia, May 2017.

“Culture and identity were important 
to him. At the same time, he respected 
Swedish society and did adjust to life 
here,” Esayas said.
In 1993, a year after obtaining Swedish 
citizenship, Isaak returned to a newly 
independent Eritrea, where he married 
and had three children – twin brother 
and sister, Yorun and Betlehem, and their 
sister Danait, who is 4 years younger. 
“One of my earliest memories of my 
father is him teaching me and my brother 
to read, and from the age of 4, he taught 
us math,” says Betlehem Isaak, who is 
now 23 years old. “He was keen for us to 
learn about our history and the world 
around us, though he wasn’t always very 
pedagogic! But he tried his best. He was 
a very committed parent.”
By the late 1990s, efforts to liberalize 
Eritrean society seemed to have paid 
off. The country issued a new law that 
permitted the private ownership of 
print media – a freedom Isaak took 
advantage of by co-founding Eritrea’s first 
independent newspaper, Setit, named 
after the only river in Eritrea that flows 
all year round.

The move comes after Isaak’s lawyers 
submitted a petition to the Commission, 
based on the principle of habeas 
corpus – a court order that commands 
an individual or a government who 
has restrained another to produce 
the prisoner and justify the prisoner’s 
detention. While the Eritrean authorities 
have accepted this principle, they have 
refused the right to a trial to Isaak and 
the other journalists detained since 
September 2001.
The Commission has said it will question 
Eritrea about the country’s failure to 
comply with international human rights 
conventions; a vow that stirred renewed 
hope for Isaak’s family. But Betlehem 
dares only to be cautiously optimistic. 
“It means something, but whether or not 
it will have any impact is still up to Eritrea. 
They have the power to decide over 
my father’s fate,” she said.
Esayas has called the move a “positive 
development”. “It does send a signal 
to the international community and to 
the Eritrean state, which has committed 
severe assaults on my brother for 
nearly sixteen years now. I only hope 
those in power are listening and will 
do something.
Quiet diplomacy
“It took a while for Swedish officials, 
media and civil society to start paying 
attention to my brother’s case”, Esayas 
said. But eventually, the government at 
the time engaged in “quiet diplomacy” 
with Eritrea for his release. A brief 
ray of hope when Isaak was released 
in November 2005, was quickly 
extinguished as he was detained again 
two days later, on his way to a hospital. 
The “Sit with Dawit” event was launched 
by the “Free Dawit” campaign in 2016, 
to create engagement in the Isaak case. 
A mock-up of Dawit’s cell was installed on 
a number of sites and individuals asked to 
spend fifteen minutes sitting alone in the 
dark cell – to reflect upon Dawit’s nearly 
sixteen years of solitary confinement must 
feel like, and show solidarity with him. 
This photograph was taken on the 
5,000th day of Dawit’s detention, on one 
of Stockholm’s main squares. 
Hope was rekindled a few years later, 
when a former prison guard who had 
fled Eritrea told Swedish media that Isaak 
was alive, but unwell and being held in 
inhumane conditions. Isaak is thought to 
have spent much of the last sixteen years 
in solitary confinement, alone in a dark 
prison cell. 
Isaak’s story demonstrates that “we need 
journalists who hold those in power to 
account but that, unfortunately, doing so 
is also increasingly associated with great 
danger,” Benkö said.
“We should be grateful that there are 
people out there who are willing to 
take risks in order to offer the rest of us 
descriptions of reality that we otherwise 
would not have access to. Dawit is an 
example of such a person and there are 
journalists around the world who offer 
important guarantees that freedom of 
expression is upheld…. I am proud that 
the jury I preside over was unanimous 
in its decision to award Dawit Isaak 
the UNESCO World Press Freedom Prize. 
This prize will contribute to putting 
pressure on those who are keeping Isaak 
imprisoned,” Benkö added. 
Nathalie Rothschild (Sweden) is a 
producer and reporter at Sveriges 
Radio, Sweden’s national public radio, 
and a freelance journalist. Her articles 
have appeared in international 
publications, including The Wall Street 
Journal, The Atlantic, the Guardian, 
and Foreign Policy.
