Understanding oceans 
"We know more about the topography of Mars than we do 
about the earth’s sea floor," Shin Tani says, even though oceans 
"have a much bigger direct impact on our everyday lives than 
the surface of Mars." But today, we have the ability to map the 
world’s sea floor in more detail than ever, and this is crucial for 
managing fish stocks and environmental change, understanding 
sediment transport, tsunami forecasting, mineral extraction and 
many more areas.
by Shin Tani 
The gap in our understanding of 
Earth is largely because resources 
have been more readily allocated to 
exploring the surface of other planets, 
as well as the fact that mapping 
beneath water is a complex business, 
especially at great depths.
Water absorbs, reflects and refracts 
light to such an extent that it is difficult 
to “see” through it with visual media 
for more than a few dozen metres. 
Huge swathes of the oceans, especially 
those far removed from coastal and 
national areas, are still inadequately 
mapped. Environments such as those 
beneath the polar ice shelves and pack 
ice-covered oceans are as unfamiliar 
to us today as the deep ocean was for 
pioneering ocean-floor mappers over a 
hundred years ago.
But today, with the advent of satellite 
mapping, multibeam sonar and other 
advances in remote sensing, we have 
access to an increasingly broad suite of 
technologies which make it possible to 
map the world’s seafloor in more detail 
than ever. 
Multibeam mapping
Recent developments in multibeam 
sonar mapping — pinging sound pulses 
off the seabed using instruments 
based on vessels — have increased 
mapping resolution so significantly 
that previously obtained data has been 
made virtually obsolete. 
Scientific conclusions based on sparse 
bathymetric information need to be 
re-examined and refined. Only around 
11% of the Arctic has been mapped 
with multibeam, leaving a vast swathe 
of the region that needs to be mapped 
in this way, to ensure that all marine 
activities in the region benefit fully. The 
cost of using multibeam technology has 
fallen sharply since it was first used in 
the 1960s and 1970s, making it a more 
economical proposition.
Meanwhile, other techniques, such as 
geodesy — or gravity mapping — from 
satellites are also coming into their own. 
By calculating anomalies in gravitational 
fields, this process can highlight peaks 
and troughs on the seabed. 

Shallow-water bathymetry in  
the Lagoon of Venice, Italy, one of  
the largest lagoons in Europe.



However, this needs time, investment 
and co-ordination. In particular, the 
onus falls on the scientific community 
to explain to the public and funding 
bodies just why bathymetry — the study 
of ocean-floor depth and topography — 
merits more attention.
There has been progress in this area. 
In June 2016 at the Forum for Future 
Ocean Floor Mapping in Monaco, 
Mr Yohei Sasakawa, Chairman of The 
Nippon Foundation, Japan’s largest 
private foundation with a long history 
of supporting key maritime issues, used 
his conference address to announce a 
plan to map the entire ocean floor by 
2030. This will be done in partnership 
with the General Bathymetric Chart 
of the Oceans (GEBCO), which The 
Nippon Foundation has supported for 
many years. GEBCO is a joint project 
of the International Hydrographic 
Organization (IHO) and the 
Intergovernmental Oceanographic 
Commission (IOC) of UNESCO.
Reasons to focus more resources on 
ocean mapping are not hard to find. 
The oceans are regions that are at 
least as fascinating and challenging for 
humans as other environments on this 
or any other planet. Judging by past 
experience, they hold plenty of surprises 
for us, with a myriad of beneficial 
discoveries made during oceanic 
exploration. Moreover, they have a much 
bigger direct impact on our everyday 
lives than the surface of Mars.
Bathymetry is of vital importance for 
navigation and coastal management, 
but also for a growing number of other 
uses. It is fundamental for the study of 
deep-water circulation, tides, tsunami 
forecasting, the upwelling of cold water 
from lower depths, fishing resources, 
wave action, sediment transport, 
environmental change, slope stability, 
palaeo-oceanography, site selection for 
platforms, cables, pipelines and offshore 
wind turbines, waste disposal, mineral 
extraction, and many more areas.
Perhaps the easiest case to make from 
a commercial perspective is that the 
better our knowledge of the ocean floor, 
the more effectively we will be able to 
manage marine environments to ensure 
we carry out fishing in a sustainable 
and productive manner. Bathymetry 
is crucial to our understanding of the 
deep-water habitats of sea life. Better 
knowledge of the oceans also helps 
make the extractive industries safer and 
more efficient.
Tsunami impact
The utility of ocean-floor mapping 
goes far beyond purely commercial 
concerns. Take the example of the 
study of tsunamis. If scientists know 
more about the contours of the 
sea floor and ocean depths, then 
predicting how the vast bodies of water 
disrupted by sub-sea earthquakes will 
behave will become more accurate. 
The modelling of tsunami propagation 
requires both deep-ocean bathymetry 
and high-resolution mapping near the 
shore to provide a complete picture 
of how water will move from deep to 
shallow depths, and how it will impact 
the coast.

© Marzia Rovere

While better ocean-floor mapping will 
not improve our ability to predict when 
tsunamis happen, as they are triggered 
by seismological events, it will give 
us more accurate predictions of their 
direction of travel and likely severity 
once they have formed.
Ocean-floor mapping is also a vital tool 
in the effort to track and predict longer-
term environmental changes, which will 
have a major impact on our lives. We 
know that climate change is occurring, 
that the oceans have become warmer 
and that ocean currents have changed. 
How these events are interlinked is 
subject to debate, but we do know they 
are happening and we need to address 
their impact. 
A good example of how an improved 
knowledge of bathymetry can help 
us is the work being carried out 
in the fjords of Greenland and in 
Antarctica, where most of the world’s 
ice is located. We have measured, and 
begun to see, the effect of the inflow 
of warmer ocean water towards the 
outlet glaciers of the Greenland and 
Antarctic ice sheets. The results are 
thinning glaciers, large calving events 
(where part of the ice sheet becomes 
detached), massive ice break-ups and 
glacial retreats. This process can be 
seen in action at locations such as 
Jakobshavn in west Greenland and 
Pine Island Bay in west Antarctica.
These events lead to increased 
acceleration of the ice streams draining 
the glaciers and ice sheets, which in 
turn contributes to a rise in sea levels. 
The scale and rate of rising sea levels is 
hard to predict, which is why we need 
to look at as many factors as possible, 
including the rate of ice melt, to make 
forecasting more accurate.
It is bathymetry that can help us 
gauge the sill depths of the fjords 
and the access points where warmer 
sub-surface water can get in and flow 
towards the glacier, or, in the case of an 
ice shelf, underneath it. These areas are 
currently extremely poorly mapped.
For some fjords we have virtually no 
bathymetry at all, and for regions 
underneath ice shelves, data is mainly 
obtained from sporadic experimental 
forays by autonomous underwater 
vehicles. Improved ocean-floor 
mapping in these areas will allow for 
a greater understanding of extremely 
complex processes.
While the rewards of improved 
bathymetric data are significant, it is 
clear that mapping vast ocean areas can 
only be achieved through international 
coordination and collaboration 
involving the scientific community, 
naval institutions, and industry.
Vice Admiral (retired) Shin Tani is the 
Chairman of the joint IHO-IOC GEBCO 
Guiding Committee, a post he has held 
since October 2013. Before that, he made 
a major contribution to GEBCO’s work 
and activities for more than twenty-four 
years. He has been Cabinet Counsellor 
for the Cabinet Secretariat of the 
Government of Japan in charge of ocean 
policy, renewable energy, ocean survey 
and monitoring, data management, 
marine land register, and the UNCLOS 
Extended Continental Shelf. 
Mounted high-resolution multibeam sonar on the 
ship Explorer of Sweden during the VEGA 2013 
Expedition to Greenland.

The United Nations Conference to 
Support the Implementation of SDG 
14, “Sustainable Conservation and 
Exploitation of Oceans, Seas and 
Marine Resources for Sustainable 
Development”, is held at the UN 
Headquarters in New York from
5 to 9 June 2017, in parallel with
World Ocean Day (8 June).
