International initiative
Called SMART Cables (Scientific Monitoring 
and Reliable Telecommunications), 
this JTF initiative aims to harness 
the vast network of submarine cables 
already in place, turning them into 
environmentally-aware “green cables”. 
An international effort in the truest 
sense, the JTF is made up of experts 
(many of them volunteers) from several 
dozen countries and 80 organizations 
representing science, observing system 
managers, industry, government agencies 
and sponsors. 
More than a million kilometres of 
submarine cables form the global 
telecommunications infrastructure 
backbone for business, finance, 
social media, entertainment, political 
expression, and science. Internationally, 
these cables are the physical layer of 
the internet. The dependability of this 
infrastructure is so important that entire 
national economies are affected when 
problems arise.
These same submarine cables could 
also provide a platform for gathering 
deep-ocean and seabed data for a range 
of environmental issues. Our oceans and 
climate are experiencing global changes, 
including warming, acidification, 
and sea-level rise, that affect us now 
and in the future. 
A standard telecommunication 
system includes an electro-optical 
seabed cable with optical repeaters 
approximately every sixty kilometres. 
By adding environmental sensors 
to the repeaters, we could have access 
to a global network of real-time data 
for environmental threats and disaster 
mitigation. 
An early-warning system for tsunamis 
could save lives and prove invaluable, 
particularly for developing countries, 
where the comprehensive coverage 
of all subduction zones is not viable. 
Since tsunami waves often arrive less 
than thirty minutes after offshore 
earthquakes, every minute counts.
To bring this concept to fruition, 
the international Joint Task Force 
of three United Nations agencies 
– the International Telecommunication 
Union, the World Meteorological 
Organization and the Intergovernmental 
Oceanographic Commission of 
UNESCO (ITU/WMO/IOC-UNESCO JTF), 
established in 2012, is working towards 
incorporating environmental monitoring 
sensors into trans-oceanic submarine 
cable systems. 



Harnessing submarine cables to 
save lives
by Bruce Howe and Kate Panayotou
Imagine environmental sensors 
spaced every sixty kilometres 
along the seabed, providing 
much‑needed data to better 
understand natural threats, 
such as tsunamis and climate 
change. With SMART Cables, 
a global network of real‑time 
data for disaster mitigation may 
soon become a reality.
With this article, the UNESCO Courier 
marks the 2nd World Tsunami Awareness 
Day, on 5 November.

It calls upon the private sector, 
governments, scientists, philanthropic 
foundations and the internet-using 
public to recognize this extraordinary 
need and opportunity, and to take 
concerted action to make this system 
a reality.
The installation of SMART Cables requires 
access to the sea-floor and the deepest 
ocean, which today is literally “owned” 
by the telecommunications private 
sector. The cables traverse the global 
ocean floor, crossing several national 
boundaries – throwing up a bewildering 
array of legal, technical and financial 
complications.
Therefore, unique new partnerships 
and collaborations must be established 
to enable this SMART cable vision. 
The engagement of the private sector, 
including internet companies which are 
newly investing in submarine cables, 
could directly address financial and legal 
issues, and the permitting process. 
Growing consensus
Through a series of meetings 
and workshops with academic 
and government scientists and 
the telecommunications industry, 
a growing consensus is being reached 
to assuage the hurdles facing SMART 
systems. Scientific and societal needs 
are being documented, and the legal 
framework under the UN Convention 
on the Law of the Sea, and technical 
feasibility have been produced. 
Today, only a fraction of these 
telecommunications cables are being 
used for scientific purposes. 
Environmental oceanic observation 
systems, owned and operated 
by academia and government agencies 
already exist, but they are utilized 
only over short distances and used 
for research purposes.
The concept of a “wet demonstrator” 
system suitable for deployment and 
medium-term operation has been put 
forth to address the effectiveness and 
practicality of the SMART approach. 
A pilot system has been proposed in 
the South Pacific, linking several islands. 
Technological advances have 
made it possible to integrate basic 
sensors with repeaters on submarine 
telecommunication cables at a small 
fraction of the total cost of a new cable 
system deployment. The unit cost of 
a single sensor package is expected to be 
around $0.2 million, so a modest system 
such as the proposed pilot should be 
under $10 million, with an expected life 
of twenty-five years. 
No ocean-aware underwater 
telecommunications system is in place 
today. The deep-ocean data from SMART 
Cables could bridge a fundamental gap 
in our knowledge. The time is ripe to 
begin a future with SMART systems. 
Crew members load an optical repeater 
(in the wooden cradle) on the deck 
of Pierre de Fermat, a cable ship belonging 
to France’s Orange Marine company.
Bruce Howe (USA) develops ocean 
observing sensor network infrastructure, 
including cable systems. He currently 
serves as Chair of the JTF SMART 
Cable initiative, and is a professor at 
the University of Hawaii, Department 
of Ocean and Resources Engineering.
Kate Panayotou (Australia) is a 
principal environmental scientist with 
seventeen years’ experience in the 
coastal, marine, estuarine, environmental 
and stakeholder engagement sectors. 
She has worked in the submarine cable 
industry for over a decade. 
