Angkor water crisis
Have the Angkor Wat temple complex, and the city of Siem 
Reap, where it is based, become victims of their own success? 
The tourism boom and an increasing population have resulted 
in water shortages, forcing the authorities to tap into the 
groundwater, and dangerously lowering the water table. This 
poses a threat to the preservation of terrestrial ecosystems and is 
causing a subsidence of the soil on which the World Heritage Site 
of Outstanding Universal Value stands. UNESCO, in consultation 
with international experts and local authorities, is studying the 
possibility of pumping into the waters of the Tonlé Sap Biosphere 
Reserve, to ensure sustainable management of water resources 
and to halt the sinking of the ground on which the temples stand.
by Chamroeun Sok
Angkor, one of the world’s most 
fascinating collection of monuments 
and temple ruins, is spread over 400 
square kilometres within the UNESCO-
protected Angkor archaeological park. 
It has attracted a growing number of 
tourists since it opened up less than 
twenty-five years ago. More than four 
million visitors — 2.5 million of them 
foreign tourists — flocked to this unique 
medieval settlement last year, putting 
tremendous strain on the area’s scarce 
water resources.
The Angkor complex, which harbours 
112 villages and forests within its 
boundaries, and the burgeoning 
town of Siem Reap, a relatively recent 
development to cater to the booming 
tourism industry, are in danger of 
becoming victims of their own success.
With its international airport and an 
ever-growing population of over one 
million, besides the tourists that fuel 
its economy, the provincial capital of 
Siem Reap has morphed from a sleepy 
backwater to a bustling town in less 
than two decades. The city boasts an 
international airport, over a hundred 
hotels, restaurants, cafés, and markets 
full of shops. But the verdant lawns of 
the five-star hotels and resorts, glitzy 
new buildings and a fancy golf course 
come at a heavy price.
Heavy deforestation — the direct result of slash-and-
burn farming — is taking its toll at the Phnom Kulen 
National Park.
© Erika Pineros

Dangerously low water table
Siem Reap province has a deficit of 
about 300 million cubic metres of 
water per year. To compensate for the 
unbridled development and water 
shortages, the Siem Reap Water Supply 
Authority draws about 27,900 cubic 
metres of groundwater per day for 
domestic use. Groundwater levels are 
further impacted by hotels and other 
businesses, many of whom have sunk 
thousands of illegal private wells and 
pumps across the city to meet their 
water needs. 
Land subsidence is the lowering 
or sinking of the land surface, and 
could cause incalculable damage 
to the temples that have withstood 
the vagaries of nature and war for a 
thousand years. Common causes of 
land subsidence from human activities 
include the pumping of groundwater 
underground reservoirs. The lowering 
of the land level is permanent, even 
if groundwater levels are recharged. 
Though there have been no serious 
problems with subsidence in Angkor 
yet, and no specific studies have been 
carried out on this, it could plague the 
World Heritage Site one day. 
Tourism accounts for more than 16% 
of Cambodia’s GDP, and has helped 
alleviate poverty in the last two decades 
of peace, after thirty years of strife. 
Though there have been efforts to curb 
the number of residents in the area, 
it is not feasible to restrict villagers 
from nearby communities from taking 
advantage of the tourism-related jobs 
in the Siem Reap province.
In order to address the challenge 
of providing adequate water to the 
province, while assuring the stability 
of the Angkor temples, UNESCO has 
partnered with stakeholders. These 
include ICC-Angkor (International 
Coordinating Committee for the 
Safeguarding and Development of 
the Historic Site of Angkor), a forum of 
technical experts in various fields; and 
the APSARA (Authority for the Protection 
of the Site and Management of the Siem
Reap-Angkor Region) National Authority,
which runs Angkor Park. The work of 
these stakeholders, charged with the 
sustainable development of the site, is 
beginning to yield some positive results.
Tapping into Tonlé Sap
One suggestion to alleviate the water 
problem is to pump water from the 
nearby Tonlé Sap (Great Lake). Part 
of the Tonlé Sap Biosphere Reserve, 
this is South-East Asia’s largest 
lake and one of the world’s most 
significant wetland ecosystems due 
to its unique environmental qualities 
and extraordinary biodiversity. The 
variety of fauna and flora of Tonlé 
Sap is depicted in the bas-reliefs of 
Angkor’s Bayon Temple. Many of its 
plant species are used for religious and 
medicinal purposes by Cambodians. 
Two million Cambodians also depend 
on the bounty of the lake’s freshwater 
fisheries — one of the most productive 
in the world, with an annual fish harvest 
of over 250,000 metric tons. 
It is crucial for the Cambodian 
government to weigh the environmental 
impact before it approves any project 
to pump water to Siem Reap. The 
biosphere, which is also the cradle 
of the Tonlé Sap River, has enormous 
significance for Cambodians. It acts as 
a flood mediator for the Mekong River, 
Angkor Wat attracts over four million visitors each year, a number that is expected to grow.

which flows through five other South-
East Asian countries, so its significance 
reaches far beyond Cambodia. Each 
year, during the rainy season, the 
Mekong water level rises and overflows 
into the Tonlé Sap River which, instead 
of draining the lake as it does during the 
dry season, is forced to change direction 
and flow back ‘up’ into the lake. This 
phenomenon makes the Mekong the 
only major river in the world to flow in 
two directions at different times of the 
year. This annual flood raises the lake 
level from 1 to 1.5 metres up to 8 to 10 
metres, increasing its area fivefold, as it 
spills out over the floodplain.
One of the world’s great conservation 
success stories, which includes the 
revival of several species of endangered 
birds since protection efforts started in 
1999, Tonlé Sap and its floodplain have 
been listed as the Tonlé Sap Biosphere 
Reserve under UNESCO’s Man and the 
Biosphere Programme (MAB).
The 20% year-on-year increase in 
tourism has also contributed to 
environmental pollution. Waste control 
remains an ongoing problem, though 
many of the temples are swept and 
cleaned ritually. Rubbish heaps are 
a common sight in Siem Reap, and 
tourists and locals think nothing of 
dumping garbage and waste water 
directly into the river. Residents 
living along the Siem Reap river have 
complained the water is too dirty to use 
or bathe in. They say that twelve years 
ago, the water was so clean, they could 
use it in their homes. Today, the river 
is dark and dirty, and the water stinks, 
according to residents.
While Phnom Kulen (“Mountain of 
Lychees”), twenty-five miles northeast 
of Angkor Wat, is off the beaten track 
for the hordes of tourists that descend 
upon the temples each day, the ill 
effects of deforestation have eaten 
into the lush tree cover there. Located 
upstream, water from the Kulen 
mountain is another source that flows 
through the Siem Reap river basin and 
runs into the Tonlé Sap lake. Here, illegal 
logging and the planting of cash crops 
such as cashew trees and beans have 
adversely affected hydrological patterns 
in the entire ecosystem, and impacted 
fish productivity.
© UNESCO/Éric Esquivel
UNESCO recently launched a pilot 
project: “Enhancing and Restoring 
Water Systems in Angkor World 
Heritage Site and Siem Reap City”. It 
uses the sustainability science approach 
to propose solutions and initiate a 
sustainable transformation of socio-
environmental interactions in the river 
basin. Policy, legal and institutional 
frameworks are strengthened through 
collaborative linkages, learning alliances 
and targeted interventions for capacity-
building at the pilot area, at the national, 
regional and community levels.
Real co-operation
The study includes a water campaign 
to make the residents of Siem Reap 
aware of the impact on Angkor of a 
decline in groundwater, and the effects 
of deforestation on the Tonlé Sap 
Biosphere Reserve. The sustainable 
development of water systems in Siem 
Reap province can be achieved if 
there is real co-operation between the 
government, stakeholders and residents. 
For instance, the government should 
strictly enforce the logging bans it has 
put in place on Kulen mountain.

A fall in groundwater levels due to illegal pumping could affect the stability of Angkor. © Hang-Peou/Éric Frogé
Chamreoun Sok (Republic of 
Korea and Cambodia) is a freelance 
consultant. After receiving a Ph.D. in 
Civil and Environmental Engineering 
from Inje University in 2013, he has 
worked mainly on water resources 
management and the environment. 
He was also a consultant to the 
UNESCO Office in Phnom Penh on the 
Sustainability Science pilot project in 
Siem Reap (2015-2016).
To resolve the critical issue of water 
management, exact data on basic 
information like pumping rates, 
groundwater levels, recharging rates, 
etc., should be made available and 
shared between the different local 
and national agencies involved. This 
would also enable water-resource 
planning based on future predictions. 
Groundwater pumping data should 
help the accurate prediction of 
groundwater use, and a groundwater 
level monitoring system around Angkor 
could alert all pumping stations and 
private users to stop and wait for 
groundwater recovery when critically 
low levels are reached.
Reviving old systems
People should be educated not throw 
rubbish or waste into the river. Another 
initiative could be the restoration of 
the Siem Reap river to create a tourist 
attraction and a surface water supply 
in the future. The restoration of more 
temples around Angkor could also be 
used to minimize the wear and tear of 
increased tourist traffic on the main site.
Recent research has shown that the 
ancient Khmers who built Angkor a 
thousand years ago were masters of 
water engineering. The rulers — who like 
the administrators of modern cities — 
had to protect inhabitants from floods 
in the rainy season, and provide water 
for domestic use and farming in the 
dry season, built a range of hydraulic 
structures that sustained the civilization 
for six centuries. The sophisticated 
waterworks included artificial ponds and 
canals to collect and channel rainwater, 
barays (constructed reservoirs) to store 
water for farming, moats, laterite weirs, 
bridges and dykes.
The Department of Water Management 
of the APSARA National Authority 
has conducted theoretical and 
practical work over eight years, which 
will allow them to rehabilitate the 
ancient hydraulic system of Angkor. 
For instance, the Angkor Thom and 
Angkor Wat moats which surrounded 
the temples have been restored and 
refilled after hundreds of years.
Groundwater level
Groundwater level
Temple Temple
Pumping machine
Before After
