Training judges online
to safeguard journalists
Massive Open Online Courses, specially designed for Latin 
American judges, train them to promote and safeguard freedom 
of expression and enlist their help to make the region less 
dangerous for journalists. The theme of this year’s World Press 
Freedom Day, celebrated on 3 May, is “Critical Minds for Critical 
Times”. What better way to achieve critical minds than training 
the custodians of the legal system about freedom of expression?
by Rosental Calmon Alves 
During a conference in May 2013 to 
mark UNESCO’s 20th World Press 
Freedom Day held in Costa Rica, I 
expressed my enthusiasm for Massive 
Open Online Courses (MOOCs) to the 
then UN Special Rapporteur for the 
promotion and protection of the right 
to freedom of opinion and expression, 
Frank La Rue. These online courses, 
aimed at unlimited participation 
and open access via the web, had 
just begun to gain currency in 2012, 
when I helped launch the world’s first 
journalism MOOC programme at the 
Knight Center for Journalism in the 
Americas at the University of Texas at 
Austin. Through several MOOCs, we 
have reached thousands of journalists 
— and nearly 100,000 people so far — 
around the world with cutting-edge 
skills training that they would otherwise 
not have had access to. 
After discussing the “magic” of 
spreading free access to journalism 
training to all corners of the world, La 
Rue and I discussed the topic of the 
UNESCO conference we were attending: 
the search for ways to end the endemic 
impunity in crimes against journalists. 
Impunity in cases where journalists 
have been murdered or attacked is a 
grave problem in many Latin American 
countries. Only 11% of murders of 
journalists in Latin America and the 
Caribbean have been resolved in the 
last decade, according to UNESCO data 
released in 2016. As noted by many 
experts in the region, impunity in these 
cases often incites further violence 
against journalists.
In recent years, the Committee to 
Protect Journalists (CPJ) has not only 
listed Mexico, Brazil and Colombia 
among the deadliest countries for 
journalists to operate in, but also 
placed these countries at the top of 
its Global Impunity Index, which ranks 
countries where the murderers of 
journalists go free.
We wondered if MOOCs could be 
used as tools to reduce violence 
against journalists in this area. Also, 
would it be possible to use MOOCs 
to train judges on issues related 
to freedom of expression and the 
protection of journalists?

A dream turned reality
Catalina Botero, then Special 
Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression 
of the Inter-American Commission 
on Human Rights (IACHR), who 
was attending the conference, was 
equally enthusiastic about the idea. 
Soon, Guilherme Canela Godoi, 
UNESCO’s Advisor in Communication 
and Information for MERCOSUR 
(Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and 
Uruguay) and Chile, joined us to 
transform the dream of introducing 
an MOOC for judges into a reality.
Offered four times between 2014 
and 2016, the MOOC, entitled “The 
International Legal Framework of 
Freedom of Expression, Access 
to Information and Protection of 
Journalists” has benefited over 3,000 
judges and judicial-sector operators 
in Latin America. The result of a 
collaboration between UNESCO, IACHR 
and the Knight Center, the course has 
reached judges from all Latin American 
countries, except Cuba.
La Rue is currently Assistant Director-
General for Communication and 
Information at UNESCO, and Botero 
is now dean of the Faculty of Law of 
Universidad de Los Andes, Bogota, in 
her native Colombia. Along with Edison 
Lanza, the current Special Rapporteur 
for Freedom of Expression at IACHR, 
they continue to work together on the 
revised and improved fifth edition of 
the freedom of expression MOOC that 
starts on 8 May 2017, a few days after 
UNESCO’s World Press Freedom Day 
conference is held in Jakarta, Indonesia.
The MOOC follows the Knight Center’s 
model used for journalism training. 
The course is asynchronous, so each 
student can work on days and times 
convenient for them, within the course 
period — in this case, six weeks, from 
8 May to 10 June 2017. The course 
content is divided into weekly modules, 
each with a set of video lectures, 
reading materials and forums, where 
students must discuss the topics and 
respond to questions posed by the 
instructors. Those who comply with 
and complete the course requirements 
receive a certificate.
Testing the water
The pilot programme, launched in 
the autumn of 2014 with a grant from 
UNESCO’s International Programme for 
the Development of Communication 
(IPDC), was aimed exclusively at judges 
and other justice operators from 
Mexico. We were just testing the water 
and unsure of how Mexican judges 
would respond. 
The response was better than we 
could have ever imagined — over 
1,000 applications were received, and 
© UNESCO/Marc James

Monitors prove effective
A second MOOC was launched the 
following year, with a more rigorous 
selection process giving preference 
to judges. The main change for the 
624 participants selected was the 
introduction of a team of monitors — a 
group of lawyers from different regions 
of Latin America — who were specially 
trained by Botero to steer the course. 
For example, the monitors lead the 
activities in the discussion forums — a 
central component of the MOOC — and 
respond to legal questions from the 
students. For the first time, the forums 
were divided into certain regions 
or countries, which facilitated the 
discussions and presentation of cases 
and references. The monitors have 
been so successful that they have been 
included in the 2017 course. 
As in all Knight Center’s distance 
learning projects, students have been 
invited to participate in a course-
instructor evaluation for each MOOC. 
The results have been very positive so 
far, with high rates of satisfaction with 
the course, the use of our platform and 
the instructors and monitors.
The MOOC “changed my way of 
thinking about the need to preserve 
and protect the right to freedom of 
expression,” one participant wrote 
on the evaluation. A judge from an 
appeals court, who took the MOOC in 
2016, said the course gave her “a wider 
perspective of the topic [freedom of 
expression]” and was an opportunity “to 
learn in more detail the importance of it 
at the international level, as it effectively 
is a pillar to strengthen the Rule of Law 
in a democratic society. Understand 
it was impressive for me. I will take it 
into consideration in my decisions as 
magistrate in an appeals court.” 
Four years after the conference in 
Costa Rica, Latin America remains one 
of the most dangerous regions of the 
world for journalists. But more judges 
are learning about the international 
legal framework of freedom of 
expression, access to information 
and the protection of journalists. The 
MOOCs are examples of concrete 
actions that can contribute to a 
better understanding of freedom of 
expression issues in the region.
Rosental Calmon Alves, a pioneer of 
online journalism in his native Brazil, 
is the founding director of the Knight 
Center for Journalism in the Americas, 
an outreach programme that helps 
thousands of journalists around the 
world with online training. Alves 
holds the Knight Chair in International 
Journalism at the University of Texas 
at Austin, where he held also the 
UNESCO Chair in Communication from 
2004 to 2016. He is a former president 
of Orbicom, the global network of 
UNESCO chairs in communication.
a total of 932 judges, magistrates, 
prosecutors, court clerks and other 
functionaries of tribunals from across 
Mexico accepted to the course. The 
Mexican Supreme Court’s support to the 
project contributed to its extraordinary 
success. We knew then that we were 
going in the right direction, using digital 
technology to offer quality training, with 
a great benefit-cost ratio compared with 
traditional, face-to-face training.
Since the course was aimed primarily 
at the Mexican judiciary, we enlisted 
Dr. Miguel Rábago, a professor from 
the Universidad Iberoamericana Law 
School, in Mexico City, to cover the 
Mexican legal framework of freedom 
of expression. Dr. Margarita Torres, 
a journalism professor, also from 
Iberoamericana, was asked to moderate 
the discussions in the MOOC and 
facilitate the contacts between students 
and instructors.
Following the success of the two pilot 
projects in Mexico — one at national 
level and the other for the state of 
Coahuila — the first MOOC for judges 
across Latin America was introduced in 
the autumn of 2015. The government of 
Sweden supported the project, as did 
the Ibero American Network of Judicial 
Schools and the Ibero American 
Judicial Summit. This helped attract 
more than 1,200 participants.
