It is with these considerations in mind 
that, several years ago, I suggested that 
we should explore a new concept − 
“humanitude” − in reference to Negritude, 
a concept I inherited from my mentor, 
the Martiniquan poet, Aimé Césaire.
I use this concept of humanitude to 
translate what, in Africa, we call maaya 
(in Bamanankan, the Bambara language), 
neddaaku (in Fulfulde, the Fula language), 
boroterey (in Songhay, the Songhay 
language), nite (in Wolof ), ubuntu (in 
the Bantu languages), and many more. 
There are so many terms that literally 
mean “the quality of being human”. 



Humanitude
or how to quench
the thirst for humanity
by Adama Samassékou 
Faced with the failure of the 
western model of development, 
which puts the culture of having 
before the culture of being, it 
is becoming urgent to develop 
a different project for society 
– one that is founded upon 
humanitude, a concept that 
explores openness to the Other, 
the only possible way out for 
a disenchanted world.
It has become commonplace to say 
that our world, which is in the grips 
of a multidimensional and seemingly 
never-ending crisis, is in very, very bad 
shape. This crisis, in fact, reveals a loss of 
meaning, reinforced by a trend towards 
the homogenization of the world’s 
cultures, brought on by an accelerated 
globalization of markets. This is leading 
to a veritable dehumanization of relations 
between individuals, peoples, and states. 
The recent environmental, energy, 
demographic, and digital challenges 
− added to the existing inequalities and 
poverty − accentuate the widespread 
feeling of existential angst and a lack of 
confidence in the future. 
The most prevalent “development model” 
today is founded upon what I call a 
culture of “having”, of profit. It has already 
shown its limitations, and the current 
crisis confirms that it is now bankrupt. 
This “western model” is responsible for 
the Eurocentrism and Western-centrism 
seen in international relations, both 
in terms of goods and intellectual 
production. As a result, a paradigm shift 
towards the promotion of values that are 
more aligned with a culture of “being”, 
has become imperative. 

Left panel of the “memory of nothing” 
diptych by Berette Macaulay 
(Sierra Leone and Jamaica). The work 
is on show at the National Gallery 
of Jamaica as part of the 2017 Biennale.

Connecting human 
to human 
African societies have always put “being”, 
rather than “having”, at the centre of 
their development. In more global 
terms, certain non-European societies 
have a cosmovision that puts “being” 
at the centre of all relationships with 
the world. This vision is characterized by 
a permanent search for non-conflictual, 
peaceful relations, oriented towards 
a consensus with others and harmony 
with the environment, in the widest 
sense. For a long time, this conception 
of the world was also shared with 
the West, before it became dominated 
by a form of modernity based upon 
market and material fundamentalism 
and individualistic accumulation. 
Humanitude is our permanent openness 
towards the Other, our relationships 
as human being to human being. It 
demands a permanent relationship 
of solidarity, free from calculation – a 
spontaneous impulse of welcoming the 
Other. This humanitude makes it possible 
to “connect human to human” – to use 
Césaire’s beautiful phrase − and is the 
basis for a culture of “being”, as opposed 
to a totalitarian culture of “having”, which 
leads to permanently conflictual relations 
of acquisition, if not domination.
In a remarkable presentation at the 
Ubuntu symposium, held in Geneva, 
Switzerland, in April 2003, my mentor 
and friend from Burkina Faso, Joseph 
Ki-Zerbo [historian, politician and writer 
(1922-2006)], emphasized that “The main 
thing, then … is to bring to the top of the 
agenda and the planet’s social struggles, 
the concept, the question, the cause, the 
paradigm, of Ubuntu as an axiomatic and 
specific antidote to the mercantilism of 
humans and humankind by the partisan 
neo-liberalism of the market economy.”
In his lecture, “Ubuntu or ‘man as remedy 
for man’”, which was later published in 
the book, Repères pour l’Afrique, Panafrika 
(Silex/Nouvelles du Sud, Dakar, 2007), 
Ki-Zerbo continues his analysis by 
specifying that “…Ubuntu can be the 
most powerful tool for this paramount 
task. But, above all, it should become 
its goal and the meaning of peace. This 
does not mean moving towards a form 
of anthropological culturalism, but 
when confronted with the steam-roller 
of one-track thinking, it is has become 
urgent to disarm conflicts where the 
burden of responsibility is borne by the 
structural violence of the status quo …”
I am now convinced that, given the 
failure of current models of development, 
we have to think about how to design a 
new project for society, founded precisely 
on the concept of humanitude.

The major international meeting of 
the human sciences, the first World 
Humanities Conference (WHC), held in 
Liège, Belgium, from 6 to 12 August 2017, 
offers the opportunity to go deeper into 
this concept.
An unprecedented 
event 
The city of Liège, called the “Ardent 
City”, both in spirit and industry, is a 
multicultural city at the heart of Europe, 
and is hosting an unprecedented event, 
under the high patronage of the King 
of Belgium.
So why a World Humanities Conference? 
The idea came to me in 2009, during my 
first term as president of the International 
Council for Philosophy and Human 
Sciences (CIPSH), a non-governmental 
organization created under the auspices 
of UNESCO in 1949. 
It was a result of three observations. 
Following recurrent episodes of instability 
linked to financial globalization, the 
crisis of 2008-2009 became more than 
just financial or economic, turning into 
a “total” crisis. It was a crisis of society, 
which, in a way, confirmed the bankruptcy 
of the dominant neo-liberal and western-
centric model of development, leading to 
a real loss of meaning.
My second observation was the 
progressive marginalization of the 
human sciences in the world. How 
can one accept that, faced with such a 
strongly compelling situation, those with 
the responsibility to explain to us the 
complexity of the social transformations, 
should be paralyzed, unable to move?
Thirdly, I observed the lack of 
involvement, if not the total absence, 
or shunning, of scholars of the human 
sciences from outside Europe and the 
“West” in global intellectual production 
and co-operation. The situation was made 
worse by the risks of the disappearance 
of traditional knowledge and of half 
the world’s languages − which are 
now spoken of as epistemicides and 
linguicides.
This is why, in 2009, it appeared to me 
not only obvious, but also imperative, 
to propose that UNESCO organize a 
World Humanities Conference (WHC). 
The first attempt of its kind, its aim would 
be to start the process of rehabilitating 
the human sciences in the world. 
An unbearable anxiety
The central issue for the WHC is to discuss 
the role of the human sciences in a 
twenty-first century characterized by 
cultural diversity, the failure of various 
forms of one-track thinking, and a need 
to reintroduce medium- and long-term 
considerations into everyday reasoning. 
This is a century stricken by global 
changes, growing migration, social and 
economic stresses – the resolution of 
which largely depends on intercultural 
skills, on understanding the unity of 
humankind in all its diversity. It also 
depends on the need to reinforce 
the relationships of the sciences across 
disciplines and with the arts and 
technologies.
We have to promote a relationship 
with the world based on a search for 
non-conflictual relations and harmony 
with the environment, in order for humans 
to reconnect with one another again.

This is a century which has started with 
the development of global terrorism 
that spares no region in the world, no 
country, striking as blindly as inhumanely, 
innocent citizens, who are victims of a 
gratuitous, barbaric and unutterable 
violence. An unbearable anxiety traverses 
the planet, all the more so because such 
acts of violence – known during the 
colonial conquests and wars of liberation 
− have remained relatively unknown 
to the cloistered West since the Second 
World War, with a few exceptions.
The main aim of the WHC is, therefore, to 
study ways in which the humanities are 
helping or can help, nationally, regionally 
and internationally, to measure and 
understand the cultural transformations 
linked to the gradual globalization of 
exchanges, in order to manage them 
better − in all their economic, social 
and environmental dimensions.
Faced with the social and human 
crisis that we are experiencing, and 
a broken world where the process of 
dehumanization is growing and gaining 
strength, the ambition of the WHC is to 
build a fertile dialogue between today’s 
minds about the challenges, the stakes 
and new knowledge, through which the 
humanities can render our world more 
legible, less opaque, less antagonistic, 
less murderous and at the same time 
– it’s our shared hope – more human. 
The humanities are a celebration of the 
genius of the languages of mankind 
and the knowledge arising from the 
proliferation of our social, political, 
economic and artistic practices.
Rehabilitating 
and rebuilding 
the human sciences
The title of the WHC, “Challenges and 
Responsibilities for a Planet in Transition”, 
clearly situates the issues underlying this 
conference. According to UNESCO, the 
major challenges of our planet in transition 
are: population growth; the recomposition 
of territories; migration flows; energy 
and environmental constraints; 
the homogenization of cultures in the 
context of globalization − and inversely, 
the construction of new identities; and 
the arrival of the digital age, which 
often creates a divided society.
“Our world is in the grips of a seemingly 
never-ending, multidimensional 
crisis,” says Adama Samassékou. 
“The Virtual Scene – Shanghai Map”, 
2005-2008, relief map of Shanghai 
made from casino chips by Chinese 
artist Liu Jianhua, on show at the 
Galerie Continua, San Gimignano, Italy.

There is a feeling that the prevalent 
development models have failed, 
especially the neo-liberal model that 
seems to be imposing itself on the 
peoples of the world. In this context, 
it becomes imperative to reconsider the 
role of the human sciences within our 
contemporary societies. It needs to take 
into account both the specificities and 
the resources inherent in each culture, 
valuing them wisely, and the possibilities 
for exchange, for dialogue and mutual 
enrichment between them.
The WHC is therefore an opportunity 
to step back to rehabilitate and rebuild 
the human sciences, to produce a 
paradigm shift, enabling the reinvention 
of a world founded upon respect for 
its rich cultural and linguistic diversity. 
This new paradigm will enable us to 
substitute the conflictual relationships 
of competition with a genuine, universal 
solidarity, which is the only way to 
help meet the challenges of our planet 
in transition!
In short, we have to quench this planet’s 
thirst for humanity by living and 
consecrating our humanitude!
Adama Samassékou (Mali) is president 
of the World Humanities Conference 
(WCH). A former minister of national 
education in Mali, he chaired the 
preparatory committee of the World 
Summit on the Information Society 
(Geneva 2002-2003). Samassékou was 
also the first executive secretary of 
the African Union African Academy of 
Languages (ACALAN), based in Bamako. 
After two terms as president of the 
International Council for Philosophy and 
Human Sciences (CIPSH), from November 
2008 to October 2014, he is currently 
its honorary president.
