What made you decide to make the film, 
Jihad: A Story of the Others?
I come from a Muslim background myself, 
and have to deal with the consequences 
of the growing religious fundamentalism 
within our communities. I was very 
invested in trying to understand why this 
movement is becoming increasingly violent 
and why it is consuming more and more 
of our young people. I was unsatisfied 
by the conversation that we are having 
around jihadism. It is easy to hate the men 
who are a part of this, but not particularly 
productive. I wanted to make a film about 
what it is like to be that person attracted 
to jihad. And I learned that I had a lot in 
common with them. 
The realization that I could recognize myself 
in a lot of their issues scared me more than 
anything else. But we are separate in how we 
deal with these issues: these men chose to 
pick up a gun, I choose to pick up a camera. 



They chose to pick up a gun,
I choose 
to pick up a camera
Deeyah Khan
Deeyah Khan at work.

Interview by Jasmina Šopova 
Born in Norway to parents of 
Pashtun (Afghan) and Pakistani 
origin, Deeyah Khan’s personal 
experience of straddling 
completely different cultures 
has honed her artistic vision. 
Using culture and art as tools 
in a courageous fight against 
extremism, she works tirelessly 
to tell the stories of people 
whose voices would otherwise 
never be heard. 

The people you interviewed are all former 
jihadists. How did you gain access to them? 
It took a really long time to build trust, 
and about two years to make the film, 
which I finished in 2015. The best way 
to gain trust is to be persistent and 
honest about what you’re trying to do. 
I constantly told them: “I do not agree 
with you, I do not even like you (but I do 
now). I just want to listen, to understand, 
for you to share your stories with me.” 
Many appointments were set up and 
cancelled; some of them would choose 
not to talk or asked me to turn off the 
camera. Some of them wanted me to lose 
hope, but I kept coming back, because 
I really wanted to know. 
What prompted them to abandon jihad?
For one of the main characters, it was 
a matter of realizing that what he had 
believed, was not true. He thought 
he was fighting for Muslims, and for 
a better world and then he realized 
he was becoming just another oppressor. 
For many of them, it was recognizing 
the fact that there were hypocrisies and 
double standards in the world-view 
that they had created for themselves. 
Another factor was that people who they 
(the jihadis) considered to be the enemy, 
starting treating them like human 
beings. The minute you start connecting 
to your humanity, it’s different.
You said that you didn’t like these men 
at first, and now you do. What made you 
change your mind? 
A lot of the young people who are drawn 
to jihad are actually initially creatively 
inclined, and because that is somehow 
stinted, it bursts out as violence. I did not 
expect to hear that an overwhelming 
majority of the men I spoke to − on and off 
camera − said they would like to be 
rappers or poets or painters. But they 
couldn’t do it because their families 
would not let them or their societies 
did not accept it. That hurts me very 
much, because that, we could have done 
something about. We are all responsible 
for what is happening to our youth.
When you say we are all responsible, 
are you referring to family, schools, 
governments, or the international 
community?
I mean all of us as individuals, how we 
respond to people in our everyday 
lives. When a young Muslim boy comes 
and sits next to us on a bus, it matters 
how we look at him, how we hold our 
purse. Similarly, when our politicians or 
governments speak about these topics 
from a very hateful place, defining their 
own citizens as monsters, it makes it very 
difficult to engage with these monsters, 
and maybe allow for the chance for them 
to become human. 
Scene from the film Jihad: A Story 
of the Others by Deeyah Khan,  
with Sabyl and Wassem, 
in Birmingham, United Kingdom.

As for families, they must recognize that 
they are betraying their children when 
they put unmanageable expectations on 
them. Their children are only human.
I think our schools, our police, our media, 
all have a responsibility when our young 
women or men come to them for help, 
whatever their culture, background or 
race. It is all about human interaction. 
Whether we are artists, activists, 
feminists, anything, we all have 
an obligation to stand up.
Is that the reason you founded sister‑hood, 
the online magazine, and series of live 
events? What made you venture into the 
media? 
Yes, sister-hood was founded in 2016, and 
works through civil society and media 
channels. It is an international platform 
where the woman of Muslim heritage 
is at the centre. Everybody talks about 
Muslim women, but rarely do we actually 
talk to them. 
I wanted to start creating work that 
refocused our attention on what it is 
like to be that girl who is suffering, 
that man who is wanting to go out 
and fight in Syria. 
The response and the community-
building between the women has been 
amazing − we now have nearly 200 
writers from forty countries. I realize 
the importance of women telling their 
own stories, whoever they are. Exposing 
oppression is only half the story. I deeply 
respect journalism as a profession, 
but I am frustrated by the incomplete 
stories that we continue to tell in the 
media. We talk about honour killings, 
about violence against women, but we 
forget the person. In everything I do, I am 
trying to turn up the volume of the voices 
of the people who are already there. 
A still from the shooting  
of Islam’s Non-Believers.

In 2012, you made the documentary, 
Banaz: A Love Story, about a young British 
Kurdish woman who was killed by her own 
family for choosing a life for herself. Why 
did you focus on just her story?
I wanted to make a film on “honour” 
violence and I was going to tell two 
or three stories − including Banaz’s 
– which was a terrible failure of 
the police in the United Kingdom.
Banaz approached the police five times 
for help, but was ignored. 
I changed my mind when I met 
the policewoman who investigated 
her murder. I asked her why she fought 
so hard for this case (she got the uncle 
and father convicted in the UK, and then 
went to Iraq and worked to extradite 
two cousins implicated in the murder, 
to the UK), and she replied: “I did it 
because I love her.” 
I could not understand how she could 
love a girl she had never met, who was 
dead, but she said: “Everyone should 
be loved. She should have been loved. 
The people who were closest to her did 
not love her. So I loved her and still do.”

I remember thinking: “This is the film 
I want to make!” And Banaz was born. 
Banaz’s story includes all the problems 
and all the solutions. And the solution to 
this problem is that we have to care.
Could you tell us about your 2016 film, 
Islam’s Non‑Believers?
The film is about an underground 
resistance movement of young people 
who have decided to leave Islam. 
Very often, ISIS and terrorism are forcing 
them to re-examine their faith. When 
I made Jihad, I was contacted by a lot 
of young people from Iraq, Syria, and 
other countries, who said to me: “There is 
a different movement also happening: 
there are a lot of young people who are 
leaving Islam. Why don’t you speak about 
us? Is it because we do not use violence?” 
When I started looking into this, I was 
shocked. I discovered that there are 
between 4 million and 15 million 
non-believers in Pakistan; between 
1.4 million and 6 million of them in Saudi 
Arabia. Some governments have set up 
ministries to counter atheist thought. 
In many Islamic countries, it is a crime to 
be a non-believer and openly talk about 
it, and people are being jailed and even 
killed for this.
I decided to make a film to explore 
this phenomenon, which is not 
discussed enough.
Why did you choose film to communicate 
these issues?
If you want people to take action, 
you have to make them feel something. 
That is what films do. That is what 
art does. It does not just engage our 
intellectual capacity, it speaks to our 
emotional register. This is what is so 
unique and precious about all forms of art. 
Art goes beyond our differences, 
beyond all the walls and inequalities 
that exist between us. To me, art is 
an equalizing factor. To understand 
its power, you have to look at how 
oppressors, dictators and abusers treat 
art and artists. And the first people that 
oppressors target, other than women, 
usually, is artists. 
Going forward, what are your plans in 
your capacity as UNESCO’s Goodwill 
Ambassador? 
What I hope to do is not just promote the 
work that artists are doing, but also to 
talk about how artists are paying a great 
price doing this, in many parts of the 
world. Artists, including some of my own 
friends, are being persecuted, mistreated 
and imprisoned. And we need to protect 
them. My dedication and my heart is 
to try and support marginalized voices, 
and to tell more of their stories. 
Deeyah Khan, UNESCO’s first-ever 
Goodwill Ambassador for Artistic 
Freedom and Creativity since 2016, is 
an Emmy and Peabody award-winning 
documentary film-maker and founder 
of Fuuse, an independent media and 
arts company that puts women, people 
from minorities, and third-culture kids 
at the heart of telling their own stories. 
She also founded sister-hood, a digital 
magazine, spotlighting the diverse voices 
of women of Muslim heritage.
Giving up a successful career as a 
singer to fight extremism and prejudice 
through different media, Khan continues 
to write and produce songs. She has 
received many awards for her work, 
including the Ossietzky prize, the 
University of Oslo’s Human Rights 
Award and the Peer Gynt Prize from the 
Parliament of Norway. 
Poster for the film Banaz: A Love Story, 
about the honour killing of a young Iraqi 
woman in the United Kingdom.
