Giuseppina Nicolini, 
former mayor of Lampedusa. 
© Rocco Rorandelli (terraproject.net)

When UNESCO awarded you the 
Félix Houphouët-Boigny Peace Prize 
in April 2017, you accepted it as a 
“homage to the memory of the countless 
victims of the traffic in human beings 
in the Mediterranean”. What did you 
mean by that?
I think it is both honest and right to 
dedicate this prize to the migrants 
who have lost their lives crossing the 
Mediterranean, because the human 
tragedy we are witnessing in the region 
is really a silent war. Theirs is a forced 
journey − forced by war and poverty, 
forced by our politics, and by the 
organized criminals who are profiting 
from their predicament. Faced with 
closed doors, the traffickers are offering 
these desperate people the only possible 
way out.
Even now, new walls are being built and 
new agreements signed with a number of 
North African countries, with the sole aim 
of protecting European borders and not 
the lives of those who are trying to reach 
our shores. In contrast, this prize shows us 
that there is solidarity in Europe; that the 
values of humanity and hospitality have 
not been lost.
Yet, faced with this influx of migrants, 
many are talking of an “invasion”…
It is natural for an island to be welcoming, 
as I’ve said before. This is essentially what 
the island of Lesbos has done in Greece. 
Perhaps it’s because of our geographical 
position – the migration route passes 
through Lampedusa. Although, to be 
more accurate, it might be the other way 
round – it’s because our island lies half-
way that the route is possible. 
I don’t know what other people would 
do if they found themselves here, at 
this historic moment where so many 
people are fleeing. Anyone who suggests 
“pushing them back” is simply living too 
far away, and doesn’t understand the 
law of the sea – pushing them back is 
impossible. Witnessing the situation first 
hand, helps us understand and awakens 
our sense of responsibility. Here, we see 
them arriving – human beings who are 
exhausted, cold, barefoot, terrorized. 
We see children, and pregnant women. 
And one can see straightaway that they 
have made this journey because they had 
no other choice. In any case, it’s the only 
thing we can do, given the position that 
geography and history have assigned us. 
We have to welcome them.
In Lampedusa, we have experienced 
some very painful moments. Faced with 
a tragedy like the shipwreck of 3 October 
2013, when 386 people lost their lives, who 
can we blame? The dead? At moments like 
these, you can see clearly who the victims 
are, and which the unjust deaths are. 
This is not the first time that Lampedusa 
has lived through difficult times … 
No, we experienced very hard times in 
2011, when the events in Tunisia caused 
many people to flee. The Minister of 
Foreign Affairs at the time, Roberto 
Maroni, decided to leave all the migrants 
on Lampedusa – they couldn’t go to 
Italy, he told us. So we had to repatriate 
them directly from here. But repatriation 
procedures take time and, in two months, 
25,000 people arrived here, which is four 
times the number of inhabitants! 
How did the island’s residents react?
Our reception facilities were 
overwhelmed. The migrants were living 
in inhumane conditions, on the streets, 
in the cold. It was a false emergency, 
because 25,000 is nothing compared 
to what we’re seeing today. If they had 
all been distributed across the Italian 
mainland, their numbers would have 
remained manageable. But leaving 
them on Lampedusa created a crisis. 
That year, the island suffered heavy 
losses. Lampedusa’s economy depends 
on tourism, which collapsed completely. 
But even then, in those conditions, 
there was a show of solidarity. The 
Lampedusani tried to help, by handing 
out blankets and food. The people took 
over from the state. If there were any 
protests, they were directed against the 
Italian government, not the Tunisians. 

It’s natural for an island to be 
welcoming!
Giuseppina Nicolini
As Mayor of Lampedusa (from 2012 to June 2017), Giuseppina Nicolini 
bravely tackled one of the most dramatic crises to have affected 
the Mediterranean Basin in recent years – the arrival of thousands 
of migrants fleeing conflict and poverty. She explains how the 
6,500 inhabitants of this little Italian island south of Sicily have reacted 
to this humanitarian disaster with a show of solidarity and respect for 
human dignity. A meeting with the woman the Italians call “The Lioness”.
Interview by Marina Forti, Italian journalist

The former Italian Prime Minister, Enrico 
Letta, went down on his knees before the 
white coffins of children. And the Italian 
government launched Mare Nostrum, the 
first official humanitarian operation to 
honour our country. This operation lasted 
a year. It was very costly and Italy asked 
its European partners for help.
But there was general opposition. Mare 
Nostrum was accused of exactly the same 
wrongs as the NGOs today – of being an 
element of attraction, even complicity, 
in the trafficking of human beings. Other 
humanitarian operations were to follow, 
such as Frontex and Triton, but their goals 
were more concerned with security and 
to detect and combat crime. 
Then, in the second half of 2016, 
all the programmes came to a halt, 
including interventions by some 
European countries who were part of 
Frontex. Italy found itself alone once 
again, with its navy and coast-guard 
vessels. We were back to where we were 
before Mare Nostrum. As the death toll 
continued to rise, the NGOs filled this 
institutional vacuum. 
Besides being very involved with civil 
society, you are also a committed 
ecologist, opposed among other things, 
to property speculation. What led you to 
stand for mayor at such a difficult time?
These struggles triggered a democratic 
movement made up of forces within civil 
society, which asked me to stand as a 
candidate with a manifesto against the 
social and environmental degradation 
from which our island was suffering. 
Lampedusa found itself pushed aside, 
both geographically and socially, with 
deteriorating schools and youth who 
had no choice but to leave.
We have worked hard and there is 
still a lot to do, but the islands in the 
archipelago have learned how to live 
again. We have invested in public 
transport, recycling, solar energy and 
schools. Earlier, we only had a college for 
the sciences; now we also have a hotel 
and tourism institute. 

During a serious economic crisis, it is 
all too easy to mark out migrants as the 
common enemy. It’s also a diversion 
to mask the political responsibilities of 
those who support an inequitable model 
of development − creating inequalities 
in a context made more complex by 
globalization. History has taught us 
that pointing a finger at an outside 
enemy also strengthens internal political 
authority, while surely not promoting the 
development of a civic conscience, or a 
sense of belonging to a community.
Today, NGOs are being accused of playing 
a role in attracting migrants...
Indeed, and this also the case for the 
French NGO, SOS Méditerranée, with 
which I have the honour of sharing the 
Félix Houphouët-Boigny Prize. But those 
who accuse these organizations are 
forgetting that they have arrived here 
to fill a vacuum. 
After the tragedy of 3 October 2013, 
we have witnessed other disasters, 
some of them even worse. In April 2015, 
between 500 and 700 people lost their 
lives when a single ship sank. In 2013, 
some European politicians came here 
and were visibly moved. 
Rescue operation by SOS Méditerranée, 
the NGO which shared the 2017 
Félix Houphouët-Boigny 
Peace Prize, awarded by UNESCO, 
with Giuseppina Nicolini.

Askavusa, a collective started in 
Lampedusa in March 2009, has created 
a permanent exhibition space, PortoM, 
to display everyday objects found 
on the boats of migrants.
Admired for her courage and humanity, 
Giuseppina Nicolini was born in 
Lampedusa, Italy. A militant ecologist, 
she was responsible for getting Rabbit 
Beach, an island next to Lampedusa, 
declared a nature reserve in 1997. She 
was mayor of Lampedusa from May 
2012 to June 2017, and fought hard to 
get the Italian and European authorities 
to act in response to the migrant crisis. 
In 2016, she received the Simone de 
Beauvoir Prize for Women’s Freedom 
in recognition of her efforts.
I am convinced that the future of an 
island like Lampedusa is linked to the 
geopolitical destiny of the Mediterranean. 
We want this sea to be transformed into 
a centre for exchanges, both political and 
cultural. But before we get there, we have 
to stop using territories as prisons for 
migrants, which is what Lampedusa 
almost became. 
We must cultivate the tradition of 
welcome in its purest form, with islands 
serving as landing stages and first-aid 
points for migrants, who are then 
transferred to a second reception centre, 
free from any logic of emergency. Then, 
as we have noted, migration and tourism 
can co-exist and the island can prosper. 
I sincerely hope that the prize 
that UNESCO has awarded to SOS 
Méditerranée and to me, will encourage 
other initiatives. Our example 
demonstrates the great strength 
of small territories. 
