by Koumanthio Zeinab Diallo
From the big cities to the smallest 
villages, the news spread like wildfire. 
Conakry, the capital of Guinea, was 
named World Book Capital for 2017 
by the Expert Advisory Committee 
gathered at the UNESCO Headquarters 
in Paris. This port city on the Atlantic 
is the seventeenth city in the world to 
be nominated, and only the second in 
Africa to receive this recognition. The 
kick-off is on 23 April 2017, World Book 
and Copyright Day.
The news, relayed by the media and 
community-based radio, was mostly 
welcomed with enthusiasm, though 
some believe that culture and books 
are not a priority, given the extreme 
poverty of the population.
However, many recognize the 
nomination as an opportunity for 
Guinean culture to be showcased 
on the international stage. Some are 
even hoping that the event will bring 
economic benefits, with the number of 
visitors it will attract and the activity it 
will generate. For avid literature lovers, 
it is an opportunity to give books and 
culture the recognition they deserve. 
Authors who will be given prominence 
include Camara Laye (1928—1980) who 
wrote the autobiography L’enfant noir 
[The Black Child], and Keita Fodéba 
(1921—1969), writer, composer and 
creator of the dance company Les 
Ballets africains. Guinean publishers 
see the nomination as an opportunity 
to promote their works, to meet other 
publishers and editors, and to discover 
fresh authors.
Writers, publishers, booksellers, 
printers, academics, journalists, 
students, and basically everyone who 
feels involved in the book world are 
all focused on making this year-long 
event a success. The Minister of Culture, 
Sports and Historic Heritage, made 
sure that the event was highlighted 
during the regional days dedicated to 
the development of a cultural policy 
for Guinea, held in four of the country’s 
regions between mid-November and 
mid-December 2016.
Institutions in charge of promoting 
books and reading have been working 
hard to commemorate the event. In 
the region of Labé, the Inspectorate 
for Culture is promoting books and 
reading in collaboration with the Fouta 
Museum and the Guinea PEN Centre, 
which has set up forty school clubs 
featuring rural libraries.
Labé, Guinea’s second-largest city which 
boasts a high concentration of writers, 
journalists, literary clubs and libraries, 
has established meeting points to 
celebrate the event. There have been 
suggestions to relocate certain activities 
from Conakry to Labé. These include the 
inauguration of four new school clubs 
by the Guinea PEN Centre, the release 
of a catalogue of the region’s writers, 
and of a photo album of the exhibition 
Merveilles du Fouta [The Wonders of 
Fouta] at the Fouta Djallon museum. 
Talks dedicated to books and reading 
will also be held at the university and in 
high schools here.
In Conakry, posters announcing the 
World Book Year are being plastered 
on the city walls, and pamphlets 
about the event are being distributed 
everywhere. Locations across the city’s 
districts, and even in neighbouring 
towns, have been identified to set up 
media libraries and reading points. 
The main aim behind this major event, 
after all, is to make books available to 
as many people as possible. Indeed, it 
would be impossible to instill a culture 
of reading if books were hard to find, 
and libraries did not exist. 
The World Book Year will help encourage 
the literate population to read more, 
promote the development and impact 
of books, and make books more easily 
accessible to students and citizens 
alike, so that they are able to make 
the pleasure of reading a part of their 
everyday lives. And who knows, maybe 
eventually there will be media libraries 
and reading points in every region 
across Guinea. Then my grandmother’s 
dream would finally come true: like 
many women of her time, she wanted 
Celebrating books  
and reading for all
Conakry is the World Book Capital  
for 2017

to decorate her living room with 
bookcases filled with books. But given 
their contents, they turned out to be 
more like ‘Biblecases’ than bookcases!
Koumanthio Zeinab Diallo (Guinea) 
is a founding member of the country’s 
Writers Association and the “A. Hampâté 
Bâ” literature and arts club. She is also 
the founder of the Guinea PEN Centre 
and executive director of the Fouta 
Museum. She has written several plays, 
as well as novels and award-winning 
collections of short stories and poetry.
A robust programme

Some of the activities associated with the 
Conakry World Book Capital include:
• Discussions on the challenges 
faced by the book and publishing 
industry in Guinea 
• Presentation of Guinean authors 
to the public 
• Meetings with Guinean and  
foreign authors 
• Days dedicated to foreign literature
© Mohamed Kaba (Waou Design) 2016.
• A month of poetry, stories and 
legends, and comics 
• Slam Festival 
• Tributes to the writers Laye Camara 
and William Sassine 
• A month dedicated to women, 
francophone literature,  
and the theatre.
