For Erussard and his team, the time 
has come for action, not words, 
if we are to tackle global warming and 
the demographic and environmental 
challenges of the twenty-first century. 
The way we travel, feed ourselves, 
build our houses, work and inform 
ourselves – these are the questions that 
need answers today. “Innovative solutions 
are being developed all over the world. 
This expedition is an opportunity to build 
a community that transcends borders 
by finding solutions and connecting them 
to each other,” adds Jérôme Delafosse, 
a professional diver and documentary 
filmmaker on nature and biodiversity, 
who is head of the expedition.
The world’s fastest yacht 
The adventure began in 2013, 
when French navigator Frédéric Dahirel 
recovered one of the fastest yachts 
in the history of offshore racing. In 1984, 
it  broke through the symbolic barrier 
of 500 miles in twenty-four hours. 
And in 1994, it enabled the famous 
New Zealand yachtsman, Sir Peter Blake, 
to set the round-the-world record, 
after having withdrawn from racing 
to devote himself to environmental 
exploration.



Around the globe in the world’s first 
clean‑energy
ship
by Virginie Jourdan 
On 26 June 2017, Energy 
Observer, the first ocean‑going 
ship to be powered by hydrogen 
and renewable energy sources, 
set sail from France on a 
round‑the‑world journey lasting 
six years. In partnership with 
UNESCO, the vessel criss‑crosses 
the oceans, stopping at 
101 ports in fifty countries, 
raising awareness − among 
the public and local authorities 
− of the value of clean energy 
and sustainable development. 
Sailing with no greenhouse gas 
or fine-particle emissions, using 
only renewable energy − this is the 
challenge taken up by the French-built 
Energy Observer, the first vessel to be 
self-sufficient in energy. It left the port 
of Saint-Malo (France) on 26 June 2017 
on a round-the-world voyage lasting 
until 2022, without a single drop of fossil 
fuel on board. 
This real-life experiment will test 
the efficacy of solar and wind energy, 
and the production of hydrogen from 
sea-water. But beyond this technical 
achievement, Victorien Erussard 
− an officer in the French merchant 
navy and one of the project’s initiators 
− and his crew want to meet the creators 
of innovative technological solutions to 
“show that there is a path to clean and 
sustainable energy”. 

The Energy Observer being presented 
to the public before its launch 
at Saint-Malo (France), in April 2017. 
This innovative project is being carried 
out in partnership with UNESCO.

Dahirel’s dream was to build the 
first French vessel powered by 
wind-generated electricity. This was 
symbolic. In 2015, he was joined 
by his sailing partner, Erussard. 
Then, a meeting with the French 
Alternative Energies and Atomic 
Energy Commission (CEA) and the 
Laboratory for Innovation in New 
Energy Technologies and Nanomaterials 
(CEA-Liten) gave the project a new 
direction. The challenge was to explore 
a new technology − the use of hydrogen 
as an energy source.
A floating laboratory
It took two years to get the yacht 
ready. Two electric motors replaced 
the mainsail and jib. Two wind turbines 
and solar panels were installed on its 
sides. In the middle, a twenty-metre-wide 
power kite can be deployed. 
Two hydrogen generators operate 
under the hull. Equipped with turbines, 
they use the hydraulic force generated 
by the yacht’s motion to produce 
electricity. This powers the yacht’s engine, 
on-board energy needs, and steering 
and telecommunications equipment. 
The laboratory causes sluggishness 
− the yacht travels at eight to ten knots 
instead of the thirty knots it attained 
when it was racing.
Hydrogen: 
energy of the future 
The second innovation lies in the 
production of hydrogen without carbon 
dioxide emissions. Hydrogen is seen 
as a future solution for the storage of 
carbon-free wind and solar energy. 
This gas does not occur naturally in its 
pure state and so has to be produced. 
The Energy Observer researchers opted 
for an environmentally-friendly solution 
– sea-water. “Today, ninety-five per cent 
of the hydrogen used in the world is 
manufactured using fossil fuels, like 
natural gas, which is highly polluting. 
We want to demonstrate that ‘carbon-free’ 
hydrogen can be produced,” explains 
Nicolas Degorce, a naval engineer who 
helped design the yacht. 
About thirty researchers at CEA-Liten 
worked for two years to create 
a hydrogen chain capable of resisting 
the extreme conditions encountered 
at sea. They were aided by engineers, 
transport specialists, naval architects 
and new technologies, as well as private 
enterprise. “About twenty prototypes 
have been developed. This is a wonderful 
opportunity to take them out of the 
laboratory and test them,” adds Degorce. 
In the holds and on the bridge, 
700 electronic sensors record 
the behaviour of the various pieces 
of the energy jigsaw puzzle in real 
time − wind, solar, hydro-electric and 
hydrogen. The researchers then use this 
data to try to optimize performance. 
Designed as a smart grid, this system 
of combined renewable energy could 
one day be used in homes, factories 
and on board cargo ships. It could also 
help prevent the energy exclusion 
of the 1.2 billion people in the world 
who still live without access to electricity.

The Energy Observer, the world’s first 
floating laboratory to be powered 
by hydrogen and renewable energy, 
set off on its round-the-world voyage 
on 26 June 2017.

A media ship 
for the planet 
It will take more than technological 
achievements to secure a better future, 
though. With the Energy Observer, 
mariners hope to help the public 
gain a better understanding of the 
immediate risks of climate change 
and the need to preserve biodiversity. 
“I have been witnessing the impact of 
human activity on the planet for twenty 
years,” says Delafosse. “This expedition 
is an opportunity to show what is 
really happening and to bring together 
positive initiatives from around the 
world.” His ambition is to make the Energy 
Observer a veritable media for the planet. 
“We want to nurture people’s dreams and 
raise their awareness, to let them discover 
the world as they have never seen it.” 
During the voyage, a series of eight 
documentaries will be made for a 
French television channel. Virtual reality 
and 3D content will also be created and 
shared on the internet and at various 
ports of call. The inner workings of the 
Energy Observer will be on view, as well 
as dives with sperm whales, to improve 
our understanding of the ways they 
communicate with one another. 
And one day perhaps we can share all 
of this information with schools around 
the world. 
This odyssey promises to be very 
fruitful. In the course of its 101 ports of 
call in fifty countries, the crew will pass 
through islands that are seeking to be 
self-sufficient in energy, like El Hierro 
in the Canary Islands (Spain); or model 
cities such as San Francisco, which has 
plans to become a zero-waste city. 
In partnership with UNESCO, twenty 
forays are planned in World Heritage 
sites and UNESCO Biosphere Reserves 
by 2022, such as the mud flats of the 
Wadden Sea in the Netherlands, and 
the Socotra archipelago in Yemen 
− home to around 700 species of 
plants and animals that are unique 
to this region. “We will be filming 
the sharks of Cocos Island off the coast 
of Costa Rica and the White Sea north 
of Russia − all these are little-known 
treasures that are nevertheless affected 
by human activity. This expedition 
is a marvellous opportunity to get 
to know our planet better,” enthuses 
Delafosse. “We want to share this 
knowledge through digital media and 
the meetings that we are organizing 
in major ports around the world.”
Virginie Jourdan is a freelance journalist, 
based in Rennes (France). After covering 
organic farming issues for many years 
for a specialist magazine, she now 
writes about the digital revolution 
and ecological change for regional 
and national magazines.

The Energy Observer’s route 
from 2017 to 2023, after its departure 
from Saint-Malo, France.
