What sharia is not
According to the Moroccan philosopher Ali Benmakhlouf, sharia 
at its origin is not a fixed code. It is a spiritual source, with an 
ethical orientation, to curb the abuse of political power. He 
examines how sharia was transformed into law.
by Ali Benmakhlouf
The word ‘sharia’ is a recurring theme 
in today’s discussions, conveying an 
array of phantasmagorical associations: 
reigns of terror, corporal punishment, 
repudiation of women, extremist 
demands by terrorist groups, archaic 
laws from the earliest days of Islam, 
a set of sanctions incompatible with 
human rights, and more.
It is essential to understand that 
the constitution of sharia, assumed 
as a fixed authority or body of law 
transcending time and history, mainly 
serves the interests of authoritarian 
regimes. These regimes founded the 
permanence of their political power 
on a law that is immune to change.
 
Etymologically, ‘sharia’ is an Arabic 
word meaning ‘avenue’, ‘opening’ or 
‘way’. Professor Wael Hallaq at Columbia 
University explains that sharia “was as 
much a way of living and of seeing the 
world as it was a body of belief.”
The process of transforming sharia into 
divine law is derived from an effort to 
interpret it, called ijtihad. It was the
result of reflection undertaken by 
qualified Islamic jurists who set out to 
“translate” the Koranic verses into 
legal norms.
A century after the Koran was revealed, 
numerous law schools were founded 
throughout the Islamic world, and they 
had different ways of evaluating divine 
law. Yet, whatever their interpretations 
and the differences among various 
lawyers and philosophers, all the 
schools agreed that the sacred texts 
of Islam were merely sources, and not 
the actual content, of the law. They 
emphasized the fact that the divine law 
was not to be found in its complete 
form in the revealed texts. In other 
words, there is no sharia code as such. It 
is not to be found either in the sayings 
of the Prophet, or in the Koran.
In more recent times, the Egyptian 
theologian, Ali Abderrazik (1888—1966), 
has drawn our attention to the fact that 
sharia is a spiritual guide, without any 
legal directives. Therefore, it is left to 
people to constitute their own system 
— based on other foundations — to 
organize their communities.
Sharia and politics
During the Middle Ages, a great debate 
began that still has significance today. 
It involved two opposing currents of 
thought. On the one hand, there were 
those who believed that the word 
sharia should be infused with political 
meaning, giving it legislative stature. 
Judges would then become what 
Montesquieu described in his 1748 
treatise, Spirit of the Laws, as “no more 
than the mouth that pronounces the 
words of the law, mere passive beings, 
incapable of moderating either its force 
or rigour.” On the other hand, there were 
those who believed, to the contrary, 
that jurisprudence should be made 
autonomous, allowing the judge to 
draw on the religious inspiration of the 
sharia to constitute within his tribunal a 
counterweight to political power.
According to this second line
of thought, the sovereign held 
discretionary power, restricted in scope, 
which could replace religious law with 
administrative regulations applicable 
in certain areas and to specific types of 
cases. This was called siyasa shar’iyya 
(policy compliant with revealed law), a 
device that was especially useful to curb 
abusive political power, as explained by 
Hallaq in his book, An Introduction to 
Islamic Law (2009).
In pre-modern states, sharia tended to be 
disassociated from political power, even 
if the boundary was not always clear 
and differed from one state to another. 
Conversely, in modern post-colonial 
societies, sharia is considered a part 
of statutory law, even though in some 
countries its scope is often reduced to 
personal status issues (such as marriage, 
inheritance, etc.). Modern understanding 
of the law is based on codification and 
control, thus rendering it purely an 
instrument of the state. The politicizing 
of sharia is a recent phenomenon.
Fatwa changes with the times
Thus, sharia is an epistemological 
concept that was for a long time 
flexible and adaptable. The saying 
“fatwa changes with the times” clearly 
shows that legal opinion was not 
considered a timeless and immutable 
truth. Indeed, a fatwa in its original 
sense is a non-binding legal opinion. 
The law was subject to modification 
because of “the changing of the 
times or…the changing conditions of 

society”, as Hallaq reminds us in his 
book Authority, Continuity and Change 
in Islamic Law (2001).
In fact, the necessity of change is 
explicitly recognized as the principal 
characteristic of divine law. The 
medieval philosopher Al Farabi (870-
950), among others, has described how 
successive legislators would modify 
the law. In his Book of Religion, Farabi 
explains that these changes served 
to: 1) close the gap left by a previous 
legislator, who enacted laws only on 
matters of the highest importance, of 
the greatest utility, value and efficacy for 
bringing communities together, leaving 
the rest to someone else; and 2) to alter 
many of the predecessor’s rulings and 
to enact other rules which he thought 
were more appropriate for the times.
We deduce from this that divine 
law is inseparable from its human 
interpretation, with the understanding 
that the interpretation should be left to 
competent experts, and not to those 
without training.
“Islamic law is thus also characterized 
by legal pluralism”, affirms Hallaq in 
his An Introduction to Islamic Law. 
“Not only because it acknowledges 
local custom and takes it into serious 
account,” he explains, “but also 
because it offers an array of opinions 
on one and the same set of facts.” 
Which is why Hallaq finds it highly 
ironic that colonial Europeans accused 
Islamic law of being rigid to justify 
replacing it with new Napoleonic 
codes. Thus began the dismantling of 
sharia that contributed to a perception 
of it as ahistorical and timeless.
When spiritual guideline
becomes diktat
This dismantling continued during the 
second half of the 20th century, as the 
word sharia took the form of a diktat via 
the fatwa, and it was accorded decision-
making power, even though fatwa 
represents only an advisory opinion.
 
With the development of modern 
law, of law emanating from the power 
of the state, and with the spread of 
parliamentary institutions in countries 
previously colonized by so-called 
Western powers (notably France and 
the United Kingdom) — sharia law 
took its place alongside legal systems 
modelled mostly on Napoleonic 
codes. It is “the corset of parliamentary 
procedure” that gave the Islamic norm 
its authority, say Baudouin Dupret and 
Leon Buskens, in the introduction to 
their 2012 book, La charia aujourd’hui 
(The Sharia Today).
Today, the constitutions of different 
Muslim nations cite sharia in different 
ways. In one country, it is a question 
of compliance; in another, reference. 
Nowhere is it considered to be derived 
from any codified law. 
It should be recognized that the word 
sharia is not sufficiently clear and does 
not refer to a set of rules familiar to all 
that would allow us to say with authority 
that it is being applied here or there. 
Paraphrasing the words of Dupret, the 
more we try to pin down what sharia is, 
the harder it is to capture its forms and 
functions. Except in terms of power, 
politics and ideology, how can we really 
define sharia? 
Ali Benmakhlouf (Morocco) is 
Professor of Philosophy at UPEC 
(Université Paris Est-Créteil) and 
a senior member of the Institut 
Universitaire de France. His long list of 
publications includes Averroès (2000), 
La conversation comme manière de 
vivre [Conversation as a way of life]
(2016), and Philosopher à Bagdad au 
Xe siècle [The practice of philosophy in 
tenth-century Baghdad] (2007), which he 
edited, and several other books about 
the great thinkers of East and West.
Part of the series of photographs, ”Minaret Hats”,
by Italian-born visual artist Maïmouna Guerresi,
who uses symbols of her adopted religion, Islam,
in her art.
© Maïmouna Guerresi
