by Magdalena Nandege
There has been a heightened 
awareness in recent years, 
of the strong links between 
culture and peace and security. 
The story of Magdalena, 
a young woman from South 
Sudan – a member of the 
Youth Peacemaker Network, 
the flagship programme 
of the Whitaker Peace and 
Development Initiative 
− illustrates how culture can 
be harnessed to transform 
societies impacted by conflicts, 
into safer and more productive 
communities.
This is something I have experienced 
personally. In 2014, I was in labour, and left 
unattended, as nurses and midwives struck 
work to reclaim unpaid salaries. Later I was 
assisted by midwives working with the 
World Health Organization (WHO). I knew 
then that women in South Sudan needed 
help to reduce maternal mortality.
This belief also led me to enroll in the Youth 
Peacemaker Network (YPN) of the Whitaker 
Peace and Development Initiative (WPDI). 
I joined the YPN in 2014 after hearing 
about it from the Eastern Equatoria Youth 
Union, of which I was secretary for gender 
and social welfare.
Through this programme, I have acquired 
skills to promote peace within myself 
and the youth in our community – 
through conflict management, mediation, 
Information and Communications 
Technology (ICT), meditation 
and entrepreneurship. 



The story 
of Magdalena,
South Sudan
My name is Magdalena Nandege. 
I am 23 years old and from South 
Sudan. I come from Homiri, a village 
in Budi county. It has a population of 
about 150,000 people, most of them 
agro-pastoralists − like my mother, who is 
a farmer. The county has two secondary 
schools and eleven primary schools, none 
of which have access to electricity. Only 
fifteen per cent of the population is literate. 
I am currently training to become 
a midwife at the Health Science Institute 
of Torit, the capital city of Imotong 
state. We are now twenty-four students, 
down from an original group of 
thirty-seven – some students stopped 
coming because of the lack of security, 
poverty and inadequate transportation. 
I chose this career because I believe 
it is important to take care of women. 
Women are the most vulnerable people 
in the world because they carry life. 
Magdalena Nandege, a young 
peacemaker from the Whitaker Peace 
and Development Initiative (WPDI) 
in South Sudan.

The training aims to reduce violence 
and promote peace and development. 
Upon completing the course of 250 
hours, I was certified by WPDI as a Trainer 
of Trainees (ToT), to train local young 
people and develop activities in remote 
communities. These activities consist of 
the facilitation of peace processes and the 
development of community businesses, 
providing services to communities and 
jobs to young people. 
The Eastern Equatoria programme 
gathers eighteen ToTs and 156 youth, 
between the ages of 16 and 35, in payams 
(local communities). They can read 
and write, which is important, because 
the programme involves interaction 
using social media platforms. This way, 
we can help each other when dealing 
with conflicts and in the management of 
our respective small businesses. 
The programme has also helped me 
acquire confidence by using my artistic 
talent for a just cause. Drama and stories 
are very important to convey messages. 
As a peacemaker, I often train people or 
engage in community dialogues. I have 
noticed that when problems are really 
hard, it is easier to use art, to use words 
that people understand, because people 
are able to differentiate between good 
and wrong through art. 
Recently, I have made a short movie 
on gender-based violence, Magda and 
Boniface – Forced Marriages, with a group 
of friends and colleagues from YPN. 
We used a tablet provided by WPDI to 
make the film because we could not 
afford to buy a camera. A fictionalized 
version of situations that take place in 
our communities, the film was shot in 
English, and also in Toposa, Juba Arabic, 
and Arabic – everyone used their own 
language. 
Many of the people in the movie were 
not professional actors. Young people 
and community leaders came together 
to solve the issue of early forced 
marriage. The fact that they accepted to 
be in the movie was, for me, one of the 
best moments of the whole process.
The movie tells the true story of a young 
adolescent, whose family wants to marry 
her off, and she refuses. She is allowed 
to make her case before a council, made 
up of her family and the community, and 
convinces them that a young woman 
should be able to choose her own 
partner and life. 
The film was shared through Bluetooth 
with youth who had smart phones and 
also used by WPDI as one of its activities. 
We have not yet shown the film in 
schools but we used a projection during 
a training of payam youth and their 
reaction was positive. The students 
acknowledged the need to encourage 
the education of girls and to discourage 
early forced marriage. I hope to show 
the film to a wider audience and to make 
more films like it, with more resources.
Through my studies and training with 
WPDI, UNESCO and UN Women, I have 
acquired skills in peace-building, 
conflict management, mediation, 
meditation, business skills, and the fight 
against gender-based violence. I have 
learned a lot about peace and human 
rights. But this needs to be translated 
in the languages that people speak 
at home − it must talk to their hearts. 
I think that art can do a lot for peace in 
South Sudan, so much more than long 
speeches. It can show positive characters 
that people can identify with, inviting 
them to practise peace and sustainable 
development. We need more art in South 
Sudan so we can have more peace.
Magdalena Nandege with a group 
of young people working on a farming 
project to support their communities. 
