Culture: at the heart of SDGs
Culture is who we are, and what shapes our identity. Placing 
culture at the heart of development policies is the only way to 
ensure a human-centred, inclusive and equitable development.
by Jyoti Hosagrahar
Within the framework of the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) adopted in 
September 2015 by the United Nations, 
the international development agenda 
refers to culture for the first time. This 
has been lauded by UNESCO as “an 
unparalleled recognition”.
The safeguarding and promotion 
of culture is an end in itself, and 
at the same time it contributes 
directly to many of the SDGs — safe 
and sustainable cities, decent work 
and economic growth, reduced 
inequalities, the environment, 
promoting gender equality and 
peaceful and inclusive societies. The 
indirect benefits of culture are accrued 
through the culturally-informed and 
effective implementations of the 
development goals.
The SDGs enshrine a conceptual 
shift in thinking about development 
beyond economic growth — 
envisioning a desirable future that 
is equitable, inclusive, peaceful, and 
environmentally sustainable. This bold 
vision demands creative approaches, 
beyond the typical linear and sectoral 
ones that most countries have been 
used to in recent decades.
Cultural heritage — both tangible and 
intangible — and creativity are resources 
that needs to be protected and 
carefully managed. They can serve both 
as drivers for achieving the SDGs as 
well as enablers, when culture-forward 
solutions can ensure the success of 
interventions to achieve the SDGs.
Inclusive cities 
Culture has a crucial role to play in SDG 
11: make cities and human settlements 
inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable. 
Target 11.4 calls for strengthening 
efforts to protect and safeguard the 
world’s cultural and natural heritage.
UNESCO’s work has addressed this 
goal even before its formal introduction 
in 2015. From the Hangzhou 
Declaration: Placing Culture at the 
Heart of Sustainable Development 
Policies adopted in May 2013 [at the 
international congress organised by 
UNESCO in Hangzou, China] to the 
Hangzhou Outcomes adopted in 
December 2015, the emphasis on 
people-centred cities has remained firm 
and contributed to the development of 
the United Nations New Urban Agenda.
The Agenda, which provides a twenty-
year road map to guide sustainable 
urban development and aims to 
transform the world’s cities, was officially 
adopted by all countries at the Habitat 
III meeting held in Quito, Ecuador, in 
October 2016. UNESCO also launched 
its Culture: Urban Future report which 
presents a global overview of urban 
heritage safeguarding, conservation and 
management as well as the promotion 
of cultural and creative industries.
An example of this is the adaptive 
reuse of abandoned and damaged 
buildings in Nablus, Palestine, which 
has benefited local communities. The 
ancient caravanserai of Khan al-Wakala 
was transformed into a mixed-used 
public space for events and cultural 
activities. Such efforts empower local 
communities and strengthen the 
local economy. By bringing together 
diverse individuals and groups for 
the development of a project, they 
also foster social cohesion (SDG 17: 
revitalize the global partnership for 
sustainable development).
Tourism is a rapidly growing economic 
sector, both within the country or 
region and around the world. Cultural 
tourism accounts for 40 % of world 
tourism revenues. These have a direct 
positive impact on SDGs across the 
board, and especially on SDG 8: decent 
work and economic growth.
Cultural heritage that is carefully 
managed attracts tourism investment 
in a sustainable way, involving local 
communities without damaging 
heritage areas.
Culture for diversity
Creative industries and cultural 
infrastructure are valuable resources 
for generating livelihoods. This 
is especially true in developing 
countries that have a wealth of creative 
industries. Furthermore, a substantial 
percentage of those employed in 
culture sector activities are women 
(SDG 5: gender equality). 
Strengthening trade in cultural goods 
and services provides impetus for local 
and national markets, which in turn 
provides employment opportunities 

for decent work (Targets 8.3 and 8.5 of 
SDG 8) and promotes local production. 
Cultural policies that promote 
preferential treatment in trade for 
locally-produced goods contribute to 
reducing inequalities within and among 
countries (SDG 10).
An illustration of this is the work of the 
Teatro Argentino de La Plata in Buenos 
Aires, which provided vocational 
training to 610 unemployed youth and 
adults on stage management and other 
performing arts skills. Funded by the 
International Fund for Cultural Diversity 
(IFCD), the project helped students to 
enhance their skills so they could find 
jobs and become entrepreneurs.
Urban areas rich in cultural heritage and 
with a vibrant creative sector are more 
attractive for businesses. Promoting 
inclusive and sustainable economic 
growth through employment in culture 
and creativity encourages decent work. 
The economies of some cities draw 
significantly on intangible heritage 
such as crafts, music, dance, visual arts, 
traditional cuisine, and theatre, that 
are often an integral aspect of historic 
urban areas. 
“Eternal ephemeral art”. © REZA/Webistan

An architect, planner and culture 
specialist, Jyoti Hosagrahar (India) is 
Director of the Division for Creativity 
in the Culture Sector at UNESCO, 
where she oversees, among other 
things, the integration of culture in 
the implementation of the UN 2030 
Agenda. Prior to joining UNESCO 
she was a professor at Columbia 
University in New York and UNESCO 
Chair professor at Srishti Institute in 
Bangalore, India.
City of music
Medellín, Colombia’s second-largest 
city and part of UNESCO’s Creative 
Cities Network, is an example of how 
music has given new momentum to 
the city, using culture, education and 
innovation. Besides strengthening 
civic culture, social equity and peace, 
especially for its youth, the city attracts 
thousands of tourists and generates 
income and employment through a 
range of music events and a popular 
music market.
Interventions for human development 
in areas such as SDG 3: health and 
well-being, and SDG 4: quality education, 
are most effective when they are 
responsive to the cultural context and the 
particularities of a place and community. 
Culture is noted specifically in Target 
4.7 (SDG 4), which calls for education to 
promote a culture of peace and non-
violence, an appreciation of cultural 
diversity, and of culture’s contribution to 
sustainable development.
Promoting respect for cultural 
diversity within a human rights-based 
approach, moreover, facilitates cultural 
understanding and peace (SDG 16: 
peace, justice, and strong institutions), 
prevents conflicts, and protects the 
rights of marginalized groups. Recent 
events have also demonstrated the 
importance of protecting culture, 
cultural diversity, and social cohesion in 
armed conflict.
Culture has an obvious correlation 
with climate action (SDG 13). Several 
traditional occupations and crafts draw 
on local knowledge of ecosystem 
management, natural resource extraction 
and local materials. As many of them 
require lower levels of technology, 
energy, and investment, they help to 
generate sustainable livelihoods and 
contribute to green economies.
Knowledge systems
In Uganda, a project to safeguard 
intangible heritage trained craft 
persons, especially the youth, in the 
ancient craft of bark-cloth making. The 
project also established the sustainable 
practice of using the indigenous and 
ubiquitous Mutuba trees, which had 
been neglected due to civil wars in 
the region. Such an effort furthered 
environment goals and ensured income 
generation, besides safeguarding the 
intangible heritage element of bark-
cloth weaving.
The knowledge systems and 
environmental management practices 
of indigenous and local people provide 
insights enabling better management 
of ecological challenges, preventing 
biodiversity loss, reducing land 
degradation, and mitigating the effects 
of climate change. Culture, particularly 
traditional knowledge, also contributes 
to resilience and recovery in the case of 
natural disasters (Target 13.1 of SDG 13).
The framework for the 2030 Agenda, 
in spite of all the references to culture, 
has not adequately recognized 
culture’s significant contribution to 
the implementation of the SDGs. The 
precise role and impact of culture on 
sustainable development needs to be 
systematically studied, measured, and 
operationalized. As the implementation 
of the SDGs moves forward, further 
work is necessary to build a systematic 
and measurable evidence base to 
demonstrate each of the contributions 
of culture to sustainable development.
