Nanhai No. 1 is one of the oldest and 
largest ancient sunken ships ever found in 
China. When and how was it discovered?
Nanhai No. 1 was discovered in 1987 by 
a joint Sino-British team, composed of the 
Guangzhou Salvage Bureau and Maritime 
Exploration & Recoveries PLC. They were 
looking for the Dutch East India Company 
vessel, Rimsburge, but failed to find it. 
Instead, they accidently found a Chinese 
merchant ship which sank in the 
thirteenth century, buried twenty-three 
metres underwater. 
The joint mission tried to retrieve some 
objects from the shipwreck. Did this work? 
They did manage to lift some objects, 
but totally destroyed the rear of the ship 
in the process. Luckily, the shipwreck 
escaped any serious pillaging attempts, 
because of its location which was visible 
from the coastline. 
‘Nanhai’ means South China Sea, but 
what does ‘No. 1’ refer to?
It refers to an archaeological way of 
naming shipwrecks − the name of the 
discovery spot appears first, then comes 
the number that reflects the order 
in which the wrecks were found. 
Do we have any idea why Nanhai No. 1 
sank at the very beginning of its journey?  
The most likely scenario is that the ship 
was overloaded. Or it perished in a storm. 
How many tons of cargo was it 
transporting? 
Nanhai No. 1 was designed for a load 
of nearly 200 tons. There are estimates 
that it was carrying 100,000 sets of 
antiques. Nanhai No.1 had a very rich 
cargo: besides the 13,000 pieces of 
porcelain from five famous kilns of the 
time excavated so far, it was carrying 
151 gold, 124 silver and 170 copper sets, 
and 17,000 copper coins. What we found 
was totally beyond our expectations. 
Interview by Katerina Markelova 
and Xiaorong Chen
As China celebrates the thirtieth 
anniversary of the discovery 
of Nanhai No. 1, visitors to this 
thirteenth‑century shipwreck 
can watch archaeologists as 
they excavate the vessel on‑site, 
in an aquarium specially built to 
house the structure. A marvel 
of "in‑whole"salvaging, 
it took twenty years before 
the shipwreck could be lifted 
out of the water, another 
six years before excavation 
could be started, and six more 
years before the process is 
completed in 2018. Add another 
twenty to thirty years for the 
conservation of the ship’s body 
to be completed.  
An interview with Jiang 
Bo, who shares details 
of this unprecedented 
archaeological endeavour. 
The China National Center for 
Underwater Cultural Heritage and 
UNESCO organize an international 
conference on the “Discovery and 
Study of Nanhai No. 1 Shipwreck” in 
Yangjiang County, Guangdong Province, 
in November 2017.



A Crystal Palace houses a
shipwreck 
Crockery from the thirteenth century 
was part of the cargo on Nanhai No. 1. 

Do we know where this merchant vessel 
was headed? 
Chinese ceramics have been found 
in the Indian Ocean, in India, Persia, 
and the Middle East – the ship was 
probably heading to one of these 
destinations. Maritime trade trajectories 
were complicated in those days, with 
many stops. Singapore, Southeast Asia 
and the East-African shore could have 
been potential destinations. What is 
almost certain is that it was sailing from 
China to the Indian Ocean. 
There are few records of shipbuilding 
technology 800 years ago in China or the 
rest of the world. What do we know now?
This ship was built around 1216, during 
the Southern Song dynasty. What is 
confirmed is that this kind of ship, called 
‘Fuchuan’, was made in Fujian province 
(‘Fu’ means ‘from Fujian’ and ‘chuan’ means 
‘ship’). The most distinctive characteristic 
of a Fuchuan is its watertight-bulkhead 
technology, which was inscribed on 
UNESCO’s List of Intangible Cultural Heritage 
in Need of Urgent Safeguarding, in 2010.

Twenty years after it was discovered, 
the entire ship was lifted out of the water, 
making it the first “in-whole” salvage 
of a shipwreck. 
On 21 December 2007, after nine months 
of preparation, the shipwreck was lifted 
and moved from the seabed to the 
Guangdong Maritime Silk Road Museum, 
which was especially designed for it. 
China’s State Administration of Cultural 
Heritage and the Transport Department 
worked together to build a 5,500-ton 
caisson [a large watertight case], 
big enough to contain the shipwreck 
of 35.7 × 14.4 × 7.2 metres. The box was 
then sunk into the sea and pressed down 
into the seabed to cover the shipwreck. 
Then the mud around the box was cleared 
and a floor inserted, so that the box could 
be lifted onto the surface of the water. 
The whole operation cost $20 million. 
The lifting of Nanhai No. 1 is considered 
the first in-whole salvage in the world. 
However, strictly speaking, there are other 
examples − two warships, Sweden’s Vasa 
and the British Mary Rose were similarly 
salvaged. But China was the first country 
to creatively use a caisson that was highly 
protective for the wreck.
Although the salvage operation was 
totally carried out by the Chinese, 
we needed advice when it came to 
archaeological excavations. Before these 
started in 2013, we conducted tests with 
the help of Japanese scholars, to decide 
what was the best way to proceed.   
What are the main findings since the 
excavation of the cargo started in 2013?  
The ship is well-preserved because it 
was buried, and we have the unique 
chance to conduct the excavation 
in a very detailed manner. We are getting 
much more information than if we were 
working underwater. We have clear 
archaeological evidence about how 
people packaged things, and what kind 
of food people ate on the ship. We found 
some personal objects, such as delicate 
lacquerware and pottery, gold necklaces 
and a Middle East-style belt. So we know 
that there were probably some foreigners 
on the ship as well − maybe Indians, 
maybe Arabs. We also found the bones 
of three individuals. 
The ship is maintained in a gigantic 
aquarium which replicates 
the exact water quality, temperature 
and environment that the wreck 
was discovered in

Would you say the finding of this ship 
marks the very beginning of Chinese 
underwater archaeology?
Yes, thirty years ago, the investigation 
process was driven by the personal 
enthusiasm of a few people and private 
donations. The research office of 
underwater archaeology at the National 
Museum of Chinese History was set 
up in 1987, after this discovery, and 
its early mission was to support the 
exploration process. The office could rely 
on the specific location data provided 
in 1989 by the museum (now called 
the National Museum of China) and the 
Japan Underwater Archaeology Research 
Institute, thanks to the donation of 
a Hong Kong merchant, Chen Laifa. 
Three investigation missions to 
Nanhai No. 1 were run by Zhang Wei, 
one of China’s earliest underwater 
archaeologists. Conditions at the site 
were difficult, with poor visibility and 
strong sea currents. The archaeologists 
realized then, that the best option 
was to get the ship out of the water 
– although it was very expensive.
The Center for the Protection of 
National Underwater Cultural Relics 
was set up by the Chinese Academy 
of Culture Heritage in 2009. In 2014, 
the government combined it with the 
underwater archaeology departments 
of the National Museum of China, 
to form the China National Center for 
Underwater Cultural Heritage. The aim 
was to ascertain the real situation 
of China’s underwater relics and to play 
a leading role in protecting them.
What is unique about the excavations 
on Nanhai No. 1? 
Now that the ship is inside the museum, 
archaeologists, conservation and 
restoration specialists, digital mapping 
and recording system specialists 
− all work together on a daily basis, which 
is quite unusual. We also simultaneously 
think about how to exhibit what 
we have found. When a package is 
identified, an archaeologist would 
immediately open it to see what is 
inside − a museologist would leave 
it untouched. That is why we always talk 
to each other. 
The Guangdong Maritime Silk Road 
Museum is the only museum in Asia with 
facilities for an underwater display of 
this magnitude. Could you describe it? 
The museum was built on Hailing island, 
close to Yangjiang city, Guangdong 
province, at a cost of $20 million. 
It is made up of five oval-shaped 
buildings, one of which, the Crystal 
Palace, made of glass, houses 
Nanhai No.1. The ship is maintained 
in a gigantic aquarium which replicates 
the exact water quality, temperature 
and environment that the wreck was 
discovered in. Visitors to the museum 
can view archaeologists as they continue 
their work, excavating the vessel on-site. 
They can then ascend to the top floor, 
to stand under a simulated star-studded 
sky, as if they were on board the ship 
at night. 
Today, Hailing, which used to be a remote 
island, is one of China’s top ten tourist 
islands − the museum is its only modern 
building, attracting over 300,000 
visitors in 2016. The local people have 
substantially benefited from this tourism.
The Guangdong Maritime Silk Road 
Museum is made up of five oval-shaped 
buildings, one of which, the Crystal 
Palace, is made of glass and houses 
Nanhai No. 1.

Visitors to the museum participate in 
the archaeological dig on the wreck of 
Nanhai No. 1.
What does the future hold for Nanhai No. 1?
We will finish the excavation of the cargo 
in 2018. The next step will be to conserve 
the hull of the ship, which is still in the 
box that was used to lift it from the 
bottom of the sea. We keep the surface 
of water in this box at the same level 
as when it was excavated. A spraying 
water system helps us keep the top of 
the ship wet as well − it would get rifted 
if it dried. The shipwreck and the cargo 
will be desalted and dewatered within 
the next twenty or thirty years. There are 
conflicting opinions on how to preserve 
the wreck. Some have suggested 
dispatching the ship in parts. But then it 
can never be reassembled. Others are in 
favour of conserving the ship as a whole, 
like the Vasa in Sweden. 
Several exhibitions are being planned 
in China and abroad to raise public 
awareness of the wreck’s historical value.
Jiang Bo is Director and senior 
researcher of the Institute of Underwater 
Archaeology, National Center for 
Underwater Cultural Heritage, China. 
With several publications and prizes 
both at home and abroad to his name, 
he delivered a talk, “Nanhai 1, Shipwreck 
and Chinese Underwater Archaeology” 
at UNESCO in May 2017.
The lifting of 
Nanhai No. 1 
is considered 
the first 
in‑whole 
salvage 
in the world
