Global lessons from Estonia’s 
tech-savvy government
Tiny Estonia, with a population of 1.3 million, ranks among 
the most digitally advanced societies in the world. According 
to Freedom House, the country tucked into the north-eastern 
corner of Europe also enjoys one of the greatest economic, 
press and internet freedoms in the world. The secret of this 
tiny nation’s rise to a digital powerhouse lies in the pioneering 
advances made by its government under its innovative e-Estonia 
initiative — fostering innovative education, virtual business and 
digital citizenship.
by Mari Roonemaa
The inspiring story of how Estonia 
became E-stonia — an apt joke coined by 
former president Toomas Hendrik Ilves —
began in 1996, with the help of the 
Tiger Leap Foundation, a government-
backed technology investment body. 
Not long after its independence from 
the Soviet Union in 1991, the country 
decided that the online economy and 
massive technological innovation was 
the way forward for a tiny country with 
no natural resources to fall back on. 
Through Tiger Leap, all Estonian schools 
were online by the late 1990s, and large 
investments were made in computer 
networking and infrastructure. 
Five years later, ten private and public 
companies formed a strong public-
private partnership, creating the Look@
World Foundation. Supported by 
telecom and banking interests, the 
project raised digital awareness and 
popularized the use of the internet 
and Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICT), particularly in 
education, science and culture. 
The initiative’s very first project aimed 
to bridge the country’s “digital divide” 
by providing free computer training to 
102,697 participants, or 10% of the adult 
population. And Estonian children are 
taught computer programming starting at 
age seven. There’s been no looking back. 
In July 2016, 91.4% of Estonians used the 
internet; a big jump from 2000, when only 
28.6% of the population was connected.
Co-operation is the key
The keys to the success of Estonia’s 
e-revolution have been co-operation 
and reciprocity. Successive 
governments have backed e-Estonia 
since it was launched in the early 1990s. 
The private sector, academic institutions 
and citizens have all co-operated to 
make the initiative a winner. Reciprocity, 
because the state has gained the 
confidence of its citizens, who in turn 
have given the state full access to their 
personal data. Estonians have a digital 
identification programme that is the 
envy of much larger countries — 
they can complete just about every 
municipal or state service online in a 
matter of minutes.
To ensure transparency and 
accountability, citizens are allowed to 
monitor their own privacy. They can 
trace anyone who has tried to access 
their data by logging on to the state 
portal, eesti.ee. There have been 
a few cases — among doctors and 
policemen, for instance — where people 
have been sentenced for unethically 
accessing databases. “You cannot 
bribe a computer,” Ilves — Estonia’s 
president between 2006 and 2016, 
who spearheaded the country’s digital 
revolution — once said.

At the Gustav Adolph Grammar School in Tallinn, one of the oldest secondary schools 
in Europe (founded in 1631), students at all levels work with computers and tablets from the age of 7. 
© Stefano De Luigi/VII



Land of Skype
Estonia has opened its borders to 
attract talent and fuel the nation’s 
start-up economy. With over 400 
startups, Tallinn, the capital, has been 
called “a sort of Silicon Valley on the 
Baltic Sea” by the New York Times. This 
is the land where Skype, the free video 
service, was created, revolutionizing 
how the world communicates. 
It is a calling card that has put Estonia 
firmly on the global map. Skype is 
also now a word in the Oxford English 
Dictionary ! Other notable startups 
include TransferWise, a foreign 
exchange service, and Jobbatical, a job 
website that allows people traveling 
the world to extend their journeys.
The tertiary, or “free sector” of Estonia 
has played an active role in shaping 
open governance and e-democracy. 
To co-ordinate public inputs for policy 
debate, three different portals have 
been created, funded by tax-payers. 
According to Secretary of State Heiki 
Loot, “Estonia is known to be the only 
country where the drafting of legislation 
and inter-ministerial co-ordination 
processes are so transparent.’’
In 2016, Estonia was recognized as 
one of countries that has best included 
NGOs in the process of consulting 
the open government plan of action. 
Last year, citizen initiative portal 
Rahvaalgatus.ee was launched, making it 
possible to compose and send collective 
initiatives to the Estonian Parliament. 
Estonia has also made some bold 
moves in experimenting with modern 
methods of the decision-making 
process. Rahvakogu or the People’s 
Assembly is a good example. Originally 
a platform of crowdsourcing ideas 
to amend electoral laws, three out of 
fifteen proposals sent to parliament 
via the online platform have actually 
become law.

Hungry for IT
How will Estonia ensure the Baltic Tiger 
keeps on leaping? Ave Lauringson, a 
leading specialist in the Information 
Society Unit, at the Ministry of Economic 
Affairs and Communications, says it’s a 
good sign that besides the government, 
the people themselves have become 
“hungry for IT”. Over the years, IT 
education has spread from schools to 
communities and hobby education. 
Recently, over 200 people — mostly 
parents themselves — were schooled 
to teach robotics as an extra-curricular 
activity. “A third of students who have 
had previous contact with IT-related 
hobbies, have admitted it has had an 
effect on their latter career decisions,” 
Lauringson says.
Eesti 2.0, a non-profit organization 
that aims to inspire young Estonians to 
embrace a future in technology (with 
Ilves as its patron), provides students with 
different technological tools and offers 
them ideas to apply these technologies.
Kids start early with computers: a programming lesson at the Gustav Adolph Grammar School, Tallinn. © Stefano De Luigi/VII
The idea, according to the non-profit’s 
website (eesti2.ee), is “to nourish 
creative thinking across disciplines and 
connect science-based theories to real-
life phenomena and events.’’ Robotics, 
coding clubs and programming enjoy 
popularity but the question of a mutual 
relationship between young people 
and the e-state remains contentious. 
“The biggest surprise is that youngsters 
who possess different digital skills, often 
lack them in giving a digital signature, 
for example,” Lauringson notes. “They 
haven’t had such a necessity for 
different e-services, but as soon as they 
are adults, it appears. Until this remains 
a problem, they cannot enter into a 
dialogue with the e-state.”
Another big challenge is increasing 
the computer literacy of the older 
generation, with many people over 60 
struggling with elementary skills. With 
Tiger Leap, Estonian public libraries 
became centres for the internet, and 
older people still use libraries to 
access the e-state. This often turns the 
librarians into “IT specialists”, who are 
being trained to give advice.
Cap 2020
Security awareness and data protection 
continue to be important goals in the 
digital era. Public authorities have 
been raising awareness and calling 
for smart behaviour on the internet 
through different campaigns and 
actions. For instance, the Estonian 
Child Welfare Union calls for the 
prevention of online distribution of 
material on child sexual abuse. A 
number of educational programmes 
are run by The Information Technology 
Foundation for Education (HITSA), 
targeted at advancing and intensifying 
the co-operation between the ICT 
industry, educational institutions and 
the state.
The most popular of these is the 
ProgeTiger programme, initiated by 
Lauringson. This unique public-private 

can use the computer, but such skills 
are not enough to bring innovation — 
we must be able to create digital and 
technological content. Though the PISA 
(Programme for International Student 
Assessment) test results flatteringly put 
us on top of the world, we shouldn’t let 
ourselves rest on our laurels. Complex 
problem- solving, critical thinking, 
creativity, people management and 
emotional intelligence will be the most 
important skills to possess in 2020. We 
also need to figure out how to keep 
our students happy, so they continue to 
enjoy the learning process.
Mari Roonemaa (Estonia) is Media
Co-ordinator of the Open Estonia
Foundation, which has worked to help
develop democracies and open 
societies in Estonia and other countries 
for the past twenty-seven years. The 
former editor of a publication covering 
Estonia’s tertiary sector, she is also a 
freelance journalist. 

parnership programme has launched 
a nationwide scheme to teach school 
kids from the ages of 7 to 19 how to 
write code. ProgeTiger combines the 
teaching of three integrated fields: 
engineering sciences, design and 
technology and information and 
communications technology. 
Getting qualified teachers remains a 
major hurdle. Professor Jaak Vilo from 
the Institute of Computer Science at 
the University of Tartu recently claimed 
that we would not be able to educate 
enough programming teachers even 
in the course of the next ten years. He 
has proposed to arrange online courses 
for high school graduates. Free online 
courses (MOOCs) exist for adults, but we 
critically need to start something similar 
for the younger generation, Vilo claims. 
So far, we don’t have enough data 
to measure digital literacy. The first 
moment of truth will be in 2018, when 
ninth graders do their first countrywide 
test on digital skills. We know people 
