Global destruction of cultural heritage, 
now occurring at an unprecedented scale, 
brings into focus the question of whether 
or not to reconstruct significant places as 
a means of recovering their meaning. 
The 2001 demolition of the ancient 
Buddha statues in Bamiyan Valley in 
Afghanistan foreshadowed a wave of 
deliberate desecration of the world’s 
iconic cultural sites, including Palmyra 
and Aleppo in Syria.  
UNESCO calls these attacks on World 
Heritage Sites a form of cultural cleansing, 
which require new national and 
international policies and the involvement 
of the United Nations, Interpol and 
the International Criminal Court. 
In addition, natural disasters are 
destroying swathes of buildings, as we 
have seen during the 2015 earthquake 
in the Kathmandu valley, Nepal, where 
hundreds of structures within the World 
Heritage Site have been affected. 



Reconstruction: 
changing attitudes
by Christina Cameron
Natural disasters and an 
increase in terrorist attacks 
have meant that the world’s 
cultural heritage has suffered 
heavier losses in recent 
years. This has led to a more 
favourable attitude by the 
World Heritage Committee 
and UNESCO towards 
the reconstruction of damaged 
or destroyed sites, in the face 
of traditional opposition. 
With this article, the UNESCO Courier 
marks the occasion of the 41st session 
of the World Heritage Committee, 
held in Krakow, Poland in July 2017.

Reconstruction is not new. Its roots 
can be found in nineteenth-century 
Western cultures, when the concept 
of historical monuments was created 
and consciousness of a historical 
past was developed, due to the rapid 
industrialization of society and its 
subsequent rupture with the past. 
Architects sought to replace missing 
parts of historic monuments as a means 
of restoring them to their previous 
splendour. French Gothic Revival 
architect and theorist Eugène Emmanuel 
Viollet-le-Duc’s reconstruction of the 
walls of the historic fortified city of 
Carcassonne, France, is a case in point. 
In the twentieth century, this trend was 
particularly strong in North America, 
where historical replicas served as living 
history museums, popular with visitors 
and effective as forms of presentation 
and interpretation of the past. 
The most famous example of this can be 
found in colonial Williamsburg, Virginia, 
where 350 buildings were reconstructed 
in the 1930s, and others from later 
periods were destroyed in an attempt 
to create an interpretative park to 
eighteenth-century colonial America. 
One can even argue that the 1972 World 
Heritage Convention originated in a 
UNESCO project: the dismantling and 
reconstruction of Nubian monuments 
from Abu Simbel to Philae in Egypt. This 
outstanding archaeological area, which 
was to be flooded by the Aswan Dam, 
was the site 3,000-year-old monuments 
and temples. These treasures were saved 
due to an unprecedented twenty-year 
international campaign launched by 
UNESCO, from 1960 to 1980. 
Honesty and 
transparency 
The question remains: to construct 
or not to reconstruct. Heritage 
conservation professionals have 
traditionally been opposed to 
reconstruction because this approach 
can falsify history and create fictional 
places that never existed in that form. 
This opposition began in the nineteenth 
century and gathered momentum 
following the oft-repeated guidance from 
French art historian and archaeologist 
Adolphe Napoléon Didron that “for 
ancient monuments, it is better to 
consolidate than repair, better to repair 
than to restore, better to restore than 
to reconstruct”. 
In 1883, in the Prima Carta del Restauro, 
Italian architect Camillo Boito spelled out 
eight principles for heritage conservation 
that insist on honesty and transparency 
when adding missing parts to buildings. 
These ideas eventually found expression 
in the key twentieth-century doctrinal 
text that is the foundation of the 
International Council on Monuments and 
Sites (ICOMOS). The 1964 International 
Charter on the Conservation and 
Restoration of Monuments and Sites, 
known as the Venice Charter, rules out 
reconstruction and insists that restoration 
must stop where conjecture begins. 
Subsequent standards and guidelines 
have consistently expressed caution 
about reconstructing historic sites. 
There are exceptions – the Australia 
ICOMOS Charter for the Conservation of 
Places of Cultural Significance, known 
as the Burra Charter, adopted in 1979, 
accepts reconstruction if it reflects a 
pattern of use or cultural practice that 
sustains cultural value. But even here, a 
“cautious approach to changing a place” 
is advocated. 
Shifting attitude 
In the early years, UNESCO’s World 
Heritage Committee (WHC) followed 
the ICOMOS doctrine and generally 
opposed reconstructions. An exception 
was made in 1980 for the historic city 
of Warsaw, whose massive rebuilding 
was seen as a symbol of the patriotic 
feeling of the Polish people. Until 
recently, the Committee has remained 
largely unsympathetic to reconstructed 
sites, although there have been 
other exceptions.
The Genbaku Dome of the Hiroshima 
Peace Memorial, Japan, preserved 
in exactly the same state it was found, 
after being hit by the first atomic bomb 
on 6 August 1945.

For example, the listing of the Old Bridge 
Area of the Old City of Mostar in Bosnia 
and Herzegovina, in 2005, was justified 
on the basis of the restoration of cultural 
value, an intangible dimension of the 
property. In the case of the Tombs of 
Buganda Kings at Kasubi, Uganda, which 
were destroyed by fire in 2010, the 
Committee gave provisional approval 
for reconstruction, on condition that 
the new structure was based on sound 
documentation, traditional forms and 
techniques and continuing use. Indeed, 
the current version of the World Heritage 
Committee’s Operational Guidelines for 
the Implementation of the World Heritage 
Convention still echoes the Venice Charter 
when it states: “In relation to authenticity, 
the reconstruction of archaeological 
remains or historic buildings or districts 
is justifiable only in exceptional 
circumstances. Reconstruction is 
acceptable only on the basis of complete 
and detailed documentation and to 
no extent on conjecture.”
Yet, in light of recent attacks by 
extremists on heritage places, decisions 
of the World Heritage Committee and 
UNESCO reflect a shifting attitude toward 
reconstruction. The justification for this 
shift is based in part on the ideas in the 
Nara Document on Authenticity (which 
was “conceived in the spirit of the Charter 
of Venice” in 1994, and adopted by 
ICOMOS) in which the broadened use of 
intangible attributes makes a stronger 
case for reconstruction. 
The beginning of this shift can be marked 
by the wilful destruction in 2012 of the 
Sufi mausoleums at the Timbuktu World 
Heritage Site in Mali. Defying appeals 
from the Director-General of UNESCO and 
the WHC to spare these revered tombs, 
extremists attacked them with renewed 
vengeance until fourteen mausoleums 
were destroyed.  
Since that time, UNESCO has 
spearheaded a reconstruction process, 
which was completed in record time in 
2015. This is a good example when trying 
to answer the question of “reconstruction: 
for or against?”. It is worth noting that 
the values listed in the Statement of 
Outstanding Universal Value focus on 
the tombs as witness to Timbuktu’s 
past, with no mention of community 
values or architectural techniques. It was 
only after the destruction of the tombs 
that community and intangible values 
were evoked. 
Tool for regeneration
Arguments in favour of reconstruction 
reside largely in the local community: 
traditional building techniques are 
transmitted from elders to a new 
generation of builders; the project brings 
together the whole community, and the 
sites continue to serve as religious spaces 
for ceremonies and contemplation. 
Indeed, the involvement of the local 
community in the reconstruction of the 
tombs is seen in part as a reconciliation 
process and a tool for regeneration. 

Arguments against reconstruction 
beyond the rules in the Operational 
Guidelines document of the WHC include 
a lack of transparency in the UNESCO 
decision-making process and concerns 
that decisions are made outside the 
local community by professional and 
governmental organizations. In such 
cases, it is important to document the 
decision-making process so that future 
generations may understand how 
choices were made, what options were 
considered, what values remain and 
what new ones were created. 
In addition, there is the idea of taking 
time to reflect after a trauma such as the 
one in Timbuktu, in the interest of leaving 
space for further consideration over time 
and generations. The reconstruction of all 
the tombs may erase memory over time 
and may deprive people of the space to 
reflect on the past. The half-destroyed 
Genbaku Dome at the Hiroshima Peace 
Memorial in Japan serves precisely 
this purpose as a reminder of the 
most destructive force ever created 
by humankind. 
New guidance needed
On the question of reconstruction, 
the ad hoc decision-making by the 
WHC appears to be leading to new 
approaches. The shift represents a 
challenge for keepers of the conservation 
doctrine like ICOMOS, because decisions 
from such a prestigious international 
body give credence to a different 
conservation standard. In light of 
changing circumstances, new guidance 
is needed. Conservation charters need 
to make room for new ideas and World 
Heritage tools need to be updated.
Since the rise of the conservation 
doctrine in the nineteenth century, each 
generation has added new principles 
and guidelines. A materials-based 
conservation doctrine, as manifested 
in the World Heritage Operational 
Guidelines, is still part of our legacy. 
The Burra Charter makes an important 
shift towards values-based conservation, 
focused on heritage and cultural values. 
The Nara Declaration, with its emphasis on 
cultural diversity and the relative nature of 
values, encourages heritage practitioners 
to interpret the Venice Charter through 
this new lens. This additive approach 
is a good starting point for addressing 
the reconstruction question. 
Christina Cameron (Canada) is 
professor and chairholder of the Canada 
Research Chair on Built Heritage at 
the School of Architecture, University 
of Montreal. She has held leadership 
positions in the heritage field at Parks 
Canada for more than thirty-five years. 
Cameron has been actively involved in 
UNESCO’s World Heritage as Head of 
the Canadian delegation (1990 to 2008) 
and as Chairperson (in 1990 and 2008). 
Patchworks of sheets hung over 
a street to stop bullets from snipers 
in war-ravaged Aleppo, Syria.
