Ameenah Gurib-Fakim:
“Science is the basis of  
social progress“
To combat climate change and its consequences, which 
particularly affect Small Island States, it is necessary, more 
than ever, to encourage research and innovation, and support 
African researchers, asserts Ameenah Gurib-Fakim, President of 
Mauritius and a renowned scientist.
Interview by  
Isabelle Motchane-Brun
We are living at a time of 
unprecedented economic, 
demographic, ecological and 
technological change. In what way is 
science, technology and innovation 
the answer to these challenges?
Science, technology and innovation 
have always been the basis of social 
progress and the improvement of 
people’s living conditions.
With the explosive increase of the 
world’s population — nine billion by 
2050 — we will need to have a better 
grasp of technological tools in order 
to adapt while using fewer resources 
to ensure the world’s food security and 
self-sufficiency in water and energy 
supply, all this in an environment 
threatened by climate change.
In January 2017, you presented 
the Coalition for African Research, 
Innovation and Entrepreneurship 
(CARIE), at the World Economic 
Forum. What is its objective?
CARIE is an association that brings 
together several partners, namely the 
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the 
Wellcome Trust, the New Partnership 
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), and 
the American National Institutes of 
Health, which have decided to unite in 
a common effort to promote research 
and innovation on the African continent.
Its objective is to contribute to 
developing the skills of African 
researchers and to help strengthen 
the environment in which they operate. 
There has been enormous progress in 
Africa in the field of research but the 
impact of the work done is relatively 
limited and often not very noticeable.
What can be done to change this?
Often, researchers do not have the 
means to follow up on their ideas 
in terms of products or starting up 
businesses. Additionally, the legal 
framework for intellectual property 
rights is inadequate. Results often end 
up buried at the bottom of a drawer 
or published in newspapers and 
publicized before being protected 
by patents. The Coalition’s aim is to 
intervene at different levels so as to 
give these researchers the means to 
change the everyday lives of Africans.

The word “coalition” is more closely 
associated with political rather 
than scientific vocabulary. Is the 
development of science a political 
struggle above all?
The issue of “politics” affects every 
level. Obviously, if good decisions are 
taken at political levels, in other word 
by those in power, their effects on 
scientific institutions will be positive. 
Africa will only progress scientifically if 
policymakers recognize the importance 
of funding science.
The word “coalition” should not be 
analyzed by itself; rather it should 
be understood as a means of uniting 
strengths to advance science in Africa 
for the well-being of its population.
How is it different from the Alliance 
for Accelerating Excellence in 
Science in Africa (AESA), created by 
the African Academy of Sciences 
and NEPAD?
There are more similarities than 
differences. The aim of AESA is to 
work on the issue of health. It receives 
support from the Bill and Melinda Gates 
Foundation and the Wellcome Trust, 
among others.
Does the multiplicity of organizations 
with such similar objectives risk 
leading to overlaps and the dilution 
of funding?
There are no overlaps between these 
organizations given that they work
in complementarity.
You know, the need is so great in Africa 
since the continent has been lagging 
behind that there is no risk of funding 
being “diluted”. We must support all 
initiatives that aim to train resources 
and develop research.
I remind you that the continent needs 
several million engineers and scientists 
to reach the population/engineer ratio 
of developed countries.
Small Island States such as Mauritius 
are by definition vulnerable. What can 
they do to combat ecological threats?
Mauritius is already on the list of 
countries at risk, particularly in 
the context of climate change. 
Unfortunately, the number of solutions 
to counter rising sea levels is limited 
but we must consolidate and make 
better use of the territory. For example, 
the erosion of our beaches can be 
reduced by planting more mangroves. 
They provide an excellent ecosystem 
for fish and other marine wildlife. In any 
case, we must continue to plant trees 
as they are the surest way of reducing 
carbon emissions in the atmosphere. 
We must redouble our efforts in terms 
of strategies to develop renewable 
energies, recycling and water 
management because water shortages 
will be severely felt.
Mauritius ratified the Paris 
Agreement on climate change. In 
concrete terms, what measures has 
the country already taken to tackle 
the issue of global warming?
It must first of all be said that Mauritius, 
like the entire African continent, has 
not really contributed to greenhouse 
gases (GHG), but we are among the 
most affected.
We act in solidarity with the world by 
making efforts to further reduce GHG.
We have already started to develop 
our strategy in renewable energies, 
to improve water management and 
review planning and land use. But we 
must double our efforts to ensure that 
all our infrastructures meet “green” 
standards, with more solar panels for 
example, or that they comply with 
any other standard that falls within 
sustainable development.
We must encourage all technologies 
that will lead to a less wasteful use of 
resources, better possibilities in terms 
of recycling and energy-efficient, low-
power industries. These concepts are 
slowly gaining momentum; some textile 
companies in particular already operate 
using solar energy.
Education and awareness-raising 
remain two important areas because 
it is essential that the population and 
other economic actors support this 
concept, in all the initiatives the state 
wants to undertake.

How do the Mascarene Islands rank 
globally in terms of production of 
renewable energies? And what about 
Mauritius compared to its neighbours 
such as Réunion?
Among the Mascarene Islands, Réunion 
has made great progress and I believe 
it produces up to 35% of green energy. 
Rodrigues has set itself as an objective 
to depend solely on renewable energy 
in the near future. In Mauritius, we have 
already implemented several wind and 
solar parks. I think the future of this 
sector is promising and we are moving 
in the right direction.
Forbes listed you among the Top 100 
Most Influential Women in the World. 
What does this mean to you?
First of all, I would like to thank the 
magazine for this recognition. I think 
this kind of visibility is always good 
for the country. I am very happy if I 
can contribute to showing the world 
that even though Mauritius is a small 
country, it can have big ambitions!
On Twitter you said: “African women 
are at the heart of the agenda 
for the continent’s development 
but their contributions are rarely 
assessed and recognized”…
Yes, it is evident that the true value of 
women’s contribution is not always 
recognized on the African continent. 
If we look at agriculture, it is African 
women who feed the continent. But 
conditions are not always present 
to ensure their full development in 
terms of access to funds, land titles or 
training. If women could remove all 
these obstacles, we would definitely 
see considerable improvements in 
terms of food production.
This also holds true for access to 
education both in primary and tertiary 
education: too often girls are still put 
at a disadvantage. If this potential was 
fully deployed with proper guidance, 
women could really help the continent 
to overcome its current situation.
A few years ago, you wanted to 
develop phyto-drugs, drugs based 
on plants, to treat illnesses at a lower 
cost. Are you making progress?
The validation of traditional recipes 
is a project I directed when I was at 
university in the 1990s. The results of 
this research were given more value 
when I created in 2009 the Centre 
for Phytotherapy Research (CEPHYR), 
that in 2015 became the Centre 
International de Développement 
Pharmaceutique (International Centre 
for Pharmaceutical Development), CIDP 
R&I. Creating a range of phyto-drugs 
Ameenah Gurib-Fakim, President of Mauritius, shows off nutmegs at the Pamplemousses botanical garden. © Micheline Pelletier

As President of the Republic of 
Mauritius since June 2015 and laureate 
of the 2007 L’Oréal-UNESCO For 
Women in Science Awards, 
Ameenah Gurib-Fakim is recognized 
for her scientific work on the medicinal 
plants of the Mascarene Islands. She is 
also a member of the Linnaean Society 
of London, the African Academy of 
Sciences, the World Islamic Academy 
of Science of Jordan and the African 
Science Institute in the United States. 
is still on the list of goals for CIPD R&I, 
but making the transition from research 
to commercialization requires time and 
vast resources.
The work continues even if I am no 
longer there. For example, thanks to 
the work at CIDP R&I, the essential 
oil extracted from Rodrigues lemons 
found takers in the perfumery industry! 
Many medicinal plants from Mauritius 
are used as phyto-ingredients which 
meet the needs of the cosmetics and 
pharmaceutical industries. 
For you, power is the ability to have 
long-term influence by leaving a 
legacy. As President and recognized 
scientist, what legacy would you like 
to leave behind?
My commitment to science and 
innovation remains unaltered. It has 
just taken a different form as I am 
engaging with decision-makers and 
other institutions. I strongly believe 
in the need to invest in institutions 
to give young people the resources 
to work on issues that are a priority 
for the continent and which require a 
good command of science. It is in this 
exact frame of mind that we launched 
On the shore of an island that could vanish with rising sea levels.
the Coalition for African Research, 
Innovation and Entrepreneurship that 
you mentioned earlier.
The legacy I will leave behind, I hope, 
is the awareness of the need to have 
strong institutions, and of the means 
we must provide to young people to 
avoid brain drain, by developing both 
their potential and the environment 
in which they will work. This requires 
resources and I am convinced that 
these will become more readily 
available. These actions will help 
countries of the region emerge. 
History has shown that countries that 
invest heavily in science, technology 
and innovation succeed best.
© Daesung Lee
