Zenaldo Coutinho, Mayor of Belém do Pará 
(Brazil), 1.5 million inhabitants. 
Belém is the first port of access to 
the Amazon, giving it an extraordinary 
cultural diversity. Culture helps 
communities to express their local 
identities and encourages dialogue. 
It stimulates intense interaction between 
socio-cultural groups and the local 
authorities, especially as Brazil is going 
through a dire ethical and economic crisis.
Brandi Harless, Mayor of Paducah, 
Kentucky, United States, 25,000 inhabitants.
Culture can be a mechanism for peace, 
specifically in the US at a time when 
our politics are very divisive. I am in a city 
of non-partisanship where we are all on 
the same level. We talk about city issues 
rather than partisan political issues.
Culture is our foundation, and we all 
resonate with it. We are known for our 
quilt-making, and have the National Quilt 
Museum. About fifteen years ago, we had 
a decrepit neighbourhood that needed to 
be revitalized. The city offered houses to 
artists for $1, which they had to renovate, 
and include an art studio. This attracted 
about fifty artists, providing a new creative 
environment that we didn’t have before.
Marc Chassaubéné, Deputy Mayor of  
Saint-Étienne (France), 170,000 inhabitants.
Artists have been working a lot with the 
people of Saint-Étienne. Jordan Seiler from 
the United States, for example, is looking 
at urban advertising with residents. He has 
invented the “NO AD” app, which displays 
a work of art on a screen when you put 
your smartphone or tablet up against 
an advertising display. Getting everyone 
− from the mayor to a child from a 
working-class neighbourhood − to work 
on the same art project, is an ideal way 
to nurture ideas of equality.


Interviews by Lucía Iglesias Kuntz 
When mayors of the UNESCO 
Creative Cities Network (UCCN) 
got together from 30 June to 
2 July 2017 in Enghien‑les‑Bains 
(France) for their XIth Annual 
Meeting, they put culture 
at the top of their agenda. 
This included respecting and 
appreciating the cultures of 
the different communities 
living in their cities, involving 
artists and citizens in joint 
projects, and fostering dialogue 
between communities – in other 
words, recognizing the role 
of culture as a factor in urban 
development that is inclusive 
and reassuring.  
At the meeting, the mayors 
adopted a new strategic 
framework and called on 
cities in the network to do 
more to integrate culture 
and participation in their 
policies. Mayors from Brazil 
to New Zealand all agreed that 
culture helps communities live 
together harmoniously.
Culture:  
giving cities a human face 
Asaad Zoghaib, Mayor of Zahlé, Lebanon, 
150,000 inhabitants.
I think the most important thing to 
have culturally, in a country like ours, 
is public awareness − when people know 
themselves, and recognize the rights 
of others. Our city is working on building 
public awareness, transparency and 
accountability.
Dave Cull, mayor of Dunedin, New Zealand, 
125,000 inhabitants.
New Zealand’s first inhabitants, 
the Maōri, lost their land to colonizers 
in the nineteenth century. We are 
now going through a healing process, 
where they are being compensated, 
and getting back their pride.
Today, my city is a refugee resettlement 
destination for Syrian refugees 
− we have taken in 200 so far. One way 
of using culture to achieve peace is to 
accept more diversity − to respect and 
to commemorate the cultures that make 
your community what it is.
“We Are All One”, the world’s largest 
mural (3,000 square metres) painted 
by Brazilian street artist Eduardo Kobra 
to mark the 2016 Rio Olympics. 
Five massive faces represent 
the five continents.
