For decades, a theoretical physicist 
defied the suspicions of his government 
and continued to teach and research, 
enduring the perpetual fear of 
surveillance and repression. Educated 
in Europe, he had published extensively 
and built an international reputation. 
He suffered for decades, advocating for 
political freedoms in his home country, 
and defending the rights of his students 
who stood up for the same values. 
Ultimately, he fled, seeking the safety 
of universities in the United States. 
This was not 1930. Nor was this 
scientist Albert Einstein. This was 2012, 
when the Institute of International 
Education Scholar Rescue Fund (IIE-SRF) 
− a programme I direct − received his 
call for help. This renowned scientist 
is one of thousands of academics 
forcibly and permanently displaced 
from their homelands. It is we who 
now reap the rewards, as he pushes 
the boundaries of science for 
our universal good. 
History repeats itself. We would hope, 
then, that the lessons learned from 
the past would teach and protect us 
from future crises. Yet here we are 
in 2017, nearing the end of yet another 
landmark year in which thousands 
of lives have been upended by violence 
and instability. 
According to the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), 
there are 65.6 million forcibly displaced 
people worldwide, 22.5 million 
refugees, and 10 million stateless. 
On average, 28,300 people are forced 
to flee their homes every day because 
of conflict and persecution. 



Refugee 
scientists: 
quiet pioneers dedicated to discovery
by Sarah Willcox 
In a world torn apart by strife, 
it is crucial that scientists and 
academics whose individual and 
intellectual freedoms are at risk 
are given a second chance to 
continue to innovate and work in 
safe environments. Without these 
freedoms, as Einstein pointed 
out, in 1933, “… there would have 
been no Shakespeare, no Goethe, 
no Newton, no Pastor, no Lister… 
It is only men who are free 
who create the inventions and 
intellectual works which to us 
moderns make life worthwhile.”
World map of exile. 
© DR

Not “just” refugees
The statistics are staggering, 
but we may accept them as part of 
a new global reality. Take a moment to 
consider the countless millions over 
the last century who were displaced 
− we know that “refugee” does not 
define them. They are mothers 
and fathers, sisters and brothers, 
granddaughters and nephews. They are 
neighbours and integral members 
of our communities. They have laid 
the bedrock of our towns and in many 
cases, crossed national boundaries to 
bridge our cultures and economies. 
Many have done this through 
their academic work: teaching at local 
universities, publishing the latest 
scientific discovery − quiet pioneers, 
contributing to research halfway 
around the world. 
Albert Einstein was lucky to be in the 
US in 1933 when Hitler came to power. 
His house was ransacked, convincing 
him that he could no longer call 
Germany home. After a brief sojourn 
to Europe, he returned to the US, 
where he joined the newly-established 
Institute for Advanced Study in 
Princeton, New Jersey. We do not 
need to understand Einstein’s theories 
to know that the scientific world has 
benefitted from them immensely. 
Few of us are aware that thousands of 
refugee scientists and scholars from 
war-torn Europe in the last century 
excelled in their host countries, even in 
the face of shocking rejection by 
their host communities and national 
academies. In the US, in the 1930s and 
1940s, the Emergency Committee 
in Aid of Displaced Foreign Scholars, 
a consortium of refugee organizations 
– which included the IIE − helped nearly 
400 academics, including 100 physicists, 
to find academic positions. 
According to the economist Petra 
Moser, patents in the US alone increased 
by over thirty per cent in fields 
commonly pursued by Jewish scientists 
of the 1930s. The positive ripple effect 
for generations to come is invaluable. 
Einstein’s era included Erwin 
Schrödinger, who fled persecution in his 
native Austria to join the Dublin Institute 
for Advanced Studies in the late 1930s 
– his work in theoretical physics won him 
the Nobel Prize in 1933. And physicist 
Hans Bethe, the German-American 
nuclear scientist and winner of the 
1967 Nobel Prize in Physics, played an 
important role in the development 
of the hydrogen bomb, but more 
importantly, he later campaigned with 
Einstein against nuclear testing and the 
nuclear arms race. 
A Carlo Bergamini-class frigate of 
the Italian navy rescued migrants from 
this boat in the Mediterranean in June 
2014. Italian photographer Massimo 
Sestini – who took this iconic image 
from a police helicopter – has launched 
the Where are you? campaign to find 
the people who were rescued that day. 
Contact him at:  
whereareyou@massimosestini.it

Exceptional 
contributions 
More than a third of Nobel prizes 
won by the US in the STEM (science, 
technology, engineering and 
mathematics) fields have been 
awarded to foreign-born scientists. 
Today, we continue to celebrate 
refugees for their contributions to 
science and society after they were 
given a second chance. Sergey Brin, 
who co-founded Google, was just 
six when his family fled the Soviet 
Union for the US in 1979, when his 
father could no longer endure the 
entrenched academic repression 
in the Soviet Union.
Since 2002, the IIE Scholar Rescue 
Fund has carried on the legacy 
of the Emergency Committee, 
aiding academics afflicted by 
conflict and persecution. Most of 
the academics we work with have 
been displaced or are on the verge 
of long-term displacement. They have 
been singled out for persecution 
by insecure regimes because 
of their academic work, religion, 
ethnicity, and, increasingly, for 
supporting their fellow academics. 
At the height of the conflict in Iraq 
from 2007 to 2013, we helped place 
hundreds of scientists at universities 
in neighbouring countries after they 
received anonymous letters threatening 
first their positions, and then their 
families. Their lives were overturned 
in ways that would paralyze the average 
person. Yet after a few years of support 
in the diaspora, most have returned 
to Iraq or maintained their academic 
productivity in the region. Many are 
helping to rebuild their universities. 
Based on our own experience, 
we estimate thousands of academics 
every year need a safe place to pursue 
their work. Our programme has provided 
vital financial support and academic 
connections to more than 700 academics 
from over fifty countries. Other refugee 
organizations have supported thousands 
of others. But it is difficult to estimate 
how many displaced scientists have 
permanently lost their academic work, 
and will never have the chance to rebuild 
it in a safe environment.
Opening doors 
and providing support
Hundreds of displaced scholars have 
suffered because their publications 
– lost in the panic of their flight from 
danger – may pre-date online records 
that would have safely maintained 
them. For many more scholars, 
language barriers feel insurmountable. 
Without readily available resources 
– like scholarships and fellowships – 
and open doors at universities and 
scientific institutions, the quiet scientist 
lacking the name-recognition of an 
Einstein has little to no chance of reviving 
his academic work. The wasted years of 
training and the lost potential to society 
has done irreparable damage to the cause 
of science.
The Scholar Rescue Fund rose from 
the IIE’s nearly hundred-year history 
of helping threatened students and 
scholars. Ours is now among a handful 
of formalized programmes that provide 
essential support for threatened 
academics. The Council for At-Risk 
Academics (CARA) was founded in 1933 
by Britain’s foremost academics and 
scientists in response to Hitler’s decision 
to expel hundreds of leading scholars 
from German universities on racial 
grounds. CARA works closely with the 
Scholars at Risk Network (founded in 
2000), and Germany’s Philipp Schwartz 
Initiative of the Alexander von Humboldt 
Foundation. The PAUSE programme of 
the Collège de France helps welcome 
scientists in exile, and The World 
Academy of Sciences (TWAS), a UNESCO 
programme based in Trieste, Italy, 
supports refugee scientists, especially 
those from developing countries. 
Organizations and universities in Belgium, 
the European Union, Canada and Jordan 
also provide aid to refugee scholars. 
But there is so much more to be done, 
to ensure that the world’s intellectual 
capital will seed innovation and discovery 
for generations to come.
Sarah Willcox (USA) is Director of 
the IIE Scholar Rescue Fund, which 
she has been involved with since 
2003. Based in New York, she oversees 
the IIE-SRF operations, including 
partnerships, programme policy, 
outreach, and communications. 
Remains of the University of Mosul, which 
was burned and destroyed during a battle 
with ISIS, in Mosul, Iraq, 10 April 2017.
