Peng Liyuan: “The equality of 
opportunity is fundamental”
China is according the highest priority to education for all, 
whether in the framework of its national policy or its international 
development assistance. Guaranteeing gender equality — in 
access and treatment in schools, in continuing education and 
professional integration — is at the heart of the convictions held 
by Ms. Peng Liyuan, First Lady of the People’s Republic of China 
and UNESCO’s Special Envoy for the Advancement of Girls’ and 
Women’s Education, and a professor herself.
Interview by
Jasmina Šopova
Madam Professor, your action 
in favour of gender equality in 
education is universally recognized 
today. How long have you been on 
this path and what was your initial 
personal motivation?
My passion for education has a lot to 
do with my father. Back in the 1950s, 
education was woefully lacking in 
rural China. Many people, women in 
particular, were illiterate. My father 
was the headmaster of a night school 
in his village, in charge of the literacy 
programme. He devoted himself 
entirely to the job. With his help, many 
villagers learned to write their names 
and read newspapers and books for the 
first time. The best thing was that some 
mothers, after attending my father’s 
school, were able to teach their children 
to read and write. Ever since I was a 
little girl, I have been inspired by my 
father, even more so after I became a 
teacher and mother myself.
Gender inequality is deeply entrenched 
in every society. Women remain the 
vulnerable group in many places 
and account for 70% of the world’s 
population living in poverty. Nearly 
two- thirds of illiterate adults are women. 
More girls drop out of school than boys. 
Women often lack the ability to take 
their destiny into their own hands and 
have to endure many hardships in life. 
Women, more than anyone else, aspire 
for equality and respect. All these factors 
have prompted me to do what I can to 
promote girls’ and women’s education.
As UNESCO Special Envoy for the 
Advancement of Girls’ and Women’s 
Education, what is your vision of 
education aimed at reducing  
gender inequalities?
Girls’ and women’s education is a 
lofty and important cause. At the 
UNESCO Headquarters in March 
2014, I received from Director-General 
Bokova the certificate of UNESCO 
Special Envoy for the Advancement 
of Girls’ and Women’s Education. It 
was a great honour and a tremendous 
responsibility. Ensuring that women 
and men have an equal opportunity 
to realize their potential is essential to 
driving social progress, gender equality 
and sustainable development. In this 
context, education has a key role to play. 
Equality of education includes equality 
of opportunity, process and outcomes. 
Our goal is for women and men to 
have equal access to education and 
equal treatment during the process of 
education so that they will enjoy equal 
opportunity in admission to universities, 
employment and social recognition. I will 
do my level best to help realize this goal.
What is your Special Envoy 
programme? Could you give us 
some examples of what you have 
done to promote girls’ and women’s 
empowerment, and what are the 
results?
Since becoming Special Envoy in 
2014, I have visited many schools, 
youth organizations and institutions 
for women’s development in Africa 
and Asia to see the situation on the 
ground, seek ideas and strength 
from them and share experience. At 
advocacy events, I often emphasize 
the importance of female teachers and 
girls’ and women’s education. At the 
UN Global Education First Initiative 
high-level event, for instance, I called 
on all countries to attach greater 
importance to promoting equality and 
quality in education.
In China, there is a project called 
”Spring Bud” to help poor girls return 
to school. Since its launch in 1989, 
it has assisted 3.42 million girls, set 
up 1,489 schools with its donations, 

provided skill training to 523,000 
girls and drafted and distributed 1.5 
million pamphlets on girls’ protection. 
As a special envoy of the project, I 
visited a summer camp for girls who 
had previously been unable to go to 
school. And it was heartening to see 
how happy and versatile the girls had 
become thanks to the help they got 
from the project.
Here’s the message I wish to send: 
equal access to education is the 
foundation for being a well-rounded 
person and living a meaningful 
life. It is a crucial factor in making 
sustainable development possible. 
I am convinced that life is full of 
possibilities for every girl and woman, 
as long as we keep our dreams alive 
and come up with the courage and 
strong will to fulfill them.
A new international prize for girls’ 
and women’s education, financed 
by the Chinese government, was 
launched in 2015. What are its 
objectives?
The UNESCO Prize for Girls’ and 
Women’s Education proposed 
and sponsored by the Chinese 
government is the first and currently 
the only prize UNESCO has 
established in this field. The aim is to 
encourage more people to be part 
of this endeavour by rewarding those 
individuals and institutions who make 
outstanding contributions to girls’ and 
women’s education. At the first awards 
ceremony in Beijing in 2016, I met 
with the laureates from Indonesia and 
Zimbabwe. They and the institutions 
they represent have done many 
concrete things to promote women’s 
education, which is truly admirable. It 
is they and many others as devoted 
and hard-working as them who have 
made our world a better place. I wish 
to pay high tribute and express deep 
appreciation to them.
The first UNESCO Prize for Girls’ and Women’s Education being awarded to laureates from Indonesia and 
Zimbabwe in Beijing, 6 June 2016. Ms Evernice Munando, Project Director at the Female Students Network 
Trust from Zimbabwe, Ms Irina Bokova, UNESCO Director-General, Ms Peng Liyuan, First Lady of China and 
UNESCO Special Envoy, and Ms Ella Yulaelawati, Director of the Indonesian project on Improving Access 
and Quality of Girls' Education.
© UNESCO

What does it mean to you to be 
a teacher?
China has a long tradition of respecting 
teachers and valuing education. Han 
Yu, a famous writer in the Tang Dynasty 
(618-907) reckoned that a teacher’s duty 
was to “pass on knowledge to students, 
teach them how to live and answer their 
questions”. For students, a good teacher 
helps them find the right path in life 
by not only imparting knowledge and 
ideas, but also inspiring wisdom and 
passion. For society, a good teacher 
sows the seed of kindness, integrity 
and peace. I believe it is important 
for a teacher to keep learning, stay 
creative and constantly improve his 
or her competence. A good teacher 
should have the ability to cultivate a 
wholesome personality and build sound 
character within the students through 
the power of virtue, culture and art. It is 
important to respect the students, be 
accommodating and understanding to 
them and teach by example, so that the 
students will learn to be kind, tolerant 
and generous, thus preparing them well 
to serve society in the future.
China has emerged as a champion of 
the Global Education First Initiative. 
Which aspects of the Chinese 
educational policy do you consider 
the most important?
In China, promoting education equality 
and ensuring equal access to education 
for all is a basic national policy. By 
adopting laws and policies as well as 
such measures as providing funding for 
students in difficulty and school feeding 
programmes, China ensures the right 
of girls and women to education. China 
has issued the National Education for All 
Action Plan (2001-2015) and monitors 
its progress in typical localities. Every 
five years, China issues separate national 
outlines for women’s and children’s 
development, setting the goal of ensuring 
equal rights for women in health, 
education and economic development 
by 2020, as well as the steps towards 
this goal. The government has made it 
clear that in all its education-related work, 
gender equality must be ensured so that 
women and girls have equal rights and 
opportunities in education and move on 
to receive higher levels of education.
China has met the MDG [Millennium 
Development Goals] on gender 
equality in education. The ability of 
Chinese women to determine their own 
fate and participate in development has 
been notably enhanced.
China has also actively expanded 
external co-operation and assistance 
in education. In 2015, at the Global 
Leaders’ Meeting on Gender Equality 
and Women’s Empowerment, 
President Xi Jinping pledged $10 
million for the implementation of the 
Beijing Declaration and its Platform 
for Action and the realization of the 
related goals in the 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development. China 
has also supported other developing 
countries in eliminating illiteracy and 
promoting teachers’ training and girls’ 
and women’s education by setting up a 
fund and prizes with UNESCO.
I will fulfill my duty as Special Envoy 
and support UNESCO’s efforts to 
promote girls’ and women’s education 
worldwide. I will spare no effort in 
advancing this noble cause.
