The UNESCO Courier 4
Editorial
“Rotation”. Amman, Jordan, 2016. © Pejac

Since its creation in 1948, the UNESCO 
Courier has been spreading an ideal 
throughout the world: humanity united 
in its diversity around universal values 
and fundamental rights, strong in 
the wealth of its cultures, knowledge 
and accomplishments.
The UNESCO Courier is a key element 
of UNESCO’s identity as well as one 
of the most powerful tools for its 
humanistic mandate. In 1988, Sandy 
Koffler, the founder and first managing 
editor of the journal, said that: “Of 
all the journals published by the 
United Nations and its specialised 
institutions, the UNESCO Courier has 
always occupied first place for the 
number of its readers and the range 
of its audience.” Throughout all the 
continents and for seventy years, the 
Courier has embodied UNESCO’s 
mission: building peace in the minds 
of men and women by disseminating 
knowledge and cultures, the free flow 
of ideas and information by word and 
image, to help strengthen mutual 
understanding, the spirit of tolerance, 
informed debate, and peace. The 
reappearance of this historic journal in 
2017, through the generous support 
of the People’s Republic of China, is 
much more than the resumption of an 
editorial endeavour: it is a valuable 
opportunity to renew our commitment 
to the Courier’s founding values.
The publication of this issue marking 
the relaunch of the UNESCO Courier 
is particularly fitting, given that it falls 
within the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development that the United Nations 
adopted in September 2015. This new 
agenda represents a turning point 
towards a more humanistic attitude in 
global development policies, relying 
on people’s capacities to respond to 
the challenges of peace and climate 
change through education, science and 
culture, which is an underlying element 
of each of the objectives of sustainable 
development.
We are convinced that in a world full of 
limitations — in terms of our resources 
and our means — humanity can count 
on the renewable resources of its 
intelligence, creativity and ingenuity. 
This wealth, fostered by the moral 
requirement to respect the rights and 
dignity of each individual, represents 
an infinite source of progress. To 
unlock this potential, we must also 
help raise awareness of the creative 
wealth of humanity, and the Courier 
can contribute to this by circulating 
words of peace, trust and intelligence 
in response to the discourse of hatred, 
fear and rejection that currently 
spreads so easily on the internet and 
on the streets. The UNESCO Courier is 
also a powerful tool of this fundamental 
aspiration, and I call upon all UNESCO 
Member States and partners, and 
first and foremost all intellectuals, 
artists and experts, to make their 
voices heard by enriching the pages 
of this Courier, which has inspired so 
many generations of readers and will 
continue to do so for a long time.
Irina Bokova
Irina Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO.
© Yulian Donov
