Decolonizing politics
These new African icons are disconcerting 
– as much because of what they say and 
the way they say it, as by the way they 
dress, which breaks with the traditional 
suit-and-tie of politicians. The decolonial 
dimension of their projects represent a 
real challenge to the political classes and 
even the general public, largely because of 
their horizontal (rather than hierarchical) 
reach, combining real political action with 
a social stance. 
Young people are getting politically 
involved in new ways – creating startups, 
using digital forms of activism and forming 
citizens’ groups. Yet none of these initiatives 
can replace politics, which is the only way 
to change the course of a country’s history, 
to halt the perpetuation of inequalities, 
and to restore a sense of dignity to millions 
of people. Much needs to be done urgently 
in Africa, but, above all, there is a need 
to foster the emergence of a new kind of 
dialogue among youth – using with other 
methods and other players if necessary, 
and with the ultimate aim of seizing 
power democratically. 
One alternative is gradually taking 
shape and deserves careful attention. 
New political youth movements are 
appearing, springing up from urban 
cultures and suburban neighbourhoods. 
Examples include Y’en a Marre (“We’ve had 
enough”), a group of rappers in Senegal, 
Le Balai Citoyen (the People’s broom), 
in Burkina Faso and Filimbi and LUCHA 
(Lutte pour le Changement, or Struggle 
for Change) in the Democratic Republic 
of the Congo (DRC). 
These civil society movements are a breath 
of fresh air compared to the drab and 
essentially interchangeable political classes. 
The message of these new elites breaks 
with classical political-speak – it is raw, 
direct and delivered in a language that 
can be understood by those to whom it 
is addressed, which explains its success. 
So, when Y’en a Marre campaigned 
to get people to register to vote in 
2011, the turnout at the elections was 
unprecedented. It was the same for 
the symbolic street-cleaning operation 
in Ouagadougou, after the popular 
uprising of October 2014 against a 
proposed amendment to the Constitution, 
which would have allowed Burkina Faso’s 
former president, Blaise Compaoré, 
who had been in power since 1987, 
to stand again in the presidential elections. 
Young Africans:
reinventing politics
Hamidou Anne
Many young people in Africa 
are taking a stand against 
the current politics in their 
countries. As civil-society 
campaigners who are active 
on social media networks, 
they are challenging the 
established authorities – using 
rap and graffiti, and bringing 
traditional cultural codes up 
to date. Supporters of direct 
democracy, they are preparing 
the way for a society that is less 
hierarchical and ‘decolonized’, 
at last.
The African political classes have failed in 
their mission to build nations characterized 
by justice and progress, in spite of a 
number of significant and very welcome 
advances. Adding the non-existence of 
credible alternatives among the opposition 
parties, we are forced to admit that politics 
in general have reached a low point. 
This impasse is leading large numbers of 
young people en masse to adopt a stance 
of defiance – which could be summed up 
by the phrase: “they’re all the same”.

The combination of methods arising 
from contemporary citizens’ groups 
and traditional African negotiation 
strategies, offers a model for how a 
political organizational structure in Africa 
might work.
These groups have proven their 
effectiveness. In Senegal, during the 
mobilization of 23 June 2011, and in spite 
of police repression and surveillance 
by intelligence agencies, Y’en a Marre 
triggered a massive movement. 
This helped to torpedo amendments to 
the Constitution by parliament that would 
have allowed the re-election of Abdoulaye 
Wade – and probably ensuring that his son 
took over when he stood down.
Young Africans:
reinventing politics
Crowds cheering the caravan of 
Balai Citoyen, during the demonstration 
against the constitutional revision 
project in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, 
October 2014.
These youth movements are deeply 
political, even if they unconsciously or 
tactically hide behind a ‘social’ label. 
They also show no desire to participate 
directly in elections.
These movements are all attempts to 
decolonize politics. They aim to return 
politics to the people – into the hands 
of citizens who have hitherto been 
excluded from the democratic process 
and consulted only to add their stamp of 
approval by voting. Interestingly, the way 
these groups are organized is a form of 
direct democracy. Through a network of 
local branches, Le Balai Citoyen enables 
people across the nation to take part in 
decision-making. With a slightly more 
limited horizontal dimension – because of 
the notoriety and massive popularity of its 
leaders – Y’en a Marre also allows everyone 
to join in the process of consultation. 
This kind of transversal connection does 
not exist in conventional politics. 
Art at the service 
of politics
By using music, dance, graffiti and 
references borrowed from street poetry, 
these movements are succeeding in 
bringing together young people who 
understand the language and codes of 
their neighbourhoods. On the streets and 
via the internet, they are calling for an 
alternative dialogue and for projects that 
give wings to their dreams. These new 
players in African politics are employing 
a range of cultural references to support 
their actions. Rap music, for instance, 
has been a powerful vector for getting 
the message of opposition across. 
Other statements include using national 
languages (Wolof by Y’en a Marre and 
Moré by Le Balai Citoyen) or wearing 
an Amílcar Cabral hat (named after 
the emblematic leader of the struggle 
against the Portuguese colonization 
of Guinea-Bissau). 
As beacons of hope, the responsibility of 
these movements is great. They represent 
political forces that are uninhibited, free, 
and unencumbered by colonial burdens. 
It is thanks to them that the continent 
no longer conjures up only images of 
pity, generated by poverty, famine, 
AIDS and war. We are on the threshold 
of a radically emancipating project. 
Much like the anti-austerity Indignados 
movement in Spain, which gave rise to 
the far-left Podemos political party in 
2014, these groups will sooner or later be 
called upon to stand in general elections. 
We could then witness a decolonial 
turning point vis-à-vis Western countries 
– with the possibility of societies founded 
on our own social and cultural realities.
Hamidou Anne (Senegal), a graduate of 
France’s École Nationale d’Administration 
(ENA) and Sorbonne University, 
has held several positions in Senegalese 
government organizations and 
contributed articles to the international 
media. He is currently working on a 
doctorate in political science at the Gaston 
Berger University, Saint-Louis (Senegal).
With this article, the Courier marks 
the celebration of UNESCO’s Africa Week 
in the month of May. 
