He who knows not where he came 
from, will not know where to go, 
by the Mozambican painter 
Magule Wango.
A missive for
youth
Abdourahman A. Waberi
“An old African teacher used 
to say: There is my truth and 
your truth, but the truth is in 
the middle. To get close to it, 
everyone must move slightly 
out of their truth to take a step 
towards the other.” This is one 
of the lessons that Amadou 
Hampâté Bâ wanted to transmit 
to young people on his continent 
and elsewhere, in a letter written 
in the 1980s. Today, this letter 
takes on a prophetic quality.

From one end of the Sahara to the other, 
a large segment of African youth have 
experienced only precarious lives. 
Destitute  and disoriented, these young 
people throw themselves body and soul 
into a hazardous adventure. For them, 
to face the desert, the smugglers, 
the barbed wire, the waves of the 
Mediterranean, seems more bearable 
than the feeling of falling by the wayside, 
rotting on the vine. What else can they do? 
Move, flee, opt for migration and perish 
in the sea if they must. When questioned, 
the shipwreck survivors emphasize 
the lack of means of subsistence. 
Crossing the Sahara to be sold as a slave 
in Libya or joining the Boko Haram 
is neither an option nor a life plan.
Growing up in slums, these youth did 
not have the opportunity to appreciate 
the legacy of elders who were generous 
with advice and other lessons of life. 
Among them, is an emblematic figure for 
the entire African continent – the Malian, 
Amadou Hampâté Bâ (1901-1991), the man 
to whom is attributed the now-famous 
dictum: “In Africa, when an old man dies, 
a library burns down.”
What he really said was: “I consider 
the death of each of these traditionalists 
as the burning of an unexploited 
cultural fund.” It was 1 December 1960, 
and Hampâté Bâ was then the head 
of Mali’s delegation at the UNESCO 
General Conference. 

Whether they like it or not, all humankind is 
sailing on the same raft: when a hurricane 
rises, everyone will be threatened at 
the same time. Is it not better to try to 
understand and to help each other before 
it is too late?”
The wise man of Bandiagara then 
encourages these young people 
– growing up and developing in a bipolar 
world where interest groups clash and 
tear each other apart – to “gradually 
produce a new mindset, more oriented 
towards complementarity and solidarity, 
both individual and international.” 
Because we cannot stress often enough 
that “in our times, so fraught with threats 
of all kinds, people must emphasize not 
what separates them, but what they 
have in common, with respect for the 
identity of each. Meeting and listening 
to the other is always more enriching, 
even for the blossoming of one’s own 
identity, than conflicts or sterile discussions 
to impose one’s own point of view.”
Macho Nne / Caribbean Peacock, 2014, 
from the C-Stunners series by Kenyan 
artist Cyrus Kabiru. 
Mali had just joined the Organization as 
an independent country. In his speech, 
he pleaded for the “gigantic oral 
monument to be saved from destruction 
by the deaths of traditionalists who are 
its only repositories [and who] are, alas, 
in the decline of their days.”
I used to say to myself that as a teenager, 
I would have liked to have had Hampâté 
Bâ as my grandfather. Honesty forces 
me to recognize that I probably would not 
have had the ears to listen to his advice. 
The old boubous, the hoary heads 
and their traditional values did not attract 
me. I condemned in advance, this world 
that seemed to me passive and obsolete. 
I rejected its rules on principle. 
I  was terribly wrong.
If today’s world, in Africa and elsewhere, 
desperately needs tutelary figures like 
the author of The Strange Destiny of 
Wangrin, it is because the rupture between 
the generations seems to be complete. 
The family circle has shrunk considerably. 
Worse, it is no longer the solid foundation 
of awakening and transmission that 
it was yesterday.
“My dear young 
people…”
Six years before his death in 1991, 
Hampâté Bâ wrote a letter dedicated to 
youth that reads like a testament. “The man 
who speaks to you is one of the first-born 
of the twentieth century,” he says. He then 
issues an alert: “Young people, last-born 
of the twentieth century, you live in a time 
which is at once terrifying, for the threats 
it imposes on humanity, and enthralling, 
for the possibilities it opens up in the field 
of knowledge and communication 
between people. 
Just as the beauty of a carpet is the variety 
of its colours, the diversity of people, 
cultures and civilizations makes up 
the beauty and wealth of the world. 
How boring and monotonous would 
be a uniform world where all humans, 
fashioned according to the same model, 
thought and lived in the same way! 
Having nothing more to discover in others, 
how would one enrich oneself?

The generations of the twenty-first century 
will experience a fantastic encounter of 
races and ideas. Depending on how they 
assimilate this phenomenon, they will 
ensure its survival or cause their destruction 
by deadly conflicts. In this modern world, 
none can take refuge any longer in their 
ivory towers. All states, whether strong or 
weak, rich or poor, are now interdependent, 
if only economically or in the face of the 
dangers of global war. 

Whether individuals, nations, races 
or cultures, we are all different from each 
other; but we all have something similar 
too, and that is what we must look for, 
in order to be able to recognize ourselves 
in the other and to converse with him. 
Then our differences, instead of separating 
us, will become complementary 
and a source of mutual enrichment
Eloquent and precise, the writer uses 
striking images to make his point: 
“Human life is like a big tree and every 
generation is like a gardener. The good 
gardener is not the one who uproots, 
but the one who, when the time comes, 
knows how to prune the dead branches 
and, if necessary, proceed judiciously with 
beneficial grafts. To cut the trunk would 
be to commit suicide, to renounce one’s 
own personality and to assume artificially 
that of others, without ever completely 
succeeding. Again, let’s remember the old 
saying: The log has spent a lot of time 
in the water, it may float, but it will never 
become a crocodile!” 
“Young people, be this good gardener,” 
Hampâté Bâ exhorts. “Then, well-rooted 
in yourselves, you will be able to open 
to the outside, without fear and without 
harm, both to give and to receive.”
Mali Ya Mfalme, Macho Nne | Nubia 
Kale (Ancient Nubia), 2016. Artwork by 
the self-taught pluri-disciplinary plastician 
Cyrus Kabiru (Kenya).
 The land was not the property of humans, 
but a sacred trust entrusted to them by 
the Creator and of which they were only 
the managers.”  
In the era of the Anthropocene – the result 
of the divorce between humankind and 
nature – this lesson of our ancestors invites 
us to seriously question the way of life 
that we have adopted, which is destructive 
of both traditions and the environment.
Open-mindedness, diversity, dialogue 
and mutual understanding –these are 
the four pillars that bear the message 
of this precious letter from Hampâté 
Bâ. The time has come to put it in the 
hands of everyone, young and old, 
in Africa and elsewhere. 
Storyteller, writer, poet, ethnologist, 
spiritual leader, numerologist, diplomat, 
Hampâté Bâ defined himself as “a graduate 
of the great university of the Word, 
taught in the shadow of baobabs”. 
Having taken some unusual paths to reach 
the higher spheres of knowledge, he made 
it his mission to pass on the baton to us 
– regardless of our beliefs, our skin colour 
or our age.
Abdourahman A. Waberi, a novelist, 
essayist and poet, was born in what is 
today the Republic of Djibouti. He now 
lives between France and the United 
States, where he is a professor at George 
Washington University in Washington, 
DC. Author of several novels, including 
Aux États-Unis d’Afrique (In the United 
States of Africa) (2005) and La Chanson 
Divine (The Divine Song, 2015), he also 
writes a bi-monthly column for the French 
newspaper Le Monde. Translated into over 
a dozen languages, his work seeks answers 
from the world with anger, tenderness 
and compassion.

A defender of traditional African society, 
and recognizing that it had “its flaws, 
its excesses and its weaknesses”, he draws 
our attention to the fact that it was “above all 
a civilization of responsibility and solidarity 
at every level,” including the environment. 
“Humankind was also considered 
responsible for the balance of the 
surrounding natural world. It was forbidden 
to cut a tree without reason, to kill an animal 
without a valid motive.
