
What I also learned was that Mosul was 
a conservative city, whose inhabitants 
distinguished themselves by their sense 
of seriousness, effort and rigour. There 
was no room for nonchalance. This is 
probably why we rarely hear the Mosul 
accent in Iraqi music. With the exception 
of the great nineteenth-century 
composer, Molla Uthmân al-Mawsili 
and the Bachir family – notably Mounir 
Bachir (1930-1997), one of the greatest 
lute-players of all time – most of Iraq’s 
singers, composers and songwriters 
come from the country’s south. These 
artists are recognizable by their rural 
accents. And though recordings of a few 
songs from Mosul can be found on the 
internet today, they can be counted on 
the fingers of one hand. 


Mosul,
the city with two springs
Inaam Kachachi 
Iraqi novelist Inaam Kachachi 
describes the city she loves 
– Mosul the austere, 
Mosul the convivial, Mosul 
the contradictory, Mosul 
the wounded, bleeding to 
death. She tells us of her deep 
attachment to the ancient city 
of Nineveh, ravaged by history. 
With this article, the Courier joins 
the initiative launched by UNESCO 
Director-General Audrey Azoulay in 
February 2018, to revive the spirit 
of Mosul. This initiative aims to 
participate in the social and economic 
renaissance of Iraq and to contribute 
to sustainable development and 
intercommunity reconciliation 
through the safeguarding and 
appreciation of cultural heritage. 
The remains of the Central Library of 
Mosul University's book collection, 
after it was ransacked by ISIS.


I then had to explain that although my 
mother and father were Christians, they 
were from Mosul and, as city-dwellers, 
they spoke Arabic at home. Chaldean, 
a recent variant of Aramaic – the 
language of Christ – was reserved for the 
inhabitants of Christian villages on the 
city’s outskirts. 
As a journalist, I have always written in 
Arabic. I know a smattering of Chaldean, 
just a few phrases and verses from 
songs sung at ceremonies. I grew up in 
Baghdad and was educated there. But 
it is Mosul that I love the most, that I 
consider home. A city surrounded by 
vast green plains, where we went for 
our Easter holidays – to enjoy the gentle 
climate, to savour the beauty of the 
gardens dappled with red poppies and 
yellow chamomiles. I had learned from 
early childhood that Mosul was a city 
with two springs, because autumn was 
like a second spring.
During a visit to the United States a few 
years ago, I remembered an Arab joke. 
A man sentenced to death was asked 
what his last wish was, before the rope 
was put around his neck. “I’d like to learn 
Japanese,” he replied. We, the people 
of Mosul, are in a somewhat similar 
situation. Condemned to exile, we dream 
of a return which is impossible. 
On the same visit, I was invited by a local 
Detroit radio station – run by the Iraqi 
community, which is quite significant 
in that city – to participate in one of its 
broadcasts. I was surprised to find that 
all the programmes on the radio station 
were in Chaldean, and I was therefore 
asked to speak in that language! 

Was it the conservative nature of the 
Mosulites that made me the target of 
a little boy one day, who threw a stone 
at me, probably because I was wearing 
a short dress? It was a dress that my 
mother had made for me, especially for 
Eid – a red dress with a white Peter Pan 
collar, or a col Claudine, à la Française. 
And when I called a passer-by for help, 
the man scolded me, saying, “Go cover 
your legs, little girl!” The little girl in 
question was 7 years old and her dress 
was two centimetres above the knee.
But Mosul was both conservative and 
tolerant. Let me tell you a story from 
when my father – to whom I owe my 
love and great passion for the Arabic 
language, its poetry and literature – was 
a teenager. It is a story that illustrates 
just how civilized and tolerant Mosul 
used to be. 
Two stories of 
the Koran
Of all the students at his high school, 
my father was the best in the Arabic 
language. It was customary to offer the 
winning student a luxurious edition 
of the Koran. A few days before the 
awards ceremony, my father found the 
headmaster, sitting in a horse-drawn 
carriage – a common means of transport 
in the 1930s – waiting for him in front 
of the school. He beckoned my father 
to sit beside him and they went to the 
town’s main bookstore. “You can choose 
any book you like as a prize, whatever 
the price,” the headmaster said. For the 
Christian student, the message was 
unambiguous. He refused the offer. The 
principal tried again: “Abdel-Ahad, you are 
a Christian, and Mosul is a conservative 
city. We cannot give a copy of the Koran 
to a student who is not Muslim.” 
My father refused to budge, saying that 
he would not accept any other prize. The 
headmaster finally gave in, after making 
my father promise that he would accord 
the same respect to the holy book as 
it would get in a Muslim home. In the 
1960s, the same scenario was repeated 
with my elder sister, but this time with 
a different outcome.  
Since ISIS was defeated, music is 
no longer forbidden in Mosul. 
Khalid was the first musician to play 
publicly in the streets of this city, 
which rises again from the ashes.

A student in the Faculty of Arts at the 
University of Baghdad, she obtained 
the highest marks for her exegesis of 
the Koran. The head of department 
summoned her and asked her to 
renounce the prize, in order to save 
him from considerable embarrassment. 
How could he announce that a Christian 
student had surpassed her Muslim 
classmates in this discipline? This teacher 
clearly did not have the same courage as 
the headmaster of Mosul High School, 
thirty years earlier.
Mosul 
was both 
conservative 
and tolerant 

The 1948 war between Arabs and 
Jews triggered the departure of tens 
of thousands of Jews from Mosul 
(who, even today, have kept their very 
particular Mosul accents, wherever 
they moved). 
The Republic succeeded the monarchy 
in Iraq, against a backdrop of rivalries 
between political parties, and Mosul 
was not spared the bloodbaths caused 
by the fights between nationalists and 
communists. Then came the Gulf Wars 
and the American occupation. The entire 
country fell into chaos. But the worst 
was yet to come, with the occupation 
of Mosul by ISIS and what followed – 
particularly the expulsion of Christians 
and their exodus. The whole world 
watched helplessly as museums, ancient 
statues and monuments, bearing 
witness to nearly seven thousand years 
of civilization, were destroyed. 
On that day in June 2017 as I watched 
the destruction of the iconic Al Hadba 
(the hunchback) minaret of the Great 
Mosque of al-Nuri, on TV, I could not 
hold back my tears. This minaret, leaning 
like the Tower of Pisa, was the symbol 
of the city – it was on postcards, like 
the Eiffel Tower, the Statue of Liberty, or 
the Egyptian Pyramids. I remembered a 
poem written in dialectal Arabic by my 
former professor, the poetess Lamiâa 
Abbas Amara, the day that Baghdad’s 
suspension bridge, the most beautiful 
in the capital, was bombed by American 
warplanes. “It’s my rib that is breaking, 
not the bridge”, she wrote. That’s exactly 
how I felt when Al Hadba was destroyed. 
But above all, it is human beings, who 
matter more than stones, who are the 
victims of dispersion, of extermination. 
It is with immense sadness that I realize, 
day after day, that I had anticipated this 
in my novel, Dispersés (2013). The exodus 
continues, and Iraq, particularly Mosul, 
is being emptied of its Christians.
The girls wore 
white shorts
Throughout my 60 years, I have 
considered myself an Iraqi. I have always 
refused to be called Christian, to be 
confined to a single community. When 
my books were translated into French, 
journalists asked me if I was a Shia or 
Sunni Muslim – I mocked their naïveté 
and refused to answer.  
“It’s my rib that 
is breaking…”
Mosul is on the Silk Road – and I am proud 
to tell my French neighbours that muslin 
(mousseline), the fine cotton fabric, 
originated in my hometown. In this city, 
the children of three great monotheistic 
religions, from many ethnic communities 
from Armenia, Turkey and the Balkans, 
lived together for a long time, in peace 
and harmony. But then, political strife 
began to poison the city’s atmosphere. 
But today, I proclaim my identity loud and 
clear – both in the interviews I give, and in 
my writing. Not in a communitarian spirit, 
but to testify to the luminous period 
during which I lived in Iraq – the country 
where I was born, where I studied, loved, 
where I started my family, where my 
eldest son was born – without anyone 
ever thinking of asking me what my 
religion was. 
Today, in Paris, my adopted city, I take 
great pleasure in reminiscing about Iraq 
with Safiya, a writer from Mosul who 
is over 80, and who emigrated like me. 
She tells me about her incredible life in 
Mosul in the last century. Although she 
was the daughter of a prominent imam, 
she dressed like her city friends in the 
latest Parisian fashion and had a full social 
and intellectual life. As female students 
attending a medical school founded in 
the 1960s, they played tennis with their 
male classmates and wore white shorts. 
Who could imagine such a scene today? 
Novelist and journalist Inaam Kachachi 
(Iraq) has lived in France since 1979, 
when she came to the Sorbonne to 
study for a PhD. She is the author of 
several novels, including Dispersés 
(originally published in Arabic, 2013), 
the French version (published in 2016) 
of which won the 2016 prize for Arabic 
literature, awarded by the Institut 
du Monde Arabe and the Fondation 
Lagardère; Si je t’oublie, Bagdad (2003) 
translated into French (in 2009); Paroles 
d'Irakiennes: le drame irakien écrit par 
des femmes (originally published in 
French, 2003).
