Yang Qiang, interviewed by Wang Chao
After the internet and mobile internet triggered the Third Industrial 
Revolution, artificial intelligence (AI) technologies, driven by 
big data, are fuelling a Fourth Industrial Revolution.
Reflection#2, installation by 
Brazilian artist Raquel Kogan. 
Computer-generated numbers are 
projected in a darkened room, so that 
the bodies of spectators are directly 
integrated into the work.
The FourthRevolution
Could you define big data thinking? How 
could companies adapt to this way of 
thinking and what changes would they 
need to make?
The first point of big data thinking is to 
consciously collect data. In other words, 
before doing any business, you have to 
think about how to collect data.
Second, data collection and core 
algorithms are closely related. You need 
to know what is missing according to the 
algorithms, and then collect data with 
a specific purpose, including data from 
different sources. 
The third requirement is to form a closed 
loop. The services provided by a software 
system should be able to stimulate the 
source to generate more data that can 
be fed back into the system, forming a 
closed loop. This allows for a continuous 
process of self-improvement and self-
refinement of the system. A special 
design is required for the closed loop, 
which is very different from the previous 
design used for business.
Could you elaborate further on a closed 
loop design for AI and big data?
The first thing to consider are data 
providers – for example, users. All user 
behaviours need to be recorded in the 
form of data. Then service providers 
– such as WeChat Pay, the Chinese 
mobile wallet and Taobao, the Chinese 
e-commerce website – have to be 
taken into account. Intelligent feedback 
is generated based on the data to 
understand the needs of users. Users 
provide feedback data to the service 
providers, and service providers in turn 
provide the service data to the users. 
This forms a closed loop.
How did the convergence between AI and 
big data occur? 
The rise of AI and big data started in the 
early 2000s. When Google and Baidu – 
the emerging search engines at the time 
– used AI-powered recommendation 
systems for advertising, they found 
that the results were much better than 
expected. The more data they collected, 
the better the results would be. But at the 
time, no one realized that this would be 
the case in other fields as well.
A real turning point occurred with the 
emerging of ImageNet, the largest 
image recognition database in the 
world, designed for use in visual 
object recognition software research. 
Established by computer scientists at 
Stanford and Princeton universities in 
the United States, it is considered to 
be the beginning of the deep learning 
revolution. The large amount of image 
data on ImageNet resulted in a ten per 
cent drop in the rate of mis-recognition. 
This showed that the convergence of 
deep learning and big data could help 
master extremely complex calculations. 
How would you define the relationship 
between deep learning and big data?
If an AI system is designed well, the 
product will be more convenient to 
use, more accurate, and therefore, 
more useful. There will be more users, 
and hence more data – which in turn, 
makes the AI system better. A mutually 
strengthening relationship exists 
between AI systems and data.
Big data and AI could be merged into a 
new kind of AI, called data intelligence.

For the closed loop to evolve rapidly, 
it should be short enough. And it is 
better not to have people involved in 
it, because the loop cannot be fully 
automated with human participation. 
Second, the update process in the loop 
should happen frequently – it is best if 
this happens several times a day, because 
it keeps updating the system. Third, the 
process must be continuous, so users are 
prompted to provide constant feedback. 
To sum up the process in three words, it 
should be short, frequent, fast.
In your opinion, how long will it take for 
this closed loop to actually be achieved?
I think the future development of AI will 
be divided into two stages. The first stage 
is that all industries will attempt to use 
the technology. For example, security 
and protection services will use facial 
recognition technology; the banking 
sector will use AI in risk control, and so 
on. These are single technologies and 
solutions serving existing industries.
The second phase will be the emergence 
of entirely new industries, with artificial 
intelligence at the core. For example, a 
bank that uses AI as the core technology 
can be completely driven by AI in terms 
of investment, service and credit. Bank 
clerks would only be required to make 
small adjustments. Building entirely new 
kinds of customer service systems would 
also be possible.
I think the second phase of AI will truly 
reshape human society, giving it its 
future form. Just as at the time when 
the internet was emerging, in the first 
stage, a traditional bookstore made a 
web page and considered itself an online 
bookstore, which was not the case. In 
the second phase, websites like Amazon 
were established, that were completely 
different from the traditional bookstore.
The combination of big data and AI could 
also threaten the information flow and 
social equity. How could the normal flow 
of large-scale data be ensured, without 
the infringement of personal privacy?
Products that are created by using big 
data and AI technologies will provide 
excellent new business models. However, 
the precondition for these business 
models to be implemented on a large 
scale would be to ensure the privacy of 
their users. Here are three concerns:
First, we need a set of legal and social 
rules to protect the ownership of data 
and to make it clear where the data can 
or cannot be used. In my opinion, the 
user data should be divided into different 
divisions. For example, data in the red 
zone cannot be touched, data in the 
yellow zone is accessible only to some 
people, whereas everyone has access to 
data in the green zone. There is currently 
no consensus on the division of data. 
Besides, there is no law that specifies the 
definition of the person in charge and the 
penalties for violating these legal rules.
The second phase of AI 
will truly reshape human society, 
giving it its future form

Yang Qiang (China) is an international 
expert in AI and data mining. He is 
the first Chinese chairman of the 
International Joint Conferences on 
Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), a fellow of 
the Association for the Advancement 
of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), the head 
of Department of Computer Science 
and Engineering at the Hong Kong 
University of Science and Technology, 
and the co-founder and chief scientist 
of 4Paradigm. 
Wang Chao (China) is a journalist and 
team leader at the AI Studio of NetEase 
News, which covers the AI industry. 

The second concern is to protect 
data privacy technically. For example, 
4Paradigm (a Beijing-based AI technology 
and service provider) is currently studying 
the use of “migration learning” to protect 
privacy, which is a relatively new field. 
This could help different companies 
exchange data. For example, A makes a 
model, and the model is moved to scene 
B. Instead of exchanging data directly 
between A and B, it is included in the 
model. This is better for the protection of 
user privacy.
Third, we need to conduct more research 
on user privacy and data pricing. 
For example, when users click on an 
online advertisement through an AI 
recommendation system, should this 
system get some of the profits? If a search 
engine earns revenue, should some of it 
be distributed to users? These issues are 
worth exploring.
In the next few years, everyone will realize 
the importance of the “landing” of AI. We’ll 
need to pay more attention to how to 
“land” AI, and to find out which areas are 
suitable for its application. Today, finance, 
the internet, and automated vehicles are 
suitable areas for the “landing” of AI.
From a global perspective, what impact 
will the combination of big data and 
AI have on developing countries?
I think big data and AI technologies 
would enable some emerging countries 
to catch up, or even surpass, traditional 
developed countries. Because in the 
future, economic competition will not 
be only about financial and economic 
scale, but more importantly, about the 
size of data and the speed of embracing 
the data economy. For example, the 
rapid development of China's internet 
and mobile internet has allowed for the 
collection of a large amount of data. This 
will also accelerate the development of 
China's AI industry, which may change 
the world balance.
On the other hand, if a country already 
has a good infrastructure and high-
quality education, it could benefit from AI 
to achieve more efficient production. Just 
as the use of steam engines allowed some 
countries to develop more rapidly during 
the Industrial Revolution.
Songs of Anagura, an interactive 
exhibition introducing a field of 
research studying the collection, 
processing and use of data on position 
and human behaviour.
