
When Doug McIntosh, an amputee taking 
part in a clinical trial, was able to quickly 
and efficiently grab an object for the first 
time in twenty years without the slightest 
effort, the designer of the bionic hand 
he was wearing said that no reward was 
greater than seeing the joy on his face. 
“It showed my innovation was successful 
and my tester was happy with it,” said 
Dr Kianoush Nazarpour, a biomedical 
engineer at the Institute of Neuroscience 
at Newcastle University, in the United 
Kingdom. The bionic hand is one of the 
winners of the Netexplo Innovation 
Awards 2018. 
The new generation of prosthetic limbs 
allows the wearer to grip objects without 
the use of the brain, automatically and 
without thinking. It is just like a real hand, 
whose ability to grasp objects correctly 
we take so much for granted. 


Chen Xiaorong
An intuitive bionic 
hand that can “see” 
objects by itself 
and is capable of 
precise and smooth handling, 
could change the lives of people 
with upper-limb disabilities. 
Designed by biomedical 
engineers at Newcastle 
University, this prosthesis 
illustrates the collaboration 
between human intention 
and the technical efficiency of 
artificial intelligence (AI). 
A bionic hand that sees
The usual process requires the user to see 
the object, physically stimulate the muscles 
in the arm and trigger a movement in 
the prosthetic limb. In the new version, a 
tiny camera (which costs less than $1.50) 
fitted on the bionic hand takes a picture of 
an object in front of it, assesses its shape 
and size, and triggers a series of smooth 
movements to pick up the object – in a 
matter of seconds. 
The device demands nothing more of the 
wearer than a quick glance in the right 
direction. Choosing from four different 
“grasps” – suitable for picking up a cup, 
holding a TV remote controller, gripping 
objects with a thumb and two fingers, or a 
pinched thumb and first finger – the hand 
uses artificial intelligence to continually 
improve its detection and grasping skills. It 
is ten times faster than current bionic limbs. 
“Responsiveness has been one of the main 
barriers to artificial limbs – controlling 
them takes practice, concentration and 
time,” explains Nazarpour. “Prosthetic limbs 
have changed very little in the past 100 
years – the design is much better and the 
materials are lighter in weight and more 
durable, but they still work in the same 
way,” he adds. “The beauty of this system is 
that it’s much more flexible and the hand 
is able to pick up novel objects – which 
is crucial, since in everyday life people 
effortlessly pick up a variety of objects that 
they have never seen before.”
This bionic hand is capable of quickly 
and easily grasping any object, using 
a camera to assess its shape and 
dimension, which then triggers the 
correct movement to pick it up. 
© Newcastle University, UK
Nazarpour, who has focused his research 
on improving prosthetics since 1999, 
grew up in Iran, dreaming of becoming a 
medical doctor. His research is motivated 
by the potential of prosthetics to restore 
function to individuals with sensorimotor 
deficits, by transforming thought into 
action and sensation into perception.
The crucial point is to understand how 
the peripheral nervous system responds 
to electro-mechanical stimulation of the 
limb, which helps to inform the design of 
prostheses. An electro-mechanical design 
and computer programme are available 
online, which can be adapted to or installed 
in various artificial upper-limb products.
“We produce a device and software 
control system, but not the artificial hands,” 
Nazarpour said, adding that the hardware 
costs just $1. Beyond the obvious benefit 
for disabled people, the bionic hand could 
belong to an intelligent robot, and be of 
interest to industry and businesses. 
Recent statistics show that in the UK there 
are around 600 new upper-limb amputees 
every year, fifty per cent of whom are 
15 to 54 years old. The number is much 
higher in the United States, with 500,000 
new upper-limb amputees every year. “We 
plan to cooperate with many prosthetics 
producers and we need to build up 
networks,” Nazarpour, whose team is still 
perfecting the design, said. “I hope this can 
help thousands of people in the world.”
