Karla Jiménez Comrie
Many scientists view the massive 
disappearance of several 
varieties of Central American 
frogs as a sign of the Sixth 
Extinction. This is one of 
the indications that we are 
entering the Anthropocene, 
that some believe will mean 
the wiping out of a quarter 
of  the world’s mammals, 
forty per cent of amphibians, 
corals, and many other species. 
In Panama, scientists and 
national leaders are in a race 
against time to prevent 
a legendary species, the golden 
frog, from disappearing 
forever. Investigations have 
shown that humans are indeed 
responsible, having introduced 
into South America an invasive 
fungus that is highly toxic 
to amphibians.
According to a pre-Columbian legend 
from the heartlands of Central Panama, 
the golden frog brings good luck. Anyone 
who sees one or manages to capture one 
will have a happy future. Its bright yellow 
livery, speckled with coffee-coloured 
patches, was a source of delight for 
indigenous tribes, who thought that when 
the amphibian died, its tiny body turned 
to solid gold.
The little frog that 
lost its lustre
Discovered on the outskirts of the small 
town of El Valle de Antón and the Altos 
de Campana National Park, and endemic to 
the central area of the Isthmus of Panama, 
the golden frog – Atelopus zeteki – has long 
frequented and decorated the streams and 
rivers of the Panamanian jungle.  
Panama has made the golden frog 
an ecological and cultural symbol, 
even dedicating a national day – 14 August 
– to it. The frog is so popular that it 
adorns arts and crafts objects, jewellery, 
festival posters, and even lottery tickets. 
It also lends its name to hotels, craft beers 
and boutiques. This hasn’t stopped 
it from disappearing from the forests 
of the isthmus, though.
According to Panamanian herpetologist 
Roberto Ibáñez, a researcher at the 
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute 
(STRI) in Panama, the first signs of decline 
were noticed between 1993 and 1996. 
Edgardo Griffith, a Panamanian biologist, 
remembers seeing dying frogs at the end 
of 2005, during an expedition in El Valle 
de Antón. 
It was not known why they were dying, 
but Griffith’s alarm coincided with other 
research questioning the status of the 
amphibian. The frogs were seen for the last 
time in the wild in 2007 – in a short video 
scene shot by the BBC for one of its Life 
in Cold Blood documentaries on reptiles 
and amphibians.
The cause of this massacre turned out 
to be Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis 
(also known as Bd), a chytrid fungus that 
is threatening the global population 
of amphibians by transmitting 
chytridiomycosis, a disease which, Ibáñez 
explains, “infects the frog’s skin, disturbing 
the way it functions”. 
Female Panamanian Golden Frog, 
Atelopus zeteki.
CC BY 2.0 photo by Brian Gratwicke

During the Golden Frog Festival, 
held every year at Smithsonian’s Punta 
Culebra Nature Center in Panama City, 
children learn more about the amphibian 
that has become the ecological 
and cultural symbol of their country.
One of the functions of the frog’s epidermis 
is to maintain the balance of water and 
mineral salts between the animal’s body 
and its environment. In frogs infected 
with Bd, the transport of electrolytes is 
disrupted, reducing concentrations of 
sodium and potassium in the blood, and 
leading to cardiac arrest.
An invasive fungus 
Where does Bd come from? Probably 
Africa. This is at least is the most widely 
accepted hypothesis among Panamanian 
biologists. The Bd chytrid occurs naturally 
in the epidermis of the South African 
amphibian, Xenopus laevis – the frogs were 
used extensively in human pregnancy 
tests starting in the 1930s. Unaware that 
Xenopus laevis was the vector for this 
disease, the amphibian test was exported 
to other parts of the world, causing the 
disease to spread.
In Panama, it is thought that the fungus 
was transmitted through contact with 
these amphibians, says Ibáñez. He points 
out that the chytrid has already spread 
throughout the country and is now 
infecting other amphibian species. 
As a result, the International Union 
for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has 
classified Bd as one of 100 of the world’s 
worst invasive alien species, because of its 
“disastrous impact on biological diversity”.
Griffith describes it as a “very effective 
organism, which reduces biodiversity, 
changes demographics and the dynamics 
of reproduction, and wipes out 100 per 
cent of the individuals of certain species”. 
It is present everywhere – in Panama as 
well as in other Latin American countries.
A Noah’s Ark for 
amphibians 
Though no effective treatment against 
the disease is available today, scientists 
hope to reintroduce the golden frog 
to its natural habitat one day. In 2011, 
the government launched an Action Plan 
for the conservation of the amphibians 
of Panama. Involving three components 
– research, conservation, and education 
– it is a first step towards resolving 
the problem. The El Valle Amphibian 
Conservation Centre (EVACC Foundation), 
led by Griffith, is also working for the 
preservation of the golden frog – although, 
at this stage, it is still being kept in 
captivity. The Centre’s zoo is home to 
around 4,500 frogs, 1,000 of which are 
of the golden variety.
At the other end of the country, in Gamboa 
– at the edge of a tropical rainforest 
in the former Panama Canal area – 
Ibáñez directs the Amphibian Conservation 
and Rescue Project. Created ex situ in 2009, 
the project aims to ensure the reproduction 
of endangered species, especially those 
affected by the chytrid fungus. It’s a 
kind of Noah’s Ark, which uses captive 
specimens in an endeavour to reconstitute 
populations of the most threatened 
species – until an effective treatment is 
found for the Bd fungus. Based twenty-two 
kilometres outside Panama City, the centre 
holds 1,200 examples of frogs belonging 
to nine species – with the exception of 
the golden frog. But Ibáñez says he hopes to 
receive some specimens of Atelopus zeteki 
from EVACC by the end of 2018.
Will the golden frog regain its former 
lustre? The scientists are convinced it will. 
Until then, we must hope that the little 
creature will, itself, have the happy future 
it symbolizes for the people of Panama.
Karla Jiménez Comrie (Panama) is a 
freelance journalist specializing in culture 
and the environment. She has worked 
in the United Nations system and has 
been a reporter for the daily, La Prensa.

Scientists hope that 
it is possible to reintroduce 
the golden frog 
into the wild one day
