Audrey Azoulay, 
Director-General of UNESCO, 
interviewed by Jasmina Šopova
Artificial intelligence (AI) 
could help humanity 
overcome many of the 
serious social problems it 
faces. But at the same time, 
AI presents a series of complex 
challenges, particularly in terms 
of ethics, human rights and 
security. Yet, no international 
ethical framework that applies 
to all AI’s developments and 
applications currently exists. 
An international regulatory 
tool is indispensable.
The question of what skills to develop 
in order to evolve in an increasingly 
automated world will become more and 
more central. 
In the field of culture, AI is already widely 
applied: for example, 3D imaging is 
used for heritage reconstruction – as 
we will do for the old city of Mosul in 
Iraq. In the sciences too, particularly 
in our environmental programmes 
and in underwater research – for the 
classification of plankton images or 
the automatic detection and census of 
cetaceans and seabirds, for example. 
Communication and information are 
also directly dependent on advances in 
AI. UNESCO must lead this reflection on 
the benefits and risks of AI in education, 
culture, science and communication 
and information.

Making the most of artificial 
intelligence 
Audrey Azoulay
Why is UNESCO interested in AI?
The experts are unanimous: humanity is 
on the threshold of a new era. Artificial 
intelligence will transform our lives to 
an extent that we cannot imagine. This 
transformation has already begun and it 
affects all aspects of our lives. AI has many 
applications in fields as varied as health, 
education, culture, security, defence, 
etc. Research has increased considerably 
in recent years: the giants of the web, 
FAMGA, but also many countries, are now 
investing massively in AI, and becoming 
actors of this “Fourth Industrial Revolution”.
UNESCO has a significant role to play 
in these changing times. First, because 
AI’s applications directly affect the 
Organization’s areas of expertise. 
Education will be profoundly transformed 
by AI. Teaching tools, ways of learning, 
access to knowledge, and teacher 
training will be revolutionized.
A symbolic representation of an 
AI cooperating with humans. 
© Veronique Deshayes

What are the risks, in your view? 
In general, AI can be a fantastic 
opportunity to achieve the goals set by the 
2030 Agenda, but that means addressing 
the ethical issues it presents, without 
further delay. An opportunity, because its 
applications can help us to advance more 
rapidly towards the achievement of the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
– by allowing better risk assessment; 
enabling more accurate forecasting and 
faster knowledge-sharing; by offering 
innovative solutions in the fields of 
education, health, ecology, urbanism and 
the creative industries; and by improving 
standards of living and our daily 
well-being. But it is also a threat, because 
automation and digitization create new 
imbalances. They can decrease diversity 
in cultural industries, disrupt the labour 
market, create job insecurity and increase 
disparities between those who have 
access to these new technologies and 
those who are deprived of them.
This is where UNESCO also has a role to 
play – in trying to reduce the inequalities 
in access to knowledge and research 
– through the support it provides to 
its Member States. The technological 
divide is likely to have a multiplier effect 
on social inequalities. UNESCO must be 
able to help its Member States adapt to 
new realities and access technological 
knowledge.
How can UNESCO provide this support, 
concretely?
One of the challenges for Member 
States is to have sophisticated, 
cutting-edge engineering materials 
and adequate human resources – 
scientists and engineers. Through its 
Centres for Education and Training in 
Science, Technology and Innovation 
(STI), its Global Observatory of 
Science, Technology and Innovation 
Policy Instruments (GO-SPIN) and its 
International Basic Sciences Programme 
(IBSP), UNESCO is in a position to provide 
such support – and to help reduce 
disparities between countries. 
What are the challenges posed by AI in 
education? How does UNESCO intend to 
respond to these?
This is, of course, a key area for the 
Organization. Here again, the revolution 
that is now underway is generating both 
positive and negative effects. 
Educational software based on AI is 
already being used to decentralize 
teaching and personalize it, and to 
provide students with curriculum 
advice, or even certification. But these 
technologies are expensive and therefore 
inaccessible to the great majority – the 
gap between rich and poor is likely to 
widen even further.
UNESCO has a 
significant role to play in 
these changing times. 
AI’s applications directly 
affect the Organization’s 
areas of expertise

As a result of its coordinating role in 
the SDG-Education 2030 Steering 
Committee to monitor the achievement 
of Sustainable Development Goal 4, 
dedicated to education, UNESCO is in an 
excellent position to lead this work – by 
identifying the possible contributions of 
AI to inclusive education and assessing 
its potential impact on the future 
of learning.
Promoting open-access AI tools that will 
encourage local innovation will be one 
of our priorities.
To prepare future generations for 
the new landscape of work that AI is 
creating, it will also be necessary to 
rethink educational programmes, with 
an emphasis on science, technology, 
engineering and mathematics – but 
also giving a prominent place to the 
humanities and to competencies in 
philosophy and ethics.
 101NETEXPLO NOTEBOOK  | HUMAN DECISIONS THOUGHTS ON  AI
 
 
We need to prevent the misuse of AI.
It is our 
responsibility 
to enter this 
new era with 
our eyes 
wide open

What is the relationship between AI and 
philosophy or ethics?
In their adult lives, today's 
schoolchildren and students will 
undoubtedly have to face problems 
that are currently unfathomable to us. 
It is difficult to predict all the possible 
developments of these increasingly 
sophisticated machines that are gaining 
a little more autonomy each day – to 
the point of already challenging human 
identity, to a certain extent. This is why 
skills in ethics, but also in the social 
sciences and the humanities in general, 
will be just as important as those in 
the formal sciences. There may also be 
embedded biases – including gender 
biases – in AI systems, that require more 
transparency from these systems and 
strong ethical principles to correct them.
Why is it difficult to predict future 
developments in AI?
Research in the field of AI is advancing 
at a very rapid pace, while the legal, 
social and ethical environments that 
are needed to guide it are evolving 
very slowly. How far can a machine’s 
autonomy and its decision-making 
power be allowed to go? If an accident 
occurs, who is responsible? And who 
decides what values are instilled in 
machines during what is called their 
“training”? These and many other 
questions remain unanswered today.
It was noticed, for example, that 
algorithms trained in ordinary human 
language had acquired prejudices 
based on stereotypes from textual 
data present in our everyday culture. 
How can we not be concerned about 
the danger of the emergence of 
machines with discriminatory, racist or 
hostile behaviours?
There are also many other reasons to be 
concerned about – privacy protection 
and targeted advertising on the internet; 
freedom of expression and censorship 
algorithms; automated journalism and 
information monopolies, etc.
Even if fundamental research in this 
field is largely motivated by well-being, 
unintentional, but also intentional, 
deviations are always possible. That 
is why it is imperative to ensure that 
this technology develops according to 
rigorously established ethical standards.

What can UNESCO do in this regard?
If we are to make the most of the 
possibilities offered by AI to the world, 
we must ensure that it serves humanity, 
with respect for human dignity and 
human rights.
Yet, no international ethical framework 
that applies to all AI developments and 
applications currently exists.
UNESCO is this unique universal forum 
with over twenty years of experience in 
developing international instruments 
related to bioethics and the ethics of 
science and technology*. It can also 
rely on the expertise of two advisory 
bodies working actively on these issues: 
the World Commission on the Ethics of 
Scientific Knowledge and Technology 
(COMEST) and the International 
Bioethics Committee (IBC).
It is our responsibility to lead a universal 
and enlightened debate – not a technical 
debate, but an ethical one – in order to 
enter this new era with our eyes wide 
open, without sacrificing our values, and 
to make it possible, if Member States 
so wish, to establish a common global 
foundation of ethical principles.
*  Universal Declaration on the Human Genome 
and Human Rights (1997)
   International Declaration on Human Genetic 
Data (2003)
   Universal Declaration on Bioethics and 
Human Rights (2005)
   Declaration of Ethical Principles in relation 
to Climate Change (2017)
   Recommendation on Science and Scientific 
Researchers (2017)
