The same idea was captured in the 
inclusion of education as one of the rights 
in the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights adopted in 1948, and in the 
Preamble to UNESCO’s Constitution.
The inclusion of that right in the 
Declaration sparked one of the 
most remarkable silent revolutions 
experienced by humanity. Global access 
to basic education increased from under 
50% in 1948 to over 85% today, and the 
percentage of the population who could 
read, increased from 36% to 85% in the 
same period (Global Rise of Education, 
2017). That this increase in access to 
education took place while the world 
population grew from 2.5 billion to 7.3 
billion, makes it all the more remarkable. 
Over the last decade, I have been 
working to understand how best to 
support the development of education 
systems to educate students as global 
citizens. The education process that 
leads to global competency must be 
supported by a high-quality curriculum 
and sustained by effective teacher 
preparation and leadership. With a 
number of collaborators, I developed 
two comprehensive school curricula, 
from kindergarten up to, and including, 
high school. We continue to collaborate 
with a network of schools around the 
world, developing instructional resources 
to further advance effective global 
citizenship education.

A road map to
change the world
by  Fernando  M.  Reimers 
It is imperative to equip the next 
generation with an education 
that will help them understand, 
care about and address the 
global risks we all face. Only then 
can we live in peace with one 
another, and with the planet 
we inhabit, argues education 
expert Fernando Reimers. He has 
created two innovative Global 
Citizenship Education curricula 
at Harvard University to help 
students become global citizens. 
What is education but the construction of 
opportunities for people to develop the 
skills and mindsets that help them live in 
ways that advance worthy goals? 
This idea dates back at least to the 
sixteenth-century pedagogue, Jan 
Comenius, who argued, in his Didactica 
Magna, that we should educate all, 
so we could have peace in the world. 
Cultivating 
a positive mindset
The first curriculum, published in the 
book, Empowering Global Citizens (2016), 
was designed in 2011 and 2012 to be 
taught in a six- to eight-hour a week 
course from kindergarten to high school. 
It was initially developed to be taught 
at Avenues: The World School, a global 
network of independent schools which 
was establishing its first campus, in 
New York, at the time. 
We developed a competency framework 
which included ethics, knowledge, social 
competencies, self-knowledge and 
mindsets, aligned to the development 
of capacities that would help students 
develop a global consciousness – while 
cultivating their motivation and skill to 
address global challenges.
Central to the conception of global 
competency was the notion of 
empowerment, cultivating a mindset that 
each individual can make a difference, 
can take the initiative and act in 
leadership roles.
We used a project-based learning 
approach, offering opportunities for 
students to develop their own interests 
and passions; it involved parents and 
community members as well.
Artwork produced during a workshop by 
the Create Peace Project, which involves 
students across the globe exchanging 
messages of peace. 

Instead of just engaging with content 
knowledge, students are engaged in 
creating a product that demonstrates 
deep understanding – whether it 
be a puppet show (kindergarten), a 
business plan (third grade) or a social 
enterprise (eighth grade). For example, 
in third grade, students study global 
interdependence through creating a 
project in chocolate manufacturing and 
the creation of a marketing campaign 
that touches on global food chains, the 
ethics of free trade and child labour.
As this first curriculum was published 
and widely shared, it became clear 
that a simpler version was necessary to 
facilitate wide-scale adoption. Feedback 
from those who adopted the curriculum 
paved the way for a more effective and 
accessible approach.
Understanding 
globalization
The second curriculum, Empowering 
Students to Improve the World in Sixty 
Lessons (2017), offers three tools with that 
aim – a protocol to design and adapt a 
global citizenship curriculum; a protocol 
to design a school-wide strategy for global 
education; and an actual curriculum 
prototype, developed following the 
process presented in the book. 
Adopting and developing such a 
curriculum is within the reach of a wide 
range of schools, with varying levels of 
resources and support. Having a concrete 
prototype makes it possible to obtain 
feedback. It requires teaching only five 
lessons in each grade – yet it is a rigorous 
and robust sequence, with a clear set of 
learning outcomes. 
This second curriculum is aligned to 
a map of global competencies that 
characterize a high-school graduate 
who understands globalization and 
appreciates the opportunities it 
offers for people to collaborate on 
improving their communities. These 
competencies map onto the Sustainable 
Development Goals. 
Leading powerful 
learning
As part of the Global Education 
Innovation Initiative (an international 
collaborative research-policy practice 
group) I lead at Harvard University, I 
am now working with a number of 
schools and networks of schools around 
the world, learning together how to 
implement intentional global citizenship 
curricula. The original two curricula 
have been translated and adapted into 
Chinese, Portuguese and Spanish. 
We are learning that establishing 
conditions that sustain high-quality 
global citizenship education at scale 
requires collective leadership, and 
coordinated efforts – across a range of 
organizations in the public and private 
sectors over an extended period of time 
– that sustain the capacity of educators to 
lead powerful learning. 
Similarly, creating opportunities for 
education leaders to share what they 
have learned with others can accelerate 
the process of intentional cultivation 
of leadership, a crucial step in making 
education systems relevant to the twenty-
first century, as discussed in One Student 
at a Time. Leading the Global Education 
Movement (2017).
There is solid evidence that intentional 
high-quality curricula and effective 
pedagogies can empower students to 
become active global citizens. Education 
is indeed a most powerful avenue to help 
students improve the world. The task to 
educate each of the 1.2 billion learners as 
global citizens has never been more urgent. 
Fernando M. Reimers (Venezuela) is the 
Ford Foundation Professor of the Practice 
in International Education and Director of 
the Global Education Innovation Initiative 
and of the International Education Policy 
Program at Harvard University. An expert 
in the field of international education, he 
is interested in advancing understanding 
of the ways schools can empower 
students to participate civically and 
economically, and to help achieve the 
Sustainable Development Goals. 
A classroom in the Erika Mann 
Elementary School in Berlin (Germany), 
designed by architect Susanne Hofmann, 
renovated and transformed into a place 
that is perfect for learning to live together.
