Audrey Azoulay also stressed on 
UNESCO's special role in orchestrating 
international cooperation and bringing 
together the normative and operative 
as effectively as possible. “This supposes 
that we continue thinking, nurturing 
the crucial link with intellectual circles, 
especially in all scientific areas, that 
continuously probe the complexities 
of the current era,” she said. One of the 
major enterprises of our century in 
which UNESCO should play a leading 
role, as it cuts across each of the pillars 
of its mandate is, according to the 
Director-General, “the reconciliation 
between the unprecedented digital 
and scientific revolution that we are 
living and the humanist values that 
we uphold.”
Based on UNESCO's clear skills to 
provide for the 2030 Agenda and the 
Paris Agreement on Climate Change, 
she stressed the need for more alliances 
with other stakeholders: United Nations 
agencies, Member States, regional 
organizations, cities and civil societies.
Convinced that none of the major 
challenges facing the world today can 
be met by any one country on its own, 
without relying on the fundamental 
pillars of science, education and culture, 
the Director-General believes that 
UNESCO must participate fully in a 
world order based on multilateralism 
and humanist values: “UNESCO’s 
promise and what we owe to the world 
is to work in this multilateral framework 
by acting on the root causes of our 
collective destiny,” she said.
In the face of the multiple challenges 
that we all share, a world without 
collective intelligence would be 
powerless, according to Audrey 
Azoulay, who describes UNESCO as 
“collective intelligence in action.”

UNESCO: collective 
intelligence  in action
Audrey Azoulay
Audrey Azoulay (France) 
was appointed to the post of 
Director-General of UNESCO 
on 10th November 2017. 
The former French Minister of 
Culture and Communication 
is the 11th Director-General 
of the Organization and the 
second woman to occupy 
this position. With a long-
standing commitment to the 
universal values of peace, she 
is determined to maintain this 
commitment as the head of 
UNESCO: “a modern UNESCO,” 
which will contribute to shaping 
“the world of tomorrow”.
Audrey Azoulay at the investiture 
ceremony on 13 November 2017.


“My ambition is that UNESCO plays a 
major role in giving a human face to 
globalization,” Audrey Azoulay said, 
on 13 November 2017, during her 
installation as Director-General of 
the Organization. She considers that 
UNESCO is a standard-setter that helps 
society advance – as an expert agency 
contributing to the dissemination of 
knowledge to the greatest number of 
people, and as an intellectual forum for 
the world of tomorrow.
The world of tomorrow needs unity, she 
believes. And to rebuild this unity, it is 
necessary to rely on the universal values 
of peace through education, culture, 
science, and freedom, and to ensure that 
our action is rooted in the long term. 
“By virtue of its missions, its voice and its 
action, UNESCO is in direct contact with 
the future of humanity in the long term,” 
she noted. “This mandate is exercised 
with a key priority given to Africa and 
women. To Africa, in the conviction that 
it is the continent that crystallizes the 
challenges and solutions of our common 
future.” And to women and girls, so 
they may “restore their rightful place as 
agents of their own destiny and a force 
of progress in our societies.”
