This is why the New South Wales 
(NSW) Department of Education 
initiated Education for a Changing 
World in 2016. Examining the strategic 
implications of technological advances, 
this comprehensive project aims to 
stimulate and inform necessary reforms 
in curricula, teaching and assessment, 
and to orient the entire system towards 
a more innovative approach. 
Leslie Loble
To the three basic pillars of any 
education system – reading, 
writing, arithmetic – we must 
now add three others: empathy, 
creativity and critical thinking. 
These skills, usually acquired 
outside school, must be 
included in school curricula, 
as artificial intelligence (AI) 
becomes part of our societies. 
In Australia, 300,000 children begin 
their school journey this year, in 2018. 
Graduating from school in 2030, they 
will spend most of their working lives 
in the second half of the twenty-first 
century – some may even live to see the 
dawn of the twenty-second century. The 
pace of change wrought by advancing 
technologies makes it increasingly likely 
that these children will live and work in a 
world that is radically different from ours. 
Education systems must move swiftly to 
anticipate and adjust to this change if 
these future generations are to thrive. 
New South Wales is the largest school 
education sector in Australia, with over 
a million children and young people 
attending some 3,000 schools. In 
every classroom, every day, a teacher 
instructs and guides these students 
toward their future. But at a system 
level, especially one of this scale, change 
can be slow to evolve, even with the 
mounting and clear urgency that new 
technology brings. 



Learning
to live in the time of AI
Since the project began, the Department 
has engaged with global leaders from 
the economic, technology and academic 
spheres, deliberations which led to the 
publication of Future Frontiers: Education 
for an AI World in November 2017. The 
book explores the future of education in 
a world with AI, and the skills needed to 
thrive in the twenty-first century.

Photo by French fine art photographer 
Vincent Fournier, taken in Barcelona, 
Spain, in 2010, as part of The Man 
Machine series, showing “speculative 
fictions”, where artificial creatures 
interact with humans. 
Some of these thought leaders got 
together with educationalists, non-
government organizations (NGOs) 
and policymakers at an international 
symposium in late 2017 to discuss how 
to use new technologies and tools to 
support teachers and improve student 
outcomes. The infusion of new ideas led 
to a unified commitment to reform. 
The new Rs
The three Rs – reading, writing and 
arithmetic – are the foundation of all 
learning, but today’s students need 
additional core skills and important 
non-cognitive skills such as self-
efficacy. The pace and breadth of 
technological change demands a 
deeper understanding of concepts, and 
a great deal of resilience, adaptability 
and flexibility for students, teachers and 
education systems as well. 
Human skills will be more important than 
ever in the new world taking shape before 
our very eyes – critical thinking will be one 
of the most powerful skills that education 
systems will impart to students.
For the time being, these essential 
skills can be acquired through extra-
curricular activities, where we learn 
about cooperation, goal-setting and 
planning, for example. Discipline and 
team spirit could be developed through 
sports, creativity through drama, critical 
thinking through debate, and empathy 
through fundraising for the Red Cross or 
volunteering at a youth group.
The challenge is how to create this wide 
range of opportunities for all students, 
how to value them as legitimate 
experiences and integrate them into our 
curricula, and how to assess students in 
these domains – which were previously 
not considered part of school education.
One thing is certain – the future 
will demand that children develop 
connections with one another and foster 
a sense of community, citizenship and 
collaboration based on empathy, which 
some believe is a key competency for the 
twenty-first century.
Interpersonal competencies are 
increasingly recognized as a crucial 
component for education systems 
around the globe. Organizations 
including UNESCO and the Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD) are developing 
frameworks, standards and assessments 
for intrapersonal competencies, and 
concepts such as global skills to support 
greater cross-cultural collaboration. In 
Australia, a set of general capabilities 
including critical and creative thinking 
and intercultural understanding were 
included in the national curriculum in 
2009 – since then, many jurisdictions 
have added them to their own curricula. 
The Education for a Changing World project 
has highlighted the imperative to foster 
innovative education practices that will 
lead to widespread gains across the system.
Already, these novel practices are 
springing up across the education 
community, seeking to motivate, engage 
and challenge students, and to harness 
the potential of advanced technology 
to lift their performance. Some of these 
practices have a stronger evidence base 
than others, which makes it difficult to 
distinguish which ones are the most 
effective.



AI in the classroom 
Drawing on lessons from national and 
international innovation best practices 
within the private and public sectors, 
the NSW Department of Education 
is examining how to better support 
educationalists to develop and accelerate 
innovative ideas. The aim is to establish 
new ways to create sustainable and 
scalable methods to extend the learning, 
capabilities and achievements of 
our students. 
AI offers significant potential within 
education, if used wisely and if it serves 
the needs of educators. Already, there 
are AI-based systems that can support 
personalized learning, freeing up teachers 
to focus on individual student needs and 
educational leadership. These systems 
are able to monitor student engagement 
and progress, and potentially suggest 
adjustments to content.
It is crucial that educators are in the driver’s 
seat when it comes to designing and 
developing AI-based systems. Teachers 
and school leaders must play a critical role 
in defining a clear purpose for AI in the 
classroom, and be trained to understand 
and utilize it effectively. Students must 
also be involved in decisions about the use 
of these technologies and educated about 
the ethical frameworks that accompany 
their use. Their future will depend on 
the policies and approaches that are 
adopted now. 
Deputy Secretary in the New South 
Wales Department of Education, 
Leslie Loble (Australia) has led 
strategy, reform and innovative 
delivery in Australia's largest and most 
diverse education sector for nearly 
two decades. She was awarded the 
Australian Financial Review/Westpac 
Top 100 Women of Influence in 2013 for 
her positive impact on Australian public 
affairs and in recognition of her role in 
education reform.
