The first school I visited in an active 
conflict zone was set on the side of a hill 
overlooking a plain in Kosovo*, in 1999. 
To get there, we had to drive through 
country lanes past a village, where 
skeletons of houses lined the road – many 
of them with makeshift roofs, and all of 
them with black scorch marks above 
their windows.
They had been torched by Serbian 
forces in retaliation for the activities of 
the Kosovo Liberation Army, the rebel 
armed group fighting for an independent 
Kosovo. And in many of them, extended 
families were now living in one blackened 
room, around a stove donated by the 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF).
At the school, I saw children sitting in thin 
clothes, shivering in freezing classrooms 
with shell-holes in the wall. Many of them 
looked numb from something deeper 
than the freezing winter cold.
by Brendan O’Malley
Every attack must be 
documented and every measure 
taken to ensure education 
continues during periods of 
conflict. The price paid for 
children losing access to schools 
is too high, writes Brendan 
O’Malley.
When going to school is 
an act of faith
With their families, they had lived in the 
woods for six months to escape earlier 
retribution and, after negotiations, 
had recently been allowed to return to 
their village. The teachers were working 
without any prospect of being paid, to 
keep classes going.
As I interviewed the headteacher, there 
was a loud thud outside and the whole 
building shook. A shell had landed on 
the other side of the hill.
“They do this every day, just to remind us 
they are here,” the headteacher explained. 
“But we will carry on. The school gives 
us hope.”
The Santa Barbara Elementary School 
in the Philippines became a killing 
ground after it was taken over by 
an armed group during the Zamboanga 
siege of September 2013. 

* Within the framework of UN Security Council 
Resolution 1244, dated 1999.

A safe place to be 
In times of conflict or crisis, being able to 
send children to school offers parents and 
communities a semblance of normal life; 
a safe place to leave their children while 
they work; a place where vital services, 
such as vaccinations, can be delivered 
and where vital safety information – 
such as how to avoid landmines – can 
be learned. But above all, it is a means 
to give their children an education that 
will enable them to build a future for 
themselves and for their community 
and country.
The reverse is also true. When schools 
are destroyed in areas of instability, hope 
is destroyed along with them – fear of 
going to school and indeed, staying in 
the area, can spread. People may flee for 
their own safety and, with that, all hope of 
an education is gone.
There have been some shocking 
examples of education being targeted 
in recent years. In Chibok, Nigeria, 
in April 2014, Boko Haram militants 
abducted 276 girls from the Chibok 
Government Girls Secondary School, 
more than a hundred of whom have yet 
to be released (as of December 2017, 
according to news agencies Reuters and 
Agence France Presse). 
In October 2016, pro-government 
air strikes on the Kamal Qal’aji school 
complex in the Idlib Governorate, Syria, 
killed three teachers and nineteen 
children, injured sixteen children 
and severely damaged the school, 
the United Nations (UN) reported.
In June 2017, militants planted bombs 
around a primary school in Pigkawayan, 
in the Philippines, occupied it and held 
local people hostage in the school. 
Entire generations 
left behind 
The immediate impact of these attacks 
may be deaths and injuries to students 
and staff, destruction of facilities, 
closure of schools and universities, 
and psychological trauma.
If they are ongoing – given that on 
average, conflicts in poor countries 
last for twelve years – attacks, or even 
collateral damage, can lead to long-term 
disruption, closure, the permanent 
dropout of students and teachers, and 
the prevention of rebuilding. 
Even after a conflict ends, it can take 
years to rebuild destroyed facilities and 
get the education system back on its 
feet – during which time whole cohorts of 
children are denied an education.
Research by UNESCO shows that half of 
the world’s primary-aged children who 
are out of school, live in conflict-affected 
states, and most never get the chance to 
complete their education, “leaving behind 
entire generations”.
The latest global study of attacks on 
education, Education under Attack 2014 
– published by the Global Coalition to 
Protect Education from Attack (GCPEA) 
– documented that over four years, from 
2009 to 2012, armed non-state groups, 
state, military and security forces, and 
armed criminal groups had attacked 
thousands of schoolchildren, university 
students, teachers, academics and 
education establishments in at least 
seventy countries worldwide. 
The attacks ranged from the bombing or 
burning down of schools or universities 
to killing, injuring, kidnapping or illegally 
arresting, detaining or torturing students, 
teachers and academics.

In the six most heavily-affected countries 
– Afghanistan, Colombia, Pakistan, 
Somalia, Sudan and Syria – the 2014 
report documented that there were 
“1,000 or more attacks on schools, 
universities, staff and students or 
1,000 or more students, teachers or 
other education personnel attacked, 
or education buildings attacked or used 
for military purposes.”
The report also found that schools and 
university facilities were used for military 
purposes in twenty-four of the thirty 
countries profiled.
The UN has since reported that in 
Nigeria, an estimated 1,500 schools 
have been destroyed since 2011, with at 
least 1,280 casualties among teachers 
and students. According to the GCPEA, 
“in the worst cases, children have been 
injured and killed and schools damaged 
or destroyed when belligerent forces 
have attacked schools because military 
forces were using them”. 
Schools and universities are targeted for 
different, and often multiple, reasons – 
whether it is to create instability, attack 
the perceived type of education offered, 
seize facilities for military use; or in the 
case of higher education, to prevent 
expressions of alternative political views.
Every attack must 
be documented
The first and most crucial step to 
addressing the problem is to develop 
effective monitoring to understand what 
is happening, and why.
Prevention measures can range from 
providing protection, such as security 
guards or building a perimeter wall, to 
addressing a motive for attacks, such as 
ensuring equitable access to schools for 
minorities or enabling minorities to learn 
through their own language and study 
their own religion; or hiring teachers 
from the local ethnic community, as has 
happened in Southern Thailand.
The reduction of impact measures 
could include building schools out of 
concrete instead of wood and straw, 
because they would be harder to burn 
down, or providing two points of exit for 
each classroom, so that students have a 
chance to escape if militants or soldiers 
try to enter a classroom to recruit them 
at gunpoint.
In the case of the military use of 
schools, a key preventive measure is 
persuading states and non-state armed 
groups to agree not to use schools for 
military purposes.
Deterrence measures include ending 
legal impunity for the attacks and holding 
to account the armed groups and armed 
forces that carry out attacks. 
This includes the listing of parties 
committing grave violations against 
children in conflict – including attacks on 
schools and recruitment of child soldiers 
– in the UN Secretary General’s annual 
report on such violations to the UN 
Security Council. Those parties listed must 
draw up action plans to address and end 
the violations or face sanctions.
Currently, the GCPEA is leading an 
international campaign to persuade 
countries to sign up to the Safe Schools 
Declaration, which commits countries to 
many of these measures. In December 
2017, the Dominican Republic became 
the seventy-second country (as of 
9 January 2018) to sign the Declaration. 
The Special Representative of the 
Secretary-General for Children and 
Armed Conflict (CAAC), Virginia Gamba, 
has urged all UN Member States to 
endorse and promote the instrument. The 
Safe Schools Declaration “has made an 
essential contribution towards promoting 
tangible measures to prevent attacks on 
education. We simply cannot afford to 
make schools in conflict zones a military 
target. The price of a child losing his or 
her access to education for years, if not 
decades, is too high to pay,” Gamba said, 
while presenting the CAAC Report at the 
UN General Assembly, in October 2017.
Brendan O’Malley (United Kingdom), 
a journalist and consultant, has worked 
with several international organizations 
on issues related to attacks on education, 
and higher education for refugees and 
crisis-affected communities. He is the 
author of Education under Attack (2007, 
UNESCO) and Education under Attack 
(2010, UNESCO). He was lead researcher 
of Education under Attack 2014 (GCPEA). 
O’Malley was editor and co-writer 
of the Education Cluster’s Protecting 
Education in Countries Affected by Conflict 
series (2012). 
Diptych by Nigerian artist, 
Rahima Gambo, from the multimedia 
project, Education is Forbidden, 
reflecting on students returning to 
their schools which were attacked by 
Boko Haram militants in Nigeria. The 
panel on the left shows Rukkaya and 
Hadiza in their school playground in 
the north-eastern city of Maiduguri 
in 2016, recalling the times when they 
had to hide their school uniforms in 
plastic bags to avoid being targeted by 
insurgents. The panel on the right shows 
drawings from a Nigerian schoolbook.

When schools are 
destroyed in 
areas of instability, 
hope is destroyed 
along with them 
