And the L’Oréal Foundation puts its 
skills and know-how behind this great 
cause to support women researchers 
through every stage of their career − 
bringing them into the public eye and 
emphasizing the importance of a better 
representation of women in scientific 
vocations if we are to solve the great 
challenges of our time.
Why is it important to promote women 
scientists?
The world has never been so 
changeable and uncertain. We are 
undergoing a veritable technological, 
social and environmental revolution, 
and are being confronted with 
challenges we have never faced before. 
How could we deprive ourselves of the 
scientific skills of half the world’s talent? 
How could we shape an inclusive world 
without women? We need to make use 
of all the talent available – obviously 
including women – if we are to address 
the challenges and the extraordinary 
complexity of our times. Yet, women 
continue to be under-represented in 
the world of science, where the glass 
ceiling remains a sad reality. 
Only about 30 per cent of researchers 
are women and three per cent of 
Nobel prizes in the sciences have been 
awarded to women since the prizes 
were established – none in 2017. At 
L’Oréal, both in our company and in our 
Foundation, it is impossible to imagine 
a world without the contribution of 
women.
How can the L’Oréal-UNESCO For 
Women in Science programme further 
the cause of women scientists? 
For the past twenty years, the L’Oréal-
UNESCO For Women in Science 
programme has been using the 
recognition and promotion of women 
in science to demonstrate by example 
that they have a full role to play in 
scientific institutions. 
This is particularly important. The 
promotion of women who serve as 
role models for others is fundamental 
to encouraging and supporting young 
women in scientific careers.
But when we look at the figures, it 
is obvious that this is not enough. 
Over the past ten years, the share of 
women in research has, it is true, risen 
by about twelve per cent. Women 
are increasingly following a career 
in science and represent about half 
of those enrolled in the first years of 
university. But they are still largely 
excluded from higher positions – only 
eleven per cent of senior academic 
posts are held by women, according 
to the UNESCO Science Report: Towards 
2030, published in 2015. 
Even if there is no doubt that our 
programme has helped to raise 
awareness and mobilized the scientific 
community, we obviously have to go 
even further. We have to work with the 
entire ecosystem − in other words, with 
the institutions and public authorities, 
as well as with men. One of the great 
merits of the L’Oréal-UNESCO For 
Women in Science programme is that it 
is far from being only a women’s cause 
being fought by women. It also allows 
women to help shape an inclusive world 
− a prerequisite for fair and balanced 
societies for all, able to respond to the 
challenges of today’s world.

A twenty-year partnership
Three questions for Jean-Paul Agon
This year is the twentieth anniversary 
of the L’Oréal-UNESCO For Women 
in Science programme. How would 
you define the partnership between 
L’Oréal and UNESCO?
L’Oréal’s partnership with UNESCO is 
unique. In 1998, when we launched the 
L’Oréal-UNESCO For Women in Science 
programme, our ambition was to 
promote women scientists by launching 
a prize for scientific excellence that 
is reserved for talented women. In 
order to do this, we were looking for 
a partner that shares this ambitious 
vision of a science – and a society – 
which is more inclusive. Partnering with 
UNESCO became an obvious choice, 
as we share the same humanist and 
universal values. After twenty years 
of collaboration, our programme has 
expanded to a magnificent scale. Not 
only do we award an annual prize to 
five eminent women scientists, each 
representing one of the five continents, 
but we also give awards to young 
researchers in 115 countries. 
Through these initiatives, in twenty 
years we have jointly supported over 
2,700 women. UNESCO is a valued 
partner for making the programme 
truly international. 
Jean-Paul Agon, Chairman and 
Chief Executive Officer of L’Oréal.
