Defeating the enemies of 
freedom
Aldous Huxley
Analysing the gravest threats facing humanity, the British novelist 
Aldous Huxley (1894‑1963) recommended that a world Bill of Rights 
should include efforts to increase available resources to meet the 
needs of the world's population; limiting the power of those who, 
through their wealth or hierarchical position, effectively dominated 
the masses of ordinary, unprivileged men and women who 
constituted the majority. He elaborated on these suggestions in his 
article, originally titled “The Rights of Man and the Facts of the Human 
Situation”, which he sent to UNESCO in June 1947. Excerpts follow.
Because of the mounting pressure of 
population upon resources, the twentieth 
century has become the golden age of 
centralized government and dictatorship, 
and has witnessed the wholesale revival 
of slavery, which has been imposed upon 
political heretics, conquered populations 
and prisoners of war. 
Throughout the nineteenth century, the 
New World provided cheap food for the 
teeming masses of the Old World and free 
land for the victims of oppression. Today 
the New World holds a large and growing 
population, there is no free land and 
over the vast areas, the much- abused 
soil is losing its fertility. The New World 
still produces a large exportable surplus. 
Whether, fifty years from now, it will still 
have a surplus, with which to feed the 
three billion inhabiting the Old World 
seems doubtful.
It should be added, at this point, that 
while the population of the planet as a 
whole is rapidly increasing, the population 
of certain extremely overpopulated 
areas in Western Europe is stationary 
and will shortly start to decline. The fact 
that, by 1970, France and Great Britain 
will each have lost about four million 
inhabitants, while Russia will have 
added about seventy-five million to its 
present population, is bound to raise 
political problems, which it will require 
consummate statesmanship to resolve. [...]
A constitutional Bill of Rights, whose 
principles are applied in specific 
legislation, can certainly do something 
to protect the masses of ordinary, 
unprivileged men and women against the 
few who, through wealth or hierarchical 
position, effectively wield power over 
the majority. But prevention is always 
better than cure. Mere paper restrictions, 
designed to curb the abuse of a power 
already concentrated in a few hands, are 
but the mitigations of an existing evil. 
Personal liberty can be made secure only 
by abolishing the evil altogether. 
UNESCO is engaged at present in 
facilitating the task of mitigation; but 
it is in the fortunate position of being 
able to proceed, if it so desires, to the 
incomparably more important task of 
prevention, of the radical removal of the 
present impedimenta to liberty. This is 
primarily an affair for the scientific section 
of the Organization. For the problem of 
relieving the pressure of population upon 
resources is primarily a problem in pure 
and applied science, while the problem 
of total war is (among other things, of 
course) a problem in ethics for scientific 
workers as individuals and as members of 
professional organizations. [...] 
The British novelist and critic 
Aldous Huxley (1894-1963) was best 
known for his dystopian Brave New 
World (1932), which vividly expressed his 
distrust of politics and technology in the 
twentieth century through satire. He was 
the younger brother of Julian Huxley, 
the first Director-General of UNESCO 
(1946-1948).
The increasing pressure of population 
upon resources and the waging, threat of, 
and unremitting preparation for, total war 
– these are, at the present time, the most 
formidable enemies to liberty. 
About three quarters of the 2.2 billion 
inhabitants of our planet do not have 
enough to eat. By the end of the 
present century, world population will 
have increased (if we manage to avoid 
catastrophe in the interval) to about 
3.3 billion. Meanwhile, over vast areas of 
the earth’s surface, soil erosion is rapidly 
diminishing the fortuity of mankind’s four 
billion acres of productive land. Moreover, 
in those countries where industrialism is 
most highly developed, mineral resources 
are running low, or have been completely 
exhausted – and this at a time when 
a rising population demands an ever-
increasing quantity of consumer goods 
and when improved technology is in a 
position to supply that demand.
Heavy pressure of population upon 
resources threatens liberty in several 
ways. Individuals have to work harder 
and longer to earn a poorer living. At the 
same time the economic situation of the 
community as a whole is so precarious 
that small mishaps, such as untoward 
weather conditions, may result in serious 
breakdowns. There can be little or no 
personal liberty in the midst of social 
chaos; and where social chaos is reduced 
to order by the intervention of a powerful 
centralized executive, there is a grave risk 
of totalitarianism. 
