
I am convinced that non-violence is the 
most effective way to combat tyranny 
and find a way out of complex conflicts. 
It is always possible to resort to it. But 
that demands faith, courage and the 
capacity for self-sacrifice. In the end, 
change is achieved at a lower cost, and 
its effects are more powerful and more 
effective. Those who choose violence to 
change things do not always get what 
they want.
For me, non-violence is the common 
denominator of all my actions. I have 
adopted it in what I say, in what I do 
and in my strategies. I never shy away 
from it and I don’t see any alternative. 
What does non-violence mean to you? 
And what is the likely impact of non-
violent civil resistance in countries 
experiencing complex conflicts?
Political violence is the recourse to 
force to achieve political or religious 
objectives and to change the beliefs, 
opinions or behaviour of people in the 
public sphere. There is another type 
of political violence − that is certainly 
hard to condemn, but which I do not 
recommend – it is the use of force as a 
means of resistance to an occupier. 


Non-violence
is the common denominator
of all my actions
Tawakkol Karman
Interview by Anissa Barrak 
and Chen Xiaorong
Without justice, peace will 
always remain fragile − a kind 
of temporary truce, a rest for 
the warrior − which will only 
be followed by something 
more terrible, says Tawakkol 
Karman. The Yemeni feminist, 
journalist and human rights 
activist – one of the winners 
of the Nobel Peace Prize 2011 
– participated in celebrations 
for the International Day of 
Non-Violence at UNESCO on 
2 October 2017.
With this article, the UNESCO Courier 
marks International Women’s Day, 
on 8 March. 
Portrait of Tawakkol Karman 2017, 
from the Hands of Peace exhibition 
by Séverine Desmarest.

As a journalist and political activist, 
you are, first and foremost, defending 
human rights. 
My goal is clear – it is to contribute to 
the establishment of democratic states 
that respect freedoms and human 
rights. This objective can only be 
achieved through a fight against the 
violation of these rights and tyranny − 
and the building of legally-constituted 
states founded upon citizenship and 
institutional integrity. I act in a number 
of ways within civil society and use all 
kinds of platforms, including the media, 
human rights and politics. 
What I try to explain, wherever I go, 
is that tyranny deprives societies of 
development and peace. Societies 
deprived of freedoms and human rights 
live in a state of precarious peace, which 
is doomed to collapse rapidly.
In 2005, you co-founded Women 
Journalists Without Chains, which aims 
to promote freedom of expression and 
democratic rights. What difficulties have 
you encountered over the last decade 
and what has been your main success?
Women Journalists Without Chains 
was founded to combat widespread 
repression in the world of information 
at the time – arrests, beatings and 
various forms of aggression – but also 
to defend the right of every citizen to 
become the owner of a media, whether 
print, radio and television or digital. 
We put a great deal of effort into 
defending the civil and political rights 
of citizens. We participated in several 
actions to fight against corruption 
and the abuse of power. We organized 
sit-ins and demonstrations to help 
citizens stand up to the domination of 
influential tribal leaders.
A wall painting created during the 
Open Day of Art, a public event 
organized by Murad Subay 
in Sanaa (Yemen), March 2017. 

It was a long struggle, on a daily basis, 
which resulted in the release of a large 
number of journalists who had been 
detained or abducted. This also made it 
possible for a number of independent 
and opposition newspapers that 
were previously banned, to be 
published again. 
Even before the peaceful revolution of 
11 February 2011 (in Egypt), I helped, 
along with others, to reduce violations 
by the incumbent regime (in Yemen). 
We created a force of civil pressure in 
order to preserve a minimum of rights 
and to raise the level of demands. After 
this civil revolution, Yemen entered 
a period of transition, where people 
could fully enjoy their rights and 
freedoms. There were no restrictions 
on freedom of expression, of assembly, 
the right to demonstrate or any other 
form of rights and freedoms. Everyone 
benefited, without distinction. There 
were no arrests or detentions – until 
the coup of January 2015 and the war 
that followed.

Peace does not 
just mean the end 
of war; it is also 
the end of oppression 
and injustice
What is your view of Yemen today, 
devastated by what you have called a 
“total war”? What do you plan to do to 
ensure a better future for your country? 
We can only think about the future of a 
country when peace has been restored. 
But peace does not just mean the end 
of war; it is also the end of oppression 
and injustice. There can be no peace 
without justice, because, without 
justice, peace will always remain fragile 
− a kind of temporary truce, a rest for 
the warrior – and which will only be 
followed by something more terrible. 
And the worst of wars are those waged 
by tyrannical regimes against their own 
people. This is why I remain convinced 
of the need to oppose regimes that do 
not respect rights and freedoms and 
which are unable to guarantee them, 
whether for individuals or institutions. 
They have to be replaced.
My struggle today, as in the past, 
remains focused on democracy: to put 
an end to the situation imposed by 
the coup d’état in Yemen and to hold a 
referendum on the draft constitution 
− which has already found consensus 
during the national dialogue set up 
during the period of transition. After 
that, elections can be held. 
Consequently, when political life returns 
to normal, I plan to found a political 
party which will bring together youth 
and women to carry forward the civic 
project advocated by the revolution. On 
the international front, I will continue to 
fight to defend human rights, promote 
peace and combat tyranny. 
In October 2011, you received the Nobel 
Peace Prize with Ellen Johnson Sirleaf 
and Leymah Gbowee. What is it that 
unites you all? 
The dreams we share are the building 
of a civil state, the use of non-violence 
as the only way to operate, and the 
defence of women’s rights for effective 
participation in political affairs. With 
Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, we have worked 
together with the United Nations on 
the Sustainable Development Goals. As 
for Leymah Gbowee, we have worked 
together to promote peace and human 
rights, particularly through the Nobel 
Women’s Initiative – which includes four 
other women Nobel Peace laureates 
– and the Nobel Peace Prize Forum, 
which works to coordinate action to 
promote peace and combat tyranny 
and violence.

The Norwegian Nobel Committee said 
that it hoped, among other things, that 
the 2011 prize would “help to bring an 
end to the suppression of women that 
still occurs in many countries…”. What 
could Arab women do to contribute to 
peacebuilding? 
We have led a long campaign to end the 
repression of women, and the struggle 
continues. This will not happen within 
a matter of days or months, but I remain 
convinced that we will succeed one day. 
Unfortunately, in the Middle East, more 
than elsewhere, women are exposed 
to repression. Adding to the violations 
of women’s rights, especially in the 
Arab Spring countries, has been a 
lust for wealth. This, in some cases, 
has led to the sponsorship of coups 
d’état, counter-revolutions and even 
collaborations with the enemy. But 
we are determined to continue our 
struggle. Arab women are the driving 
force of sustainable peace in their 
countries and in the region. 
In one sentence, how would you 
summarize your philosophy of life?
I was born into a family whose 
philosophy of life revolved around two 
words – righteousness and justice. 
My father is a man of the law, and one 
of the earliest constitutionalists in the 
country. He is known for his efforts to 
fight against corruption and nepotism, 
and for his integrity in the high public 
offices he has held. Thanks to him, 
I acquired the legal culture needed to 
assert rights and conquer freedoms, the 
courage to speak the truth and confront 
oppression and injustice. He taught 
me to take initiatives, to be part of the 
solution and not part of the problem. 
My mother taught me to love people 
and to understand their suffering. 
To summarize my philosophy, I would 
say that it is possible to fight against 
violence and repression without 
resorting to violence and repression.
Tawakkol Karman (Yemen), Nobel 
Peace Prize 2011 laureate (with Ellen 
Johnson Sirleaf and Leymah Gbowee), 
is a feminist and human rights activist 
and one of the leading figures of the 
Arab Spring in Yemen. She has been 
arrested several times for organizing 
peaceful protests against Ali Abdullah 
Saleh (1942-2017), who was president 
of Yemen for over thirty years till 2011.
