But can you really have a romantic 
relationship with a robot? No, because 
love and friendship cannot be reduced 
to a set of neuronal transmissions in 
the brain. 
Love and friendship exist beyond 
the individual, and even beyond the 
interaction between two people. When 
I speak, I am participating in something 
that we share in common, language. It is 
the same for love, friendship and thought 
– these are symbolic processes in which 
humans participate. Nobody thinks only 
for themselves. A brain uses its energy to 
participate in thinking. 
To those who believe that a machine can 
think, we must respond that it would 
be astonishing if a machine could think, 
because even the brain does not think! 
From the series Constellations (2014), 
by Spanish artist Jordi Isern.

Humans, not machines,
create meaning
Miguel Benasayag, 
interviewed by Régis Meyran
In the term “artificial 
intelligence” (AI), the word 
“intelligence” is just a metaphor. 
While an AI may surpass 
humans in terms of calculating 
capacity, it is unable to 
ascribe any meaning to these 
calculations. For the Argentinian 
philosopher and psychoanalyst 
Miguel Benasayag, reducing the 
complexity of a living being to 
computer code is a mistake – 
just as the idea that machines 
can substitute humans is absurd.
Two computers in the Google Brain 
programme could apparently 
communicate with each other in a 
“language” that they themselves created 
and which humans could not decipher. 
What do you think of this?
That just doesn’t make any sense. In 
reality, each time these two machines are 
launched, they systematically repeat the 
same sequence of information exchange. 
And this is not a language, it does not 
communicate. It is a bad metaphor, like 
the one that says the lock “recognizes” 
the key.
It’s rather like when some people say they 
are “friends” with a robot. There are even 
smartphone applications that supposedly 
let you “chat” with one. In Spike Jonze’s 
film, Her (2013), a man is asked a series of 
questions, which enables his brain to be 
mapped. A machine then synthesizes a 
voice and fabricates responses that trigger 
a feeling of being in love, in the man.
What distinguishes human intelligence 
from AI? 
Living intelligence is not a calculating 
machine. It is a process that articulates 
affectivity, corporeality, error. In human 
beings, it presupposes the presence 
of desire and an awareness of their 
own history over the long term. 
Human intelligence is not conceivable 
separately from all other cerebral and 
corporeal processes. 
Unlike humans or animals who think 
with the help of a brain located inside 
their bodies – which itself exists in an 
environment – a machine produces 
calculations and predictions without 
being able to give them any meaning. 
The question of whether a machine can 
substitute humans is, in fact, absurd. It 
is living beings that create meaning, not 
computation. Many AI researchers are 
convinced that the difference between 
living intelligence and artificial intelligence 
is quantitative, whereas it is qualitative. 

In your opinion, is reducing a living being 
to code the principal failing of AI?
Indeed, some AI experts are so dazzled 
by their own technical achievements – 
rather like little boys fascinated by their 
construction games – that they lose sight 
of the big picture. They fall into the trap of 
reductionism. 
In 1950, the American mathematician 
and father of cybernetics, Norbert Wiener, 
wrote in his book, The Human Use of 
Human Beings, that one day we might be 
able to “telegraph a man”. Four decades 
later, the transhumanist idea of “mind 
uploading” has been built on the same 
fantasy – that the whole real world can 
be reduced to units of information that 
can be transmitted from one piece of 
hardware to another. 
The idea that living beings can be 
modelled into units of information is also 
found in the work of the French biologist 
Pierre-Henri Gouyon, with whom I have 
published a book of interviews, Fabriquer 
le vivant? [Manufacturing the living? 
2012]. Gouyon sees deoxyribonucleic 
acid (DNA) as the platform for a code that 
can be transferred to other platforms. 
But when we think that living beings can 
be modelled into units of information, 
we forget that the sum of information 
units is not the living thing, and no one 
is interested in carrying out research on 
what cannot be modelled. 
Taking into account that which cannot 
be modelled does not lead us to the 
idea of God, or obscurantism, whatever 
some may think. The principles of 
unpredictability and uncertainty can 
be found in all the exact sciences. That 
is why the aspiration of transhumanists 
for total knowledge is part of a perfectly 
irrational, technophile discourse. It owes 
its considerable success to its ability to 
quench the metaphysical thirst of our 
contemporaries. Transhumanists dream of 
a life freed from all uncertainty. Yet in daily 
life, as in research, we have to contend 
with uncertainties and randomness.
According to transhumanist theory, we will 
one day become immortal, thanks to AI. 
In our current postmodern turmoil, where 
we no longer ponder on the relationships 
between things, where reductionism 
and individualism dominate, the 
transhumanist promise takes the place 
of Plato’s cave. 
For the Greek philosopher, real life was 
not to be found in the physical world, but 
in the world of ideas. For transhumanists, 
twenty-four centuries later, real life lies 
not in the body, but in algorithms. For 
them, the body is just a façade – a set 
of useful information must be extracted 
from it, and then we need to get rid of its 
natural defects. That is how they intend to 
achieve immortality.
At scientific conferences, I have had the 
opportunity to meet several members of 
Singularity University [more a think-tank 
than a university, based in Silicon Valley 
in the United States, with an unwritten 
transhumanist approach] who wore 
medallions around their necks requesting 
that, if they died, their heads should 
be cryopreserved. 
I see this as the emergence of a new 
form of conservatism, even though 
I am the one who comes across as a 
bioconservative, because I am opposed to 
the transhumanist philosophy. But when 
my critics call me a reactionary, they are 
using the same types of arguments as 
politicians – who claim to be modernizing 
or reforming, while eroding the social rights 
of a country and labelling as conservative, 
all those who want to defend their rights!
The hybridization of humans and 
machines is already a reality. That is also 
a transhumanist ideal.
We have not even begun to understand 
living beings and hybridization, because 
biological technology today still omits 
almost all of life, which cannot be 
reduced only to those physiochemical 
processes that can be modelled. Having 
said this, the living have already been 
hybridized with the machine, and this will 
certainly be even more so, with products 
resulting from new technologies. 

Robot (2013), a performance created for 
dancers and robots by Spanish-French 
choreographer, Blanca Li, who takes a 
questioning look at a world inhabited 
by humans and machines.
There are many machines with which 
we work, and to which we delegate a 
number of functions. But are they all 
necessary? That’s the whole point. I have 
worked on cochlear implants and the 
culture of deaf people. There are millions 
of deaf people who claim their own 
culture – which is not respected enough 
– and who refuse to have a cochlear 
implant because they prefer to express 
themselves in sign language. Does this 
innovation, which could crush the culture
of deaf people, constitute progress? The 
answer is not intrinsically obvious.
Above all, we need to ensure that 
hybridization takes place with respect 
for life. However, what we are witnessing 
today is not so much hybridization 
as the colonization of the living, by 
machines. Because they externalize 
their memories, many people no longer 
remember anything. They have memory 
problems that are not the result of 
degenerative pathologies.
Take the case of Global Positioning Systems 
(GPS), for example. There have been 
studies on taxi drivers in Paris and London, 
both labyrinthine cities. While London taxi 
drivers navigate by orienting themselves, 
Parisians systematically use their GPSes. 
After a three-year period, psychological 
tests showed that the subcortical nuclei 
responsible for mapping time and space 
had atrophied in the Parisian sample 
(atrophies that would certainly be 
reversible if the person abandoned this 
practice). They were affected by a form 
of dyslexia that prevented them from 
negotiating their way through time and 
space. That is colonization – the area of the 
brain is atrophied because its function had 
been delegated, without being replaced 
by anything.
What worries you the most? 
I am worried about the inordinate success 
of the logic of innovation. The notion 
of progress has misfired. It has been 
replaced by the idea of innovation, which 
is something quite different – it contains 
neither a starting point nor an end point, 
and is neither good nor bad. It must, 
therefore, be questioned critically. Using 
a computer word processor is much more 
powerful than the Olivetti typewriter I 
used in the 1970s – for me this is progress. 
But conversely, every smartphone 
contains dozens of applications and 
few people ask themselves seriously 
how many of them they really need. 
Wisdom consists of keeping a distance 
from the fascination provoked by 
entertainment and the effectiveness of 
new technologies.
Also, in a disoriented society that has lost 
its great narratives, the transhumanist 
discourse is very disturbing – it infantilizes 
humans, and views the promises of 
technology without scepticism. In the 
West, technology has always referred to 
the idea of transcending limits. Already 
in the seventeenth century, the French 
philosopher René Descartes, for whom 
the body was a machine, had imagined 
the possibility of thought without a body. 
It is a human temptation to dream that, 
through science, we will free ourselves 
of our bodies and their limitations – 
something that transhumanists believe 
they will finally achieve. 
But the dream of an all-powerful, post-
organic man who knows no limits has 
all kinds of serious consequences for 
society. It seems to me that it should 
even be viewed as a mirror image of the 
rise of religious fundamentalism, which 
lurks behind the supposed natural values 
of humans. I see them as two irrational 
forms of fundamentalism at war.
A philosopher and psychoanalyst, 
Miguel Benasayag (Argentina) is 
a former member of Che Guevara’s 
resistance against Juan Perón’s regime. 
He succeeded in fleeing Argentina in 
1978, after having been imprisoned and 
tortured there, and now lives in Paris. 
His recent publications include Cerveau 
augmenté, homme diminué (Augmented 
brain, diminished human, 2016) and La 
singularité du vivant (The singularity of 
the living, 2017). 
