A study of recent statements on human 
rights reveals the curious paradox that 
the one condition which is essential to 
their realization and proper use is hardly 
ever mentioned. Perhaps the omission 
of any reference to education can be 
explained on the assumption that it 
is taken for granted as a human right 
and as the essential foundation for the 
enjoyment of human rights. 
The history of education, however, provides 
ample evidence that education has not 
been regarded as a human right nor has it 
been used as an instrument for developing 
an appreciation of the importance of 
human rights for the fullest development 
of each individual as a human being. 
Historically two motives have dominated 
the provision of education. The first 
and the earliest motive was directed to 
indoctrinating the younger generation 
in the religious beliefs of their particular 
denominations. The second motive, which 
came with the use of the national state, was 
to develop a sense of loyalty to the political 
group or nation. In both cases, the ends 
that were sought emphasized acquiescent 
discipline rather than education for 
freedom as a human being. […] 
Because education has not yet been 
recognized universally as a human right, 
it is essential that it be included in any 
declaration of human rights that may 
be drawn up. The right to education 
needs greater emphasis than it is given 
in the Memorandum on Human Rights, 
prepared by UNESCO [27 March 1947]. 
Isaac Leon Kandel 
“Education for freedom does not mean, as it has frequently 
been thought to mean, a laissez‑faire programme of content 
or of methods of instruction, but the intelligent recognition of 
responsibility and duty,” wrote the American educator Isaac L. Kandel 
(1881‑1965), in his article “Education and Human Rights”, sent to 
UNESCO in 1947. Excerpts follow.
Two-tier education 
One of the tragic results of the traditional 
organization of education into two 
systems – one for the masses and the 
other for a select group – is that, even 
when equality of educational opportunity 
is provided, certain social and economic 
classes feel that the opportunities are 
not intended for them. The provision 
of equality of educational opportunity 
demands in some countries, measures 
to change the psychological attitudes 
produced by the traditional organization. 
Thus Henri Laugier, in discussing plans for 
the reconstruction of education in France, 
wrote [in the Educational Yearbook of the 
International Institute, Teachers College, 
Columbia University, p. 136 f, New York, 1944]: 
“So many generations in France have 
lived in an atmosphere of theoretical 
equality and actual inequality that the 
situation has in practice met with fairly 
general acceptance, induced by the 
normally pleasant conditions of French 
life. Of course, the immediate victims of 
the inequality are barely conscious of 
it or do not suffer from it in any way. It 
does not occur to the son of a worker or 
an agricultural labourer that he might 
become the governor of a colony, director 
in a ministry, an ambassador, an admiral, 
or an inspector of finance. He may know 
that such positions exist, but for him they 
exist in a higher world which is not open to 
him. Most frequently this situation neither 
inspires nor embitters him, nor does it 
arouse in him a desire to claim a right or to 
demand a definite change!” […] 
The recognition of education as a human 
right is, however, only one aspect of the 
problem as it concerns the Rights of Man. 
Free access to education at all levels may 
be provided without affecting either the 
content or the methods of instruction. 
Traditionally, the quality of elementary 
education differed from the quality of 
secondary education; the former was 
directed to imparting a certain quantum of 
knowledge, most generally to be acquired 
by rote and resulting in what the French 
call l’esprit primaire; the latter was intended 
to import a liberal or general cultural 
education. In neither case was there, except 
by indirection, any deep-rooted training for 
the use and enjoyment of those freedoms 
which are included in the list of Human 
Rights. The emphasis, particularly, since 
most types of education were dominated 
by exigencies of examinations, was rather 
on the acceptance of the authority – either 
of the printed word or of the teacher.
Freedom is not license
When the pendulum began to shift from 
an emphasis on discipline, indoctrination, 
and authoritarianism to an emphasis on 
freedom, it was too often forgotten that 
freedom is a conquest and that education 
for freedom of any kind demands a type 
of discipline in learning to appreciate 
the moral consequences of one’s actions. 
Education for freedom does not mean, as 
it has frequently been thought to mean, 
a laissez-faire programme of content or of 
methods of instruction, but the intelligent 
recognition of responsibility and duty. 
If this principle is sound, it also means a 
change in the status of the teacher and 
of teaching. If the teacher is to be more 
than a purveyor of knowledge to be tested 
by examinations, then the traditional 
limitations placed upon him by courses of 
study prescribed in detail, by prescribed 
methods of instruction, and by control 
through inspection and examinations must 
be replaced by a different concept of the 
preparation that is desirable for the teacher. 

Education:
the essential
foundation for human rights

Education Rewards, a poster by 
German artist Sarah Hartwig, judged 
one of the Ten Best Posters in the Right 
to Education competition, organized 
in 2014 by the human rights non-profit, 
4tomorrow. 
That preparation must be raised to 
the same level as preparation for any 
other liberal profession. If the efforts 
of the teacher are to be directed to 
the development of free personalities 
and to education for freedom of 
speech, expression, communication, 
information and inquiry, the teacher 
through his preparation should become 
professionally free and recognize that 
freedom without a sense of responsibility 
easily degenerates into license.
Before the Rights of Man can be 
incorporated into programmes of 
education, another change is essential. 
In the past, education has been used 
as an instrument of nationalistic 
policy, which too frequently meant 
indoctrination in either national or racial 
separatism and superiority. And even 
where the humanities formed the core 
of the curriculum, so much attention 
was devoted to the scaffolding that the 
essential meaning of humanism was lost. 
The common goals inherent in the 
ideal of the Rights of Man can only be 
attained as programmes of education and 
instruction are based on the realization 
that there is no national culture which 
does not owe far more than is usually 
admitted to the influence of the cultural 
heritage of man of all races and of all 
ages. It is upon this foundation that 
the freedoms included in the Rights of 
Man can be laid; it is only in this way 
that the true concept of humanism as 
an end in education can be developed. 
Their attainment, finally, depends upon 
training in the methods of free inquiry. 
Education for the various freedoms 
demands discipline. To paraphrase 
Rousseau, man must be disciplined to 
enjoy the freedoms which are his rights.
