To banish poverty 
and want
Secondly, there is the need for 
guaranteeing a certain minimum 
subsistence for all, sufficient to banish 
poverty and want. This has two aspects. 
First is the guarantee through a 
comprehensive system of social security 
against loss of earning power from any 
of the risks to which the wage-earner is 
prone: risks arising from accident, sickness 
or old age. Second is a guarantee of 
certain minimum terms and conditions of 
employment: a prohibition of any contract 
of employment which fails to secure a 
certain minimum standard of earnings. 
This is not only a matter of aspirations: it 
is a matter also of attainment; while the 
standard that is regarded as the minimum 
standard – as “a living wage”– is itself 
subject to change from one generation to 
the next and varies with the level of social 
and historical development in different 
parts of the world.
Over large parts of the world, any 
desirable minimum standard is at present 
unattainable (even with radical alterations 
in the distribution of income) owing to 
the low level of productivity per man-
hour. Here the practical realization of this 
“right” requires a planned development 
of these regions as a prior condition 
(development which is systematically 
integrated under public auspices over a 
wide area, and not left to laissez-faire; and 
preferably development that is financially 
assisted from outside, provided that 
undesirable political conditions are not 
attached to such assistance). 



Maurice Dobb 
The right to employment, to social security, to a minimum wage, 
to the freedom of assembly and association, to free access to 
employment. These are the essential elements to integrate into a 
charter of human rights, in order to imagine a new kind of society, 
according to the British economist, Maurice Dobb (1900‑1976). 
Economic
and social rights 
A guarantee 
for everyone
Thirdly, it is necessary that rights of 
assembly and of organization should 
be guaranteed to all employed persons: 
moreover, that this right of organization 
should be made actual by extension of 
the right to all representative workers’ 
organizations to negotiate regarding the 
terms of their employment and to be 
represented on bodies responsible for 
controlling the conditions of work. It is 
manifestly inconsistent with the dignity 
of man that labour should be regarded 
(as hitherto) as a mere hired factor of 
production, excluded from any voice in 
the conduct of industrial policy. 
Fourthly, it is necessary that employment 
and access to the means of livelihood 
should be unrestricted by any 
considerations of race, creed, opinion or 
membership of any legal organization. 
Against private-owned 
monopolies
It can reasonably be held that ownership 
of the means of production (including 
land) by private individuals on such 
a scale as to imply that independent 
access to these means of production is 
barred for a substantial section of the 
community, represents an infringement 
of the economic rights of man in any 
full sense of the term. Where ownership 
of land and productive equipment is 
concentrated in the hands of a class, the 
remainder of the community is deprived 
of the possibility of a livelihood except as 
hired servants to the former – a situation 
which involves a substantial inequality 
of rights, de facto, and in an important 
sense, involves a deprivation of freedom 
from the class of non-owners. 
Such an interpretation of human rights is, 
of course, incapable of being reconciled 
with Capitalism as an economic system. 
Clearly, the notion of a declaration 
of rights which shall hold true of all 
times and conditions is too abstract to 
be tenable in this age, which is more 
conscious than its forbears of the 
historically-relative character of social 
and economic problems. Problems, 
needs, rights and duties only have a 
meaning within the framework of a 
particular set of social institutions and 
social relations – institutions and relations 
which are subject to historical change, 
and in the contemporary world are 
continually changing before our eyes. Yet 
declarations of rights can have a function 
in summarizing the aspirations of 
progressively-minded persons in a given 
age, confronted with the given situation 
and a given group of problems – as 
pointers to the direction in which efforts 
at social advance must be turned. 
Foremost among the requirements of 
any new society must be the attainment 
of full employment. This is nowadays 
a commonplace. But it has not always 
been so; and there are even some today 
who resist its attainment, or if they 
accept the ends, will not accept the 
means. Until recently, unemployment 
was considered to be either an inevitable 
accompaniment of so-called “free society” 
or even a desirable reserve without which 
a capitalist economy would lack a vital 
instrument of flexibility and of discipline. 
It is of interest in this connection that the 
1936 Constitution of the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics (U.S.S.R.) included 
as the first among its “basic rights of 
citizens”, “the right to work” ( Article 118).

In a more modified form, however, 
this interpretation could be held to 
debar the existence of private-owned 
monopolies which dominate whole 
industries and control the production and 
sale of essentials of human existence or 
essential raw materials and requisites of 
production, and which are accordingly in 
a position to dictate their terms to private 
consumers or to other producers. 
A distinguished Marxian economist, 
the British academic Maurice Dobb 
(1900-1976) taught at Cambridge 
University, in the United Kingdom. He 
joined the Communist Party of Great 
Britain in 1920, and was one of the 
founders of its Historians’ Group. 

Work is Dignity 
(for the employer), 
a poster by Bolivian 
artist Bruno Raul 
Rivera Catacora 
for the Work Right! 
competition, 
organized in 2014 
by the human 
rights non-profit, 
4tomorrow. 
