President Evo Morales, who is of 
indigenous Aymara descent, chose 
Tiwanaku as a symbolic location for the 
inauguration of each of his three terms 
as head of the Bolivian state (in 2006, 
2010 and 2015). As a result, the site 
has regained its prestige, and become 
an important tourist destination. It 
takes a lot of effort, however, for the 
visitor to appreciate and understand it 
fully. Tiwanaku is more an exercise in 
observation and documentation than in 
simple contemplation. This is because 
all that remains of the city’s majestic 
ensemble of temples and palaces are 
the ruins or partially reconstructed 
remains of seven great buildings − 
the Akapana Pyramid, the temple of 
Kantatayita, the temple of Kalasasaya, 
the Putuni Palace, the Kheri Kala Palace, 
the Puma Punku Pyramid, and the small 
semi-subterranean temple. 
With its monumental complex of 
buildings and its location at more than 
3,800 metres above sea level, Tiwanaku is 
one of South America’s most spectacular 
archaeological sites. A pre-Columbian 
city in the southern Andes, it was for 
centuries the capital of a vast and 
powerful empire that owed its supremacy 
to the use of innovative materials and 
techniques to improve agricultural 
production, thus increasing its economic 
power. It was from Tiwanaku that the 
eponymous culture spread, reaching 
its peak between 500 AD and 900 AD. 
From there, its influence radiated over 
a vast territory that included western 
Bolivia, southwestern Peru and northern 
Argentina and Chile.

The secrets of 
Tiwanaku,
revealed by a drone
Lucía Iglesias Kuntz (UNESCO)
Tiwanaku, the spiritual and 
political centre of Bolivia’s 
Tiwanaku culture, is seventy 
kilometres west of La Paz 
and fifteen kilometres from 
the shores of Lake Titicaca. 
Inscribed on UNESCO’s World 
Heritage List since 2000, the 
place still holds many secrets 
today. A UNESCO project reveals 
some extraordinary discoveries.
The publication of this article 
coincides with the 42nd session 
of the World Heritage Committee, 
held from 24 June to 4 July 2018, 
in Manama, Bahrain.
A map of Tiwanaku, created using data 
from the 3D model generated by a 
drone. The black lines probably indicate 
domestic structures in the Mollo Kontu 
area.
© José Ignacio Gallego / UNESCO
Unfortunately, Tiwanaku was brutally 
plundered, following the collapse of 
its culture in the thirteenth century. 
The place attracted hunters of buried 
treasure like a magnet, and much of its 
valuable heritage disappeared. Numerous 
historical documents also show that 
the site became a quarry, from which 
to extract materials to build modern 
buildings – the evidence of which is still 
visible in the town centre nearby, and 
even in La Paz, the Bolivian capital.

These remnants, nevertheless, exhibit 
the unmistakable hallmark of great 
civilizations, with marvels such as the 
Puma Punku (Doorway of the Puma), 
made of solid blocks of sandstone, 
weighing upto 130 tons, assembled with 
copper staples. This was an astonishing 
feat for a civilization that lacked the 
concept of the wheel – some experts 
estimate that between 1,300 and 
2,600 people would have been needed to 
lift the stones. The knowledge of the use 
of metal demonstrates the civilization’s 
military superiority.
New discoveries
The need to provide the site with 
an updated management plan – a 
requirement for all sites inscribed on 
the World Heritage List – as well as an 
educational programme and museums 
to help solve some of Tiwanaku's 
riddles, constitutes the raison d'être of 
the Preservation and Conservation of 
Tiwanaku and the Akapana Pyramid 
project. Launched in 2015 by the UNESCO 
Office in Quito, the $870,000 project is 
funded by Japanese Funds-in-Trust for 
World Heritage.
This ambitious undertaking, which has just 
been completed, also included a plan for 
sustainable tourism − since Tiwanaku is 
located on the Altiplano, a seismic zone in 
a valley set between two mountain ranges 
− and finally, at the request of the World 
Heritage Committee, the completion of a 
topographic survey of the entire site.
“I was already working in the field, so I 
proposed to UNESCO that this topography 
study be done using remote sensing, 
because now, with drones and satellites, 
topographic results with very high 
precision can be obtained,” explains 
archaeologist José Ignacio Gallego Revilla, 
who worked on the project on behalf 
of the Organization. “It took us a year to 
set it up. Since I was collaborating with 
the Complutense University of Madrid, 
I thought of going to its Campus of 
Excellence − which is actually a group of 
laboratories formed by various faculties, 
with excellent professionals and very 
competitive prices. But we needed a drone 
that could fly at more than 4,000 metres 
and, as we couldn’t transport the one 
available at the university in Madrid to 
Bolivia, we approached a Swiss company 
that sells its aircraft in Chile and Bolivia. That 
company picked up the images which we 
then analysed in Madrid, in the laboratory.”
An Aymara ceremony 
in Tiwanaku, Bolivia.



For me, it’s 
the discovery 
of a lifetime: 
Tiwanaku has 
been one of 
the historical 
references 
of world 
archaeology 
for 500 years

The imaging was done between 
October and December 2016 and the 
first results were obtained in May 2017. 
The drone provided a highly accurate 
topography of the entire archaeological 
site, with a margin of error of less than 
four centimetres.
The resulting map revealed the presence 
of a set of hitherto unknown structures 
that extend over the entire explored area 
of more than 411 hectares. In total, the 
heritage area covers over 600 hectares − 
six times larger than previously estimated.
After the analysis, the images taken by 
the drone made it possible to identify the 
traces of a stone temple buried next to a 
hundred or more circular and rectangular 
structures of vast dimensions, which were 
possibly domestic units, as well as ditches, 
canals, roads and other constructions in 
different sectors. But the new data also 
redefined known monuments, such as 
Puma Punku, a temple complex of which 
only two hectares had been explored, 
and which we now know has two more 
platforms that are buried. “The drone has 
revealed that this a religious complex 
covering seventeen hectares, which 
is three times the size of the Great 
Pyramid of Giza in Egypt,” explains 
the archaeologist.
“Suddenly we had a map of the site and 
of everything that is still buried there,” 
Gallego Revilla added. “For me, it’s the 
discovery of a lifetime: Tiwanaku has been 
one of the historical references of world 
archaeology for 500 years. As a researcher, 
things like this happen only once in your 
entire career,” he enthuses, displaying the 
maps and images that support his claim, 
on his computer.
Involving communities
Julio Condori, director of the 
Archaeological, Anthropological and 
Administrative Research Centre of 
Tiwanaku (CIAAAT), the site’s managing 
body, has been involved in the 
project since its beginning. For him, 
the new topographic map is in itself 
a conservation tool. “We now have 
650 hectares under study,” he notes. “This 
marks a milestone for further research 
and an expansion of the area under high-
level protection.”
Another strong point of the project is 
that the indigenous communities that 
inhabit the site, on its northern and 
eastern sides, were consulted at all times. 
The municipality of Tiwanaku currently 
includes three towns with twenty-three 
communities, and some 12,000 people, 
who live in the archaeological zone itself, 
and its immediate surroundings. “At 
each stage of the project, we had a very 
dynamic interaction with the inhabitants. 
I would say that this is precisely the key 
that allowed us to reach this result,” adds 
Condori. “Members of the Huancollo 
and Achaca communities participated 
last year in the surveys we conducted to 
verify if the reality corresponded to data 
provided by the drone, and they did so 
with great pleasure. We have to continue 
communicating our results so that they 
can take ownership of them.” At the 
same time, the number of national and 
international visitors – more than 125,000 
in 2017 – continues to increase. “With 
that income, the site is economically 
self-sufficient, and it gives us the means 
to work with architects, chemists, 
geologists, etc.,” says Condori. “We hope 
to continue working with the municipal 
and national authorities, and of course, 
with UNESCO’s support.”
According to an Aymara legend, 
the ancestors concealed the most 
emblematic monument of Tiwanaku in 
the Puerta del Sol, the Gate of the Sun. It 
was an important secret that would save 
humanity when it reached the brink of 
the abyss. Fortunately, that moment does 
not seem to have arrived yet. Instead, 
what is certain is that all the good work 
and the flight of a drone has opened 
up a new era for the culture, that from 
the shores of the sacred Lake Titicaca, 
established the most advanced society 
of its time and managed to create a new 
kind of state hitherto unknown in this 
corner of the American continent.
A coloured-in view of the Akapana 
pyramid. The red lines correspond 
to canals already known from 
archaeological digs. The black 
lines indicate possible canals, 
the deterioration of which may have 
caused large cracks in the building. 
© José Ignacio Gallego / UNESCO
