The Courier first appeared in three 
language editions: English, French, and 
Spanish. That was steadily increased 
over the years, until, by 1988, thirty-five 
different language editions were being 
published – plus four different language 
editions in Braille.
In 1949, 40,000 copies of the magazine 
were produced; this figure rose to 
500,000 by the beginning of the 1980s. 
It was estimated that each copy would 
be read by more than four people, which 
meant the Courier had a readership 
of over two million. You could buy 
it at newsagents; you could take out 
a subscription, or you could find it 
in libraries.
The Courier was never well-known in the 
United Kingdom or the United States. 
But if you ask people – especially those 
in their 50s, brought up elsewhere – it’s 
astonishing how many of them will say: 
“Yes, I remember the Courier. We used to 
get it”, or even, “That’s where I first learned 
about anthropology”. I myself have heard 
statements like that from people as far 
afield as Indonesia, India, Pakistan, Ghana, 
Brazil, and Jamaica.

The UNESCO Courier is 70!
An inspiring read
by Alan Tormaid Campbell
Since its inception in 1948, the impact of this iconic magazine has 
been far-reaching, enthralling readers across the globe. Covering a 
vast array of topics, its contributors have included the biggest names 
in their fields. UNESCO’s actions against racism have been on the top 
of the agenda since the beginning – the Courier has always provided 
a powerful platform for debate and discussion of this dangerous and 
widespread prejudice that continues to blight our world. 
The UNESCO Courier, July-August 1950. 
Wide global horizons
The Courier was founded by the 
remarkable Sandy Koffler. The purpose 
of the magazine was to have – to use his 
famous phrase – “A window open on the 
world”, through which readers could look 
out onto “the wide global horizons”. 
Koffler, an American, graduated from 
the City College of New York, and was 
studying at the Sorbonne in Paris when 
his plans were cut short by the Second 
World War. Joining the Psychological 
Warfare Branch of the American army, 
Koffler’s war experience included 
landing with the troops of Operation 
Torch when the Allies invaded Vichy-
French North Africa in November 1942. 
There he started radio broadcasts in 
Rabat (Morocco) and Algiers (Algeria), 
before becoming a Voice of America 
correspondent – a job he held 
throughout the Italian campaign of 
1944-1945. 
UNESCO came into being in the mid-
1940s. Remembering the horrors of the 
Second World War, the preamble to the 
Constitution of UNESCO includes a phrase 
that is both haunting and inspiring: “Since 
wars begin in the minds of men, it is in 
the minds of men that the defences of 
peace must be constructed”.
Richard Hoggart, a British academic 
who was Assistant Director-General at 
UNESCO (1971 to 1975), wrote: “The 
extraordinary assertions within UNESCO’s 
Constitution – that governments will 
collectively promote the objective pursuit 
of knowledge and its free circulation – are 
redolent of their time. The world had just 
come through a terrible and protracted 
war… The impulse […] that people 
should understand each other better 
through improved education and all 
forms of cultural and scientific exchanges, 
the passionate emphasis on truth, 
justice, peace and the importance of the 
individual – these impulses were almost 
irresistible”. (Hoggart, R. 1978, An Idea and 
Its Servants: UNESCO from Within. London, 
Chatto and Windus, pp.27-29.) And 
UNESCO aimed very high to achieve these. 
UNESCO had a bulletin for official 
announcements and reports from its 
inception, but in 1948 it was decided 
to create the UNESCO Courier, a popular 
monthly journal to keep the public 
informed about UNESCO’s ideals 
and activities. 

With this article, the UNESCO Courier joins the celebration of the International Day for  
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, on 21 March.

Whenever an Italian city was liberated, 
Koffler would set up a newspaper called 
the Corriere there. It came as no surprise, 
then, that when he joined UNESCO 
after the war, he set up, inevitably, the 
UNESCO Courier. His was an astonishing 
creative drive mixed with a passion for 
publishing. Moreover, it was publishing 
with a clear moral vision attached.
The magazine was intended for an 
“enlightened” public, in particular 
teachers and students, and it did indeed 
get its greatest readership through 
schools, colleges, and universities.
Koffler set out its principal themes 
as: the impact of science on human 
life, racial problems, art and culture, 
human rights, history and archaeology, 
cultural differences and conflicts 
between peoples. 
The sheer breadth of the subjects 
covered is breathtaking. In the same 
issue, you can discover the threats 
faced by the temple of Borobudur in 
Indonesia, by the Sri Ranganathaswamy 
temple in Srirangam, India, and the 
Parthenon in Greece. In the pages of the 
Courier, you will marvel at the work of 
the fifteenth-century Florentine painter 
Masaccio, and then, the work of the 
Aborigines of Australia. There is an issue 
to celebrate Einstein’s 70th birthday, 
another dedicated to Chekhov, and yet 
another, to Rabindranath Tagore. 
There are also numerous articles on 
ecology and conservation, especially on 
oceanography and marine biology – the 
Courier was green avant la lettre, or way 
before its time. 
The articles were notably well-written 
and beautifully presented. In 1954, 
the magazine’s format was changed to 
include colour illustration – setting new 
standards at the time. 
The range of contributors reads like a 
check-list of twentieth-century culture. 
The tradition of excellence established 
by Sandy Koffler has continued over 
the years. The Courier’s writers include 
Jorge Amado, Isaac Asimov, Jorge Luis 
Borges, Anthony Burgess,Aimé Cesaire, 
Arthur C. Clarke – to skim just a few 
names off the top of the alphabet. The 
magazine also covered major United 
Nations and UNESCO events. When the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
was proclaimed, for example, a Courier 
edition was devoted to it. 

Racism at the top of 
the agenda
Action against racism was at the top of 
the UNESCO agenda from the outset. An 
explicit campaign against South Africa’s 
apartheid regime led to the criticism 
that focusing on one country in this way 
sidelined other human rights issues. 
The point was well-made. Anyone who 
looks at the list of nations that officially 
signed up to the Universal Declaration 
and inquires about political repression 
and censorship, the ill-treatment of 
minorities, the consistent discrimination 
against women, etc., in some of these 
countries, would be forgiven a response 
of enormous cynicism. 
Besides, the campaign against apartheid 
was going on in a world where the British 
and French empires were still going 
full tilt, where the Jim Crow laws – that 
enforced racial segregation – were still a 
way of life in the southern United States, 
and where caste divisions in India were 
still thriving.
The first article in the Courier that 
directly addressed the question of race 
was in November 1949: “The question 
of race and the democratic world” by 
Arthur Ramos. A Brazilian psychologist 
and anthropologist who was head of 
UNESCO’s Department of Social Sciences, 
Ramos had been fighting racism all 
his life, and been imprisoned twice by 
the Brazilian security police during the 
dictatorship of Getúlio Vargas. 
The article made the case that: “In any 
discussion on the reorganization of the 
post-war world, particular account must 
be taken of anthropology. No other 
science has been so deflected from its 
true ends. In its name, whole nations 
have resorted to conflict, to defend the 
false ideal of racial or ethnic supremacy. 
It is, therefore, entirely natural that 
anthropology, restored to its proper place 
and stripped of the myths in which it 
had been veiled, should now deliver its 
scientific message to the world.” 
Then, when UNESCO released its 
“Statement on Race” in 1950, the July-
August Courier of that year carried 
the headline: “Fallacies of Racism 
Exposed”. The statement was published 
in full, with the conclusions on the 
front page. It was accompanied by an 
article, “Race and Civilization”, by the 
Swiss-born Argentinian anthropologist 
Alfred Métraux.
Métraux, who joined UNESCO in 
1947, and was head of the Division for 
the Study of Race Problems in 1950, 
played a central role in UNESCO’s anti-
racism initiatives. He was the principal 
coordinator behind the early statements 
– the first in 1950, and its revision in 1951. 
He was a close friend of Koffler, and an 
enthusiastic supporter of the Courier. 
With more than twenty articles to his 
name, Métraux was one of the magazine’s 
top contributors, till his death in 1963. 
Challenging long-held 
beliefs
As seen today, there were some 
obvious naïvetés in the arguments in 
the statements on race. Firstly, there 
was the enormous confidence in the 
power of “science” – that anthropology is 
“scientific”, and would therefore establish 
conclusions with unassailable certainty. 
Secondly, some of the examples are 
clearly debatable – the same July-August 
1950 issue carried an illustration, on 
page 8, accompanying the statement, 
shows a group of New Zealand Maori 
above the caption “Racial Harmony”. 
Did anyone ask the Maori their opinion 
on that?
Referring to the US, Ramos wrote in the 
November 1949 issue : “... after many years 
of vain effort, the policy of protecting 
the Indians seems to have become 
more humane and scientific. Here it is 
a question not only of protecting the 
Indians’ “reserves”, but of respecting 
the characteristics of their civilization, 
material or otherwise; ...”. Few Native 
Americans today would be happy with 
the words “humane”, “scientific”, and 
“respecting” as descriptions of the way 
they are treated. In the same issue, Ramos 
praised the work of Brazil’s Serviço de 
Proteção dos Índios (Indian Protection 
Service), writing that “the results have 
been highly encouraging”. 
The UNESCO Courier, March 1967.

The Cintas Largas, the Yanomami, and 
many other indigenous groups in the 
Amazon were to be engulfed in atrocities, 
and continue to suffer discrimination to 
this day.
The Courier edition of August-September 
1952 featured a report on race relations in 
Brazil. It heralded a major UNESCO study 
on race in that country. All the writers 
argued on the basis of a belief that was 
common then – that Brazil represented 
a picture of racial harmony – with one 
exception. Luiz de Aguiar Costa Pinto, 
one of the authors of UNESCO’s 1950 
statement on Race, wrote in this issue of 
the Courier: “…the harmonious integration 
which is regarded as characteristic of 
interracial relationships in Brazil fails 
to correspond to facts revealed by 
sociological investigations. It has been 
said so often and for so long that racial 
prejudices do not exist in Brazil, that 
this affirmation which has been passed 
around the world has finally become a 
source of Brazilian national pride. Yet, 
behind this piece of dogma lie feelings of 
bitterness and an obvious uneasiness.”
Because the discussions in the Courier 
have always been robust and dynamic, the 
inevitable complacencies and received 
ideas get shaken up and challenged.
The greatest achievement of UNESCO’s 
four statements on the race question 
is the progressive move away from the 
“scientific” or “biological” definition of race. 
They dismantled any scientific justification 
or basis for racism, and proclaimed that 
race was not a biological fact of nature, 
but a dangerous social myth.
Decades later, on the question of race, 
no one can look at our world with 
much comfort. But listen to the hope 
and the intrinsic goodness in Métraux’s 
words in “Race and Civilization” (Courier, 
July-August 1950): “There is in this 
concept of race something implacable. 
The barbarity of our time is more ruthless 
and more absurd than that of the so-
called Dark Ages; for racial prejudice is 
an unintelligent and unattractive myth. 
Its flourishing development in the 
twentieth century will no doubt in future 
ages be regarded as one of the most 
shameful episodes in history.”
The Courier articles on race show a 
brave, uncompromising campaigning 
initiative. With a few adjustments, these 
statements are as appropriate today 
as they were then. The integrity of 
the arguments are part of the general 
strengths of the publication, not in the 
least constrained by narrow academic 
disciplines and protective professional 
postures. The inspiring, educative, 
cultural vision offered by the Courier is 
part of a vigorous moral vision of what 
human society can be.
Alan Tormaid Campbell (United 
Kingdom) taught Social Anthropology at 
the University of Edinburgh in Scotland 
for many years. Since 1974, he has been 
involved with the Wayapí, an indigenous 
people who live in the Amazon forest 
of Northern Brazil. His best-known book 
on the Wayapí is Getting to Know Waiwai 
(1995).
The UNESCO Courier, November 1971.



The inspiring, 
educative, 
cultural vision 
offered by 
the Courier 
is part of a 
vigorous moral 
vision of what 
human society 
can be
