An image capture of Blue Spelling, 
a change of perspective is a change 
of temporality, by Guadeloupean 
artist Minia Biabiany. 
Creolizing 
the idea of humanity
Mireille Delmas-Marty
How can we protect and 
promote the diversity 
of cultural expressions, 
while resisting relativism and 
imperialism, and reconciling 
the universalism of human rights 
with the pluralism of cultures? 
Mireille Delmas-Marty, a member 
of the Institut de France and 
a jurist specialized in the study 
of the internationalization of law, 
shares her perspective on the 
issue. She advocates “reciprocal 
creolization”, a dynamic and 
evolving process of coordinating, 
harmonizing and sometimes 
unifying, differences.
Protecting and promoting the diversity 
of cultural expressions is one of the 
priorities that UNESCO’s Member States 
have set for themselves at the dawn 
of the third millennium. By signing 
the 2005 Convention, they defined 
cultural diversity as a common heritage 
of humanity that must not only be 
protected – as an established, permanent 
treasure – but also promoted, because it is 
a living treasure, and therefore renewable 
and evolving.
Cultural diversity had already been 
elevated to the rank of common heritage 
of humanity in the Universal Declaration of 
2001, unanimously adopted by UNESCO’s 
General Conference in November of 
that year. The text affirms that cultural 
diversity is, for humankind, “as necessary 
as biodiversity is for nature”. 

It was the first major intergovernmental 
meeting held just after the 11 September 
attacks in the United States, 
and UNESCO wanted to proclaim loud 
and clear its rejection of the theory 
of the clash of civilizations and its refusal 
to sanctify differences. 
Recalling this context seems to me entirely 
necessary, because since 2001, we have 
been engaged in a kind of permanent 
global civil war, which sustains genuine 
religious frenzy and terrorizes entire 
populations. This has resulted, in particular, 
to the mass exodus of populations 
that we are experiencing today, and in 
the identity tensions of the countries of 
immigration − that are closing themselves 
off on their differences, in the name 
of a supposedly threatened national 
identity. All these current events compel 
us to develop increasingly effective tools 
for cultural pluralism. 

Are pluralism 
and universalism 
incompatible?
It must be recognized, however, 
that the text of the 2005 Convention 
contains an underlying contradiction, 
which is not easy to resolve, between 
pluralism − which the 2001 Declaration 
describes as giving “policy expression 
to the reality of cultural diversity” 
− and universalism, which is enshrined 
in the 1948 Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights and, more broadly, 
in human rights law.
The risk of contradiction is twofold, 
because by posing the principle of “equal 
dignity of all cultures” (Article 2 of the 2005 
Convention), cultural pluralism, if limited 
to juxtaposing differences alongside each 
other, could lead to a certain relativism 
of values  and, consequently, to a kind of 
negation of universalism.
Conversely, the universalism of human 
rights could lead to the negation of 
pluralism, if it were to force the fusion of 
all cultures and the disappearance of all 
differences. In such a case, this universalism 
would be the new garb of an imperialism 
that does not speak its name.
The drafters of the 2005 Convention saw 
this difficulty clearly. They laid down the 
fundamental rule in Article 2: “No one may 
invoke the provisions of this Convention 
in order to infringe human rights and 
fundamental freedoms as enshrined 
in the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights or guaranteed by international law, 
or to limit the scope thereof.”
In other words, differences are only 
permitted if they are compatible with 
human rights. The difficulty is that 
the guarantee is not the same for all rights. 
For “non-derogable rights”, such as equal 
human dignity (prohibition of torture and 
other inhuman or degrading treatment), 
the protection is absolute and applies even 
in the event of war or terrorism, marking 
in principle, a common limit to the diversity 
of cultures. Other rights (privacy, religious 
freedom) are subject to restrictions, 
when the purpose is legitimate and 
the restrictions proportionate.
It is fair to say that the drafters of the 2005 
Convention set a goal, but that they did 
not provide the “user guide” to prevent 
pluralism from rhyming with relativism 
and universalism with imperialism.
As a jurist, my contribution to the 
reflection on the tools of cultural pluralism 
would be to propose, if not a set of 
instructions, at least a few ways to try 
to reconcile pluralism and universalism, 
and some means to try to bring cultures 
closer together.
We know that many conflicts are the result 
of ignorance of the Other, but we often 
forget to look for their origin in the 
ignorance of our own culture, which is a 
key factor. Opening up ways to broaden 
our knowledge of different cultures, 
including our own, is essential, I think, 
because it makes it possible for everyone 
to avoid conceiving the universal as 
an extension of their own culture. 
In other words, it is necessary to pluralize 
the universal.
But where should these paths, which open 
to the widening of our knowledge of 
different cultures, lead? My answer 
is: to the rapprochement of cultures. 
It is one step further, not just to merge 
cultures, but to make them more 
compatible with each other. I would call 
that ordering pluralism. 
Pluralizing the universal
Sensory perceptions – hearing, sight, 
smell, taste and touch – constitute the first 
tool for a true knowledge of different 
cultures. We know to what extent concerts 
or festivals, for example, contribute 
to expanding our knowledge through 
sensory perceptions.
The second tool comprises cognitive 
representations – the acquisition of 
knowledge through reason, and not 
necessarily through the senses. 
These include educational, philosophical, 
economic, sociological, ethical and 
legal discourse. For example, the role of 
libraries, cultural institutions or the People’s 
Universities of ATD Fourth World.
These are based on the convergence of 
knowledge, a notion on which I would 
like to dwell on briefly. Since 1972, 
the Fourth World People’s Universities 
have been investing in the sharing 
of knowledge between the learned 
and those who know – that is, between 
the knowledge of scholars and the 
knowledge of experience. The cooperation 
between cultural institutions is also 
based on the idea of mixing together 
several cognitive paths. In the field of 
art, we have a large number of examples 
of this kind of cross-over. For example, 
French composer Pierre Boulez who, 
in the late 1980s, shed light on the process 
of musical composition, by evoking the 
lessons of the Swiss artist Paul Klee of 
the Bauhaus School of Design in Weimar, 
Germany (from 1921 to 1931).

The combination of the sensory and 
the rational – and we know that these 
two capacities are linked – is undoubtedly 
the one that opens the widest perspectives 
for our knowledge of different cultures. 
Today, this combination is facilitated by 
new technologies, as admirably illustrated 
by the Museum of World Culture in 
Gothenburg, Sweden, inaugurated in 2004, 
or the Mucem (Musée des Civilisations de 
l’Europe et de la Méditerranée) in Marseille, 
France, established in 2013.
Whichever path we take – sensory, 
cognitive or combined – we have 
several ways to order pluralism, 
without suppressing it.
Going beyond fixed 
metaphors
To avoid both the relativism and 
imperialism of values, an interactive 
and adaptable dynamic is necessary. 
The rapprochement of cultures must be 
understood as a process, a movement 
that encourages us to go beyond 
the fixed metaphors – human rights 
seen as the foundations, pedestals, 
pillars or roots of various cultures 
– and give preference to the metaphor 
that presents human rights as the common 
language of humanity. It suggests three 
processes, the dynamic effect of which 
is growing: from intercultural exchange 
(dialogue) to the search for equivalences 
(translation), and even to reciprocal 
transformation (creolization).
Dialogue, or intercultural exchange, 
improves the understanding and 
knowledge of the Other and thus facilitates 
rapprochement, but does not guarantee it. 
As an example, I summarize here the judges’ 
dialogue on the death penalty, triggered 
in 1989 by a bold interpretation of the 
European Court of Human Rights (ECHR). 
The court had ruled that the extradition 
to the United States, of a man facing a 
death sentence violated the prohibition 
of inhuman or degrading treatment or 
punishment. By its potential applications to 
various third countries, this case law would 
have an influence throughout the world. 
It seems to have favoured a turnaround 
in 2001 by the Supreme Court of Canada, 
which is largely based on the decision of 
the ECHR. It was also used by the Supreme 
Court of Appeal of South Africa in 1995, 
to support the judgement on the death 
penalty as contrary to the prohibition of 
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
Lambeaux is an intimate diary reconstructed from disparate elements. It is a “Creole memory, 
Creole in the geographical and spiritual sense,” according to its author, 

But dialogue remains subject to 
the goodwill of the actors and, 
in this sense, its contribution to 
the rapprochement of cultures is limited 
to coordinating differences.
The second way, which goes further 
in the recognition of common values,  
is translation. A true “miracle”, according 
to French philosopher Paul Ricœur 
(1913-2005), it “creates a resemblance 
where there seemed to be only 
plurality”. I would add that translation is 
“miraculous” in that it respects differences, 
while seeking equivalences that can 
make these differences compatible. 
Translation is a means of harmonizing 
differences, an approach that contributes 
to rapprochement on the principle of 
musical harmony, as defined by Plato in 
The Symposium: “From contrary elements, 
such as sharps and flats, the art of music, 
by making them agree with each other, 
produces harmony.”
That said, we often encounter 
untranslatable concepts, and the 
misunderstandings they cause. 
For example, in Article 1 of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, we read that 
“all men are endowed by nature with reason 
and conscience”. Initially, only “reason” was 
mentioned. But one of the drafters of the 
Declaration, Zhang Pengchun of China, 
remarked that if the declaration was to 
be universal, the notion of reason alone 
was not enough. He proposed adding the 
Chinese term liangxin, which translated 
to conscience. In reality, the equivalence 
between liangxin and conscience is weak, 
because the Chinese term, derived from 
the characters lian and gxin, evokes moral 
conscience in the Confucian sense, that is, 
a conscience that favours otherness.
To solve this type of difficulty, we would 
need to go even further, by implementing 
the third means mentioned above: 
hybridization or, to avoid possible 
misunderstandings, creolization. 
I use the word creolization in the way it was 
used by the French poet Edouard Glissant 
(1928-2011), when he suggested opening 
up our particular poetics, one with the 
other. In other words, creolization makes it 
possible to unify differences by integrating 
them into a common definition.
In his book, La Cohée du Lamentin (2004), 
Edouard Glissant wrote: “Creolization is 
not a simple mechanism of inter-breeding. 
It is a mixture that produces something 
unexpected.” To produce the unexpected 
is to find − beyond dialogue and 
translation, but thanks to them − a new, 
truly common meaning. It is a way 
of overcoming differences.
the Martinique artist and filmmaker Gilles Elie-Dit-Cosaque. It is also a fantasized diary, 
where the individual and the collective intertwine in fragmented pages.

Errance, 2012, by Haitian artist 
Sergine André
A shift from the poetic to the legal realm 
will allow me to examine the example 
of a concept with a universal vocation, 
the legal significance of which is evolving: 
crime against humanity.
Towards a mutual 
transformation 
The notion of crime against humanity has 
a collective dimension – “a widespread or 
systematic attack on a civilian population” 
– and implies the depersonalization of 
the victim. First used in the charter of the 
International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg 
in 1945, this concept is implicitly part of the 
Western perception of humanity, which is 
based on the idea that each human being 
is an individual, and equally, a member 
of the human community.
But the concept has gradually been 
extended to the destruction of 
cultural property. In 2001, the judges 
of the International Criminal Tribunal 
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) 
ruled that when the destruction and 
degradation of buildings dedicated to 
religion or education is perpetrated 
with discriminatory intent, it amounts to 
“an attack on the very religious identity 
of a people. 
As such, it almost exemplifies the notion 
of crime against humanity, because 
in fact it is humanity as a whole that is 
affected by the destruction of a specific 
religious culture and cultural objects that 
are attached to it.” [ICTY, Prosecutor v. 
Dario Kordic and Mario Cerkez, IT-95-14/2, 
Judgement, February 26, 2001].
The question also comes up regarding 
Iraq. “The destruction of objects tracing 
the history of a people is an eloquent 
way of uprooting them, depriving them 
of their origins and destroying them 
in their soul,” says French-Iranian jurist 
Pejman Pourzand (Radio Notre Dame, 
6 March 2015]. Other commentators have 
referred to this kind of destruction as 
a “crime against the history of humanity”.
To ensure genuine creolization through 
a reciprocal transformation, it would 
be necessary to integrate cultures 
that value the links between individuals 
of the same national community 
− as suggested by the Zulu word 
ubuntu (which, roughly translated, 
means common humanity) from South 
Africa, the Japanese term uchi-soto 
(the distinction between group members 
and others), or the previously-mentioned 
Confucian term, liangxin (conscience).
It would also be necessary to associate 
the cultures that impose duties on 
humans towards nature, like those that 
protect Pachamama (Mother Earth), 
for example, inscribed in the constitutions 
of Ecuador and Bolivia. This is perhaps 
how we should understand the proposal 
that is currently being circulated, 
to extend the notion of crime against 
humanity and genocide to ecocide 
–  that is, the irreversible and serious 
damage being caused to the equilibrium 
of the ecosystem.
In order to endow the notion of crimes 
against humanity with a truly universal 
vocation, other traditions should enrich 
the Western vision of humanity itself.
The rapprochement of cultures, 
the theme of the ongoing International 
Decade (2013-2022), involves many 
paths that make it possible to resist 
both relativism and imperialism, 
and to reconcile the universalism 
of human rights with the pluralism 
of cultures. These are the paths that lead 
to reciprocal humanization.
Mireille Delmas-Marty (France) is 
a member of the Institut de France 
and an honorary professor at the 
Collège de France. She is a founder of 
the Association de recherches pénales 
européennes (ARPE), honorary president 
of the Pharos Observatory of Cultural and 
Religious Pluralism, member of the Haut 
Conseil de la Science et de la Technologie, 
and an administrator of the Bibliothèque 
nationale de France.
Delmas-Marty has published numerous 
books on criminal law, human rights 
law and the globalization of law, 
including: Les forces imaginantes du droit, 
in four volumes (2004-2011); Résister, 
responsabiliser, anticiper (2013); Aux quatre 
vents du monde. Petit guide de navigation 
sur l’océan de la mondialisation (2016), 
and De la grande Accélération à la grande 
Métamorphose (2017). 
