Nüshu literally means “women’s writing” 
in Chinese. Today it is the world’s only 
script designed and used exclusively by 
women. It was developed among the 
rural women of the Xiao River valley, in 
the Jiangyong county of China’s Hunan 
province, where there is a mixture of 
Han culture and Yao folkways.
Nüshu characters are a rhomboid variant 
derived from square Chinese characters, 
adapted to the local dialect (Chengguan 
Tuhua). The characters are formed 
with dots and three kinds of strokes 
− horizontals, virgules and arcs. These 
elongated letters are written with very 
fine and thread-like lines.
The earliest known artefact in the Nüshu 
script is a bronze coin discovered in 
Nanjing, the capital of Jiangsu province. 
It was minted during the Taiping 
Heavenly Kingdom, a rebel kingdom 
in China from 1851 to 1864, which 
introduced important social reforms and 
adopted − to a certain extent − several 
policies regarding gender equality. 
The eight characters etched in Nüshu 
on the coin mean “all the women in the 
world are members of the same family”.
A culture of sunshine 
Nüshu was taught mainly by mothers 
to their daughters and practised for 
fun among sisters and friends. It was 
used by women in a feudal society who 
lacked access to education in reading 
and writing. 



Nüshu: from tears to sunshine
by Chen Xiaorong
Nüshu is considered to be the 
world’s only writing system that 
is created and used exclusively 
by women. Originating in 
China’s Jiangyong county 
in the nineteenth century, 
it gave rise, over time, to a 
traditional female culture, 
which is endangered today. 
The country’s local and 
national authorities are 
working to revive it. 
He Jingua, writing the phrase 
“mysterious scripts through the ages” 
in Nüshu characters.

This syllabic script was generally used 
for writing autobiographies, letters 
between sworn sisters, and sanzhaoshu 
– "third day missives" of good wishes, 
presented to a bride by her closest 
friends, three days after her wedding. 
It was also used to record folk songs, 
riddles and translations of ancient 
Chinese poems, and to compose songs 
for farm women that promoted morality 
– stressing the importance of helping 
their husbands and encouraging 
frugality in household management. 
All of these works are in poetry form 
− most are seven-character poems and 
a few have five characters.
According to Zhao Liming, a professor at 
Tsinghua University in Beijing, Nüshu is 
not just a script − it represents a typical 
Chinese traditional female culture. It 
was like a ray of sunshine that made 
women’s lives more pleasant. “It is a 
culture of sunshine,” she says, “which 
allows women to speak up with their 
own voices and to fight against male 
chauvinism.”
As a Nüshu practitioner once said, “Men 
have their script, books and texts; they 
are men of honour. We have our own 
script, books and texts; we are women 
of honour.” 
Zhao explains that it was customary 
for women to gather together to sew 
clothes and sing Nüshu songs. The 
Nüshu script can be found inscribed on 
paper and fans, and also embroidered 
on clothes, handkerchiefs and belts. 
“Each woman in Jiangyong county was 
responsible for writing a biography,” 
she continues. “Those who didn’t know 
how to write might have others write 
for them. Daughters would also write 
biographies for their mothers, after 
their deaths.”
Like a fragile plant, Nüshu withered 
when its writer died. When older women 
felt the end was near, they would often 
ask family members to place some of 
their writing in their coffins and to burn 
other pieces of their work. Thus, most 
of a woman’s work was buried with her; 
her descendants were often left with 
only a few examples. 
“The content of Nüshu works comes 
from women’s everyday lives – marriage, 
family, social interactions, anecdotes, 
songs and riddles. These are rich in folk 
custom and are important for the study of 
linguistics, grammatology, archaeology, 
anthropology and other human and 
social sciences,” explains Zhao, who has 
been studying Nüshu for thirty years.
After several years of research, her team 
at the Tsinghua University collected and 
translated over ninety-five per cent of 
all existing original documents written 
in Nüshu, to produce the five-volume 
Chinese Nüshu Collection, published in 
2005 − the most complete anthology of 
Nüshu works to date. 
Before it, only one chapter of the book, 
A Ten-year History of Jiangyong, published 
in 1959, was dedicated to Nüshu. The 
first documentary evidence of this script 
is found in the 1933 Survey Notes on 
Counties of Hunan Province. 
“Women used their own script to tell 
stories, to comfort each other, to sing 
out sorrow and to express admiration. 
In the process, a paradise was built,” says 
Zhao. “Tianguang (heavenly light) is a 
word that often occurs in Nüshu works.” 

Nüshu practitioners found comfort 
in this word, which could guide them 
through all their sorrows and difficulties 
to a better life. “None ever committed 
suicide, in fact, because Tianguang made 
them stronger and more optimistic. 
Through their tears, they never stopped 
seeking the light of the sun.”
A script from tears 
“This script helped women in Jiangyong 
to dry their tears,” says Tan Dun, 
renowned Chinese composer and 
conductor, and UNESCO Goodwill 
Ambassador. “When I hear their beautiful 
songs, I can see their tears.” In 2008, he 
went back to Hunan, his home province, 
to research Nüshu culture. “At the gate 
of Shanggangtang village, there is an 
800-year-old Song Dynasty bridge. Half 
of it has collapsed. It reminded me of 
Nüshu, which is also on the verge of 
extinction,” he wrote in his travel diary. 
Tan Dun promised himself he would 
help save this script, the characters of 
which look like “musical notes flying 
along on the wind”. Some of them 
reminded him of the harp and the 
Chinese stringed pipa. The idea for a 
new symphony, Nüshu: The Secret Songs 
of Women, was born. Since 2013, the 
Philadelphia Orchestra (United States), 
the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra 
(the Netherlands), and the NHK 
Symphony Orchestra (Japan) have co-
produced performances of this Nüshu 
symphonic poem at several prestigious 
musical venues across the world. From 
a confidential women’s culture, Nüshu 
is becoming a “global culture that 
belongs to the world,” Tan Dun tells us. 
According to the composer, the success 
of his symphony “shows the world’s 
respect for women’s Utopia.”
The thirteen-movement modern 
symphony, which combines Eastern and 
Western musical forms, reflects different 
aspects of Nüshu culture − songs about 
dressing for the wedding ceremony, the 
daughter’s separation from her mother 
on her wedding day, remembering 
fifty years of married life, longing for 
childhood friends, and so on. The 
central instrument is the harp, which, 
according to the composer, sounds like 
“a woman telling a story and crying”. He 
has incorporated thirteen short videos, 
recorded during his journey home in 
2008, into the production. It was the 
first time that someone filmed Nüshu 
traditional culture.
In Shanggangtang, he met six women 
who can still write Nüshu and who 
have been designated by the county 
government as keepers of the Nüshu 
tradition. Thanks to them, this ancient 
culture can be passed on to new 
generations. 
“For me, the secret of immortality is the 
effort to preserve endangered cultural 
traditions and deliver them to the 
future,” notes Tan Dun. 
Extinction and rebirth
The death of centenarian Yang Huanyi 
on 20 September 2004 marked the start 
of the “post-Nüshu era”. Yang was one of 
the most famous writers and holders of 
Nüshu culture.
Cover and inside page of 
a sanzhaoshu or “third day letter” 
given to a newly married woman 
three days after her wedding.

The progressive disappearance of Nüshu 
culture and the need to protect it have 
aroused particular attention at all levels 
of government. In 2002, Nüshu was 
added to the Chinese National Register 
of Documentary Heritage. Since 2003, 
the introduction of Nüshu workshops in 
Jiangyong county has helped develop 
this culture by attracting more people to 
learn about it. In 2006, the State Council 
listed Nüshu as a national intangible 
cultural heritage.
A Nüshu museum was built in Puwei 
Island, Jiangyong county, in May 2007. 
This beautiful island, surrounded by the 
Xiao river, was home to many famous 
Nüshu authors, making it an important 
place for Nüshu culture. According to 
Yang Cheng, Director of the Jiangyong 
Publicity Department, “the special 
Nüshu culture is the crystallization 
of the collective wisdom of women 
whose spiritual pursuits of intelligence, 
sense of self-respect, self-improvement 
and innovation have allowed various 
civilizations in the world to blossom with 
radiant splendour. And the protection 
of this national culture requires not only 
attention from academics, artists and 
officials, but also, more importantly, the 
cultural awareness of local people.” 
Over the years, China has made an 
effort to develop language legislation 
and planning, as well as to improve 
the digitalization and standardization 
of language. As part of the Chinese 
government’s plan to protect language 
resources, launched in 2015, Jiangyong 
has been designated as a pilot area for 
an ecolinguistics project.
Local governments are currently 
commissioning Nüshu specialists 
(researchers and authors) to prepare 
easy-to-understand manuals to explain 
the historical background, values and 
basic elements of Nüshu culture − 
stressing its significance and the need 
for its preservation. This content will 
be included in primary and secondary 
elective courses, to popularize the 
unique women’s script.
Colourful style
Because Nüshu was used among women 
to write the local dialect, its writing 
was not standardized, meaning each 
practitioner had her own, often highly 
colourful, wording and phrasing style. 
To put the transmission of the script 
on a more scientific footing, Zhao and 
her team worked on “Nüshu Character 
Unification”. Among the 220,000 
characters used by Nüshu practitioners, 
they chose the most frequently used, 
based on a statistical survey. In 2015, 
397 Nüshu characters were admitted 
by the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) and in March 
2017, China’s proposal to include Nüshu 
characters into the Universal Coded 
Character Set was approved. 
The conservation and protection 
of Nüshu culture represents a huge 
and complex social project. With the 
increasing exploitation of cultural 
space and the development of the 
information era, Nüshu is making 
progress in the endeavour to ensure 
its survival. Among its enthusiasts, 
some simply admire this charming old 
script, others are exploring business 
opportunities and developing creative 
products. And some are seizing the 
opportunity to promote a fine example 
of women’s traditional culture.
Scene from a microfilm, 
“Dressing for the wedding”, created by 
composer Tan Dun in 2008.
