Where and how did your impulse to fight 
for children’s rights start? 
When I was five. The very first day of my 
schooling, I saw a boy, around the same 
age as me, sitting outside the school 
and looking at my shoes. He had a shoe-
polishing box in front of him. I was very 
disturbed. My first-ever question to the 
teacher was: why was the boy outside 
and not inside the school? The teacher 
said it was very common for poor children 
to have to work. 
One day I asked the boy’s father 
about this and he said his father and 
grandfather had also been shoe-shiners. 
Then he said: “Sir, don’t you know that 
people like you are born to go to school 
and people like us are born to work?” That 
question really stayed with me, but I had 
no answer as a child. 
Interview by Mary de Sousa
Children may have been given the right to education, but now they 
must be educated about their rights. This is the new challenge faced 
by Kailash Satyarthi, winner of the Nobel Peace Prize 2014. He has 
been at the forefront of the fight against child slavery and labour 
since 1980, when he founded his movement, the Bachpan Bachao 
Andolan (Save the Childhood Movement), which has helped liberate 
more than 85,000 children in India from exploitation – through 
education and rehabilitation. Satyarthi tells the UNESCO Courier 
how his quest to improve the lives of children began, what he hopes 
for from his new cause to make schools safe, and why he believes 
true liberation starts with education.
September 2017, on the twenty-third 
day of the Bharat Yatra march in Indore 
(Madhya Pradesh, India).



Kailash Satyarthi : 
Fighting for children’s rights,
one step at a time

I spoke to legal friends, who explained to 
me the problem was that India did not 
have education classed as a human right 
in its Constitution. It was only in 2001 
that a mass campaign led to the 86th 
Amendment to our Constitution, making 
education a human right. 
Your child labour campaign started in 
India, but soon became international. 
How did that happen?
It took two decades before it became 
a global issue. When I founded the 
Bachpan Bachao Andolan (BBA) in 1980 
in India, I discovered that none of the 
United Nations bodies – the International 
Labour Organization (ILO), the United 
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) – or 
the World Bank, had any international 
legal instrument to prevent children 
from being drawn into labour, trafficking, 
prostitution and other dangerous 
occupations.
I began to look at Pakistan, Nepal and 
Bangladesh, and realized that they 
all had similar situations concerning 
contemporary slavery. In parallel, I started 
to participate in the Human Rights 
Commission in Geneva, Switzerland, and 
decided to work towards an international 
law against child slavery.
I campaigned in Europe and America 
and set up a programme in Germany 
to fight against child labour. As a result, 
the first ILO International Programme on 
the Elimination of Child Labour was born 
in 1992, and then UNICEF and the World 
Bank joined in. 
In 1993, BBA initiated the first campaign 
in the form of a march against child 
labour in India. Five years later, 
we launched the 80,000-kilometre 
Global March Against Child Labour 
across 103 countries, which lasted for 
six months. 
The crowning achievement of these 
efforts was undoubtedly the ILO 
Convention 182, concerning the 
Prohibition and Immediate Action for the 
Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child 
Labour. It was unanimously adopted and 
ratified by 181 countries. This happened 
in 1999, twenty years after my first leaflets 
were circulated in India.
When I got older, I saved my old 
schoolbooks and collected my pocket 
money to pay the fees for poor children. 
I trained as an electrical engineer, but the 
feeling that I should do something for 
these children never left me. I left my job 
to become truly involved. 
What would you say were your first major 
achievements?
From the very start – when I used to 
write and print thousands of leaflets 
to be distributed in the market for our 
first campaign – I have believed that 
education and liberation are two sides of 
the same coin. When I first tried to bring 
the issue of child labour into the public 
domain, there was nothing being done 
about it. India did not have a law against 
child labour till 1986. I fought for six years 
for this law and it is still not perfect, so 
the fight goes on. 
When I freed children from slavery and 
asked for them to attend school, I was 
humiliated so many times. I was told 
they are dirty, uncared for, we can’t have 
them here. 

Ten years ago, you launched another 
march in South Asia, to advocate for a 
regional protocol against forced labour, 
and more recently, in September 2017, the 
Bharat Yatra march to end child sexual 
abuse and trafficking. What made you 
organize these marches?
Bharat Yatra, a nationwide mobilization 
covering 11,000 kilometres over 36 days, 
was a clarion call to “Make India Safe 
Again for Children”. Child sexual abuse 
is a growing problem worldwide, but in 
India it has become a modern epidemic 
– with young children abused, raped or 
trafficked on a daily basis. 
A child is sold every two minutes and 
sexually abused every half hour. In most 
cases, the perpetrators are school bus 
drivers, teachers, tutors. While they roam 
free and fearless, the victims keep quiet 
out of feelings of shame.
I realized I had been fighting all this time 
for every child to be in school, but in fact 
children are not always safe there. 
The first thing that has to change is 
the taboo associated with child abuse. 
That requires a mass movement, so 
we used the time-tested strategy 
of marching. Based on our previous 
successful experiences, we have tackled 
the problem of violence against children 
– this time including child marriage 
and exploitation, which remain huge 
obstacles to education.
How successful was this journey and 
what will happen now that awareness 
has been raised?
To have 1.4 million people join the 
Bharat Yatra march was unprecedented, 
particularly as the topic of child sexual 
abuse is taboo. Wherever we went, young 
people from the crowd stood up, even 
came to the stage, and spoke for the very 
first time about what was happening 
to them. 
Children may have been given the right 
to education, but now they must be 
educated about the rights they possess. 
We are also pushing for a Safe Schools 
campaign to be promoted by schools, 
universities and colleges across India, 
where the priority will be safety from 
sexual abuse. 
We are now working on a study assessing 
attitudinal and behavioural change and 
knowledge-building as a result of the 
Bharat Yatra campaign, which may be 
shared internationally. We have already 
had requests from other countries to run 
Safe Schools campaigns there. 



I realized I had been 
fighting all this time 
for every child 
to be in school, 
but in fact children 
are not safe there
Marriage of an under-age girl in Kota 
(Rajasthan, India) on 16 May 2010. 
Early marriage is one of the main 
obstacles to education in India.
During the Bharat Yatra march, you told 
politicians they should go back to school. 
What did you mean?
They pledged to visit the schools they 
had attended, and I told them they 
should go, not as VIPs (Very Important 
Persons), but as ordinary fathers and 
mothers and try to learn more – not 
just about safety, but about the quality 
of education, the general school 
environment, the teachers. Is the school 
child-friendly? Does it have the midday 
meal programme? What is school 
attendance like? So often the education 
sector is aloof and disconnected, and 
corruption can mean that in rural areas, 
teachers don’t turn up and school 
drop-out rates are high. 
By getting politicians to visit schools, 
many changes can be brought about 
at the same time. I also asked that 
female police officers visit schools more 
often, to build the idea of protection. 
The government has indicated that 
there will be a new bill against human 
trafficking, including child trafficking. 
The bill will also include education 
campaigns and programmes to help 
create awareness on the subject. 

Kailash Satyarthi (India) was jointly 
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize 2014 
(with Malala Yousafzai), for his “struggle 
against the suppression of children and 
young people and for the right of all 
children to education.” Satyarthi was 
instrumental in the adoption of the ILO 
Convention 182 on the worst forms of 
child labour in 1999. He is also founding 
president of the Global Campaign for 
Education and in this capacity, was 
a civil-society representative in the 
High-Level Group on Education for All. 
Satyarthi is best known for his mass 
awareness marches, the Global 
March Against Child Labour, across 
103 countries in 1998, the South Asian 
March Against Child Trafficking in 2007 
and the Bharat Yatra (Safe India for 
Children) march to end child sexual 
abuse and trafficking, which concluded 
in October 2017. He has also launched 
the 100 Million for 100 Million campaign 
to support children to know their rights.
Indian students holding a meeting.

You were awarded the Nobel Peace 
Prize in 2014 for your “struggle against 
the suppression of children and young 
people and for the right of all children 
to education.” Did it change your life?
I always joke that I was handed a 
medal for peace and all my peace was 
taken away! I have received about 
40,000 invitations and would need to 
live another 160 years to attend all these 
events. At the same time, I am very happy 
to be thought of as the ordinary man’s 
Nobel laureate. Being directly connected 
with ordinary people gives me much 
more confidence in what I am trying 
to do. 
One downside is that I am not able 
anymore to personally go on child 
labour rescue operations! My face is so 
well-known that I am recognized even in 
the remotest areas. This means there will 
be a tip-off, and children are removed 
from the mining area or factory before 
I get there. In several cases, I have had 
to be more stealthy and return two or 
three times to find them. On the positive 
side, I have access to almost all the 
heads of UN agencies, prime ministers, 
presidents, where I can talk directly about 
policy change. 
You have come a long way from your 
original career as an electrical engineer. 
Have you found a place for those skills 
in your work?
My training has proved extremely 
useful in that it allows me to think in an 
analytical, rational and structured way. 
I believe this is why my work against child 
slavery has a rights-based, rather than a 
conventional, charity approach. Structural 
change is much easier to bring about 
when you are familiar with a structural 
approach. 
What changes in children’s lives have you 
witnessed since you became an activist? 
I know that once we free children 
from slavery and child marriages, we 
see a ripple effect. Education brings 
empowerment, dignity and identity to 
the most deprived and marginalized 
people, particularly children and 
girls. Once they are educated about 
their rights, and acquire reading and 
writing skills, they gain tremendous 
self-confidence. 
I have witnessed girls standing up and 
refusing to be married against their 
will because they know their rights 
and can go to the police or to a non-
governmental organization (NGO). In the 
same way, many boys trapped into slave 
labour, once they know they have rights, 
are able to make contact with someone 
who can help.
You have met thousands of children. 
What have they taught you? 
That it is essential to keep the child alive 
inside oneself. I believe when people 
are genuine and simple and clear in life, 
it is because they have not forgotten 
the importance of being childlike. 
What keeps you motivated?
What keeps me motivated? The dreams 
I can see in children’s eyes. 
