Anti-Semitism is not a contemporary 
phenomenon. It is a centuries-old evil. 
Since the capture of Jerusalem by Titus 
in 70 AD, since the dispersal of the Jews, 
mainly throughout the Mediterranean 
basin, when they were sold as slaves in 
such large numbers that market prices (to 
use a modern economic term) plummeted 
in the Roman Empire − the condition 
of the Jews for two millennia, especially 
in Europe, has never ceased to involve 
exclusion, suffering, and persecution. Since 
that distant Roman period, I would say 
we know of three forms of anti-Semitism, 
which sometimes merge.
From religious to 
nationalist and racial 
anti-Semitism
The first form of anti-Semitism is 
religious. Since Constantine’s Edict of 
Milan recognizing Christianity as an 
official religion in 313, anti-Semitism has 
always nourished itself on the hatred 
of the “Jewish deicide”, those who killed 
Jesus Christ. Throughout the periods of 
persecution and massacres, the possibility 
was sometimes – though not always – 
offered to Jews to escape death or exile 
by forced conversion, even if they became 
Jews again when times were less cruel. 
The long, culturally rich history of the 
Marranos, particularly in the Iberian 
states, is an illustration of this.
With the birth of modern nations, 
anti-Semitism became essentially 
nationalist. The Jews, even when they 
were natives of the countries in which 
they lived, were always foreigners who 
were suspect. The fact that the Jews had 
quite naturally assumed responsibilities, 
despite the ostracism inflicted on them, 
and that they held eminent positions in 
political, economic and financial spheres, 
made them, at the slightest national 
crisis, potential traitors − always in the 
service of a mythical “international Jewish 
conspiracy” imagined by the anti-Semites.
This was particularly the case in France. 
I do not need to recall the significance 
of the Dreyfus affair (a political scandal 
and notable example of a miscarriage 
of justice, 1894 to 1906) in this respect. 
Because if we had been looking at things 
with lucidity for a moment, there was no 
reason why Alfred Dreyfus − a wealthy 
Alsatian Jew who hated Germany and 
wanted, first of all, to serve France – 
should be a traitor.
by Robert Badinter
Over the course of history, anti-
Semitism has continued to raise 
its ugly head. It first emerged 
under religious pretexts in the 
Middle Ages, then appeared 
as nationalism from the 
nineteenth century onwards, 
before assuming a scientific 
claim in Nazi ideology. Since the 
end of the Second World War, it 
has reappeared, in the guise of 
anti-Zionism. History urges us 
to be vigilant. Robert Badinter 
draws lessons from it that 
are rich with meaning − and 
warnings.
With this article, the UNESCO Courier 
contributes to the commemoration 
of the International Holocaust 
Remembrance Day on 27 January.
From Le Journal d'Anne Frank 
(The Journal of Anne Frank), a comic 
book written by Antoine Ozanam and 
illustrated by Nadji Scelsi, 
(Editions Soleil, 2016).



Anti-Semitism:
Learning the lessons of history

A wealth of significant 
lessons and warnings
I will not repeat here the long list of 
increasing persecutions suffered by the 
Jews − first in the Third Reich and then in 
the territories occupied by the German 
army. Today, countless studies have 
unveiled the scope and the horror of the 
Jewish genocide by the Nazis. Nor will 
I return to the remarkable historical and 
philosophical works which have dealt 
with this phenomenon.
What I would like to emphasize is this, 
which seems to me the most significant 
and cautionary lesson: what is quite 
remarkable and difficult to understand is 
that a great Christian people – cultivated 
among all the peoples of Europe, from 
which emerged numerous geniuses of 
art, thought and scientific research – was 
the bearer, organizer and perpetrator of 
the most terrible persecutions against 
the Jews that have ever blighted the 
history of Europe. It is essential to 
remember this, for in Europe there were 
no countries where the love of culture, 
the passion for art, especially music, and 
scientific research, were held higher 
than in Germany, at the end of the 
Weimar Republic.
This is precisely UNESCO’s opportunity 
for reflection. Because if there was one 
country that shone by its philosophy, it 
was Germany − Germany before Hitler. 
And it is this country – yielding to every 
fury of anti-Semitism and racism – that 
orchestrated the cruellest episodes the 
Jews have ever known. 
The lesson – and that is why I am 
insisting – is that culture, knowledge, 
and a love of the arts are not enough 
to constitute insurmountable ramparts 
against anti-Semitism, since it was here 
that it established itself with the most 
terrible horror.
Let me be understood clearly: in no 
way do I mean that we – disciples of the 
Enlightenment, who believe, throughout 
every ordeal, in the progress of humanity 
through the benefits of enlightened 
education and just institutions based on 
the philosophy of human rights – must 
renounce the struggle for ever-needed 
progress. But we must take into account 
the fact that neither education nor art, 
per se, nor culture in the broadest sense 
of the word, are by their very nature 
sufficient defences against the fury of 
racism and anti-Semitism. We must learn 
from this.
By the end of the nineteenth century, 
minds had evolved. Anti-Semitism 
strove to be scientific in the image of 
the modern disciplines. It became racial: 
the Jews being defined as a “race” of 
mysterious eastern origin that could not 
be assimilated by the peoples among 
whom they settled – especially those 
who claimed to belong to a superior 
Aryan race, who felt threatened with 
degeneration by the presence of Jews, 
with their numerous flaws, in their midst.
Recognition of Jewish 
citizenship
Thus, in the form of prohibitions, 
consignment to ghettos, markings on 
clothing – as if they were dangerous 
animals – Jews appear, in the long history 
of humanity, as an accursed species. 
Hence, the extreme importance we 
must attach to the French Revolution, 
which for the first time in history, in 1791, 
proclaimed that Jews living in France 
would be considered full French citizens.
A little anecdote: on the day the 
citizenship of the Jews was voted on, at 
the end of the Constituent Assembly, the 
Dauphine, sister of Louis XVI, wrote these 
words to a cousin of the royal Austrian 
Hapsburg family in Vienna: “The Assembly 
has reached the height of its folly, it has 
made the Jews citizens.”
If I stress this point, it is because the 
desire to make Jews full citizens, attained 
with difficulty in the parliamentary 
proceedings, is exactly what the Nazis 
hated the most – namely, human 
rights and the philosophy of the Age of 
Enlightenment. As stated in Adolf Hitler’s 
Mein Kampf, the Jews must be excluded 
absolutely from the community of the 
German people. This rabid anti-Semitism 
is at the origin of the racial laws of the 
Third Reich, adopted in Nuremberg in 
1935, the purpose of which, I would 
remind you, was “the protection of 
German blood and German honour” − 
supposedly defiled by the presence of 
the Jews.
I leave aside the impossibility that the 
racial theory has encountered, of finding 
scientific criteria. The scholars of the 
Third Reich sought hard and, of course, 
found nothing. And so they fell back on 
religious practice. 
The criteria adopted by the Nuremberg 
laws forbade any possibility for Jews to 
leave, through any kind of conversion, the 
herd of these evil beings to which they 
belonged by birth.
A woman endures a “scientific” racial 
examination during the Second World 
War, to establish her Jewish identity. 
Stills from the film Mr. Klein, by American 
director Joseph Losey, 1976.

The Third Reich collapsed, its founder 
committed suicide, his main henchmen 
were hanged, or they vanished. The 
immensity of the Jewish genocide in 
Europe was discovered, which gave rise 
to a powerful movement − at the newly-
created United Nations − in favour of 
the creation of a Jewish state. The Allies 
had, moreover, already made such a 
commitment between 1914 and 1918.
The creation of a Jewish state in Palestine 
− which we must remember ensued from 
a United Nations decision, UN Resolution 
181(II) of 29 November 1947 − was not 
accepted by all. The result was a war, 
launched by the armed forces of the 
neighbouring Arab states. They invaded 
Palestine, the conflict turned to the 
advantage of the Jews and the rest is 
history. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has, 
in fact, never ceased since the creation of 
the State of Israel.
Depiction of the plundering of 
the Judengasse Jewish ghetto during 
the Fettmilch riot in Frankfurt, Germany, 
22 August 1614. 

I am not going to discuss the legitimacy 
of the rights of the various parties here, 
nor the best solution to end this conflict 
– these issues need to be discussed in 
other forums. But that is the reality. What 
is certain is that in the context of the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, anti-Semitism 
has once again spread widely under the 
name of anti-Zionism.
We must have the lucidity to recognize 
that under this label that refers to 
Zionism, it is indeed the Jews, and Jews 
everywhere, who are targeted. And I 
would say that anti-Zionism under the 
surface is nothing but the contemporary 
expression of anti-Semitism, namely, 
hatred of the Jews.
The new battleground
Today’s anti-Semitism, of course, does 
not present itself in the same form as the 
one dating back to Constantine. It widely 
and successfully uses social media; 
speeches and videos, posted on certain 
websites, are based on a particularly 
perverse rhetoric. I have pondered at 
length what might have happened in 
pre-1939 Europe if Dr. Goebbels (Reich 
Minister of Propaganda of Nazi Germany, 
1933 to 1945) had had access to the 
same technical means that we have 
today in the digital age. This is the new 
battleground, as far as the fight against 
anti-Semitism is concerned. 
I would simply state my conviction, as 
a man who has lived a long time, and 
who has never seen anti-Semitism lose 
its hold − that as long as the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict continues, it is clear 
to me that hatred of the Jews, far beyond 
the Middle East, will continue to inflame 
some Muslims, especially the younger 
ones, inspired by the internet and the 
shrill propaganda of the violent images 
familiar to us. 
Hence the atrocious attacks that occur 
throughout the West, notably in France 
and in the Middle East, where the 
conflation of “Jewish equals Zionist” 
feeds anti-Semitic hatred. It is enough to 
look at a list of the victims of the crimes 
committed in the last few years. 
A recent image haunts my mind: a man, 
pursuing Jewish children in a Jewish 
school, and a little girl running away. And 
because she is running, this man grabs her 
by the hair and shoots her point-blank. 
What is this crime, if not a replica of 
the acts of the SS (The Schutzstaffel, 
the paramilitary organization of the 
Nazi party)? A horrifying expression of 
anti-Semitism, this image traverses time, 
reminding us of the Einsatzgruppen 
(SS death squads, 1939 to 1945) let loose 
in the ghettos of Eastern Europe. 
Action for civil peace 
Finally, I would like to point out, and to 
stress emphatically, one thing concerning 
action for civil peace. It is the importance 
of the role – and I would say for some, the 
fraternal role – of representatives of the 
Muslim community who denounce these 
crimes. Conflation here is another trap 
set by terrorism, and we certainly must 
not yield to it. I always stress the results of 
studies on terrorism by think-tanks, which 
have found that eighty per cent of the 
victims of terrorism in the world today 
are Muslims. I want to emphasize this 
fact, because conflation here would be 
reprehensible. 
My message is not overly optimistic, 
I know, but I believe that complacency 
nourishes prejudice, and that prejudice 
nourishes death, because it breeds 
hatred. If we can make the principles of 
the Enlightenment and human rights 
triumph in the minds of the younger 
generations, we will have served the right 
cause − that of peace among peoples. 
A French lawyer and Professor of Law, 
Robert Badinter was France’s Minister 
of Justice from 1981 to 1986. He is 
best known for obtaining a vote in 
French parliament to abolish the death 
penalty in 1981. Badinter was appointed 
President of the Constitutional Council 
from 1986 to 1995, and elected Senator 
(Socialist Party) for the Hauts-de-Seine 
department from 1995 to 2011.
Drawing by French illustrator Luz 
from the comic album Ô vous, frères 
humains (Futuropolis, 2016), inspired 
by the book with the same title by 
Swiss author Albert Cohen.
