Faced with these concerns about the 
contemporary world, one would imagine 
that the humanities – with one of its 
central missions being precisely to provide 
the keys to interpret the world in which 
we live – would have assumed a more 
prominent role. But, with the possible 
exception of sociology, the humanities 
have remained largely in the background 
in current debates and are slowly 
disappearing from university curricula. 
The place traditionally reserved for the 
humanities is clearly diminishing, just 
about everywhere in the world, but 
particularly in developed countries. 
by Jean Winand
Technological and scientific 
advances have changed the 
way we relate to the world. The 
role of the humanities has been 
ousted by an economics-centric 
approach. In this context, 
universities are confronted 
with a dilemma: should they 
be producing technicians who 
are intrinsically productive, or 
more generalist graduates who 
are able to reflect on the future 
of societies? Economic realism 
cannot be the sole response to 
today’s challenges.  
Among the phenomena that characterize 
the early twenty-first century, the most 
significant must be the disappearance of 
the landmarks that society uses to find 
its bearings, and the increasing difficulty 
that individuals have in visualizing an 
optimistic future for themselves – a 
feeling exacerbated by following a daily 
spectacle of wars and mass migrations. 
To this can be added our questions 
about the nature of the living world – 
the maintenance of our ecosystems, 
the workings of our democratic and 
individual freedoms, the role of the 
State, relationships between States 
and multinational corporations – that 
are able to mobilize enormous means 
to control the gathering, distribution 
and preservation of knowledge 
and information, as well as their 
transformation and exploitation.  
The isolationism of some rich countries, 
the rise of populism and the dramatic 
reinforcement of integralist movements, 
leads us to believe that power is 
progressively being seized by those 
who believe in quick and easy – if not 
simplistic – solutions. 



Universities 
and the “democracy of the gullible” 
On the one hand, their scope is shrinking 
– the messages they convey have ceased 
to be relevant for technical disciplines. 
At the same time, the resources allocated 
to the humanities, for both teaching and 
research, are at a constant low level.
The causes contributing to this situation 
are too numerous to be detailed here. 
I will restrict myself to the role of the 
political authorities.
Do politicians see how important 
it is to train people who can think 
about things with a critical mind? 

What priorities 
for policy? 
In a world where full employment is no 
longer a certainty, the almost isometric 
correspondence between training and 
a trade that can lead to employment has 
become a real obsession. It now seems 
preferable to train graduates who are 
immediately ready for specific tasks, 
rather than offer them a more general 
degree. For example, in June 2015, the 
Japanese government announced its 
intention to drastically reduce, if not 
abolish, departments of humanities, 
social sciences, philosophy and the 
arts, in the universities it controls. 
The Japanese Prime Minister stated 
at the time, that rather than backing 
more academic research, which is very 
theoretical, it was preferable to provide 
more practical courses, which would 
better anticipate the needs of society. 
But can universities content themselves 
with training specialized technicians 
who remain ignorant of anything outside 
the limited area of their discipline? 
It has come to the point where we 
have to ask ourselves if politicians, who 
are responsible for setting strategic 
objectives, see the need to train people 
who can think more generally, with a 
critical mind. In some countries, the 
answer is clearly no. In many others it 
is not, or is no longer seen as a priority 
– sometimes even by the university 
establishment itself, now obsessed with 
questions of profitability.
In a world where it is becoming harder 
to find a philosophical and moral 
compass, universities still enjoy a good 
measure of trust with the public. But, 
in order to maintain and reinforce this 
trust, they have to continue to set a 
good example. Scientists are not always 
immune to certain criticisms of their 
intellectual integrity. 
So science has become suspect in the 
eyes of a growing proportion of the 
population. The presentation of what is 
called ‘alternative facts’ is an interesting 
case in point. This is probably not the 
place for a lengthy exposition of the 
various sceptical views – which are 
sometimes held at the highest levels of 
government – on the reality of climate 
change, or arguments – as if they were 
two equivalent opinions – about the 
theory of the evolution of species and 
creationism. In this changing context, 
universities can be strongholds of 
freedom. This depends, of course, 
to a large extent on the institutions 
themselves, but governments need to 
guarantee sufficient resources to ensure 
their real autonomy.
The role of 
the humanities
In an ideal university, the humanities 
would have a central role to play. And 
yet they are not taken seriously today. 
Too often the survival of these disciplines 
depends on an instrumentalization that 
is almost forced. For example, we can 
easily agree that a philosophical insight 
is necessary on ethical issues in the life 
sciences, but we don’t see the use of 
supporting research on Kant [Immanuel 
Kant (1724-1804), German philosopher] 
medieval philosophy or phenomenology. 
For many scientists, research in the 
human sciences is not real science. The 
lack of understanding stems particularly 
from the fact that the natural sciences 
impose their epistemological paradigm 
– or at least their research practices – on 
science as a whole. 

As the preserve of the humanities is 
first and foremost that of meaning, 
it inevitably follows that there will be a 
certain relativity in their findings. 
Also, no one thinks of criticizing 
the technical elite, respected for their 
contributions to economic wealth, 
our physical well-being and our material 
comfort. The same is not true of the 
intellectual elites, whose mission is also 
to be disruptive, by the questions they 
pose to society, by the critical position 
they take vis-à-vis the authorities, or the 
way they decode the meaning – always 
the meaning – that is hidden, disguised 
or obscured under the continuous 
flow of information, in which we are 
all submerged. 
But it is precisely the humanities – which 
do not think in terms of binary categories 
– that are able to provide the tools we 
need to understand the complex world 
around us. By default, what will gradually, 
and perhaps irreversibly, emerge, is the 
“democracy of the gullible”, to borrow 
a term from the French sociologist, 
Gérald Bronner.
The warning signs of 
obscurantism
Confronted with the colossal challenges 
posed by the evolution of the 
contemporary world, by the extraordinary 
technological developments that 
profoundly question our models of 
society, the only possible response 
cannot lie solely in a search for economic 
well-being – even if there obviously 
have to be basic minimum standards, 
especially in the least developed 
countries. But sticking to that principle 
would at best be a fig leaf, used to 
conceal more complex and essential 
realities. The only adequate response lies 
in the comprehension of the intelligence 
of the world in which we live.  
This understanding depends on culture, 
a profound culture, not – or in any case, 
not only – a culture of entertainment. 
It demands a culture nurtured by the 
breadth of history; a multilingual culture, 
a culture which is concerned with its 
origins, which researches them, tries to 
deepen our understanding of them, and 
thus tries to understand its own present 
and envisage its future. A culture, then, 
that is fully informed, and which can 
only be so through the irreplaceable 
contribution of the humanities.
In order to understand the position 
of humans in the universe, along with 
their history and culture, in more than a 
superficial manner, we need to acquire 
methods that can sometimes be very 
exacting. Yet the ignorance of these 
things, along with the disdain or even 
contempt for those who defend them, 
have always been the harbingers of 
authoritarianism and obscurantism.
The excuse of leaders who would follow 
a path based solely on economic realism 
is, at best, stamped with the seal of 
ignorance. At worst, it is the trace of a 
desire to subjugate people by brutalizing 
them. This is what I was referring to when 
I spoke of a major democratic challenge 
in the way we conceive the status and the 
role of the humanities in our societies.
Jean Winand (Belgium) is a professor at 
the University of Liège, and an expert in 
the languages and literature of ancient 
Egypt. He was Dean of the Faculty of 
Philosophy and Letters between 2010 
and 2017, and elected a member of the 
Royal Academy of Belgium in 2017. He 
co-chaired the International Programme 
Committee of the World Conference on 
the Humanities held in August 2017 in 
Liège, in partnership with UNESCO.
A collection of antique globes at a shop 
in downtown Vienna, Austria, 2011. Part 
of German photographer Frank Herfort’s 
Interiors-Public series. 
The excuse of leaders 
who follow a path based 
solely on economic 
realism is marked with 
ignorance, or a desire to 
subjugate people
