Asylum-seekers, awaiting a decision 
about their future, need basic 
language courses – especially if they 
are unaccompanied minors. For 
undocumented migrants, access to a 
basic education provides stability and 
a semblance of regularity in their lives, 
besides increasing self-esteem. The 
right to education requires states to 
provide access to educational services 
and financial resources, so that no one 
is deprived of basic schooling, at the 
bare minimum. 
The educational situation of asylum-
seekers and refugees in temporary 
reception camps across the borders 
of countries where conflicts occur (for 
example, Lebanon, Jordan, Greece 
and Turkey), is likely to be even more 
precarious. This could be due to a 
shortage of facilities such as buildings 
and school materials, a lack of qualified 
teachers, and scarce financial resources. 



Education
for migrants: 
an inalienable human right 
Fons Coomans
The right to education is often 
taken for granted – until it is 
taken away. An indispensable 
tool to protect the freedom 
and dignity of all migrants, 
education allows them to 
fully integrate into their new 
societies. This legitimate 
aspiration, however, faces 
obstacles on the ground. 
With its Ideas section, the UNESCO 
Courier marks the celebration 
of International Migrants Day 
on December 18. 
Who, in these cases, should be 
responsible for enforcing their right 
to education? The international 
community, of course, but that requires 
a determined commitment and a 
strong political will to protect those in 
vulnerable situations. Often, additional 
financial resources are required to meet 
the educational needs of these groups. 
UNHCR, the UN Refugee Agency, relies 
heavily on special donations for its 
educational programmes in refugee 
camps. If these children are denied 
a good basic education, an entire 
generation may be lost.
Enshrined in Article 26 of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, education 
is an essential tool for the protection of 
human dignity. Human rights become 
even more meaningful when their 
realization is at risk – as when people 
are forced to flee from armed conflict 
or persecution, or simply because they 
want to improve their socio-economic 
condition. When they arrive in their new 
countries, their educational situation 
could be uncertain. 
For refugees, receiving an education is 
the best way to become full members 
of their host countries. Regular migrant 
workers and their children benefit 
intellectually and socially from attending 
school, where they learn about the 
society in which they are living. 

A young migrant waits to be registered 
after arriving on the Greek island of 
Samos (2016).

What the law 
guarantees...
International human rights law 
guarantees an education for all, without 
discrimination. This principle of non-
discrimination extends to all persons of 
school-going age residing in the territory 
of a state, including non-nationals, 
irrespective of their legal status. Irregular 
or undocumented migrants can therefore 
invoke the right to education. This right 
creates immediate and unequivocal 
obligations – the state has no margin 
of freedom in this area. Discrimination 
on any ground is prohibited, because 
the very essence of the law is at stake. 
This implies an equal right of access 
to educational institutions, which can 
be described as the core, or minimum 
content, of the right. 
This follows from the universal nature of 
human rights. Special measures for the 
protection of the right to education can 
be derived from the 1951 Convention 
relating to the Status of Refugees. 
Article 22 provides that states “shall 
accord to refugees the same treatment 
as is accorded to nationals with respect 
to elementary education” and “in any 
event not less favourable than that 
accorded to aliens generally in the same 
circumstances, with respect to education 
other than elementary education 
and, in particular, as regards access to 
studies, the recognition of foreign school 
certificates, diplomas and degrees, the 
remission of fees and charges and the 
award of scholarships.”
To this, Article 3(1) of the Convention on 
the Rights of the Child (1989) adds that 
“the best interests of the child shall be 
a primary consideration” in all actions 
concerning children. This includes the 
provision of educational services for 
all migrants.
The International Convention on the 
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant 
Workers and Members of Their Families 
(1990) guarantees that migrant workers, 
their children and members of their 
families, have equal treatment with 
nationals of the state of employment. 
Concerning the education of children, 
Article 30 stipulates that “Each child of a 
migrant worker shall have the basic right 
of access to education on the basis of 
equality of treatment with nationals of 
the State concerned. Access to public pre-
school educational institutions or schools 
shall not be refused or limited by reason 
of the irregular situation with respect to 
stay or employment of either parent or 
by reason of the irregularity of the child's 
stay in the State of employment.” The 
problem with this Convention is that it 
has not been widely ratified by the states 
of employment – probably because it 
contains very strong obligations.
At the regional level, the European 
Convention on Human Rights (1950) 
contains a clear-cut provision: “No 
person shall be denied the right to 
education”, (Article 2, of the first Protocol). 
Under European Union (EU) law, minors 
seeking asylum and refugees have access 
to education under the same conditions 
as nationals of EU member states. This 
right may be invoked by any person 
within the jurisdiction of a state party 
to the convention, therefore including 
irregular migrants. However, it is limited 
to education only at the primary and 
secondary levels. 
…and the problems 
on the ground
The implementation of the right to 
education for migrants poses a number 
of challenges and dilemmas for the 
governments of host countries. 
It may be in the public interest to prevent 
irregular non-nationals from becoming 
a part of society through education. 
This could be to limit the allocation of 
scarce resources only to those who have 
obtained a residence permit, or to ensure 
that migrant labour would be available in 
the future, as populations age. 
Quality Education, by German 
artist Leon Löwentraut, part of the 
On the other hand, newcomers have 
a legitimate interest in becoming full 
members of society, through participation 
and progressive inclusion. Education plays 
a pivotal role in this. States are free to 
decide how they allocate their financial 
resources, but while doing so, must 
respect the obligations of assistance and 
protection to which they have voluntarily 
subscribed by becoming parties to human 
rights treaties.
For example, the public interest may 
require the state to deter irregular 
migrants from leaving their country 
and undertaking a perilous journey to 
Europe. However, once these migrants 
have arrived, fundamental human rights 
must be respected. This does not mean 
that they should be given access to all 
services on the same basis as citizens 
of the host country. States may have 
a legitimate interest in restricting free 
access to higher education if that has 
the effect of attracting more irregular 
migrants. But states cannot restrict 
access to elementary or basic education. 
This right must be guaranteed in 
all circumstances. 
We know that some refugees will 
probably stay permanently, because it 
is impossible for them to return to their 
country of origin. It is therefore essential 
that national and local authorities 
anticipate and design educational 
policies that are culturally appropriate 
– enabling those who are interested to 
become integrated, with access to the 
labour market. 
Above all, a balance must be struck 
between the educational needs of young 
migrants and the differential treatment 
of citizens and non-citizens with respect 
to access to education. For instance, 
language instruction is recommended for 
migrants as soon as they arrive.
Ensuring access to education, housing, 
social and healthcare services and jobs for 
refugees is bound to impose a financial 
burden on governments. However, since 
a generous policy to welcome migrants 
can sometimes lead to misunderstanding, 
uneasiness and discontent among some 
citizens, governments must explain the 
reasons for their choices and justify them 
in light of other budgetary priorities, 
political interests and their international 
human rights obligations.
To conclude, it is important that the rights 
of migrants to an education are widely 
recognized as inalienable human rights, 
and not merely as goals to be achieved 
through public policy measures. National, 
local and school authorities must be 
aware of this, and act accordingly.
Head of the Department of International 
and European Law, Fons Coomans 
(The Netherlands) holds the UNESCO 
Chair in Human Rights and Peace at 
Maastricht University. He is Director of 
the Maastricht Centre for Human Rights, 
and a member of the Netherlands 
Network for Human Rights Research. 
