Benedetto Croce 
For UNESCO to conduct “a formal, public and international debate 
on the necessary principles underlying human dignity and 
civilization” so that “the force of logic, culture, doctrine and the 
possibility of fundamental agreement would secure the triumph 
of free minds over the adherents of autocracy and totalitarianism” 
was the best way forward, advocated Italian philosopher 
Benedetto Croce (1866‑1952) in his text, sent to UNESCO from 
Naples on 15 April 1947, with the title “The Rights of Man and 
the Present Historical Situation”. 
Negative and Positive, 1956, by 
Italian artist Carla Accardi (1924-2014), 
who co-founded the artist movement, 
Forma Uno, in 1947.



A debate on the principles of 
human dignity 

Declarations of Rights (of the natural 
and inalienable rights of man, to quote 
the French Declaration of 1789) are all 
based upon a theory which criticism on 
many sides has succeeded in destroying: 
namely, the theory of natural rights, 
which had its own particular grounds 
during the sixteenth, seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries, but which has 
become philosophically and historically 
quite untenable. Nor can we argue from 
the moral character of such rights, for 
morality recognizes no rights which are 
not, at the same time, duties, and no 
authority but itself – this is not a natural 
fact but the first spiritual principle.

This, moreover, is already implied in the 
report you have sent me [Memorandum 
on Human Rights, 27 March 1947], when 
it says that these rights vary historically; 
thereby abandoning the logical basis 
of those rights regarded as universal 
rights of man, and reducing them to, at 
most, the rights of man in history. That 
is to say, rights accepted as such for 
men of a particular time. Thus, they are 
not eternal claims but simply historical 
facts, manifestations of the needs of 
such and such an age and an attempt 
to satisfy those needs. As a historical 
fact, the Declaration of 1789 had its 
importance, since it expresses a general 
agreement which had developed under 
European culture and civilization of the 
eighteenth century (the Age of Reason, 
of Enlightenment, etc.) concerning the 
certain urgent need of a political reform 
of European society (including European 
society in America).
Today, however, it is no longer possible 
to realize the purpose of the Declaration, 
whether of rights or of historical needs, 
for it is precisely that agreement on 
the subject which is lacking and which 
UNESCO desires to promote. Agreement, 
it is obvious, is lacking in the two most 
important currents of world opinion: 
the liberal current and the authoritarian-
totalitarian current. And indeed that 
disagreement, though moderated in 
its expression, may be discerned in the 
report I have before me.
Will this agreement be obtained? And 
by what means? By the reinvigoration 
of the current of liberalism, whose 
moral superiority, power of thought and 
persuasion and whose political wisdom 
and prudence will prevail over the other 
current? Or will it be through a new 
world war which will bring victory to 
one or the other side, according to the 
fortunes of war, the course of events 
or Divine Providence? And would the 
immortal current of liberalism emerge 
from its opposite, should the latter be 
temporarily victorious?
Is compromise 
possible?
I assume that UNESCO reckons with the 
first alternative or hypothesis and I need 
not tell you that, for my part, I am heart 
and soul in favour of this endeavour for 
which each of us is bound to work with all 
his energies and for which I myself have 
been working for nearly twenty-five years 
in Italy and also further afield.
If that is so, however, a working 
organization such as that you invite 
me to, and in which representatives of 
all currents, especially the two most 
directly opposed, will participate with the 
same rights, cannot possibly proclaim 
in the form of a declaration of rights, a 
declaration of common political action, 
an agreement which has no existence, 
but which must, on the contrary, be 
the ultimate outcome of opposed and 
convergent efforts. That is the point 
to be carefully considered, for it is the 
weak point. 
Nor do I even see how it would be 
possible to formulate any half-way or 
compromise declaration, which would 
not prove either empty or arbitrary. It 
may be that you and your colleagues, 
when you get to work, will discover 
the futility and the impossibility of it, 
and even, if you will allow me to say 
so, the danger of causing readers to 
smile at the ingenuousness of men who 
have conceived and formulated such a 
declaration. 
In my opinion, there is only one useful 
form of practical work for UNESCO 
to do: namely, a formal, public and 
international debate on the necessary 
principles underlying human dignity 
and civilization. In such a debate I 
do not doubt that the force of logic, 
culture, doctrine and the possibility 
of fundamental agreement would 
secure the triumph of free minds 
over the adherents of autocracy and 
totalitarianism, who are still reduced to 
reiterating the same slogans and the 
same sophistries to catch the public ear. 
Once that debate was held, it would 
no doubt be possible to formulate 
the declaration of certain historical 
and contemporary rights and needs 
in some such short form as the Ten 
Commandments or, if it were to include 
details, at somewhat greater length. 
An Italian philosopher, essayist and 
historian, Benedetto Croce (1866-1952) 
was a member of the Prussian Academy, 
of the British Academy, and of the 
American Academy of Letters. Noted 
for his literary criticism, he founded 
La Critica, a journal of cultural criticism 
in 1903, and was the author of almost 
seventy books.
