Francis Chateauraynaud, 
interviewed by Régis Meyran
The debates sparked off by 
the Anthropocene have real 
scientific stakes, since they 
could play a role in forging 
a global model of the evolution 
of planetary equilibria. 
But the interpretations could 
get distorted by those who 
use the term to prophesy the 
end of the world – an approach 
which is counter-productive, 
argues Francis Chateauraynaud.
You have been studying scientific 
controversies for a long time. What do 
you think of the debates around the 
Anthropocene?
This is an important debate – scientists 
are looking for a global model for the 
planet, which, for the time being, has 
not been consolidated. It’s a question of 
establishing a formal system that sets 
the laws governing the functioning of 
Planet Earth, by thinking on a global 
scale and integrating many variables 
that were previously disconnected. 
With the computing power available to us 
today, it is possible to construct a model 
of the biosphere and to run simulations 
to study the variations that occur when 
parameters − such as ocean temperatures 
and acidity – change.
Stop the
 catastrophist
discourse!
As a hypothesis, the Anthropocene 
is of interest to both geologists and 
archaeologists, who deal with radioactive or 
chemical residues in the soil. The question 
remains whether it is really necessary to talk 
about a new geological epoch that would 
follow the Holocene. The relevance of the 
term Anthropocene will certainly become 
clearer over time, and it is normal that it 
should be debated. Some authors, such as 
the American academic Jason W. Moore 
and Swedish author Andreas Malm, 
prefer to speak of the Capitalocene. 
This reclassification is questionable, though, 
given the large ecological footprint of the 
former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
(USSR) in the twentieth century.
In fact, it is not so much the term 
Anthropocene that poses a problem as 
the predictability of the model, on the 
one hand, and the temptation to embrace 
catastrophism or determinism, on the other.


Speculation, Passion and Anxiety, 
acrylic on canvas, 2001, by the French 
and Canadian artist-philosopher 
Hervé Fischer.
Could you tell us more about this tendency 
towards catastrophism?
One problem comes from the way in 
which many experts speak on behalf 
of all humanity, by using the pronoun 
“we”. The historian Dipesh Chakrabarty 
has questioned the function this “we” 
might serve. To attribute phenomena to 
humanity as a whole is to forget or mask 
the fact that many people, who are living in 
poverty or are from minorities, play almost 
no part in the advent of the Anthropocene.
The other problem is the idea that “we” 
have already embarked on this fatal 
trajectory. To give you an example, 
in November 2017, the French daily, 
Le Monde, published an open letter 
“to humanity” signed by 15,000 scientists, 
titled “It will soon be too late”. 
There are always individuals, groups, 
cities or regions that are inventing 
alternatives and new possibilities. 
The book that I co-authored with 
Josquin Debaz, Aux bords de l’irréversible 
[On the Edge of the Irreversible, 2017] 
traces the emergence of a multiplicity of 
“counter-Anthropocenes” – other possible 
worlds that are forged in the interstices. 
While they often appear as forms of 
“resistance”, they generate other modes of 
acting and of the perception of the world.
Take, for example, the plan to 
build a new international airport at 
Notre-Dame-des-Landes in France. 
First initiated in the 1960s, the project was 
relaunched in the early 2000s. Found to be 
inconsistent with the COP21 (Paris, 2015) 
declarations on combating climate change, 
it was finally abandoned in January 2018 
under pressure from activists. Central 
to the civic resistance organized by the 
citizens of Notre-Dame-des-Landes was 
their collective ability to reverse the order 
of priorities.
The movements around farmers’ seed 
systems and permaculture are inspired 
by the functioning of traditional 
ecosystems and knowledge, while aiming 
for self-sufficiency. As with cities in 
transition, multiple collective experiences 
work together to redefine and manage 
common goods, fuelling new ideas 
for shaping policy.
The future remains open. Every humanist 
has a duty to prove the prophets 
of catastrophism wrong. There are 
countless places on this planet 
where people are already struggling 
to overcome the devastating effects 
of the techno-industrial hubris.
Francis Chateauraynaud (France) is 
a sociologist and Research Director at 
the École des Hautes Études en Sciences 
Sociales (EHESS, School of Advanced 
Studies in the Social Sciences) in Paris. 
His most recent book, co-authored 
with Josquin Debaz, is Aux bords 

de l’irréversible. Sociologie pragmatique 
des transformations (2017).
While a measure of reversibility is implied 
in the adverb “soon”, a marker like “too late”, 
and the repetition of stock phrases 
such as “we have failed” or “we did not 
succeed in”, put us on the slippery slope 
of catastrophism.
The global thinker (the intellectual who 
thinks of the world in its global dimension) 
finds a form of legitimacy here for his 
flights of fancy and can unfold a great 
narrative, encompassing all the complexity 
of the world in a few stock phrases. Even 
the French sociologist Bruno Latour has 
entered the field, with his book Face à 
Gaïa (2015). The temptation to prophesy 
fuels writings on “collapsology”, like the 
book by French researchers Pablo Servigne 
and Raphaël Stevens, Comment tout peut 
s’effondrer [How Everything Might Collapse, 
2015]. While these authors base their 
arguments on data that few would dispute, 
the way in which they are assembled into 
an end-of-the-world narrative is problematic.
The main criticism against the catastrophist 
argument is that it doesn’t work. 
The “heuristics of fear” theory, put forward 
years ago by the German philosopher 
Hans Jonas (1903-1993) – who believed 
that only fearing the worst was enough to 
raise consciousness – is no longer relevant 
in the contemporary context. It’s all very 
well for great minds to sign ominous 
open letters, but this doesn’t bring us any 
closer to solutions. The task of scientists 
is not to announce the inevitability 
of a catastrophe, but to tackle problems 
at different levels of action.
Catastrophist arguments may be futile, 
but they are successful...
Not only are they successful, 
they also provoke hostile reactions. 
Ecology ends up getting confused 
with catastrophism. Groups like the 
Association française pour l’information 
scientifique (French Association for 
Scientific Information (AFIS)) have even 
back-pedalled, proclaiming that we 
have never been happier on this planet. 
In these polemics, the arguments of 
groups like AFIS are all the more successful 
because they do not call on the public 
to do anything.
Concretely, though, can we avoid a 
catastrophe?
First of all, there are many kinds of 
catastrophes. To announce a final global 
catastrophe is to ignore the real facts. 
It is important to avoid endorsing a 
closed-off vision of the future, even if it is 
supported by institutions, and to unlock 
possible futures. 
