Man and nature reconciled
Luc Jacquet
In March 2018, French film 
director Luc Jacquet, who won 
an Oscar for his documentary 
March of the Penguins (2005), 
travelled to the Galápagos 
with French photographer 
and film director Sarah Del 
Ben on a scouting trip for a 
future film project. They were 
accompanied by experts 
from UNESCO's Man and the 
Biosphere Programme (MAB). 
This is their experience. 
This article marks the 30th session of 
the MAB Council in Palembang, South 
Sumatra, Indonesia, 23-28 July 2018.

This morning, as I walked through 
the alleys of Santa Cruz, I saw an old 
man reading his newspaper. A sea lion 
casually kept him company, sitting on 
the same bench. A little further away, 
men just back from fishing were selling 
fresh fish that would be eaten the same 
day. I continued on my way, meeting 
passers-by, tourists and iguanas. 
Walking only a short distance away 
from the alleys, I could see children 
playing around century-old giant 
turtles, which were grazing peacefully 
in the grass.
I've travelled the world, but I've never 
before witnessed such proximity 
between different species, except 
perhaps in Antarctica. These places, 
so far from everything, are ultimately 
the last sanctuaries of harmonious 
life between humans and nature. And 
yet, in both cases, living conditions 
are extreme.

French director Luc Jaquet, 
on a reconnaissance trip to the 
Galápagos, with a team from UNESCO 
in March 2018.

Man and nature reconciled
For my part, I am fortunate to have 
the know-how that allows me to play 
the modest role of mediator between 
science and the general public. I can 
make images that convey messages 
with an effectiveness that is now 
proven. And I put this know-how at 
the service of the planet. That is why 
I want to support the UNESCO-MAB 
Programme – its aspirations are in line 
with mine. Its philosophy is based on 
an idea that I fully endorse, that of 
living together.
Cinema is a wonderful tool for 
awakening awareness. It uses the 
language of emotion and metaphor. 
Far from indulging in a moralizing or 
guilt-laden discourse – which has been 
proved to be relatively ineffective – a 
film acts on both the hearts and minds 
of its audience. It thus incites them to 
appropriate things of nature – because 
of their beauty, because of their 
interest, or simply out of curiosity.
Climate change and the loss of 
biodiversity are complex issues. Cinema 
is able to make them accessible to the 
public by translating them into stories 
that are both simple and universal 
in scope. This is how it opens this 
first door that leads us onto the path 
of awareness.
And when we are on this path, we 
understand what an illusion it is to 
imagine for a moment – and yet the 
last four or five generations of human 
beings have done it – that we can 
live, cut off from nature. We come 
from nature and we need nature for 
things as basic as breathing, drinking 
or eating. But we also need nature so 
that we can dream.
In the arid lands of the Galápagos, 
burned by the sun and so hostile to 
life, human activity and biodiversity are 
not in conflict. One has the impression 
of being in a life-size laboratory and 
witnessing the brilliant demonstration 
that it is possible for humans and 
animals to live together – as long 
as we put in place sound resource 
management policies that allow 
ecosystems to survive. The archipelago 
should serve as a model for the rest of 
the world, on how to bridge the gap we 
have created between ourselves and 
other living beings.
Participating in the conservation of 
ecosystems is always a complicated 
task. But above all, we must learn to 
know and love them. If each of us does 
this, using our talents and know-how, 
I am convinced our collective efforts 
will bear fruit. I deeply believe that this 
collective energy will enable us to move 
towards a way of life in which we will no 
longer be colonizers, but managers – 
and towards a society that appreciates 
the value of the planet on which it lives.
