In each being dwells a light and 
inspiration which no power can 
extinguish, which is benign and tolerant, 
and which is the real man. It is our 
business to discover him, protect him 
and see that he is utilized for his own 
and humanity’s welfare. It is the nature 
of this man to search for the true, the 
good and the beautiful in life, to esteem 
them properly and to strive for them 
continuously.



The Hindu
concept of human freedoms
Shrikrishna Venkatesh Puntambekar
Criticizing the Western emphasis on reason and science that marked 
the emergence of European human rights doctrines, the Indian 
political scientist S.V. Puntambekar was of the opinion that “we shall 
have to give up some of the superstitions of material science and 
limited reason, which make man too much this‑worldly, and introduce 
higher spiritual aims and values for mankind.” He focused on the 
spiritual nature of human beings in his text, “The Hindu Concept of 
Human Rights”, sent to UNESCO in May 1947. Excerpts follow.
Then we must note that there is also an 
incalculable element in the human will, 
and an endless complexity of human 
nature. No system, no order, no law can 
satisfy the deep and potential demands 
of a great personality, be they religious, 
political, social or educational. Men are 
often endowed with great potential 
energy and creative power which 
cannot be encased within the bounds 
of old formulas and doctrines. No fixed 
discipline can suit the developing 
possibilities of new human manifestations 
in the psychological, ethical or spiritual 
fields. No system can satisfy the growing 
needs of a dynamic personality. There 
always remains something unthought of 
and unrealized in the system. Hence we 
want freedom for man in the shape of 
human freedoms.
Strands, an installation at the National 
Museum of 21st Century Arts (MAXXI) in 
Rome, Italy. Passers-by, who are part of 
the installation, form a human garland 
under the watchful eye of the artist, 
the Indian painter N. S. Harsha. 
The proper study of mankind is man. 
There is something more in man than is 
apparent in his ordinary consciousness 
and behaviour under a given system of 
environment – something which frames 
ideals and values of life. There is in him a 
finer spiritual presence which makes him 
dissatisfied with merely earthly pursuits. 
The ordinary condition of man is not his 
ultimate being. He has in him a deeper 
self, call it soul or spirit. 

Freedom encourages 
growth
There is always a tendency for new values 
and new ideals to arise in human life. No 
ready formulas and systems can satisfy 
the needs and visions of great thinkers 
and of all peoples and periods. Freedom 
is necessary because authority is not 
creative. Freedom gives full scope to 
developing the personality and creates 
conditions for its growth. No uniformity 
or conformity or comprehension of 
all aspects of life will be helpful. The 
present centralization of all authority, its 
bureaucracy and party dictatorship, its 
complexity and standardization, leave 
little scope for independent thought and 
development, for initiative and choice. [...]
Can we be aware of a call for national 
freedom and for human freedom, when 
we are so rigid, inflexible, fanatic and 
exclusive in our political, religious, cultural 
and socio-economic outlook? Not having 
succeeded in disposing our rules and 
systems on all countries and continents, 
some of us still harbour feelings of 
superiority and hatred, coercion and 
dominance against our neighbours.
Therefore first let us “be men”, and then 
lay down the contents, qualities and 
interrelations of human freedoms. We 
must respect humanity and personality, 
tolerate our differences and others’ ways 
of internal and external group behaviour, 
and combine to serve one another in 
calamities and in great undertakings.
To talk of human rights in India is no 
doubt very necessary and desirable, 
but hardly possible in view of the 
socio-cultural and religio-political 
complexes which are so predominant 
today. There are no human beings in 
the world of today, but only religious 
men, racial men, caste men or group 
men. Our intelligentsia and masses 
are mad after racial privileges, religion, 
bigotry and social exclusiveness. In 
short, we are engaged in a silent war of 
extermination of opposite groups. Our 
classes and communities think in terms 
of conquest and subjugation, not of 
common association and citizenship. 
There is at present a continuous war 
of groups and communities, of rulers 
and the ruled, in our body politic and 
body social, from which all conception 
of humanity and tolerance, all notion of 
humility and respect, have disappeared. 
Bigotry, intolerance and exclusiveness sit 
enthroned in their stead.
The world is mad today. It runs after 
destruction and despotism, world 
conquest and world order, world loot 
and world dispossession. The enormous 
hatred generated against human life and 
achievements has left no sense of humanity 
or human love in the world politics of today. 
But shall we renounce “being men” first 
and always? What we want is freedom from 
want and war, from fear and frustration 
in life. We also want freedom from an 
all-absorbing conception of the state, 
the community and the church coercing 
individuals to particular and ordered ways 
of life. Along with this, we desire freedom 
of thought and expression of movement 
and association, of education and of 
expansion in the mental and moral spheres. 
In any defined and ordered plan for living, 
we must have the right of non-violent 
resistance and autonomy, in order to 
develop our ideas of the good human life.
Seeking higher 
spiritual values
For this purpose, we shall have to 
give up some of the superstitions of 
material science and limited reason, 
which make man too much this-worldly, 
and introduce higher spiritual aims 
and values for mankind. Then on that 
basis, we shall have to organize our 
social life in all its aspects. We want 
not only the material conditions of a 
happy life but also the spiritual virtues 
of a good life. Man’s freedom is being 
destroyed by the demands of economic 
technocracy, political bureaucracy and 
religious idiosyncrasy.
Great thinkers like Manu and Buddha 
have laid emphasis on what should 
be assurances necessary for man and 
what should be the virtues possessed 
by man. They have propounded a 
code, as it were, of  ten essential human 
freedoms and controls or virtues necessary 
for a good life. They are not only basic, 
but more comprehensive in their scope 
than those mentioned by any other 
modern thinkers. They emphasize five 
freedoms or social assurances and 
five individual possessions or virtues. 
The five social freedoms are (1) freedom 
from violence (Ahimsa), (2) freedom 
from want (Asteya), (3) freedom 
from exploitation (Aparigraha), 
(4) freedom from violation or dishonour 
(Avyabhichara) and (5) freedom from early 
death and disease (Armitatva and Arogya). 
The five individual possessions or virtues 
are (1) absence of intolerance (Akrodha), 
(2) compassion or fellow feeling 
(Bhutadaya, Adroha), (3) knowledge 
(Jnana, Vidya), (4) freedom of thought 
and conscience (Satya, Sunrta) and 
(5) freedom from fear and frustration or 
despair (Pravrtti, Abhaya, Dhrti).
A photo from the series, 
In Praise of India, by Greek 
photographer Giannis Papanikos.

More comprehensive 
freedoms
Human freedoms require as counterparts, 
human virtues or controls. To think in 
terms of freedoms without corresponding 
virtues would lead to a lopsided view 
of life and a stagnation or even a 
deterioration of personality, and also to 
chaos and conflict in society. This two-
sidedness of human life, its freedoms and 
virtues or controls, its assurances and 
possessions must be understood and 
established in any scheme for the welfare 
of man, society and humanity. Alone, 
the right to life, liberty and property or 
pursuit of happiness is not sufficient; 
neither, alone, is the assurance of liberty, 
equality and fraternity. Human freedoms 
and virtues must be more definite and 
more comprehensive if they are to 
help the physical, mental and spiritual 
development of man and humanity.
In order to prevent this open and latent 
warfare of mutual extermination – 
national and international – we must 
create and develop a new man or citizen 
assured and possessed of these tenfold 
freedoms and virtues which are the 
fundamental values of human life and 
conduct. Otherwise our freedoms will 
fail in their objects and in their mission 
to save man and his mental and moral 
culture from the impending disaster with 
which the whole human civilization is 
now threatened by the lethal weapons 
of science and the inhuman robots of 
despotic and coercive powers and their 
ideologies and creeds.
We in India also want freedom from 
foreign rule and civil warfare. Foreign 
rule is a damnable thing. This land has 
suffered from it for hundreds of years. 
We must condemn it, whether old or new. 
We must have self-rule in our country 
under one representative, responsible 
and centralized system. Then alone we 
shall survive.
I know that men who are devoted to and 
dominated by rigid ideas of cultures and 
religions cannot feel the call of national or 
human freedom. But we cannot give up 
higher objectives and aspirations for their 
sake and their prejudices.
An Indian academic educated at Oxford 
University, S.V. Puntambekar taught at 
Banaras Hindu University and Nagpur 
University. He is the author of several 
books on politics and foreign policy.
