In January 2014, Akil established his 
own business, Namaa Solutions, with a 
friend. Based in Gaziantep, Turkey, about 
twenty-five miles from the Syrian border, 
the startup harnesses his technical and 
entrepreneurial skills to develop digital 
and mobile solutions to address the 
needs of other Syrian refugees. 
 



Forging new lives, using
mobile technology
Christoph Pimmer and Fan Huhua
The case of Moujahed Akil, 
a Syrian refugee in Turkey, 
highlights the fact that 
innovative mobile learning 
practices are best driven from 
within the communities to 
address real needs, sustain 
development, empower 
members and maximize impact.
Addressing needs is key
Establishing the business posed its 
own difficulties: “The lack of funding 
and a sustainable model were major 
challenges,” Akil explains. But, he adds, 
“addressing needs is a key success factor. 
Syrian refugees in Turkey want this 
information, and now they have it at their 
fingertips.” The small business has grown 
rapidly, and employs a staff of twenty-five 
– the number of downloads of the app 
continues to grow. With 3.5 million Syrian 
refugees in Turkey, according to figures 
released by UNHCR, the UN Refugee 
Agency and the Government of Turkey 
in 2018, this is hardly surprising.
 
 
When Moujahed Akil fled Syria in 
September 2012 for fear of being 
arrested, one of the biggest challenges he 
encountered in Turkey, his host country, 
was not being able to communicate with 
the people there. 
“Not knowing the language was very 
hard, because I could not even discuss the 
most basic things needed to start a new 
life in Turkey,” he recalls. “For example, I 
went to the government building where 
nobody spoke Arabic, and we had to use 
our hands and feet to understand each 
other.” When Akil later obtained a mobile 
phone, he started using a translation 
app to find information relevant to his 
situation, and to fill in forms that he had 
previously photographed.
Akil, who was a computer information 
science student and an Information 
Technology (IT) freelancer in Aleppo, used 
his coding skills to find a job at a tech 
company. With the help of his Turkish 
colleagues and friends, he learnt the 
language before too long. He also learnt 
programming for mobile phones. His own 
early experience as a refugee inspired him 
to start working on a smartphone app 
to help Syrians to obtain all the practical 
and legal information they needed about 
resettlement issues and to build new lives 
in Turkey. 
The cover of UNESCO’s A Lifeline to 
Learning: Leveraging technology to 
support education for refugees.

About ninety-four per cent of these 
refugees live outside refugee camps, 
fending for themselves, mostly in big 
cities. Namaa Solutions’ Gherbtna (“our 
expatriates” in Arabic) app helps them 
navigate the hurdles to access basic 
facilities such as healthcare and education. 
The app has several tools, including Video, 
Laws, Find a Job, Alerts, and “Ask Me”, 
providing answers to everything from 
legal advice and how to open a bank 
account, to housing, job listings, and 
even a directory for medical specialists. 
“Our ultimate goal is to reach all refugees 
around the world with the app,” Akil says. 
According to June 2018 figures released 
by UNHCR, the world is witnessing the 
highest levels of displacement on record. 
Out of an unprecedented 68.5 million 
people who have been forcibly displaced 
worldwide, there are nearly 25.4 million 
refugees, over half of whom are under the 
age of 18. 
“Many Syrian people are students who 
wish to continue their studies in Turkish 
schools and universities, and this is 
why education is the most relevant 
category on the Gherbtna app,” says 
the 29-year-old entrepreneur. The app 
provides information about schools and 
universities in which Syrian refugees 
can continue their studies, and lists the 
requirements and certifications needed to 
enrol. The second most popular category 
is information about the laws and rules 
to be followed during the integration 
process. After these two categories, the 
most popular app element is the “My 
story” feature, which is a platform where 
personal stories about Syrian refugees 
and their daily lives can be shared. 
Bridging a barrier
Sensing the giant barrier caused by 
language, and having experienced it 
first-hand, Akil launched Tarjemly Live 
(“Translate for me” in Arabic) in 2016. For 
a small fee (one Turkish lira, or $0.21 per 
minute), the app connects the user to 
a live human translator, who are often 
Syrian refugees themselves, with more 
advanced Turkish language skills. In this 
way, Namaa Solutions is also generating 
jobs for Turkish people with Arabic 
language skills. Online usage statistics in 
the first year of operation showed that 
seventy-seven freelance interpreters 
translated more than 37,000 words for 
17,000 minutes, using calls and texts. 
Over time, more than 1,500 text and 
video entries have been developed for 
the app, covering a wide range of topics. 
To complement the app, Gherbtna has 
a website and a Facebook page. “The 
Facebook page is a very strong component 
of the app, allowing us to directly interact 
with our users,” Akil explains.
Akil’s innovative spirit has not waned. 
New projects planned include a learning 
management system and interactive 
learning content for Syrian refugees. 
Another project is buy4impact.com, 
a trading platform that helps Syrians 
to sell hand-crafted products to an 
international market.
A researcher and lecturer at the 
University of Applied Sciences and 
Arts Northwestern Switzerland FHNW, 
Christoph Pimmer (Austria) specializes 
in digital learning and knowledge 
management in education contexts. 
He has co-authored the UNESCO 
publication, “A lifeline to learning: 
Leveraging technology to support 
education for refugees” in 2018. 
An associate project officer at UNESCO’s 
Unit for ICT in Education, Fan Huhua 
(China) facilitates the implementation 
of the UNESCO-Weidong Group Funds-
in-Trust project on leveraging ICT to 
achieve Education 2030.
Mobile learning to address individual 
challenges, an illustration by 
Cuban-American artist, Edel Rodriguez. 
