Today, young Africans know very little 
about our traditional heritage, and would 
rather spend their time discovering 
Hollywood films, or playing games on the 
internet. Instead of passing down our own 
culture to our children and grandchildren, 
and having them create their own art 
based on that culture, they are paying for 
foreign entertainment. 
We Live in Silence VIII, 
by the Zimbabwean artist and plastician, 
Kudzanai Chiurai, 2017.
The outcome is that our youth is 
disconnected from both our traditions 
and the work of contemporary African 
authors and thinkers.
Yet, our youth is as talented anywhere 
else in the world. I have witnessed 
young girls and boys produce the most 
beautiful music with the most rudimentary 
instruments, or making some of the 
best short films using their smartphones 
– all without any formal training. 
Filling 
the cultural vacuum
Lucy Mushita
Southern Africa’s youth are as 
talented as young people anywhere 
else. But with disappearing local 
traditions, and the lack of avenues to 
channel their creativity, they live in 
a cultural vacuum. Consuming content 
that is bombarded on the internet 
is not enough – these young people 
need to be given access to the right 
tools and opportunities, and to be 
guided and encouraged to craft 
their own stories. 
The African continent is overflowing 
with talent: musicians, writers, poets, 
philosophers, dancers and other artists. 
These artists and their creative work are 
the conduits through which cultures 
pass from one generation to the next. 
But many of them have lived in exile: 
Kenyan writer Ngugi wa Thiong’o, Nigerian 
playwright Wole Soyinka, Congolese 
novelist and chemist Emmanuel Dongala, 
French-Congolese author Alain Mabanckou 
and Zimbabwean musician Thomas 
Mapfumo. The list goes on. Some exiled 
Africans are teaching at prestigious 
universities abroad where their real value is 
appreciated – while students in their home 
countries are deprived of their wisdom.
At the same time, traditional oral literature 
is disappearing from our cultural scene. 
When I was young – I grew up in a small 
village during apartheid in Southern 
Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe) – my identity 
and cultural needs were nourished 
through this literature that elders conveyed 
through stories recounted in the evenings. 
Involving acting and singing and dancing 
in the community, these “lessons” 
complemented the formal education 
we received.
It was in school that I read the classics by 
numerous icons of English, French and 
American literature. These books did not 
reflect our reality, and were devoid of 
thoughts that might have given us any ideas 
of equality with Whites. But regardless of 
the censorship, reading opened up a whole 
new world for me – introducing me to 
other cultures and to philosophical thinking 
and reasoning, which led to questioning 
the status quo.
La professeure Ada E. Yonath 
lors d’une expérience 
de cristallisation.

Young people would greatly benefit from 
e-resources in forms of downloadable 
books. The same applies to visual artists, 
whose work needs galleries to exhibit 
their genius. It is also essential to develop 
policies governing intellectual property 
to protect their work. 
Lack of funds?
How can Southern Africa shape public 
policy to fill this cultural vacuum with 
relevant content? How can African youth 
learn to reflect before regurgitating 
whatever comes their way? How can 
the region reject that which is toxic and 
incorporate that which is untainted, 
into their own creative work? 
The common argument about a lack 
of funds may be valid in many cases. 
But it is interesting to note that nearly 
every Southern African country spends 
millions on football stadiums and on the 
inflated salaries of footballers. It is true 
that sport must be promoted and that 
football stadiums are generally profitable. 
One solution could be to create a strategy 
in which sports and culture were merged. 
Revenue from stadiums, for example, 
could be channelled to fund libraries, 
cinemas, theatres, music centres. 
Another frequent political argument is 
that any investment should create jobs. 
Take the example of Hollywood, which 
employs thousands, if not millions, 
directly or indirectly – economically 
benefiting the United States, besides 
allowing it to use its soft power. 
Now that technology is available to us, 
we too are in a position to craft our own 
stories – through literature, cinema, 
and art. 
Homegrown success
Being creative doesn’t have to be 
prohibitively expensive. In 2016, the Italian 
publisher 66thand2nd, published La felicità 
degli uomini semplici (The happiness 
of simple men), a book of short stories 
on soccer in Africa, by African writers. 
In Italian and at €18 a copy, not many 
Africans can afford it. 
By contrast, Neria, the homegrown 1993 
arthouse film scripted by Zimbabwean 
author and filmmaker Tsitsi Dangarembga 
and directed by fellow-Zimbabwean 
Godwin Mawuru – which explores gender 
issues – was more accessible and remains 
the highest-grossing film in Zimbabwe’s 
history. 
While it was nearly impossible for someone 
of my generation to write their own stories 
while growing up, today’s African youth 
have both the possibility and the tools at 
their disposal to do so. Women writers and 
philosophers – like Ken Bugul (Senegal), 
Kidi Bebey (France-Cameroon), Nadia Yala 
Kisukidi (born in Belgium, of a Congolese 
father and a French-Italian mother), 
Virginia Phiri (Zimbabwe), Chimamanda 
Ngozi Adichie (Nigeria) – are all writing 
their stories, and Africa needs to listen to 
and engage with them. Most world-views 
of Africa continue to be tainted by colonial 
points of view – African voices, if provided 
the right platforms, could change that. 
Lucy Mushita (Zimbabwe) is a novelist 
and essayist. Born in Southern Rhodesia, 
she grew up in a small village during 
apartheid. Her novel Chinongwa 
(published in South Africa in 2008, 
and in France in 2012) explores this period 
of her life, before she left her country 
in 1986, for France, the United States 
and Australia – eventually making Paris 
her home.
With this article, the Courier marks 
the celebration of UNESCO’s Africa Week 
in the month of May. 
Revenue from stadiums could 
be channelled to fund libraries, 
cinemas, theatres, music centres
