Over the last five years or so, basic AI 
research has been all the rage with 
some information technology giants, 
who are investing considerable sums of 
money in the field. Could you explain 
this phenomenon?
The answer is very simple. Science in 
AI has reached a level of maturity that 
makes it very useful for companies. The 
accumulation of big data and the increased 
computing power available, facilitate the 
development of new AI products, which 
will be even more profitable in the future 
than they are today.
Today, when we search the internet, 
we are constantly solicited by targeted 
advertising – these ads allow companies 
like Facebook, Amazon, YouTube, etc., to 
thrive. Currently, AI products have only a 
small share of the market. But economists 
predict that they will account for up to 
15 per cent of the total production of 
goods within a decade. That is enormous.



Yoshua Bengio, interviewed 
by Jasmina Šopova
Artificial intelligence (AI) is 
still in its infancy. “Its level of 
reasoning is very superficial, 
not even equivalent to that of 
a frog,” says Yoshua Bengio, AI 
pioneer and an expert on deep 
learning. However, it already 
poses serious problems of 
monopolization and inequitable 
distribution, which can only 
be resolved on a global scale. 
International coordination is 
imperative in the development 
of AI, he cautions.
Countering the
monopolization
of research 
AI will then allow these companies to sell 
more, to get rich and to be able to pay the 
researchers they recruit even more than 
they do now. By increasing their customer 
base, they will increase the amount of 
data they have access to – and that data is 
a gold-mine that makes the system even 
more powerful.
All this creates a virtuous cycle, which is 
good for these companies but unhealthy 
for society. Such a concentration of power 
can have a negative impact on both 
democracy and the economy. It favours 
large companies and slows down the 
ability of small new companies to enter 
the market, even if they have better 
products to offer.
Yoshua Bengio: “We must encourage 
greater diversity in the business 
world associated with AI, and avoid a 
monopoly situation.”

We must encourage greater diversity in 
the business world associated with AI and 
avoid a monopoly situation.
But the monopoly is already being 
established. How can this be remedied?
With anti-monopoly laws. History teaches 
us that they can be effective against the 
excessive power of some companies. 
Remember Standard Oil in the United 
States, which bought its competitors to 
monopolize the oil market? Or Hollywood, 
which until the middle of the twentieth 
century, controlled seventy per cent of 
film theatres and imposed its rule on the 
distribution of films? The legal decisions 
against these companies and some 
others, helped to rebalance the markets.
I believe that judicious advertising 
regulations can go a long way towards 
preventing the establishment of 
monopolies in AI research. We are all, in 
a way, prisoners of advertising and we 
often forget that we have the option of 
making a collective decision to regulate it, 
so that it is not harmful to society.
Besides, the services provided by large 
private companies like Google and 
Facebook could very well be made public 
− in the same way that television, which 
provides a similar service, is.
You have decided not to work in the 
private sector, haven’t you?
Yes, I want to remain neutral. My 
project is to develop a science that is 
accessible to everyone, and not only to 
a few shareholders. I want research to 
develop in a way that it targets the most 
useful applications for humanity − and 
not necessarily the most profitable for 
the economy.
That said, I have tried to create a common 
ecosystem that is mutually beneficial to 
research and industry at the University of 
Montreal, where I work. Several private 
laboratories have been set up in Quebec’s 
capital, and they collaborate with us. 
Researchers from industry are employed 
as associate professors at the university 
and help train students. Companies make 
donations to universities and give them 
complete freedom to choose which areas 
of research they will invest in.
What is the proportion of researchers 
working in the academic field today?
If I base my answer on the people I meet 
at major international conferences, I 
would say that it is about half. Five years 
ago, virtually all AI researchers worked in 
the academic field.
Private companies recruit talent from 
around the world. Does this contribute to 
brain drain in less developed countries?
Inevitably. That’s why we must think 
collectively about how the poorest 
countries can benefit from the most 
recent research results − but also about 
how to create research centres within 
their universities. In Africa, for example, 
more and more academic institutions 
are offering courses in AI and summer 
schools (see page 20) are being 
organized, which are proving very useful.
In addition, there are a large number of 
courses, tutorials and codes available 
online for free. I meet many young 
people who have been trained through 
the internet. We must also look for 
the best ways to help these students 
train themselves.
Some countries, 
including Canada, 
are investing 
heavily in 
AI research.
Yes, Canada has 
decided to fund 
not only basic 
research and to help startups, 
but also to invest in collective thinking 
and research in the social sciences and 
humanities, in order to assess the social 
impact of AI.
At the initiative of the University of 
Montreal, a debate was started on 
3 November 2017 to help develop the 
Montreal Declaration for a Responsible 
Development of Artificial Intelligence. 
This approach essentially aims to 
establish ethical guidelines for the 
development of AI at the national level.
In the first phase of this long-term 
participatory process, the general public 
is invited to debate with experts and 
policymakers. Seven values have been 
identified: well-being, autonomy, justice, 
privacy, knowledge, democracy and 
responsibility.
At what stage is this reflection, at the 
international level?
To my knowledge, there is no 
international treaty governing AI 
research. Yet, these are international 
issues and without international 
coordination, we will not be able 
to move forward in the right direction.
Scanning your brain, by French 
cartoonist Bernard Bouton.
© Bernard Bouton / Cartoon Movement
First and foremost, the general public 
and policymakers must be made aware 
of the concerns about AI. In some parts 
of the world, researchers have already 
issued warnings about major problems, 
and the media and general public have 
responded. These are the first steps that 
will lead us towards a broader global 
political dialogue on the problems posed 
by this discipline, particularly in the areas 
of ethics, the environment and security.
Computer scientist and researcher 
Yoshua Bengio (Canada) is full professor 
of the Department of Computer 
Science and Operations Research 
(DIRO), University of Montreal; head 
of the Montreal Institute for Learning 
Algorithms (MILA); co-director of 
the Learning in Machines and Brains 
program of the Canadian Institute for 
Advanced Research (CIFAR) and Canada 
Research Chair in Statistical Learning 
Algorithms. The results of his research 
have been cited more than 80,000 times 
(as of September 2017). Born in Paris, 
Bengio moved to Quebec in 1977 at 
the age of 12, with his parents, who are 
of Moroccan origin. He is an Officer of 
the Order of Canada and a Fellow of the 
Royal Society of Canada.
