Under the pretext of helping 20-year-old Gisèle get rid of an evil eye, a friend 
of her parents took her to a deserted place and raped her. “I know he’s done 
it before,” she says. He had already raped two girls aged 12 and 15, whose 
parents are afraid to take action. Their parents don’t dare to do anything 
as they’re scared of what might happen. But Gisèle wants justice to be done.

Gisèle, Marie,
Viviane
and millions of other women
Photos: Bénédicte Kurzen / Noor
Text: Katerina Markelova
This photo-reportage is published 
by the UNESCO Courier to mark the 
International Day for the Elimination 
of Violence against Women, 
25 November. 
The names of the women who 
participated in the photographic 
project have been changed for 
their protection.
Fortunately, more and more women are 
raising their voices to break the silence, 
overcoming feelings of shame and 
guilt – and often the fear of reprisals. 
Like four other Haitian women – one 
of them only a teenager – Marie chose 
to join this fight by participating in a 
photographic project. “Against Their 
Will” was launched in 2016 by Médecins 
Sans Frontières/Doctors Without Borders 
(MSF) in collaboration with the French 
photographer Bénédicte Kurzen.
“Let’s take the car, leave Port-au-Prince. 
Let’s go to Source Zabeth. I want to be 
photographed in traditional clothes, 
in the water, as if I were doing laundry.” 
For her photo session, Marie chooses a 
setting that symbolizes purification. She 
wants to be rejuvenated, to free herself 
from the horrible experience and to make 
a fresh start. “I’m going to move on. I want 
to become a journalist,” she declares. 
“It was impossible for me to approach 
these women solely from the point of 
view of the tragedy they have lived 
through, because they all sought 
to overcome it,” explains Kurzen. 
“That opened up new perspectives to 
the photographic narrative.”
Haiti, 2015. In the streets of Port-au-Prince, 
a 20-year-old student is looking for work. 
Let’s call her Marie. A young man offers to 
help her. “He said I should accompany him 
to his home to pick up some documents. 
When we got there, he pulled out a gun. 
That’s when it happened,” she recounts. 
Marie was raped. 
The story of this young Haitian woman, 
is, unfortunately, only one illustration of 
a much greater scourge. Violence against 
women knows no borders. Women across 
the world are being crushed under the 
weight of the suffering and stigmatization 
it causes, regardless of their culture, 
religion or socio-economic status. 
Considered taboo in most societies, 
violence forces many women to remain 
silent about their ordeal, and is often 
not reflected in statistics. Surveys 
among these women are often the only 
way to get an idea of the extent of the 
malaise. According to the World Health 
Organization (WHO), one in three women 
in the world is exposed to physical or 
sexual violence during her lifetime.
2

In Haiti, where rape was recognized as 
a crime only in 2005 (it was considered 
indecent assault until then), twenty-
eight per cent of women aged 15 to 
49 reported experiencing some form of 
physical violence, and more than one 
woman in ten said they been subjected 
to sexual violence. 
According to The New York Times, 
following the earthquake that hit the 
Haitian capital in 2010, the rates of sexual 
attacks in the city’s makeshift camps 
was twenty times higher than in the 
rest of the country. MSF has pointed to 
inadequacies in the treatment of victims 
of sexual and gender-based violence, 
including a lack of institutions offering 
medical and psychological support, and 
the almost total absence of social and 
legal protection. 
To draw attention to this neglected 
problem – grossly underestimated in 
official statistics – the humanitarian 
organization launched its photographic 
project a year after it opened the Pran 
Men’m (‘take my hand’ in Haitian Creole) 
clinic in Port-au-Prince. In two years, the 
clinic has treated more than 1,300 victims 
of sexual aggression. The vast majority of 
these were under the age of 25. What is 
particularly disturbing is that fifty-three 
per cent of the victims were minors.
For UNESCO, educating young people is 
the only long-term solution to gender-
based violence. In spite of the alarming 
figures – about 246 million children are 
subjected to various forms of gender-
based violence each year – there are too 
few children and teenagers who receive 
a comprehensive sex education (learning 
the cognitive, emotional, physical and 
social aspects of sexuality) as part of their 
regular curriculum. Yet the benefits of 
such an education are undeniable – not 
only do young people learn to refrain 
from all forms of gender-based violence, 
they also learn to prevent it, recognize it 
and find help. 
UNESCO published a revised edition of 
its International technical guidance on 
sexuality education in 2018, produced in 
collaboration with UNAIDS, the United 
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 
UN Women and WHO. The guide is 
aimed at education and health officials 
and other competent authorities, to 
help them develop and introduce sex 
education programmes and materials. 

In a makeshift camp in Port-au-Prince, a man sneaks into a torn 
tent. Sarah’s alone, with no one to protect her. “He was someone 
we knew. He lived in the same area as us in the camp,” says 
the 13-year-old girl’s mother. Now she doesn’t want Sarah to do 
what the little girl has always loved doing: dancing. 
“I feel she is too visible when she dances,” she explains.
5

6

“I met this guy on the street. We started to chat. I told 
him I was looking for a job. He said that one of his friends 
was looking for someone like me. He said that I should 
accompany him to his home to pick up some documents. 
When we got there, he pulled out his gun. This is when 
it happened,” recounted 20-year-old Marie, who was 
raped at gunpoint. 

Advertising for a beauty 
salon in the streets of 
Croix-des-Bouquets, 
twelve kilometres from 
Port-au-Prince.

The boy was a school friend of 22-year-old Viviane. 
He invited her to his house, saying he would lend her 
a book. “I kept asking if his dad was there. He said yes. 
When we got there, the house was empty.” 
The rape was premeditated. 
