Dalia Al-Najjar has crammed a great deal 
into her short life. At 22, the Palestinian 
refugee has already lived through three 
wars and has spent every spare moment 
between siege and ceasefire studying, 
volunteering, working, blogging, on 
the daily struggle to live in Gaza – and 
planning how to change the future. 



I chose to be
optimistic
Dalia Al-Najjar 
Dalia Al-Najjar, 
Goodwill Ambassador for 
Children of Peace. by Mary de Sousa
A child of war dedicates herself to peace
I was so angry, 
I felt like I wanted 
to blow up the 
whole world, 
but I didn’t. 
I decided 
I wouldn’t be 
pushed to 
become evil. 
I would choose 
peace.
A good deal of her energy goes into 
her role as Goodwill Ambassador for 
Children of Peace, a non-partisan 
children’s charity dedicated to building 
trust, friendship and reconciliation 
between Israeli and Palestinian children, 
aged 4 to 17, and their communities. 

Dalia says she is fuelled by anger and 
hope, but also that she draws heavily on 
a family culture that values education. 
She has consciously used learning as a 
means to realize her dreams, the greatest 
of which is to find solutions to violence 
and hatred. “My family has always made 
me aware that education is hugely 
important,” she said. 
Dalia experienced her first siege when 
she was just 12, followed by two major 
conflicts. “I was in ninth grade when the 
first war started, and everything fell apart. 
I didn’t understand: why were people 
killing each other? I thought it would last 
only a few weeks,” she said. 
She continued to study throughout, 
finally graduating with a Bachelor’s 
degree in Business Administration from 
the Islamic University of Gaza, her life 
reduced to the intermittent bursts of 
electricity in the city. “In those days I 
never went to school without watching 
the news first, and everything depended 
on the power schedule. So I woke up 
when there was electricity, or studied by 
candlelight, which destroyed my eyes. I 
would often fight with my brother and 
sister to get the candle.”
“Wars and Peace”, from the 
Cartooning for Peace international 
network of editorial cartoonists, 
supported by UNESCO. 
The 2014 war proved a turning point for 
Dalia. “After the war, my ideas became 
much clearer. I didn’t want anybody else 
to have to live like this. I chose to be 
optimistic, because if not, I don’t live. Not 
living wasn’t a choice for me,” she said. 
Dalia was invited on a short scholarship 
to the United States, and began a blog 
and YouTube show. She is also a member 
of the World Youth Alliance, a New York-
based international coalition, which 
works with young people worldwide to 
build a culture that nurtures and supports 
the dignity of the person – through 
advocacy, education and culture.
But it is Dalia’s work as a Goodwill 
Ambassador for Children of Peace that 
has changed her most profoundly.  
“It is easy to stay on your own side and 
demonize the other. Now I have Israeli 
friends and we realize we have been 
given different narratives, and we have to 
find our way through that together, using 
critical thinking,” she explained.  
“Being on one side of a conflict makes 
it much easier to dehumanize someone 
than to accept that there is trauma 
on both sides.” 
Now studying for her Master’s degree 
in Human Resources in Sakarya, Turkey, 
Dalia has an exciting new project. She 
attended the Young Sustainable Impact 
(YSI) conference in Oslo in 2017, as an 
‘earthpreneur’ (someone who uses 
entrepreneurship to work towards a 
sustainable planet), where she was 
tasked with proposing a startup that 
addressed one of the Sustainable 
Development Goals. 
When she learned that more people die 
as a result of waterborne diseases than 
from conflict, she co-founded Xyla Water 
Filtration Technologies. The company 
aims to commercialize a filter made from 
plant tissue that costs less than $10 and 
can provide clean water for a family of 
seven for a year.
And she has another goal. “I want to be 
prime minister,” she said, matter-of-factly. 
