Jan Zalasiewicz
In the geological blink of an 
eye, a new sphere has emerged, 
and is evolving at a furious 
pace. Weighing thirty trillion 
tons, this is the technosphere. 
It includes a mass of carbon 
dioxide which is industrially 
emitted into the atmosphere 
– the equivalent of 150,000 
Egyptian Pyramids!
The Earth that sustains us may be 
considered in terms of different spheres. 
There is the lithosphere, made up of 
the rocky foundations of our planet; 
the hydrosphere, representing our 
planet’s water; and the cryosphere, 
comprising the frozen polar regions and 
high mountains. The atmosphere is the 
air we breathe, and we are also part of 
the biosphere, made up of the Earth’s living 
organisms. These spheres have been in 
existence, in one form or another, for most, 
or all, of our planet’s 4.6-billion-year 
existence. Most recently, a new sphere has 
emerged – the technosphere.
The technosphere, in the sense that we 
understand it, is a concept that has been 
developed by the American geologist 
and engineer Peter Haff, Professor 
Emeritus at Duke University, in the United 
States. Like the Anthropocene, it is 
growing rapidly in recognition – having, 
for instance, been the focus of a recent 
major initiative of Haus der Kulturen 
der Welt (House of World Culture), 
the international centre for contemporary 
arts in Berlin, Germany. 
Like the Anthropocene, the technosphere 
is controversial, not least because of 
the role – and constraints – it affords to 
humans. It suggests that we have far less 
freedom, collectively, to guide the Earth 
system, than we may think we have. 
The technosphere encompasses all of 
the technological objects manufactured 
by humans, but that is only part of it. 
It is a system, and not just a growing 
collection of technological hardware. 
This distinction is crucial, and may 
be illustrated by comparison with 
the more established concept of the 
biosphere. Originally coined by the 
nineteenth-century Austrian geologist 
Eduard Suess, the term biosphere was 
developed as a concept by Russian 
scientist Vladimir Vernadsky in the 
twentieth century. He propounded that 
it was not just the mass of living things 
on Earth, but the combination of that 
mass with the air, water and soil that 
sustain organic life and the Sun’s energy 
that largely powers it. More than the sum 
of its parts, the biosphere interlinks and 
overlaps with other spheres of the Earth, 
while having its own dynamics and 
emergent properties.
The unbearable burden of the 
technosphere
Technofossil (Samsung E570), a pretend 
fossilized mobile phone sculpted 
in malachite rock by Belgian artist 
Maarten Vanden Eynde, in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo (2015).
© Maarten Vanden Eynde (Courtesy of the artist 
and Meessen De Clercq)
Tampering with nature
The technosphere, similarly, comprises 
not just our machines, but us humans too, 
and the professional and social systems 
by which we interact with technology 
– factories, schools, universities, trade 
unions, banks, political parties, the internet. 
It also includes the domestic animals that 
we grow in enormous numbers to feed 
us, the crops that are cultivated to sustain 
both them and us, and the agricultural soils 
that are extensively modified from their 
natural state to carry out this task. 

Forming future fossils
One analogy here may help show the 
striking nature of this planetary newcomer. 
Technological objects, including 
mobile phones, may be considered 
technofossils geologically, because they 
are biologically-made constructs that are 
robust and resistant to decay; they will 
form future fossils, to characterize 
the strata of the Anthropocene.
Plastiglomerates, facsimiles of 
hypothetical future geological matter, 
made for the Manufacture of Rocks 
of the Future project, started in 2013 
by French  artist Jean-Pierre Brazs. 
The technosphere also includes roads, 
railways, airports, mines and quarries, 
oil and gas fields, cities, engineered 
rivers and reservoirs. It has generated 
extraordinary amounts of waste 
– from landfill sites to the pollution of air, 
soil and water. A proto-technosphere of 
some kind has been present throughout 
human history, but for much of this time, 
it took the form of isolated, scattered 
patches that were of little planetary 
significance. It has now become a globally 
interconnected system – a new and 
important development on our planet.
How big is the technosphere? One 
crude measure is to make an assessment 
of the mass of its physical parts, from 
cities and the dug-over and bulldozed 
ground that makes up their foundations, 
to agricultural land, to roads and railways, 
etc. An order-of-magnitude estimate here 
came to some thirty trillion tons of material 
that we use, or have used and discarded, 
on this planet. 
The physical parts of the technosphere 
are also very various. Simple tools like 
stone axes were made by our ancestors 
millions of years ago. But, there has been 
an enormous proliferation of different 
kinds of machines and manufactured 
objects since the Industrial Revolution, 
and especially since the Great Acceleration 
of population growth, industrialization 
and globalization of the mid-twentieth 
century. Technology, too, is evolving 
ever faster. Our pre-industrial ancestors 
saw little technological change from 
generation to generation. Now, in the 
space of little more than one human 
generation, mobile phones – to take but 
one example – have been introduced to 
mass public use and have gone through 
several generations. 
Nobody knows how many different kinds 
of technofossils there are, but they already 
almost certainly exceed the number 
of fossil species known, while modern 
technodiversity, considered this way, 
also exceeds modern biological diversity. 
The number of technofossil species is 
continually increasing too, as technological 
evolution now far outpaces 
biological evolution.

While almost all of the biosphere’s 
energy comes from the Sun, some of the 
technosphere is powered by solar energy 
too – and other renewable resources such 
as wind-power, but most is powered by 
the burning of hydrocarbons including oil, 
coal and gas. These non-renewable energy 
sources in effect represent fossilized 
sunshine that has been amassed deep 
in the Earth over hundreds of millions of 
years, and that is now being expended 
in just a few centuries. 
Humans have used power sources such as 
watermills for millennia, but the enormous 
burst of energy now needed to power 
the technosphere is on a completely 
different scale. One estimate suggests 
that humans have collectively expended 
more energy since the mid-twentieth 
century than in all of the preceding eleven 
millennia of the Holocene.
Inundated with waste
The technosphere, though, differs from 
the biosphere in one crucial respect. 
The biosphere is extremely good at 
recycling the material it is made of, and this 
facility has enabled it to persist on Earth 
for billions of years. The technosphere, 
by contrast, is poor at recycling. Some of 
the waste is all too obvious, like the plastics 
accumulating in the world’s oceans and on 
its shorelines. Other kinds, being colourless 
and odourless, are invisible to us, like the 
carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil 
fuels. The mass of industrially-emitted 
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is now 
enormous – nearly one trillion tons, which 
is the equivalent of about 150,000 Egyptian 
Pyramids. This rapid growth in waste 
products, if unchecked, is a threat to the 
continued existence of the technosphere 
– and the humans that depend on it. 
The technosphere is an offshoot of the 
biosphere and, like it, is a complex system 
with its own dynamics. The capacity of 
our species to form sophisticated social 
structures and to develop and work 
with tools were important factors in its 
emergence. However, Haff emphasizes 
that humans are not so much creators 
and directors of the technosphere, 
as components within it, and therefore 
constrained to act to keep it in existence 
– not least because the technosphere 
keeps most of the current human 
population alive, through the supplies of 
food, shelter and other resources that it 
provides. Its development has allowed the 
human population to grow from the few 
tens of millions that could be kept alive by 
the hunter-gatherer mode of life in which 
our species evolved, to the 7.3 billion 
that inhabit the planet today. Just one 
technological innovation – artificial 
fertilizers made using the Haber-Bosch 
process – keeps about half the human 
population alive. 
The technosphere today is not evolving 
because it is being guided by some 
controlling human force, but because of 
the invention and emergence of useful 
technological novelties. There is now 
a kind of co-evolution of human and 
technological systems.
Altering planetary 
conditions
Currently, the technosphere might 
be regarded as parasitic on the 
biosphere, altering conditions of 
planetary habitability. Obvious 
consequences include greatly increased 
(and accelerating) rates of extinction 
of species of plants and animals, and 
changes to climate and ocean chemistry 
that are largely deleterious to existing 
biological communities. These changes 
can in turn damage both the functioning 
of the biosphere and human populations. 
Ideally, therefore, humans should try to 
help the technosphere develop into a form 
that is more sustainable in the long term. 
Nevertheless, humans collectively have 
no choice but to keep the technosphere 
operative – because it is now indispensable 
to our collective existence. 
Working out the degrees of freedom, 
within this context, for effective 
socio-economic and political action, 
is one of the challenges that the evolving 
technosphere presents us with. A first 
step here is to more fully understand 
the workings of this extraordinary new 
phase in the evolution of our planet. 
Here, there is  still much to do.
Jan Zalasiewicz, a British geologist of 
Polish origin, is professor of Palaeobiology 
at the University of Leicester, 
United Kingdom. He has worked as a 
field geologist and palaeontologist for 
the British Geological Survey, and is Chair 
of the Anthropocene Working Group 
of the International Commission 
on Stratigraphy, since 2009.
