What projects are you working on 
in FAIR’s Paris laboratory?
The topics that interest me most are the 
fairness, transparency and reliability of 
AI. In 2017, a group of colleagues and 
I were the first to develop algorithms 
(Houdini) that evaluate the robustness of 
intelligent systems, whatever the media: 
sound, video or other.
The robustness of algorithms is 
essential for the security of AI products. 
Imagine what could happen if someone 
malicious wanted to change the 
algorithm that drives your autonomous 
car! Any computer system can be 
attacked from the outside – by hacking 
or malicious modification. So it is 
essential to ensure its ability to resist 
such attacks.
Other work I recently published with a 
colleague involves equipping intelligent 
algorithms with the ability to treat all 
human beings fairly – which means 
that their behaviours are no different 
whether you are a man or a woman, 
black or white, etc.
In other words, I try to ensure that 
algorithms are not only as reliable as 
possible, but as relevant as possible 
to the needs and values of the human 
society they are meant to serve.

Moustapha Cissé, interviewed by Katerina Markelova
He is 32 years old, and was born and raised in Senegal where he 
studied mathematics and physics. He earned master's degrees in 
artificial intelligence (AI) in France and Canada before returning 
to Paris to pursue a Ph.D. Two years ago, he joined Facebook 
AI Research (FAIR). Founded in 2013, it has since established 
laboratories around the world − in New York, Menlo Park (California), 
Paris, Montreal, and most recently, in Seattle and Pittsburgh. This, 
in short, is the story of Moustapha Cissé, who tells us about his 
research, his motivations and his hopes.
Democratizing AI in
Africa
Studies have shown that facial 
recognition systems work better with 
European faces than with African ones, 
for example. It is the same for AI systems 
that identify skin cancers: they give 
better results for white patients than for 
black patients. Similarly, some systems 
were found to work better with men 
than with women. There is, therefore, a 
whole axiological dimension that has 
been neglected during the development 
of these systems. I am working with 
other colleagues to integrate this 
dimension from the very beginning in 
the construction of the AI models we 
are working on. This is a very important 
aspect of AI development, if we want 
it to be able to offer the same benefits 
to everyone.
You have said that the AI research 
community should stop focusing 
exclusively on “white people’s problems”.
I term all those technological advances 
that are in the realm of reality in the West 
“white people’s problems”, and the realm 
of the imagination elsewhere, such as 
autonomous cars, for instance. In Africa, 
but also in many parts of Asia and South 
America, people have other problems to 
deal with on a daily basis, the solutions 
of which depend on technologies that 
are much less sophisticated, and yet 
are non-existent. I believe that as a 
scientific community, we could have 
a much greater impact if we looked 
at the problems of these people to 
find solutions.
In concrete terms, how can people's lives 
be improved through AI?
When you give people the opportunity 
to access the information they need 
to build social connections, get more 
quickly integrated into an environment, 
find work, etc., you improve their lives. 
If you use AI to diagnose their diseases 
earlier and offer therapies, you also 
improve their lives.
AI is already changing many industries 
and I would like it to be made available 
to all those who need it – not just part 
of the world's population – to meet 
the various challenges of this century. 
For my part, I try to make things move 
in that direction, at my level. And I 
remain convinced that the AI research 
community is making giant strides.
How can the most disadvantaged 
be given access to these 
technological advances?
If this technology is to be accessible 
to all, it must be taught everywhere. 
It is through education that it will be 
placed in the hands of those who need 
it most. And I guarantee you that if you 
give them the means, people will find 
solutions to their own problems.
For the last three years, I have started, 
along with a group of friends, to teach 
AI at summer schools organized in 
Africa, by Data Science Africa, a non-
profit professional knowledge-sharing 
group. Every summer, for a week or two, 
we introduce various AI techniques to 
students and teachers who want to 
discover this scientific discipline.
Last year, we launched the Black in 
AI initiative with a group of other 
friends. It brought together more than 
200 black researchers (not counting the 
Americans) at the 30th edition of the 
world’s largest AI science conference, 
Neural Information Processing Systems 
(NIPS 2017).

Narcisurfing Netizenship (2015), 
sculpture by Maurice Mbikayi from 
the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo, who is particularly interested 
in the impact of modern technology 
on society, especially in Africa.

In previous years, we were not even 
ten, out of a total of more than 
5,000 participants.
So, at our modest level, we are trying 
to democratize AI and access to 
information about the discipline. I am 
aware that this is not enough and 
that greater action is needed, but 
I remain optimistic.
Are these initiatives that you have 
launched on your own, or are they part 
of your work at FAIR?
These are initiatives that I launched 
personally with friends, but I have 
received logistical and financial support 
from Facebook, which sponsored most 
of the participation of about fifty young 
African researchers at the conference I 
just talked about.
