The inhabitants of Addis Ababa have the 
impression that they live in the middle 
of a construction site. As they say, “Head 
out on one road in the morning and you 
might find it blocked off for a development 
project by the evening!”  The Ethiopian 
capital is a massive  continental hub with 
an exploding population of people fleeing 
from unrest and the lack of opportunities 
in the country’s poverty-stricken provinces. 
At the current growth rate, the number of 
inhabitants is expected to double in thirty 
years. 
Some economists have called Ethiopia an 
“African lion”, for mimicking the success 
stories of Asia’s economic tigers. But this 
economic success and the accompanying 
population growth – one of the highest in 
the world – come at a price.
Although its carbon (CO2) emissions are still 
modest, Ethiopia is one of the countries in 
the world that is most vulnerable to climate 
change. The variable rainfall and rising 
temperatures cause recurrent droughts 
and famine. The problems related to 
climate change are exacerbated by rapid 
urbanization, as multinational clothing-
retail companies like Calvin Klein and H&M 
establish garment factories here, taking 
advantage of some of the lowest wages in 
the world.
In May 2018, Addis Ababa – along with 
seven other African cities – made a 
commitment to reduce its CO2 emissions. 
This means it will have to rethink its 
transport, energy production and waste 
management strategies. 
Meanwhile, Ethiopians complain that 
concrete progress in the fight against 
pollution and traffic congestion remains 
elusive. “The pollution is increasing and 
people are getting sick,” says Biniam 
Getaneh, 30, one of the 3.5 million 
inhabitants of the capital. 
Niels Boel and Finn Rasmussen, with Hadra Ahmed
Ninety-four megacities around the world have come together to form the 
C40 network. Their aim is to share their experiences of combating climate 
change and its effects, and to set ambitious goals for the reduction of 
carbon emissions. 
African cities  
in action
Leading the way on 
climate action
Addis Ababa is a member of C40, a network 
of cities representing over 700 million people 
and a quarter of the global economy, which 
have been working together since 2005 to 
reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
For Hastings Chikoko, the Regional Director 
for Africa at C40’s Cities Climate Leadership 
Group, it is clear that cities have an important 
role to play in producing innovative solutions 
and technologies to address the climate crisis. 
“As cities have private sector and research 
institutions within their boundaries, we see 
them coming up with innovation, being able 
to demonstrate to national governments that 
climate change mitigation and adaptation 
work, and  can be upscaled to the national 
level.”
Chikoko, a Malawian economist with long 
experience in climate change, points to 
positive experiences in Accra (Ghana) 
and Tshwane (South Africa), where 
traffic congestion has been  eased by 
transportation initiatives, while significantly 
reducing CO2 emissions.
While acknowledging the difficulties faced 
by the capitals of many of the world’s 
poorest  countries in particular, Chikoko 
says he remains optimistic – pointing out 
that some cities have decided to exceed the 
goals of the Paris Agreement 2015 (COP21).
The C40 Cities network is working to 
promote local climate initiatives at 
the national level, such as facilitating 
municipal representatives to integrate 
with government teams participating 
in international platforms. “We have 
ensured that some C40 mayors take part in 
delegations whenever possible,” explains 
Chikoko. “That way, they can use their best 
practices from the local level and raise their 
voices in decision-making processes.”
Ethiopia is one 
of the countries 
in the world 
that is most 
vulnerable 
to climate 
change

Also, in the context of the scarcity of local 
finances, municipalities are struggling to 
allocate budgets in the fight against climate 
change. C40 provides support for capacity-
building, to enable city officials to access 
alternative financing.
“During the Paris climate summit, we 
launched the C40 Cities Finance Facility. 
We identify big projects and help cities to 
identify the challenges and to transform 
these challenges to bankable projects that 
can be financed, for example, by the World 
Bank,” Chikoko adds. 
Technology transfer is another central 
aspect facilitated by the network. “Some 
solutions really depend on cities being 
innovative. This could be green buses, or  it 
could be technology for water efficiency. 
This is an area where African cities are 
lagging behind. There is also a value in 
identifying cities that are advanced in terms 
of cleaning technology, for example. We are 
then able to facilitate knowledge transfer as 
well as technology transfer from those cities 
to other  cities in Africa, for instance.”
Another obstacle to climate change at 
the city level is often the lack of adequate 
plans. A fundamental objective of the 
C40 network is to ensure that the cities 
involved have common data references and 
measurements, enabling them to assess and 
compare their progress.
Accra’s mayor, Mohammed Adjei Sowa, was 
supported by the C40 network to gather 
credible data on which to base decisions for 
the city’s waste management plan. Waste  
generation plays a significant and growing 
role in carbon emissions.
“The mayor is now collaborating with the 
private sector to establish an efficient waste 
collection service,” explains Chikoko. “Other 
African cities can learn from this: first, illegal 
dump-sites must be banned. Secondly, you 
must make sure you have an efficient system 
that gives residents an incentive to abide by 
the rules.”
Sharing lessons learned
Transportation is another major source of 
carbon emissions – it is in this sector that 
global GHG emissions are rising the fastest.
The city of Tshwane – created in 2000 by 
the merger of thirteen municipal entities, 
including Pretoria, the administrative capital 
of  South Africa –  is part of C40’s Mass 
Transit Network, which brings together 
member cities that have shown innovation 
in this field.
“This metropolis of more than three million 
people has worked to improve its public 
transport network, making it comfortable 
enough to encourage car owners to use it. It 
has improved its transport infrastructure to 
include dedicated bus lanes. This is also one 
of the cities that have completely changed 
the source of energy of their buses from oil 
to gas.” 
The lessons learned in areas of 
transportation or waste management in C40 
cities, including  Tshwane, Accra or Chicago, 
can inspire action in an overpopulated and 
congested city like Addis Ababa. When the 
Ethiopian capital launched its plan for a bus 
rapid transit system, it sent a delegation to 
Tshwane to learn from its experience.
Improving the public transport in Addis 
Ababa is part of the national Ethiopian 
Green Economy Strategy, launched in 2011. 
The Ethiopian government is currently 
revising its environmental policies, taking 
climate change into account, according to 
Chikoko. “It will contain measures for cities in 
different parts of the country to be climate-
change resilient and to minimize their 
carbon emissions while developing.”
“The role of C40,” concludes Chikoko, “is 
essentially to connect cities that are trying 
to implement solutions to reduce carbon 
emissions and to help cities to inspire each 
other.”  
Niels Boel, Danish political scientist, 
journalist and author, and Finn 
Rasmussen, Danish sociologist and 
culture specialist,  are consultants for 
the Wide Angle section in this issue of 
the UNESCO Courier. Ethiopian journalist 
Hadra Ahmed contributed to this article 
from Addis Ababa.
Street scene of the third edition  
of Car-Free Day, 3 February 2019,  
in Addis Ababa, the Ethiopian capital.
