“We want to write an encyclopaedia 
on our water issues. Could you help 
us?” It was with this request that a 
delegation representing the Mayangna 
community from the Bosawas rainforest 
in Nicaragua, visited UNESCO in the mid-
2000s. Also known as the Heart of the 
Mesoamerican Biological Corridor, their 
forest joined UNESCO's World Network 
of Biosphere Reserves in 1997. In 2002, 
the Organization had launched the Local 
and Indigenous Knowledge Systems 
(LINKS) programme, and it was the 
right time to start an innovative project: 
registering the holders of indigenous 
knowledge, in order to publish all the 
know-how that the Mayangna had 
on fish and turtles. A book of over 
450 pages, in two volumes and in two 
languages  (Mayangna and Spanish) 
was published in 2010, marking the 
completion of the first stage of a larger 
project on Mayangna knowledge about 
nature in general. 
The Mayangna knew that if they did not 
urgently document their knowledge in a 
book, it would gradually disappear – just 
as their forest was disappearing under 
the pressure of the illegal logging of 
trees and the development of intensive 
agriculture. These two methods of 
exploiting nature are in contrast to the 
traditional way of life of the indigenous 
peoples of the Bosawas Biosphere 
Reserve – based on hunting, fishing, fruit 
and vegetable harvesting, and breeding 
livestock, all of which are self-sustaining.
UNESCO has helped the Mayangna to 
safeguard their knowledge, so that they 
could pass it on to future generations, 
but also to make it available to the 
international scientific community. 
This is one of the main functions of 
LINKS, which aims, in particular, to 
ensure an equitable role for indigenous 
knowledge in formal and informal 
education and to integrate it into 
scientific debates and policies.
This knowledge, which contains 
essential information on the subsistence, 
health and sustainable use of natural 
resources, is conveyed and transmitted 
by only one means – language. This is 
why the safeguarding of indigenous 
languages – a growing number of which 
are now threatened – is crucial not 
only for the maintenance of linguistic 
diversity, but also for the world's cultural 
and biological diversity.
While indigenous peoples make up 
only 5% of the world's population, they 
speak the majority of its 7,000 languages 
and “own, occupy or use resources on 
some 22% of the global land area, which 
in turn harbours 80% of the world’s 
biological diversity”, according to the 
book Weathering Uncertainty, published 
by UNESCO in 2012.
With the designation of 2019 as the 
International Year of Indigenous 
Languages  (IYIL2019), officially 
launched at UNESCO on 28 January, the 
international community reaffirms its 
commitment to supporting indigenous 
peoples in their efforts to preserve 
their knowledge and enjoy their rights. 
Since the adoption of the Declaration 
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples by 
the United Nations General Assembly 
on 13 September 2007, considerable 
progress has been made in this regard.
Nevertheless, indigenous peoples still 
have a long way to go before they 
emerge from marginalization and 
overcome the many obstacles they 
face. One-third of the world’s people 
living in extreme poverty belong to 
indigenous communities, just as in a 
number of countries, legislation that 
promotes the rights of indigenous 
peoples remains incompatible with 
other laws that deal with issues such as 
agriculture, land, conservation, forestry, 
mining and other industries, according 
to Victoria Tauli-Corpuz, United Nations 
Special Rapporteur on the Rights of 
Indigenous Peoples.
The Wide Angle section in this issue 
of the Courier is dedicated to these 
indigenous peoples. It takes its title from 
the Chinese proverb: “When you drink 
water, think of the source”, to remind us 
that indigenous knowledge, the source 
of all knowledge, deserve a prominent 
place in modernity. The issue also marks 
the celebration of International Mother 
Language Day, 21 February.
Vincent Defourny and Jasmina Šopova
