Under the auspices of UNESCO
The ISIL occupation completely 
devastated Iraq’s education system, from 
pre-primary to higher education. When 
subjects such as history or the arts were 
replaced with content designed to incite 
hate, the vast majority of families decided 
to take their children out of school. 
Those who remained were subjected 
to systematic indoctrination, mainly by 
teachers who were forced to relay the 
group’s extremist ideology.
Considering these observations, it is 
not just the cultural heritage that needs 
to be restored, but also dignity and 
memory. UNESCO therefore decided to 
mobilize the international community, 
to propose an initiative that would 
combine heritage, culture and education. 
Reviving the spirit of Mosul 
It is being deployed in collaboration with 
the Government of Iraq, along these 
three lines, and involves multiple actors 
– neighbouring countries, international 
organizations and the European Union 
(EU). The initiative aims to give a new 
perspective, a new impetus, to Mosul. 
In addition to the restoration of 
monuments and the rehabilitation of 
Mosul’s historic urban fabric, a project 
to rebuild houses in the old city (Mosul 
and Basra), and to train cultural heritage 
professionals, will be implemented 
with the support of the EU. This is 
based on a participatory approach that 
focuses on skills development and job 
creation to promote social cohesion and 
community reconciliation.
In February 2018, UNESCO launched 
the “Revive the Spirit of Mosul” initiative 
at the International Conference for 
the Reconstruction of Iraq in Kuwait. It 
brought the international community 
together under its aegis, to participate 
in the reconstruction of this city, which 
has been decimated by war, looting and 
destruction. This reconstruction must be 
part of Mosul’s history – a plural history, 
at the crossroads of the cultures and 
religions of the Middle East. 
Mosul has seen its heritage ransacked, its 
identity bruised, at the hands of ISIL. The 
destruction targeted places of worship 
(mosques and churches), the shrine of 
Nabi Yunus and the Assyrian and Parthian 
statues and frescoes of the Mosul 
Museum. The city’s library, with its several 
thousand ancient texts, was deliberately 
set aflame. Antiquities were trafficked. 

Along the same lines, the inventory 
of religious sites damaged by ISIL has 
resulted in a publication that will serve 
as a support for interfaith dialogue 
workshops, permitting the recreation 
of links between communities. An 
emergency plan for the safeguarding of 
intangible heritage in danger and the 
creation of “cultural mobile spaces” for 
displaced persons and host communities 
is being prepared. 
At the same time, the Iraqi government 
has called on UNESCO to develop a 
national education strategy for the 
period 2020-2030, in order to rebuild 
the foundations of an education system 
that meets the needs of its population. 
Simultaneously, educational projects are 
being implemented with the purpose of 
preventing the resurgence of extremism 
and recreating the conditions for 
living together.
Two projects will aim to ensure that 
the primary schools in the Old City of 
Mosul are safe places where students 
can flourish, learn and interact with 
others with respect, thus contributing 
to tolerance and peaceful coexistence in 
the long term.
These projects, supported by Japan and 
the Netherlands, are based on a holistic 
approach that involves children, but 
also teachers, communities, parents 
and educational staff in the prevention 
of extremism. The upgrading of higher 
education will also be a key action in 
rebuilding the country and its system of 
production. Beyond a purely economic 
approach, it is a matter of enabling 
institutions such as Mosul’s university 
library to once again become the 
cultural and intellectual epicentres they 
used to be.
These different projects pursue the same 
goals: to protect, rebuild and educate. 
Because culture and education are 
the only long-term responses against 
the violence of extremism and its 
destructiveness. This approach is aligned 
with the vision of the Iraqi government, 
as it is up to the Iraqi authorities to 
conduct this initiative locally, while 
UNESCO continues its coordinating role.
Stefania Giannini and Ernesto Ottone 
Ramirez, Assistant Directors-General for 
Education and for Culture, UNESCO.
Iraqi cellist Karim Wasfi performs with 
an orchestra in Mosul’s war-ravaged 
Old City, on 10 November 2018. 
