Saving urban
landscapes: the Island of
Mozambique
Ilha de Moçambique, which gives the 
country its name, is a crescent-shaped 
coral island four kilometres from the coast 
of the northern Mozambique mainland, 
at the entrance to the Indian Ocean’s 
Mossuril Bay. 
Barely three kilometres long and 200 to 
500 metres wide, with an urban area of 
about one square kilometre, this little slice 
of paradise is a cultural melting pot of Bantu, 
Swahili, Arab, Persian, Indian and European 
influences. The island’s rich architecture 
reflects its dramatic and colourful history. 
Inhabited by Bantu speakers in the year 200 
and recorded on navigation routes of the 
Indian Ocean since the first millennium, the 
Island of Mozambique was dominated by 
Arabian trading between the eighth and 
sixteenth centuries. 
Beyond the decay of its built heritage, 
the town of Macuti faces the challenges 
of overpopulation and poverty. 
© Peter Hess

Then, for four centuries (1507 to 1898), 
this fortified town was the capital and 
trading post of Portuguese East Africa, at 
the centre of Portuguese maritime routes 
between Western Europe and the Indian 
subcontinent, and later, Asia.
The island’s incredible architectural 
unity is derived from the consistent 
use – since the sixteenth century − of 
the same building techniques with the 
same materials and decorative principles. 
Recognizing its international historic 
importance, its exceptional urban fabric, 
fortifications and other examples of 
architecture, the Island of Mozambique 
was inscribed on UNESCO’s World 
Heritage List in 1991. 
Two different types of dwellings and 
urban systems co-exist here – the city of 
stone and lime, and the city with palm 
leaf roofs.
The Stone Town, with its houses made of 
limestone and wood, has Swahili roots, 
with Arab and Portuguese influences, 
and dominates the island’s northern 
half. It is a living museum, with religious, 
administrative, commercial and military 
buildings testifying to its role as the first 
seat of Portuguese colonial government. 
Occupying two-thirds of the island, it 
is inhabited by a relatively small part of 
the population. 
The city of Macuti, named after the 
original palm leaf roofing (macuti) of 
the houses, hosts many variations of 
the vernacular Swahili architecture, 
and lies to the south. Organized into 
seven bairros or districts, which are the 
densest settlements on the island, it is 
not surprising that Macuti suffers from an 
acute water shortage, a lack of sanitation 
and a serious threat of seasonal flooding. 
The island’s outstanding universal 
value has borne the brunt of multi-
faceted threats, such as uncontrolled 
development and the impacts of a 
globalized culture. A lack of financial 
resources, inadequate infrastructure, 
a low awareness of conservation 
among the local population and a weak 
institutional capacity for conservation 
management have all contributed to 
the degradation and poor upkeep of 
the island’s built heritage. For example, 
an evaluation of the condition of the 
buildings in the Stone Town has shown 
that they have deteriorated by fifteen per 
cent between 1983 and 2012.
This has prompted UNESCO-driven 
initiatives on the island to focus on two 
major areas: the condition of life and 
habitation in the bairros of Macuti and the 
general degradation of the built heritage 
of the Stone Town.
Following the adoption of the UNESCO 
Recommendation on the Historic Urban 
Landscape (HUL) in 2011, it was decided 
to apply the HUL approach to the island. 
As part of the UNESCO World Heritage 
Cities Programme, HUL provides technical 
assistance and helps World Heritage cities 
across the globe to better reconcile urban 
heritage conservation into strategies 
of socio-economic development. 

These new strategies have helped 
strengthen the governance mechanism 
for the sustainable management 
and development of the Island 
of Mozambique.
Albino Jopela, programme manager, 
African World Heritage Fund (AWHF), 
South Africa.
