One of the hundred posters 
produced on the theme 
“One for all, all for one!” by 
a hundred graphic designers 
from all over the world 
to celebrate the seventieth 
anniversary of the Universal 
Declaration of Human 
Rights. The campaign 
was launched by Poster 
for Tomorrow. 
© posterfortomorrow 2018 
Frank Arbelo

The third “c” raises the question 
whether human rights principles are 
operationalized on the ground, and 
made accessible to people whose rights 
are at stake. What does human rights 
mean to a person living in extreme and 
permanent poverty in Cairo, Karachi 
or Lagos − what difference has human 
rights made in their lives? 
What should the role of the state be in the 
protection of human rights? 
I find that the protection of rights 
anywhere happens at the level of civil 
rights, not at the level of human rights – 
in other words, protection is granted by 
the states to citizens and so-called “lawful 
residents,” never to human beings as such. 
Interview by Shiraz Sidhva
An expert on human rights in 
cross-cultural perspectives, 
An-Na’im has sought to 
reconcile his identity as a 
Sudanese Muslim with his 
staunch commitment to 
universal human rights. He 
argues that human rights 
should be people-centred, not 
state-centric. Explaining his 
controversial views, An-Naim 
says that he expects opposition 
to his ideas. “If I’m not resisted, 
I’m not relevant,” he insists. 
When you refer to the three “Cs” of human 
rights, what exactly do you mean? 
I sometimes speak in terms of the three 
“Cs” of human rights − the concept, the 
content and the context. 
The concept is universality, as we talk 
about human rights as the rights of the 
human, but do we really mean that? Are 
we really capable of protecting the rights 
of the human as such? Which state does 
that? Sadly, the truth is to the contrary − 
human rights rhetoric is used by states as 
a weapon to demonize each other in their 
power politics, instead of being universal 
principles of public policy to protect the 
dignity of all human beings. 
The second “c” refers to what these 
rights are, and here we must admit 
that it is a work in progress rather than 
already implemented as public policy on 
the ground. 
Abdullahi Ahmed An-Na’im.
© Photo courtesy of Emory University School of Law
That is why refugees and migrant 
workers, for instance, do not enjoy 
protection of their human rights as 
proclaimed by the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights (UDHR). Even the 
rights of citizens and lawful residents are 
determined by the state every step of the 
way. It is always states which decide to 
negotiate treaties with other states, ratify 
or ignore relevant international treaties, 
and determine the manner and scope 
of protection of the rights of any person 
subject to their jurisdiction. 
The entire human rights field is under 
the authority of state sovereignty. Global 
international law does not pretend 
to force any state to do anything. The 
United Nations and all other international 
organizations are constituted and 
governed by states, they can only do 
what states permit them to do, and in 
the scope and manner authorized by 
the states. 



Abdullahi Ahmed An-Na’im
On human rights, the secular state
and Sharia today 

In Sudan, the British amended the Penal 
Code to make FGM punishable by two 
years’ imprisonment in 1946, the year 
I was born. I am now 72, and FGM still 
exists, for more than ninety per cent 
of the population. To my knowledge, 
there has not been a single prosecution. 
“Honour” killing is a similar problem. 
These are clear areas where we have to 
have transformation. 
What is the best way to bring 
about change? 
We need to go beyond bureaucratic, 
formulistic ideas − to inspire the 
imagination of people, and to 
drive change. 
Sometimes people don’t try to bring 
about change because they don’t think 
it’s possible. But they are wrong. See how 
transformative thinking has worked in 
the gay rights movement, for example, 
within a short span of twenty years. 
When I moved to Atlanta, Georgia, in the 
United States, in 1995, sodomy was a 
crime for which you were sent to prison. 
In 2015, it became a constitutional right 
for same-sex couples to marry.
When you think of the speed by which 
this transformation happened, it shows 
that you don’t have to start with legal 
change. In fact, if you start with cultural 
and social change, the transformation in 
a community is really the driving force of 
change – not the consequence of change. 
When you refer to the culture of human 
rights, which can be promoted through 
internal discourse and cross-cultural 
dialogue, what do you mean? 
By human rights culture, I am referring 
to internalized values − since early 
socialization of children − which are 
reinforced throughout our lives. These 
values tend to support respect for and 
protection of the human rights of others, 
though they may not be identified in 
these terms. 
All this may be appropriate for the 
present state of human development, 
but these principles are not good for the 
protection of human rights. That is why I 
speak of the paradox of self-regulation by 
states, in contradistinction to entrenched 
fundamental rights which are supposed 
to be beyond control and manipulation 
by the state. 
But then, how do we ensure respect 
for human rights?  
I do not mean that we don’t need human 
rights, or that their protection cannot be 
realized in practice. The point I do wish 
to emphasize is that we must be clear on 
where human rights come from and in 
which manner − including questions such 
as how these rights are defined and how 
they are operationalized. 
In my view, human rights should be 
defined by the people who accept 
and live by them on the ground, 
and not imposed by former colonial 
powers on their former colonies or by 
delegates of post-colonial states, and 
international bureaucrats. 
Second, human rights norms must be 
implemented through realistic contextual 
steps that are suited to the needs and 
resources of relevant communities, 
and not by enacting high-sounding 
legislation to be presented at sanitized 
meetings of international organizations, 
and diplomatic or academic conferences. 
Third, strategies of implementation must 
be deeply contextual, and under the 
control of the human subjects of these 
rights everywhere. 
Could you give us an example of this? 
If I want to combat female genital 
mutilation (FGM) in Sudan, for example, 
I can’t do it by having a declaration 
issued in Geneva. I can’t do it by even 
Sudan issuing a statute. But I can do it by 
changing attitudes in the communities. 
That is the key. 

Within human beings, and among 
their communities, there are impulses 
for respecting the dignity of the 
other, and also striving for inter-
communal harmony, co-existence and 
mutual interdependence. 
All these are human rights values, in my 
view, though they are not represented 
as such in common discourse. I have 
argued since the 1980s for cultivating 
the culture of human rights for each 
community, as the basis of deepening 
and expanding international consensus 
within cultures, and by dialogue among 
different cultures. The 1992 book Human 
Rights in Cross-Cultural Perspectives: 
A Quest for Consensus, which I edited, 
expands on this.
On a more personal level, how did you 
start taking an interest in human rights 
from an Islamic perspective? 
As I struggled with my own conflicting 
belief in Islam and opposition to Sharia 
in the 1960s, I was fortunate enough 
to encounter Ustadh (revered teacher) 
Mahmoud Mohamed Taha. It was his 
innovative interpretation of Islam 
which helped me reconcile my belief in 
Islam and commitment to upholding 
human rights. 
Ustadh Taha was a Sudanese engineer by 
profession, and a Muslim Sufi reformer 
by religious orientation. He participated 
in the struggle for independence in 
Sudan of the 1940s, and was a political 
prisoner under the Anglo-Egyptian 
colonial administration of Sudan. He 
was the founder and president of the 
Republican Party, which agitated for 
independence of Sudan as a democratic 
Republic, hence the name. After an 
extended period of imprisonment, 
continued into a period of religious 
discipline, Ustadh Taha emerged in 1951 
with a reformist interpretation of Islam. 
Following his tragic execution in January 
1985, and the suppression of his reform 
movement in Sudan, I left my home 
country but continued to develop my 
own understanding and application of 
the reform methodology of my teacher, 
and striving to live by his model. 
Tell us about your “Future of Sharia 
project”.
My current “Future of Sharia” project 
combines several themes of my 
academic work and advocacy for social 
change, as these elements have evolved 
in my thinking since my law student 
days in the 1960s to the present time. 
In terms of Islamic reform and 
scholarship, I have managed to reconcile 
my commitment to a secular state from 
an Islamic perspective, as I have done 
regarding human rights earlier, with 
my religion. 
Through my website/blog, I have called 
for a global public debate on the ideas 
based on my 2008 book, Islam and the 
Secular State. 
I am convinced that ideas of human 
rights and citizenship are more 
consistent with Islamic principles than 
with claims of a supposedly Islamic state 
to enforce Sharia. In the book, I present 
Islamic arguments for the separation of 
Islam and the state, while regulating the 
relationship between Islam and politics. 
I argue that the coercive enforcement 
of Sharia by the state betrays the 
Koran’s insistence on the voluntary 
acceptance of Islam. Individual piety can 
be reconciled with collective religious 
identity – in order to be a Muslim by 
conviction and free choice, which is 
the only way one can be a Muslim, I 
need a secular state, one that is neutral 
regarding religious doctrine, and 
promotes genuine religious observance. 
An internationally renowned Sudanese-
American legal scholar and author, 
Abdullahi Ahmed An-Na’im is the 
Charles Howard Candler Professor of Law 
at Emory Law in Atlanta (United States), 
associated professor in the Emory 
College of Arts and Sciences, and a 
senior fellow of the Center for the Study 
of Law and Religion of Emory University.
The Mosque, by the Sudanese painter 
Ibrahim El-Salahi, 
oil on canvas, 1964. 
The transformation 
in a community is really 
the driving force of change 
– not the consequence 
of change
