For organizations and their managers, 
it is an opportunity to entrust more and 
more managerial responsibilities to AI: 
optimizing purchasing, logistics, the security 
of installations and databases, selection and 
recruitment, the distribution of tools and 
human resources – all this in real time, with 
maximum flexibility. 
But is everything in the capabilities of these 
algorithms worth accepting? Anything at 
all, at any price, in the name of efficiency 
and profitability? The dizzying pace of 
successive innovations and disruptions, and 
the increasing concentration of innovation 
hubs in the hands of a few, must keep us on 
the alert. Especially since this trend towards 
the delegation of responsibilities will only 
increase when AI develops to become 
more generalized. It is already setting the 
stage for this by extending its connectivity 
network to our entire real environment, in 
a technological trend where interfaces are 
becoming more invisible and intuitive. 
A tale 
 of two futures
Sandrine Cathelat and Mathilde Hervieu
Is artificial intelligence (AI) on the 
verge of becoming completely 
autonomous? The answer will 
depend on us alone. It is up 
to us to define the future of 
humanity, in harmony with 
this technological tool that 
we sometimes perceive as a 
terrifying monster.
As we have seen for several years now, 
the latest technological developments are 
creating a service-based ecosystem that is 
ever easier to use. Steering this convenient 
ecosystem, is AI! For the individual, citizen 
or consumer, it means an increasingly wide 
range of user-friendly services, available 
to simplify their lives and make optimized 
choices. For the worker, self-employed or 
salaried, it provides the advantage of a more 
objective assessment, more immediate 
access to know-how and experts, digital 
assistance at all times to be up for the task.
We are at the crossroads of civilizations, 
and a major challenge is emerging: what 
status, what place, what use for Homo 
sapiens in this digitalized ecosystem (hybrid 
at best) of the twenty-first century? Are 
we experiencing the opportunity here, to 
redefine human beings and their humanity 
in order to better envisage life with AI and 
its multiple incarnations? What scenarios 
of the future should we envisage and write 
(since it is still our responsibility to wield the 
pen)? It is certainly high time to reflect and 
to choose which strategy to adopt in the 
face of digital empowerment: prohibit or 
regulate, to reverse the course of innovation 
or at least to slow it down? Should we bet  
on a new kind of cyborg human species to 
animate the man-machine competition, 
on the machine’s own playing field? Or 
demonstrate creative plasticity by imagining 
a society of complementary collaborations 
between human and digital capacities?
Robotics conception,  
by Cuban artist Falco.

The time of 
metamorphosis 
AI is a hot topic. It catalyses all our anxieties. 
Some still say it is “weak”. When will we see it 
as “strong”? Who will own it? Who will have 
the right to use it? To do what? And above 
all, what will it look like? Will it be human 
or human-like? Will it have all our qualities 
and defects? Will it have a morality and an 
intention? To evoke it in this way makes 
it a terrifying monster. However, if AI is 
monstrous, it is more a monster of efficiency 
than a monster like Frankenstein’s! Because 
AI is a tool, just like a hammer, driven by an 
external will.
This will is organizational and not human, 
however. AI is a tool that, since it emerged a 
few decades ago, has served the objectives 
of profitability and functionality of an 
organization. It is thus, first and foremost, 
the tool of a project, a vision, a narrative. 
And today, the dominant narrative is that of 
efficiency.
Given this logical and anticipated 
metamorphosis (which we cannot deny if 
we maintain this technological momentum), 
we are tempted to be frightened by AI, even 
though we still hold the reins. But we have 
to face major challenges: the transparency 
of algorithms and databases; the limits and 
constraints to be set for the machines and 
services they can provide; the writing of 
a narrative that AI can serve in the same 
way we can. The question is probably 
less technological than ethical, moral and 
political: what is our future with AI, what 
narrative will we write?
Nevertheless, AI is not a tool like any other. 
If at first it was tactical software entirely 
sponsored and programmed by humans, it 
is now entering a second phase where it is 
gradually gaining autonomy – becoming 
capable of choosing, by itself, the method 
that will allow it to achieve a goal. The goal 
is still set by a human. Tomorrow, yesterday’s 
software will become autonomous AI in 
every respect, capable of setting its own 
objectives and means, capable of operating 
in a network, capable of modifying people’s 
narratives. For better or for worse.

Blow-Up, Shadow Box 4, 2007. Created 
by Mexican-Canadian multimedia 
artist Rafael Lozano-Hemmer, this high-
resolution interactive display is designed to 
fragment the view of a surveillance camera 
into 2400 virtual cameras that zoom into 
the exhibition space. 
AI is, first and 
foremost, 
the tool of a 
project, a vision, 
a narrative. 
And today, 
the dominant 
narrative is that 
of efficiency

The cyborg solution 
A first scenario is the natural extension 
of the current narrative. In this tale of 
efficiency, growth and liberalism, humans 
have no choice but to develop themselves – 
not to compete, but to co-operate, with the 
machine. Because the advent of AI raises the 
question of human employment and skills 
versus digital skills. In a profitability model, 
it is highly likely that the vast majority 
of jobs will be assigned to machines. In 
order to hold their ground, humans will 
increase the number of their digital aids 
and acquire capacities greater than those 
conferred on them by nature. Thanks to 
the osmosis between the human and the 
digital, humans will become more efficient. 
They will understand faster, decide faster, act 
faster. These gifts of hyper-awakening and 
hyper-consciousness are consistent with the 
current narrative of efficiency. 
The cyborgs – very light, very agile, very 
chameleon-like – will be ready to co-operate 
actively and on an equal footing with the 
machine, provided they get closer to it. 
They will be augmented by the unlimited 
resources of the digital intelligence 
network, but at the same time, their quota 
of humanity will be diminished. Like AI, 
the cyborg will then become a monster of 
efficiency and both will be part of the same 
network that will connect humans and 
machines without distinction. 
This osmosis with AI has many benefits, 
mainly functional reassurance and 
operational efficiency. But it raises major 
issues. What will happen if the power is “cut 
off”? Who will have access to the cloud? Will 
we have to agree to be transparent to have 
access to it? Will we have to pay for it? Will 
there be a single cloud for everyone? Or a 
variety of clouds, but of variable quality? Will 
the cyborg be synonymous with equality or 
will it mean a socio-economic divide? One 
thing is certain: once cyborgs have become 
fully connected, they will no longer own 
anything, and especially not their skills. They 
will be users, merely temporary custodians 
of available services. What will happen then 
if their rights are cut off?
A new human narrative
These issues are all the more important 
because if AI is still in the midst of a 
metamorphosis, this is also the case for 
humanity. The cyborg solution is part of 
the narrative of capitalist liberalism. But 
is this narrative capable of meeting the 
challenges we face, even as the planet and 
its resources are being depleted? Aren’t we 
being ordered to invent a new narrative? 
Especially since with this powerful tool, AI, 
we would undoubtedly have the means to 
implement it. 
AI is a powerful tool capable of successfully 
developing an existing model, but 
disrupting the established order is not 
in its DNA. Moreover, our current digital 
transformation efforts do not invent 
anything, either, and do not change the 
narrative in any way. Our catchphrase could 
then be summed up like this: let’s stop 
innovating and start inventing!
Because it is humans that we can trust (once 
again) to invent. And their convictions and 
motivation are multiple sources that fuel 
efforts to resist the current model. To invent 
is to speak of a faith, a desire, an intention 
fixed to the body, a certainty. It means 
talking about meaning before talking about 
technological achievement or financial aim. 
Inventiveness often originates in a singular, 
unique spirit – in the mind of a woman or a 
man, in their history, wounds or strengths, 
desires or needs. Let us not forget that the 
great geniuses of humanity have drawn 
from their innermost weaknesses (which 
they sought to overcome, mostly), the 
obstinacy necessary for their success. 
Is everything in the capabilities 
of these algorithms worth 
accepting? Anything at all,  
at any price, in the name 
of efficiency and profitability?
Sandrine Cathelat (France) is Partner 
and Research Director of the Netexplo 
Observatory and Mathilde Hervieu 
(France) is Editorial Project Manager. 
Founded in 2007 by Martine Bidegain and 
Thierry Happe, under the patronage of the 
French Senate and France’s Ministry for the 
Digital Sector (Ministry of Economy and 
Finance), the Netexplo Observatory studies 
the global impact of new digital uses on 
society and businesses.
We are talking here about a scenario that no 
longer has anything to do with cyborgs, and 
where there is no mention either of rejecting 
technology as a tool. We are talking about 
another narrative, which will use AI, but for 
other purposes, with other constraints and 
rules of use. We are talking about a strategy 
that gives pride of place to what makes us 
human. And without pitting the human 
against the machine, we must recognize 
that in this strategy, what was for the cyborg 
a weakness, becomes a strength. 
We are not talking about standardization 
here. We are not talking about rational 
logic. We are not talking about causality, 
prediction, process. We are not talking about 
a stereotypical model of efficiency. We will 
not be able to leave this new scenario to the 
machines. Their overpowering algorithms 
have neither faith nor conviction; no 
anarchist or transgressive spirit, and no 
fierce desire to survive and see their children 
happier than themselves! Collaboration with 
the machine can be beneficial, undoubtedly, 
but it must be better supervised, better 
controlled and better understood. All 
this will be possible if we all agree on the 
narrative it should serve. Let’s pick up our 
pens today!
 
