Grave threats 
The biggest threat comes from climate 
change, which is gravely impacting 
their subsistence economies. So-called 
development projects such as dams, 
plantations, mines and other extractive 
activities are also taking their toll, as 
are government policies that minimize 
diversity and encourage homogeneity. 
There is an increasing propensity of 
states to criminalize any dissent, resulting 
in more and more rights violations. 
We have witnessed an unprecedented 
rise in the number of indigenous peoples 
harassed, arrested, imprisoned, and even 
summarily executed for daring to defend 
their territories. 
What is often overlooked in discussions 
on these concerns is the impact of 
these threats on indigenous cultures 
and values. Indigenous peoples derive 
their identities, values and knowledge 
systems from their interaction with 
their territories, whether forests or seas. 
Their languages are shaped by their 
environment – it is their attempts to 
describe their surroundings that forms 
the bases of their unique tongues. Thus, 
when the territory is altered, changes also 
occur in the culture and eventually, in the 
language.
The Inuit, for example, have more than 
fifty terms for snow, each appropriately 
describing different types of snow, in 
different situations. Snow is a prime 
element that the Inuit live with, and 
therefore have come to know intimately. 
The same is true with the Igorot of 
the Cordillera in the Philippines when 
describing rice – from when it is but a 
seed ready for planting to when it is fully 
ripe and ready for harvesting, to when it is 
newly cooked and ready to be eaten and 
when it takes the form of wine.



Minnie Degawan
For indigenous peoples, 
languages not only identify 
their origin or membership in a 
community, they also carry the 
ethical values of their ancestors 
– the indigenous knowledge 
systems that make them one 
with the land and are crucial to 
their survival and to the hopes 
and aspirations of their youth. 
Indigenous languages:
Knowledge
and hope
While new information and 
communication technologies could 
be used to enhance the learning 
process and provide tools to preserve 
indigenous languages, this is sadly not 
the case. Because indigenous peoples are 
considered minorities, their languages 
are often overlooked in positive efforts 
by governments to protect languages. 
For instance, in the Philippines, the 
government has launched the use of 
mother tongues in schools, but no 
resources are available in terms of 
teachers and learning materials to allow 
for indigenous children to be taught in 
their mother tongues. As a result, they 
end up mastering another language and 
eventually losing their own. 
Notions and values lost 
In addition, because of years of 
discrimination, many indigenous parents 
choose to teach and talk to their children 
in the dominant languages – in order 
to create optimal conditions for their 
social success. Since their mother tongue 
is often used only by older people, an 
entire generation of indigenous children 
can no longer communicate with 
their grandparents. 
In my community, the Kankanaey 
Igorot, we have the concept of inayan, 
which basically prescribes the proper 
behaviour in various circumstances. 
It encapsulates the relationship of the 
individual to the community and to the 
ancestors. It goes beyond simply saying 
“be good”; it carries the admonition that 
“the spirits/ancestors will not approve”. 
Because many of the young people now 
no longer speak the local language and 
use English or the national language 
instead, this notion and value is being 
lost. The lack of dialogue between elders 
and the youth is exacting a toll, not just 
in terms of language but in ancestral 
ethical principles.
The state of indigenous languages today 
mirrors the situation of indigenous 
peoples. In many parts of the world, 
they are on the verge of extinction. The 
biggest factor contributing to their loss 
is state policy. Some governments have 
embarked on campaigns to extinguish 
indigenous languages by criminalizing 
their use – as was the case in the 
Americas, in the early days of colonialism. 
Some countries continue to deny the 
existence of indigenous peoples in their 
territories – indigenous languages are 
referred to as dialects, and accorded less 
importance than national languages, 
contributing to their eventual loss.
But today, the major influence on the 
sorry state of their languages is the fact 
that indigenous peoples are threatened 
themselves.

Keeping languages alive
However, with the growing global 
recognition of indigenous knowledge 
systems, the hope that indigenous 
languages will thrive and spread in 
spoken and written forms is being 
rekindled. Many indigenous communities 
have already instituted their own systems 
of revitalizing their languages. The Ainu 
of Japan have set up a learning system 
where the elders teach the language to 
their youth. Schools of Living Tradition in 
different indigenous communities in the 
Philippines similarly keep their cultural 
forms, including languages, alive.
This edition of the Courier is a welcome 
contribution to the worldwide effort to 
focus more on indigenous languages. It 
is a valuable companion to the UNESCO-
Cambridge University Press book, 

Indigenous Knowledge for Climate Change 
Assessment and Adaptation, published in 
2018. The book illustrates the importance 
of indigenous knowledge in addressing 
contemporary global challenges. 
A Kankanaey Igorot from the Cordillera 
in the Philippines, Minnie Degawan is 
Director of the Indigenous and Traditional 
Peoples Program at Conservation 
International, based at its international 
headquarters in Virginia, United States. 
She has years of experience advocating 
for the greater recognition and respect 
of indigenous peoples’ rights, and has 
participated in various policy-making 
processes, including the drafting of the 
United Nations Declaration on the Rights 
of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP). 
Celebrations to mark the end of the rice 
harvest season in the paddy fields 
of the Philippine Cordilleras, 
a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
