Interview by Lucía Iglesias Kuntz, 
UNESCO
When you speak of Havana, you 
speak of Eusebio Leal Spengler. 
Which other city has its own 
personal historian? On the eve 
of the 500th anniversary of the 
founding of the Cuban capital, 
the City Historian of Havana – 
who has been in charge of the 
restoration of its historic city 
centre for over thirty years – 
takes us on a journey through 
its streets and monuments, 
showing us its strength, its 
beauty ... and its ailments.
Eusebio Leal:
Havana,
mon amour
This year, Havana celebrates five centuries 
of its existence. How is the city faring? 
If I were to put myself in the city’s place, 
I think the ailments you have are what 
you feel when you’ve lived so long. Five 
centuries is little in comparison with 
ancient cities like Athens in Greece, or 
Istanbul in Turkey. But it’s a lot for us 
in our Americas – with the exception 
of the great pre-Hispanic cities like 
Cusco, the Inca city of Peru, the Aztec 
Tenochtitlán in Mexico, or the Mayan 
cities of Central America. Havana was 
part of the new wave that began with 
the Spanish conquest and colonization 
at the beginning of the sixteenth 
century. The Cuban cities were founded 
immediately after the cities of Santo 
Domingo, La Vega, San Pedro de Macorís 
and Santiago de los Caballeros, in the 
Dominican Republic. 
Unusual flooding caused by 
climate change threatens the 
Malecón, Havana’s famous 
waterfront promenade. 

I believe these cities have reached a 
noble antiquity, and also show the aches 
and pains of all the historical moments 
they have lived through. In our case, it is 
fundamentally the new era that began 
sixty years ago with the victory of the 
Revolution – the resistance of the Cuban 
people, of which Havana has been an 
emblem and a symbol. 
The historic centre, Old Havana, has been 
inscribed on the World Heritage List since 
1982, for its “outstanding universal value”, 
that any visitor can appreciate. But what, 
from your personal point of view, is the 
value of Havana?
The range of values is very large. There 
is the symbolic value – it is the capital 
of the nation, the country’s head. But at 
the same time, it is very representative 
of all the cultural, intellectual, political, 
historical and social values of the Cuban 
people. It is also a catalogue of the most 
beautiful and dazzling architecture 
that the island has ever produced, 
with features that can also be found in 
Camagüey, Santiago de Cuba, or Trinidad.
The Moorish architecture, for example, 
which was influenced by the Hispano-
Islamic tradition, is very characteristic 
of the historical centre. Then, there is 
also the timid but passionate baroque 
architecture of the Havana Cathedral 
– which is more like a state of mind, a 
kind of feeling or atmosphere that the 
Cuban writer, Alejo Carpentier, so vividly 
described in his great novel, El siglo de las 
luces (Explosion in a Cathedral), 1962.
Havana is 
a living city, 
of wisdom 
and of 
memory

There is also the neoclassical city, with El 
Templete, the monument to the founding 
of Havana. It is rather a small-scale model, 
that has been reproduced with great 
originality in other Cuban cities, like 
Matanzas and Cienfuegos. 
And then there is the eclectic city in 
Centro Habana that is so impressive 
– filled with gargoyles, Atlanteans, 
extraordinary figures, imaginary 
creatures. The Art Nouveau – the Palacio 
Cueto in the Plaza Vieja – and then the 
considerable splendour of the Art Deco 
– as in the Emilio Bacardí building – are 
almost subversively introduced there, 
making the architectural dialogue even 
more intense. 
Finally, there is the Havana of modernity, 
which reaches the height of its splendour 
with the work of the Viennese architect, 
Richard Neutra – the Casa de Schulthess, 
one of the most beautiful houses in the 
residential quarter where Quinta Avenida 
[Fifth Avenue] takes us. 
Havana is a living city, of wisdom and 
of memory. In this lively metropolis, we 
find the acropolis of knowledge that is 
the beautiful university campus – and 
the great monumental cemetery, the 
necropolis, is beautiful too. 
Could you tell us what the November 2019 
celebrations will consist of? 
The city government has developed an 
extensive commemoration project. The 
plan we drew up in the Office of the City 
Historian of Havana, which we designed 
specifically for the historical zone, is 
harmoniously incorporated into that 
project. Our task is to promote the idea 
of preserving the memory of the city, not 
only when it comes to commemorating 
its fifth centenary, but also in everyday 
life. I’ve dedicated more than three 
decades to this, and I have to confess 
that sometimes it felt as though I was 
preaching that cause in the desert.
Currently, we have developed a series of 
events, radio and television programmes, 
and the publication of a number of 
different works. We also continue to work 
simultaneously on the restoration of the 
city’s monumental symbols – the main 
example of this will be the completion of 
major work on El Capitolio [the national 
Capitol building], the Castillo de Atarés 
and other iconic buildings in the heart of 
Havana. We will remember and celebrate 
not only the story of the act of the city’s 
founding, but also its history and culture.
I would like to emphasize that culture 
is the key word in our master plan for 
the rehabilitation and restoration of Old 
Havana. Any development project that 
ignores culture, leads only to decadence. 
On the other hand, the human factor is 
just as important. I would like to ensure 
that these commemorations generate a 
passion among the people. If they don’t 
touch people’s hearts, all we will have 
done is made a few official speeches, 
moved some stones and printed a 
few articles.
Would you say that cultural heritage has 
more to do with everyday life, and is not 
just about museums? 
Of course I believe that museums are 
essential for history, memory and culture. 
The Museo de la Ciudad [City Museum] is 
of vital importance for the entire nation, 
and not just for the people of Havana. But 
I have also fought against museumization 
and defended the cause of a living city. 
One of the challenges facing World 
Heritage cities is the difficulty of 
reconciling tourism – sometimes on a 
massive scale – and the preservation of 
heritage values. Has Havana had to face 
these contradictions?
We must ensure that Havana does 
not disappear under a tide of tourists. 
But at the same time, I believe that 
tourism – a necessary activity and an 
important economic factor – should not 
be demonized. In the case of Cuba, given 
its isolation, it is also an opportunity to 
initiate a direct dialogue with visitors 
from all around the world. That is 
something wonderful. 
While the rehabilitation is completed, 
many buildings in Old Havana still 
remain inhabited. 
In many cases, the buildings that were 
in ruins, and that we have restored, were 
inhabited by very poor families. This is still 
the case for many of them. The answer 
has been to provide safe and dignified 
shelter for thousands of people, offer 
education for young people and create 
safe jobs for adults. We have tried to 
implement what UNESCO defined, at the 
time, as “a unique project”, something 
different. Unique does not mean better. 
We do not claim to have done better than 
other parts of the world. Rather, it was 
done according to our own experience. 
In other words, in spite of the setbacks 
and mistakes we suffered in the search for 
a rehabilitation model, we finally found it 
(see p. 17).
You have also put a lot of effort into 
restoring the Malecón, Havana’s 
emblematic avenue that stretches along 
the coastline. You have defined it as 
“Havana’s smile”.
I must confess that I have almost lost 
the battle against the sea, a battle that 
could only be fought by Neptune with 
his trident. I cannot forget the images of 
the devastating waves crashing against 
the Castillo del Morro, which has stood 
in front of the sea for centuries. These are 
Dantesque visions that are repeated at 
every step of a cyclone. 
The tornado that hit us recently, during 
the night of January 27 and 28 [2019], 
causing the death of several people and 
wounding some 200, reminds us that 
the time has come to understand that 
climate change is a hidden threat to the 
elegant silhouette of the Malecón, which 
will always be that beautiful smile that 
Havana gives to the sea, and that we have 
a duty to protect. 
We have lost the battle against the sea, 
but we must win our fight against climate 
change. Great challenges and new 
adventures await us. 
Don’t you ever tire of working for Havana?
It’s true that everything has always led 
me to Havana. It’s really been many 
years of work, hard work. I don’t regret 
it. If there were another life than the one 
we know here on earth, my soul would 
wander eternally through Havana. It has 
been the greatest of my loves, the best 
of my passions, and the greatest of my 
challenges. I really do not know why 
I always mysteriously return to it, in light 
and silence, in life and in dreams. 
Cuban historian, author and researcher 
Eusebio Leal Spengler is the City Historian 
of Havana, and director of the Master Plan 
for the rehabilitation and restoration of its 
historic centre. His works include Patria 
amada (Beloved Homeland), Regresar 
en el tiempo (Back in Time), La luz sobre el 
espejo (The Light on the Mirror), Fundada 
esperanza (Founded Hope) and Poesía y 
palabra (Poems and Words).
