even international prizes, including the 
UNESCO-Sharjah Prize for Arab Culture, 
the Sharjah Award for Arabic Poetry, the 
Sharjah Award for Translation and the 
Sharjah Award for an Emirati Book.
The emirate also boasts of the Sharjah 
Publishing City (SPC), which it describes 
as the world’s first free zone dedicated 
exclusively to serving the global publishing 
and printing industry. Spread over 19,000 
square metres, the facility offers state-of-
the-art services and infrastructure for the 
entire chain of book-publishing – from 
writing and designing, to printing and 
distributing books – for a range of budgets. 
For its part, the Emirates Publishers 
Association helps to promote books and 
reading among all sections of society and 
different generations of readers. This has 
earned the non-profit organization the 
recognition of its peers – its president, 
Sheikha Bodour Bint Sultan Al Qasimi, was 
elected vice-president of the International 
Publishers Association in 2018.
“The book is the means by which every 
society can progress, surpass itself and 
engage in dialogue. It is a bridge between 
all the countries of the world,” Sheikha 
Bodour said, taking up her post as head of 
the Sharjah World Book Capital 2019 office. 
Ghalia Khoja
The city of Sharjah in the United 
Arab Emirates (UAE) became the 
World Book Capital for the year, 
starting in April 2019. It invites 
the public to embark on the 
bridge of knowledge to discover 
the diversity of the world’s 
cultures and peoples. 
With this article, the Courier 
participates in the celebration of World 
Book and Copyright Day, 23 April. 
In partnership with twenty 
representatives of the public, private 
and civil society sectors, the secretariat 
is organizing a series of cultural and 
artistic events throughout the year, not 
only in the Emirates but also in other 
countries in the region. The event aims 
to contribute to the development and 
support of publishing in the UAE and 
throughout the Arab world, by providing 
access to books for everyone, especially 
children and teenagers; introducing 
promising authors; increasing the 
readership of printed and digital books, 
and encouraging their translation. All 
genres of books are represented – poetry, 
fiction, non-fiction, social and scientific 
publications, and even comic books. 
At the end of the event, Sharjah will pass 
on the baton to the city of Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia, which has already been 
designated by UNESCO as the World Book 
Capital, 2020.
A writer and literary critic, Ghalia Khoja 
(Syria) is the author of twenty-five books, 
including collections of poetry, novels 
and essays. A journalist for the Al-Ittihad 
Arabic daily, she has been living in the 
United Arab Emirates since 2004.
Open books,
open minds 
“The book is, in all circumstances, the 
best of companions.” This quote from Al-
Mutanabbi, the illustrious tenth-century 
Arab poet, has become an adage that 
lovers of literature, poetry and knowledge 
in general, take pleasure in repeating – 
even today, when social networks and 
audio-visual media have considerably 
overshadowed the role of books.
The book remains a privileged medium 
for promoting the values of tolerance, 
coexistence and peace, for defending 
freedom of expression and fighting 
extremism and obscurantism – all 
common denominators of the events that 
begin in Sharjah on 23 April 2019, World 
Book and Copyright Day, and continue for 
twelve months, as part of its nomination 
as World Book Capital 2019. 
Sharjah is the first city in the Persian Gulf 
and the third city in the Arab world to 
receive this designation.
It was in Sharjah that the first school and 
the first library were opened in the UAE. 
And it is in this city that, since 1982, the 
annual Sharjah International Book Fair, 
has exhorted the public with “Read – 
you’re in Sharjah!”, its catchy slogan. Now 
the third-largest book fair in the world, 
it welcomed 2.7 million visitors in 2018, 
and 1,874 exhibitors from seventy-seven 
countries. It offered over 1.6 million titles 
and a programme of 1,800 events.
The emirate of Sharjah has given books 
a special place in its cultural policy, with 
projects such as “A library in every home”, 
mobile libraries, national, regional and 
The Sharjah International Book Fair, 
2018.
