One of your most recent works consists of 
red neon letters that say “I give up”. Have you 
lost hope that we will win the race against 
climate change?
The answer is yes. I don’t know if it’s 
because I’m getting older or because the 
situation is getting worse. We no longer live 
in fear, we live in “it’s too late”. But I don’t 
think that means we’re giving up. For it 
is perhaps precisely this despair that will 
finally rouse sleeping consciences! Almost 
everybody is aware of climate change and 
the responsibility of human activity. And yet 
nobody, almost nobody, does anything. 
The problem isn’t ignorance, it’s apathy. 
I have the impression we live in a world 
where planes fly across the sky day and 
night, spraying sleep-inducing substances 
that atrophy our consciousness. The media 
has a lot to do with this – they ignore 
the real causes of the extreme weather 
phenomena we are witnessing, so that we 
don’t question the system of production 
and consumption on which the power of 
the elites is based. Knowing that the same 
media is part of these same elites.
I think that artists have a role to play in 
raising awareness. They can detect the 
workings of media propaganda. They 
can show the public the real face of the 
problems.
That’s the purpose of your Emergency Room 
project, isn’t it?
Indeed, the essence of my work on climate 
change is to ask the question: “What’s 
the emergency?” Just as in hospital 
emergency wards, it isn’t possible to treat 
all emergencies at the same time – it’s 
necessary to identify those that need to be 
treated as soon as possible. It’s clear that 
climate change is the priority of all priorities. 
It is – and will be – the cause of many 
other emergencies: massive population 
movements, ecological problems, wars, etc.
Colonel: We must act quickly!
So I imagined a project – or rather, a format  
that allows contemporary artists to urgently 
express themselves on the news transmitted 
by the media. They’re on the lookout, 
observing what’s happening around them 
and reacting almost in real time – creating 
a work that they display in the Emergency 
Room the next day, to discuss it with the 
public.
To give you an example, for the first 
Emergency Room installed at MOMA PS1 in 
New York, the Danish artist Søren Dahlgaard 
had produced – in the aftermath of very 
heavy snowstorms – fake copies of the 
world’s most influential newspapers to draw 
public attention to climate change. The 
headlines announced disasters everywhere.
Critical run is 
a metaphor: 
either we run 
to save the 
world, as long 
as it’s not too 
late, or we 
run to save 
ourselves, 
because it’s 
too late
Critical Run, an art format first created 
by Colonel in Italy, during the Venice 
Biennale 2011.
Thierry Geoffroy, interviewed by Niels Boel, Danish journalist
Apathetic and soporific. These words describe the state of public opinion 
and the media’s attitude to climate change, according to French-Danish 
conceptual artist Thierry Geoffroy, alias Colonel. Little by little, his slogans 
– that wavered between “Before it’s too late” and “Tomorrow is too late” – 
were reduced to a simple “Too late”. Paradoxically, it is in despair that he 
finds some consolation. 

That was in 2007, and the public was really 
shaken by it. Today, no one would bat an 
eye seeing such topical headlines! But, as I 
was saying, that does not mean we should 
give up. I continue to set up Emergency 
Rooms all over the world. I’m counting on 
the fact that the debates taking place there 
will eventually win over and raise awareness 
among new audiences. 
You use recyclable materials for your works. 
Is this a deliberate choice? 
It’s the fact of working in the present that 
imposes this choice. I’ll go find a box in the 
street and write on it. I will spend more time 
trying to understand what’s going on and 
communicating with the audience than on 
polishing my work alone in my workshop 
or studio. There’s no time for perfecting. We 
must act quickly.
Critical Run is another art format you have 
created. What does it entail, and what’s the 
objective?
Critical Runs are in fact conferences on 
current topics, particularly climate change. 
But instead of participants sitting in a warm, 
comfortable conference room, drowsy from 
the heat and the whirring of projectors, 
they’re invited to debate while running!
Critical Run is a metaphor: either we run to 
save the world, as long as it’s not too late, or 
we run to save ourselves, because it’s too 
late. If it’s really too late, we’re not going to sit 
on chairs and leaf through the history of art.
In May 2019, you organized a Critical Run 
at the Venice Biennale to reflect upon 
the title of the 58th edition of this major 
international art exhibition: May You Live in 
Interesting Times. 
Yes. And some good questions were 
asked during this race-debate. One of the 
participants discussed the main work of 
this year’s Biennale, Barca Nostra (Our boat) 
by Christoph Büchel. This Icelandic-Swiss 
artist is exhibiting the wreck of a fishing 
vessel that sank in the Mediterranean in 
2015, killing about a thousand migrants. Our 
participant suggested it would have been 
better to exhibit one of those cruise ships 
– which, through a chain reaction, causes 
entire populations to be condemned to 
migrate for climatic reasons – instead. 
The Biennale should exhibit works 
that evoke the causes of problems and 
encourage us to try to solve them in time, 
not works that ironically embody our 
attitudes that it is “too late” and of us turning 
our backs.
The son of a soldier, French-Danish artist 
Thierry Geoffroy has adopted the nom 
de guerre,  Colonel, to indicate that 
he is fighting a battle: to raise public 
awareness of climate change. Originally 
a photographer, Geoffroy has been 
touring art fairs, galleries and museums 
in many countries for over a decade. He 
invites himself, even when not invited, 
to communicate his messages. Author 
of several books and manifestos, he 
has produced more than twenty films 
for Danish television and as many solo 
performances in museums.
Now before it is too late,  
an Emergency Rooms installation 
by Thierry Joffroy/Colonel in Morocco, 
during the Casablanca Biennale, 2018.
