It all began in 1859 in Mobile, Alabama, 
when planter and ship captain Timothy 
Meaher bet that he could bring in “a 
shipful of niggers” right under the noses 
of the authorities. By then, the slave 
trade to the United States – which had 
been legally prohibited since 1 January 
1808 – could only be conducted illicitly, 
with offenders risking the death penalty. 
Nevertheless, the trafficking continued 
unabated and demands to reopen the 
slave trade had grown since the 1840s. 
Short of labour for their expanding cotton 
and sugar plantations, slave-holders in 
the Deep South had to buy enslaved 
labour from the Upper South, at prices 
they considered exorbitant. A man sold 
in Virginia could fetch $50,000, whereas 
a smuggled African could be bought for 
$14,000. Meaher recruited and financed 
William Foster, the builder and owner of 
the Clotilda. As an improvised slave-ship 
captain, Foster arrived in Ouidah, in the 
kingdom of Dahomey, on 15 May 1860.
The terrible ordeal of the 110 children 
and young adults – half male, half female 
– who became the Clotilda’s prisoners, 
had begun a few weeks earlier. After a 
deadly raid by the Dahomey army on a 
small town, a group of survivors were 
brought to Ouidah. Among them was 
19-year-old Oluale Kossola, who was later 
renamed Cudjoe Kazoola Lewis. Others, 
including a group of traders, had also 
been kidnapped. 
Sylviane A. Diouf 
In May 2019, the news that archaeologists had discovered the 
wreck of the Clotilda – the last recorded slave ship to arrive in the 
United States, fifty-two years after the international slave trade 
had been outlawed – made headlines around the world. 
But all the attention focused on the ship’s owner, its captain, and 
the ship itself, rather than on the victims of this appalling journey. 
From the holds of the 
Clotilda to Africatown
The prisoners came from various areas 
of Benin and Nigeria, including Atakora, 
Banté, Bornu, and Dahomey. They 
belonged to the Yoruba, Isha, Nupé, 
Dendi, Fon, Hausa and Shamba ethnic 
groups. Among them were Muslims, 
and initiates of the Oro society, or 
Orisha convents. All of them had been 
brutally snatched from their families and 
communities, and held in a barracoon, 
after Foster had selected them from 
among hundreds of captives. 
As Ar-Zuma, Oroh, Adissa, Kupollee, 
Oluale, Abache, Omolabi, Sakaru, Jabar, 
and their companions set foot on the 
Clotilda, they were stripped of their 
clothes, as was customary on slave ships. 
The humiliation and the suffering they 
endured was such that even fifty years 
later, they could not bring themselves to 
speak about it – except to say that they 
were very thirsty, and that two people 
had died. 
Hidden in a swamp
On 8 July 1860, after forty-five days at 
sea, the captives arrived in Mobile, under 
cover of night. To remove any trace of the 
landing, the Clotilda was set on fire. Even 
so, news of the “secret” arrival spread from 
coast to coast. The federal government 
was forced to intervene, and a crew was 
sent to search for the young Africans. 
Detail of a sculpture by Ghanaian 
artist Kwame Akoto-Bamfo. Dedicated 
to the memory of the victims of the 
transatlantic slave trade, it is on display 
at the National Memorial for Peace and 
Justice in Montgomery, Alabama.

They had been hidden in a swamp, 
completely naked for several days, until 
some rags and skins were handed out to 
them when they were discovered. A sale 
was organized discreetly, and the group 
went through another heartbreaking 
separation. As some of them were leaving 
for places that were far away, they all sang 
a parting song, wishing each other a safe 
journey. About seventy-six people were 
divided between Meaher and his two 
brothers, and Foster. 
The cases against the slave-owners were 
ultimately dropped, and the “ship-mates” 
– as Africans who travelled on the same 
slave ship generally called each other – 
were put to work, openly, on steamships, 
in the fields, and as domestics. They were 
a tightly-knit community, and were said 
never to accept brutality – they stood 
up to authority and were unafraid of 
the consequences. An African American 
enslaved on the same plantation as 
some of the newcomers recounted that 
once, when a supervisor tried to whip 
one of the women, they all jumped 
on him and beat him up.  
When a cook slapped a young girl, she 
screamed. Her companions ran to her 
rescue, tools in hand, and banged on the 
door of Mrs Meaher’s bedroom, where 
the cook had taken refuge. Often mocked 
by their enslaved companions born in 
the US, the Clotilda passengers kept to 
themselves and continued to adhere to 
their original cultures – including their 
funeral rites. 
In April 1865, at the end of the Civil War, 
the ship-mates were finally free. But it was 
not the kind of freedom they had longed 
for. They wanted to go back home. As 
one of them, Ossa Keeby, said, “I go back 
to Africa every night in my dreams.” The 
men found work in the lumber-mills and 
powder-mills. The women, who were self-
employed, made their living gardening 
and selling their produce, and the baskets 
that the men wove at night. They saved 
their money to pay for their return. When 
they realized they would never make 
enough, they sent Cudjoe Lewis to ask 
Meaher for some land. They argued that 
they had families, homes, and land before 
he had forcibly brought them to Mobile 
and made them work hard for nothing, 
for five years. Meaher refused. 
Africatown 
Redoubling their efforts, the ship-mates 
accumulated enough money to buy plots 
from the Meaher family and other local 
owners. By 1870, they had established 
a small village in Alabama that they 
proudly called African Town – it was later 
renamed Africatown. 
It was a clear way of demonstrating who 
they were, who they wanted to remain, 
and where they wanted to be. To manage 
their settlement, they elected a chief, 
Gumpa, who was a nobleman from 
Dahomey, and two judges. They built the 
first church and the first school in the area 
and some of them learned to read and 
write. They also stayed in touch with the 
ship-mates, some of whom lived several 
counties away. 
As they married within – and sometimes 
outside – the group, a second generation 
was born. They were given one American 
name and one African name. These 
children learned about their origins – some 
were fluent in their parents’ languages and 
even acted as translators. The ship-mates 
talked fondly about their hometowns – 
which became a paradise, a refuge, for 
the children, where they could go to in 
their dreams when white racism and black 
derision became too hard to bear. 
The ship-mates never lost 
their deep-rooted sense 
of belonging to a land 
and a people far away

Having stood up while they were 
enslaved, the people of Africatown 
continued to fight for their rights. When 
the men decided to vote in elections 
in 1874, an incensed Meaher blocked 
their way. Undaunted, the men walked 
from polling station to polling station, 
finally succeeding in casting their ballot. 
Kohenco, who ran a dairy farm with her 
American husband, became a member 
of the first reparations movement that 
sought pensions for freed people. In 
1902, Lewis was hurt by a train and sued 
one of the largest corporations in the 
South. Against all odds, an all-white jury 
awarded him $13,000, but the judgement 
was overturned by the Alabama Supreme 
Court. Gumpa also sued, after being 
injured by a train. He died before the case 
went to court, but the claim was later 
settled, with a small amount of money 
awarded to his grandchildren.
When the ship-mates were interviewed, 
starting in the 1890s, they systematically 
refused to belittle their former religions, 
or to criticize polygamy. They also 
refused to condemn those who had 
taken them prisoners, attributing 
their fate to “bad luck”.  
They patiently, and sometimes 
exasperatedly, explained and defended 
their cultures. Asked whether they 
preferred Mobile or their erstwhile 
homes, they forcefully picked the latter. 
Clotilda’s last survivors 
When Emma Langdon Roche, a teacher, 
told the last survivors, now in their 
seventies, that she wanted to write 
about their lives, they asked to be called 
by their original names – so that if the 
story reached home, their relatives 
would know they were still alive. The 
book, with their photos taken fifty-four 
years after their brutal uprooting, was 
published in 1914. The author, Zora 
Neale Hurston, also interviewed Lewis at 
length and filmed him in 1928. Cudjoe 
Lewis, who lost his wife, Abile, and 
their six children in short succession, 
was the last survivor of Africatown. He 
passed away in 1935, aged 94, and was 
the second-to-last known survivor of 
the Atlantic slave trade. Two years later, 
Redoshi, a woman captured in the same 
raid, died in Dallas. She too had been 
photographed, interviewed, and filmed.
Cudjoe Lewis (1841-1935) was one of the 
founders of Africatown, a village created 
in 1870 by the people who were brought 
to Alabama on the Clotilda.

They did all 
they could 
to ensure 
that their 
stories were 
recorded, 
shared and 
remembered

The ship-mates of the Clotilda lived in 
Alabama as much as they could on their 
own terms. But in spite of their deliberate 
insularity, they were involved in a series 
of events that marked their times. Yet, 
they never lost their deep-rooted sense 
of belonging to a land and a people far 
away. Today, the Africatown they created 
as an alternative, is still home to some of 
their descendants. But this once-vibrant 
community has fallen on hard times. 
Polluting paper mills, streets blocked 
by factory walls, roads cutting through 
the neighbourhood – environmental 
racism has devastated the place. Only 
the Union Missionary Baptist Church 
and the graveyard where the ancestors 
are buried are tangible reminders of 
the first generation. The residents hope 
that the discovery of the Clotilda will 
encourage tourism and result in a much-
needed revival of Africatown and its 
fascinating history.
The shipwreck of the Clotilda, and 
whatever it reveals, is only a disgraceful 
symbol of the basis of the economic 
development of the US. More important 
is the history of the experience of the 
young people who lost everything, but 
transcended their awful circumstances. 
Through the ordeals of the trans-Atlantic 
crossing of slave ships from Africa to 
America, slavery, the Civil War, Jim Crow 
[the state and local laws that enforced 
racial segregation in the southern states 
of the US], and for part of the Great 
Depression of 1929, they retained their 
dignity, their confidence in themselves 
and their abilities, their unity, their sense 
of family and their pride in their cultures. 
What is more, they did all they could to 
ensure that their stories were recorded, 
shared and remembered. Theirs is a 
dreadful tale of loss and calamity, but 
also of triumph over adversity – a story of 
unsung heroes.
A historian of the African diaspora, 
Sylviane A. Diouf is the author of 
Dreams of Africa in Alabama: The Slave 
Ship Clotilda and the Story of the Last 
Africans Brought to America and several 
other books. She is a Visiting Professor at 
the Center for the Study of Slavery and 
Justice, Brown University, in Providence, 
United States.
The graveyard of the original enslaved 
people who arrived on the Clotilda, 
and their descendants, in Africatown. 
The neglect is apparent, with some 
graves disappearing into the ground.
A dreadful 
tale of 
loss and 
calamity, 
but also 
of triumph 
over 
adversity
