Interview by 
Agnès Bardon, UNESCO
Orphaned at the age of five, 
Mohamed Sidibay became 
a child soldier during the 
civil war in Sierra Leone, and 
owes his survival to school. 
A tireless advocate of education, 
particularly through the Global 
Partnership for Education, he 
tells the story of his debt to a 
teacher who knew how to reach 
out to him. 
Mohamed Sidibay: The role
of teachers is to restore 
our confidence
You were recruited as a child soldier at 
an early age. How were you able to go 
to school? 
It was in 2002, a year before the end of 
the war in Sierra Leone. I was part of a 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) 
programme for the Disarmament, 
Demobilization and Reintegration 
(DDR) of child soldiers. I was nearly 
10 at the time, and had never been to 
school. All I knew was how to load an 
AK-47. But UNICEF made sure that I 
received an education by providing my 
primary school with books, pencils and 
equipment. Without this help, the story 
of my life would undoubtedly have been 
very different from what it is today. Going 
to school has aroused my curiosity to 
learn, and it is this curiosity that continues 
to be my driving force today.
After what you had been through, what 
were your first days at school like? 
The first time I sat in a classroom, 
I felt lost. I was upset. I didn’t feel like 
I belonged. But above all, I felt alone. 
At the age of 10, most of the children 
who were there knew how to spell their 
names, read, write and count. I didn’t 
know how to do any of that. I was 
ashamed and didn’t feel welcome among 
them. But I stayed, not because I was 
aware of the importance of education, 
but because school, in spite of everything, 
was the safest place for me.
A ceremony to release child soldiers in 
Yambio, Southern Sudan, in February 2018. 
It is estimated that more than 
250,000 children worldwide are still directly 
or indirectly involved in armed conflict.

A still from the short film Mohamed 
Sidibay: Teaching Peace, directed by The 
MY HERO Project, a non-profit educational 
organization based in the United States. 
What was your relationship with 
the teachers? 
Having grown up during the war, I did 
not trust adults. When I came into contact 
with them, my only goal was to make 
myself very small, so as not to attract their 
attention. Being invisible is the only way 
to survive a civil war. At first, my relations 
with most of my teachers were not good. 
Their anger at losing everything during 
the war, my frustration with what I had 
lost myself, and my fear of adults, made 
relationships difficult. I was very tempted 
to give up everything. 
Do you remember any teacher 
in particular? 
When you are only one of eighty students 
in a public school in a slum, you are just 
one face among others. But one teacher 
left a lasting impression on me. She was 
special for many reasons. As a homeless 
child, I had nothing to eat at lunch-time. 
So, from time to time, she would share 
her meal with me. In class, she didn’t 
make me come to the blackboard 
because she knew that, as I couldn’t read, 
the other students would laugh at me. 
And then she had the good idea of 
making me sit next to the brightest girl 
in my class, who became my tutor. And 
even though the teacher knew what my 
life was like outside her classroom, she 
always asked me about my day. When 
she realized that I didn’t like school, she 
had the intelligence not to force me. 
In fact, she did her best to make me feel 
safe. She knew that if I felt good, I would 
keep coming to school. And she was 
right. It is by this kind of attitude that you 
recognize a good teacher.
 In your opinion, how should teachers 
approach children suffering from trauma? 
There is always a time when wars come 
to an end. But the scars they leave on 
the lives of men and women last a 
lifetime. Teachers are the architects of 
the reconstruction of society. Their job is 
not only to pass on knowledge, but also 
to make sure that children feel safe. They 
must understand that children like me 
come from a world where adults have 
not only failed to protect them, but also 
robbed them of their childhood and 
innocence. The first thing we see when 
we enter a classroom is not teachers but 
adults, ready to exploit us once again. 
The role of teachers is therefore to restore 
our confidence. At first, we do not go to 
school with a desire to learn, with the 
idea of growing up and becoming better 
citizens. Sometimes all I needed was 
someone to sit next to me.
How can we help teachers to meet 
this challenge? 
It requires resources. Teachers working 
in war zones or in post-conflict regions 
often lack adequate training. In fact, their 
work is less about passing on knowledge 
than about retaining students until the 
end of the year. If they do not manage 
to inspire their pupils, it is not because 
they lack imagination, but because 
maintaining discipline becomes more 
important. This is why teachers must be 
given the means, particularly through 
appropriate training, to play their full role 
with children who have suffered. 
