The years go by and new records are set 
for rising temperatures. Greenhouse gases 
(GHG) continue to increase, and populations 
the world over are more and more 
concerned and discontented about the lack 
of responsiveness of states to the climate 
change crisis. As a result, the number of 
lawsuits against climate change inaction is 
rising sharply.
The first case of this kind in the world 
was filed in 2013, in the Netherlands. 
The Urgenda Foundation, a Dutch 
environmental group, sued the government  
for “the failure of the Dutch state to take 
sufficient actions to prevent dangerous 
climate change”. At the time, the 
Netherlands was one of the most polluting 
countries in the European Union, and the 
Foundation demanded it take action to 
reduce the country’s emissions by twenty-
five per cent to forty per cent by 2020 
(compared to 1990 levels). 
On 24 June 2015, the District Court of 
The Hague ruled in favour of Urgenda – a 
judgement confirmed on 9 October 2018 
by the Hague Court of Appeal, based 
on scientifically established facts and 
in line with the traditional principle of a 
government’s duty of care. The court ruled 
that Dutch GHG emissions must be reduced 
by at least twenty-five per cent. Recognized 
as the world’s first climate liability lawsuit, 
this ruling sets a precedent that has 
since inspired other legal actions around 
the world.
Anne-Sophie Novel 
More and more citizens and non-
governmental organizations 
around the world are going to 
court to seek climate change 
justice. The unprecedented extent 
of these disputes deserves to be 
highlighted. This relatively recent 
type of litigation is forging public 
opinion, and constitutes a form of 
pressure on states and industries 
that is forcing them out of their 
inertia.
Climate change: 
A new subject for the law
On 5 April 2018, the Supreme Court 
in Colombia ruled in favour of twenty-
five young people who had sued the 
government for failing to guarantee 
their fundamental rights to life and 
the environment. With the support of 
Dejusticia, a Bogota-based human rights 
non-governmental organization (NGO), 
they obtained a court ruling ordering the 
government, provincial governors and 
municipalities to draw up an action plan to 
preserve the forest – recalling their duty to 
protect nature and the climate on behalf of 
present and future generations.
Earlier in the same year in Norway, a verdict 
that was less favourable for the plaintiffs was 
delivered. In 2015, two NGOs, Greenpeace 
Nordic and Nature and Youth, had opposed 
the opening of new oil and gas drilling areas 
in the Barents Sea in the Arctic Ocean, one 
of the most fragile ecosystems in the world. 
But the Oslo Court ruled that these new 
drilling efforts were not in violation of the 
Norwegian Constitution. The NGOs were 
required to reimburse 580,000 Norwegian 
kroner ($66,100) in legal costs to the 
government.

Poster by Cambodian-American illustrator 
Peter Pa, commissioned by amplifier.org.

Also in 2015, in the United States, twenty-
one youth represented by the non-profit 
Our Children’s Trust, filed an appeal in an 
Oregon court, demanding that the US 
federal government reduce carbon dioxide 
(CO2) emissions significantly. Their plaint 
asserted that the government, through 
affirmative actions that cause climate change, 
has violated the youngest generation’s 
constitutional rights to life, liberty and 
property and failed to protect essential 
public trust resources. Known as the Juliana v. 
United States Youth Climate Lawsuit, this trial 
has yet to be admitted to the US Supreme 
Court, in spite of the support of thousands 
of people – including members of the US 
Congress, legal scholars, businessmen, 
historians, medical doctors, international 
lawyers, environmentalists – and more than 
32,000 youth under the age of 25.
At a hearing in the case held by the Ninth 
Circuit Court of Appeals [a US federal court 
preceding the Supreme Court] on 4 June 
2019, a three-judge panel remained sceptical 
of whether the court had any role to play 
in dealing with the landmark case. Their 
decision could have important implications 
on whether or not the courts can be used to 
pursue climate action in the US. 
By contrast, in Pakistan in 2015, a farmer 
successfully petitioned judges to force 
the government of this country – which is 
particularly affected by global warming – to 
adopt climate legislation to protect his farm 
and guarantee his right to food and access 
to water.
In France, the first lawsuit related to 
climate change was initiated in December 
2018 by Notre Affaire à Tous, a climate 
justice association, with three other NGOs 
(Oxfam France, Greenpeace France and the 
Fondation Nicolas Hulot pour la nature et 
l’homme). 
Dubbed the “case of the century”, it 
presented six demands to the government: 
the inclusion of climate in the constitution; 
the recognition of climate change as 
a crime of ecocide; the possibility for 
citizens to defend climate well-being in 
court; the reduction of GHG emissions; 
the regulation of multinational companies’ 
activities, and an end to subsidies for 
fossil fuels. 
Aided by numerous influencers, the petition 
was an unprecedented success, with more 
than two million signatures obtained in a 
few weeks. In March 2019, when there was 
still no response from the government, the 
NGOs filed an appeal. 
Going to  
court is an 
effective means 
to compel 
action
Poster by American artist and activist Chip 
Thomas, commissioned by amplifier.org, 
a design lab that creates art to amplify the 
voices of grassroots movements. 

They are aware that the procedure will drag 
on, but hope to raise public awareness and 
promote the idea that going to court is an 
effective means to compel action.
At the European level, the first litigation 
was initiated by a group of ten families from 
eight countries – France, Portugal, Romania, 
Italy, Germany, Sweden, and also Kenya 
and Fiji – in May 2018. The plaintiffs of the 
People’s Climate Case took the European 
Parliament and the Council of the European 
Union to the European General Court (EGC) 
for having allowed too high a level of GHG 
emissions. According to a press release 
from the People’s Climate Case in April 
2019, the plaintiffs called on EU leaders 
to reduce GHG emissions by fifty-five per 
cent by 2030 (compared to 1990), instead 
of the target of forty per cent. According to 
them, the currently set target is “inadequate 
with respect to the real need to prevent 
dangerous climate change and far from 
what is needed to protect our fundamental 
rights of life, health, occupation and 
property.” 
While recognizing that climate change 
affects all Europeans in different ways, 
the EGC dismissed the case on procedural 
grounds in May 2019, saying the plaintiffs 
did not have a right to go to court to 
challenge the EU’s 2030 climate target. The 
families who initiated the lawsuit  plan to 
appeal to the European Court of Justice – it 
is a case to be followed. 
Suing corporations for 
climate change 
Legal action for climate crime is also being 
taken against the private sector. The nature 
of the claims differs according to the 
target. From states, plaintiffs demand more 
urgent, proactive and binding mobilization 
and action. From the private sector, they 
increasingly litigate for compensation for 
losses (crops, infrastructure) in the event 
of climate change hazards (heat waves, 
droughts, floods, etc.) or the management 
of upstream developments, in coastal areas 
in particular.
One of the most significant lawsuits in 
the private sector was filed in Germany 
in November 2017. After two years of 
proceedings, the court agreed to hear the 
case of Saúl Luciano Lliuya, a Peruvian 
peasant and mountain guide from the city 
of Huaraz (100,000 inhabitants). Lliuya is 
suing German energy giant RWE, Europe’s 
largest carbon emitter, to force it to pay for 
the damages caused by climate change in 
the Andes. Once his lawsuit was deemed 
admissible, the case entered the expert 
appraisal phase. It was a symbolic step 
forward to commit states and corporations 
to global climate justice. 
In the Philippines, in 2015, survivors of the 
Haiyan super-typhoon and a coalition of 
NGOs filed a petition with the country’s 
Human Rights Commission for action 
against forty-seven  multinationals, 
including Shell, ExxonMobil and Chevron. 
They demanded an investigation into 
human rights violations related to the 
effects of climate change and ocean 
acidification, and the possible failure of 
the most polluting companies to meet 
their responsibilities to the Filipino people. 
Another legal case to be followed. 
In the US, lawsuits against the oil industry 
are multiplying. Big Oil [as the clutch of the 
world’s largest publicly-traded oil and gas 
companies are known] has been accused of 
being responsible for climate change and 
its effects (rising water levels and coastal 
erosion) and of deliberately “discrediting” 
climate science.
The United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP) recorded nearly 900 
climate cases worldwide, as of May 2017. 
The figure is increasing daily: in May 2018, 
the database of the Sabin Center for Climate 
Change Law at Columbia University in New 
York counted 1,440 court cases related to 
climate worldwide, including 1,151 in the 
US. 
“Sometimes plaintiffs know very well that 
the trial has no chance of success, but it’s 
the media coverage that counts, and the 
way the lawsuit is orchestrated,” explains 
Sandrine Maljean-Dubois, CNRS (National 
Centre for Scientific Research) Research 
Director at the University of Aix-Marseille, 
France. According to her, “the main issue is 
to establish that the state has failed, that it 
is responsible for this deficiency and that it 
must remedy this and choose the means to 
comply with its obligations.” It is therefore 
a question of obtaining action rather than 
compensation and of exerting political 
pressure through lawsuits, but also through 
marches or strikes for the climate, and 
ultimately of seeing civil society adopting 
this type of approach to other subjects – air 
pollution, biodiversity, the environment, etc. 
“Even losing a lawsuit can be positive, to 
show the inadequacy of the law,” concludes 
Maljean-Dubois.
A French journalist, author and film director 
who focuses on environmental, economic 
and social issues, Anne-Sophie Novel 
works for Le Monde, Le 1, Public Sénat 
and specialized French publications. She 
directed the documentary Les médias, le 
monde et moi (The Media, the World and Me), 
a preview of which was held at UNESCO on 
28 March 2019.
Even losing 
a lawsuit can 
be positive, 
to show the 
inadequacy 
of the law
