According to the RISU Project (2015), which 
defines indicators for the evaluation of 
sustainability policies in Latin American 
universities, seventy per cent of these 
institutions have a university authority to 
apply environmental measures; eighty-
six per cent engage in extra-curricular 
communication and awareness-raising 
activities on environmental and 
sustainability issues, and forty-six per cent 
conduct research in these two areas. 
The report also reveals that forty-six 
per cent of universities have an energy 
sustainability plan, and thirty-five per cent 
conduct awareness-raising activities on 
energy conservation. Lastly, thirty-three  
per cent of these universities monitor 
the quality of water intended for human 
consumption, and 61.5 per cent have a unit 
to handle hazardous waste management. 
Half of the universities have an information 
and monitoring system for solid waste, 
classifying it by type and quantity.
Laura Ortiz-Hernández
Educating on climate change and 
sustainable development issues is 
a necessity. In Latin America, there 
are some promising experiments 
being carried out that deserve to 
be replicated, both in the entire 
region and on other continents. 
There are some aspects, however, 
that are being neglected.
Climate change and  
education
These figures are rather encouraging. But 
it must be noted that in the education 
sector, the emphasis has been mainly on 
environmental aspects – the social aspects 
that complement the efforts being made to 
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) that the 193 United Nations Member 
States have a duty to achieve by 2030, have 
yet to be included. This is the next stage that 
will have to be undertaken. 
An environmental consultant and research 
director at the Misión Sustentabilidad 
México A.C., Laura Ortiz-Hernández is a 
member of the Coordination Committee 
of the Alliance of Ibero-American 
University Networks for Sustainability and 
the Environment (ARIUSA). She was the 
UNESCO Chair in Climate Change and 
Sustainable Development in Latin America, 
2016-2017. 
In recent years, the environmental crisis 
and climate change have highlighted the 
need to transform our ways of thinking 
and acting. Education for Sustainable 
Development (ESD) is therefore, a key factor 
in the search for alternative methods to 
build a different kind of society that is fair, 
participatory and open to diversity. 
In Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), 
ESD has advanced through the application 
of different strategies, adapted to the 
conditions of each country. In Mexico for 
example, ESD is being implemented at all 
levels of the school system: educational 
games in preschool education, biodiversity 
activities and programmes in primary or 
basic education, and the integration of 
environmental protection studies into the 
secondary school curricula.
In countries such as Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, 
Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala and Peru, 
ad hoc ESD strategies are being developed 
– book publications, television and radio 
programmes, visits to protected natural 
areas, and teacher training on these issues – 
to comply with established regulations.
In addition to the formal system, civil society 
organizations are also working to impart 
knowledge on different environmental 
issues and to support the work of teachers 
in schools.
Children playing at the Mar Chiquita 
primary school, Argentina’s first 
sustainable public school.
