Under the auspices of UNESCO
Gently sloping underground channels, 
or tunnels, collect water from aquifers 
with the help of gravity, transferring it 
downhill for drinking and agricultural 
purposes. A series of vertical well shafts 
are drilled at regular intervals along the 
route, communicating with the surface of 
the ground. This assists the construction 
and maintenance of the qanat, providing 
ventilation and access for workers, 
equipment and debris. The technology of 
these underground aqueducts has stood 
the test of time and is now a model for 
sustainable groundwater use. 
Today, 37,000 qanats are still operational 
in Iran, supplying eleven per cent of the 
country’s water. They have been used 
mainly for irrigation since the installation 
of a water distribution network in 1961. 
Yazd:
Living in symbiosis with the desert
Farmers maintain a sustainable balance 
between the water flow and cultivated 
areas by adjusting – depending on 
their reserves – the water distribution 
between water-intensive farms and low-
consumption orchards. The core concept 
of the qanats is that it is up to humans to 
adjust to available water resources, not 
the other way around. 
Qanats are not just examples of well-
preserved ancient infrastructure. The 
search and control of water are so vital 
for life in the desert, that considerable 
efforts have been made by communities 
to maintain and improve this essential 
know-how from generation to generation 
– and to adapt it to current realities. 
Modern cities and cultural traditions may 
be perceived as contradictory notions. 
Synonymous with modernity, new ways 
of life and multiple opportunities, we 
always imagine that cities look to the 
future. Entrenched in the past, traditions, 
on the other hand, are thought to 
obstruct progress. The preservation 
of heritage is often viewed as costly 
and time-consuming for a relatively 
low return on the investment, and is 
therefore accorded less attention than 
infrastructure development. 
Even so, traditions continue to have a life 
of their own, and cities would be empty 
shells without them. These customs are 
passed on from generation to generation 
and are constantly evolving – allowing 
communities to respond to new 
needs and to adapt to changes in their 
environment. More than we can imagine, 
they are able to provide tailor-made 
solutions to current problems. 
The qanats of Iran
In the heart of Iran, for example, the 
old town of Yazd has greatly benefited 
from the ingenuity of its inhabitants, 
who over the centuries, have developed 
the art and technologies necessary to 
live in symbiosis with the desert. They 
have harnessed the harsh nature of 
their environment to make it a source of 
artistic creation. This is expressed through 
their architecture, and especially through 
innovative urban planning. 
Yazd’s elegant earthen architecture has 
thus been able to withstand the ravages 
of time and extreme climate, leading 
the historic city to be listed on the World 
Heritage List in 2017. In spite of the aridity 
of the climate, agriculture employs a 
significant proportion of the inhabitants 
of the city and the surrounding region. 
This is mainly due to the preservation 
of an infrastructure that dates back 
a thousand years – the qanats.
The ingenious system of qanats is 
designed to capture groundwater. 
Devised in Iran centuries ago, it has been 
adopted in many parts of the Middle 
East and the Mediterranean Basin. 

The social fabric has largely been 
woven around the principles of sharing, 
ownership and distribution of water 
resources. These days, however, an 
elected qanat council has replaced the 
traditional public gatherings of the past, 
to facilitate decision-making processes.
Perpetuating know-how
The trade of the moqannis, the well-
diggers or geo-hydrological experts who 
maintain the qanats, has also evolved. In 
the past, the wide range of skills needed 
– to find underground water, deciding on 
the best location for the wells, mastering 
the techniques of excavation, cleaning 
and repair of wells and tunnels, and the 
wisdom of managing the water – were 
passed down from father to son. 
To ensure that this ancestral occupation 
flourishes, the International Centre on 
Qanats and Historic Hydraulic Structure 
(ICQHS), affiliated to UNESCO, and 
the Faculty of Qanat in Taft, provide 
education in the field. Located about 
twenty kilometres south of Yazd, the Taft 
college has been offering a two-year 
apprenticeship since 2005. Students are 
trained by traditional masters in theory 
and practice, in the Yazd desert. The 
profession has also received additional 
recognition – master moqannis can now 
be licensed by the Ministry of Justice to 
settle qanat disputes.
Of course, water management in a 
country with many desert areas such 
as Iran is extremely complex. In recent 
decades, new technologies for the 
exploitation and sharing of water 
resources have been developed to meet 
the needs of a growing population and 
economic imperatives. This modern 
infrastructure sometimes competes with 
traditional systems, leading to water 
shortages in extreme cases.
Nevertheless, the qanats and the resulting 
know-how remain a pillar of Yazd’s urban 
planning and an integral part of its 
future projects. This is why institutional 
management and safeguard mechanisms 
have been adopted to complement the 
customary system. Three government 
agencies oversee qanat management, 
while the ICQHS carries out research and 
capacity-building activities. 

The cultural 
backgrounds of 
inhabitants
Yazd is living proof that intangible cultural 
heritage can provide or inspire ingenious 
solutions, adapted to local conditions. 
By basing their strategies on local 
practices and making the most of their 
cultural resources, cities are more likely to 
mobilize their populations to participate 
in their development projects. This 
requires, of course, that living heritage is 
valued through appropriate safeguarding 
measures and the active participation of 
the holders of traditional knowledge.
Cities vibrate and prosper to the rhythm 
of the activities and exchanges of their 
inhabitants. Whether they have been 
settled for a long time or have arrived 
only recently, they all bring their own 
cultural backgrounds with them. Their 
knowledge, beliefs, traditions, customs 
and worldviews shape their identities 
and relationships with others – and, 
consequently, their cities.
Vanessa Achilles (France), 
independent researcher and writer.
The historical garden of Dolat Abad 
in Yazd, Iran, with its fountains 
and ornamental pools. 
