At 90, Nelly Minyersky 
is a major figure in the 
fight of Argentinian 
women to denounce 
gender violence and 
decriminalize abortion.
 © Sebastián Hacher

What about feminism?  
Did you have role models? 
I would be lying if I said that I was inspired 
by the great figures of the movement. 
My role models have been independent 
women. The women in my husband’s 
family were all professionals – chemists, 
French teachers... I have always been 
surrounded by progressive people. I came 
through the law, and became interested 
in feminism as part of human rights in 
general, as I have lived under various 
dictatorships. 
I specialized in family law and began to 
realize that a woman’s legal incapacity 
mainly concerned a married woman. 
The single woman had very few 
limitations or constraints, and enjoyed 
practically all the rights. However, due to 
the economic model and the desire to 
preserve the family income, the married 
woman was far more limited. When 
I became interested in changing things, 
I became interested in feminism. 
Interview by 
Lucía Iglesias Kuntz, UNESCO
Through their campaigns 
to protest gender 
violence and femicide, 
such as #NiUnaMenos 
(Not one less), and their 
fight for the legalization 
and decriminalization of 
abortion, Argentinian women 
are breaking new ground 
and transcending borders. 
The 90-year-old lawyer Nelly 
Minyersky is one of their 
most active representatives. 
So much so that some call her 
“the green queen”, because 
of the colour of the scarves 
worn by supporters of free and 
safe abortions – who demand, 
in short, a law “to not die”.
How did the current campaign for the 
right to abortion in Argentina, in which 
you are involved, come about? 
The campaign for the right to abortion 
started in 2005, but it had its origins 
in the Encuentro Nacional de Mujeres 
(national women’s encounters), 
which was created in 1986, shortly 
after democracy was restored1. The 
encounters are spaces for meeting and 
discussing values, principles and forms 
of organization, by and for women, 
and are held every year in a city in 
Argentina. When they first started, about 
a thousand of us attended – now, we are 
more than 60,000 women who attend. 
The meetings are held over two and a 
half days, where all the activity revolves 
around gender issues – with workshops, 
plays, craft fairs, and panels on health, 
on breast-feeding, and literary debates 
with a gender perspective. It’s a unique 
experience that unites different social 
classes, different ages.  
 
 
1. Democracy was restored in Argentina in October 1983, 
following a bloody dictatorship that began in 1976.
Nelly Minyersky:
The green queen
Nelly Minyersky with activists from 
the National Campaign for the Legal, 
Safe and Free Right of Abortion, outside 
the National Congress of Argentina 
on 13 June 2018, during a debate on 
the law to legalize abortion.

Where does your commitment to 
human rights come from? 
My father emigrated to Argentina from 
Bessarabia, now Moldova, at the age of 
23. His entire family was in Europe, so we 
lived very intensely through the Second 
World War. I remember hearing Hitler’s 
voice on the radio – that pungent voice 
was a very hard thing that marked me, 
and undoubtedly predisposed me to do 
what I do. 

Why does Argentina, which has legalized 
same-sex marriage and allows the free 
choice of sexual identity, remain opposed 
to an abortion law? 
It is true that in recent years, Argentina 
has adopted those and many other 
laws that have granted many rights to 
women – a comprehensive protection 
law, the Optional Protocol to the 
Convention on the Elimination of All 
Forms of Discrimination against Women2, 
retirement pensions for housewives, etc. 
My theory is that egalitarian marriage 
ultimately means allowing a group of 
people to enter into an institution that is a 
model, so they are under social control. But 
abortion, on the other hand, falls out of the 
desired model; it is completely disruptive. 
And it is also undoubtedly one of the most 
resistant strongholds of patriarchy.
2. The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women, ratified by Argentina in 2007, allows individuals 
and associations to file complaints of violations of 
the Convention to the Committee on the Elimination 
of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) when 
they do not obtain prompt and effective judicial or 
administrative protection in their country, and to the 
Committee to open an ex-officio investigation procedure 
for serious or systematic violations of the Convention.
You were one of the drafters of the bill 
on the decriminalization of abortion 
approved by the Argentinian Congress in 
June 2018, but you failed to obtain Senate 
approval two months later. What does 
this bill contain? 
Our campaign slogan is: “Sexual 
education to decide, contraceptives to 
not abort, legal abortion to not die”. These 
three principles demonstrate that there 
are solutions. And our proposal advocates 
the decriminalization of abortion, but 
also its legalization. The law criminalizing 
abortion is discriminatory because the 
women who die – pregnant girls who are 
forced to be mothers – are the girls and 
women who belong to the most excluded 
and vulnerable sections. If abortion is not 
legalized but simply decriminalized, these 
sections won’t have the right to decent 
and safe health services. Between 2007 
and 2018, there were seven attempts in 
Argentina to introduce a bill for the right 
to abortion, and soon we will make an 
eighth proposal. In the meantime, the 
campaign, which brings together more 
than 500 organizations, persists and 
continues to work on the issue, which 
we consider essential, and the right to 
abortion is experienced and transmitted 
as a fundamental human right. 
What has been the reaction to this bill? 
When, in 2018, the debate was finally 
opened in parliament, a unique 
phenomenon occurred, an incredible 
mobilization. We got 1.5 million to 2 
million young girls and women marching 
in the streets to support us, we were 
invited to speak in secondary schools, 
where the boys politely asked me if I’d 
had an abortion. There were debates 
without screaming. We woke up and we 
communicated – and this is the most 
exciting thing – a message that went far 
beyond abortion. It was a message of 
freedom, of autonomy. It was thrilling 
to see these girls, young people, men, 
wearing the green scarf, which is the 
symbol of the law’s supporters. And 
that’s how we achieved something we 
had never dreamed of – an agreement 
between women representatives from 
opposing political parties who, together, 
managed to obtain approval for the law – 
what we call a “half sanction” in Argentina 
– from the Chamber of Deputies. It was 
something wonderful, unexpected. 
In my opinion, women have this 
particularity – it’s easier for us to get 
together than for men, even though each 
one of us has our own political ideas. You 
get together with municipal workers, 
with young people from schools… and 
you breathe joy. These meetings are 
also pluralistic, so much so that now 
they want to change their name to 
“plurinational encounters”, to include 
our indigenous peoples. 
The United Nations Office on Drugs and 
Crime (UNODC) estimates that more than 
50,000 women worldwide are victims of 
femicide each year. How can we confront 
this problem?
I have a theory – which I’ll probably 
never be able to explore in depth – that 
femicide will decrease as comprehensive 
sex education advances. The proof is that 
in all the countries where they receive this 
education seriously from a very young 
age, murder rates due to gender violence 
are lower. But in many countries, we are 
years away from getting there. 
“A legal, safe and free abortion”. 
Drawing by Argentinian artist Andi 
Landoni, part of the Linea Peluda 
campaign for the legalization of abortion.
© Andi Landoni

“You are not alone”. Drawing by 
Argentinian artist Lucia Seisas, 
 part of the Linea Peluda campaign for 
the legalization of abortion.
© Lucia Seisas
But the law still hasn’t been passed...
The law was rejected by the Senate, 
but we were short of only seven votes 
(thirty-eight against, thirty-one in 
favour) and that was a huge triumph. 
We didn’t lose. We didn’t get the law 
passed, but times are changing. Abortion 
has been taken out of the dark zone, 
out of the criminal zone in society’s 
imagination, it has been un-demonized. 
And now we talk about sexual and 
reproductive rights – young people 
talk about these. That’s how greatly we 
have advanced. And we have opened 
a breach, because we are achieving a 
change in social consciousness. We have 
won over teenagers and young people, 
who consider abortion a human right. 
And other important sectors, because 
networks of professionals, doctors, 
nurses, lawyers have also emerged 
– a real green tidal wave. 
After so many decades of work and 
activism, how do you view feminism at 
the global level? 
There is no doubt that popular 
movements have succeeded in advancing 
the feminist movement. But this progress 
has also provoked a reaction, which 
is rather hidden, but which works in 
a permanent way within the United 
Nations and other international forums. 
A recent report by the Observatory 
on the Universality of Rights, Rights at 
Risk, very clearly demonstrates how the 
most extreme supporters of various 
religions are joining forces with the most 
conservative sectors to try to return, 
on gender issues, to before the Beijing 
Conference (1995). 
The term “gender ideology” was coined 
there, for example. It is a movement that 
is advancing every day, and which, by the 
way, accuses UNICEF, or you at UNESCO, 
of promoting this supposed ideology. 
We must remain alert. 
I became 
interested 
in feminism 
as part of 
human rights 
in general, 
as I have lived 
under various 
dictatorships
Born in 1929 in San Miguel de Tucumán, 
north-west Argentina, Nelly Minyersky is 
one of the most prominent women’s rights 
activists in her country. She was named 
an illustrious citizen of the city of Buenos 
Aires in 2010 and has presided over the 
Women’s Parliament since 2017. She was 
the first woman president of the Asociación 
de Abogados de Buenos Aires (Buenos 
Aires Bar Association) and of the Tribunal de 
Disciplina del Colegio Público de Abogados 
de la Capital Federal (Disciplinary Tribunal of 
the Buenos Aires public Bar Association). 
