Before the publication of the Special Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change in October 2018, the tipping point 
(the critical threshold at which the climate 
changes from one stable state to another) 
of the increase in the earth’s average 
temperature was thought to be 2 ºC. As we 
have learnt since, it is now at 1.5 ºC. If this 
threshold is crossed, IPCC scientists note, 
society will face devastating consequences. 
These include the loss of entire ecosystems 
and species, melting polar ice caps and 
rising sea levels, intense heat waves and 
droughts, and an increased intensity and 
frequency of extreme weather events.
The Paris Agreement of 2015 (COP21) is not 
enough to stop this catastrophe. Scientists 
have explained that in order to limit global 
warming to 1.5 °C instead of 2 °C, as set out 
in this Agreement, it would be necessary 
to reduce net global carbon dioxide (CO2) 
Manuel Guzmán Hennessey 
Non-state actors, with cities at 
the forefront, must be the first to 
sow the seeds of a carbon-free 
society. To avoid the nightmare of 
climate change, we must reduce 
our carbon emissions further than 
called for by the Paris Agreement 
of 2015. This requires coordinated 
actions at the international 
level and concrete initiatives 
such as electric transport, the 
decarbonization of housing and a 
large-scale transition of energy.  
Zero carbon, 
starting with cities!
emissions by about forty-five per cent of 
2010 levels by 2030, and to achieve net-zero 
carbon emissions by 2050. The emission 
reduction targets set by COP21 average 
around twenty-five per cent. 
What is to be done? The IPCC has called for 
“rapid, far-reaching and unprecedented 
changes in all aspects of society”, which 
essentially involves reducing our carbon 
emissions. Accumulated CO2 emissions 
and the average increase in the earth’s 
temperature are directly related to the 
production and consumption of fossil fuels. 
The consequence is unprecedented global 
warming – the last three years have been 
the hottest in history. 
Future city, a drawing by Wang Boya, 
7,  for The Future World in My Eyes, an art 
activity launched by the UNESCO Courier 
on its WeChat platform, in 2019.

Why start with cities? Because they account 
for three-quarters of greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions and two-thirds of the world’s 
energy consumption. About seventy per 
cent of the world’s cities already face the 
consequences of climate change, and 
almost all are at risk. By 2060, more than a 
billion people  – projected at ten per cent of 
the world’s population at that time – will live 
in low-lying urban coastal areas, with the 
majority of them in developing countries. 
These figures – taken from Bahareh Seyedi, 
climate and energy advisor at the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
– provide an overview of the vulnerability 
of cities to climate change, and stimulate 
reflection.
It is clear that cities will have to develop 
climate action plans by the end of 2020 – 
that is, tomorrow! – to limit global warming 
to 1.5 °C and to adapt to the repercussions 
of climate change. These action plans can 
be structured around three pillars: reducing 
CO2 emissions, increasing  resilience, and 
education.
Reducing CO2 emissions includes the 
transition of transport systems; energy 
efficiency; integrated waste management 
and the promotion of recycling, and the 
renewal of urban infrastructure to achieve 
sustainable patterns. Increasing resilience 
must start from the recognition that cities 
are complex systems and must therefore 
respond in complex ways to the effects of 
climate change.
This approach includes the adaptation 
of territories to climate change; risk 
management and prevention; the 
strengthening of circular and local economy 
systems; and the implementation of 
decentralized energy systems (for the 
production, distribution and marketing of 
renewable energy surpluses). The education 
of citizens, especially the youngest, is 
essential, because it will enable them to 
Glimmers of hope
So what explains the certainty of scientists 
who say that it is possible to lay the 
foundations of a carbon-free society by 
2030? According to them, a net-zero 
emissions society is entirely possible. 
And it is not an “alternative” society or an 
experimental social model: decarbonization 
is the new condition for the viability of life 
on the planet.  
Among the most authoritative sources 
on the subject is the International Energy 
Agency (IEA), which has published its 
flagship publication, World Energy Outlook 
(WEO), every year since 1977. From its 
analysis, it can be concluded that the 
new actors in the fight against climate 
change – non-state groups made up of 
citizens, entrepreneurs, city governments 
and universities – have taken the lead in 
decarbonization efforts. Multiple platforms 
demonstrate the climate actions undertaken 
by these new actors. They are a daily 
illustration of a transition that is making 
advances, which are sometimes faster than 
the fulfillment of the goals set by their own 
countries. Here are some examples of these 
new certainties that encourage hope. 
First, in 2016, the growth rate of installed 
capacity of solar photovoltaic systems 
exceeded that of all other energy sources. 
Since 2010, the cost of new installations 
has fallen by seventy per cent for solar 
photovoltaic and twenty-five per cent 
for wind energy. The cost of photovoltaic 
batteries has fallen by forty per cent, in 
addition. Between 2020 and 2050, wind and 
solar energy will together account for forty-
eight per cent of total electricity. And the 
European Council has set new targets to be 
achieved by 2030, which include a forty per 
cent reduction in carbon emissions, twenty-
seven per cent renewable energy in the 
energy mix,  and a twenty-seven per cent 
improvement in energy efficiency. 
The climate action 
of cities
I start from the premise that a decarbonized 
society is possible on the condition that 
we concentrate transitional climate 
actions in the management of cities, 
and if we undertake these actions in an 
articulated and collaborative manner on an 
international scale between 2020 and 2030.  
The education of citizens, especially 
the youngest, is essential, because 
it will enable them to implement 
transitions in an orderly and 
accelerated manner
implement transitions in an orderly and 
accelerated manner. 
The cities that follow the net-zero carbon 
route will need to combine the best of 
urban design and cutting-edge digital 
technologies to meet these challenges. 
They will have to get rid of fossil fuels in their 
streets by purchasing only zero-emission 
buses starting in 2025, to ensure that large 
parts of their cities have no more carbon 
emissions by 2030. 
It will also be important to decarbonize 
buildings, by adopting regulations or 
designing policies to ensure that new 
buildings reduce their carbon emissions 
to net-zero by 2030 – with the measure 
applying to all buildings by 2050. 
Another key measure would be to reduce 
the amount of waste generated by at least 
fifteen per cent per capita by 2030, and to 
reduce the volume of municipal solid waste 
sent to landfills or incinerators by at least 
half. 
Finally, cities will have to implement climate 
actions with high social impact, that deliver 
significant environmental, social, economic 
and health benefits, especially to vulnerable 
and low-income communities.
Founder of the Klimaforum Latinoamérica 
Network (KLN), Manuel Guzmán 
Hennessey (Colombia) is a professor at 
the Universidad del Rosario in Bogota, 
Colombia. KLN is an independent 
organization dedicated to promoting 
climate actions that contribute to the 
decarbonization of society. It works in 
partnership with universities, companies 
and civic groups, and consists of an 
advisory board and a team of recognized 
environmental advocates. 
