Alain Mabanckou, 
French-Congolese writer.
© Nico Therin

So, it’s a kind of tri-continental attic that 
I sneak into, to retrieve whatever might 
help to explain tomorrow’s world. The 
world of tomorrow is the sum of different 
cultures.
Some say that today the neo-liberal system 
is such a hegemony that we no longer even 
have the words to criticize it…
Frankly, I can’t identify with that! That 
would mean that all the tools for criticism 
have been corrupted by the neo-liberal 
system – I am not that pessimistic. 
There are always ways to thwart a 
system, and it is sometimes by entering 
into the vocabulary of that system, by 
deconstructing it and demonstrating how 
empty it is, that a new way of thinking 
can emerge. Just because the peanut has 
a shell doesn’t mean I won’t break it to 
see what’s inside, and eat it!
Take the example of African civilizations.
They have used Western thought to 
establish African thought. The Negritude 
movement was born in Europe, in 
the minds of the Black and Caribbean 
students who came to study in France. 
One of them, the Senegalese [poet and 
statesman] Léopold Sédar Senghor, 
entered the Académie Française. 
Alain Mabanckou, interviewed by 
Ariane Poissonnier, French journalist
Alain Mabanckou browses 
through a “tri-continental attic”, 
searching the past to shed light 
on the present. How should 
colonial history be read? What 
meaning should be given to the 
restoration of African cultural 
heritage? And what is the role of 
the novelist in all this? The French-
Congolese writer discusses these 
issues, in all simplicity. 
With this interview, the Courier 
participates in the celebration of 
World Africa Day, 25 May.
And who would question the universality 
of Return To My Native Land by 
Martinique’s Aimé Césaire? Who can 
doubt the power of analyses of another 
Martinican, Frantz Fanon, in Black Skin, 
White Masks? These writers have attacked 
the colonial system and its corollaries 
from within, using the tools that the 
system provided them. 
“The Belgians are trying to recount 
their colonial history”, you commented 
recently on Instagram, after visiting the 
AfricaMuseum in Belgium. Why did you 
say that? 
A museum is like an individual, who 
sends out a message by the choice of his 
clothes, which can be honest or biased. 
Some wear a wig. You may fall in love 
with this beautiful hair and be deeply 
disappointed when you discover it’s fake! 
Similarly, when you enter this museum, 
you say to yourself that it’s very beautiful 
and finally... nothing. I went around in 
circles, but I didn’t see the arms that were 
cut off during the time of Léopold II.
The mobile Africas of Alain
Mabanckou
You divide your time between three 
countries – the Congo, France, and the 
United States. How does this arrangement 
work out for you?
As an advantage! This tri-continental 
culture has allowed me to encounter 
the variety of the world and to discover 
what I call mobile Africas. First of all, a 
mobile Africa within the continent. When 
I lived in the Congo, I came across West 
Africans, and that made me aware of 
Africa’s diversity. When I came to France, 
I discovered the Western world, but 
also the Africans who had settled there 
through migration, travel, the history of 
slavery and colonization – a mobile Africa 
in Europe. And then, when I am in the 
United States, I perceive my continent 
through a distant magnifying glass that 
allows me to discern the floating shadows 
of yet another mobile Africa, deported by 
slavery and the slave trade. 
I got acquainted with this African-
American world in New York, through 
Richard Wright, Chester Himes and James 
Baldwin, writers of the Harlem Renaissance 
– a movement they launched in the 
first half of the twentieth century, that 
revolutionized so-called Black thinking.
The young Alain Mabanckou with 
his mother, Pauline and father, Roger.

Does African literature occupy its rightful 
place in world literature?
African literature in French is still young, 
it’s not even a hundred years old, and 
needs time to become established. What 
is interesting is that it has been able to 
follow the path of globalization – it takes 
into account the fragmented dimension 
of the world and enters into the great 
dialogue that is taking place here and 
there, about the current social challenges. 
Do you sometimes feel like the voice 
of Africa?
That would be pretentious. It’s true that 
I am always flattered to see that more 
and more Africans, including English 
speakers, read what I write, identify with 
it, and are enthusiastic about it. All I do 
is reciprocate, through stories that speak 
of their world. I would like people not 
to think of me as a spokesperson – that 
would be too Christ-like a destiny – but 
to think instead that we are writing the 
books I write, together.
You could have become a lawyer. In 1989, 
you won a scholarship and left your 
modest family in Pointe-Noire to study 
law in France.
My parents wanted me to become a 
judge or a lawyer. The University of 
Nantes offered me a place – I studied 
private law for a year and then came to 
Paris to obtain a postgraduate degree 
in business and social law at the Paris 
Dauphine University.
But writing took precedence over law. 
It’s a jealous activity that doesn’t like 
competition. And then, when my parents 
died, I had the feeling that I had no one 
left that I needed to make proud of me.
Admittedly, this [recently renovated] 
museum has given some African 
descendants an opportunity to tell their 
stories – it is good to have thought about 
this. That is not necessarily the case in 
France where, as soon as there is any 
mention of colonial history, everyone 
rears up and takes refuge behind Jules 
Ferry, who apparently brought us 
the alphabet!
But if you gave this same museum to 
Africans to build – indeed, from the 
front door to the back door, they would 
have shown the White man whipping 
the Black man, putting him in the holds, 
plundering the continent, building a 
railroad where people die. Know that I 
would also have written about them on 
Instagram, that they “are trying to write 
their colonial history”.
The colonized will present the apocalyptic 
version of colonization, the Westerner, its 
supposedly civilizing version. All this must 
be synthesized. For now, we have only 
subjective interpretations.
Do you believe it is important for 
countries to start returning cultural 
heritage to African countries, such as 
France is currently undertaking? 
I like Felwine Sarr and Bénédicte Savoy’s 
report on the restitution of African 
cultural heritage [submitted to the French 
Elysée on 23 November 2018], but let us 
wait to see what happens in practice.
Restitution raises the same question – 
how do we reread our colonial history? 
Why are these looted objects never 
mentioned in French and European 
history books? The colonizer made a 
big mistake in thinking that what we 
produced artistically was junk. Today, 
these are the missing elements in the 
explanation of the global imagination. 
Africans simply want us to recognize that 
the world’s imagination also includes 
those elements of African culture 
that have been plundered – and that 
there would not have been a Surrealist 
movement, for example, if these painters 
had not had the exposure to African art. 
Going beyond restitution, there is the 
question of the recognition of Africa as an 
artistic power.

Was there a day when you said to 
yourself: “I want to write”? 
I started writing poems in high school, and, 
basically, I only wanted to write poetry. I 
wasn’t aware then that writing could be 
a main activity. For me, it served to calm 
my anxieties, to control my loneliness. It 
became a confession for me, as an only 
child – a way of refusing the world as it 
was written, in the present, so that I could 
invent my own version of the world.
Maybe that’s where the writing began, 
even if I can’t put a date on the moment 
when I became aware that this was what 
I had to do. I continued to write, telling 
myself that I would work, and, in parallel, 
from time to time, I would write. By doing 
it on a regular basis, I was building up 
my strength for what would become my 
principal activity – and an obsession.
Before you published your first novel, 
Bleu Blanc Rouge (Blue White Red) in 
1998, you had published four collections 
of poems. How do novels and poetry work 
together? 
Poetry corresponds to the romantic 
soul of teenagers – it is the place of first 
loves, the moment one describes one’s 
disappointments, or falls in love with 
Lamartine, Hugo, Vigny, or some other 
romantic poet. And also, poetry was 
highly regarded in my country, with great 
national authors like Tchicaya U Tam’si. 
We really only discovered the novel in 
1979, with the publication of La vie et 
demie [Life and a Half ] by Sony Labou 
Tansi, whom I consider to be the greatest 
writer in Congo. There, we realized that 
we could also recount something that was 
not necessarily about personal pain. In the 
novel, the state of mind no longer belongs 
to the novelist – it belongs to the character.
Your friend, the Haitian writer Dany 
Laferrière, says that when it comes to 
creation, “talent is important, but the 
most important thing is courage”. Do we 
have to dare, to create?
Courage is everything that you do not see 
in a literary work. A novel or a collection 
of poems is the finished product. We do 
not see in it all the author’s tribulations, 
his anguish, his living conditions, his 
cracks. If you do not have the courage, 
if you do not have the obstinacy, if you 
do not have the obsession, then talent is 
worth nothing!
Writing a novel means polishing each 
sentence and coming back to it as many 
times as necessary, to really express the 
feeling it is meant to. The courage that 
Dany Laferrière speaks of is synonymous 
with obsession and strength. The writer 
is obsessed with the aesthetic project 
he bears, and he uses all his strength to 
defend it within his imaginary universe.
When you write, do you expose yourself?
Yes! There is also the political courage, the 
recklessness to expose one’s self. Writing 
is not a walk in the park, it is rather a 
steep road, with potholes, mud, rainwater, 
stones. Those who don’t have the 
courage, wear boots. The writer, he walks 
barefoot and makes it to the end of the 
road, even if he’s covered with wounds. 
He has accomplished the project that was 
within him, the force of the world that he 
wanted to give birth to. He did it!
A novelist, journalist, poet and academic, 
Alain Mabanckou is among the most 
recognized writers in French contemporary 
literature. Born in 1966 in Pointe-Noire, the 
economic capital of Congo, he currently 
teaches literature and creative writing in the 
Department of French and Francophone 
Studies at the University of California, Los 
Angeles (UCLA). Mabanckou has held the 
Artistic Creation chair at the Collège de France 
in 2015 and 2016, and has received numerous 
international prizes. His work has been 
translated into thirty languages. His twelfth 
novel, Les Cigognes sont immortelles (The Storks 
are Immortal), was published in France in 2018. 
 The new Museum of Black Civilizations 
in Dakar, Senegal, retraces the cultural 
contributions of Africa around the world. 
Shown here, a Bamoun statue from 
Cameroon, left, and a 2018 painting, 
Redresseurs, from the Cuban art 
collective, The Merger.
