When did Baku become a modern city?
Baku began to become a modern 
city in 1872, when the Russian tsarist 
power established what is now called 
a concession for oil field development. 
From that moment, known in history as 
the first oil boom, the city experienced 
rapid development that resulted in an 
extraordinary growth of its population – 
which  increased tenfold in the first twenty-
five years, then doubled every seven or 
eight years. 
While Baku had 14,500 inhabitants in 
1872, it had a population of 215,000 at the 
beginning of the First World War. Of course, 
no city can grow at such a speed in a natural 
way. This demographic growth is due, above 
all, to immigration, which was attracted 
by the country’s wealth. It should not be 
forgotten that at the very beginning of the 
twentieth century, Baku provided more than 
fifty per cent of the world’s crude oil. 
That was when a new city began to take 
shape around the old fortified city, which 
was several millennia old (a World Heritage 
Site since 2000). It was planned at the time 
of the Imperial Russian administration 
and built thanks to local millionaires, who 
invested in projects by European architects. 
Fuad Akhundov,  
interviewed by Mila Ibrahimova
Several millennia old, the 
fortified city of Baku, the capital 
of Azerbaijan, retains traces of 
the presence of the Zoroastrian, 
Sassanian, Arabic, Persian, 
Shirvani, Ottoman and Russian 
peoples. The modern city, born 
from the first oil boom in the late 
nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries, has an equally eclectic 
cultural heritage. Because of its 
bay and its proximity to caravan 
routes, the city has always been 
crossed by multiple currents. 
The result is an extraordinary 
harmonious diversity, reflected 
both in its architecture and its 
cosmopolitan spirit.
This transformed the city into a real 
patchwork of cultures.
The oil magnates of Baku were keen to 
get closer to Europe, and this desire was 
also reflected in the architecture. They 
invited renowned architects to the city, 
who were mainly of Polish descent, among 
whom were Kazimir Skurevich, Konstantin 
Borisoglebski, Eugene Skibinski, Jozef 
Goslawski and Jozef Ploszko. 
This new city became so sumptuous that 
it would be nicknamed the Paris of the 
Caucasus.
Did turning to the West mean turning away 
from the past? 
In no way were the local oil tycoons trying 
to erase their past! Quite simply, they were 
receptive to cultural influences from outside, 
such as the European spirit that came to 
them through Russia. But this did not mean 
that they lost their cultural particularities.
So, for example, the vast majority of the 
frescoes that I have had the opportunity 
to see in my life, I found in ancient Azeri 
houses – although traditionally, they were 
prohibited by the Islamic religion.  
Baku: 
Multicultural city 
This article is published to mark the 
occasion of the 43rd session of the 
World Heritage Committee, held in Baku, 
Azerbaijan, from 30 June to 10 July 2019.
Fuad Akhundov in Baku. 

The orders they placed were more or less 
like this: “I want the same entrance as 
Taguyev, the same balcony as Mukhtarov, 
the same dome as Dadachev and the same 
window, say, as Mitrofanov, and something 
more of my own inspiration!” From this 
competition between millionaires, who 
wanted to impress their competitors, 
emerged the unusual style of Baku 
architecture of the late-nineteenth and 
early-twentieth  centuries – which is 
impossible to classify in any of the known 
genres of Western architecture.
But who was actually doing the work?
The local craftsmen, of course. The architects 
were able to take full advantage of the 
ambitious orders of the Azeri millionaires, 
equipped with unlimited resources, to 
enhance the value of stone – the only 
construction material available in this desert 
region. 
The stonemasons of Baku enjoyed a great 
reputation at that time. They were said to be 
born with chisels in their hands! But they did 
not have knowledge of figurative art, which 
is forbidden by Islam, according to some 
interpretations. An Italian sculptor, Antonio 
Franzi, was brought in to teach them this 
skill.
Although the architects borrowed motifs 
from different cultures, their approach was 
never a ‘copy-paste’ one. It was perceived 
through deeply-rooted local traditions and 
executed in fine local sandstone in quite an 
impeccable manner. The different influences 
coexist side by side, so to speak. This gives a 
special cachet to Baku’s architecture, which 
reflects the multicultural dimension of its 
population, from the first oil boom to this 
very day. 
What was the ethnic composition of the city 
at that time?
At the beginning of the First World War, the 
majority ethnic groups each represented 
about a third of the population: thirty-six 
per cent Russians and thirty-four per cent 
Azeris, about one third of whom came from 
Iran. There was also a rich and prosperous 
Armenian community in Baku, representing 
nineteen per cent of the population. About 
four and a half per cent of them were Jewish, 
followed by Germans, Poles, Georgians, 
Greeks, Tartars, etc. 
The Jewish community enjoyed a tolerant 
environment in Baku and did not fear 
persecution. They provided the city with 
nearly forty per cent of  the doctors and 
more than thirty per cent of the lawyers. The 
Rothschild, Landau, Cohen and Itskovich 
families were among them. Together with 
the Poles and Germans, they constituted 
Baku’s upper middle class. 
The Azeris, for their part, were the core of 
the middle class. They owned eighty-one 
per cent of the real estate during Baku’s oil 
boom. The billionaire Moussa Naghiyev, 
for example, who had started as a field 
worker and ended up as the richest Azeri oil 
baron, was also one of the local real-estate 
moghuls. Many of them had grown rich 
very quickly, without having had the time to 
obtain any formal education. Often, these 
first-generation local industrial magnates 
could barely read or write. One of these 
An extraordinary interpenetration of 
cultures took place in Baku, at all levels, 
including architectural and artistic. For 
example, Murtuza Mukhtarov, who was a 
famous drilling wizard, had mosques built in 
his native suburb of Amirajanin near Baku, 
and in Vladikavkaz (Russia), the hometown 
of his wife. He later erected a fascinating 
French Gothic palace for her, which still 
adorns Baku’s downtown.
One detail deserves attention: the imposing 
shape of this palace takes after the stately 
image of its owner! Just like the neo-
Renaissance palace erected by Dmitri 
Mitrofanov reflects the sturdy appearance 
of this other nouveau riche (I use this term 
in its positive sense) man who came from 
the province of Perm to make his fortune 
in the oil industry. The same applies to Isa 
Bey Hadjinski’s palace, built on six levels and 
mixing a variety of styles: from neo-Baroque 
to neo-Gothic and Modern. 
These similarities are so striking, they 
inspired this verse by the Russian poet 
Alexander Gorodinsky: “I am there, not 
knowing where to go, / standing, in the 
morning wind of Baku, / among its houses 
so similar to their masters, / from the 
outside, as from the inside.”
To a certain extent, this challenging 
individuality resulted from the wish of  the 
newly rich Baku elite to outdo each other. 
Dmitri Mitrofanov’s palace in Baku  
evokes the imposing appearance  
of its owner.

illiterate oil barons was Hadji Zeynalabdin 
Taghuyev, who nonetheless founded the 
first secular school for Muslim girls in 1901, 
and the first European theatre in Baku.
How did these communities relate to each 
other?
The Azeris in general did not take a negative 
view of the foreigners who came to settle 
in the city. This made it possible for the 
different communities to live together in 
peace, and even solidarity. Local Muslim 
millionaires frequently made donations for 
the shrines of other faiths. For example, for 
the consecration of the Alexander Nevsky 
Cathedral in Baku – the largest Orthodox 
church in the South Caucasus (demolished 
by the Communists in the 1930s) – Hadji 
Taguyev donated 10,000 roubles.
The process of Azerbaijan’s integration into 
the Soviet Union started in the early 1920s. 
What changes did this bring to Baku? 
In terms of architecture, the Soviet influence 
was first felt through a set of landmarks with 
strong Oriental influence in the 1920s. The 
Sabunchi train station in Baku is vivid proof 
of this National Romantic style, conveying 
the desire of the new Soviet administration 
to win the hearts of the local population 
by turning back to their architectural past. 
This trend gave way to constructivism 
in the 1930s, which introduced modern 
buildings with cubic shapes and flat roofs 
into the Baku landscape. Many felt that this 
architecture was a harmonious addition to 
traditional architecture, of which the flat 
roof was one of the main features. Thus Baku 
easily assimilated this novelty, as it had so 
many others in previous decades.
The Stalinist Empire style of the 1940s and 
1950s was heavily impacted by a plethora 
of architects trained at the Soviet school, 
such as Mikhail Useinov, Sadik Dadachev, 
Konstantin Sentshikhin, Elbay Gasimzade 
and others. They managed to adorn this very 
heavy and pompous style with elaborate 
details featuring the Oriental legacy, and 
thus made the Stalinist era architecture 
in Baku very site-specific, interpreting it 
through a local prism. 
If you had to summarize the main feature of 
Baku’s architectural heritage in one word, 
what would you say?
Eclecticism! And I would add immediately: 
a very site-specific eclecticism that is due 
to the deeply-rooted local traditions on 
the one hand, and the spirit of competition 
and openness on the other. And it is this 
openness of spirit which explains, for 
example, the strange similarity between 
the flamboyant Gothic Venetian Ca’ d’Oro 
and the sumptuous Ismailiyya palace which 
Moussa Naghiyev donated to the Muslim 
Charity Society of Baku, to honour the 
memory of his son, Ismail. 
The “city of winds” well deserves its 
nickname in the literal sense, but also in 
the figurative sense of the term – swept 
as it was by these winds that came from 
elsewhere, yet, never losing its unique and 
cosmopolitan identity.
A great lover of Baku, Fuad Akhundov 
is known for his unusual tours of the city, 
during which he presents each place by 
juxtaposing his photographs of yesterday 
and today, using the hundreds of archive 
photos he carries in his immense portfolio. 
Akhundov is the author of articles, films and 
television shows, including The Baku Secrets.
Isa Bey Hadjinsky and his palace in Baku.
