The school under
a bridge in New Delhi
Most of them also attend the local school, 
but come to him for academic support. 
“We have sixty-three students in my class,” 
says Mamta, 13, who attends the third 
year of high school. “Sometimes we can’t 
understand everything, so we come and 
ask Mr Rajesh.”
Sébastien Farcis, French journalist 
based in New Delhi 
For the past nine years, 
Rajesh Kumar Sharma has been 
operating a makeshift school 
between two pillars of the aerial 
metro that runs across India’s 
capital. More than 200 children 
from the surrounding slums 
attend this open-air classroom 
every day. 
Personal vindication 
His battle is also a personal vindication. 
Sharma, who comes from a poor family 
of nine children in a rural area of Uttar 
Pradesh state in the country’s north, had 
always wanted to study but could not 
finish university because he lacked the 
means. “The school was seven kilometres 
from my home,” he says. “It took me over 
an hour to cycle there. When I was in high 
school, I always missed chemistry, which 
was the first class. As a result, I didn’t get 
good marks in this subject, and couldn’t 
go on to study engineering, which was 
my dream.”
Sharma still managed to obtain a high 
school degree, a feat that none of his 
eight older brothers and sisters had 
achieved. He enrolled in university, selling 
his textbooks to pay the registration fees. 
To get there, he had to travel more than 
forty kilometres by bicycle and bus. But 
after a year, the elders in his family cut 
off the funds for his education. His dream 
was cut short. 
The next phase in Sharma’s life was 
challenging. When he was about 
20, he moved to New Delhi with his 
brother. “I sold watermelons, worked 
on construction sites, did anything I 
could to earn a few rupees,” he recalls. 
One day, on the metro construction 
site, he was shocked to see the workers’ 
children, most of them out of school, 
wandering amidst the rubble. At first 
he offered them candy and clothes, and 
then he considered providing them more 
sustainable help. And thus, in 2006, he 
began helping two children with their 
homework, under a tree. One of them, 
now 18, has just entered university, and 
wants to become an engineer. 
Four years later, in 2010, he set up his 
makeshift school under the newly-built 
aerial bridge, where he now welcomes 
more than 200 children a day – at levels 
ranging from the first year of primary 
to the third year of secondary school. 
The students are divided into two groups 
– boys in the morning, and girls in the 
afternoon, for almost two hours each. 
A primary school student attends a Hindi 
class at the makeshift school under a 
bridge in New Delhi. Rajesh Kumar Sharma, 
who started the school, can be seen in the 
background, teaching other students.
This school does not appear on any 
map. It does not have whole walls or a 
complete roof, let alone tables or chairs. 
Like the small street shops that keep 
the Indian capital alive, the “Free school 
under the bridge” has simply merged into 
New Delhi’s sprawling urban space. It 
nestles between the massive number five 
and number six pillars of the aerial metro 
of this megalopolis of over 20 million 
inhabitants. And for the past nine years, 
the school has provided free education 
to hundreds of poor children from the 
surrounding slums on the banks of the 
Yamuna River – a no-man’s land located 
in the heart of a city that is prosperous in 
pockets, but badly overcrowded. 
The district is a concrete grey, the sky low 
and heavy in the monsoon season. But 
the street school is full of life and colour. 
The three walls that make up its space 
are painted sky blue, with a forest of tall 
trees and giant roses surrounding the five 
blackboards that hang on the back wall. 
As soon as they spot him, the students 
run up to the teacher from everywhere, 
shouting “Namasté, teacher!” The man 
held in such esteem by the children is 
Rajesh Kumar Sharma, 49, founder of 
the “Free school under the bridge”. He 
considers it his mission to help break 
the cycle of poverty by improving the 
education of the poorest. 

Outdoor classes
There are many other children who do 
not attend school because their parents 
– migrants or informal workers – are 
undocumented. Sharma helps them 
to get papers, so they can enroll their 
children in school. He does this for free, 
relying on the meagre income from 
his family grocery store and occasional 
donations. So far, he has refused to create 
a non-governmental organization (NGO). 
“It’s a way to avoid paperwork, but also 
because I’m afraid that with a formal 
structure, the metro authorities will be 
afraid that we’ve settled in, and will kick us 
off their property,” he explains. But in the 
absence of a legal organization, donations 
are received in his personal name, which 
has recently exposed him to criticism. “I 
do the best I can, but I can’t provide an 
invoice when I use the donated money to 
feed the children,” he says. To dispel such 
doubts, he has stopped accepting money 
and only receives donations of clothing, 
food and books. 
On this hot July afternoon, the outdoor 
classroom is a little disorganized. The 
105 students are divided into groups 
of different levels. Three teachers, all 
volunteers, assist Sharma and have to 
shout as they point to the letters on the 
board, to be heard above the noise of the 
metro overhead. One teacher does his 
best to hold the attention of the youngest 
pupils. Sharma, meanwhile, is busy 
interpreting a Hindi text to a group of 
very attentive girls. “We use the national 
textbooks and do everything we can with 
the few resources we have, to help them 
progress,” explains this improvisational 
teacher. “In the old days, classes were held 
outdoors, so I don’t think it’s essential to 
have closed classrooms to teach properly. 
In India, it is said that the most beautiful 
lotuses are born in the marshes.” 
Sharma considers 
it his mission to help 
break the cycle of poverty 
by improving the education 
of the poorest
