The recent commissioning of five solar-
powered water pumps in the region has 
made these hardships a thing of the past. 
Currently serving 700 households in seven 
villages, the new water project, launched 
on 11 February 2019, gives residents access 
to clean water for drinking and cooking, 
while protecting the water catchment areas 
around the Rangwe and Riana rivers. Its 
water pump at Nyandiwa produces 3,000 
litres of water per hour – the 2.2 kilowatt 
pump has been reinforced by a five kilowatt 
solar structure, to ensure that it works even 
when sunshine levels are low.  
Previously, the people of Rangwe 
constituency were forced to boil their 
water to avoid contracting waterborne 
diseases such as cholera. This was especially 
important after water pipes burst and clean 
water was contaminated by raw water. 
Boiling water requires firewood and the 
burst pipes meant that people had to fetch 
water from the catchment areas – both 
these actions  contribute to climate change.  
It took the intervention of the Kenya Red 
Cross Society (KRCS) and the area’s Member 
of Parliament to rehabilitate an old water 
supply project that was conceptualized in 
1979 to run using diesel power, but was 
never completed. 
Eliminating pollution
The work involved the KRCS – which 
manages the new project – undertaking 
the fresh protection of the old water spring 
and fencing it, designing and constructing a 
new sump tank, and installing solar energy-
based pumps.  The use of solar energy, 
instead of diesel, to pump the water has 
not only saved the community from the 
high costs associated with using petroleum 
products, but has also ensured a steady 
supply of clean power – all without adding 
any air pollution. 
Victor Bwire
The availability of solar-powered 
water pumps and solar lamps 
have had a life-changing effect 
on rural communities in Kenya, 
providing clean drinking water 
and lighting while eliminating 
hardships, health hazards and 
habits that contribute to climate 
change. The government’s 
commitment to invest in clean 
energy has been bolstered by 
private companies to bring about 
real change, especially for those 
who need it most.  
Solar energy: 
Changing rural lives in Kenya 
The private sector has viewed solar 
energy as a business opportunity, while 
providing climate- friendly energy to poor 
communities. In addition to government 
investment in the development of solar 
energy in the country, the private sector 
– both businesses and non-profits – have 
been instrumental in the growth of the 
sector.  Through such initiatives as highly 
subsidized prices, social marketing and 
loan schemes, a number of entities have 
aggressively expanded the use of solar 
systems across the country.  
Targeting women’s 
networks
Solibrium, a local company, provides solar 
power at affordable prices. It sells solar 
panels, solar systems and solar lamps to 
communities through women’s groups, 
offering loans or a subsidized price system. 
Residents have access to the solar systems 
and can pay in installments. Incentives 
are extended to those who pay promptly 
and some existing users are made sales 
representatives to recruit more users. 
Solibrium has recruited nearly 200 members 
through women’s communities, who 
actively promote the sales of solar products 
in six counties in Kenya. More than 50,000 
households have been equipped by the 
company so far. 
The solar lamps have been life-changing 
for the communities. “The solar systems 
have reduced the health burden and air 
pollution related to using diesel engines 
within the communities. For example, for 
generators at water pumps and hospitals, 
the solar lanterns have eliminated the use 
of kerosene, which was not only expensive, 
but caused eyesight problems for users. It 
has  reduced the destruction of forests by 
eliminating the need for charcoal, and the 
availability of power also enables children to 
do their homework after nightfall, without 
hurdles,” Anton Espira, the company’s 
founder and chief of operations explains. 
“I have nothing more to say than thank God 
for remembering us, and the people who 
have made the completion of this water 
project here possible” Jane Akinyi, a resident 
of Nyandiwa in Homa Bay county, says. Even 
though the area is not far from Lake Victoria, 
one of the largest fresh-water lakes in the 
world, access to clean drinking water has 
remained unattainable here for decades. 
“Women used to walk several kilometres 
to the rivers to seek water, and often, the 
long queues at the only water points in the 
region would mean you could waste the 
whole day waiting. This meant chores at 
home would remain undone, resulting in 
other challenges,” Akinyi explains.

Benefiting small 
landowners
The solar systems, which include lamps 
and chargers, play a significant role in 
the economic empowerment of the 
farmer communities they are working in, 
affirms John Ohaga of One Acre Fund, an 
international non-profit working in East 
Africa. “These lanterns have helped some of 
the farmers do business late into the night, 
thus growing their businesses. They are able 
to charge their phones, thus fully utilizing 
the online payment platforms, and use the 
torches to continue some work on the farms 
after dark,” he says.
Farmers are also increasingly using 
solar irrigation systems to deal with the 
unpredictable seasons brought about 
by Kenya’s climate. Unlike before, when 
irrigation farming and predictable farm 
produce was mainly associated with the 
rich who could afford them, things have 
changed for the better for these formerly 
poor farmers, who were unable to invest in 
their crops and land. A better harvest also 
means food security for these farmers.
Optimizing solar energy
According to estimates by the International 
Energy Agency (IEA), solar photovoltaic 
energy will contribute the largest share 
(forty-seven per cent) of the technology 
mix for mini-grids and off-the-grid systems 
power generation in Sub-Saharan Africa by 
2040. M-KOPA Solar, a privately-held Kenyan 
solar energy company has installed 225,000 
solar energy products in the country so far, a 
2016 study by the World Resources Institute 
indicated. 
Kenya has committed to reducing its carbon 
dioxide emissions by 30 per cent by 2030.   
Decreasing the use of diesel and petrol 
machines and easing pressure on forests 
by using less charcoal, the solar power 
systems are a major intervention that not 
only alleviate the problems faced by women 
and children in communities, but also play a 
big role in mitigating the adverse effects of 
climate change in Kenya.
The climate change interventions in Kenya 
are guided by governmental decisions as 
reflected in the National Climate Change 
Response Strategy (NCCRS 2010) and 
the National Climate Change Action Plan 
(NCCAP 2013). Meanwhile, a National 
Climate Change Framework Policy 
and legislation are in their final stages 
of enactment to facilitate an effective 
response to climate  change. In addition, the 
Government of Kenya has developed Energy 
(Solar Photovoltaic Systems) Regulations, 
which require the registration and licensing 
of players in the sector.  
The Government Master Plan for the energy 
sector notes that due to its position on the 
equator, Kenya is endowed with very high 
solar resources, among the highest ten of 
Sub-Saharan African countries. Given the 
challenges posed by conventional energy 
sources and poverty levels in Kenya, solar 
energy has high potential – the government, 
through its energy regulatory framework, 
is working to ensure the maximizing of this 
resource.  Electricity consumption is forecast 
to grow in the medium term by an annual 
average of 7.2 per cent per year, a 140 per 
cent increase over the 2015 level, by 2020. 
This makes it imperative to find renewable 
energy solutions to benefit marginalized 
groups and small-scale users.
Head of Media Development and Strategy 
at the Media Council of Kenya, Victor Bwire 
is an environmental journalist. He also trains 
journalists on environment, health and 
related issues. 
Kenya’s Masai women walk  
house-to-house with their donkeys, which 
carry solar panels on their backs. 
