Maria Magdalena Carmen 
Mendoza at her home in Guerrero 
state, Mexico, makes panela, 
unrefined cane sugar derived 
from the boiling and evaporation 
of sugarcane juice. A third of the 
world’s population rely on solid 
biomass to cook their meals (2017). 
About 1.4 hours are spent each 
day collecting firewood – a burden 
borne mostly by women. 

Lighting up the world!
Photos: Rubén Salgado Escudero
Text: Katerina Markelova
This photo essay is being published to mark the 
International Day of Light, celebrated on 16 May. 
forty-three per cent of the population can 
light their homes at nightfall. 
Once his mission was completed, Salgado 
continued on his path as a freelance 
photographer. He decided that he would 
earn the right to be there. He didn’t know 
how yet, but he wanted to draw attention 
to the problem. The idea of Solar Portraits 
came to mind when he met villagers 
equipped with solar panels. “The quality 
of life of these people was so vastly 
different from everyone else’s around 
them,” he recalls. 
Energy is indeed “essential for humanity 
to develop and thrive”, as highlighted 
in the 2017 Report of the International 
Energy Agency (IEA). It is essential for the 
achievement of many of the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) set out by the 
United Nations in its 2030 Sustainable 
Development Agenda, which includes 
poverty eradication (SDG1), universal 
access to quality education (SDG4) 
and gender equality (SDG5). Clean and 
affordable energy for all is, in itself,  one 
of these objectives (SDG7). This is the 
first time that the fundamental role of 
energy has been recognized on this scale, 
according to the report.   
Yet, “having access to electricity is 
still a privilege in many countries 
and not a right,” the photographer 
says indignantly. In 2017, there were 
nearly one billion people in the world 
without electricity.
Digging a household latrine in Kayah state, 
Myanmar. In South-East Asia, 65 million 
people live without electricity, ninety-five per 
cent of them in four countries – Cambodia, 
Indonesia, Myanmar and the Philippines.
“Do I even have a right to be here?” On 
more than one occasion, Rubén Salgado 
Escudero asked himself this question as 
he travelled through rural Myanmar with 
his expensive photographic equipment. 
The Spanish photographer, who visited 
this country in 2014 on behalf of a 
humanitarian organization, was amazed 
by the glaring lack of access to electricity. 
“Most of the villages I went to, didn’t have 
electricity,” he explains. 
Out of more than 53 million people in 
Myanmar, 22 million are deprived of 
this commodity, which until now had 
been so commonplace in his eyes. While 
seventy-nine per cent of urban dwellers 
are supplied with power, this rate drops 
dramatically in rural areas – where only 

Guru Deen Shukla pumps water for his grandson outside his home in India, 2015. 
Delivering on a high-priority commitment, the Indian government completed 
the electrification of all villages in early 2018. 
Faustina Flores Carranza and Juan Astudillo Jesus in their home in Guerrero, 
Mexico, recently lit by solar energy. This is the first time the couple, 
married forty-eight years, have been able to look into each others’ eyes after dark. 

But how do we attract the attention of 
the public, who are increasingly jaded 
by the negative news that reaches them 
every day? “By finding new creative 
ways to tell stories, to capture people’s 
attention,” Salgado responds.
He takes his photos with only the light 
of LED bulbs powered by solar panels. 
This light, which gives them an air of 
Rembrandt portraits – and undoubtedly 
the positive energy that emanates 
from it – aroused an interest that the 
photographer did not anticipate. 
Published in Time, the American weekly, 
and the German monthly, GEO, the 
Myanmar portraits were enthusiastically 
received by the public. So much so that 
the photographer, with the help of an 
Austrian reader, launched a crowdfunding 
campaign, Let there be light Myanmar. 
The funds collected were used to equip 
three villages with solar panels in 2016, 
benefiting 400 inhabitants. 
Since then, the project has continued 
to expand. The novice photographer 
was noticed by the American magazine 
National Geographic, which sent him to 
Uganda in sub-Saharan Africa in 2015, 
to complete the series. It is estimated 
that by 2030, this region will be home 
to 600 million of the world’s 674 million 
people living without electricity. 
In the same year, Salgado visited India, 
which is currently performing one 
of the greatest feats in the history of 
electrification. Half a billion Indians have 
been connected to the power grid since 
2000, giving the country hope that it 
will reach its goal of universal access to 
electricity by the early 2020s. 
In 2017, the photographer travelled all 
over Mexico. In 2019, he plans to visit the 
Navajo in New Mexico (United States), 
Guatemala, Colombia and the Philippines.
Nowadays, Salgado organizes workshops 
in the schools of each community he 
encounters in the course of his work. 
Through practical experiments with 
solar bulbs, students are introduced to 
the concept of renewable energy, which 
is, according to the IEA, the cheapest 
solution for three-quarters of the new 
connections needed in the world. “The 
sooner we can make children conscious 
of the importance of this issue, the more 
leaders we will have in future who will 
care, and take us in the right direction,” 
he explains. 
Cristóbal Céspedes Lorenzo and his young associate, Francisco Manzanares Cagua, carry freshly-picked coconuts 
across the river to Copala, Mexico, which they will sell to a company which makes coconut butter and oil. 

Students do their homework in a solar-powered 
after-school community centre in Yangon, Myanmar. 
Studies have shown the pivotal role of electricity 
in promoting literacy and improving the quality 
of education. In 2017, only twenty-seven per cent 
of schools in the country had electricity. 

In India’s Odisha state, villagers trap fish using cone-shaped baskets 
and solar lighting. According to the government, 
9.6 million households in  the state have electricity. 

Daw Mu Nan, a Padaung farmer in Kayah state, Myanmar. Solar panels have become cheaper and 
more efficient, making them a viable and instant source of energy. 
After a day of fishing on Lake Victoria, Ugandan Lukwago Kaliste spends the evening breaking rocks into small pieces, 
which he sells for use in building foundations. It takes him three hours to fill a small truck with rocks, 
which earns him $10. Only nineteen per cent of Uganda’s population had access to electricity in 2016. 

Thanks to solar energy, Ugandan mechanics Ibrahim Kalungi and Godfrey Mteza 
can work longer hours and earn more money. The electrification rate in sub-Saharan Africa 
is currently forty-three per cent.
Too Lei, an oozie or elephant handler, poses on his elephant in Myanmar’s Bago region. 
For 300 years, oozies have worked with elephants to ensure sustainable logging.
