The money needed to resolve the financial 
issues (including employees’ salaries, 
money owed to raw material suppliers and 
transporters) was allocated by the Russian 
state-owned bank, the VTB Group, and 
production at the plant was resumed.
It is clear, however, that the personal 
intervention of a head of state cannot 
become a sustainable model for 
resolving crises. Especially since in most 
cases, the problems do not stem from 
disagreements between owners but 
from market exigencies. Indeed, Russia’s 
transition to a market economy in the 
early 1990s has created a series of acute 
problems for monotowns.
At the top of the list is unemployment – 
jobless rates in these towns are twice as 
high as the national average in Russia. In 
addition, these towns were designed to 
accommodate the industry that supports 
them, rather than with the well-being 
of their residents in mind. Problems of 
pollution, and the lack of infrastructure, 
health and education are recurrent. To 
make matters worse, these towns are 
often situated in far-flung corners of the 
country, with exorbitant airfares making it 
impossible for people to travel. If they do 
finally make it on a plane, it often means 
they’re leaving for good! 
Origin of monotowns
Around 13.2 million inhabitants – almost 
one in ten Russians – live and work in 
one of these 319 factory towns. Whatever 
their differences, they have one thing 
in common – their livelihood is entirely 
dependent on a single company or 
consortium, which employs at least a 
quarter of the population. They have all 
been formed around factories, major 
industrial forestry centres and the 
availability of raw material deposits (gold, 
iron, coal, oil, gas, apatite, etc.). In the case 
of Pikalyovo, the town and its cement 
factory were built in 1935, in the vicinity 
of the station of the same name, where 
deposits of limestone and cement clay 
had been discovered, five years earlier. 
Ivan Nesterov 
The crisis in Detroit, America’s 
Motor City, was splashed all over 
the international press when the 
city filed the largest municipal 
bankruptcy in American history, 
in July 2013. The stories about 
the fall and then, the renaissance 
of this once-great city, which 
had staked everything on the 
automobile industry, abounded. 
But we don’t hear as much 
about the monogoroda, Russia’s 
long-forgotten industrial 
towns, that share a similar fate. 
There are 319 of these single-
factory towns, where a single 
industry or factory accounts 
for most of the local economy. 
How are they faring?
Russia: 
From monotowns to pluritowns
The first Russian factory towns were 
built in the eighteenth century, in the 
wake of reforms by Tsar Peter the Great, 
who encouraged linen manufacturing 
and industrial forges. The second wave 
of rapid development took place in the 
nineteenth century, with the emergence 
of textile mills and the development of 
light industry. But most of these towns 
were established in the 1930s, as part of 
Joseph Stalin’s grandiose industrialization 
plans, which focused mainly on defence.
Today, there are more than 400 large 
enterprises in monotowns – including 
Russia’s largest coal producer, the Siberian 
Coal Energy Company (SUEK); the metal 
and mining companies, Severstal and 
Mechel; and the world leader in diamond 
mining, Alrosa. The number also includes 
state-owned enterprises, like Rostec, 
the industrial conglomerate, which 
manufactures and exports high-technology 
industrial products for military and civil 
use, and the Rosatom State Atomic Energy 
Corporation (ROSATOM), the nuclear 
energy company, among others. 
There are factory towns all over Russia, 
but they are mainly concentrated in 
Siberia and the Urals region. There 
are twenty-four of them in Kemerovo 
oblast, for example, fifteen in Sverdlovsk 
oblast, and fourteen in the autonomous 
okrug[district] of Khantis-Mansis. Some of 
them have fewer than 1,000 inhabitants, 
like the mining village of Beringovsky, 
Russia’s easternmost town. Others 
have populations in the hundreds of 
thousands, like Togliatti, home to the 
country’s automobile industry, with 
712,000 inhabitants, and Naberezhnye 
Chelny, where Kamaz heavy-duty trucks 
are manufactured, with a population of 
517,000. Most monotowns, however – 
around 216 of them – have no more than 
50,000 inhabitants.
New strategy 
The problems facing Russia’s monotowns 
is one of the main threats to the social 
and political stability of the country. 
It is 2 June 2009, and the world is in the 
throes of one of its most severe financial 
crises. In north-west Russia, the federal 
highway linking Novaya Ladoga and 
Vologda is blocked. More than 300 
residents of Pikalyovo, a small town 
in Leningrad oblast [a region, with St. 
Petersburg as its capital], have formed a 
roadblock. They are protesting because 
they have not been paid for months. The 
three state factories that supported the 
town changed hands, taken over by three 
private owners: BaselCement, EuroCement 
and PhosAgro. However, these companies, 
who formed a single production line, could 
not agree on a series of issues, including 
raw material prices, production volume 
and development prospects. To such an 
extent that in this small town of 21,000 
inhabitants, 4,000 remained unemployed. 
It was only when Russian Prime Minister 
Vladimir Putin intervened in person that 
the conflict was resolved. On 4 June, he 
arrived in Pikalyovo, and brought the 
owners together – they eventually signed 
agreements to supply raw materials and 
drew up various long-term contracts. 

In 2014, the government adopted a strategy 
for the development of monotowns, 
based mainly on the diversification of their 
economies, investment and the creation 
of new jobs. It called on Russia’s state 
development bank, VEB, which finances 
large-scale projects to develop the country’s 
infrastructure, industry, social activity, and 
technological potential. The bank was 
instructed to set up financial instruments, 
primarily to aid red-zone factory towns 
to emerge from their crises. With this aim, 
the bank created a fund specifically for the 
development of monotowns.
Once the strategy was in place, teams 
of representatives from the monotowns 
received training in investment and 
entrepreneurship. This training was 
provided by a top private business 
school, in Skolkovo, Russia’s answer to 
Silicon Valley.
After the Pikalyovo crisis, the state 
government drew up a list of these 
towns, which experts classified into 
three categories – towns with the most 
complex socio-economic conditions ( red 
zone, consisting of ninety-four towns); 
towns at risk of deterioration of their 
socio-economic situation (amber zone, 
with 154 towns), and towns with a stable 
socio-economic situation (green zone, 
with seventy-one towns). 

A copper-smelting workshop at 
the Nornickel factory in Norilsk, Russia.

The state pitches in
Today, the Monocities Development 
Fund works with teams of entrepreneurs, 
municipal and regional administrators. 
Most of the factory towns have 
developed and approved development 
programmes that take into account 
their particular territorial, climatic, socio-
economic and production features 
– these are integrated into regional 
strategic development plans.
The Fund also provides the regions with 
the money needed for the projects, 
implemented by local and national 
enterprises, in cooperation with the 
municipal authorities. It contributes 
resources and skills, monitors spending, 
and shares best practices. In 2016-2017, 
it concluded twenty-nine co-financing 
agreements with the regions to attract 
investment projects worth 14.3 billion 
roubles (over $217 million), for the 
reconstruction of infrastructure. In the 
long term, it is expected to invest more 
than 106 billion roubles (over $1.6 billion) 
in factory towns.
A priority programme for the “Integrated 
Development of Single-Industry Towns” 
came into force at the federal level 
in 2016. Aimed at creating small and 
medium-sized enterprises, or individual, 
one-person businesses, linked to new 
activities, the programme is expected 
to generate some 230,000 jobs. 
For Pikalyovo, for example, this would 
mean that more than 1,700 jobs of various 
kinds – the production of greenhouse 
vegetables, sportswear, furniture, etc. 
– are expected to be created by 2030. 
The development plan also provides 
for an investment of 20 billion roubles 
($303 million) in the town’s economy.
Another significant privilege is that 
areas of advanced socio-economic 
development have been created, where 
companies benefit from unprecedented 
tax advantages. The incentives include 
reductions in taxes on corporate income, 
property taxes and mining royalties, and 
also on insurance premiums. By the end 
of 2018, sixty-three such territories had 
been established in factory cities, with a 
total of over 200 companies registered.
Corporations lend 
a hand
The state alone cannot solve the 
problems of Russia’s monotowns, 
however. Large companies have also lent 
a hand. In 2017, Nornickel, a mining and 
smelting company, laid an internet fibre-
optic cable worth 2.5 billion roubles (over 
$38 million) in Norilsk, a city situated 
300 kilometres north of the Arctic circle. 
In 2018, CC Kolmar LLC, a coal-mining 
and processing company, undertook to 
develop regional tourism in Neryungri, 
a town in Yakutia, and co-invested in the 
reconstruction of the local airport.
In addition, large corporations have 
started to promote green industry. 
In 2008, Taneko, the oil and natural gas 
company in Nizhnekamsk, Tatarstan, 
invested in the development of a Single 
Maximum Allowable Pollutant Emission 
Project, an automated air pollution 
monitoring system which has since been 
regarded as something of a standard for 
controlling harmful emissions. In 2016, 
Nornickel shut down the oldest and most 
polluting nickel plant in Norilsk, reducing 
harmful emissions by thirty per cent.
In 2017, Mechel installed collectors 
that capture ninety-eight per cent of 
the dust and gas in its coal enrichment 
plant in Neryungri. And Kolmar has built 
closed-circuit enrichment plants, which 
recycle waste water for reuse in the 
production process.
The tangible results of all these measures 
are expected by 2025. Meanwhile, in the 
first half of 2019, the Fund will already 
be announcing the list of the eighteen 
towns with sustainable economies that 
no longer classify as monotowns. The 
leading candidate is Cherepovets, a 
former steel manufacturing centre with 
a population of 318,000. In 2017, a major 
mineral fertilizer production unit was set 
up here by PhosAgro. Twenty thousand 
individual companies have also been 
established here, employing one in four 
of the active labour force.
Russian journalist Ivan Nesterov has 
worked on promoting the integrated 
development of South Yakutia, a large 
investment project, between 2008 
and 2018. He has also been involved in 
mobilizing investment for socio-economic 
development projects in the Far East.
Polar climate, pollution and isolation. 
In her series, Days of Night – Nights 
of Day, Russian photographer 
Elena Chernyshova investigates the 
capacity of the inhabitants of Norilsk 
to adapt to extreme living conditions.
