Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim:
Speaking up for the rights of the 
Mbororo
Interview by Domitille Roux
Recognized internationally, the indigenous peoples of Africa 
cannot always count on being granted the same recognition in 
their own countries. The Fulani Mbororo community, for example, 
is a long way from fully enjoying its rights, according to one of its 
strongest advocates, Hindu Oumarou Ibrahim. She is coordinator 
of the Association des Femmes Peules Autochtones du Chad 
(AFPAT, the association of indigenous Fulani women of Chad).
Without this essential document, it 
is impossible to obtain identity cards, 
passports, or access to education and 
health care. If a patient comes to the 
hospital without a birth certificate, not 
only is he the last to be examined, but he 
also risks receiving inappropriate care, 
since his age and needs are not known 
to the doctors.
Though many papers and directives 
do exist, in actual fact, we are on our 
own. We do not even have access 
to safe drinking water. The Mbororo 
drink the same water as animals – this 
promotes diseases that make them even 
more vulnerable.
Could you tell us more about AFPAT? 
What are the association’s projects since 
its creation in 1999, and especially since 
it obtained legal status in 2005?
Our main objective is to improve the 
living conditions in our community, 
and our work is supported by two 
programmes. The first focuses on the 
protection and promotion of human 
rights and the rights of indigenous 
peoples, in line with national and 
international declarations on the subject. 
The second concerns the protection of 
the environment, as provided for by the 
three Rio Conventions, which emerged 
from the United Nations Conference on 
Environment and Development (UNCED, 
1992). They focus on climate change, 
biodiversity and desertification. 
In practice, we raise awareness of basic 
social rights through training sessions in 
education or access to health care. We 
also educate communities about access 
to justice – given their marginalization 
and the violence they suffer, it is essential 
to tell them that they have the right to 
justice and equity.
With regard to the protection and 
promotion of the environment, we 
organize training sessions and discussions 
with communities on adaptation to 
climate change and the importance of 
traditional knowledge and know-how 
for adaptation.
What results have you achieved through 
these awareness campaigns?
One of our successes is the creation 
of health centres adapted to nomadic 
communities, for example. We have also 
succeeded in integrating women into 
community debates. Now, women and 
men sit together to discuss their future.
At the legislative level, we contributed 
to a reform of the pastoral code, which 
dated back to 1958 and had become 
obsolete: the demography and 
environment have changed enormously 
since then. We are not entirely satisfied 
with the reform, but it is already a kind of 
victory for our association.
With regard to education, it must be 
understood that nomadic communities 
do not reject school, contrary to what 
is often thought. They simply want a 
school with programmes and schedules 
that are adapted to their way of life. 
What is the status of the Mbororo 
in Chad?
Thanks to the United Nations Declaration 
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, we 
have regional recognition from the five 
countries in which we are distributed: 
Cameroon, Central African Republic, 
Chad, Niger and Nigeria. However, at 
the national level, there are no laws that 
protect or recognize indigenous peoples.
In 2014, the current President of Chad, 
Idriss Deby Itno, who was then president 
of the Economic Community of Central 
African States, participated in the Third 
Edition of the International Forum of 
Indigenous Peoples of Central Africa 
(FIPAC 3), held in Impfondo, Republic 
of the Congo. At this international 
meeting on traditional skills and the 
green economy, he gave a speech in 
support of indigenous peoples. It was 
a considerable political endorsement 
and a very strong message in our favour. 
But the impact of this speech fizzled out 
– it was not published afterwards and 
remained ineffective.
How would you describe the living 
conditions of the Mbororo?
As unacceptable. At the very least, 
members of my community should 
be recognized as citizens of a country. 
However, half of them – particularly the 
women and children – do not even have 
a birth certificate. How then can they 
have rights?  

Nomadic children have less need to know 
the history of world wars or the history 
of France than to learn how to manage 
natural resources, such as water, or about 
conflicts between communities. They 
also need teachers who understand their 
culture and master their language, which 
is essential for learning.
The creation, in 2012, of the directorate 
for the education of nomadic children 
was very encouraging news. This 
body took into account the needs of 
nomadic communities and set up pilot 
programmes adapted to the lives of their 
children. But for now, the Mbororo do not 
benefit from it.
What do you think of the Biosphere and 
Heritage of Lake Chad (BIOPALT) project*?
The project holds great promise for the 
restoration of the ecosystems of Lake 
Chad, the preservation of its resources 
and relations between the peoples of the 
neighbouring countries. What worries me 
is that it takes time to establish priorities, 
create protected areas, put in place 
pilot projects – time is running out and 
the budget is being used up before any 
concrete results are delivered.
In my opinion, this project will make a 
difference if the experts in charge of it 
establish a relationship of trust with the 
indigenous peoples. They have lived in 
these places for centuries; they are not just 
passing through, like some politicians. It is 
with, and for these populations that the 
project must be successfully completed.
* Launched in February 2018 by UNESCO, the 
project is designed to strengthen the capacity 
of the five states where the Mbororo live, to 
sustainably manage the hydrological, biological 
and cultural resources of the Lake Chad Basin, 
which supports more than 40 million people. 
Habituated to the livestock market in 
the border village of Gbiti (Cameroon), 
the Central African Mbororo herders 
took refuge there in 2014, fleeing 
the violence in their country. 
© UNHCR / Frederic Noy
Born in Chad in 1984, Hindou Oumarou 
Ibrahim travels to international summits 
to raise awareness among the world’s 
leaders about the rights of indigenous 
peoples and climate change. In 1999, she 
helped found AFPAT, an association of 
the indigenous Fulani women of Chad, 
to improve the living conditions of her 
community, the Mbororo.
