Thiagarajan Jayaraman,  
interviewed by Shiraz Sidhva
There is a tendency in the public 
debate on climate change to 
present the use and development 
of green technologies as a miracle 
solution or panacea. We often 
forget one aspect: it is crucial to 
ensure that their development 
goes hand in hand with social 
justice. “The realization that it 
is not just global warming that 
we are dealing with, but global 
warming in an unequal and 
unjust world, has yet to sink 
in,” according to Thiagarajan 
Jayaraman. Without equality and 
equity – in other words, without 
peace and security – we cannot 
effectively fight climate change, 
the Indian climate policy expert 
insists.
Climate and 
social justice 
Does the current push towards green 
technologies overshadow the need to focus 
on equality and social justice in the fight 
against climate change?
This is definitely an issue that needs to 
be explored. I think there is a general 
recognition that you could hardly fight 
what is the most prominent environmental 
threat to humanity while you ignore issues 
of equality and social justice. The natural 
tendency is to argue that fighting climate 
change must go hand in hand with social 
justice. Unfortunately, the term social justice 
gets diluted in the usual international 
agency-speak in which this subject is 
sometimes being dealt with, and then you 
lose a specific understanding of what social 
justice means – it means very different 
things to  different people.
For me, at least one reading of social justice 
is having a regime or social economic 
order that leads to the enhancement, the 
extension and the development of human 
capabilities.
Obviously, one cannot speak of saving 
humanity while talking about tolerating 
injustices in the social and economic 
world. But in practice what happens is 
that there is a tendency in a section of the 
polity − especially among those who are 
environmentalists − to argue that the one 
is so important, that the other has to be put 
on the back burner. For instance, you shut 
down factories that are polluting before 
you worry about what is going to happen 
to those who are employed there. That kind 
of issue is where the question of equity and 
justice becomes really sharp.
Maskbook, an international participatory 
and artistic project by Art of Change 
21, an association which raises public 
awareness on the climate issue. 
So how do you avoid these pitfalls of social 
inequity while undertaking the development 
of green infrastructure?
This is not just an issue about the 
development of green infrastructure, but in 
all varieties of climate action, and there is no 
easy solution to it. To pretend otherwise is 
to fool ourselves. For instance, people talk 
of adaptation, of vulnerability or dealing 
with the needs of the vulnerable in a certain 
way as part of adaptation. This is the same 
jargon, slightly displaced, that comes from 
earlier talk about poverty eradication, like 
sustainable livelihoods. It’s not as if such 
talk does much to push poverty eradication 
along. There is no easy route to ensuring 
social equity as part of climate action.  Like 
all other developmental agendas, the fight 
for an equitable and just world is an ongoing 
fight, and it will continue. The important 
thing is to be very clear that climate is no 
exception.
There is a tendency, which has become 
prominent recently, since the publication 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) Special Report on Global 
Warming of 1.5 °C, wherein it is sought to 
be argued that a 1.5 °C world is naturally 
equitable. I think this is completely bogus 
− it’s not as if you can completely conflate 
social justice, equity and development with 
keeping the world average temperature 
increase at 1.5 °C. It amounts to saying that 
all problems of injustice are environmental 
in origin, which is obviously an absurd 
statement. 

Are the developed countries willing to 
help out to achieve this leapfrogging of 
developing countries to help fight climate 
change?
The effort is very patchy. Where developed 
countries sense opportunities, they are keen 
to bring their technologies to developing 
countries, as in electric vehicles. The other 
problem is that they want all-or-nothing 
solutions, which will not work. For instance, 
they want India not to invest in coal. My 
point is, when developed countries are 
unable to implement the coal-to-renewables 
transition, and in effect doing only coal-
to-gas, why are they asking developing 
countries to do this?
Why are developed countries so slow in 
reforming the transport sector? Why is there 
not a push for electric mobility in developed 
countries, comparable to the push that is 
happening in countries like India and China? 
China has entire cities, like Shenzhen, which 
are run on electric transport. There’s nothing 
of the kind in the West. Forget electric 
mobility – even the most stringent norms 
on emissions have been deferred for a few 
more years in the European Union. Transport 
is a sector where developed countries have 
been getting away with doing very little.

Politicians who are aware of the threat of 
climate change and its scope have been 
trying to get businesses to back green 
industries, saying they will create millions of 
new jobs and fresh opportunities for growth. 
Is social justice a part of this equation?
So far, there has been a tendency to 
mollycoddle businesses and hope that they 
will do right by climate change and social 
justice. But this is a strategy doomed to 
failure. 
Developed countries have reached a 
stalemate on this in climate talks. They go 
back and forth on carbon taxes, on carbon 
trading, but why can’t they mandate certain 
targets to be reached by certain industries? 
There have to be tighter regulations. 
Otherwise they should be made to pay the 
penalty, and that hardly seems to be on the 
agenda. To believe that somehow you can 
sweet-talk businesses into acting morally, 
or scare them into taking the right steps, 
seems to me a little absurd. I don’t think it’s a 
very useful point of view either – economics 
doesn’t work like that. Companies like Shell 
and ExxonMobil make polite noises about 
investing in green technologies, and then 
continue their business as usual.
I think that you need a two-pronged 
strategy on technology for the world: in 
developed countries, push very hard to 
convert rapidly to green technologies, which 
is not happening fast enough. For instance, 
many developed countries are still thinking 
of substituting gas for coal − both are fossil 
fuels − instead of going for renewables.
The other leg of the strategy is that 
developing countries must leapfrog in 
moderate amounts. This has to be done in 
a sensible way. They cannot be expected 
to leapfrog from centuries-old biomass 
burning to state-of-the-art solar power. To 
move an economy from one level of energy 
use and efficiency to a completely different 
level is not simply a matter of saying, ‘If you 
try hard enough, it can be done’. It’s more 
complicated than that.

In a wide variety of other sectors, the 
urgency which emerges in the talks of 
climate scientists is not reflected in policy 
and real climate action. Even in the official 
documents of the developed countries 
themselves, they are clear they will be hard-
put to meet their Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDC) targets at the rate at 
which they are moving today. There is hardly 
any real furore over this in climate policy 
circles.
If climate change escalates, the 
consequences and indirect consequences 
− an increase in migration, for example − 
will also affect the wealthy countries. Do you 
think self-interest – like mitigating migration 
− can motivate wealthy countries to support 
social justice?
There are two kinds of self-interest: one is 
the self-interest in a stable global order, 
and the other is self-interest in one’s own 
country. But when it comes to the US, 
unfortunately there is not even self-interest 
with regard to the conditions of life in the 
US itself. A recent study has suggested that 
the higher rate of warming in the higher 
latitudes will create a lot of extra storm 
activity and this especially refers to Canada, 
the US, the EU and Russia. 
There is this new wave of thinking which 
attributes all migration and conflicts to 
climate or environmental conditions. Some 
of it seems to be an effort to awaken the 
self-interest of developed countries, but 
from the global security perspective. But 
war or armed conflicts – which have a 
lot to do with migration – are very much 
problems of social and political conditions 
and are not simply climate-driven. For 
instance, the North African migration to 
Europe has a great deal to do with the 
huge destabilization and overthrow of 
regimes that provided some basic welfare, 
so obviously people are fleeing in the 
tens of thousands. The conflation of this 
with the impact of climate change is quite 
unwarranted.
A peaceful and secure world is a 
precondition for dealing effectively with 
climate change. But that does not mean 
peace and security will arise because you 
take effective climate action.
An Indian academic who has focused on 
climate action and climate justice for more 
than a decade, Thiagarajan Jayaraman is 
a professor at the School of Habitat Studies 
at the Tata Institute of Social Sciences, 
Mumbai, India. He is also a member of the 
Planning Board of the government of Kerala 
state and has worked with the Government 
of India on climate policy issues.
There is no easy route 
to ensuring social equity  
as part of climate action
These are the countries − except perhaps 
for the EU, which is not in the same league 
− that hardly discuss their own countries as 
the sites of the most demanding adaptation 
requirements, when in fact they should be 
doing so. Australia is now a huge burden of 
adaptation − all those forest fires contribute 
a lot to climate change.
This idea that adaptation is a problem 
of the third world – and not of their own 
(developed) countries – which has gained 
ground in some of the policy discourse, is, 
I think, unfortunate. In fact, if you compare 
sea-level rise at 1.5 °C to that at 2 °C – in 
terms of the number of people affected by 
it, North America has the highest absolute 
numbers of people who will be affected, 
even more than the island states. The idea 
that self-interest should make them worry 
about the environmental conditions of 
human life in the developed world itself, is 
not quite there. It has come home, to some 
extent I believe, in Europe, though it doesn’t 
seem to affect all their behaviour. But I think 
in many other places, this realization has not 
really sunk in.
“A peaceful and secure world is a 
precondition for dealing effectively with 
climate change.”
 Luc Schuiten
