How would you describe the Gran Pajatén 
Biosphere Reserve to someone who has 
never heard of it?
It is an extraordinary place, characterized 
by a great natural and cultural diversity, 
because it brings together two totally 
different habitats – the Andes and 
the Amazon. Spread over some 2.5 
million hectares, the reserve is home to 
5,000 plant species and more than 900 
animal species, about thirty of which 
are endemic. It also encompasses the 
Río Abiseo National Park, inscribed 
on UNESCO’s World Heritage List in 
1990, which has an abundance of 
archaeological remains. Since the mid-
1980s, thirty-six pre-Columbian sites 
have been discovered here, at altitudes 
ranging from 2,500 to 4,000 metres.
For those of us who were born here, all 
this constitutes a unique legacy, for which 
we feel responsible and which obliges us 
to think in the long term.

Gran Pajatén, 
“our geographical fortress”
Roldán Rojas Paredes,  
interviewed by William Navarrete
It was a region devastated by 
intensive rubber production 
in the nineteenth century, and 
occupied by drug cartels and 
guerrillas – who made it a lawless 
zone overrun by coca plants, 
where the trafficking of cocaine 
was routine – in the 1980s. But 
today thousands of people live 
off mixed agroforestry here, 
planting cacao and other crops. In 
this area of the Central Cordillera 
of Peru, UNESCO designated the 
Gran Pajatén Biosphere Reserve 
in 2016. Roldán Rojas Paredes 
was at the heart of the project.
With this interview, the Courier 
participates in the celebration of 
the International Day for Biological 
Diversity, 22 May.
I see this reserve as our geographical 
fortress, offering us ideal conditions for a 
better quality of life and providing great 
opportunities for future generations.
Personally, I have always been attached 
to working on the land, to our primary 
forests, to their impressive greenery and 
the direct energy you receive from them 
when you live here. My life has always 
been intimately linked to the cultural 
richness, legends, imagination, music and 
gastronomy of this place. This is why I left 
to study in Lima, the capital, with every 
intention of returning to devote myself 
to promoting this exceptional heritage. 
Which is what I have done.
What does the designation of Gran Pajatén 
as a UNESCO biosphere reserve mean for 
the region’s 170,000 inhabitants?
The local population has suffered greatly 
in the past, plagued by rubber and 
drug cartels, and even guerrillas. But 
in the early 2000s, the revival of cacao 
farming enabled thousands of people to 
escape poverty and exclusion. Over time, 
we have developed mixed agroforestry, 
which is particularly well adapted to the 
production of cocoa, because cacao trees 
flourish in the shade of other trees.
The inscription of our region in UNESCO’s 
World Network of Biosphere Reserves 
(WNBR) in 2016 gave us a tremendous 
boost. We saw it as a sign of recognition 
of the efforts we have put into becoming 
the leading organic cocoa-producing 
region in Peru. 
This international recognition has 
opened up new opportunities for the 
Amazonia Viva Foundation (FUNDAVI), 
which works to conserve the Gran Pajatén 
ecosystem. Now, companies that were 
once sceptical and snubbed us are taking 
an interest in us. Poderosa, the precious 
metal mining company, for example, 
is investing in archaeological research 
(it has just published an excellent 
handbook), agricultural research (it has 
launched a study on potatoes) and has 
provided us with teaching materials for 
primary schools.
Fish farming in the village of 
Santa Rosa, Peru.
© PUR Projet / Christian Lamontagne

We are also receiving offers from new 
foreign investors, such as Chanel, the 
French fashion house, which has signed 
a collaboration agreement with our 
Biocorridor Martín Sagrado REDD + project, 
for reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
Could you tell us more about that project? 
It provides for the conservation and 
development of 300,000 hectares of primary 
forests managed by local communities in 
the Alto Huayabamba, which is adjacent 
to the Abiseo National Park. Launched in 
2010 for a period of eighty years, it is funded 
by PUR Projet, the French social business 
enterprise, and the Jubilación Segura 
(secure retirement) project. The latter is 
a forty-year project which implements 
agroforestry models designed to create a 
new sustainable rural economy, through 
a reforestation and carbon sequestration 
plan that helps revalue the land, to break 
the cycle of poverty for farmers who do not 
have a retirement pension.
What are the next steps planned by 
FUNDAVI?
We are beginning to share experiences 
between the different members within our 
biosphere reserve, such as the creation of 
botanical gardens or beekeeping farms. 
We also intend to forge alliances with 
other biosphere reserves in Peru and 
elsewhere in the world.
We want 
to become 
a source 
of inspiration 
for all, 
in terms of 
the excellence 
of our work 
and teaching
We are not interested in competition. 
We want to combine strategies, to 
present and improve our activities, and 
to become a source of inspiration for all 
– in terms of the excellence of our work 
and teaching.
We are also keen to involve more 
universities, companies, civil society, the 
State and to strive for more international 
cooperation, to take advantage of this 
fabulous “brand” of biosphere reserve – to 
ensure that the farmer, who toils on his 
plot of land day after day, feels connected 
to the whole world.
Born in Tarapoto, 136 kilometres 
from Juanjuí, the capital of Mariscal 
Cáceres province in north-west Peru, 
Roldán Rojas Paredes was the driving 
force behind the creation of the 
Gran Pajatén Biosphere Reserve. He 
is currently Executive Director of the 
Amazonia Viva Foundation (FUNDAVI), 
which works to conserve the reserve’s 
ecosystem, and was a member of the 
first management committee of the Río 
Abiseo National Park in 2001. Joel Diaz plants a tree as part of 
the PUR Projet reforestation project 
in the Gran Pajatén biosphere 
reserve in Peru.
© PUR Projet / Christian Lamontagne
