Added to this idyllic image is the family 
tradition that Tumanyan’s ancestors 
belonged to the great princely family 
of the Mamikonian dynasty, who for 
centuries had served as chief generals 
of Armenian armies. A family fiction or 
mythified story, the writer believed in it – 
even if his genealogical research did not 
quite produce the desired result. 
From childhood, the future poet was 
immersed in the wonderful world of tales 
and legends, transmitted by his father 
– himself surrounded by a double aura, 
both sacred and profane. We understand 
that telling stories will become for 
Tumanyan, a way of thinking and of 
transmitting ancestral and folk material.



Hovhannes
Tumanyan
A passion for storytelling 
Krikor Beledian
It has been nearly a century 
since Hovhannes Tumanyan 
lived, but his poems have lost 
none of their originality, their 
emotional charge, or their 
ability to stimulate reflection. 
Using the form of narrative 
poems in rhyming verse almost 
exclusively, the writer forged 
his own style in the early 1900s, 
drawing inspiration from the 
Armenian oral tradition. His work 
inspired two operas – Anoush by 
Armen Tigranyan and Almast by 
Alexander Spendiaryan. 
With this article, the Courier joins 
UNESCO in the celebration of the 
150th anniversary of the birth of 
Hovhannes Tumanyan, and of World 
Poetry Day on 21 March.
Hovhannes Tumanyan 
in the 1910s.
Evoking his childhood in his 
autobiography, Hovhannes Tumanyan 
(1869-1923) presents his father, Ter 
Matheos, not just as a priest of the 
Armenian church – who sang the usual 
repertoire of liturgical songs – but also 
as a bard who recited epic poems, 
accompanying himself on a tchonkour, 
a popular plucked-string instrument. It is 
in this familiar setting that the source of 
the fascination for narrative poetry in the 
child’s imagination should be sought. 
As for the image of his mother, Sona, it 
evokes in the child the somewhat wild 
alpine landscape of Dsegh, his native 
village. “My mother was born and raised 
in the mountains, she was a daughter of 
the mountains,” the poet who gave us the 
beautiful verses on the steep mountains 
of Armenia, would later write at the end 
of this portrait.

Discovering other 
literary worlds
Born in February 1869 in Dsegh, a village 
in Lori province, in the north of what is 
today Armenia, the young Hovhannes 
had to leave this primordial Eden – first 
to study in Stepanavan, about forty 
kilometres from his village, and then in 
Tbilisi, the capital of Georgia. He would 
spend most of his life in this great cultural 
centre for all Transcaucasia (made up of 
Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia).
The death of his father prevented 
Tumanyan from completing his formal 
education at the Nersessian high school, 
one of the country’s best schools at the 
time. Obliged to support his family, he 
began working as a secretary at the 
bishopric of the local Armenian church 
in 1887. But, stifled by the restrictive 
atmosphere there, he left the post. He 
then worked at odd jobs, struggling to 
support his growing family – because 
in the meanwhile, the young man had 
married and fathered ten children. 
An enlightened self-taught man, this 
avid reader plunged into both Armenian 
and foreign culture. He read poets who 
were Russian (Lermontov, Pushkin), 
German (Goethe), English (Byron, Milton, 
Shakespeare), American (Longfellow) 
and many others – translating and 
“Armenianizing” them. He absorbed both 
Western and Eastern folklore. 
At the Tumanyan House-Museum in 
Yerevan, the Armenian capital – where 
his library and some of his manuscripts 
are preserved today – we can measure 
the extent of his reading, and consult 
some of the documentation that the poet 
considered essential for the composition 
of his poems and prose narratives.
Reading Pushkin is likely to have 
reinforced his ideas on the formal 
elaboration of narrative, while it was 
probably Shakespeare’s “ghost” that 
dissuaded him from publishing his plays, 
which he eventually destroyed. Apart 
from this indirect influence, foreign 
literature appears very little in his own 
texts. They represent “reading contacts” 
that were essential to the development 
of a poet whose immediate environment 
offered few innovative literary models.
A performance of Armen Tigranyan's 
opera Anouch at the Théâtre  
Nanterre-Amandiers, France, in 2013.
The right word
Tumanyan’s first collection, Poems, 
published in Moscow in 1890, was a great 
success with literary critics. Subsequently, 
all his collections would have the same 
generic title, with the exception of 
Harmonies, published in Tbilisi in 1896. 
Each volume included a number of 
previously published poems, to which 
new ones were added.
Following this lyrical interlude of the 
years 1890 to 1896, a completely new 
tone can be heard in his narrative poems 
– that cannot easily be classified into any 
established literary genre. A narrative 
that is versified, rhymed and structured 
in episodes – this is the common 
denominator of his new literary pieces, 
in which the author revisits famous 
Armenian or Caucasian fables, legends 
and tales, reworking them with a clearly 
allegorical aim. 

The age of literary 
maturity
It was at the very beginning of the 
twentieth century that Tumanyan 
achieved perfect mastery of the poetic 
narrative in verse, notably in Anoush and 
The Siege of Tmouk Castle. A pastoral epic 
set in idyllic Lori, Anoush is composed 
of six songs, beginning with a prelude. 
This story of thwarted love, with all the 
ingredients of a tragedy in verse, inspired 
Armen Tigranyan (1879-1950) to write 
his eponymous opera, which is still 
performed around the world today.
The Siege of Tmouk Castle recounts an 
episode in eighteenth-century Armenian 
history, in which Princess Almast, 
enticed by the false promises of the 
Persian king, Nadir Shah, betrays her 
husband, Prince Tatul, and delivers the 
fortress to the enemy. After destroying 
everything, the conqueror turns against 
the traitor and has her beheaded. 
The political significance of this poem 
is much more explicit than that of 
Anoush. It inspired Almast, the opera by 
Alexander Spendiaryan (1871-1928). 
Today, bronze statues of the poet and the 
composer stand in the foreground of the 
Yerevan Opera, a highly symbolic site in 
the Armenian capital. They remind us that 
the stories immortalized by them are still 
relevant today.
Around the same time, Tumanyan 
began writing the folk epic, David of 
Sassoon, of which he would publish only 
a fragment. In it, he revisited a famous 
work of the Armenian literary tradition, to 
convey messages that were close to his 
heart – mutual respect among peoples, 
rejection of violence, and the rejection of 
all oppression.
Poet and man of action
This work remained unfinished, as did 
his poem The Firebird, because his public 
activities took up more and more of his 
time. Because, alongside the poet, there 
was in Tumanyan a real man of action, 
who had always refused to be a mere 
literary figure – even when he created 
the literary circle, Vernatun (the upper 
chamber), in his own home, with a 
group of writer friends, including Avetis 
Aharonian, Alexander Shirvanzade, 
Avetik Issahakian and Nikol Aghbalian.
Substantially different from the many 
literary and artistic salons of Tbilisi, 
Vernatun’s main objective was to offer 
writers – including those passing 
through the city – a place to meet and 
exchange ideas.  ©

When Tumanyan writes The Dog and the 
Cat, The Unlucky Merchants, The Convent 
of the Dove – or other tales that every 
Armenian has known by heart since 
childhood – his inventiveness lies less 
in the material used than in the way the 
action is staged. This action corresponds 
perfectly to an underlying idea, unveiled 
only at the end of the story. The narrative 
involves animals or humans in an 
ongoing plot with cleverly orchestrated 
twists culminating in a climax. The central 
message is expressed at the end, in one 
or two succinct phrases.
This literary technique, unique to 
Tumanyan, makes him an outstanding 
storyteller, who masterfully commands 
verse and word. It is the result of hard 
work, traces of which can be found in 
a multitude of drafts and successive 
versions of the texts. The poet often 
rewrites even texts that have already 
been published, transforming them in 
depth with the obvious aim of achieving 
as simple and effective an expression 
possible. In contrast to many of his 
colleagues who favoured being more 
prolific, Tumanyan used understatement, 
allusion, the right word, and in the literal 
sense, a true poetic method.
Pursuing the same goal, Tumanyan also 
founded an association of Armenian 
writers from the Caucasus. It remained 
the epicentre of Armenian literature until 
the October Revolution of 1917. 
Tumanyan exhibited the same enthusiasm 
when he was involved in politics. During 
the Armenian-Tatar conflict in 1905, he 
played the role of negotiator between the 
parties and succeeded in preventing the 
hostilities from spreading to Lori province. 
He tried to do the same during the short 
Armenian-Georgian war in 1919, when 
the first symptoms of the evil that would 
prevail in March 1923 appeared. This 
activism led him to be arrested twice, in 
1908 and 1911.
During the genocide of 1915, he 
organized relief efforts for Armenian 
refugees fleeing the devastated towns 
and villages. This painful experience is at 
the heart of two of his finest poems, ‘Rest 
in Peace’ and ‘With My Fatherland’– which 
have the merit of being free of both 
pathos and resentment, so widespread at 
that time in this kind of literature.
If it is true that “the poet is first and 
foremost the heart of his people”, as 
Tumanyan wrote, it is also true that the 
Armenian people will always carry his 
immortal poems in their hearts. Many 
years after the poet’s death, we still hear 
his voice echoing in the steep mountains 
of our country:
The way was heavy and the night was dark,  
And yet we survived  
Both sorrow and gloom.  
Through the ages we go and gaze at the stark 
Steep heights of our land – 
The Armenian Highlands […] 
And we gaze with dolorous, longing eyes  
At the earth in its gloom,  
At the distant stars; 
Ah, when will the dawn break at last 
Over our green 
Armenian Highlands? 
A French poet and novelist of Armenian 
origin, Krikor Beledian was born in 
Beirut, Lebanon, and has lived in Paris 
since 1967. He is the author of numerous 
collections of poems and essays, and 
a series of autobiographical stories in 
Western Armenian. His work has been 
published in Armenia, France, Lebanon 
and the United States.
