Liberation, by the French-Bosnian 
artist Slobodan K. Bijeljac. 
Collage and gouache, 2018. 
© Slobodan K. Bijeljac
Id
ea
s

Freedom means freedom of choice. 
A man exercises his freedom when, 
confronted by two or more possible 
alternatives, he realizes one and excludes 
the rest. Free choices are definite choices. 
Liberal theologians were foolish to get 
excited over Heisenberg’s Principle. 
Vagueness of behaviour may be good 
enough for electrons, it is not good 
enough for free men.
Choices are of three kinds:
• choices of action. A thirsty man in a 
desert is unfree, not because he cannot 
satisfy his craving for water, but because 
he cannot choose between drinking and 
not drinking.
• choices of value judgement; good 
or evil, true or false, beautiful or 
ugly, absolute or relative, required or 
forbidden.  
A man who has seen only one picture is 
unfree to decide whether it is beautiful or 
ugly. A man in a passion of anger or fear is 
unfree because he is no longer conscious 
of any alternative state and so cannot 
judge his anger or his fear.
• choices of authority: this God or man or 
organization is to be believed or obeyed, 
that is not. Here again, if there is no 
consciousness or possible alternatives, 
there is no freedom. 
The cravings of man’s spirit are totally 
unlike the appetites of his nature, such 
as hunger and sex. There are two of 
them: to be free from conditions and to 
be important. These can and often do 
conflict, for the former senses anything 
that is “given” whether by his own 
nature or by the world about him as 
a limitation on his freedom and longs 
to act gratuitously, yet it is precisely 
and only from the “given” that he can 
derive a sense of importance. Absolute 
arbitrariness would at the same time be 
absolute triviality.



Reflections on freedom
and art
Wystan Hugh Auden
“Poets are not the 
unacknowledged legislators 
of the world, and never were 
and it is a good thing that they 
should be made to realize this,” 
writes W.H. Auden, dismissing 
the famous claim by English 
poet Percy Bysshe Shelley. 
Here, in this text written in 
1947, the English-American 
writer questions the limits of 
freedom and art, their potential 
and their interactions. Far from 
the Romantic vision of art that 
gives it more importance than it 
actually has, Auden advocates 
the Shakespearean vision: art 
holding a mirror to nature. 
Art as play
One of man’s attempts to satisfy 
both is the criminal acte gratuit, the 
breaking of a given law for the sake of 
breaking it, where the law supplies the 
importance, and the act of breaking 
it asserts the freedom. Another is play 
where the laws governing the game 
are kept by the player because they are 
chosen by him. At bottom, all art, all 
pure science, all creativity is play in this 
sense. The question What is Art? and the 
question Why does the artist create? are 
different questions. 
It seems to me that the basic impulse 
behind creativity of any kind is the desire 
to do something that is quite necessary: 
the desire that the result should turn out 
to be important comes second.
The rules of a game give it importance to 
the player by making it difficult to play, 
a test and proof of an inborn gift or an 
acquired skill. Given that a game is morally 
permissible, then whether or not one 
should play it depends simply on whether 
or not it gives one pleasure, i.e., whether 
or not one is good at playing it. If one asks 
a great surgeon why he operates, if he is 
honest, he will not answer: “Because it is 
my duty to save lives” but “Because I love 
operating”. He may perfectly well hate his 
neighbour and nevertheless save his life 
because of the pleasure it gives him to 
exercise his skill.
One must say therefore that, in the 
profoundest sense, art and science are 
frivolous activities for they depend on 
the chance possession of special talents. 
The only serious matter is concerned 
with what every human being has alike, 
a will, namely that one shall love one’s 
neighbour as oneself. Here one cannot 
speak of a talent for love, nor in terms of 
pleasure and pain. 
“Reflections on Freedom and Art” 
by W. H. Auden is reprinted in the 
UNESCO Courier by permission of 
the Estate of W. H. Auden. 
This text is the writer's response 
to UNESCO's 1947 survey on the 
philosophical foundations of human 
rights. The survey featured in the 
Wide Angle section of the Courier’s 
October-December 2018 issue: 
Human Rights: Back to the Future.  
“Reflections on Freedom and Art” 
was first published in 2018, in Letters 
to the Contrary: A Curated History of 
the UNESCO Human Rights Survey, 
by Mark Goodale.

If one asks the good Samaritan why he 
rescues the man fallen among thieves, 
he cannot answer, except as an ironical 
joke, “Because I like doing good” since 
pleasure or pain are irrelevant and 
the point is obeying the command: 
“Thou shalt love”.
A common love
There are three kinds of human groups.
• Crowds, i.e., two or more individuals 
whose sole common characteristic is 
togetherness, e.g., four strangers in a 
railway carriage.
If there is no 
consciousness 
or possible 
alternatives, 
there is 
no freedom
• Societies, i.e., two or more individuals 
united for the purpose of carrying out 
an action which requires them all, e.g., 
a string quartet.
• Communities, i.e., two or more 
individuals united by a common love for 
something other than themselves, e.g., a 
room full of music lovers.
Societies have a definite size and a 
definite structure and the character of the 
whole is different from the simple sum of 
the characters of the parts. Consequently 
the will of the individual member is 
subordinate to the general will of the 
society, however that is established. 

Someone in the string quartet must 
have the authority to decide whether 
it is to play Mozart or Beethoven and 
the rest must obey whether they agree 
with the choice or not. A society may at 
the same time be a community but not 
necessarily. It is quite possible that the 
cellist of our quartet hates music and 
only plays to earn his living. A society 
is a free society as long as the member 
who exercises authority does so with 
the free consent of the other members. 
Societies function best when they are 
free, but in certain cases coercion can, 
and indeed must, be applied to compel 
a recalcitrant member to contribute his 
partial function, the moral justification 
depending on two factors:
• the importance of the function the 
society discharges
• the degree to which the recalcitrant 
member can or cannot be replaced by 
another more willing individual.
Communities, like crowds, have no 
definite size. It is impossible therefore to 
speak of the “general will” of a community 
since the individuals who belong to it 
cannot disagree; they are a community 
precisely because as individuals they all 
love the same thing (unlike members of 
crowds who have no love in common). 
In Time Magazine, of June 23[1947], Mr 
Vladimir Koretsky was reported as having 
said at the United Nations Conference 
on Human Rights: “Man should have no 
rights that place him in opposition to 
the community. Man opposed to the 
community is nothing”. If the translation 
is correct, Mr Koretsky was talking 
nonsense. 
An individual can be in opposition to 
a society, e.g., if the cellist plays out of 
tune, but if the rest of the quartet love 
the music of Mozart and he detests it, 
this simply means that there are two 
communities, a community of Mozart 
lovers and a potential community of 
Mozart haters, for a community can begin 
with a single individual, while a society 
cannot exist until all its members are 
present and correctly related. 
There are two kinds of communities: 
closed or unfree, and open or free. The 
members of a closed community have a 
common love but they have not chosen 
it for they are unaware of any other love 
which they could prefer to, or reject for, 
the love they have. The members of 
an open community have consciously 
chosen their love out of two or more 
possible loves. 
Art as looking glass
If I understand either the myth of 
Orpheus or Aristotle’s doctrine of 
catharsis correctly, the Greeks held what 
is, to me, a false theory of art which has 
plagued the world ever since, namely, 
that art is a magic device for arousing 
desirable emotions and expelling 
undesirable emotions, and so leading to 
right action. If this were so, then I think 
Plato’s censures of art in The Republic and 
Tolstoy’s in What is Art? are unanswerable. 
For me the correct definition is 
Shakespeare’s holding the mirror up 
to nature, i.e., art does not change my 
feelings but makes me conscious of 
what I have in fact felt or what I might 
feel, and of actual or possible relations 
between my feelings. The world of art is a 
looking-glass world, i.e., a possible image 
of the actual world where emotions are 
observed, divorced from their origin in 
immediate passion. It is the business of 
the artist to make a mirror which distorts 
the world as little as possible and reflects 
as much of the world as possible. Bad art 
distorts; minor art reflects only a small or 
trivial corner of the world.
Vandal-ism, a tribute to Édouard Manet 
by the Spanish artist Pejac, 2014.
The world of art is a looking-
glass world, a possible image 
of the actual world where 
emotions are observed, 
divorced from their origin 
in immediate passion

Art does not judge
Art has two values: firstly it gives pleasure, 
the pleasure of idle curiosity; secondly, 
it enlarges the field of freedom. If man 
had no imagination, he could not make 
a choice between two possible courses 
of action without taking both, or make 
a value judgement about a feeling of his 
until he had felt the opposite.
Art does not and cannot influence the 
choice or judgement man actually 
makes, it only makes it more of 
a conscious choice.
Reading Macbeth, for instance, cannot 
prevent a man from becoming a 
murderer, but the man who has read 
Macbeth knows more about what 
becoming a murderer would be like than 
the man who hasn’t, so that, if he chooses 
to become one, he is more responsible. 
Art, in other words, is never a means for 
converting a bad community into a good 
one, it is one of the great means by which 
closed communities are turned into 
open communities.
Art can do harm in two ways. Firstly by 
failing to be good art and giving the 
wrong kind of pleasure thereby. If the 
reflection of the world which it offers 
is distorted, if it flatters the spectator 
by omitting the possibilities of evil or 
draws him to despair by denying the 
possibilities of good (which, surprisingly 
enough, can also give pleasure), then it 
injures him. 
Secondly and more seriously, because 
the better the art the greater the danger, 
it may ensnare the spectator in the 
luxurious paralysis of self-contemplation 
so that, like Hamlet, he fails to choose at 
all. The danger of great art is narcissism. 
Narcissus does not fall in love with 
his reflection because it was beautiful 
but because it is his own in all its 
endless possibilities. 
One can tell the myth in another way: 
Narcissus was a hydrocephalous idiot; 
catching sight of himself in the pool, 
he cried: “On me it looks good”. 
Or again: Narcissus was neither beautiful 
nor ugly but as commonplace as a 
Thurber husband*; catching sight of 
himself in the pool, he said: “Excuse me, 
but haven’t we met before some place?”
Art can encourage the formation of 
two kinds of bad communities, the 
community of those with false pictures 
of themselves, and the parody of a free 
community in which the knowledge of 
good and evil is turned against the will, 
till it becomes too weak to choose either.
Every work of art is the focus of the 
potential community of those individuals 
who love it or could love it. Such a 
community is free if the artist could 
have created something else but chose 
to create this work, and vice versa, the 
spectators or readers could have chosen 
to look at or read another work but 
chose to look at or read this. If the artist 
creates a work which no one but he 
appreciates or a spectator cannot find 
any work which he likes, there is no lack 
of freedom, but simply no community. 
Freedom can be curtailed in two ways; 
the artist may be forced to alter his work 
so that the character of the community is 
other than it would have been if he were 
left alone; or people may be prevented 
from becoming acquainted with his work 
so that the community is smaller than it 
might have been. 
Censorship
Censorship can be of two kinds, an 
unplanned economic censorship where 
the artist cannot afford to create as he 
wishes or the public cannot afford to 
become acquainted with his work, and 
the planned censorship of authority. 
Economically the freedom of art is best 
attained if there is as great a variety of 
publishers, booksellers, libraries, galleries, 
etc. as possible and if some, but not all, 
of these are large-scale organizations. 
* “The Thurber husband” refers to several weak and 
harried male characters who figure in the work of 
the American writer and humorist James Thurber 
(1894-1961). 

If there are too new agencies, above all, if 
there is a state monopoly, the variety of 
works distributed invariably declines even 
if there is no deliberate censorship. If all 
are on a small scale, costs are too high for 
some of the potential public. 
The obstacle on which liberalism has so 
often come to grief is the fact that we 
find it easier to respect the freedom of 
those to whom we are indifferent than 
the freedom of those we love. A parent or 
a government who believes something 
to be good or true knows well enough 
that it is possible for their children or their 
people to choose what, to them, is evil 
or false, and that, if the wrong choice is 
made, those they love will suffer and they 
themselves will suffer with them; further, 
they and those they love will no longer 
belong to the same community. 
However, to love one’s neighbour as 
oneself means precisely to be willing to 
let him make his own mistakes and suffer 
with him when he suffers for them, for 
no man can himself consciously wish 
not to be responsible for his thoughts 
and actions, at whatever cost. Every man 
knows for himself that right and duty are 
not identical, that he has a duty to choose 
the good, but a right to choose the evil, 
that, as Kafka says: “A man lies as little as 
he can when he lies as little as he can, not 
when he is given the smallest possible 
opportunity to lie”.
Authorities who are more concerned 
that their charges should do the right 
thing than that they should choose it are 
always tempted to look for a short cut. 
In the short run, a man in a passion acts 
quicker and more effectively than a man 
who has reached the reflective stage 
of desire. Usually therefore, authorities 
would like the artist to arouse in others a 
passion for the good instead of making 
them conscious of good and evil; they 
would turn him, if they could, into Plato’s 
Noble Liar. 
Art has hardly ever been censored for 
aesthetic reasons because artists have 
rarely been in authority, which is perhaps 
just as well. In my own daydream state, for 
example, people caught reading Shelley 
or listening to Brahms are sentenced to 
the salt mines, and the possession of a 
juke-box is a capital offence.
The usual reasons for censorship are 
two: either that the work is immoral, i.e., 
will incite the public to act immorally 
or illegally so that society ceases to 
function properly; or that it is heretical, 
i.e., will induce the public to adopt other 
values than those held by the authorities, 
causing them to desert the latter’s 
community for a new one. Censorship 
always implies two things: that there is 
a potential public for the work and that 
its members are incapable of making a 
responsible choice. It is therefore only 
permissible under two conditions: for 
minors who are legally presumed to be as 
yet incapable of responsible choice; and 
for adults who have chosen their censor 
and are free to disregard him if they cease 
to believe in his authority.  
The Parthenon of Books, an installation by 
Argentinian artist Marta Minujín, presented 
at Documenta 14, at Kassel, Germany, 
in 2017. Made with books that were 
formerly or are currently banned in some 
countries, this monumental replica of the 
Parthenon takes a stand against censorship. 
Art does 
not change 
my feelings 
but makes 
me conscious 
of what 
I have felt 

The Roman Catholic Church, for 
example, does not violate the freedom 
of its members by putting books on the 
index, because no one is obliged to be 
a Roman Catholic and to choose to be 
one necessarily implies believing in the 
authority of the Church to decide what 
the faithful may read. 
No State has such a right because one 
becomes a member of a political society 
by being born, an act of chance, not 
a choice. 
Revolutions and 
human freedom
Each major revolution in history is 
concerned with some particular aspect of 
human freedom, and has its representative 
human type. Each establishes its kind of 
freedom once and for all. 
The success of each is threatened by its 
own false claim to be the revolution, i.e., 
that the aspect of freedom with which 
it is concerned is the only freedom 
that matters. 
Since the particular aspect with which 
any revolution is concerned is one 
conspicuously ignored by the revolution 
before it, it is apt in its just criticism of the 
latter’s failing to be hostile to the freedom 
for which it fought. Nevertheless the fates 
of all revolutions are bound up with each 
other; they stand or fall together: if the 
preceding revolution had not won its battle, 
its successor could not be fighting its own. 
In any revolution, therefore, the gains of the 
revolutions before it have to be defended if 
the present revolution is to succeed. 
The Papal Revolution of the eleventh 
and the twelfth centuries established 
the freedom of an individual to choose 
between loyalties, his right to leave one 
community and join another, his right 
to belong to two communities at the 
same time.  
Its typical figures are the contemplative 
international priest and the activist 
local soldier.
The revolution of the Reformation in 
the sixteenth century established the 
freedom of the individual to choose 
his career, his right to leave the society 
to which his father belonged and 
join another. Its typical figure is the 
professional man. 
The French and Industrial Revolutions of 
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries 
established the freedom of the individual 
man of talent to develop himself freely 
and compete for public attention, the 
right of the individual mind to change 
the community or lead a society if he 
can. The typical figure is Figaro. L’esprit 
seul peut tout changer. / De vingt rois que 
l’on encense / Le trépas brise l’autel / Et 
Voltaire est immortel. (Only wit can make 
a difference. / Out of twenty kings who 
wear a crown / Death breaks the altar, / 
But Voltaire is immortal.).

One of the world crowd
Our revolution of the twentieth century 
is trying to establish the freedom of 
the individual body to determine its 
satisfactions, to grow and be healthy. 
Its typical figure is the anonymous 
naked man with a dog-tag number, 
not yet a member of any society or 
any community, but simply one of the 
world crowd. 
Hence the preoccupation of our time with 
medicine and economics, its activism, 
its hostility to the achievement of the 
French Revolution, freedom of speech 
and thought, which it sees as a threat to 
unanimous action. At the physical level 
all are really equal in their needs and 
individual differences of temperament or 
talent are irrelevant. 
In our revolution, therefore, focused on 
winning freedom from physical want**, 
all the freedoms gained by preceding 
revolutions are threatened as never 
before. The French Revolution is denied 
wherever there is a controlled press 
and a censorship of art and science; 
the Reformation is denied wherever a 
state dictates what career an individual 
citizen shall follow; the Papal Revolution 
is denied wherever a monolithic state 
claims unconditional authority. 
The talented individual today is being 
punished for the airs he gave himself in 
the past two centuries. Poets are not the 
unacknowledged legislators of the world 
and never were and it is a good thing that 
they should be made to realize this. Those 
who preached a doctrine of Art for Art’s 
sake or Art as a luxury were much nearer 
the truth, but they should not then have 
regarded the comparative frivolity of 
their vocation as a proof of their spiritual 
superiority to the useful untalented 
worker. In actual fact, the modern censor 
and the romantic artist are alike in 
thinking art more important than it is. 
What role for the poet?
“Once he looked rosy, now he looks 
blue. / Nurse is wondering What shall I 
do?” sings the poet in the sick room. If 
patient or nurse were to say to him “For 
God’s sake, stop humming and fetch 
some hot water and bandages” it would 
be one thing. But neither says this. The 
nurse says: “Tell the patient I am the only 
one who can cure him and I will give 
you a passport, extra ration cards, and 
free tickets to the opera. If you tell him 
anything else, I shall call the police”. And 
the poor delirious patient cries: “Persuade 
me that I am looking and feeling fine and 
I will give you a duplex apartment and 
a beautiful mistress. If you can’t do that, 
I shan’t listen to you”. 
Perhaps the poet, if he really loved the 
patient and the nurse as himself, would 
be silent and fetch the hot water, but as 
long as he continues singing, there is 
one commandment which his song must 
obey, “Thou shalt not bear false witness 
against thy neighbour”.
English-American poet, playwright, critic, 
and librettist, W. H. Auden (1907-1973) 
was one of the leading literary figures 
of the twentieth century. He emigrated 
to the United States in 1939, where he 
taught at several universities and took 
US citizenship in 1946. 
Work by the Chinese artist Fang Lijun, 
untitled, woodcut, 2003.
© Fang Lijun / photo Centre Pompidou, MNAM-CCI, 
Dist. RMN-Grand Palais / Georges Meguerditchian
The modern censor 
and the romantic artist 
are alike in thinking art 
is more important 
than it is 
**Freedom from want was the primary objective that 
needed to be addressed if Britain’s major social and 
economic challenges were to be resolved, according 
to the British economist and reformer William 
Beveridge. The 1942 Beveridge report paved the way 
for the British welfare state; a series of reforms were 
introduced by Clement Attlee's Labour government 
in the years after the Second World War.
