How was the Djerbahood project born 
and why did you choose Erriadh as 
a location for it? 
In 2013, I had completed the Tour Paris 
13 project, which received exceptional 
media coverage. This high-rise building 
in the 13th arrondissement of the French 
capital, was condemned to destruction 
and was demolished in April 2014. But 
before the deadline, about 100 artists 
of eighteen nationalities volunteered 
to transform it into a collective work of 
art. Façades, common areas and thirty-
six apartments were taken over by the 
masters of street art. These works, though 
ephemeral, are now available on the Web, 
to a huge audience around the world.
This success encouraged me to set up 
another project that I had been working 
on for some time – organizing a street-
art event in Tunisia, which would make 
people talk about the country in positive 
terms. Erriadh, on the island of Djerba, 
seemed to me the ideal place – with 
its luminosity, its beautiful traditional 
architecture, its urban development 
structured around a central square, its 
Mehdi Ben Cheikh, interviewed 
by Anissa Barrak
Long considered marginal, 
street art today represents a 
major trend that democratizes 
access to art and infuses urban 
spaces with a new social and 
economic dynamic. In the 
heart of the island of Djerba, 
Tunisia, some 100 artists have 
illuminated the small town 
of Erriadh – now known as 
Djerbahood – with about 
250 murals. Mehdi Ben Cheikh, 
a French-Tunisian gallery owner 
who initiated this promising 
project, tells us how the idea 
continues to grow. 
When art takes over the street
history, the legendary hospitality of its 
inhabitants. Let’s not forget that if Djerba 
is indeed, as we believe, the land of the 
Lotus-Eaters of Homer’s Odyssey, Ulysses 
was its most famous visitor! 
Formerly known as Hara Essaghira, 
Erriadh is located near the famous 
Ghriba Synagogue, one of the oldest in 
the world. A Jewish pilgrimage site to 
this day, it was built by the exiles who 
fled Jerusalem after Nebuchadnezzar 
II destroyed Solomon’s temple around 
586 BC. Its population was therefore 
mainly composed of Jews and Muslims, 
who lived there together, as evidenced 
by its five synagogues (two of which are 
still in operation) and its two mosques. 
But following the massive departure of 
the Jewish population from the island in 
the 1960s, the small town fell into a state 
of lethargy – remaining at the margins 
of tourism, the island’s main economic 
activity. Even though it’s only six minutes 
from an international airport!
A collaborative mural by Tunisian artist 
Inkman and French artist Nilko.

Did you face any difficulties getting 
the project accepted locally? 
I quickly obtained permission from the 
national authorities to start work in 
the public space. The country was in a 
period of transition after the revolution, 
municipal authorities had been dissolved 
throughout the country and replaced 
by provisional committees, but in 
Erriadh there wasn’t even a provisional 
committee. So the project was started 
with private donations. With the support 
of some hotel owners in Djerba, I was also 
able to get a financial contribution from 
the Ministry of Tourism.
As for the inhabitants, we had to 
negotiate with them at first, of course. 
They didn’t know what we were going 
to do with the spaces they owned. 
We explained the idea, the process, and 
it was mainly the women who persuaded 
their men to let us go ahead with it. 
Once the first works were completed, 
the inhabitants began to ask us to 
decorate their houses. 
Suddenly, Erriadh woke up. It has 
become a destination and a transit 
point for thousands of tourists (the taxi 
drivers were thrilled!), many restaurants 
and several galleries have opened, and 
property prices have risen sharply. The 
lives of the inhabitants have completely 
changed. That’s what matters most 
to me. 
You brought in about 100 renowned 
artists. What persuaded them to join 
the project?
The project makes sense. What interests 
artists is to create, and to share their work 
with as many people as possible. The 
contracts signed with them concerned 
only image rights. Our objective is to 
promote the reputation of artists and 
not to earn money directly through 
these events. And there’s something for 
everyone – artists, cities, the public.
The artists represented thirty-four 
different nationalities and produced 
250 murals! Groups of them took turns 
working every week, for a period of three 
months. They were free in their creative 
approach. Of course, we were all aware 
that we shouldn’t shock the inhabitants 
with images of naked bodies, for 
example. It was necessary to respect the 
population, its culture. But beyond that, 
they were free to do as they pleased. Each 
artist interacted with the space according 
to his or her own inspiration. 
Since this experience, the artist’s place 
has gained more respect in Djerba. The 
inhabitants have understood not just the 
economic benefits that this art represents 
for them, but also the essence of the 
artistic approach. They met the artists, 
they forged close ties with them. The 
artist is no longer perceived as the village 
madman, marginal, but as someone 
gifted – who creates a structured 
imaginary universe and who, at the same 
time, can contribute concretely to the 
improvement of daily life.
Some people tend to think that street 
art can only succeed in a country where 
there’s already a cultural and artistic 
dynamic – in other words, in the West. 
Djerbahood has proven the opposite. 
It shows that not everything is done 
elsewhere. That any place in the world 
can become, at some point, the capital of 
street art, even if it’s located at the far end 
of an island.
Street art was 
not created 
with the 
intention of 
bringing art 
to the people, 
but in reality, 
that’s what 
it does
Mural by Tunisian artist Wissem el Abed.

In what condition are the works that have 
been in Djerbahood since 2014?
Very few of them remain. The great 
difference in temperature between the 
winter and summer, the humidity, the 
lime smeared on the walls – all this has 
affected the conservation of the works. 
In the new project I am launching in Paris 
in April 2019, we use resistant materials 
like marine varnish, and restoration is 
part of the plan in the city’s specifications. 
It is in this spirit that I would like to 
perpetuate the Djerbahood project, 
which enters its second phase this year. 
My objective is to make Djerba a huge 
street-art lab – like Ibiza, in Spain, is the 
island of musical creation and electro. 
How can street art be defined?
Street art is an appropriation of urban 
space through an artistic approach, 
whatever its nature. It includes as many 
styles and worlds as there are artists. 
It goes from graffiti to gestural or 
chromatic figuration, from sound and 
light installation to physical performance. 
Artists play with urban infrastructure, 
with architecture, with light and shadows. 
Graffiti can measure seventy centimetres 
or as many metres high! Regardless of the 
medium used, the most important thing 
is to take over the streets. 
This kind of artistic expression has always 
existed – the Lascaux cave that dates 
back to the Palaeolithic period is proof. 
But street art is now booming, particularly 
in Latin America, the United States, 
Europe and the Arab world. Street artists 
el Seed, Shoof and KOOM – to name just 
a few artists of Tunisian origin – have now 
acquired international reputations and 
embody the exceptional dynamism of 
this art form that wants to build bridges 
between people.
El Seed, for example, has transformed 
the face of Kairouan, a Tunisian World 
Heritage site, and paints his calligraffiti 
all over the world – South Africa, Canada, 
South Korea, Dubai, Egypt, US, France. 
Hosni Hertelli, whose pseudonym 
Shoof means “look” in Arabic, has also 
resurrected traditional calligraphy in his 
own way – through painting on ancient 
Tunisian façades, but also through 
music and light. His show White Spirit 
attracted thousands of spectators in 
Australia and France. Musician and 
calligrapher Mohamed Koumenji 
(KOOM) combines these two arts in 
his plastic and luminous works, while 
drawing inspiration from Sufi tradition 
and incorporating modern technologies. 
An example that showcases his great 
talent is his multidisciplinary creation, 
On the Roads of Arabia, co-organized 
by Paris’ [founded by Cheikh] Galerie 
Itinerrance at the Louvre Abu Dhabi in 
November 2018.
Bringing art to the people rather than 
confining it to the places reserved 
for it – is that what street art is about?
Street art was not created with the 
intention of bringing art to the people, 
but in reality, that’s what it does. 
Because it’s practised in public spaces, 
it’s offered to people free of charge, at 
street corners. It’s the most democratic 
artistic movement there is, but also the 
most appropriate for its time – relayed 
on the Web through photos and videos 
generally taken by the artists themselves, 
its reputation is based on the recognition 
of the greatest numbers, through social 
media. Once the artist is recognized, she 
or he can choose to exhibit in galleries, 
which link street art to art in places 
dedicated specifically to art. 
Therefore, it’s a whole system parallel 
to contemporary art that’s being 
established. I have mentioned the project 
launched in Paris in April 2019. It’s on 
Boulevard Vincent Auriol, where we are 
creating a real museum of a new type. 
Everything has been thought about – 
the lighting with projectors using solar 
energy, the sound system, the durability 
of the works. Street art does not have 
to chase museums to be shown – it 
plays with the city, it’s created under the 
public’s eye, it has exchanges with the 
urban population, and it is accessible to 
everyone for free. 
And anyone can become a street artist! 
But in the absence of gallery owners or 
museum curators, isn’t there a risk that 
this art will alter cultural heritage sites? 
In Kairouan, for instance, the domes have 
recently been painted.
We can indeed question the aesthetic 
value of certain works that emerge in 
the public space. But we can also say 
that instead of white domes, some of our 
mausoleums now have colourful domes! 
Even if it’s more or less well done, I think 
that in a few years’ time, we will end up 
with interesting results – street art is an 
art that is constantly being renewed. 
There is no need to fear art. Sometimes 
we want to pass off certain creations 
as art, when they don’t deserve the 
name, because they serve abominable 
ideologies. But these are extremely 
rare exceptions. Art has never been a 
threat to anyone, quite the contrary. 
I am convinced it’s the best weapon 
against obscurantism.
A French-Tunisian visual arts teacher, 
Mehdi Ben Cheikh founded the 
Galerie Itinerrance (http://itinerrance.
fr/) in Paris in 2004. He stages street-art 
projects involving artists from all over 
the world, and has published two books 
based on the two major projects he 
set up in Paris and Erriadh respectively: 
L’événement street art Tour Paris 13 (2013) 
and Djerbahood, le musée de street art à 
ciel ouvert (2014).
