In my classes, I always try to make clear 
the difference between opinions and 
facts. It is a fundamental rule, a very simple 
intellectual exercise that we owe ourselves 
to undertake in the post-Enlightenment 
era. I started becoming obsessed with 
such obvious matters when I found out, 
in 2005, that some students were arguing 
that something “is true because I believe 
it”, and they weren’t joking. Since then, 
I’ve suspected that such intellectual 
conditioning, such a conflation of physics 
with metaphysics (cleared up by Averroes 
almost a thousand years ago) – which year 
by year becomes increasingly dominant 
(faith as the supreme criterion, regardless 
of all evidence to the contrary) – has its 
origins in the majestic churches of the 
southern United States.
But critical thinking involves so much 
more than just distinguishing facts from 
opinions. Trying to define what a fact is 
would suffice. The very idea of objectivity 
itself paradoxically originates from a 
single perspective, from one lens. And 
anyone knows that with the lens of one 
photographic or video camera, only one 
part of reality is captured, which quite 
often is subjective or used to distort reality 
in the supposed interest of objectivity.
Racism does not need 
racists
Jorge Majfud
The debate on what we call 
a “migration crisis” has a racial 
component. It is a pattern which 
consistently repeats itself in laws, 
narratives and practices, like it has 
done over centuries, according 
to Uruguayan-American writer 
Jorge Majfud. Taking us on 
an instructive detour through 
history, he points out the total 
absence – in this same heated 
debate – of any mention of half a 
million European immigrants who 
live illegally in the United States 
and another million Americans 
living illegally in Mexico.
On the occasion of World Refugee Day, 
June 20, we dedicate the Ideas section 
to displaced people around the 
world. According to the latest figures 
published by the United Nations 
Refugee Agency (UNHCR), the number 
of forcibly displaced people worldwide 
reached a record 68.5 million in 2017.
For some reason, students tend to be 
more interested in opinions than facts. 
Maybe because of the superstitious idea 
that an informed opinion is derived from 
the synthesis of thousands of facts. This is 
a dangerous idea, but we can’t run away 
from our responsibility to give our opinion 
when it’s required. All that we can and 
should do is take note that an informed 
opinion continues to be an opinion which 
must be tested or challenged.
An opinion
On a certain day, students discussed 
the caravan of 5,000 Central Americans 
(at least 1,000 of whom were children) 
fleeing violence and heading for the 
Mexican border with the US. President 
Donald Trump had ordered the border 
closed and called those looking for 
refuge “invaders”. On 29 October 2018, 
he tweeted: “This is an invasion of our 
Country and our Military is waiting 
for you!”. The military deployment to 
the border alone cost the US about 
$200 million.
New world map, drawing by Rafat 
Alkhateeb, Jordan.
© Rafat Alkhateeb / Cartoon Movement

Since one of my students insisted on 
knowing my opinion, I started off with 
the most controversial side of the issue. 
I observed that this country, the US, was 
founded upon the fear of invasion, and 
only a select few have always known 
how to exploit this weakness, with tragic 
consequences. Maybe this paranoia came 
about with the English invasion of 1812, but 
if history tells us anything, it’s that the US 
has practically never suffered an invasion 
of its territory – if we exclude the 9/11 
attacks in 2001; the one on Pearl Harbor, 
which at the time was a military base in 
foreign territory; and, prior to that, at the 
very beginning of the twentieth century, 
the brief incursion of a Mexican named 
Pancho Villa mounted upon a horse. But the 
US has indeed specialized in invading other 
countries from the time of its founding – it 
took over the Indian territories, then half 
of Mexico, from Texas, to reinstall slavery, 
to California; it intervened directly in 
Latin American affairs, to repress popular 
protests and support bloody dictatorships – 
all in the name of defence and security. And 
always with tragic consequences.
certain cultural practices and voicing your 
support for some law or another is quite 
often all it takes.
I drew a geometric figure on the board 
and asked students what they saw there. 
Everyone said they saw a cube or a box. 
The most creative variations didn’t depart 
from the idea of tri-dimensionality, when 
in reality what I drew was nothing more 
than three rhombuses forming a hexagon. 
Some tribes in Australia don’t see that same 
image in 3D, but rather in 2D. We see what 
we think and that’s what we call objectivity.
Double standards
When President Abraham Lincoln 
emerged victorious from the American 
Civil War (1861-1865), he put an end to 
a hundred-year dictatorship that, up 
to this day, everyone calls “democracy.” 
By the eighteenth century, black slaves 
had come to make up more than fifty 
per cent of the population in states like 
South Carolina – but they weren’t even 
citizens of the US, nor did they enjoy even 
minimal human rights. 
Many years before Lincoln, both racists 
and anti-racists proposed a solution to the 
“negro problem” by sending them “back” 
to Haiti or Africa, where many of them 
ended up founding the nation of Liberia 
(one of my students, Adja, is from a family 
which comes from that African country).  
Therefore, the idea that a few thousand 
poor people on foot are going to invade 
the most powerful country in the world 
is simply a joke in poor taste. And it’s 
likewise in bad taste for some Mexicans 
on the other side to adopt this same 
xenophobic talk that’s been directed 
at them – inflicting on others the same 
abuse they’ve suffered.
A critical view 
In the course of the conversation, I 
mentioned in passing that in addition to 
the foundational paranoia, there was a 
racial component to the argument. “You 
don’t need to be a racist to defend the 
borders,” said one student.
True, I noted. You don’t need to be a racist 
to defend borders or laws. At first glance, 
the statement is irrefutable. However, if 
we take history and the wider current 
context into consideration, an openly 
racist pattern jumps out at us right away.
At the end of the nineteenth century, 
the French novelist Anatole France 
wrote: “The law, in its majestic equality, 
forbids rich and poor alike to sleep under 
bridges, to beg in the streets, and to 
steal their bread.” You don’t need to be 
an elitist to support an economically 
stratified culture. You don’t need to be 
sexist to spread the most rampant type 
of sexism. Thoughtlessly engaging in 
Missing home, by students of the Colegio 
Americano Anáhuac in San Nicolás de 
los Garza, Mexico. It received second 
prize in the Primary School category of 
the UNESCO Associated Schools Network 
global art contest, “Opening Hearts and 
Minds to Refugees”, 2017.

The English did the same thing to “rid” 
England of its blacks. But under Lincoln, 
blacks became citizens, and one way to 
reduce them down to a minority was not 
only by making it difficult for them to 
vote (such as by imposing a poll tax) but 
also by opening the nation’s borders to 
immigration.
The Statue of Liberty, a gift from the 
French people to the American people to 
commemorate the centenary of the 1776 
Declaration of Independence, still cries 
with silent lips: “Give me your tired, your 
poor, your huddled masses yearning to 
breathe free...” In this way, the US opened 
its arms to waves of impoverished 
immigrants. Of course, the overwhelming 
majority were poor whites. Many were 
opposed to the Italians and the Irish 
because they were red-headed Catholics. 
But in any case, they were seen as 
being better than blacks. Blacks weren’t 
able to immigrate from Africa, not just 
because they were much farther away 
than Europeans were, but also because 
they were much poorer, and there were 
hardly any shipping routes to connect 
them to New York. The Chinese had more 
opportunities to reach the west coast, 
and perhaps for that reason a law was 
passed in 1882 that prohibited them from 
coming in, just for being Chinese.
I understand that this was a subtle and 
powerful way to reshape demographics, 
which is to say the political, social and 
racial make-up of the US. The current 
nervousness about a change to that 
make-up is nothing more than the 
continuation of that same old logic. Were 
that not the case, what could be wrong 
with being part of a minority group or 
being different from others?
You don’t need 
to be racist...
Clearly, if you’re a good person and you’re 
in favour of properly enforcing laws, it 
doesn’t make you a racist. You don’t need 
to be racist when the law and the culture 
already are. In the US, nobody protests 
Canadian or European immigrants. The 
same is true in Europe and even in the 
Southern Cone of South America [the 
southernmost region of Latin America, 
populated mainly by descendants of 
Europeans]. But everyone is worried about 
the blacks and the hybrid, mixed-race 
people from the south. Because they’re 
not white and “good”, but poor and “bad”. 
Currently, almost half a million European 
immigrants are living illegally in the US. 
Nobody talks about them, just like nobody 
talks about how one million US citizens are 
living in Mexico, many illegally.
With communism discarded as an 
excuse (none of those chronically failing 
states where migrants come from are 
communist), let’s once again consider 
the racial and cultural excuses common 
to the century prior to the Cold War. 
Every dark-skinned worker is seen as a 
criminal, not an opportunity for mutual 
development. The immigration laws are 
themselves filled with panic at the sight 
of poor workers.
It’s true that you don’t need to be racist 
to support laws and more secure borders. 
You don’t need to be racist to spread and 
shore up an old racist and class-based 
paradigm, while we fill our mouths with 
platitudes about compassion and the 
fight for freedom and human dignity.
You don’t need 
to be racist 
to spread and 
shore up an 
old racist and 
class‑based 
paradigm, 
while we fill 
our mouths 
with platitudes 
about 
compassion 
and the fight 
for freedom 
and human 
dignity
Professor of Latin American Literature 
and International Studies at Jacksonville 
University in Florida, in the United States, 
Jorge Majfud is a renowned 
Uruguayan-American writer, who 
regularly contributes to the international 
media. He is the author of many novels 
including The Queen of America, Crisis, 
Tequila, and books of essays such as 
A Theory of Semantic Fields. 
Stop the racism, 
by Italian cartoonist Tomas.
