Archive treasure:
The unpublished album 
of David Seymour
Photos:  David Seymour/
Magnum Photos
Text: Giovanna Hendel, UNESCO
One of the pictures on the contact sheet shown 
opposite was used as the cover for the March 
1952 issue of the UNESCO Courier. An elderly 
peasant learns to write. To his right, the map of 
Calabria, Italy, allows the reader to place the 
location of the reportage. 
It all began in the autumn of 2017, with 
the exploration of UNESCO’s audiovisual 
collection, after their transfer to the 
Organization’s archives. Most of the 
collections had barely been indexed in 
their almost seventy years of existence. 
Walking through these archives was a bit 
like visiting Jorges Luis Borges’ The Library 
of Babel. With thousands of documents in 
the archives, the only way to get an idea 
of how the collection was organized, was 
simply to open the drawers of the many 
old filing cabinets and take a look inside.
It was by opening one of these drawers 
that we made an amazing discovery: 
an unpublished album of thirty-eight 
contact sheets and accompanying 
texts by David “Chim” Seymour, one 
of the greatest photographers of the 
twentieth century. In 1947, Seymour, 
along with Henri-Cartier Bresson, Robert 
Capa, George Rodger and other leading 
photographers, co-founded the Magnum 
photography cooperative – now known 
as Magnum Photos. 
In 1950, UNESCO commissioned Seymour 
to report on a major campaign to fight 
illiteracy in southern Italy. The UNESCO 
Courier published an article on the 
subject in March 1952, with Seymour’s 
photos and the text by Carlo Levi, author 
of the famous 1945 memoir, Christ 
stopped at Eboli. The book is based on 
what the Italian intellectual experienced 
when he was exiled in the 1930s by the 
fascist authorities to a remote region, 
known as Basilicata today. It tells the 
story of the lives of its inhabitants, their 
customs, their beliefs and the misery they 
struggled through.

Sixty-seven years later, on the occasion 
of the publication of the book They 
Did Not Stop at Eboli: The UNESCO 
Campaign against Illiteracy in Reportages 
by David “Chim” Seymour and Carlo Levi 
(1950), which reproduces the entirety 
of the Seymour album, accompanied 
by analytical essays, the Courier 
reveals another perspective of the 
photographer’s work.
The historical context of Seymour’s 
reportage was the fight against illiteracy 
led by the post-war Italian government 
and non-governmental associations 
such as the Unione Nazionale per la 
Lotta contro l’Analfabetismo (UNLA, the 
National League for the struggle against 
illiteracy). Illiteracy was rampant in the 
country’s south. In some regions, like 
Calabria, where Seymour travelled for 
his reportage, nearly fifty per cent of the 
population was illiterate at the time. 
To combat this scourge, UNLA has 
contributed to the creation of many 
schools offering basic literacy classes for 
children and adults, since it was founded 
in 1947. The organization’s most original 
initiative has been the creation of nearly 
sixty Centri di Cultura per l’Educazione 
Permanente (CCEP, cultural centres for 
continuing education) across the country. 
Under the direction of an UNLA teacher, 
adults who have already benefited from 
literacy classes are able to continue 
their education by asking questions 
about their practical lives, but also more 
theoretical questions. The UNLA teacher 
tries to answer them with the support of 
professionals in the community – such 
as doctors, pharmacists, veterinarians, 
parish priests, etc.
UNESCO first took great interest in, and 
then supported the Italian campaign 
– clearly considering it very important, 
since the report was commissioned 
from one of the great photographers of 
the time.
For his reportage, Seymour not only 
took hundreds of photos, but also wrote 
very detailed notes to accompany 
them. He provided distinct storylines 
or themes for groups of photographs, 
and even made suggestions of possible 
editorial selections. Some, but not all, 
of these choices were followed in the 
1952 Courier article, and only a small 
part of the text was used. Sixty-seven 
years later, it is time to do justice to what 
Seymour noted. 
For instance, very little attention 
was given to Seymour’s detailed 
observations on the condition of 
women in the context being analysed. 
In particular, in the text accompanying 
another series of photos of women 
learning to read (including the photo 
of the woman learning to read with 
her daughter reproduced in the 1952 
article), Seymour highlights the linking 
of the literacy campaign with the 
application of equal opportunities 
measures to promote social progress. 
The 1952 Courier article also reproduced 
one of Seymour’s photos of women 
carrying loads on their heads (In this 
article, we have reproduced another 
photo from this series [p. 26], digitized 
for They Did Not Stop at Eboli). However, 
the caption accompanying this photo 
restricted its role. It was used to illustrate 
the fact that the workers had to be 
taught at evening classes, after a hard 
day in the fields. 
Similarly, the 1952 article reproduced 
one of Seymour’s photographs of 
men working in the fields. However, 
once again, the role of the photo 
was reduced by the caption, which 
illustrated the day’s hard work, followed 
by evening classes. Reading Seymour’s 
comments on one of his series of 
photographs of men working in the 
fields, however, one can appreciate 
the depth of his observations – as he 
stressed that educational campaigns 
had to go hand in hand with social and 
economic reforms.
This mise en abyme of the Courier 
illustrates how UNESCO’s archives 
continue to shed light on past 
campaigns that remain of great 
relevance today – while highlighting 
how these campaigns were brought to 
the attention of readers. 
After a hard day’s labour 
in the fields, peasants of 
Rogiano Gravina attend 
evening classes, often 
accompanied by their 
children. Illiteracy is more 
widespread among women 
than men. Besides reading 
and writing, women are 
taught embroidery and other 
handicrafts. For the teaching 
of reading, the mobile letter 
system proves very effective. Ca

Women’s evening classes in reading. 
The problem of the students’ small 
children is handled in various ways. 
Sometimes they are brought to school 
and sit in class with their mother and 
father. In the case of infants, mothers 
and fathers take turns – one stays at 
home while the other goes to school on 
alternating evenings. The old established 
traditions in Southern Italy in which the 
woman has been kept in a very inferior 
position are changing here.

Photo taken from 
the contact sheet 
reproduced opposite.

The need for agrarian reform in Southern Italy is recognized by everybody. The Italian Parliament 
is discussing at present a project of law concerned with agrarian reform. However, poor peasants of 
Calabria went ahead and started occupying uncultivated land. This occupation is not taking over 
the land. It means only that the peasants will work the land, harvest the crop, and give the owner 
the usual share of the harvest which varies from 30 to 40 per cent. The average holdings of Rogiano 
Gravina peasants and agricultural workers are from two to four acres (the minimum land holding for 
a peasant family to assure an acceptable standard of living being from 15 to 20 acres). The extent of 
the occupation goes to one or two acres per family and still doesn’t solve the basic problems of living. 
The occupation was peaceful, with no police or carabinieri present. The man in center, Oreste Rossini, has 
a family of five, land holding of three acres and is a very active pupil in the evening school of the Centro.

A contact sheet from David Seymour’s 
unpublished album. The photos show farmers peacefully 
occupying and working on uncultivated land. 
It is accompanied by detailed facts and observations from 
the photographer (see below). 

One of the many pictures of women 
carrying different loads on their 
heads. I have a general idea that 
these pictures can be used as a sort 
of symbolic introduction to the story. 
I couldn’t find yet the verbal slogan 
for it, but the general idea is that 
people in Calabria were using their 
heads to carry loads, and sometimes 
very heavy loads, and at present 
they are discovering that they can use 
their heads for education. 

First class in reading for peasant 
women in Rogiano Gravina. Illiteracy 
is much more widespread among 
women than men and the League for 
Struggle Against Illiteracy is making 
special efforts to attract women to 
evening classes. Besides reading 
and writing, the women are taught 
embroidery and other handicrafts 
and their evening classes are divided 
between reading, writing and 
sewing. The very successful device of 
embroidering the letters combines all 
in one. For reading, the mobile system 
shown here is very effective. 
