In her Report to the thirty-ninth 
session of the Human Rights Council 
(10-28 September 2018), she wrote: 
“Added to this situation is the 
escalating number of criminal charges 
– reportedly in the hundreds – being 
filed in Guatemala against indigenous 
leaders and community members. 
The active participation of private 
entities in pressing charges implies that 
prosecutors and judges are colluding 
with companies and landowners in some 
of these cases.” 



Avexnim Cojti and 
Agnes Portalewska 
As the preferred media 
for defending the rights 
of indigenous peoples, 
community radio stations are 
not necessarily easily accessible, 
in spite of commitments made 
by the state. Many indigenous 
radio stations have no option 
but to operate illegally.
Radio: A lifeline
for indigenous
peoples
The role of radio
Indigenous community radio stations 
play a crucial role in defending the right 
to freedom of expression of indigenous 
peoples. Providing the most effective 
way of disseminating information on 
issues affecting the communities, they 
also reveal news of the violence that 
hits them. They are the first to broadcast 
information about the incidents, and to 
interview and air the views of community 
leaders on these acts of violence. 
There are some places in the world where 
broadcasting your voice can render you 
illegal, just as defending your rights as an 
indigenous person can cost you your life. 
On 21 September, Juana Ramírez Santiago, 
a 57 year-old Mayan lxil community leader, 
became the twenty-first human rights 
activist to be assassinated in Guatemala 
in 2018. She was one of those leaders 
who have a political vision and a desire 
to change society to ensure a better life 
for their families and communities. Most 
Guatemalans believe her murder, like 
many others, will go unpunished. 
Victoria Tauli-Corpuz, United Nations Special 
Rapporteur on the Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples – who visited Guatemala in her 
official capacity twice in the same year 
– expressed concern about the forced 
evictions, criminalization and violence 
against indigenous peoples who defend 
their rights and their lands. Referring to 
the killings of seven defenders during and 
shortly after her visit in May 2018 [eleven 
defenders were killed between May and 
July that year], she observed, “All were 
representatives of two indigenous farmers’ 
organizations advocating for land rights and 
political participation. The killings took place 
in a broader national context of a pernicious 
closing of spaces for civil society.”
The Ixil Mayan community actively defends 
its cultural and linguistic identity. 

The radio stations publicly support 
land and human rights defenders, and 
raise public awareness about their 
criminalization. This was the case with 
Radio Xyaab’ Tzuul Taq’a, a radio startup 
of the Maya Q’eqchi in El Estor, which 
supported several defenders who have 
been arbitrarily accused and imprisoned 
by the government for their human and 
land rights activities. 
A thwarted right
Many Latin American countries have 
enshrined in legislation the right of 
indigenous peoples to have their own 
media. But although many states have 
committed to assigning frequencies 
to these media, this is often not 
implemented. Numerous indigenous 
community radios are forced to 
broadcast without a licence even after 
requesting a frequency as required 
by law – and see their volunteers 
prosecuted for their radio activities. 
In Guatemala, for example, the right of 
indigenous peoples to their own media 
is guaranteed by the Constitution and 
the Peace Agreement signed in 1996, 
ending a civil war that lasted over 
thirty years. But the licences are so 
expensive that non-profit community 
radios do not have enough money 
to pay for them. In 2003, a frequency 
cost two million quetzales ($274,000), 
for a modulated frequency (FM) in 
areas outside Guatemala City and 
Quetzaltenango, the country’s second-
largest city. The current cost is unknown 
as public auctions have been stopped in 
recent years, though frequencies are still 
sold illegally by their owners. For small 
farmers this amount is more than they 
can afford. With a salary of $80 to $120 
a month, purchasing a frequency is an 
unattainable dream. 
Decolonizing minds
Radio has proven that it is able not only 
to mobilize indigenous peoples, but 
also to influence policies and to hold 
governments to account. Radio stations 
organize social audits on the budget 
expenses of municipal governments in 
indigenous communities, for example. 
They also organize campaigns about 
the conscious vote. At election time, 
candidates are invited to hold debates on 
the air and to receive questions from the 
public. This public space for politicians 
to be accountable reduces the margin of 
manipulation of the vote.
Community-based indigenous media is a 
powerful means to decolonize minds and 
create a sense of cultural and linguistic 
pride. Radio can be effectively used to 
highlight ancestral music and knowledge, 
and to inform people of the local forms of 
organization that are today threatened by 
globalization and the world-view imposed 
by major international media corporations.
The medium has particularly proven itself 
in the remote areas of Latin America, 
where the scourge of illiteracy prevents 
indigenous populations from accessing 
information from print sources and where 
older people, especially women – who 
very rarely know the dominant language 
– are unable to get information from 
mainstream radio stations.
Last but not least, the survival of 
indigenous languages depends to a very 
large extent on native speakers and their 
ability to speak them fluently. In this 
respect, indigenous media can and must 
play a decisive role. 
Avexnim Cojti, from the K’iche’ Maya 
community in Guatemala, is a Community 
Programme Manager at Cultural Survival 
(www.cs.org). Agnes Portalewska 
(Poland) is a Communications Manager 
at the indigenous peoples’ rights non-
profit. Headquartered in Cambridge, 
Massachusetts (United States), Cultural 
Survival has supported a global network 
of more than 800 indigenous radio 
stations since 2005. 
