Gabriela Neves de Lima 
Faced with a policy against migrants, the inhabitants of London’s Haringey 
borough have launched a welcome campaign that has been shaking up 
British immigration legislation. Proving that finding common ground is 
always possible, the borough works with local communities, and the central 
government funds some of its projects. The idea of everyone working 
together to create a more welcoming neighbourhood is catching on.
A warm welcome
versus hostility
Another highlight was the support of 
elected officials for a motion introduced 
by Haringey Welcome in November 
2018. This, says Nabijou, provides 
a great opportunity “to put all the 
problems on the table and to rebuild 
local management”. 
Threatened social 
relations
The need to rebuild local management 
is essential in a context of an upheaval in 
social relations. This is because the so-
called hostile environment policy, which 
targets undocumented immigrants above 
all, and aims to deter migrants from 
crossing territorial boundaries, actually 
affects the entire population. 
Migration policies involve not only 
the different ministries and local 
representations involved in border 
control and immigration management, 
but also the private sector and ordinary 
citizens. In practice, this means that there 
are also borders within the country. All 
aspects of social life are monitored and 
potentially reported, with increased risks 
of deportation. As a result, migrants and 
asylum seekers are discouraged from 
accessing essential services. 
For instance, private landlords are obliged 
to check whether their future tenants have 
the right to reside in the country, and to 
keep proof of this, at the risk of paying a 
fine or being imprisoned for a maximum 
period of five years. With a more stringent 
redefinition of the “habitual residence” 
category, access to free health care has 
been curtailed, and temporary non-
European immigrants have been forced 
to pay an annual surcharge for the 
duration of their stay. Between 2016 and 
2018, schools were required to provide 
the state with information on children 
with a migrant background. 
Since the emergence of what is commonly 
referred to as the “migrant crisis” in the 
2010s, the local authorities in Europe 
have been at the forefront of ensuring the 
integration of migrants and refugees into 
their communities. Some act within the 
framework of political agendas defined by 
governments, others are more proactive. 
The Haringey Welcome campaign in 
north London has chosen to adopt a 
collaborative approach, while remaining 
an activist and independent organization 
that takes a more antagonistic stance 
when necessary.
Moral obligation 
against social injustice
Haringey Welcome is based on the 
notion of political solidarity, defined by 
the American philosopher Sally Scholz 
as a positive moral obligation which 
encourages collective action in the 
face of a situation of injustice or social 
vulnerability. Her ideology is the polar 
opposite of a hostile environment policy, 
explains Lucy Nabijou, coordinator 
of the residents’ group that initiated 
the campaign. “It is about solidarity 
and justice, about fighting for values, 
contesting bad law and really trying to 
work together with the local government, 
seeking a real collaboration with local 
authorities to improve services,” she adds.
With forty-five per cent of its population 
born outside the United Kingdom and 
five per cent having moved there in the 
last two years, Haringey is one of London’s 
most cosmopolitan boroughs. “Haringey 
has a strong and proud history of 
welcoming asylum seekers and refugees 
and people who have chosen to re-settle 
in London. There are generations of 
people from around the world who have 
moved here and made Haringey one of 
the UK’s most open and diverse boroughs,” 
notes a report from the local council to 
the Cabinet, dated 15 November 2016. 
It was around that time that the founders 
of Haringey Welcome took their first steps, 
demanding that the neighbourhood 
implement the central government’s 
voluntary resettlement scheme for Syrian 
refugees. Claire Kober, then council leader 
of Haringey and chair of London councils, 
pledged to relocate ten Syrian families – 
to give them “a place of safety” and the 
support they needed “in order to start 
rebuilding their lives”.
But, as Nabijou points out, the council 
suffers from a lack of financial resources, 
training and dialogue with residents and 
community groups, which undermines 
its effectiveness. This is why Haringey 
Welcome has adopted a more collaborative 
approach in its negotiations with the local 
council, emphasizing the need to create 
new communications channels and build 
relationships based on trust. 
The programme’s purpose is not to 
advocate that elected councillors or 
local council employees violate national 
law per se, Nabijou insists, but rather, to 
increase transparency and accountability 
and to better navigate through available 
instruments to provide adequate services 
for migrants and refugees. 
The Haringey council already seems to 
be moving in this direction. In September 
2018, it launched the Connected 
Communities programme, with funding 
from the central government. It aims to 
improve local support for migrants in the 
areas of employment, housing, learning 
the English language, childcare and 
community empowerment. Although 
she welcomes this initiative, Nabijou has 
expressed her reservations about the 
choice of keeping it in-house, the viability 
of the project if it is tied to the current 
funding stream, and its ability to reach 
more vulnerable migrant groups. 

However, data collection has been 
stopped as a result of a campaign that is 
currently fighting for the destruction of 
this data.
Writing about the shift in focus of recent UK 
immigration legislation, British academics 
Nira Yuval-Davis, Georgie Wemyss and 
Kathryn Cassidy have concluded that it 
amounts to “everyday bordering in which 
ordinary citizens are demanded to become 
either border-guards and/or suspected 
illegitimate border crossers”. A relative, 
a friend, or a neighbour could become an 
informer. As Latvian anthropologist Dace 
Dzenovsca suggests, personal conflicts 
could interfere with the defence of 
borders. These practices disrupt social and 
political relations, creating fear, suspicion 
and tensions within communities, 
and threatening local solidarity and 
conviviality. It is also important to note 
that certain social categories (such as 
those based on race, class or gender) are 
disproportionately impacted by these 
policies, indicating the relative fragility 
of their rights. 
Joining forces 
In this context, Haringey Welcome 
contributes to improving social relations 
on the ground, by building solidarity 
networks within the borough. The 
group has been working with schools, 
for example, to raise awareness of the 
implications of the hostile environment. 
It has also garnered support from other 
local community groups and migrant 
support organizations – all of whom work 
together to create a more welcoming 
borough. 
By forging these links and working 
directly with elected and government 
officials, Haringey Welcome promotes a 
form of multi-stakeholder collaboration 
involving all interested parties. Some 
of the ways in which this can be done 
includes bidding for funding for 
integration initiatives from the Controlling 
Migration Fund of the Ministry of Housing, 
Communities, and Local Government. 
Establishing a working group of local 
advisors, migrant organizations and legal 
experts to develop a strategy for migrants, 
especially more vulnerable groups, would 
also be beneficial.

Beyond the political aspect, Nabijou 
observes that the Haringey Welcome 
campaign has another side-effect, 
that is equally central to the initiative. 
“Through mobilization, you get to know 
your neighbours, you meet new people, 
you are better informed about what is 
happening, and all this blends together 
to produce an extremely strong sense 
of community that transforms the place 
where you live,” she enthuses. 
A political scientist, Gabriela Neves 
de Lima (Brazil) is a research assistant 
at the Department of Geography and 
Environment at the London School 
of Economics and Political Science, 
United Kingdom. She is a co-author of 
Cities Welcoming Refugees and Migrants: 
Enhancing Effective Urban Governance 
in an Age of Migration, published by 
UNESCO in 2016.Collage by children at the Sterrenbos 
pre-school in Hamme, Belgium, 
which received a special mention at the 
UNESCO Associated Schools Network 
global art contest, “Opening Hearts and 
Minds to Refugees”, 2017.
