The 2018 Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) Special Report on 
Global Warming at 1.5 °C caused quite a stir 
and a lot of ink to flow. To avoid catastrophic 
consequences, global warming should be 
limited to 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels, 
the report warned. But, as we know, we are 
far from achieving this. To overcome this 
challenge of the century, scientists advocate 
a radical change in behaviour – something 
that cannot be achieved without a profound 
change in our attitudes. 
“Changing minds, not the climate” is the 
slogan for the public awareness campaign 
of UNESCO’s Strategy for Action on Climate 
Change 2018-2021. It is in line with the 
2015 Paris Agreement (COP21) and the 
United Nations’ 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development (SDGs). 
It sets out a wide range of actions in 
various fields – from Education for 
Sustainable Development (ESD) and 
responsible ocean management (through 
the Intergovernmental Oceanographic 
Commission, IOC), to water security (through 
the International Hydrological Programme, 
IHP) and the cultural and natural sites under 
UNESCO protection, which serve as Climate 
Change Observatories.
Many other projects to raise public 
awareness on climate change through 
the media, or to inform children through 
the UNESCO Associated Schools Network 
(ASPnet), are ongoing. In addition to these 
efforts, there are UNESCO Chairs on Climate 
Change and Sustainable Development; 
Climate Frontlines, networks of indigenous 
people and other vulnerable communities 
and the grassroots UNESCO Green Citizens: 
Pathfinders for Change initiatives. 
Editorial
Changing minds means establishing a new 
order of priorities in politics, the economy, 
industry and the daily lives of us all. But 
above all, it is about becoming aware of 
the ethical implications of climate change 
– which threaten not only the planet’s 
ecosystems, but also our fundamental 
rights, by creating injustices and widening 
inequalities. 
As the ethical dimensions of climate change 
are still relatively unexplored, UNESCO 
adopted, in November 2017, the Declaration 
of Ethical Principles in relation to Climate 
Change – a tool that is accessible to all actors 
in society, especially political leaders, to allow 
for the most appropriate decision-making.  
With this special report, the Courier aims 
to open up new avenues for reflection on 
these lesser-known aspects of the greatest 
global challenge of our times. Because, in 
parallel to the scientific issues that hit the 
no plan, no planet
A Planet for Tomorrow poster from 
the Poster for Tomorrow project.  
© posterfortomorrow 2018 - homework
media headlines, the issues of justice and 
equity, respect for human rights, solidarity 
and scientific and political integrity, and 
individual and collective responsibility, must 
be the principal cornerstones of our actions 
on a global scale. 
But in practice, this is still not the case. Even 
“the human rights community, with a few 
notable exceptions, has been every bit as 
complacent as most governments in the 
face of the ultimate challenge to mankind 
represented by climate change,” asserts 
Australian expert Philip Alston, in his report 
to the UN on 25 June 2019. The Special 
Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human 
rights considers the measures taken by the 
majority of  UN human rights bodies have 
been patently inadequate. “Ticking boxes 
will not save humanity or the planet from 
impending disaster,” he warns.
Vincent Defourny and Jasmina Šopova
The Wide Angle section of this issue is published to mark the United Nations Climate 
Action Summit on 23 September 2019, and the 25th session of the Conference of 
the Parties on Climate Change  in Santiago, Chile (COP25), 2-13 December 2019.
