How did you end up demonstrating alone on 
the street?
I have been interested in environmental 
issues for a long time. But it was only 
towards the end of 2018 that I was really 
struck by the problem of global warming, 
when I discovered, through Greenpeace 
International, what Greta Thunberg is doing. 
At the time, the idea of demonstrating in the 
streets, like this young Swedish schoolgirl, 
had not yet crossed my mind, because we 
don’t really have a culture of protest here.
Then, in February 2019, I participated in a 
demonstration for the first time  – the march 
in memory of Boris Nemtsov, the former 
Russian minister and deputy, who was 
murdered in 2015. This experience made me 
realize that I was an adult who was capable 
of doing something similar myself. 
When I learned – quite by chance – that 
a demonstration was being organized in 
Moscow on 15 March as part of the Global 
Climate Strike, I went along. It was being 
held in “Hyde Park”, a space in Sokolniki Park 
specially designated by the authorities as 
a zone for free speech and protests. There 
were about seventy participants, but as the 
site is surrounded by a fence and not many 
people go through there, no one really 
noticed us. 
That’s when I decided to take action. Since 
solitary pickets or single-person protests 
are permitted in Russia, I thought I would 
demonstrate alone every Friday, to show my 
support for the Fridays for Future movement 
launched by Greta. I chose Pushkin Square 
because it is always teeming with people.  
Interview by Jasmina Šopova
Every Friday since March 2019, Arshak Makichyan has been 
demonstrating alone in Moscow’s Pushkin Square. His placard displays 
slogans like “Global warming equals hunger, war and death”. This young 
violinist in Russia’s capital is leading a solitary and tenacious fight on 
behalf of the entire planet.  
Arshak Makichyan: 
The lone picketer
According to some sources, the first Global 
Climate Strike on 15 March 2019 mobilized 
about 1.8 million people worldwide. Why did 
only seventy people turn up for the march in 
Moscow? 
This was not at all surprising. A large 
part of the population in Russia does not 
understand what global warming is. Many 
people think that the weather will become 
milder, that the winters will be less severe. 
People have nowhere to go for information.
We do not have a single well-known 
political figure who talks about ecological 
catastrophes and global warming, and the 
media do not report on these issues. Some 
believe that the public is not interested in 
climate change; others avoid the subject 
in order not to offend the oil and gas 
companies that hold the reins of economic 
power in this country – which is one of 
the world’s largest producers of these 
commodities. As a result, we keep quiet 
about Russia’s lack of action to implement 
the 2015 Paris Agreement (COP21), which 
it has signed but not yet ratified. In my 
opinion, the silence on climate is no 
different from the silence on the Chernobyl 
disaster.
Even on the internet, the March 15 strike 
went almost unnoticed, for example, 
because people are afraid to mention 
youth demonstrations. Here, people are 
not allowed to organize demonstrations 
or hold a solitary picket if they are under 
18 – involving minors in such actions is a 
punishable offence.
Yet, across the world, it is mainly young 
people who are mobilizing against climate 
change.
Yes, and it is precisely for this reason that I 
organized a flash mob on the web last May 
– with the idea of obtaining the right for 
schoolchildren and youth under 18 to fight 
for their future. 
Photographs of young people holding 
placards saying: “Let Russia Strike for 
Climate” (my flash mob’s slogan) in different 
countries were sent to me. Like one of a 
9-year-old girl demonstrating in New York. 
Greta is 16 and she can demonstrate on the 
streets without fear of any consequences. 
She also responded to my flash mob 
and follows me on Twitter, where I write 
in English. That made me so happy. It’s 
really rewarding when someone like Greta 
Thunberg, who has done so many positive 
things for the world, takes an interest in 
what you are doing. 
And this is even more important because, to 
my knowledge, there were only three of us 
staging solitary pickets before the second 
World Climate Strike on 24 May 2019 – one 
girl in Yaroslavl, in the central region of 
Russia, and another in Saratov, about 850 
kilometres from Moscow.
And what did you do for this second strike? 
It is reported to have mobilized more than 
a million people around the world and 
even influenced the European Parliament 
elections on 26 May,  putting green parties in 
the lead in several countries.
Along with the Uchenik student’s union, we 
applied for authorization to hold a gathering 
of 500 people in Museon Park, in the city 
centre. But we were refused permission on 
the grounds that the space was not large 
enough – even though, according to the 
union, the park could hold up to 850 people. 
After several unsuccessful negotiations, 
about ten one-person demonstrations took 
place in Moscow. During the day, I held a 
solitary picket in front of the Pushkin statue, 
and in the evening, the union members took 
over.
On that day, Greenpeace International let 
me use their Twitter account. For an hour, 
I reported on the various actions being 
staged in Russia. Then, for the rest of the day, 
I wrote the tweets for their Russian section. 

There were demonstrations in about ten 
cities in total, but they were always quite 
small.
Where do you get the inspiration for the 
slogans on your placards?
For the first one, I referred to the Paris 
Agreement, but I quickly realized that 
people did not know what that was. So I 
started writing about simpler things – about 
sorting waste [for recycling], for example, 
which is still not done in Moscow, and 
against the oligarchic system of waste 
management. We pay for waste collection, 
but there is no infrastructure in place. Of 
course there are a few sorting bins, but the 
rubbish gets mixed together as soon as it is 
loaded into the garbage truck and arrives 
jumbled up at the landfill site – under the 
pretext that so few people sort their rubbish 
that it is not worth the effort! 
And how do passers-by react to your 
slogans?
I usually stand in front of the Pushkin 
statue and stay there for about two hours. 
In this time, I am usually photographed 
approvingly and supported by about ten 
people. Many others come up to me and ask 
strange questions, referring to lies invented 
by Russia’s enemies or international 
conspiracy theories. I don’t argue with them. 
I have also been approached by police 
officers who photographed my passport 
and told me they would report me to their 
superiors. As for other passers-by who don’t 
show any particular interest, I have no idea 
what the effect is on them. They read what 
is written on my placard and it probably 
makes them think. 
Have you thought about what to do next in 
your fight against climate change?
Before I started all these actions, I planned 
to continue my music studies in Germany. 
But last May, I decided to stay in Moscow. 
I realized that my solitary picket was more 
important than my violin bow. Because 
what’s the point of having an education and 
starting a career if you have no future?
As my actions seem to be finding some 
resonance in society, I have decided to 
continue going out on the street every Friday. 
I am in contact with people who share the 
same concerns as me and we plan to meet to 
discuss how we should develop our projects. 
I believe we will make a difference. If until 15 
March 2019, the problem of global warming 
had been ignored, everything is beginning to 
change now.  
A Russian environmental activist and 
violinist of Armenian origin, Arshak 
Makichyan, 25, recently  graduated from 
the Moscow Tchaikovsky Conservatory. 
I realized 
that my 
solitary picket 
was more 
important 
than my violin 
bow 
“Global warming equals hunger, war and 
death”. Arshak Makichyan has been picketing 
alone every Friday since 15 March 2019 in 
Moscow’s Pushkin Square.
