Poornima Luthra
Educator at the Copenhagen Business 
School, and founder and chief consultant 
of TalentED Consultancy ApS, a training 
and consultancy firm based in Copenhagen, 
Denmark .
With over a third of the global population 
under some form of lockdown due 
to COVID-19, the health crisis  has caused 
an unprecedented disruption in education. 
From kindergarten to university, schools 
worldwide have been temporarily closed, 
forcing educators to find alternative 
teaching methods. This situation is likely 
to leave a lasting footprint.
“We will feel the effects of COVID-19 on 
students globally until a vaccine is widely 
available, at the very least,” says Amy 
Valentine, executive director of Future 
of School, an American public charity that 
supports the growth of innovative school 
models. “The way systems and individual 
districts have responded to this crisis will 
have a ripple effect on students as they 
advance, ready or not, to new grade levels.” 
The negative impact on the mental 
health of students being away from 
the social interaction and routines that 
a school environment provides, is of prime 
concern. Even the technology- saturated 
generations of Z (children born in the years 
1996 to 2015) and Alpha (children born 
after 2015) have been craving social 
interaction and physical experiences away 
from their devices. This has been perhaps 
the biggest challenge for educators 
to address through online platforms. 
“Human contact is important when 
it comes to education, especially for teens,” 
a high school teacher in Singapore said. 
“Most students would definitely rather go 
to school, to feel included in a community, 
where there is more structure to their 
learning.”
With stringent social-distancing 
requirements in place, it will likely be 
a while before social interaction levels 
return to pre-COVID-19 times.The impact 
of this on today’s generations of learners 
may be felt for years to come. “Once 
schools reopen and a sense of normalcy 
prevails, the job of educators will be tough 
– to bring students up to speed, plug gaps 
in learning and provide greater social 
and emotional support to students who 
require it,” Sarita Somaya, a primary teacher 
at an international school in Singapore, 
explained. 
For many children around the world, 
schools provide their one main meal 
of the day. The closures have forced these 
children to seek out alternative options, 
often unsuccessfully. Gayathri Tirthapura, 
co-founder trustee of the Tejasvita Trust 
– an organization based in Bengaluru, 
which provides education to underserved 
communities in south India – explains 
that “families are struggling to have three 
meals a day, and are depending on private 
donors and relief packages announced by 
the government.” 
Education: An opportunity 
to reinvent teaching 
More than 1.5 billion students – or ninety per cent of the world’s student 
population – have been affected by temporary closures of schools 
and universities in 2020 due to the health crisis, according to UNESCO. 
Educational institutions have been forced, almost overnight, to switch 
to remote learning platforms and devise alternative teaching methods. 
 Seven-year-old Nelly studies on 
her tablet at home in Abidjan, Côte 
d’Ivoire, April 2020. Educational videos 
produced by UNICEF and the country’s 
Ministry of Education are also 
broadcast on national television.

In countries including the United States, 
United Kingdom, and New Zealand, 
concerted efforts have been made 
to ensure that disadvantaged children 
are provided laptops, tablet computers 
and mobile hotspots. In India, the team 
at Gurushala, a learning portal which 
provides digital education for teachers 
and content for students, explain that 
“access to education has never been easy 
for India’s children from disadvantaged 
groups. With mobile and internet 
penetration growing by the day, there 
is a sudden spotlight on technology”. 
The end of group 
activity?
What does this health crisis mean for 
education in the long run? “Primary 
classrooms have become more clinical 
Diplomas received 
by robots
Yet, in spite of the grim scenario, 
educational institutions around the world 
are finding creative and innovative 
ways to address the challenges posed 
by COVID-19 – from holding university 
graduations with robot avatars replacing 
students in Japan, to using social-
distancing hats in China. Educators have 
also had to get creative about designing 
content to deliver academic lessons in an 
engaging way across the digital platforms 
available. 
To address the lack of social interaction, 
counsellors in some schools have created 
themed activities to engage students 
– some educators have even organized 
virtual picnics with their classes. In rural 
schools, teachers have had to think 
of different ways to engage with students 
– often via text messages to parents’ 
mobile devices and phone calls. Where 
children do not have access to even 
a pencil at home – let alone a computer 
– teachers have had to think on their feet 
to find new ways of teaching them. 
There is the chance that 
COVID-19 will be disruptive 
in a positive way 
 Nine-year-old Maria follows a pre-recorded lesson via WhatsApp 
on her father’s smartphone at a camp for internally displaced 
people in Kili, north of Idlib, Syrian Arab Republic. 

– where students can’t share, use shared 
resources or work in huddles, excited 
over a science experiment. I hope I’m 
mistaken, but will this be the end of group 
work and rotations? Will we go back 
to classrooms with the teacher lecturing at 
the front and students sitting in their seats 
all day?” Taryn Hansen, a primary school 
teacher in Perth, Western Australia, where 
schools reopened in late April, wondered. 
Sankalp Chaturvedi, an associate 
professor at Imperial College Business 
School, London, believes that “in the long 
term, higher education will still be done 
in the classrooms. People will be more 
comfortable with online education as 
an alternative, which was not as evident 
or effective before the lockdown.”
“There is the chance that COVID-19 will 
be disruptive in a positive way,” Sandy 
Mackenzie, director of the Copenhagen 
International School, predicts. This 
may lead “schools to discard what was 
obsolete, to employ technology effectively 
and to ensure that educators are 
developing the skills that new generations 
need for the decades to come.”
Reduced inequalities 
in education
The use of digital technology implies 
widespread access to it. The pandemic 
has highlighted the inequality in both 
the quality and accessibility to education 
globally, and the digital divide that exists, 
even in developed nations. With only 
sixty per cent of the global population 
being online prior to the pandemic, 
governments, publishers, technology 
providers and network operators have 
had to work together to enable educators 
to provide asynchronous and synchronous 
education online to as many students 
globally as possible. 
One programme that does this 
is the Learning Passport, a digital remote 
learning platform, originally developed 
for displaced and refugee children by 
the United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF) in collaboration with Microsoft. 
Due to start as a pilot programme in 2020 
– with children in Kosovo, Timor-Leste 
and Ukraine being the first to experience 
it – the project has rapidly expanded 
its reach to include schools affected by 
closures worldwide. Now all countries 
with a curriculum capable of being taught 
online have access to the programme’s 
content through online books, videos 
and additional support for parents 
of children with learning disabilities. 
To achieve Goal 4 of the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
within the next decade, we will, hopefully, 
see more public and private institutions 
come together to make our educational 
systems more resilient, inclusive 
and equitable for all. 
Rethinking the role 
of the educator 
The new remote learning environment has 
meant that educators have had to think 
creatively about content and the best 
possible ways to teach online. This 
provides the catalyst for rethinking the role 
of the educator, while adding value 
to what is taught.  
This experience has also shown us 
that there is potential for flexibility 
in how education is delivered – creating 
alternatives to more traditional 
educational formats and structures. 
Educators and parents have observed 
that some of their students or children 
are flourishing in the new context. This 
could lead to the development of more 
sophisticated remote learning, or blended 
learning options for students who prefer 
such an educational experience.
This crisis has resulted in a digital 
disruption, but also underlined the need 
to rethink what future generations are 
taught. This has been driven more recently 
by research from the World Economic 
Forum (and other organizations) on skills 
required by the future workforce. These 
future skills include higher cognitive 
skills of entrepreneurship, creativity, 
and innovation, and social and emotional 
intelligence skills – such as resilience, 
adaptability and having a growth mindset. 
To solve some of the world’s most pressing 
global challenges in the future, education 
will need to focus on the development 
of these skills. 
Redefining what education will look like 
for future generations in a post-COVID-19 
world will require the combined efforts 
of the various stakeholders. They will have 
to think hard and honestly about the issues 
involved, and then take the necessary 
actions to address them.
Even technology-saturated 
generations of children have 
been craving social interaction 
 Xiaoyu, a high school student in Beijing, follows an online learning 
programme at home on an educational platform set up by the government. 
Her mother, seen in the background, also works remotely, February 2020. 
