What the pandemic 
says about us
The higher value placed on human life, the rise of the influence 
of health services, the medicalization of our lives, the extension 
of state power – these phenomena did not arise from the crisis 
caused by the pandemic, but were revealed by it.
Ekaterina Schulmann
Associate professor at the Moscow School 
of Social and Economic Sciences (MSSES), 
and Associate Fellow, Russia and Eurasia 
Programme at Chatham House, The Royal 
Institute of International Affairs, London .
While it is too early to discuss 
the consequences of the pandemic, we can 
already see trends emerging that did not 
arise from the crisis, but which the crisis 
has made salient. Societies, governance 
systems, businesses and citizens can 
only react with the tools they had before 
the emergency. As it is often said, generals 
are always fighting the last war. From 
this perspective, we are all generals, 
individually and collectively.
What the recent global health crisis has 
revealed is that governments can no longer 
afford to allow an epidemic to spread. If 
they want to ensure their political survival, 
they must show they are doing everything 
possible to preserve human life.
In the past, the emergence and spread of 
a disease like COVID-19 would have been 
considered inevitable. However, in view 
of our current ethical requirements, this 
is no longer possible – because of the 
higher value placed on human life.
The primacy  
of human life 
In the twentieth century, citizens could 
accept having their freedoms restricted 
in the name of high ideals or superior goals 
– victory over the enemy, the construction 
of a great work or the promise of a golden 
age. In the twenty-first century, it is not 
the prospect of a bright future that leads 
people to accept a curtailing of their 
freedoms, but the desire to avoid a large 
number of casualties. Today, the constraints 
that we are under – and which many 
perceive as a sign of increased state 
violence – are in fact the corollary of our 
need for security.
Life has become so precious that no 
government in the world can afford a loss 
of life that society considers preventable. 
Moreover, it should be noted that states 
– whether democratic or authoritarian – 
have taken measures that are quite similar 
in terms of restrictions on freedoms. 
They have, however, adopted very 
different strategies to support the 
economy, shattered by the shock of the 
epidemic and lockdown. The modern 
economy is based on services, and not on 
the exploitation of resources. It is therefore 
rational to preserve people – producers 
and consumers of services – even if it may 
seem unprofitable in the short term, from 
a strictly economic point of view. 
During this crisis, humanist culture 
has revealed that it is ready to make 
concessions on freedom  in the name 
of public health. The increase in life 
expectancy, medical progress, the cult 
of healthy living and the narcissistic 
valorization of social networks have 
favoured this phenomenon.
The constraints that 
we are under, are in 
fact the corollary of 
our need for security
 “Extraordinary 
circumstances justify 
and legitimize surveillance 
and control, in the eyes 
of societies, even 
in democratic regimes.”©

for formulating these recommendations 
and monitoring their implementation, if 
it is created, will become an important 
player in international relations.
Common experience
While the world has suddenly closed in on 
itself, it has never been more connected. 
This common  tragedy has united 
humanity around a shared cause. Such 
a communion of destiny may not have 
occurred since the race for the atom bomb 
– with the difference that today, citizens 
are much more involved in world events.
It is at these pivotal moments that alliances 
that will shape the world of tomorrow 
are forged – as was the case after the two 
world wars that shook the twentieth 
century. Who will be the winners? Who 
could be the new members of an Anti-
Virus Security Council? It is too soon to say.
The medicalization 
of everyday life
The imperative of “security”, a notion 
to be understood as both “survival” 
and the “preservation of health”, has 
resulted in the medicalization of our 
daily lives. This does not refer only 
to the circulation of medical expressions 
and practices in our lives. Tomorrow, 
it could well extend to political processes 
and governance – if the international 
community were to decide, for example, 
that the fight against diseases requires 
the same level of co-ordination as the fight 
against terrorism.
Medical knowledge – and with it, the 
pseudoscientific representations that 
flourish, particularly online – has invaded 
everyday language and entered our daily 
lives. Soon, no one will be surprised by 
the presence of temperature-measuring 
devices in public places, in the same way 
that we have become accustomed to metal 
detectors. Soon, we will hardly remember 
the time when consulting a doctor was 
a matter of free will. Perhaps tomorrow, 
people with fevers will be placed under 
house arrest, as we have just been.
The medicalization of everyday life also 
means an increased role for the health 
services, including in the political field. 
This process can be observed at the state 
level, but also at the global level. The 
political importance of the World 
Health Organization (WHO) is measured 
not only by the number of countries 
that implement its epidemiological 
recommendations, but also by 
the harshness of the political resistance 
to these recommendations.
The resumption of international trade, 
air transport and travel will necessitate 
the development of a new set of global 
health rules and regulations, in the near 
future. The supranational body responsible 

 “This common  tragedy has united humanity around a shared cause.” 

What is certain, though, is that 
the industrialized countries will have 
to assume greater responsibility for 
addressing the shortcomings of the 
health systems of poorer countries.  
Otherwise the efforts made to combat 
a pandemic will be in vain. The benefits 
of drastic measures such as lockdowns 
will be negated if a new outbreak occurs 
in a country that is unable to contain 
an epidemic.
We have just lived through a common 
experience – one that was lived and 
shared by a very large number of people 
at the same time. It is similar to what 
happened when the Twin Towers collapsed 
in New York, nearly twenty years ago. 
The 11 September 2001 attacks 
in the United States marked a turning 
point. After that date, extensive powers 
were granted to security services 
around the globe, and the surveillance 
of citizens was intensified. Practices such 
as the installation of cameras in public 
places, the use of  facial recognition 
software and wiretapping systems became 
widespread after the attacks. Our daily lives 
– especially our air travel, with its series 
of controls that we now consider normal – 
have also been altered.
More surveillance, 
less freedom
During this crisis, certain states have 
taken advantage of the coronavirus 
epidemic to legally expand their powers 
of surveillance and use of citizen 
data. We see thus, how extraordinary 
circumstances justify and legitimize 
surveillance and control, in the eyes 
of societies. The same applies 
to democratic regimes. The epidemic 
threatens to erode privacy even further. 
In democracies at least, counterbalancing 
powers exist to limit this intrusion into 
our data. This is not the case in autocratic 
regimes.
The threat is all the more real in times 
of an epidemic, when everything 
favours the power of the state – starting 
with the economic crisis generated by 
the health crisis, which makes public 
companies and institutions almost 
the only solvent employers. The crisis also 
strengthens the welfare state, which acts 
as a safety net – perhaps turning workers 
into recipients of a universal income 
tomorrow. 
Invisible work
While the world was in lockdown, 
millions of people realized that working 
remotely, in all its forms, is more beneficial 
to the employer than to the employee. 
Thanks to this new organization of work, 
the costs of heating, maintenance, rent, 
and even equipment, were now borne by 
the employee.
Moreover, the boundaries between 
working time and personal time, 
between workspace and living space, 
tend to become blurred. Such a trend 
undermines the hard-won rights acquired 
by social and trade-union movements 
in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. 
It brings us back – albeit at a new 
technical level – to an earlier situation, 
when relations between employees 
and employers were poorly regulated, 
work was often carried out at home, 
and paid for on a piecework basis.
During this unprecedented lockdown 
period, employees also found themselves 
obliged to take on service functions 
normally performed by others – such 
as childcare, care of the elderly, cooking 
or other domestic tasks. The pandemic 
has highlighted this invisible and unpaid 
service labour – sometimes referred to as 
a “second GDP”– that is usually performed 
by women. The crisis may provide an 
opportunity to discuss the need to pay for 
these forms of invisible work.
It is always in the wake of major disasters 
that the international relations system has 
been reorganized. The First World War gave 
birth to the League of Nations, the Second 
World War, to the United Nations. 
On the basis of a common experience, 
humanity united and designed for itself 
new instruments, new mechanisms 
of governance. New institutions could 
emerge from the current crisis.
Unlike other past tragedies that 
pitted humankind against each other, 
the pandemic confronts us with only 
a virus. So, we have no one to hate. In 
the face of this crisis, we have no other 
choice but to show solidarity.
It is at these pivotal 
moments that alliances 
that will shape the world 
of tomorrow are forged 

 “The pandemic has highlighted 
the invisible and unpaid service 
labour that is usually performed 
by women.” Photo from the series 
At home, March 2020.

