OUR GUEST
 How is this global health pandemic different from 
past health crises and what does it tell us?
I am not sure it is the worst global health threat 
we have faced. The influenza epidemic of 1918-1919 
was worse, the AIDS epidemic was probably worse, 
and pandemics in previous eras were certainly far 
worse. As pandemics go, this is actually a mild one. In 
the early 1980s, if you got AIDS – you died. The Black 
Death [the plague that ravaged Europe between 1347 
and 1351] killed between a quarter and half of the 
affected populations. The 1918 influenza killed more 
than ten per cent of the entire population in some 
countries. In contrast, COVID-19 is killing less than five 
per cent of those infected, and unless some dangerous 
mutation occurs, it is unlikely to kill more than one per 
cent of the population of any country. 
Moreover, in contrast to previous eras, we now have 
all the scientific knowledge and technological tools 
necessary to overcome this plague. When the Black 
Death struck, people were completely helpless. They 
never discovered what was killing them and what 
could be done about it. In 1348, the medical faculty 
of the University of Paris believed that the epidemic 
was caused by an astrological misfortune – namely 
that “a major conjunction of three planets in Aquarius 
[caused] a deadly corruption of the air” (quoted 
in Rosemary Horrox ed. The Black Death, Manchester 
University Press, 1994, p. 159). 
In contrast, when COVID-19 erupted, it took scientists 
only two weeks to correctly identify the virus 
responsible for the epidemic, sequence its entire 
genome, and develop reliable tests for the disease. 
We know what to do in order to stop the spread of this 
epidemic. It is likely that within a year or two, we will 
also have a vaccine. 
However, COVID-19 is not just a health-care crisis. 
It also results in a huge economic and political crisis. 
I am less afraid of the virus than of the inner demons 
of humankind: hatred, greed and ignorance. If people 
blame the epidemic on foreigners and minorities; if 
greedy businesses care only about their profits; and if 
we believe all kinds of conspiracy theories – it will be 
much harder to overcome this epidemic, and later on 
we will live in a world poisoned by this hatred, greed 
and ignorance. In contrast, if we react to the epidemic 
with global solidarity and generosity, and if we trust 
in science rather than in conspiracy theories, I am sure 
we can not only overcome this crisis, but actually come 
out of it much stronger. 
In an interview with the UNESCO Courier, Yuval Noah Harari, Israeli historian 
and author of Sapiens, Homo Deus, and 21 Lessons for the 21st Century, analyses what 
the consequences of the current coronavirus health crisis are likely to be, and underlines 
the need for greater international scientific co-operation and information-sharing 
between countries. 

OUR GUEST Yuval Noah Harari: 
“Every crisis is also an opportunity”   

 To what extent could social distancing 
become the norm? What effect will that 
have on societies? 
For the duration of the crisis, some 
social distancing is inevitable. The virus 
spreads by exploiting our best human 
instincts. We are social animals. We like 
contact, especially in hard times. And 
when relatives, friends or neighbours are 
sick, our compassion arises and we want 
to come and help them. The virus is using 
this against us. This is how it spreads. So 
we need to act from the head rather than 
the heart, and despite the difficulties, 
reduce our level of contact. Whereas 
the virus is a mindless piece of genetic 
information, we humans have a mind, 
we can analyse the situation rationally, 
and we can vary the way we behave. 
I believe that once the crisis is over, we will 
not see any long-term effects on our basic 
human instincts. We will still be social 
animals. We will still love contact. We will 
still come to help friends and relatives. 
Look, for example, at what happened 
to the LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual 
and transgendered] community 
in the wake of AIDS. It was a terrible 
epidemic, and gay people were often 
completely abandoned by the state, 
and yet the epidemic did not cause 
the disintegration of that community. Just 
the opposite. Already, at the height of the 
crisis, LGBT volunteers established many 
new organizations to help sick people, 
to spread reliable information, and to fight 
for political rights. In the 1990s, after 
the worst years of the AIDS epidemic, 
the LGBT community in many countries 
was much stronger than before. 
 How do you see the state of scientific 
and information co-operation after 
the crisis? UNESCO was created after 
the Second World War to promote 
scientific and intellectual co-operation 
through the free flow of ideas. Could 
the “free flow of ideas” and co-operation 
between countries be strengthened as 
a result of the crisis? 
Our biggest advantage over the virus 
is our ability to co-operate effectively. A 
virus in China and a virus in the United 
States cannot swap tips about how 
to infect humans. But China can teach 
the US many valuable lessons about 
coronavirus and how to deal with it. 
More than that – China can actually send 
experts and equipment to directly help 
the US, and the US can similarly help other 
countries. The viruses cannot do anything 
like that. 
And of all forms of co-operation, 
the sharing of information is probably 
the most important, because you cannot 
do anything without accurate information. 
You cannot develop medicines 
and vaccines without reliable information. 
Indeed, even isolation depends on 
information. If you don’t understand how 
a disease spreads, how can you quarantine 
people against it? 
For example, isolation against AIDS 
is very different from isolation against 
COVID-19. To isolate yourself against AIDS, 
you need to use a condom while having 
sex, but there is no problem talking face 
to face with an HIV+ person – or shaking 
their hands and even hugging them. 
COVID-19 is an entirely different story. 
To know how to isolate yourself from 
a particular epidemic, you first need 
reliable information about what causes 
this epidemic. Is it viruses or bacteria? Is 
it transmitted through blood or breath? 
Does it endanger children or the elderly? Is 
there just one strain of the virus, or several 
mutant strains? 
If we want to enjoy 
trustworthy scientific 
information in a time 
of emergency, 
we must invest 
in it in normal times

In recent years, authoritarian and populist 
politicians have sought not only to block 
the free flow of information, but even 
to undermine the public’s trust in science. 
Some politicians depicted scientists 
as a sinister elite, disconnected from 
“the people”. These politicians told their 
followers not to believe what scientists are 
saying about climate change, or even about 
vaccinations. It should now be obvious 
to everyone how dangerous such populist 
messages are. In a time of crisis, we need 
information to flow openly, and we need 
people to trust scientific experts rather than 
political demagogues. 
Fortunately, in the current emergency 
most people indeed turn to science. 
The Catholic Church instructs the faithful 
to stay away from the churches. Israel has 
closed down its synagogues. The Islamic 
Republic of Iran is punishing people who 
go to mosques. Temples and sects of all 
kinds have suspended public ceremonies. 
And all because scientists have made some 
calculations and recommended closing 
down these holy places.
I hope that people will remember 
the importance of trustworthy scientific 
information even after this crisis is over. 
If we want to enjoy trustworthy scientific 
information in a time of emergency, 
we must invest in it in normal times. 
Scientific information doesn’t come 
down from heaven, nor does it spring 
from the mind of individual geniuses. 
It depends on having strong independent 
institutions like universities, hospitals 
and newspapers. Institutions that not only 
research the truth, but are also free to tell 
people the truth, without being afraid 
of being punished by some authoritarian 
government. It takes years to build such 
institutions. But it is worth it. A society that 
provides citizens with a good scientific 
education, and that is served by strong 
independent institutions, can deal with 
an epidemic far better than a brutal 
dictatorship that has to constantly police 
an ignorant population. 
For example, how do you make millions 
of people wash their hands with soap 
every day? One way to do it is to place 
a policeman, or perhaps a camera, 
in every toilet, and punish people who 
fail to wash their hands. Another way 
is to teach people in school about viruses 
and bacteria, explain that soap can remove 
or kill these pathogens, and then trust 
people to make up their own minds. 
What do you think, which method is more 
efficient? 
 How important is it for countries 
to work together to disseminate reliable 
information?
Countries need to share trustworthy 
information not only about narrow 
medical issues, but also about a wide 
range of other issues – from the economic 
impact of the crisis to the psychological 
condition of citizens. Suppose country 
X is currently debating which kind 
of lockdown policy to adopt. It has to take 
into consideration not only the spread 
of the disease, but also the economic 
and psychological costs of lockdown. 
Other countries have already faced this 
dilemma before, and tried different 
policies. Instead of acting on the basis 
of pure speculations and repeating past 
mistakes, country X can examine what 
were the actual consequences of the 
different policies adopted in China, 
the Republic of  Korea, Sweden, Italy 
and the United Kingdom. It can thereby 
make better decisions. But only if all 
these countries honestly report not just 
the number of sick and dead people, but 
also what happened to their economies 
and to the mental health of their citizens. 
 The rise of AI and the need for technical 
solutions has seen private companies 
come forward. In this context, is it still 
possible to develop global ethical 
principles and restore international co-
operation? 
As private companies get involved, 
it becomes even more important to craft 
global ethical principles and restore 
international co-operation. Some private 
companies may be motivated by greed 
more than solidarity, so they must be 
regulated carefully. Even those acting 
benevolently are not directly accountable 
to the public, so it is dangerous to allow 
them to accumulate too much power. 
This is particularly true when talking 
about surveillance. We are witnessing 
the creation of new surveillance systems 
all over the world, by both governments 
and corporations. The current crisis 
might mark an important watershed 
in the history of surveillance. First, 
because it might legitimate and normalize 
the deployment of mass surveillance tools 
in countries that have so far rejected them. 
Secondly, and even more importantly, 
it signifies a dramatic transition from “over 
the skin” to “under the skin” surveillance. 
Previously, governments and corporations 
monitored mainly your actions in the world 
– where you go, who you meet. Now they 
have become more interested in what 
is happening inside your body. In your 
medical condition, body temperature, 
blood pressure. That kind of biometric 
information can tell governments 
and corporations far more about you than 
ever before. 
 Could you suggest some ethical 
principles for how these new surveillance 
systems can be regulated? 
Ideally, the surveillance system should be 
operated by a special health-care authority 
rather than by a private company or by 
the security services. The health-care 
authority should be narrowly focused on 
preventing epidemics, and should have 
no other commercial or political interests. 

I am particularly alarmed when I hear 
people comparing the COVID-19 crisis 
to war, and calling for the security services 
to take over. This isn’t a war. It is a health-
care crisis. There are no human enemies 
to kill. It is all about taking care of people. 
The dominant image in war is a soldier 
with a rifle storming forward. Now 
the image in our heads should be a nurse 
changing bed-sheets in a hospital. Soldiers 
and nurses have a very different way 
of thinking. If you want to put somebody 
in charge, don’t put a soldier in charge. Put 
a nurse.  
The health-care authority should gather 
the minimum amount of data necessary for 
the narrow task of preventing epidemics, 
and should not share this data with any 
other governmental body – especially not 
the police. Nor should it share the data 
with private companies. It should make 
sure that data gathered about individuals 
is never used to harm or manipulate 
these individuals – for example, leading 
to people losing their jobs or their 
insurance.  
The health-care authority may make 
the data accessible to scientific research, 
but only if the fruits of this research are 
made freely available to humanity, and if 
any incidental profits are reinvested 
in providing people with better health care. 
In contrast to all these limitations on data 
sharing, the individuals themselves should 
be given as much control of the data 
gathered about them. They should be free 
to examine their personal data and benefit 
from it.
Finally, while such surveillance systems 
would probably be national in character, 
to really prevent epidemics, the different 
health-care authorities would have to co-
operate with one another. Since pathogens 
don’t respect national borders, unless 
we combine data from different countries, 
it will be difficult to spot and stop 
epidemics. If national surveillance is done 
by an independent health-care authority 
which is free of political and commercial 
interests, it would be much easier for such 
national authorities to co-operate globally. 
 You have spoken of a recent rapid 
deterioration of trust in the international 
system. How do you see the profound 
changes in multilateral co-operation 
in the future?
I don’t know what will happen 
in the future. It depends on the choices 
we make in the present. Countries can 
choose to compete for scarce resources 
and pursue an egoistic and isolationist 
policy, or they could choose to help one 
another in the spirit of global solidarity. 
This choice will shape both the course 
of the present crisis and the future of the 
international system for years to come. 
I hope countries will choose solidarity 
and co-operation. We cannot stop this 
epidemic without close co-operation 
between countries all over the world. 
Even if a particular country succeeds 
in stopping the epidemic in its territory 
for a while, as long as the epidemic 
continues to spread elsewhere, it might 
return everywhere. Even worse, viruses 
constantly mutate. A mutation in the virus 
anywhere in the world might make it more 
contagious or more deadly, putting 
in danger all of humankind. The only 
way we can really protect ourselves, is by 
helping to protect all humans. 
The same is true of the economic crisis. 
If every country looks only after its own 
interests, the result will be a severe 
global recession that will hit everyone. 
Rich countries like the US, Germany 
and Japan will muddle through one way 
or the other. But poorer countries in Africa, 
Asia and Latin America might completely 
collapse. The US can afford a $2 trillion 
rescue package for its economy. Ecuador, 
Nigeria and Pakistan don’t have similar 
resources. We need a global economic 
rescue plan. 
Unfortunately, so far we don’t see anything 
like the strong global leadership we need. 
The US, which acted as world leader during 
the 2014 Ebola epidemic and the 2008 
financial crisis, has abdicated this job. 
The Trump administration has made 
it very clear that it cares only about the US, 
and has abandoned even its closest allies 
in Western Europe. Even if the US now 
comes up with some kind of global plan, 
who would trust it, and who would follow 
its lead? Would you follow a leader whose 
motto is “Me First”? 
But every crisis is also an opportunity. 
Hopefully the current epidemic will help 
humankind realize the acute danger 
posed by global disunity. If indeed this 
epidemic eventually results in closer global 
co-operation, it will be a victory not only 
against the coronavirus, but against all 
the other dangers that threaten humankind 
– from climate change to nuclear war. 
National surveillance must be done 
by an independent health-care 
authority which is free of political 
and commercial interests

 You speak about how the choices 
we make now will affect our societies 
economically, politically and culturally, 
for years to come. What are these choices 
and who will be responsible for making 
them? 
We are faced with many choices. Not 
only the choice between nationalistic 
isolationism and global solidarity. Another 
important question is whether people 
would support the rise of dictators, 
or would they insist on dealing with 
the emergency in a democratic way? 
When governments spend billions to help 
failing businesses, would they save big 
corporations or small family businesses? 
As people switch to working from home 
and communicating online, will this 
result in the collapse of organized labour, 
or would we see better protection for 
workers’ rights?
All these are political choices. We must 
be aware that we are now facing not just 
a health-care crisis, but also a political 
crisis. The media and the citizens should 
not allow themselves to be completely 
distracted by the epidemic. It is of course 
important to follow the latest news about 
the sickness itself – how many people 
died today? How many people were 
infected? But it is equally important to pay 
attention to politics and to put pressure 
on politicians to do the right thing. 
Citizens should pressure politicians to act 
in the spirit of global solidarity; to co-
operate with other countries rather than 
blame them; to distribute funds in a fair 
way; to preserve democratic checks 
and balances – even in an emergency. 
The time to do all that is now. Whoever 
we elect to government in coming years 
will not be able to reverse the decisions 
that are taken now. If you become 
president in 2021, it is like coming 
to a party when the party is already over, 
and the only thing left to do is wash 
the dirty dishes. If you become president 
in 2021, you will discover that the previous 
government has already distributed 
tens of billions of dollars – and you have 
a mountain of debts to repay. The previous 
government has already restructured 
the job market – and you cannot start from 
scratch again. The previous government 
has already introduced new surveillance 
systems – and they cannot be abolished 
overnight. So don’t wait till 2021. Monitor 
what the politicians are doing right now.
