But no one around me had ever faced 
a situation like this before. Thus, it was 
dicult to nd the right expression. When 
the shooting started, I had just nished 
my studies at the Russian Institute of 
Theatre Arts. I had a spring in my step. 
Now, I was going to be playing a woman 
paralysed by pain. 
Before I started shooting, I had to run and 
dance until I was literally exhausted. This 
state of exhaustion was enough for a few 
takes, but I quickly regained my energy 
and had to start running and dancing 
again. Even more so because, as the story 
progressed, my character’s level of fatigue 
increased. 
Interview by 
Katerina Markelova, UNESCO
Familiar yet invisible people, 
around 2.5 million migrants 
have left their homes in Central 
Asia to try their luck in Moscow. 
Most of them eke out a living 
doing precarious jobs. In Ayka 
– a feature lm which won the 
Best Actress award at the Cannes 
Film Festival in 2018 – Russian-
Kazakh writer-director Sergey 
Dvortsevoy and Kazakh actress 
Samal Yeslyamova explore the 
fate of those who are willing to 
sacrice everything in the hope 
of a better life.
Sergey Dvortsevoy, how did you 
come up with the idea for this lm?
Dvortsevoy: I was appalled to learn 
that a large number of women from 
Kyrgyzstan were abandoning their 
children in Moscow’s maternity hospitals. 
Although I have lived in Moscow for 
over twenty years, I am originally from 
Shymkent, Kazakhstan. I am therefore 
familiar with the culture and mentality of 
Central Asia. I wanted to understand what 
could be pushing these women to do 
something so drastic.
I started to do some research, to meet 
women who have been through such an 
ordeal. Some of them, like the character 
played by Samal, commit this desperate act 
after being raped. Others do it because the 
child was conceived outside marriage, and 
it is impossible for them to return to their 
country because they would be rejected. 
I was very touched by this situation and 
decided to make a lm about it.



Samal Yeslyamova and
Sergey Dvortsevoy:
Samal Yeslyamova, in the lm you 
play a Kyrgyz migrant who is forced to 
abandon her newborn child to return to 
work. How did you prepare for this role?
Yeslyamova: My character lives in 
extremely dicult conditions. I knew 
Sergey as a director, and realized how 
complicated it would be to play this role 
under his direction. When he becomes 
interested in a subject, his approach is 
more that of a documentary lmmaker 
than of a director of ction.
I prepared myself for the role for 
a long time. I rst interviewed my 
family, my acquaintances, my friends. 

Reality on the big screen 
Ý  Sergey Dvortsevoy and Samal 
Yeslyamova after the screening of Ayka, 
the opening lm of the rst Kazakhstan 
Film Festival in France.
Our Guests
Our Guests were interviewed during 
the rst Festival of Kazakhstan 
Film in France, held in Paris from 
26-29 September 2019. Samal 
Yeslyamova was the guest of honour. 

Samal, you express your character’s 
feelings with so little dialogue. 
How did you manage that? 
Yeslyamova: There were a lot of takes. 
Sergey edited them right away, and 
the next day we would watch the 
results. If we felt that something didn’t 
work, we would shoot it again. It was a 
permanent work in progress. The lm was 
constructed as we went along.
And then we talked a lot with migrants 
from Central Asia. Some of them told 
us that eight of them lived in a single 
room. Sometimes one person would stay 
in a room during the day, and another 
would use the same room at night. They 
also told us how much they missed their 
children. To avoid the painful moment 
of separation, some of them preferred 
to leave early in the morning, when the 
children were still asleep. When they 
returned home, their children would not 
leave their side, afraid that they would 
be left alone again. These painful stories, 
and the shooting itself, were so hard 
and psychologically charged that I can 
say that this lm was like a third school 
for me. 
How do you explain that this lm, which 
shows a few days in the life of a Kyrgyz 
migrant in Moscow, was able to nd 
such resonance with audiences abroad?
Dvortsevoy: At each screening, the lm 
generates strong reactions from the 
audience. I wasn’t expecting that at all. 
When I started working on the lm in 
2012, the issue of migrants was not so 
acute a phenomenon in Moscow. At that 
time, the Western European countries 
were not facing such an inux of 
migrants either. Today, these population 
movements are aecting almost all 
countries.
The other thing is that, in all my lms, 
I try to avoid anything that seems fake 
in the acting. When this authenticity is 
achieved, the audience can identify with 
the character. I knew that by watching 
this lm, the audience would stop seeing 
these migrants in terms of what they do, 
but would begin to see them as people. 
Cinema cannot change the way things 
are, but it can reach people’s hearts. If a 
work succeeds in touching the soul, it is 
an immense satisfaction for the creator. 
Some migrant workers participated in 
the lm alongside professional actors. 
Why did you make this choice?
Dvortsevoy: For the same reason – that 
is, for the sake of truth. Non-professional 
actors have a big advantage over 
professional actors. Their sincerity 
shows on their faces and in their words. 
Ayka is your second feature lm, before 
which you made documentaries. Why 
did you feel the need to switch to ction?
Dvortsevoy: In fact, I had already started 
to feel restricted by the documentary 
format. I couldn’t have made a 
documentary about a story like Ayka’s 
because I would never have been able 
to get close enough to this woman’s 
most intimate life. Besides, there is a 
contradiction in documentary lmmaking 
– the more dicult the character’s 
situation, the more dramatic the lm is, 
and the better the result for the director. 
This ethical problem has been very 
painful for me. Although it is not easy to 
make a feature lm, it is still ction.
The main character literally takes 
up the entire space in the lm, 
from beginning to end. Why is that?
Dvortsevoy: On the screen, we see Ayka’s 
life in the present. We have to understand 
who she is through her eyes, her body 
and her behaviour. It is through these, 
more than through her few lines, that we 
must also glimpse her past and predict 
her future. Samal has very expressive 
eyes, which the camera hardly leaves 
for a moment.
Ý  Ayka, seen in the foreground, with 
migrant women workers at a clandestine 
sweat-shop in Moscow. A still from the lm. 

Our Guests
They bring to the lm the roughness of 
life, the authenticity and the scent of real 
life. That’s why I wanted non-professional 
actors to join the cast. But that requires 
a lot of training. Many people who have 
seen the lm said that they could not 
distinguish between the professional and 
non-professional actors – I take that as 
a great compliment.
Some of these migrants were on Russian 
territory illegally, which couldn’t have 
made shooting any easier.
Dvortsevoy: That did indeed happen 
many times. We would choose someone, 
check their papers, start working, train 
them in acting, and they would disappear 
overnight. They would then phone us 
from Kyrgyzstan to say they had been 
deported. In Moscow, it is extremely 
dicult to obtain a residence permit 
legally, so the majority of migrants use 
false documents – sometimes even 
without knowing it. People arrested in 
possession of forged documents are tried 
and deported after a few days. We would 
then have to search for another person 
and start all over again.
Were these unusual shooting conditions 
the reason the lm took six years to make?
Dvortsevoy: That is one of the reasons, 
but not the only one. To highlight the 
heroine’s dicult conditions, we shot 
the lm in winter, in the middle of a 
snowstorm. But as it turned out, it hardly 
snowed in Moscow for two years in 
a row. We tried to continue shooting 
using articial snow, but this lm did not 
support such artice. So we had to wait 
until the weather was favourable, and 
there were snowstorms. Waiting is a very 
complicated state.
Samal, how did you feel when you heard 
your name announced for the Best 
Actress award at the Cannes Festival?
Yeslyamova: When the lm was chosen 
to be in competition in the ocial 
selection, it was still being edited. The 
month before the festival, we worked 
hard to ensure that it was completed 
on time – the director slept for only 
two hours a night, and the rest of the 
crew, four hours. Each of us performed 
about three dierent functions. At the 
beginning of the festival, I was so tired 
that even though I was aware of the 
importance of the moment, I only felt 
the emotional impact a little later. 
When I heard my name, I felt both joy and 
disappointment. In fact, I was hoping that 
the lm would win the Palme d’Or. What 
would my role have been without such 
a talented director and dedicated team? 
So this prize is not only mine, it goes to 
the whole lm.
What does Samal’s award mean for you, 
Sergey?
Dvortsevoy: It is totally justied. I am 
happy that an actress who has thrown 
all her strength into the lm has been 
rewarded. It is proof that thorough work 
and a sincere rapport with what is being 
done can elevate you to the top. But 
this level of commitment is not given 
to all actors.
In addition, this recognition is important 
for Kazakhstan. It is the rst time that the 
Best Actress award at Cannes has been 
given to a country in the post-Soviet 
area. This award has also made it possible 
to understand that Ayka is a lm that 
touches people beyond our borders. Its 
reach will continue to grow long after its 
release. For a creator, this is essential.
Winner of the Best Actress award at 
the 71st edition of the Cannes Film 
Festival in 2018, Kazakh actress Samal 
Yeslyamova, born in 1984, started her 
career in film by chance. After considering 
becoming a journalist, she studied drama 
at the Petropavlovsk College of Arts in 
Kazakhstan. Before she graduated, she got 
a role in Sergey Dvortsevoy’s film, Tulpan, 
which won the Un Certain Regard award 
at the Cannes Film Festival in 2008. She 
graduated from the Russian Institute of 
Theatre Arts (GITIS), Moscow, in 2011.
Cinema cannot 
change the 
way things 
are, but it can 
reach people’s 
hearts. If a work 
succeeds in 
touching the soul, 
it is an immense 
satisfaction for 
the creator 
Russian-Kazakh director Sergey 
Dvortsevoy was born in 1962 in 
Shymkent, Kazakhstan. He worked as an 
aeronautical engineer before enrolling in 
the documentary section of an advanced 
course for screenwriters and film directors 
at a Moscow film school, at the age of 
29. After making four highly regarded 
documentaries, he turned to feature films. 
His second full-length feature, Ayka (2018), 
has won awards in several international 
competitions. In 2019, he became a 
member of the Academy of Motion Picture 
Arts and Sciences, which awards the Oscars.
Ü  Sergey Dvortsevoy at the rst 
Kazakhstan Film Festival in France: 
“It is important that there are festivals 
to show complex lms like Ayka.” ©
