Helen Pankhurst
Far from seeming like something in 
history, the resistance of the suragettes 
a hundred years ago, with their demand 
for equal political representation, seems 
as relevant today as it was then. There 
seems to be something in the air, globally, 
that is a reminder of those early struggles, 
which my great-grandmother spear-
headed. This includes millions of feminists 
marching in the streets again, challenging 
heads of states and governments who are 
openly adopting policies that are socially 
regressive.
In spite of the fact that huge progress 
has been made, women the world over 
are still ghting for equality. Why, at the 
present rate, will we have to wait till 2069 
in the United Kingdom for the gender 
pay gap to disappear? Why, in 2015, did 
eleven per cent of women lose their jobs 
due to pregnancy? Why, globally, has one 
in three women experienced physical or 
sexual violence?
The journey of every country in the ght 
for women’s rights is specic to that 
country. And yet, so much is common 
in the experiences of women across 
space and time. Gender inequality 
and discrimination remain integral to 
our political and economic systems, 
to people’s identities, to cultures and 
religions – to power.
Two years after the #MeToo movement erupted in the United States 
and twenty-ve years after the Fourth World Conference on Women in 
Beijing, Helen Pankhurst assesses the dierent waves of feminism over 
the last 100 years. The activist and author also writes about the roles of 
her great-grandmother Emmeline Pankhurst and grandmother Sylvia, 
leaders of the suragette movement, who helped win British women 
the right to vote in the early twentieth century. 
Helen Pankhurst:
Feminism
is in my blood
Ü  The See Red Women’s Workshop was 
founded in 1974 by three British former art 
students. It focused on creating feminist 
posters to combat sexist images of women. ©

A new wave
Today, as was the case a century ago, it is 
the unity around one particular issue that 
has captured the moment. The issue at 
this time, which has become denitional 
of the fourth wave of feminism, is 
workplace violence. This wave is mainly 
dened by the #MeToo Movement, which 
started in the US in October 2017, and has 
reverberated around the world – known 
dierently, for example, as #WatashiMo in 
Japan and #BalanceTonPorc in France. 
Importantly, the voices of individuals 
speaking out and challenging 
discriminatory social norms are now 
being taken up in the form of structural 
change, nationally and globally. After 
years of campaigning, the landmark 
International Labour Organization (ILO) 
Convention on Violence and Harassment 
at Work was adopted in June 2019. Eort 
is now focused on ensuring its ratication. 
Overall, the waves are rst and foremost 
a description of the momentum 
created by individuals coming together 
to challenge the status quo – with 
increasing numbers becoming part 
of the force for change, and together 
changing the structures and policies 
of society. The result not only changes 
what people think and how they behave, 
but also spear-heads policy change. 
The metaphor of waves to describe 
feminism was introduced retrospectively, 
and it has stuck, as a simple way of 
explaining how energy and priorities 
have shifted over time. 
Social media, a tool of both oppression 
and liberation, has been a dening 
characteristic of the fourth wave. This 
current wave is acutely aware of – in fact, 
is dened by – an understanding not so 
much of the dierent political positions 
women might hold, but of the dierent 
layers of privilege and vulnerability that 
women experience. 
The term intersectionality, coined by 
Kimberlé Cranshaw, puts this centre 
stage and demands an understanding 
of dierences beyond gender – such as 
those of age, reproductive status, class, 
colour, sexuality and ability. 
Women leaders have also brought their 
feminism to other causes − for example, 
in the current wave, Black Lives Matter, 
the global activist movement started 
by African Americans in the US, and the 
environmental movement by Sweden’s 
young Greta Thunberg.
There are also two calendar moments 
that are umbilically linked to the global 
women’s movement. The International 
Day of the Girl Child on 11 October 
is an annual reminder of the specic 
constraints facing girls, and the reality 
that their voices are the least likely to 
be heard in any policies or decisions – 
including those that most aect their 
own lives.
Ý  Emmeline Pankhurst being arrested on 
21 May 1914, while trying to present a petition 
to the king at Buckingham Palace, London.
© Museum of London

The other key dates on the global feminism 
calendar fall between 25 November and 
10 December, known as the 16 days of 
Activism against Gender-based Violence. 
This period highlights both the problems 
remaining, and the ongoing activism 
against gender-based violence in the form 
of sexual abuse of all kinds. One way or 
another, feminist activism always circles 
back to gender-based violence – the ip 
side of women’s lack of political, social and 
economic power.
The vote, key to all 
change
Starting in the late nineteenth and 
early twentieth centuries, the rst wave 
of feminism built on the demands of 
women centuries earlier − for a greater 
voice. It also built on campaigns in 
which women were pivotal, such as the 
anti-slavery movement. Many concerns 
were addressed, including rights to 
education and employment; double 
standards around sexuality; tracking 
and violence against women; temperance 
(anti-alcohol campaigning); and women-
led anti-colonial and anti-war protests. 
This foundational wave is, however, best 
known for campaigns around citizenship, 
the right to vote and to be voted into 
parliament. The vote was seen at the time 
as the key to all other changes.
That rst ght was particularly bitter in 
the UK. Emmeline Pankhurst (1858-1928), 
the leader of the suragette movement 
and my great-grandmother, was at the 
forefront of that ght – which started in 
Manchester in 1903. She was, and has 
remained, an iconic global representation 
of women’s resistance, as a consequence. 
The movement resulted in hundreds of 
thousands of people, mainly women, 
marching, but also to the destruction of 
property, to thousands being imprisoned, 
to being force-fed, to dying for the 
cause. As the leader of the movement, 
Emmeline’s courage, her determination, 
her vision of gender equality has 
continued to inspire. She was, and 
remains, a controversial character, even 
among supporters of her objectives. 
Emmeline’s three daughters were all 
involved in the movement − her second 
daughter, Sylvia (1882-1960), was 
my grandmother. Sylvia increasingly 
disagreed with her mother’s leadership 
of the movement – opposing her 
authoritarian decision-making, with the 
focus on wealthier women, and with 
the militancy.  
Ü  The Italian feminist movement 
Non Una Di Meno (Not one less), 
born in 2016 in the wake of the 
Argentinian movement of the same 
name, Ni Una Menos, to denounce 
gender violence and feminicide.
Ý  The Prisoners' Pageant – made up 
of more than 600 suragettes who had 
served prison sentences – participating 
in a procession in support of a bill that 
would allow women to vote, in 1910. 
In the centre, Sylvia Pankhurst, 
holding a model of the prison gates. 

She also believed that campaigning for 
the vote needed to be done together with 
strategies through which working women 
could address their daily struggles.
Furthermore, Sylvia argued for the 
importance of universal surage – at 
a time when many working-class men 
didn’t have the vote either − and was an 
outspoken pacist when it came 
to the Second World War. Following the 
invasion of Ethiopia by Mussolini, this 
became another cause that she took on. 
She moved to Ethiopia, where she was 
buried with a state funeral.
The splits in our family are a reection 
of how very personal the political can 
be, and of the schisms throughout the 
history of women’s rights. 
Feminism’s second wave, from 
the 1960s, spotlighted economic 
rights such as equal pay and the 
challenge to gendered hierarchies 
of work, which had resulted in 
women being driven into 
poorly-paid jobs.  
Sexual freedom and individual choice 
characterized the third wave, from the 
1990s – thirty years later. The period 
also saw greater government and intra-
governmental commitments to address 
gender issues. The United Nations World 
Conferences on Women took place in this 
time frame. 
Personal inuences
The Pankhursts were extraordinary 
women in their day, but how have they 
inuenced me, a woman in the twenty-
rst century? Without a doubt, I am 
moulded by having had to think about the 
dierences of opinion within my family, 
and also by the fact that I was brought 
up in Ethiopia. In 1992, I wrote a book on 
women in Ethiopia, based on my thesis, 
called Gender, Development and Identity.
Last year, I turned to women’s experiences 
in the UK with the book Deeds Not Words: 
The Story of Women’s Rights, Then and 
Now. It considers how far we have come 
over the last hundred years, and has 
facilitated innumerable discussions with 
audiences here and abroad. 
If feminism is in my blood, so too is an 
understanding of the power of solidarity 
and purpose created by marches. The 
celebration of global feminism around 
International Women’s Day and the 
March4Women events – in London, in 
particular – have long been highlights of 
my year. 
On 8 March this year (2020), I will be 
marching as so many have done, and will 
continue to do so right around the world 
– banners held up high. We still have a 
long way to go.
A human rights activist and author, 
Helen Pankhurst is an advisor for 
CARE International, a professor at 
the University of Manchester, and a 
chancellor at Suffolk University. She 
divides her time between Ethiopia and 
the United Kingdom. 
Û  Image for the Greater 
Manchester for Women 
2028 coalition. Convened by 
Helen Pankhurst, the coalition 
aims to achieve gender equality 
in Greater Manchester, United 
Kingdom – where the suragette 
movement was born – by 2028.
