Jens Boel
National interests and multilateralism are 
not necessarily antagonistic. They can 
even be complementary. It was from this 
idea that the League of Nations was born. 
Far from being idealistic dreamers, its 
founders were convinced that the “spirit 
of internationality” and state realism were 
inextricably linked.
The League of Nations was established 
as part of the Treaty of Versailles, which 
marked the end of the First World War. 
The creation of this new intergovernmental 
organization was inspired by United States 
President Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen 
Points declaration – outlining his proposals 
for a post-war peace settlement – which 
he presented to the US Congress in 
January 1918. The idea of a “society 
of nations”, however, is much older. It 
dates back to international conferences 
in the second half of the nineteenth 
century. It was during the Hague Peace 
Conferences in 1899 and 1907 that the 
decisive move from the idea of the Concert 
of Nations – orchestrated by the major 
European powers – to true, inclusive 
multilateralism, was made. 
At the 1907 conference, European 
states had become a minority at an 
intergovernmental meeting for the rst 
time – due in particular to the presence 
of eighteen Latin American states, out of 
the total of forty-four states. The creation 
of the League represented a historical 
breakthrough and precedent. This was 
in spite of important limitations, which 
reected the historical context of the time 
– in particular, colonialism, and the refusal 
of governments to accept the principle of 
gender equality.
A hundred years ago, on 10 January 1920, the League of Nations 
was born out of the rubble of the First World War. The International 
Institute of Intellectual Cooperation (IIIC), UNESCO's predecessor, 
was created in its wake. The aim was to overcome the national 
egoisms that had led to the disaster, by focusing on multilateralism. 
This dream would not survive the inter-war period. But in an era 
facing challenges such as war, terrorism, economic crises and climate 
change, the credo of the founding fathers of the League for a more 
united world has not lost any of its relevance. 
preventing or sanctioning the territorial 
aggressions of Japan, Italy and Germany 
in the 1930s. The outbreak of a second 
devastating world war saw the dream 
completely shattered – until the birth of 
the UN on 24 October 1945 brought it 
back to life, against all odds. 
The League
of Nations:
A universal dream that has stood 
the test of time
Never again
Like the United Nations twenty-ve 
years later, the League emerged from a 
world war – with the rm determination 
that never again should such a tragedy 
be allowed to happen. But the lack of 
will on the part of the major powers 
incapacitated the League from eectively 
Ý  A plenary session of the International Commission on 
Intellectual Cooperation, attended by well-known gures in culture 
and science, among them Albert Einstein. Geneva, in the 1920s.

Soon after its creation, the League’s 
members accepted the idea – of the 
French statesman and scholar Léon 
Bourgeois (1851-1925) and winner 
of the 1920 Nobel Peace prize – that 
international intellectual co-operation 
was an essential precondition for 
peace. Thus, in 1922, the International 
Commission on Intellectual Cooperation 
was created. The International Institute 
of Intellectual Cooperation (IIIC), the 
executive branch of the commission, was 
established in 1925. These organizations 
were the predecessors of UNESCO, or, “the 
Forgotten UNESCO”, as French historian 
Jean-Jacques Renoliet called it. 
In concrete terms, the IIIC established 
international norms and standards, 
organized conferences and published 
books on themes such as The Future of 
Culture; The Future of the European Spirit; 
Towards a New Humanism and Europe – 
Latin America (about cultural relations). 
Probably its most famous publication 
was Why War?, an exchange of letters 
between Albert Einstein and Sigmund 
Freud, published by the institute in 1933, 
which discussed the causes of war, and 
how to prevent it. 
Among the many intellectuals who 
worked with the IIIC were French 
philosopher Henri Bergson (1859-1941); 
the physicist and chemist Marie Curie 
(1867-1934); philosopher and statesman 
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (1888-1975), 
who later went on to become India’s 
President from 1962-1967; the Chilean 
poet and diplomat Gabriela Mistral (1889-
1957) who, in 1945, became the rst Latin 
American writer to be awarded the Nobel 
Prize in Literature; and German author 
Thomas Mann (1875-1955), winner of the 
Nobel Prize in Literature, 1929. 
Lessons learnt
The IIIC quickly faced the challenges 
related to the inter-war context, and was 
forced to reect on the diculties of its 
time. For example, in 1933, there was a 
proposal that the organization reprint 
the books that were burned by the Nazis 
in Germany. Its leadership refrained 
from doing so out of fear of oending 
Germany, and provoking the country’s 
departure from the institute. Eventually, 
Germany left the League, but for dierent 
reasons. 
When UNESCO was created, its founders 
learned from the experience of IIIC, 
both from its successes and failures. 
Part of the institute’s weakness was the 
over-emphasis on co-operation among 
intellectuals (“a society of minds”), and 
the relatively secondary role of politics. 
The League 
emerged from a 
world war, with the 
firm determination 
that never again 
should such a 
tragedy be allowed 
to happen

This is why a greater role was reserved 
for States within UNESCO’s structure. In 
addition, education, that had not played 
a particularly prominent role in the IIIC, 
became UNESCO’s main programme 
sector – emphasizing its fundamental 
signicance for the Organization’s 
peacebuilding mission.
In several areas, the IIIC achieved a 
number of successes, which laid the 
foundations that UNESCO could build 
on. These include work on languages 
and translations; the organization of 
international conferences that encourage 
debates on key philosophical subjects; 
and standard-setting work – in the elds 
of libraries and museums, for example. 
The preservation of cultural heritage 
was already one of the concerns of the 
IIIC, as was cultural diversity – called 
“the particularity of cultures” at the time. 
Work on textbooks – particularly on history 
and geography – with a view to ghting 
prejudices and stereotypes, was started 
by the IIIC and continued by UNESCO. The 
role of the mass media – radio in particular 
– for the promotion of peace was another 
priority area for the IIIC, which was taken 
up by UNESCO. 
A realistic dream
The IIIC was what the American historian, 
Jay Winter, called “a small utopia”. Its 
archives – now a part of UNESCO’s 
archives – bear witness to dreams 
and hopes that were momentarily 
defeated, but which were reborn after 
the Second World War. The founding of 
the institute represents the rst time in 
the history of humanity that there was 
an attempt to create a truly universal 
organization for intellectual co-operation. 
There were many shortcomings, but it 
was a beginning, a rst attempt.
The work of the IIIC, its successes and 
failures, its political strengths and 
weaknesses – all this is reected in the 
archives. In 2017, their universal value 
was acknowledged and highlighted by 
their inclusion in UNESCO’s Memory of 
the World Register. In the same year, a 
project was launched to digitize these 
records (and completed in 2019), making 
them universally accessible online. 
The creation of the League of Nations and 
its associated bodies for the promotion 
of intellectual co-operation, represented 
the concrete emergence of a dream 
of universality and global solidarity of 
humanity. This seems more relevant than 
ever today, when it is under erce attack 
in many parts of the world. The dream is 
still with us. 
A Danish historian, Jens Boel was 
Chief Archivist of the UNESCO archives 
from 1995 to 2017. He initiated the 
UNESCO History Project in 2004 and 
organized international conferences 
on UNESCO's history to encourage the 
use of its archives. Boel's next book is 
on the history of the Intergovernmental 
Oceanographic Commission (IOC), 
created in 1960.

Û  The Human Rights and Alliance of 
Civilizations Room, one of the largest 
conference rooms at the United Nations 
Oce in Geneva.
