Nathalie Strub-Wourgaft
Director of Neglected Tropical Diseases 
at the Drugs for Neglected Diseases 
initiative (DNDi), an independent research 
organization based in Geneva, Switzerland .
Interview by Agnès Bardon
UNESCO
 What motivated the creation of the 
COVID-19 Clinical Research Coalition? 
Clinical research on the coronavirus was 
already very active by mid-March – but 
it was concentrated in rich countries, 
where the majority of infected people 
were also located. There were a number 
of us who were concerned that no 
clinical trials were planned in countries 
in the South, whether in Africa, Asia 
or Latin America. There were still only a few 
cases there, but projections predicted that 
the epidemic would escalate, particularly 
in Africa. There was a clear imbalance 
between North and South in research. 
That is why we launched the Coalition. 
We still had in mind what happened at 
the time of the health crisis with the Ebola 
virus. A multitude of research projects had 
emerged at that time, but there was no co-
ordination and no sharing of information 
between these different projects. It was 
necessary to avoid repeating those 
mistakes.
As COVID-19 was a new disease, 
everything had to be done from scratch 
– new protocols had to be invented, 
samples had to be described, clinical 
images had to be created. The research 
developed in parallel with epidemiology. 
It was necessary to go very quickly, but 
it was also necessary to avoid duplication 
in order to provide rapid answers to basic 
questions – how to avoid fatalities, how 
to avoid hospitalization, how to protect 
oneself, who were the risk groups? To make 
progress on these issues, however, a high 
level of analytical power is needed, which 
means bringing together information 
and data.
 Why is it necessary to develop specific 
research for countries with low resources? 
The therapeutic propositions that could 
be developed in the North are not 
applicable as such in the South – if only 
because comorbidities are not the same 
from one region to another. In Africa, for 
example, malaria, tuberculosis, or HIV 
are widespread, which is not the case 
in Europe. Moreover, health systems 
are different. In industrialized countries, 
hospitals have had difficulty coping 
with the influx of patients with severe 
forms of the disease. What about those 
not equipped with artificial respirators? 
As far as treatments are concerned, 
the molecules that are showing some 
promising results today are injectable 
molecules, and therefore require trained 
hospital staff. If this personnel is not 
available, other therapeutic solutions must 
be found. 
In addition, it is unclear whether the virus 
is the same everywhere. It would appear 
there are geographical variants. Finally, 
the problems addressed by the social 
sciences also depend on the regional 
context – lockdown is not the same 
in Delhi as it is in a rural area in France. 
The impact of this confinement and its 
acceptability by the population varies 
from one region to another. Therefore, 
in research, the notion of context 
is essential. You cannot conduct scientific 
research in industrialized countries 
and apply it everywhere else. Research 
must be guided by the priorities 
of countries.
 Could a health crisis of this magnitude 
raise awareness of the need to federate 
research efforts?
Absolutely. We need to federate efforts 
in terms of identifying treatments, 
and diagnoses. It is necessary for the major 
donors to agree on priorities, which 
is absolutely essential in the response. 
We are at a time in history when 
we are all concerned by a global health 
Research:  
“This epidemic will be a detonator”
Nathalie Strub-Wourgaft is one of the initiators of the COVID-19 
Clinical Research Coalition, launched in April 2020. It brings together 
scientists, physicians, donors and policymakers from over thirty 
countries, to accelerate research on the disease in resource-poor 
nations. She argues that research must be specifically adapted 
to the needs of these countries.
 From microscopic 
to macroscopic, drawing by French 
artist Thierry Olivier Epi2mik.

This health crisis will be a tipping point, 
although it is still difficult to measure its 
impact. We are in the process of building 
a new way of working, but much remains 
to be done. One of the achievements 
is that today, we are trying to integrate 
the issue of access into research projects. 
At DNDi, for example, we are currently 
working on a clinical trial. We are looking 
at molecules that will be made available 
to populations, and will be accessible on 
a large scale. It seems obvious, but this 
hasn’t always been the case.
 Could we talk about a breakthrough 
in this health crisis?
There will be a before and an after. How 
could it be otherwise when the infections 
can be counted  in millions, the deaths 
in hundreds of thousands? If this is not 
the case, it means that we are in denial 
about what we have just experienced. 
Time has been lost in research on this 
disease, but less than in the past. Ebola 
was a turning point. COVID-19 will be 
a detonator. This crisis is undeniably 
a lesson. Some people have been trying 
to sound the alarm for several years – like 
Bill Gates, who warned of a pandemic 
many years ago. Some had suggested 
that WHO member countries should 
devote 0.1 per cent of their budgets 
to research, according to priorities defined 
by the research imperatives of the day. 
Those voices must now be heard.
problem. This is a totally new situation. 
Even the Ebola crisis was finally identified 
as an African problem. This new 
virus leaves us no choice but to work 
together. The fact that the World Health 
Organization (WHO) has named its first 
clinical trial “Solidarity” is not insignificant.
 Are we witnessing the beginnings 
of a better governance of research 
efforts?
It is still a little early to say. The will 
is there, and we have better collaboration 
among the research community than 
in the past. We cannot yet talk about 
better governance, but we are getting 
closer to it. At the same time, nearly 
a thousand different clinical trials have 
been launched on COVID-19 – which 
means that internationally, there is no real 
collaboration. 
This new virus leaves us no 
choice but to work together
 Epidemic, painting by Thierry Olivier Epi2mik, 2015. 
