Deprived of a physical image, 
listeners rely on the evocative 
power of the voice on the radio, 
to immerse themselves in the 
story – creating mental images 
that facilitate concentration 
on what is being said. 
A voice you can't see
Forging a mental image
When we listen to a voice, we draw a 
specic physical portrait of its owner in 
our minds, based on its vocal features. 
In a study conducted in 2013 by Olatz 
Larrea and myself, a group of participants 
listened to several radio voices reading a 
piece of news. Another group listened to 
the same voices after seeing photographs 
of the presenters. Seventy-three per cent 
of the participants reported that they 
had been inuenced by the images they 
had seen. They said they were less able to 
use their imagination, because they were 
conditioned by these images.
In both groups, the listeners imagined the 
presenter, but dierently. Of the group 
that heard only the voice, thirty-nine per 
cent imagined what the speaker looked 
like, while 18.5 per cent in the second 
group conjured up the presenter. The 
group that had no image of the presenter 
to go by, paid more attention and were 
more focused when they listened only to 
the voice. More importantly, they were 
able to recall more information about 
what they had heard. 
Listeners rely on characteristics of the 
voice to conjure up a mental image. 
This process is strongly inuenced by 
the stereotypical associations conveyed 
by the media – lm, in particular. For 
example, the villain of the lm always 
has a rough, low-pitched voice. Through 
these conventions, listeners form a 
mental image derived from the sound of 
a speaker's voice. They do so, coinciding 
with other listeners’ judgements, beyond 
what we might consider chance. 
This means that when we hear the voice 
of a presenter on radio, we all imagine 
the same physical traits. If the voice is 
weak and high-pitched, we imagine a 
person who is small; if we hear a sensual, 
low-pitched voice, we tend to imagine it 
belongs to an attractive person – even if 
this association does not always coincide 
with reality. This explains why many 
listeners are surprised when they see a 
radio presenter – because the person is 
often quite dierent from the image they 
had conjured up in their minds. 
The characteristics that we infer from 
the sound of a voice depend mainly on a 
particular vocal feature – the tone or pitch 
of voice are the most important in terms 
of perception. A high pitch is usually 
associated with positive moods such as 
euphoria, excitement, or joy; but also with 
alertness, conveying fear or nervousness. 
Deep voices 
are more credible 
Our study concluded that listeners tend 
to perceive that high-pitched voices on 
the radio were tense, distant, cold and 
weak. A deep voice is often associated 
with a strong, tall physical presence, and 
dark hair. But the essential factor in the 
listeners’ preference was that low-pitched 
voices conveyed sensations of credibility, 
maturity and dominance. In a study we 
applied to radio news, low-pitched voices 
were rated as more pleasant, but also as 
“more convincing, calm and credible”. 
When listeners hear a presenter’s voice, 
they can infer his or her personality and 
their aective or emotional state with a 
sixty-ve per cent accuracy, according 
to a study by psychologist Klaus R. 
Scherer, published in the Journal of Voice 
(September 1995). Our voices provide 
information about our personalities. 
For example, people who speak very 
quickly are usually perceived as nervous 
or extroverted, while those who express 
themselves with a low intensity are 
perceived as shy. 
Emma Rodero
Listening to the voice of a radio presenter 
is an experience that triggers a cascade 
of emotions, feelings and mental images 
– which makes listeners unconsciously 
sketch a physical person and a story 
in their minds. The more numerous 
and vivid these mental images – or 
representations – created in the listener’s 
mind are, the richer their cognitive 
processing will be. The radio voice 
generates a dened hearing imprint on 
the mind – composed of both a physical 
and psychological representation of the 
speaker, and the content of the message.
When listening to the radio, people 
have the feeling that they are not 
alone. The listener has the perception 
of being connected with the speaker, 
and immersed in the content. This 
connection and immersion occurs on 
the psychological level. The listener feels 
a pleasant sensation of well-being by 
establishing a strong connection with the 
radio presenter and getting involved with 
the story.
In doing so, listeners tend to infer various 
traits to the presenter. Studies have 
shown that listeners have the unique 
ability to recognize certain characteristics 
– such as age, gender, height and weight; 
although the latter two are tougher 
to detect. 
Ü  Deprived of a physical image, 
listeners rely on the evocative power 
of the voice on the radio.
© Serge Picard/Agence VU

Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            19 
The way radio presenters use their 
voices also conveys their emotions and 
intentions. This is called prosody, or the 
melody of speech – formed by intonation, 
accent, speech rate, and pauses. The rst 
rule for a radio presenter, in this respect, 
is to avoid extremes: monotony (very 
few low inections) and uptalk (many 
high inections). 
A monotonous tone directly causes the 
listener to lose attention. At the opposite 
end of the spectrum is uptalk, a manner 
of speaking with rising intonation at the 
end, repeated at regular intervals. This 
over-emphatic style is widespread in 
radio news broadcasts and advertising. 
Often this style, which sounds like a 
repetitive sing-song, does not work 
either. It produces a negative perception, 
especially if it does not relate to the 
content, or hinders comprehension. 
Instead of these two extremes, the best 
strategy for a radio presenter would be 
to use variations – starting a sentence 
with a high pitch to attract the listener’s 
attention, and ending with a low pitch, to 
reinforce the essential information. 
With proper vocal training, radio 
presenters can evoke detailed images, 
impressions, intentions and emotions 
that they want to elicit in the minds of 
their listeners. All we have to do is relax, 
allow ourselves to be accompanied 
by the warm voice of a host, compose 
suggestive mental images in our brains, 
feel intense emotions – and immerse 
ourselves entirely in their stories. 
A communications professor at the 
Pompeu Fabra University (UPF) in 
Barcelona, Spain, Emma Rodero heads 
the Media Psychology Lab there. She 
also teaches communication skills at 
UPF’s Barcelona School of Management. 
Listeners rely on 
characteristics of the voice 
to conjure up 
a mental image
