The lack of knowledge about the diseases 
that caused these epidemics and their 
modes of infection, led the authorities, 
very early on, to take the only possible 
sanitary measures to limit their spread. 
Examples include the isolation of the 
sick, since the eighth century, to stop 
the spread of leprosy; then confinement 
in the fourteenth century, to contain 
the plague, which was rampant at the time. 
At sea, the corpses of infected people who 
died on ships were thrown overboard. The 
first measures of forced sanitary isolation 
were taken in Ragusa – now Dubrovnik – 
in the fourteenth century; then in Venice, 
in the fifteenth century. Both cities had 
imposed several weeks of quarantine on 
ships at the time. This measure became 
widespread in major ports, including 
Genoa and Naples in Italy, and Marseille 
in France. 
The search 
for scapegoats
The consequences of such measures 
proved very unfavourable for trade. Like 
the Justinian plague which raged through 
different parts of the world from the sixth 
to the eighth centuries, the Black Death 
which struck Europe in the mid-fourteenth 
century, severely disrupted traditional 
trade routes. The Mediterranean basin 
was abandoned in favour of the region 
of Flanders, which became a major trading 
centre in Europe. In fact, the desire not 
to harm trade was a significant factor 
in the management of epidemics – often 
dramatically delaying measures to curb 
The microbes and viruses  
that made history
Epidemics and pandemics are not new phenomena. Leprosy, plague, cholera 
and smallpox have all left their deadly mark on human history. They have also 
led humans to question themselves, and often result in positive change.  
Ana María Carrillo Farga
Medical historian, pandemics expert 
and professor at the Department of Public 
Health, National Autonomous University 
of Mexico (UNAM) .
Characterized by their rapid spread 
and high mortality rates, epidemics – 
whether they are linked to bacterial 
diseases, such as bubonic plague 
and cholera, or to viruses, such as 
smallpox, influenza and HIV/AIDS – have 
left their mark on human history since 
prehistoric times. 
These epidemics have been responsible 
for a massive number of deaths 
– occasionally resulting 
in demographic disasters – 
and have even changed 
the course of history sometimes. The Great 
Plague of Athens, which struck the city 
between 430 and 426 BC, certainly 
precipitated the fall of the besieged city. 
The populations of the Inca and Aztec 
empires were decimated by smallpox, 
brought in by Spanish conquistadors 
in the sixteenth century. Many historians 
believe that the Spanish flu helped 
to accelerate the end of the First World War. 
IDEAS

their spread. It was not uncommon for 
traders and politicians to try to cover up 
their existence. 
The history of epidemics is also marked 
by the emergence of popular movements 
against certain social groups accused 
of causing the disease. The massive, 
simultaneous and sudden loss of human 
lives generated such a sense of fear 
and disarray that it led to a quest to find 
the culprits – most often, the poorest 
and most marginalized populations, 
who were then discriminated against. 
Pandemics caused widespread suffering, 
affecting entire families and villages. 
The Black Death killed an estimated 
25 million to 40 million in Europe 
– a third to half of the population at 
the time. It took more than two centuries 
for the continent to regain its previous 
population. The Spanish flu of 1918 caused 
the deaths of an estimated 50 million 
people worldwide. It is difficult to imagine 
the state of devastation that this 
pandemic must have caused at the end 
of the First World War. 
Confronted with death 
and the unexplained, these disasters led 
humans to reflect on their  condition. 
The events also drove progress in the 
search for treatments and preventive 
measures. Although medicine was still 
in its infancy at the end of the Middle 
Ages, certain hygiene measures were 
beginning to be imposed. As early 
as in the fourteenth century, the bed 
linen of patients was being changed. 
After the cholera epidemic that struck 
London in the mid-nineteenth  century, 
the authorities started monitoring 
the water supply.
Emergence of public 
health policies
The succession of deadly epidemics has 
led many countries to understand that it is 
more costly to treat a health crisis than 
to prevent it. Cholera, a pre-eminently 
social disease, highlighted the deplorable 
conditions in which most of the world’s 
inhabitants lived and worked. The 
need to implement long-term health 
policies gradually emerged – to promote 
hygiene measures, adopt sanitary codes, 
and conduct research into the cause 
of diseases and their prevention. 
As diseases do not respect borders, 
international co-operation in public 
health developed during the second half 
of the nineteenth century. This resulted 
in a series of conferences and the drafting 
of international health conventions. 
In an effort to prevent the spread 
of epidemics – especially cholera 
and the plague – while limiting trade 
barriers and the free movement of people 
as far as possible, twelve European states 
organized the first International Health 
Conference in Paris in 1851. This resulted 
in a draft International Sanitary 
Convention, accompanied by international 
regulations concerning the plague, yellow 
fever and cholera. 
Though similar conferences followed, 
it was not until 1903 that an International 
Health Convention was adopted, 
and the second half of the twentieth 
century that the World Health Organization 
was created, in the aftermath of the 
Second World War.  
Even though epidemics are caused by 
the circulation of microbes and viruses, this 
does not fully explain them. Very often, 
they are also the result of environmental, 
food, migration, health, economic 
or political crises. Epidemics act as an 
aggravating factor in pre-existing crises, 
often caused by war and famine. 
The current pandemic is no exception. 
It marks a crisis of our way of life. 
Scientific studies show that it is 
the systematic degradation of nature 
that is the root cause of the  COVID-19 
pandemic – industrial animal farming 
and deforestation in particular. 
Widespread deforestation is exerting 
unsustainable pressure on habitats, forcing 
animals out of their natural environments 
and encouraging pathogens to jump from 
one species to another – as was the case 
for the Ebola and Zika viruses. 
Epidemics put humanity to the test, with 
a collective threat, followed by mourning.
But history has shown us that they always 
come to an end – and that emerging 
from each one, humanity has been 
able to reinvent itself, and even make 
some advances. The current pandemic 
could similarly lead to a world that 
is more respectful of the environment 
and of human life. 
The influenza ward at the United States 
Army Field Hospital No. 29, in Hollerich, 
Luxembourg, during the Spanish Flu in 1918. 
Confronted with death 
and the unexplained, 
these disasters led humans 
to reflect on their condition
