Shi Zhan, Chinese broadcaster 
and talk-show host
It was by pure chance that I enrolled 
in a training course that Himalaya, the 
online audio platform, was oering to 
media professionals, amateur voice 
lovers and people from all walks of life. It 
was from this course that I learnt how to 
use cutting-edge ideas and techniques 
in new media broadcasting. By using 
creative narration and sharing knowledge 
based on a respect for historical facts and 
audience preferences, I am now one of 
the most popular hosts on the platform. 
With my new media thinking and 
humorous interpretation of Chinese 
history, I have attracted over 800,000 
fans – ten times the number of fans I had 
in traditional media. Audio content has 
gained popularity in China over recent 
years. Unlike in most Western countries, 
where public or private advertising 
funds radio platforms, Chinese networks 
are gradually convincing audiences – 
especially the younger generation – to 
pay for audio content and knowledge. 
This monetizing of audio programmes 
– where listeners think it is worthwhile 
to chip in, often in very small amounts, 
to listen to their favourite shows – has 
allowed radio hosts to increase their 
incomes, depending on their popularity. 
I recently spent $150,000 of my income 
from Himalaya to build my own studio.
A pioneer in live-streaming broadcasts, 
audiobooks and podcasts, Himalaya FM – 
with oces in China, Japan and the United 
States, and plans to expand further – has 
over 600 million users (as of October 2019, 
according to a company release). The 
network’s unique expertise has enabled 
amateur and professional producers to 
create content for a potentially broad and 
burgeoning audience. 

Having worked as a professional host for the radio and television 
station of Jilin province, one traditional Chinese broadcaster 
experienced an interesting transformation into a new media host. 
Since 2014, Shi Zhan has been practising a new form of audio 
storytelling – vividly recreating the history of China’s ancient 
dynasties on Shanghai-based Himalaya FM, the country’s most 
successful audio network. 
China's
Himalaya FM:
Radio à la carte 
“Sharing human 
wisdom through audio”
Professional lawyers, doctors and other 
experts can share their knowledge with 
the general public through audio. Their 
eorts are supported by Himalaya, whose 
stated mission is to “share human wisdom 
through audio”. The online audio platform 
provides a large market for paid copyright 
content, and a wide distribution channel. 
Anyone can benet from the company’s 
business model. One striking example 
of this is of broadcast host Deshu from 
Shenyang, who led a group of disabled 
people to read and record audiobooks, 
earning them a good wage.
In a fast-growing and intensely 
competitive Chinese online audio 
market, the new radio practices followed 
by the Asian audio giant have enabled 
traditional radio producers to achieve 
a successful transformation into new 
media hosts. My training and years 
of experience with Himalaya have 
taught me to create original content 
while adhering to three fundamental 
new media practices – which have 
transformed my way of thinking and 
have proved game-changing. 
The rst new media practice involves 
paying more attention to the completion 
rate than merely looking at the click-
through rate of listeners. The completion 
rate signies the probability that the 
audience will listen to the programme till 
the end. Himalaya’s users spent an average 
of 170 minutes listening to its shows (as 
of October 2019), but the back-end data 
reected that after just a few minutes of 
listening, half of my listeners left. This really 
surprised and frustrated me.

Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            13 
Ý  Shi Zhan, who hosts a Chinese history 
programme on Himalaya FM.

To solve this problem, I spent half a year 
cultivating the internet’s “user thinking” 
model, forcing myself to develop “a sharp 
mind while covering the latest events 
and discovering the latest news”. Doing 
your homework and being up-to-date is 
very important in this business. Before 
recording each programme, I study the 
news and current aairs for two hours 
and spend eight hours writing an original 
script – before nally distilling it to a 
programme of only eight minutes. This 
“grinding” of my own work has doubled 
my audience, and allowed me to rapidly 
increase the completion rate.
The second new media practice involves 
improving the user experience, which 
is of paramount importance. To achieve 
this, I developed my own method. This 
involved moving away from the “loud” 
background music of traditional radio, 
and using music as a tool to enhance the 
atmosphere – so the audience would pay 
more attention to the content itself.
“Selection” and “creation” are the 
keywords of the third new media 
practice. As a new media host, I dare to 
choose material that is not accessible 
to the audience anywhere else. This 
original content is created with my own 
interpretation – making it both interesting 
and informative for my listeners.
My current projects for Himalaya include 
working on an audio guide on the 
terracotta warriors of the Mausoleum 
of the First Qin Emperor. Tourists only 
need to scan the QR code to listen to 
my narration.
UNESCO Radio: A brief history 
“I am at peace with what I wanted to do.” The voice is gravelly, partly mued by 
the surrounding brouhaha. It is the voice of an elderly man, who speaks French 
with a Spanish accent – the voice of Pablo Picasso. Interviewed from Vallauris, 
in the south of France, the Spanish painter talks about the The Fall of Icarus, the 
monumental fresco he has just completed – and which will soon adorn UNESCO’s 
Paris Headquarters. 
The recording dates back to 1958. It was produced by UNESCO Radio. This unique 
service existed almost since the Organization's inception. In 1947, a recording 
studio was set up at its international Headquarters, which at the time, were 
located at the Majestic Hotel in Paris. 
In the post-war context, radio emerged as a mass medium – capable of 
transcending borders between countries, but also of removing certain barriers 
that stood between individuals, whether social, economic or cultural. The role of 
radio was also to promote a better understanding of the Organization's objectives 
and to help countries develop their own infrastructure.
Originally part of the Mass Communications Projects Division, UNESCO Radio 
did not broadcast its own programming, but produced shows – round-tables, 
interviews, documentaries, reports, and music – for broadcast by radio stations 
around the world. 
The Masters Meet was one of these radio series. Personalities of dierent 
nationalities presented the work of writers, artists or scholars from other 
countries. The Hopes for Tomorrow series explored the possibilities oered by 
science, technology and certain cultural or educational programmes to provide 
solutions for humanity – from the exploitation of new sources of energy to the 
treatment of mental illness or the development of synthetic foods. 
These programmes were recorded in a number of languages that would vary 
over the years. In September 1949, UNESCO Radio made recordings in seventeen 
dierent languages and distributed 3,000 programmes in fty-two countries 
and territories. “UNESCO's voice is heard by listeners on all ve continents,” the 
UNESCO Courier proudly proclaimed in its September 1949 issue.
At the time of its closure in 1997, UNESCO Radio was still producing some twenty 
programmes in English, French, Spanish and Russian. The thousands of sound 
documents that were produced over the years are being digitized, giving a second 
life to these recordings. Some 1,639 audio documents are now available online on 
the Digitizing Our Shared UNESCO History website.
