Rethinking museums  
for the future
With new constraints on welcoming visitors, the Queens Museum in New 
York City – like many other institutions around the world – is reflecting 
on how best to redefine our ties to art and culture. The museum’s 
team is working on an inclusive model that places artists, educators 
and residents at the heart of its activities, as it seeks to reinvent itself.
Sally Tallant
President and Executive Director, 
Queens Museum, New York . 
Across the globe, museums have been 
closed due to the impact of COVID-19. 
This has meant that these institutions 
have had to learn quickly how to operate 
remotely and to remain relevant 
and visible while their buildings remain 
out of bounds. The role of culture 
and museums in our society is already 
going through rapid change. Digital 
content is now essential for maintaining 
audiences confined to their homes. 
The challenges of adapting to reduced 
visitor numbers, social distancing 
in the museum, and ensuring 
staff and public safety mean that 
the experience of culture has radically 
changed. These unpredictable times 
necessitate quick decision-making 
at all levels.
Globally, cultural leaders are working 
together to share information 
and knowledge at this time and there 
is a real sense of community, support 
and collaboration in spite of the 
challenges we are each facing. In 
New York, there have been regular 
meetings of small groups and much 
larger coalitions. Over 200 people from 
cultural organizations met daily to gather 
and share information and lobby together. 
 Detail from Maintenance Art, a sculptural installation by Mierle Laderman Ukeles at the Queens Museum, 2017, 
in which the artist highlights the role of essential workers who maintain indispensable urban systems.

We are finding innovative ways to keep 
our institutions afloat and to inspire our 
communities locally and globally. 
A need to change 
models
Until there is a complete recovery, 
museums with large endowments 
and collections to draw from will be 
in a better position than small ones, that 
rely on contributions from supporters, 
who themselves will likely experience 
deep losses. All museums will be analysing 
their income streams. Large museums 
that depend on tourism and admission 
fees, will need to change their models. 
Small museums will have the advantage; 
we are nimble, used to working with small 
budgets and more attuned to the needs 
of our neighbours and communities.
As we navigate the challenges 
of a dramatically altered world due 
to COVID-19, we are thinking about 
the future of the Museum. Queens, 
the city’s most diverse borough, 
where the museum is located, was at 
the epicentre of the pandemic in New York. 
Its neighbourhoods have been among 
the most vulnerable in the five boroughs. 
They include many of our essential workers 
– they drive cabs, stock supermarkets, 
make and deliver food, and work in the gig 
economy. Often, their jobs do not offer 
health insurance, benefits or employment 
protection. Many are undocumented 
immigrants and do not have the luxury 
of staying home and not working. 
There has been a systemic political failure 
to provide equitable resources and health 
care, and this has led to the development 
of a society that lacks empathy, 
care and respect for people and for 
diversity. Working-class communities 
in our neighbourhoods are suffering 
disproportionately. 
Now we are living with a palpable 
precarity. We are faced with many 
questions: how will we make our way 
back to the Museum? What will it mean 
for people to gather once again in public 
places? What measures will we need 
to take to make our spaces safe – for our 
staff and for the public? Together with 
my colleagues in Queens, we are working 
with the community to understand what 
is relevant and what is needed. We will 
need to recover, reconnect, repair, heal; 
we will need to learn together how we can 
generate productive and joyful spaces, 
while responding to the care and practical 
needs of our communities.
Showcasing existing 
collections  
The history of the Queens Museum, 
and its location, can provide a guide 
to understanding how we might 
create a relevant model of a Museum 
for the future, and develop strategies 
to support artists, educators and our 
communities. The collection of over 
13,000 objects enables us to tell stories 
that will help us to inform our future, 
using the fragments of the past. We will 
invite artists, curators and the public 
to agitate and activate its content to make 
exhibitions and displays. 
Founded in 1972, the Museum is located 
in the New York City Building, which was 
built to house the New York City Pavilion 
at the 1939-1940 World’s Fair. The Fair 
was planned during the Great Depression 
(1929-1939) and intended as an uplifting 
project for the public and for the economy. 
The theme, The World of Tomorrow, 
emphasized this optimism and hope for 
the future. From 1946 to 1950, the building 
housed the General Assembly of the newly-
formed United Nations until the site of the 
UN’s current home in Manhattan became 
available. 
Many important decisions were taken  there, 
including the establishment of the United 
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). By way 
of honouring this history, we are developing 
a Children’s Museum, which is inspired 
by the history of recreation and play 
in the surrounding park and in the building, 
which was also once used as an ice rink.
The strategies of the past – of employing 
artists to work together with communities 
and in organizations – can provide us with 
inspiration for how we might once again 
assert culture and the arts as an essential 
industry, and central to society and its 
recovery. We will need new financial models 
and new tax initiatives to aid recovery.
Writers, designers, 
architects, invited 
to contribute 
For the 1939 World’s Fair, many projects 
were produced through President Franklin 
D. Roosevelt’s New Deal work-relief 
programmes, which created employment, 
including artistic production in the wake 
of the Great Depression. Artists were paid 
to create work for government buildings, 
community centres and institutions through 
various programmes, which created 
employment for thousands of artists over 
the years. These initiatives and histories 
continue to inform generations of artists 
and organizers in the US.
We will need 
to recover, 
reconnect, 
repair, heal
 The painter Ilya Bolotowsky (left) 
and John Joslyn, his assistant, working on 
a mural for the Hall of Medical Sciences 
at the 1939 New York World’s Fair.

Today, we face the prospect of mass 
unemployment and an economic 
recession, a growing refugee crisis, as 
well as living in the midst of a global 
health crisis. We will need to develop 
an understanding of how we can live 
and work with a constantly shifting world 
and how we can together face collective 
grief – grief for the loss of loved ones, loss 
of habitat due to the climate emergency, 
and grief for the loss of a way of living. 
So, what have we learnt, what does it 
mean to reimagine a museum and what 
tools do we need to be able to create 
relevant and useful organizations? 
At the Queens Museum, we will embrace 
the uncertainty of this moment and trust 
that artists, writers, designers, poets 
and architects can help us to remake 
the Museum. We are developing 
a model of a museum that puts artists, 
educators and organizers at its centre. 
We will work in coalition with cultural, 
educational and community partners 
locally and create the conditions to 
support the production of work, ideas 
and collaboration. We will employ 
artists from our communities and will 
provide studio space, support, resources, 
technical support and mentors to create 
intergenerational and international 
conversations. We will reimagine how 
the Museum can operate and focus 
on production on-site, and in our 
neighbourhoods. 
Education is at the heart of our work 
and we will continue to develop 
digital content and will broadcast from 
the Museum as well as convene and create 
much-needed moments of connection 
and intimacy. We will be hyper-local 
and international in our reach. 
Connecting through art
Queens is multicultural in its traditions, 
and over 160 languages are spoken 
in the borough. This diversity will be 
reflected in the art that is produced 
and education and social practice 
that takes place. At the same time, 
the dissemination of what is produced, 
and descriptions of what takes place 
in the borough, will be communicated 
digitally to a global audience – both in 
places that reflect the backgrounds of the 
Queens communities, and in dialogue with 
other culturally diverse neighbourhoods 
and cities around the world.
“The only thing that makes life possible 
is permanent, intolerable uncertainty; 
not knowing what comes next,” wrote 
the American author Ursula K. Le Guin in her 
1969 science-fiction novel, The Left Hand 
of Darkness.
Are we living in the dystopian future 
we feared and that was described so 
eloquently by Le Guin? I hope that we can 
find our way back to our communities. 
I hope that we can recover and reimagine 
our cultural spaces and once again create 
and connect through art and culture. I hope 
that this experience has shown us how 
we can overcome distance and find new 
ways to communicate, collaborate and build 
proximity and community. 
I know that museums and culture have an 
important role to play in the healing and 
recovery that we will all need in the coming 
months and years, and look forward to 
us finding our place together with our 
communities – in Queens and elsewhere.
The only thing that makes 
life possible is permanent, 
intolerable uncertainty…

