Carolina Guerrero, interviewed by 
Lucía Iglesias Kuntz, UNESCO 
How did you come up with the idea of 
Radio Ambulante?
Eight years ago, Daniel Alarcón and 
I were living in San Francisco. He is 
a writer, and I am a journalist; he is 
Peruvian, and I am Colombian. We 
emigrated for dierent reasons, but 
we shared the same attachment to 
Latin America, to the culture we grew 
up in – the culture of our parents and 
the Spanish language. We often found 
ourselves commenting on the type of 
format that dominates public radio 
in English, here in the United States – 
which is long-lasting, and narrated by 
the characters themselves. We really 
liked this format and regretted that 
nothing similar existed in our language. 
The Spanish content available to us in 
the US was not of great quality, so we 
ended up consuming content and media 
in English. Given that Latin America has 
a wealth of stories and narrators, we 
thought that there was a need for telling 
stories in that format… and decided to 
create it ourselves.
A Colombian guru who abused dozens of women while 
pretending to heal them; a Cuban writer remembering her 
childhood in Havana; an amateur astronomer who managed to 
photograph the birth of a supernova from the terrace of his house 
in Rosario, Argentina. These are some of the diverse stories told 
on Radio Ambulante, a podcast service in Spanish that for eight 
years has not spared the imagination or eort to reach more and 
more people. Carolina Guerrero, one of its founders, explains 
the mission of this new kind of broadcasting.
Radio Ambulante:
A wealth of 
Latin American stories
Why did you choose the podcast format 
and not broadcast radio?
When we rst started, we were radio 
listeners but had no idea how that 
industry worked. We started looking for 
funding for our project here in the US, 
and realized that there was no room 
for another live radio station and that 
nobody was going to give us the means 
to create one. We immediately saw that 
the future was digital and realized that 
if Radio Ambulante was going to nd an 
audience, it would be in digital media. 
How do you interact with 
your listeners?
Nowadays, it is impossible to ignore 
your audience. The digital world oers 
a means of constant interaction, that 
may not be so easy to nd on the air. In 
fact, for us, more than an audience, it is 
a community of listeners – who listen to 
us, tell their friends about us, and give 
us their positive or negative comments. 
The listeners feel empowered, and they 
can also be quite demanding. They ask 
us for things, and sometimes point out 
our mistakes – we have a very direct line 
to them.
Were you thinking then of a Latino 
audience, that is, Spanish-speaking 
migrants living in the US?
When I migrated to the US over twenty 
years ago, I somehow stopped being 
Colombian and became more Latin 
American. I no longer had many 
Colombian friends, they came from 
everywhere – Chile, Argentina, Venezuela, 
Puerto Rico – and also Latinos born 
here. A new horizon opened up for me, 
because this explosion of cultures in 
the US makes you realize that you didn’t 
know as much about Latin America as 
you thought you did. The idea was to 
create content not just for migrants, but 
the fact of living here pushed that idea. 
Because deep down, we consider the US 
to be a Latin American country – it is full 
of people who speak Spanish. 
From the beginning, we wanted our 
stories to have a universal appeal, so 
that everyone could somehow relate 
to them. They are not too newsworthy 
or too local – yet they are entertaining 
enough for a listener from the Bronx in 
New York to be interested in a story from 
Chile; or for someone from Colombia to 
be following a story from Guatemala.
Ý  The Radio Ambulante logo. Podcasts 
are distributed exclusively by National 
Public Radio (NPR), the United States 
non-prot media organization.
Þ  “Let's do that radio thing”, a series of illustrations 
by Argentinian artist María Luque to mark the creation 
of Radio Ambulante on its 7th birthday in 2019.

Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            11 
About three years ago, we hired 
Colombian journalist Jorge Caraballo 
as a growth editor, to strengthen the 
show’s relationship with its community 
of listeners. In this way, we opened other 
channels of communication, like a group 
on WhatsApp, for the most enthusiastic 
listeners. This allowed us to strengthen 
our bulletin and to build even more 
direct communication with listeners. 
We also recently launched Listening 
Clubs, which are like book clubs, but for 
podcasts – where people get together 
to listen to one of our stories and then 
comment on it. 
What is your business model and 
how do you sustain it?
Radio Ambulante is an expensive 
project. Today, there are twenty of 
us, who do not produce news or do 
a certain number of articles per day. 
We produce thirty episodes a year – 
which is not a lot, but they take time to 
produce because they require a lot of 
editorial work and rigour. We received 
support from a few foundations. And 
three years ago, we signed an exclusive 
distribution contract with NPR (National 
Public Radio, the US non-prot news and 
media organization), which distributes 
our content as podcasts and pays us 
for exclusive rights. Every year, we 
also organize live events that are held 
in theatres, and oer a membership 
programme for those who want to 
support us on a regular basis. 
We have recently been trying to derive 
new products from our existing content, 
to give them added value. These 
derivatives are not expensive to produce, 
and allow us to monetize our catalogue. 
For example, we are currently looking at 
two additional sources of income, based 
on the 150 episodes that we already 
have in our catalogue. 
We have just launched Lupa, the rst 
initiative. It is an application that 
enables people with an intermediate 
or advanced level of Spanish to 
perfect their language through our 
programmes. A signicant segment 
of our audience is made up of people 
studying Spanish who match this prole, 
especially in the US and Canada. We are 
very enthusiastic about this project.

We immediately 
saw that the 
future was digital 
and realized 
that if Radio 
Ambulante was 
going to find 
an audience, 
it would be in 
digital media
Ý  Radio Ambulante’s listening clubs 
(Clubes de Escucha+) are like book clubs, 
but for podcast episodes. 

Our second idea is much more long-
term – it involves looking for intellectual 
property opportunities in movies or 
television series. We think that some 
of the stories in our catalogue might 
one day be the basis for a ctionalized 
story or screenplay that could generate 
royalties for us.
How do you choose your stories?
We look for stories with characters 
rather than choosing topics. It is key 
that they have a narrative arc, with 
a beginning and an end. As we are 
present in various parts of the world, 
particularly in American and Latin 
American cities, and even in London, 
we receive stories all year round. 
We know, for example, that stories 
about drug dealers attract many clicks, 
but those are already being made by 
others, and we are not interested in 
giving a human face to these villains. 
We think that there are other stories 
that deserve to come to light. Listeners 
like stories that are well-told, with many 
scenes and several voices – stories 
that make them dream, that connect 
them with their childhoods, that value 
ambition or eort. There are stories that 
we all see every day in the media, but 
here we can recount them unhurriedly 
and give ourselves the pleasure of 
going deeper into topics – which the 
audience appreciates. The average 
production time for each story is 
six months. 
One last question, that could well 
have been the rst: why are you called 
Radio Ambulante?
We really had a tough time deciding on 
the name – it was hard to nd! It refers 
to the street vendors – simply called 
ambulantes – who are everywhere in 
our Latin American cities. These are 
super-brave, resilient people, who 
walk, travelling around the city, moving 
all over the public space; they are 
persevering. We felt that this image 
reected us particularly well. And we 
loved the idea of our logo, of someone 
carrying a radio.
© María Luque
