Minnie Degawan
Director of the Traditional and Indigenous 
Peoples programme at Conservation 
International in the United States .
Indigenous peoples have always isolated 
themselves from the rest of the world 
when circumstances required it. In 
the Cordillera in the Philippines, for 
example, such a practice – known as 
ubaya or tengaw – is regularly observed  
at specific points of the agricultural cycle, 
to allow for the earth and the people 
to rest. 
No one is allowed in or out of the 
community, including community 
members who happen to be outside 
when the lockdown was announced. 
A knotted clump of leaves is placed at 
various entrances and exits to signify that 
the community is on ubaya. It is taken 
very seriously by community members 
and neighbours alike – to violate it is 
to invite disaster for the entire community. 
The rituals which accompany the ubaya 
are an important part of the community 
response. They are not meant to instil 
fear or invite evil, but serve to strengthen 
the sense of community, as the elders call 
for the protection of all, including nature. 
Similar rituals – which emphasize the need 
to achieve a balance between the spiritual 
and physical world – are performed by 
elders in different indigenous communities 
in the Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia 
and Thailand to protect their villages. 
During these lockdowns, community 
members look out for those in need, 
Indigenous 
peoples:  
Vulnerable, yet resilient  
The global health crisis has highlighted the resilience of some 
indigenous communities. But above all, it has revealed 
the fragility of these populations – whose poverty, malnutrition 
and poor access to health care makes them particularly 
vulnerable to infectious diseases. 
A woman tattooed according 
to the 1000-year-old Kalinga tradition, 
looks out of her window in the remote 
village of Buscalan in the Cordillera.
Poverty, malnutrition, 
and a high rate of  
pre-existing health problems 
have aggravated the risks 
of these populations 

But the health crisis has also acutely revealed 
the vulnerability of these communities. 
Indigenous populations – who suffer from 
a lack of health-care facilities and insufficient 
access to basic services, sanitation facilities 
and key preventive measures, including safe 
drinking water, soap and disinfectants – 
are the hardest hit by socio-economic 
marginalization that puts them at 
a disproportionate risk during public health 
emergencies.
Their continued struggle with 
deforestation, climate change 
and the loss of traditional livelihoods 
make them particularly vulnerable 
to new infectious diseases. Poverty, 
malnutrition, and a high rate of pre-
existing health problems have 
aggravated the risks of these populations 
– many of whom dwell in multi-
generational homes, in close proximity 
with their elders.
and extend help and share food, 
including dried sweet potatoes that have 
been stored for a rainy day. 
Poverty 
and malnutrition
These traditional practices helped 
indigenous populations to cope with 
the containment constraints imposed by 
the COVID-19 epidemic and to organize 
their survival. “Their good practices 
of traditional healing and knowledge, 
such as sealing off communities 
to prevent the spread of diseases 
and of voluntary isolation, are being 
followed throughout the world today,” 
stated Anne Nuorgam, Chair of the United 
Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous 
Issues (UNPFII).
The efforts of governments 
to respond to the particular 
needs of communities 
are often sketchy
 Hunter-gatherers from the Aeta indigenous tribe hunting for birds and monkeys in a forest on Luzon 
island, the Philippines. They are thought to be among the country’s earliest inhabitants.

© Jacob Maentz

Testing their way of life
The pandemic has only exacerbated 
the multiple problems faced by indigenous 
populations. In northern Thailand, for 
example, forest fires are raging, adding 
pressures to food security, and threats 
to physical well-being. The Naga people 
in India’s north-east are faced with 
increased discrimination owing to their 
physical appearance and misconceptions 
about the virus. Naga students have 
been turned away from their lodgings 
and subjected to violence solely because 
of their Chinese features. The Dumagats 
of Southern Luzon in the Philippines 
dealt with food shortages while trying 
to stop the government from constructing 
the Kaliwa and Kanan dams in their 
territory. A similar story played out 
in Ecuador, where miners continued 
to pass through indigenous territories 
to extract oil, in spite of the lockdown.
But the current crisis is testing their 
way of life. Many cultural practices 
and traditions which call for gatherings 
and processions for events such as 
harvests or coming-of-age ceremonies, 
have been shelved in the interest of the 
safety of elders and the most vulnerable.
The efforts of governments to respond 
to the particular needs of communities 
are often sketchy, and do not address 
the long-term impacts on the livelihoods 
and survival of indigenous peoples as 
distinct populations. Some immediate 
steps must be taken to ensure that 
indigenous peoples are “informed, 
protected and prioritized” during 
the pandemic, Nuorgam stressed 
in a statement. 
A key factor is to make sure that reliable 
and appropriate information is provided 
in indigenous languages. “The indigenous 
elders are a priority for our communities 
as our keepers of history and traditions 
and cultures,” the UNPFII chairperson 
added. “We also ask Member States 
to ensure that indigenous peoples 
in voluntary isolation and initial contact 
exercise their right to self-determination 
and their decision to be isolated be 
respected.”
Any intervention or plan must have 
indigenous communities at the centre, 
in terms of their agency and rights. 
They have emphatically demonstrated that 
where traditional knowledge is still being 
utilized – and when they are in full control 
of their resources, and freely exercising 
their right to self-determination – they 
are more able to protect themselves, 
and nature and their environments. 
This is also true in the face of new 
challenges.
 A young boy from the Ifugao community of wet-rice agriculturalists in the Philippines, is helped by elders 
to don the traditional dress for the annual punnuk ritual, which marks the end of the harvest.
