Interview by Laetitia Kaci
UNESCO
 In March 2020, you warned of an 
increase in gender inequality due 
to the health crisis. Why is this pandemic 
particularly detrimental to women? 
There is no crisis that is gender neutral, 
and this one is no different. Often, 
the crisis accentuates the inequalities 
between men and women that already 
exist. 
Women have experienced great hardships 
due to this pandemic. Many of them 
work on the front line and have been 
directly exposed to the virus. They have 
also been hit hard by its economic 
and social consequences. The interruption 
of activity due to the crisis has led 
to greater economic hardship for 
women, who generally work in more 
precarious and lower-paid jobs than 
men. Many of them have lost their means 
of livelihood. 
Additionally, many women depend on 
social services, which have become less 
accessible during this period. Those who 
did not have access to social support 
in the first place, are even worse hit. 
 The pandemic has brought 
to the forefront crucial professions – such 
as nurses, teachers, cashiers – in which 
women are over-represented. Could this 
crisis change the way we perceive these 
workers?
Women are the real heroes of this crisis, 
even if they are not recognized as such. 
But curiously, there seems to be a lack 
of awareness that women are actually 
shouldering the response to this crisis. 
Even if they are saving lives, they remain 
unsung heroes.
743 million  
girls out of school  
during the pandemic  
(UNESCO, April 2020)
School closures increase drop-out rates that disproportionately affect 
adolescent girls, reinforcing gender disparities in education.
Up to 25%  
increase in violence  
against girls and women 
(United Nations, April 2020)
Based on data from countries with reporting systems. 
In some countries, reported cases have doubled.
I hope that this perception will change. 
That is why we have to keep talking about 
the role they play – put their efforts front 
and centre, so no one can escape it. 
 What can women bring to crisis 
management?
Women are viewed by our societies as 
the main carers, whether paid or unpaid. 
But they also know how to go beyond 
thinking of this as a purely health-
related crisis to be managed. Because 
women know how to multitask, they are 
perhaps better placed to understand 
that in a situation like this, we are dealing 
with several factors – such as economic, 
social, health and food security. They have 
a better understanding of intersectionality 
because they experience it on a daily basis. 
So they are already hardwired to deal with 
crises like these.
 In a statement in April 2020, you 
referred to the shadow pandemic 
of increased violence against women. 
What impact have the lockdowns had 
on the situation of women?
In that statement, I said that helplines 
and shelters for victims of domestic 
violence around the world have 
“Women are the unsung 
heroes of this crisis”
The health crisis, and the subsequent widespread lockdowns worldwide, have 
led to a surge in violence against women. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive 
Director of UN Women, warns that women’s rights could be diminished as 
a result of the pandemic.

reported an increase in calls for help. 
The confinement has exacerbated tensions 
and increased the isolation of women with 
abusive partners, while cutting them off 
from the services that are best able to help 
them. This particular context has made 
reporting abuse even more complicated, 
due to limitations on women’s and girls’ 
access to phones and helplines, 
and disrupted public services like police, 
justice and social services.
In some countries, where services 
to protect victims of domestic violence 
are not considered essential services, 
women have been deprived of all help, 
while they remain locked in their homes 
with their abusers. This has made it even 
more difficult for women to cope with 
the violence.
Is there a risk that women’s rights are 
being diminished?
Definitely, women’s rights have taken 
a step back – they are even grinding 
to a halt in some cases. We must not allow 
this to happen. 
This year, 2020, is a big year for women. 
It marks the twentieth anniversary 
of the United Nations Security Council 
resolution 1325 (on Women, Peace 
and Security). We must push on all 
the plans that we have, and get ready for 
when it is possible to be more active. But 
we have to stay on top of that agenda 
and we cannot shelve it. It is as important 
for women to achieve their rights as it is 
to survive COVID-19. These two battles [for 
women’s rights and against the disease] 
have to be fought together. And we have 
to win them both.  
 How can we ensure that women’s rights 
are not victims of this crisis?
In the economy, for instance, we have 
to make sure that the stimulus packages 
[offered by  governments in different 
The confinement 
has exacerbated tensions 
and increased  
the isolation of women
70% women  
exposed to the virus  
in health systems
As women make up the majority of health-care workers 
(WHO, 2019), they are on the front line in the fight against 
COVID-19, and are at greater risk of being infected. 

while ensuring that it is not accompanied 
by a widening of the digital divide. 
Communities do not always have access 
to technology, and even where there 
is technology, there is still a gender digital 
divide. We have to continue to make that 
fight a reality. We have to make sure that 
girls in poor communities do not miss 
out on education when education moves 
to digital platforms. 
I hope that UNESCO, UN Women, 
the Broadband Commission, 
the International Telecommunication 
Union (ITU) and ministries of education can 
work together to ensure that a broadband 
infrastructure is established in rural schools 
and communities in informal settlements 
– so that everyone, everywhere, has access 
to education.
countries] target women very clearly, 
and that they work for the women 
in the informal sector. These are 
some of the rights that we will have 
to continue to fight for. The fight against 
gender-based violence will not end 
after the crisis. We must remain vigilant 
and aim to flatten the curve of violence 
against women.
We must also encourage women to take 
up positions of leadership in the response 
to the pandemic in the fight against 
the virus – especially in countries where 
they are under-represented in the health 
sector and beyond – and call for fairer 
representation in certain sectors. This 
is where our efforts must be focused.
It is also necessary to encourage 
the development of distance education, 
 Christine Banlog (centre), carries large sacks of produce up the crowded stairs to the Sandaga market 
in Douala, Cameroon. The 64-year-old has worked as a market woman for twenty-two years. 
740 million women 
at risk of poverty
The economic crisis related to the COVID-19 pandemic  
disproportionately affects the 740 million women 
working in the informal sector (ILO, January 2019).
47 million women 
deprived of modern 
contraceptives
(UNFPA, April 2020)
The COVID-19 pandemic has led to the overburdening of health 
systems and the closure of social service institutions, including 
family planning facilities on which these women depend. 
