After months of necessary preparation, as the Director-
General declared recently in an address to the Secrétariat,
Unesco is now moving forward, carrying out in many fields
of action. the tasks assigned to it as one of the specialised
agencies related to the United Nations.
ion addition to working in the closest co-operation with
the appointed représentatives of its 31 Member States,
relations have been established for the execution of the
programme with a certain number of non-member States,
notably, Austria, Hungary, Italy and Switzerland, which
have applied for membocship within the organisation. Both
Switzeriand and Italy have appointed officiais of their
diplomatic representations in Paris to maintain liaison
with Unesco House.
The Vatican has established in Paris an International
Catholic Co-ordination Committee to ensure liaison with
Unesco and to inform Catholic circles throughout thé. world
of its activities.
During the past, weeks, Unesco has participated in. or
has been represented at, a number of United Nations con-
ferences and activities at Lake Success. Thèse include : the
First Session of the Trusteeship Council, the Temporary
Social Welfare Committee. thé Sub-Commission on Free-
dom of Information and the Press, thé-informai Committee
on Housing and Town Planning, the Comm'sMrn on the
Status of Women, and the Drafting Committee of the Com-
mission on Human Rights.
Unesco is negotiating agreements with thc Worid Heaith
Organisation, the International Labour Organisation, the
Food and Agriculture Organisation.
An information office of the United Nations has been
established in Paris, with offices in Unesco House, to
strengthen liaison between the two bodies.
Thé Nationa ! 
Commissions
As regards National Commissions and Co-operating
bodies, the Netherlands became the seventh nation to
establish a Commission and plans are progressing for the
création of Commissions in Canada, China, Denmark, New
Zealand and TUlfkey. National Commissions, are function-
ing. 
in Brazit, Errance. Haiti, NQrwax. poláz, (J... an1...... L11e
United States.
National Co-operating Bodies for Education. Mass
Media. Muséums, Social Sciences, Arts and Libraries, and
an Inter-Departmental Committee, have been set up in the
United Kingdom in the place of a National Commission.
Pians hâve been made for active association of National
Commissions with the execution of the programme of
Unesco. Practical proposais are being worked out for each
country.
A national conference on Unesco, art, which more. than
500 Voluntary Organisations were represented. was hetd at
Philadelphia'March 24-26. under the auspices of the U. S. Na-
tional Commission, and the first U. S. régional conference,
attended by 1, 780 delegates and guests from the Rocky
Mountain and Plains States. was held at Denver. Colorado,
in. May.
Dr. Julian Huxley, the Director-General of Unesco, was
able to describe the work and importance of the Na-
tional Commissions, as well as report on the progrès of
Unesco, on his tour of ten Latin American countries during
June and early July. The Director-G'eneral had the op-
portunity to présent his views on the officiai as well as the
academic and cultural levels, and as a result of the interet
shown in the Unesco programme, fuller participation of
Latin American countries in thé forthcommg Gênerai Con-
ference at Mexico City and in Unesco work generally is
anticipated.
$72, 000, 000 Raised
The campaign for reconstruction and rehabilitation of
educational, scientific and cultural institutions in war-
devastated countries by Unesco and Co-operating gfoups is
proceeding on a wide scale. The American Commission for
International Educational Reconstruction (CIER). com-
prising 200 rational voluntary organizations, had raised
$7, 000, 000 for educational reconstruction by the end of
July and estimates contributions will have reached arouud
$100, 000, 000 by June, 1948. Reports of Unesco field teams
. rho made surveys of needs in six European nations during
the Spring and Summer are being compiled now. Mean-
time, questionnaires and letters have been sent to govern-
ments, ministries of éducation and others in the potential
recipient countries to ascertain exact needs.
There have been a number of contributions to the re-
habilitation programme and many others are in prospect.
In the limitéd space available hère, not hall can be men-
tioned. but examples are 300 sets of the EncyCiopedia
Britannica, most ot which have been distributed. 38000
post-liberation books from the French Government. 2. 000
tons of educational equipment from Canada. The Council
fo :' Education in World Citizenship has agreed to use the
JE4, 000 unspent balance of a Æ : 13, 000 fund for educational
reconstruction in collaboration, with Unesco.
A mission in London this Spring puorchased workshop
machinery and tools to be assembled in 50 complete work-
shop sets for use in construction of their own apparats
and equipment by University science faculties and technical
colleges in devastated countries.
Hytean Amazon Project
Considerable progress has been made with the Hprlean
Amazon projet. This was raised to the status of a Unesco-
wide project at the Al ? ril'meeting of the Executive Board,
and Dr. Alfredo Metraux, the social anthropologist, was
loaned by the United Nations Economic and Social Counêl1
to act as expert consultant to Uno.'Dr. Bernard Mish.-
kin'was named consultant on the educational aspects of
thé projet.

Dr. Patno Carneiro, the BraziliaI
member of the Executive Board
teft for South America, May 15, t<
act as special consultant to Unesc<
thi the préparation of the Hylear
Amazon SclenölUcCommlssion, witt
'which much of thé work of Unesc<
Field Science. Co-operation Offi
in Latin Amenca. wiM, for the près-
ent, be concerned. The Commis.
Mon, which the'Brazilian govern.
ment has been asked to convoke
wi ! ! consist of representatives of ter
countries of the area, together with
representatives of the United Na.
tions, Unesco and certain other
U. N. spécialiser agencies (WHO
FAO, ILO) and other bodies such a1
thé Pan-American Union, and thE
Pan-.. American SanitaryCommission,
The meeting is to take place
ion 
August at Belem do Para
and its recommendations as to the
establishment of an institute, the
undertaking of eollaborativE
scientific work and other activities
in the region will be brought to thé
General Conference at Mexico City.
While the décision a. wait the Con-
ference, it can be said that the
gênerai plan is one of research and
survey in two broad fiels-naturel
resources of thé area, and op-
portunitiee for human development.
With the arrivai of Dr. W. E.
PumelL (lndusttial chemist, Aus-
tra) Mt). on April 30, to be counsel-
lor for Field Operations, it was
possible to begin setting up the
system of field liaison offices. Mr.
E. J. H. Corner (tropical botanist,
U K.) had already gone to South
America as Principal Field Scienti-
fine Officer and Dr. B. Malamos
(parasitologist, Greece) left as
Field Scientific Officer on May 2.
Dr. L. C. M. Thuriaux (Agricul-
tural chemist. Belgium) ha. s gone
to Cairo to establish the Field
Science Co-operation office for thé
Middle East. A third Fie ! d Science
Co-operative Office, for the Far
East, witi be located in China under
the direction of Dr. F. Cernuschi.
Teams from the Technical Needs
Commission have conducted wide-
spread surveys in Europe, Asia and
the Philippines and ait will have
returned in July, 50 that their re-
ports on requirements of press,
radio and communications in the
countries they have visited will be
in and processed for the meeting
of experts in Paris August 25-30,
Questionnaires employed Dy
thèse fieid teams contained ques-
tions on such subjects as quotas.
tariffs, currency restrictions and
censorship. with the view not Gnly
of ascertaining the technical ! needs
in mass communications of coun-
tries which have suffered in the
, war, but also of obtaining inform-
avion which might lead to removal
of obstacle to the free flow of in-
formation. Almost 60 per cent of
the questions concerned free flow l,
of information. There were 167
questions deaiing with) egis) ation of
thé press and news agencies in-
cluding queries on such subjects
as responsibihty for prpss offences,
liber iaws. banned publication,
Ja. ws controlling the administrative 1
and financial operation of the 1
press. foreign correspondents and :
thé position of governments 1 ! 1 con-
troiiing thé. press. Thé same gen-j
eral line of enquiry,. with necessR"Y
technica) différences, was pursucd'
in thé fietd of radio and filmes.
For Frite Ftow « f tnformation
It is the flet ; t time in hblory
t. hat a widespread survt'y of this
sort,, under international supcrvi-
sion ion and control, has been under-
taken, and the massive documenta-
tion gathered contains information
of considérable interest and value.
The information will aid) n thé
drawing up of practical plans for
diminishing thé économie, technical
and othf't'barI'ier to the farce slow
of information.
Unesco has made repn'sl'ntations
at severa) conférences of would-
I\IJlde organisations deaiing, wlth the
technica) facitities required for the
free slow of information. Thesc
inciuded the Congre8B of the Uni-
vI'rSllI Postal Union in Paria, at
whioh Unesco rf' ('ommended supprps-
tion of extra charges for airma))
of n ('wspaperll. perlodlcalø and pub-
lications, sought lower postage rates
8enf'rally for information materlal 1
and lower chargea on transport and
dÚltrlbutlon of newtpapfr* and
Jna8azineø. PrioriUM and lower
ratels ior t. be press. ere r
- survey and fiU Ubrary needa on an
 international Mate.
- Four Intecnatlonal YouhSer, vjce
i Camps are being opened in Europe
, 
in which Unescq : is associated in
s sponsorship.
r Grants-in-Aid
To date Unesco has made avail-
- able $55. 465 in grants-in-aid. which
- are facilitating attendance of
, scientists at international scientific
; conferences scheduled this'year.
; Aid to international scientific and
 technological organisations is one
of the main pillars of the pro-
s gramme of Unesco in the field of
. natural sciences. Of these organ-
; isations, thé-best-established and
. most effectively integrated is the
s International Council of Scientific
, 
Unions (1CSU) and the bodies
which it federates. Unesco has al-
'located provisionaHy about $250, 000
ion grants-in-aid to some twenty
l organizations affiliated to ICSU.
: This is intended to permit execu-
tion of some 140 specific projects,
including the travel of over 5
outstanding scientists to 60 im-
, portant international conferences,
- publication of around 80 reports of
'international importance and as-
distance to the rehabilitation and
'opérations of 30 intocnational la-
, boratories, bureaux and stockrooms.
To date allocations have bee
, made to the following groups, t
1 make it possible for specified
'scientistes to attend thirty-eight
international meetings this year :
International Council of Scienti-
fic Unions. International Union for
Pure and Applied Physics, Interna-
tional Physiological Congress Com-
mittee, International Society of
Microbiology, International Acade-
my and Union of the History of
Science, International Congress for
Expérimental Cytology, Internatio-
nal Union of Scientific Radio.
International Union of Biological
i Sciences, and International Union
of Chemistry.1 Seholarshlps aDei Fell_lIbips
Unesco is associated in thé spon-
soring of a number of schola...", i1ip. >
and telJowships, bath ne. wir. d.. Id.
Included in these are ten film
scholarships by the Britieh Film
Producers Association and five
press scholarships b}'British nf'WS-
papers.
Fellowships hâve oeen offered by
the Rotary International, the Amer-
ican Chemical Society, the Belg ;. an 1
Government, the French Ministry
of Education and the Britisn Min-
istry of Education. Mr John Mar-
shall, of the RockefeIIer Founda-
 : on, has been on loan to Unesco to
assise in planning the organization
of the fellowship programme.1 der. Howard E.. Wilson, of the
1 Carnegie endowment, previously
Deputy Executive Secretary of
Unesco's Preparatory Commission.
came to Paris this month to act a
director of Unesco's Seminar on
éducation in international under-
standing, Nearly one hundred pro-
minent educationists. sent by
thirty member states to exchange
ideas and techniques in teaching
for international understanding.
were to attend this meeting, from
Ju). \- 21 to August 30, at Sèvres.
! Personne) of the Arts and Levers
section were named to act a. s
: secrétariat for the interuaonal
'conférence of theatre experts at
Unesco House, Ju) y 28-Augu. st 1.
under thé chairmanship of Mr.
J 
B. PriesHey. for the purpose of
: considering the loundation.) f a,)
International Theatre InsUtute.
A meeting of experts assembled
by the Arts and Letters section of
Unesco here in May recommended
: hat Unesco continue the inquiry
undertaken before the war by the
International Institute of Intellec-
tua) Co-operation on Folk Arts, the
Jiving pxpression of a country's cul-
ture.
A fulh-prepared scheme for a sa-
tisfactory survey of the conditions of
artists and the arts in seJected
areas of the world will be pre-
sented to the Mexico Conference,
with a view tao ils implemenr. ttion
in 1948.
The calendar of Unesco confer-'
ences and activities on the flrst 1
page of this issue is an indicat'>r of.
where and how the programme is
being {implemented at this : la te 1
The 19411 programme of Unesco,
prepared for the General Con-1
ference by the Executive Board
this month. wil ! be published ton
the I) t Issue of the Monitor.
The Secrétariat now nUluber3 1
495, not including loaned peon-1
ne). from 31 nationa. Dr. Julien t
Huxley (United Klngdom) II ! DI-1
rector-OeneraI ; Mr. Walter H C. (
Lavée (United States) Deputy Dit
rector-úneraJ ; professor Jean Tho-
mesa (France) ABtiatant Dlrector-1
GeneraL ]
