Be hind the World Programme ;
Another View of Unesco
(Behind the execution of Unesco's world programme, and out
of the spollfght of public attention, there is a mass of detailed,
headquarters labour without which none of the many 1Jro1 ! ! cts coul : t
be carried out. Members of any large organisation, governmental or
private, are familiar with this lIital and unpub/icized activIty. At
Unesco House, it is carried out by an internatIOnal team-the Central
Administrative Services, under the direction of GordOn Menzies. The
following article describes something of how thai team backs up the
programme departments of UnescO.)
Unesco's Central AdminL<. trative ServiceS Secl10n was f : stabl1shed
last February to co-ordinate the provision of common services to the
Programme Sections of the Organisation It is composed of six main
units-Central Registry. BuiMing Management, Languages Service,
Purchase and Stores. Documents Service and the Restaurant and
Commissary and provides a. variety of services, supplies and equip-
ment to all Sections of Unesco.
The Building Manage-
ment division maintains
Unesco House and provi-
des local transportation
services. It is largely
staffed by local techni-
cians, ranging from car-
penters and. locksmiths to
highly qualified telephone
mechanics.
Many of these French
workers knew the luxu-
rious Hotel Majestic in
its pride and saw it beco-
me first the home of a
French Ministry and then,
in 1940, the headquarters
of the German occupation
Tile once famous ballrooms
and deception rooms are used
today to house Unesco's Interna-
tional Conferences and meetings.
To service these meetings-
attended by representatives from
many nations-Unesco maintain
its own team of interpreters and
summary reporters.
The twenty-one members of
the Reproduction Unit last year
printed and assembled over
twelve and a half million pages
of documents, which were dis-
tributed to the furthermost cor-
ners of the earth through the
Unesco Distribution Unit and
Central Registry.
All documents are produced in
French and English and, this
year, to further the Organisa-
tion's programme in the Latin-
American countries, a small
Spanish translation service has
been established. It is anticipated
that, during 1949, in line whith
Unesco's growing interest in the
countries of the Middle East, an
Arabic translation service will
be added.
The Central Registry, which
receives, circulates and files all
incoming correspondance and
cables, and despatches the a-
nisation's outgoing mail, is still
in its infancy. In a recent month.
however, the unit despatched
over 7, 000 communications.
With world-wide shortages of
essential supplies, currency res-
trictions, import and export re-
gulations, the task of maintain-
ing the Organisation's stocks of
consumable items presents a d1Y-
to-day problem.
Amongst the large variety of
requests which regularly pour
into the unit, some inevitably
cause a lifting of the eyebrows.
One day, a telephone caller
laconically requested the unit
to obtain clearance through
Customs for'the Atomic train'.
This task Purchase and S ! ores
accomplished-as soon as it re-
covered its breath-but only after
ascertaining that the train was
a mode), being sent by the So-
ciety of Nuclear Scientists for  I
Unesco-sponsored exhibition.
The staff Restaurant and Com-
missary are also'a responsi-
bility of the administrative ser-
vices. An erroneous impression
often exists that scientist, wri-
ters. artists and other intellec-
tuals are singularly uninterested
in the nature of the food pro-
vided for their sustenance. In
Unesco, however, the subject 1&
a matter of great concern, and
the Restaurant experiences con-
siderable difficulty, especially in I
these days of'world food shor-
tages, in catering for the indivi-
dual, tastes and national habit
of such a varied clientele.
The diversity of functions
carried out by the Administra-
tive Services is exceeded only by
the variety of nationalities em-
ployed therein. Individuals from
twenty different countries are
daily illustrating in a practical
manner that it is indeed possible
for the nations of the world to
work together in friendly hair-l
tony.
