Middle East Cultural
Liaison Office Proposed
WHEN the Third Session of the General Conference of Unesco meets. ill Beuuton November 17th, it will have before it a proposal from the Executive Board
on the representation of Unesco in the main cultural areas of the world. One such
ar"a is the Middle East, and the proposal urges the creation of a Cultural Liaison
Office for that area.
, ThIs suggestion tames with the choice of the Middle East as the venue of the
Conference : :'01'. by meeting in a different place each year, Unesco arouses interest
in its work among the people of that and neighbouring areas and thereby helps its
activities to spread-
Telling evidence of this can be seen in the fact that the meeting of last year'3
conference in Mexico has resulted I
Above, the decorative portat of the famous
Palais de Beiteddine in the Lebanon.
Upper left, the decorated interior of the
samc Palais, showing the rich lace-work
carvings executed by Arab artists.
The Palais is one of the architectural and
artistic landmarks of the Middle East.
in the creation and development
of a number of significant pro-
jects by Unesco on the one hand
and by the Governments of Latin
By
Victor AZAM,
Former News Chronicle cor-
respondent in the Middle
East. Now with the Unesco
Secretariat.
America, on the other. Today, the
countries and people of Latin
America follow closely the work
of Unesco and contribute to the
development of its activities.
Similarly, the Middle East pre-
sents a two-fold interest to Unes-
co Just as Unesco presents a
multifarious interest to the Gov-
ernments and peoples of the
Middle East
As far as Unesco is concerned,
one experiment has already pro-
duced sufficiently good results to
warrant the encouragement of
cultural liaison throughout the
Middle East. The Unesco Field
Science Co-operation Office which
has been functioning in Cairo for
over a year, has done valuable
work in bringing Middle East
sCientists within the orbit of in-
ternational science and putting
within their reach the wealth of
world knowledge.
Similarly, a Cultural Liaison
Office if voted by the General
Conference, would be called upon
to play a leading role in the
development and spread of educa-
tion and culture. Although the
Arabs are heirs to one of the
world's great culturar"possessions,
handed down to them over cen-
turies of eventful history, they
find themselves today striving
vigorously for a cultural rebirth
WhICh twentieth-century condi-
tions generally, and their aloof-
ness and isolation from the rest
of the world, render more diffi-
cult. This aim can. consequently,
be brought nearer to realization
through international co-opera-
tion.-which is where Unesco can
help.
In such countries as Egypt and
Iraq, where the illiteracy rate is
high. the problem facing the na-
tional education authorities is a
very hea\7 one. It is. naturally,
their concern in the first place.
But it 15 undeniable that in co-
operation with Unesco they can
find solutions to their difficulties,
through the technical assistance
which the Organization can make
available, in the same way as the
Field Science Co-operation Offices
arp oegmning to do.
It must be made clear that
Unesco does not and cannot
substitute itself for national
administrative bodies, or interfere
in their affairs. It can only
arrange for expert help and
advice to be provided when it is
needed, making the best ex-
perience of one country available
to another. This task should be
made easier thanks to the Arab
League Cultural Committee, which
since its formation two years ago
has done much to bring about
closer ties between the Arab Gov-
ernments in the cultural fie1l ; l
In view of all these considera-
tions. the Executive Board of
Unesco decided to define the
responsibility of the proposed
Cultural Liaison Office for the
Middle East as follows :"To pro-
mote the exchange of ideas, in-
formation, materials and persons
in the fields of arts, letters, philo-
sophy and humanistic studies"
The small staff to be assigned
to this task. if the Cultural Off-
ice IS approved, would initially
spend several months at Unesco
House in Paris and then travel
throughout the Middle East. No
fixed regional office is con-
templated at this stage.
In addition to this experimental
undertaking, the Executive Board
also proposes to appoint, in areas
to be determined by the General
Conference, one or two regional
representatives who will main-
tain liaison with the Govern-
ments and National Commis-
sions. distribute information on
the activities of Uneseo. and
represent Unesco at conferences
and meetings convened by the UN
and other agencies, in those
areas.
Should these new activities of
Unesco be sanctioned by the Gen-
eral Conference, there is no doubt
that a step forward will have
been take spreading understand-
ing and interchange of culture in
a world which needs such action
to achieve the goal of One World.
.,-
