Social Scientists Issue Joint
Statement on World Tensions
At the end of June, Unesco brought to Paris eight ; ; eminent
social scientists to consider the causes of nationalistic aggression
and the conditions necessary for international understanding.
The following statement, signed by each of them, presents the
opinions on which all could agree. Its significance lies in the
fact that a series of important propositions on : he causes of
international tensions have been formulated and agreed to by
social scientists widely differing in their ideological allegiances.
The following men signed the statement :
Gordon W. Allport, Professor of Psychology, Harvard University ;
Guuerto Freyre, Honorary Professor of Sociology, University of
Bah ! a, Brazil, Professor at the Institute of Sociology, University
of Buenos Aires, Argentina ; Georges GurvÍfch, Professor of So-
ciology, University of Strasbourg, France. Administrator of the
Sociological Study Centre, Paris ; Max Horkheimer, Director of
the Institute of Social Research, New York City ; Arne Naess,
Professor of Philosophy, University of Oslo, Norway ; John Rick-
man, M. D., Editor,"British Journal of Medical Psychology" ;
Harry Stack Sullivan, M. D., Chairman, Council of Fellows,
Washington School of Psychiatry, USA, Editor,"psychiatry :
Journal for the Operational Statement of Inlerpersonal Rela-
tions' ; Alexander Szalai, Professor of Sociology, Unrversity of
Budapest, Hungary, President, Hungarian Institute of Foreign
Affairs.
A.. 4 AN has now reached a
stage in his history where
he can study scientifically
the causes of tensions that make
for war. The meeting OI this
little group is itself symptomatic,
representing as it does the first
time the people of many lands,
through an international organi-
zation of their own creation,
have asked social scientists to
apply their knowledge to some of
the major problems of our time.
Although we differ in the em-
phases we would give to various
parts of our statement and in our
views as to its comprehensiveness
and implementation, no one OI
us would deny the importance of
any part of it.
We agree to the following
twelve paragraphs :
War not Necessary
(A) To the best of our know-
ledge, there is no evidence to in-
dicate that wars are necessary
and inevitable consequences of
"human nature"as such. While
men vary greatly in their capa-
cities and temperaments, we
believe there are vital needs
common to all men which must
be fulfilled in order to establish
and maintain peace : men every-
where want to be free from
hunger and disease, from inse-
curity and fear ; men everywhere
want fellowship and the respect
of their fellowmen ; the cnance
for personal growth and deve-
lopment.
(B) The problem of peace is
the problem of keeping group
and national tensions and aggres-
sions within manageable propor-
tions and of directing them to
ends that are at the same time
personally and socially construc-
tive, so that man will no longer
seek to exploit man. This goal
cannot be achieved by surface
reforms or isolated efforts. Fun-
damental changes in social
organization and in our ways of
thinking are essential.
Insecurity Fosters Conflict
(C) If we are to avoid the kind
of aggression that leads to armed
conflict, we must among other
things, so plan and arrange the
use of modern productive puwer
and resources that there will be
maximum social justice. Econo-
mic inequalities, insecurities and
frustrations create group and na-
tional conflicts. All this is an
important source of tensions
which have often wrongly led
one group to see another group
as a menace through the accep-
tance of false images and over-
simplified solutions and by mak-
ing people susceptible to the
scapegoating appeals of dema-
gogues.
(D) Modern wars between na-
tions and groups of nations are
fostered by many of the myths,
traditions and symbols of nation-
al pride handed down from one
generation to another. A great
many current social symbols are
still nationalistic, hindering the
free movement of thought across
political boundaries of what is,
in fact. an interdependent world.
(E) Parents and teachers find
tut difficult to recognize the extent
to which their own attitudes
and loyalties-often acquired
when they were young and when
conditions were different-are no
longer adequate to serve as effect-
iYe guides to action in a chang-
ing world. Education in all its
forms must oppose national self-
righteousness and strive to bring
about a critical and self-disci-
plined assessment of our own and
other forms of social life.
mass Media Strong Ally
(F) The development of mo-
dern means of swift and wide
range communication is poten-
tially a great aid to world soli-
darity. Yet this development also
increases the danger that distor-
tions of truth will reach a great
many people who are not in a
position to discriminate true from
false, or to perceive that they are
being beguiled and misled. It
must be a special responsibility
of U. N. organizations to uti-
lize these means of mass com-
munication to encourage an
adequate understanding of the
people in other countries. This
must always be a two-way traf-
fic. It will aid the cause of peace
if 1IIQ, tions are enabled to see
themselves as others see them.
(G) The prospect of a contin-'
uing inferior status is essen-I
tially unacceptable to any group
of people. For this and other
reasons, neither colonial exploi-
tation nor oppression of minori-
ties within a nation is in the long
run compatible with world peace.
As social scientists we know of
no evidence that any ethnic
group is inherently inferior.
(H) Many social scientists are
studying these problems. But so-
cial scientists are still separated
by national, ideological and clas&
differences. These differences
have made it difficult for social
scientists to resist effectively the
emergence of pseudo-scientific
theories which have been exploit-
ed by political leaders for their
own ends.
(I) Objectivity in the social
sciences is impossible to achieve
whenever economic or political
forces induce the investigator to
accept narrow, partisan views.
There is urgent need for a con-
centrated adequately, financed
international research and edu-
cational programme.
Research Necessary
(J) We recommend, for exam-
ple, the co-operation of social
scientists on broad regional and
international levels, the creation
of an international university
and a series of world institutes
of the social sciences under inter-
national auspices. We believe
that international scientific fact-
finding studies could contrlbute
useful information concerning the
cultures of all nations and bring
to light dangerous insecurities
and sources of tension, as well as
legitimate aspirations of people
all over the world. Equally cer-
tain to be rewarding are studies
of educational methods in the
home. the school, and in youth
organizations and other groups
by which the minds of the young
are oriented toward war or
toward peace. From the dissemin-
ation of the information result-
ing from these studies, we may
anticipate the emergence of con-
crete proposals for the guidance
of national programmes of edu-
cation.
(K) The physical and biologi-
cal sciences in recent years have
provided impressive demonstra-
tions of the effect of research.
Some of the practical results i
have been rather to dismay anu
disquiet the civilized world than
to reduce its tensions. The scien-
tists whose research has been
used in the development of atom-
ic and biological warfare are
not themselves responsible for
launching a curse upon the
world. The situation reflects the
forces now determining the uses
to which sciences can be put.
While other factors are concern-
ed, we hold that the chances for
a constructive use of the poten-
tialities of scientific and techno-
logical developments will improve
if and when man takes the
responsibility for understanding
the forces which work upon him
and society both from within and
from without.
Real Hope Remains
(L) In this task of acquiring
self-knowledge and social insight.
the social sciences-the sciences
of Man-have a vital part to
play. One hopeful sign to-day Is
the degree to which the bounda-
ries between these sciences are
breaking down in the face of the
common challenge confronting
them. The social scientist can
help make clear to people of all
nations that the freedom and
welfare of one are ultimately
bound up with the freedom and
welfare of all, that the world
need not continue to be a place
where men must either kill or
be killed. Effort in behalf of
one's own group can become
compatible with effort in behalf
of humanity. 
