UNESCO CCHJRFER 7
TRANSLATION OF CLASSICS
TO BE PROMOTE BY UNESCO
By Prof. Jean' : Jacques Mayoux
IF it is true that"it is in the minds of men that the defences of
peace must be constructed,"in what way can philosophy and the
vast studies dealing with the cultural past of mankind contribute to
such a peace ?
Let us, in this respect, examine the Philosophy and Humanist : yes
programme of Unesco, by dividing it into two categories : the empir-
ical and the theoretical.
-"'

On the practical side, it is a
fact that intellectual life and the
minds of men are both condition-ed by habit and surroundinga. Be-
cause of the every nature of their
academic work and the universal"
character of their interests, philo-
sophers,'humanists and sociaf
science specialists depend on inter-
national exchanges. These, until
now, have been almost entirely
lacking. The fact is that philo-sophers and humanists are not
organised on an international
scale, or at : east not effectively.
In an endeavour to remedy. tiiis,
Unesco has proposed the re-group-
ing of the existing organisations
I in order to establish an Interna-
tonal Council of Philosophy and
Humanistic Studies similar to the
International Council of Scientific
Unions. This International Council
it is hoped, will stimulate the
movement of ideas and the dissemi-
nation of knowledge between na-
tions.
i Among the many duties whicn
Mie Association will undertake on
an international scale are the pre-
paration of bibliographies : various
systems of card indexing ; analy-
tical summaries and abstract sur-
veys ; clearing house services for the
exchange of articles between philo-
sophical reviews and. eventually.
bulletins and year books containing
scientific information..
Translation-01 Great Books
In this same field of Cultural In-
terchange, the Economic and So-
cial Council of the United Nations
has charged Unesco with a difficult
and important undertaking, that of
preparing, submitting and ultimate-
ly putting into execution a plan
for the general translation of the
classics,'including great contem-
porary books not only of literature.
but of philosophy and of social and
natural science as well.
This project will have the follow-
ing two objectives :
a) Unknown or insufficiently
known classics are to be translated
into. a number of major languages
in order to enrich the culural
I heritage of the world and to give
particular encouragement to all na-
tions whose cultural'importance
may have seemed insignificant.
b) A limited number of Great
Books, selected for their universal
'value and their representative and
iiuman qualities, are to be translat-
ed into a. < ; many languages as pos-
sible.
Regional Centres
and Culture Understanding
Realising that it is essential
for Unesco's purposes to under-
stand and appreciate all cul-
tural differences, the Organisa-
tion, during 1948, is to consider the
possibility of setting up regional
centres of cultural co-operation. A
start in this direction will be made
this year when a survey wilt be
carried out in the Middle East.
On the theoretical side, Unesco,
and in particular. the Philosophv
and Humanities programme will en-
courage a critical study of human
values on an international scale. It
must avoid the danger of civilisa-
tion destroying itself through ap-
parent conflicts of ideology, which
in reality, may be no more than a
confusion of words.
In 1948, Unesco will undertake
two groups of surveys :
1) an enquiry into the influence
on current ideological controversies
concerning the fundamental con-
of the fundamental concepts of
democracy, justice and liberty.
2) an enquiry into the ideas held
by a country, or b :' a group within
a country, of its own culture and
the relations of that culture with
others, individually or as a whole.
Here the object is to ascertain the
gaps in existing relations and to
work out measures to integrate
e : :,. : culture in the whole of world
civilisation.
These undertakings, and in fact
the work of Unesco as a whole, will
succeed any in proportion to the
active participation stimulated, par-
ticularly amongst youth. 
