HYLEAN AMAZON INSTI UTE CREATEDn) ! LtEM sw M) ? ti% &.-n ! a !' ! w a a a' s ! & vms-M a Sa M
/t05 Con/erence 7Ae5
1 uitos Con erence ßsfablzsRes
Seal of I I H A in M anaus, 13crazi ! 'na-s razil, Seat o IIHA tn la u, Bf
A Conference for the creation of an International Institute of the Hylean Amazon, called
jointly by the governments of Peru and Bràzil and by Unesco, has successfully concluded
its deliberations at Iquitos, Peru. Lasting for eleven days from April 30 to May 10, the
Conference agreed upon a convention establishing the Institute which will come into force
. upon final acceptance by the founding nations. Pending the initiation of the operation of the
Institute, an Interim Commission was established with headquarters in Manaus, Brazil.
The following nations signed the final act of the Conference : Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia,
Ecuador, France, Holland, Italy, Peru and Venezuela.

Government, into being in 1918.
The Hylean Amazon-the
vast wooded region of the Ama-
zon River basin-comprises
some 7, 000, 000 square kilometres
expending from the Andes to the
Atlantic and from the River
Or. loco to the Mountains of Bo-
livia. A huge, but little known
ares of the world. it is inhabited
by about 200. 000 Indians except
for a few settlements along flyer
banks.
The aims of the Institute will
be to encourage and carry out
scientific studies in the Hylean
Amazon region so as to provide
a greater knowledge and unders-
tanding of tropical nature and
the practical development of the
regions by the Governments Of
South America directly concer-
nEa
At the Iquitos Conference the
scientific scope of the Institute
(Continued on Page 2.)
List of Chief Delegates
to Iquitos Conference
Bolivia :
Dr. Martin Cardenas
Brazil :
Dr. Linneu Albuquerque Mello
Dr. HeWisa Torres
Colombia :
Dr. Enrique Perez Arbelaez
Ecuador :
Dr. Rafael Alvarado
Italy : A. Volpiceli
Fra-nce : Paul Rivet
Netherlands :
Mr. V. Savelberg
Peru :
Dr. Luis Alayza y Paz Soldan
United States :
Dr. Clarence C. Boonstra
Venezuela :
Mr. William Phelps Jr.
Dr. Tobias Lasser
Dr. Albuquerque Me !) o of Brazil is shown addressing one of the
Plenary Sessions of the Iquitos Conference. in Peru which established
the International Institute of th Hylean Amazon.

Unesco's activities in connection with this Conference stem from
resolutions passed by its General Conference at the Second Session
in Mexico City. The Director-General was instructed to take steps to
bring this Institute, which was originally proposed by the Brazilian-.-.----

HYLEAN
AMAZON
(Continued from Page 1.)
was outlined and a budget of
approximately $300. 000 was set
for the first year of the Institu-
te's operation. A financial proto-
co ! was also signed by Bolivia.,
Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, France,
Holland. Peru and Venezuela,
which determined the scale of
national contributions toward fi-
nancing the Institute.
Observers from the United Sta-
tes and the United Kingdom
expressed great interest in the
Institute, and will study ways of
bringing about active partlcJ : pa-
tien by their countries.
At the opening session on April
30, Dr. Linneu Albuquerque de
MeIIo'Brazil) and Dr. Rafael
Alvarado (Ecuador) were elected
'Vice-Presidents.
The Conference recommended
that Manaus be es : ablished as
the seat of the IIHA because of
its geograpJ : 1ical situation and
teat centres of study should be
developed in Belém (Brazil) to
cover the Lower Amazon, in Iqui-
tos (Peru) for the Upper Amazon,
in San Fernando de Atabapo (Ve-
nezuela) for the northern region,
in Riberalta (Bolivia) for the
southern region, and in Archi-
dona (Ecuador) and Sibundoy
(Colombia). It was clearly un-
derstood that although the seat
of the IIHA would be in Manaus,
the actual work of the Institute
would be conducted in various
part.  of the Hylean Amazon. Re-
commendations were made for an
initial survey to be undertaken
in the Rio Huallaga valley in
Peru
O the $300. 000 budget propo-
sed for the first year of the Ins-
titute, Brazil has been assessed
150. 000 dollars, Colombia and Peru
$40000 each, Venezuela $25. 000,
France $15. 000, Bolivia $9. 000 and
Ecuador and Holland $5. 000 each ;
At the close of the Iquitos Con-
ference the Brazilian Government
provided air transport from Iqui-
tos to Manal1S for the first meet-
ing of the Interim Commission
of the IIHA which lasted for five
days from May 13 to May 17.
The work of the Commission
was mainly. technical. It concen-
trated its attention on the deli-
mitation of the area of the Hy-
lean Amazon, the setting up of
a secretariat for the Commission,
its finance and duties. The com-
mission confirmed Manaus as the
seat of the IIHA and arranged
that, while the Director-General
of Unesco should be asked to fi-
nance the secretariat in 1948. the
member nations of the Interim
Commission would undertake the
responsibility of continuing the
secretariat in 1949 at their own
expense. It recommended the
appointment of E. J. H. Corner,
Principal Field Science Coopera-
tion Officer in charge of Unesco's
Latin-American F. S. C. O., as Exe-
cutive Secretary.
