Left to right : Mr. A. S ! onimsM of Poland ; Mr. R. Calder and Mr. J. B. Priestley of the United Kingdom,
three members of the Working P arty on Mass communications at the General Conference who
helped formulate Unesco'jI challen ging programme for 1918 in the fie ld of radio, films and the press.
Production Unit Planned
MASS MEDIA TO BE USED
FOR PEACE
FAR-REACHING measures to mo-bilisé the resources of press.
radio and film for peace will be
undertaken by Unesco in 1948. An
impressive list of activities was
planned during the) month-long
Conference at Mexico City by dele-
gates from forty Member States.
Daring-1947, Unesco carried out
a Survey of Technical Needs in
12 countries of Europe and the Far
East. The survey, which was pub-
lished in September, 1947, in both
French and English, gave the first
detailed picture of its kind of losses
and deficiencies in equipment, man-
power and raw materials in the
press, film and radio industries. In
view of the success of this first
study, Unesco will extend its in-
quiries in 1948 to Central and South
America, to India, Burma, Malaya,
Thailand, Indonesia and the new
Member States in Europe (Italy,
Austria, Hungary and Switzerland).
Furthermore, Unesco will launch
a world-wide appeal during the
coming year ; for contributions to a
special fund designed to help war-
devastated countries rebuild their
media of mass communication so
sorely hit during the last war.
In order to promote the use of
mass media towards understanding
and co-operation among nations
and disseminate more extensively
the cultural wealth of the world,
the. United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organisa-
tion will give high priority to the
study of positive measures for the
reduction of obstacles to the free
flow of information. The obstacles
that Unesco will attempt to break
down include excessive postal and
télegraph charges ; high tariff walls,
consorship, quotas, currency and
postal restrictions, to educational,
scientific and cultural materiaL
In this, Unesco will work closely
with the UN Commission on Human
Rights, the Sub-COmmission Óf In-
formation and of the Press, the
Universal Postal Union, the Inter-
national. Telecommunications Union
and other agencies engaged in
similar work.
lnterhationalldeas Bureau
Although it is important, and
indeed necessary, that meetings of
science, education and cultural spe-
cialists be organised, Unesco can
become a truly world movement
only when the ordinary people
take an active interest and share
in its work. In this light, the crea-
tion of a special Production Unit
working with top-flight radio pro-
ducers, film producers and news-
papermen, assumes special signi-
ficance. Knbwn as the International
Ideas Bureau, the production unit 
will promote special programmes.
documentary and feature films. I
news stories, articles and books to ;
get across to the world the ideas'
Unesco stands for and thus encou-
rage a greater sense of cultural'
solidarity among peoples. The head-'
quarters of the International Ideas
Bureau will be located in Paris, but J
sections of the unit will probably J
be based in other countries in order J
to facilitate productivity.'
, ]
BY
John Crierson
Four key themes of world signi-
ficance within the field of Unesco's
interest will be mapped'out during
1948. Each theme will then be
tackled by top-notch writers and
newsmen, aided by world-famous
authors, specially engaged for the
occasion, who will produce a series
of highly readable articles, stories
and"reportages"for publication in
newspapers, magazines and periodi-
cals throughout the world.
Simultaneously, a squad of script
writers and radio producers, sup-
ported by nationally famous artists,
playwrights and producers, will
make available to the radio public,
feature programmes and dramatisa-
tions built around the same themes.
These programmes will be broadcast
in various languages over medium,
long and short wave bands.
At the same time the film experts
at Unesco will endeavour to get the
same themes covered by newsreels
aid, treated either in documentary
or feature films.
In addition to the joint projects
envisaged for the development of
Mass Media Major Themes, Unesco
will also undertake, during the com-
ing year,'separate production pro-
grammes in the field of radio and
films.
In the field of radio, for example,
a World University of the Air is
scheduled for 1948. It will work in
close co-operation with existing
radio networks in Member States.
not in competition with them. The
plan is to get the products of the
world's best brains and best talents
across to all peoples so that cultural
knowledge and progress will not be
contained within political frontiers.
In this way Frenchmen can get to
know what the Brazilians are doing
in literature, music and drama, the
Poles can get to know about the :
literature of India, the Italians
about Canadian and U. S. science
and education, rather than only
about their political differences.
Unesco will collaborate in the
operation of a United Nations
World Radio Network if the UN
decides on its establishment. If
not, Unesco is to examine the
establishment of its own. Until that
decision is made, however, emphasis
: will be placed on co-operation with
, existing radio stations and efforts
to increase their programmes in the
, cause of peace and understanding
between nations. In this connection
Mass Media radio specialists will
prepare a restricted number of
high-quality transcribed program-
mes to be circulated for use on
national hook-ups. Surveys of con-
cepts, techniques and results obtain-
ed in the use of radio in school
broadcasting by Member States will
also be carried out. This data will
ultimately be published so as to
encourage a more extensive use of
radio as an educational instrument.
In the development of its film
programme Unescb will promote the
production of a series of documen-
tary film dealing with the achieve-
ments of a selected number of in-
dividual nations as well as subjects
concerning whole groups of nations.
These documentaries, of an educa-
tional. scientific and cultural Ma-
ture, will be produced by the co-
operative action of Unesco Member
States for national and interna-
tional distribution.
Staff specialists of the cinema
will also study the problem of the
inexpensive production of film pro-
jectors in the hope that this will
ultimately encourage the cheap
manufacture of all types of equip-
ment used for mass communica-
tions.
International Press Institute
'To strengthen ties and contact
among journalists throughout the
world, Uneco will help the crea-
tion of an International Ins-
titute of Press and Information.
The Institute will facilitate
exchanges of techniques and
materials in processing of editorial
ideas and standards. It is hoped
that the feeling of unity among
the world's pressmen will be
strengthened and that mass com-
munication techniques wUI be im-
proved throughout the world
through clearing-house activities,
study grants and scholarships.
The Second General Conference
in Mexico stressed the importance
of such scholarships as a means
for training film, radio and press
personnel in devastated and de-
ficiency countries. (Details of
Unesco's programme for scholar-
ships will be found elsewhere on
this page.)
Of Unesco's overall budget for
1948, totalling just under 7, 700, 000
dollars, some 900, 000 dollars will be
devoted to the field of mass com-
munications. Unesco believes that
this is a small price to pay-a bill
shared proportionately by its forty
member states-to help outweigh
the tensions, the prejudices and
antipathies, and to help build in
their place a stronger sense of
world community among all peo-
ptes.
