U niversit y L
At Utrecht
World leaders in higher educa-
tion met early this month at a
Preparatory Conference of Repre-
sentatives of Universities m
Utrecht, the Netherlands. The
Unesco-sponsored conference-
first of its kind since 1937-provid-
ed an opportunity for top-level
educators to discuss common prob-
lems and to provide mutual assis-
tance In their solution.
Some three hundred university
representatives from thirty-two
countries are attending the twelve-
day meetings, August 2-13, which
were presided over by Dr H. I.
Kruyt, Chairman of the Nether-
lands National Commission for
Unesco.
In his opening address to the
conference, held in the old audi-
torium of the University of
Utrecht, Dr. Kruyt expressed the
hope that the meetings"with the
firm will to promote higher edu-
cation all over the world will give
results which will be beneficial to
us all and which will promote that
mutual understanding that always
leads to mutual respect".
Mr. Walter H. C. Laves. Deputy
Director-General of Unesco. creat-
ed a considerable stir on the open-
New International Agency
g y
To Uelp War Orphans
p p
Important steps forward towards the care of children handicapped
by the war were taken last month with the creation of an International
Federation of Children's Communities at Trogen, Switzerland. The
new agency was formed during a conference of Directors of Children 5
Villages which had been called by Unesco, July 4 to 11, at Trogen.
, eaters Meet
Con
f
ing day by asserting that in his
opinion the world's institutions of
higher learning had not yet learn-
ed how to form the citizens of a
world community. He called on
universities to grasp the leader-
ship which can give the world an
understanding of interdependence
of nations and a One-World way
of living.
Str2ssing the importance of the :
conference, he pointed out its
purpose as that of promoting in-
ternational understanding through
providing an opportunity 01 repre-
sentatives of universities through-
out the world to discuss their
common problems and to arrive
at common solutions.
Mr. Laves emphasized that such
discussions would be useless unless
they were practical enough to en-
compass the realities of the pre-
sent-day world."Research atone",
he said,"is not enough. Positive
steps are required... to ensure that
understanding is made widespread
and that the necessary trained
leadership is available to conduct
the affairs of this one world".
(Cont. page 2, col. 4.)

(Continued from Page 1.)
Dr. Clarence E. Beeby, Assistant
Director-General of Unesco, then
spoke on the"Purpose and Scope
of the Conference"in which he
called on the delegates to assume
the leading role rather than have
Unesco as the most active parti-
cipant.
University problems throughout
the world, Dr. Beeby declared,
were very similar. The universities
of today are overcrowded, lack
trained personnel and equipment
and. more important, sufficient
funds are not made available by
governments.
Regarding the scope of the con-
ference, Dr. Beeby pointed out
five main fields of study which
would be covered : the changing
role of the university, better aca-
demic standards, the financing 01
higher education, university teach-
ing of international understand-
Dr. H. R. Kruyt, Chairman of the Utrecht Conference, addresses
delegates to the meeti ng of university leaders.
ing, and methods of cont'nuing
Q, nay international cooperation amongFort-War universities.
M. André AIlix, French d legate
Student film and Rector of the University ofLyons, and Sir Chandreshwar
A documentary film, spon-Prasad Narayan Singh, Indian
sored by Unesco and the World Union delegate and Vice Chan-
Student Service Fund, portraying cellor of Patna University were
student ! iff and reconstruction elected Vice-Presidents of the con-
in the war-devastated universities ference.
of Europe and Asia, is being Four general sessions of the con-
prepared for screening this au-ference are being held, Dr. Geor-
tumn before American student ges Scelles, of the Faulty of Law
groups. of Paris, addressed the delegates
Entitled"Letter from a on relations between higher edu-
Student", the film is being made cation and the state and Dr.
by"The World Today", New George Stoddard, President of the
York documentary film produ-University of Illinois, spoke on
cers. Information about its"New Horizons in University
availability can be obtained Development". Dr. Julian Huxley
from the World Student Service spoke on the role of Unesco in the
Fund, 20 West 40th Street, New field of higher education.
York, 18, or from Unesco (New In addition to the general ses-
York Office) at 405 E. 42nd sions, regular meetings of partici-
Street, New York, 17. pants and observers are held, as
