MYSO
FO R AN
this trend has led to a desire and will to assist the
cover themselves, the main action being centred rot
of Adult and Fundamental Education.
Now, all over Asia, enthusiastic and devote !'"vôr
with limited means, improvised techniques, and, : n th
difficulties, to bring education, or"uplift"as it is
Asia. Lo the rural areas.
literacy from Humanity's Viev
THAT is why Unesco's undertaking to hold a S
Adult Education at Mysore from Novembet 2 u
was hailed with deep satisf ction by all Asian
To this first Asian Seminar, plans for which w
Unesco's Third General Conference in Beirut last
experienced adult education experts, a1 med with the
through achievements, and failures, in practical eXI
out in other so-called"backward"areas of the wor
The 30 delegates, representing 15 countries, v
together at Mysore include energetic Barbara MoLac :
who arrived fresh from her work among the Papuan
and veteran adult education leader Spencer Hatch,
time's experience of work in India, Mexico and Cost
Among the Asian educators are amiable U Tin
Dirgharaj Kourala, who travelled several days on he
native Nepal, to reach the train which brought him
The advisers sent by Unesco include Dr Frede
Division of Fundamental Education, who helped
Fundamental Education Pilot Project in the Marbia
and who more recently took part In the Unesco Sem
in the Americas, at Quitandinha, Brazil and Dr
Director of the Institute of Educational Research
of Puerto Rico.
Twelve of the 14 observers at the Seminar are far,
the remaining two being from the World Health
the International Labour Office.
Since the Seminar was inaugurated by India's E

TWELVE miles north of the city of Mysore in Southern India, are the celebrated Brindavan Gardens, whose. Might.
orange-colored flowers, red blossomed trees, canals and artificIal lakes attract visitors from all parts of India
and from abroad.
At night., these enormous gardens are illuminated, and the cascades of water, floodlit in all the colours of the
rainbow, produce a magnificent and unreal effect-like an endless display of fireworks against the black Indian night.
A group of some 50 men and women who arrived early last month at the Hotel Krishnarajasagar, which overlooks the
gardens had not, however, come to Brindavan to admire this beauty..
As delegates to the Seminar on Rural Adult Education for Community Action, organized by the Indian Government on
LIIL'SCO'S lJe ! wlf, tlleir illlerest was centred on a dítlcl'ellt kind of spectacle common to many of the nearby, villages : a picture
of people living wretchedly in overcrowded huts, alongside thoir cattle, goats and fowls, without proper sanitation and under
the ever threatening shadows of famine and disease.
Such villages, as well as the breathtaking beauty of Brindavan Gardens, mirror the real India and bring into stark relief
the age-old problems of ignorance, poverty, famine and disease.
These Indian villages are described in that great work"The Discovery or India", in which Prime Minister Jawaharlal
Nehru, relates how the intellectuals and political leaders of hits generation found their way back to the villages.
He wrote :"It was a disturbing sight, not only because of Its stark misery and the magnitude of its problems, but because
it began to upset some of our values and conclusions"...
The same process has been going on all over Asia, and has led to a sharpened sense of community responsibilities and a
changing of values. Because the villages are fhe real Asia. But, Nehru and others who re-discovered their countries and
countrymen also found a rich cultural and ethical tradition.
There is a deep connection between the re-discovery of the vitlages and the arising of a new Asia which we see to-day ; and
The Rural Education Seminar is being held in the Hotel Krishnara-
jasagar, (above) which overlooks the magnificent gardens of Brindavan.
The effect of this beautiful setting is heightened by the contrasting
poverty and squalor of nearby villages visited by delegates.

RE : A NEW
HOPE

, the villages to dis-
round the concepts
work is being done,
n the face of endless
it is often called in
ewpoint
a Seminar on Rural
2 until December 14,
sian countries.
were approved by
ast year, have come
i the lessons learned
experiments carried
world.
, who are meeting
LacMan of Australia.
uans in New Guinea,
: ch, who has a life-
: osta Rica.
in from Burma and
I horseback from his
jm to Mysore.
ederick Rex, of the
led to institute the
rbial Valley of Haiti
; eminar on Illiteracy
Dr Rodriguez Bou,
) h at the University
: from Indian States,
th Organization and
s Education Minister
Maulana Azad, on November 2, leaders and delegates have clearly
indicated the practical lines on which they will work.
There is, however, no confusion in the mInds of those working
near Mysore on the difference between literacy and education.
The Right Hon. Pin Malakul, Thailand's Under Secretary for
Education, and Director of the Seminar, stressed this at the opening
of the Seminar when he said :"We as educators must look at it
(literacy) from humanity's point of view. What is needed most is
education, and literacy is just a medium through which this can
be realized. A man is not better off if he is just able to read and
make some scribbling that goes for his name, if he Mill has to
live in abject misery Adult education is concerned with healthy
living, the means of living, social contacts and culture. The concerns
of the Seminar will therefore be wider in scope than mere Meracy".
Adult fundamental education problems are directly linked with
those of health. economics, nourishment and standards of life.
In a broadcast from the Seminar, Professor Humayun Kabir. Joint
Secretary, Indian Ministry of Education, gave this definition of funda-
mental education for adults :
"It must be the education of free man in a free soctety and not
merely a course in literacy. It must liquidate the problem of
illiteracy, help the people to improve their living standards, through
reform in the forms and customs of family life. It must bring to
them new techniques in old crafts and introduce new cmfts and
skills so that their economic standards are raised. It must inculcate
in them a sense of citizenship ana community living."
An Avenue Named Unesco
UNESCO and the Indian Government have called the Mysore
Seminar in order to provide educational leaders from Asia and
elsewhere in the world with the opportunity to giv  content
and practical shape to this definition.
Reports which each national delegation has prepared on the state
and progress of rural adult education in its own country are of
immense value and together form what is probably the first
comprehensive survey of fundamental education, in Asia's rural areas.
At a Hindu temple near Mysore, Dr. Spencer Hatch, a veteran education worker and leader
of the Seminar group working on economic questions, examines some of the intricate stone
carvings. With Dr. Hatch is his daughter, an orientalist from Columbia University.
But these reports only constitute a background for the work of the Seminar
which is organized in four working groups, each having carefully planned objectives
and scope for studies. In each group experiences are pooled so as to find the
most efficient means of tackling the particular problems under discussion.
The early days of the Seminar were taken up with general meetings, visits,
lectures and development of tile general"get-together"spirit which must accompany
an experience in"international living", such as a Unesco Seminar.
Vidyapeeth, a people's college for training in rural leadership, modelled on the
Scandinavian folk high schools, was also visited. Vidyapeeth is probably the only
college in the world with a road called Unesco Avenue. During their visit, delegates
from each country planted young palm trees along the main avenue leading to the
college, as Indian officials, in the presence of villagers from the whole district, named
it in honour of Unesco.
Vidyapeeth gave the Seminar an encouraging example for the opening of its
work. It showed the immensity of the problem, and the devotion, despite meagre
means, with which it is being tackled.

Seminar Learns from the Army
plans for the next live years and samples of books and pam-
phlets prepared for newly literate people were also displayed.
The first group which studies various literacy teaching
techniques was also able to see a demonstration and hear
lectures on fundamental Education work in the Indian Army.
About 80 % of all new recruits are now being made
literate through the simple, efficient teaching given in all
units.
In view of the available financial resources-two annas
(about 5 cents) per man, each month, is provided by the
Army Education Budget-the results obtained are remarkable.
All Asia's Problems at"Tiger's Pond"
coil. \f) tMAx of Group 2. which is studying health and home
life problems in rural areas, is Professor S. Y. Cho, of
the China Mass Education Movement. Professor Cha
who has repaesented China at two of Unesco's General
Conference, brings with him experience gained during
2j years work with the Mass Education movement.
Group 8, which is concerned with the economic aspects
of rural adult education, is led by Dr. Spencer Hacth, of
the inter-American Institute of Agricultural Sciences. Dr.
Hatch's group is studying ways of impruving agriculture
in Asian countries, the development of rural and home
industries, the raising of housing and equipment standards,
and the teaching of basic economics.
Jovial Professor A. X. Basu, of Calcutta L'niversitv, who
attended Unesco's first Seminar at Sevres, near Paris in
l : 1947 is directing the studies of the fourth group into social
and cilizenship aspects of rural education.
Should they need a physical reminder of the problems
they are discussing, the members of the Seminar have many
"living laboratories"close at hand. When some of them
visited the little village of Hulikere, which means"Tiger's
Pond", about a mile away from their meeting place, these
problems suddenly became dramatically alive.
In this village of 600 people, life has not changed for
centuries. Hoads and homes are filthy, cattle and human
being are housed together : the farming tools are primitive
and each man works for himself and his family and not for
the community. There is no water in the village, and soil ero-
sion has ruined inost of the land. Sanitation, medical care,
persona hygiene are practically unknown. The school is
. a windowless mud-hut. This village is one of the more
backward ones, hut it is far from being an isolated case.
One of the Indian delegates, Shri Aryanayatam, who has
worked closely with both Tagore and Mahatma Gandhi.
ealled the village leader and council together. and talked
to them.
"Clear the dirt from your roads, homes and lives", he said.
"I am ashamed of you. You have a school that is not fit for
cattle to live in. 1 worked with the Mahatma and was with
him when he decided to settle down in the most backward of
all villages. Gandhi chose that village because he said if he
could accomplish something there he could do anything. But
you too must do something. for yourselves. Build a new school,
keep your village and homes clean. Then you will live a happier
life,"
The sight of this village and others like it has impressed
the members of the Seminar with a sense of urgency and
impatience and a feeling that they'are fighting against time,
fighting for the millions of people now living In extreme
miserly and poverty.
II is this need for practical, tangible'results that caused
the organizers ùf the Seminar to add the words :"For
Community Action"to the original title of "Seminar on
Rural Adult Education".
The problems which the members of the Seminar have seen in the villages
around Brindavan Gardens are not problems for any one specialist : they must
be attacked by a team. This has. been realized in the setting up of the four
working-parties, whose very names indicate the close relationship between
modern literacy teaching and the welfare of peoples.
The first group, under the chairmanship of Dr. Mohamed Salim, of Iraq, began its
studies of literacy and adult education, wilh discussions on the definition and purpose
of literacy. The problem of literacy is a very real one for the participating-countries.
They have all initiated ambitious literacy drives, sometines on the lines of the"each
on teach one" method, sometimes through evening classes, often in the open air, or
anywhere the teachers can find an audience.
The whole Seminar, but, in particular this first group, has been greatly helped
through an exhibition arranged by the Mysore State Adult Education Council. The
excellent material sent to the exhibition by Indian States and provinces, included
detailed statistics on illiteracy in relation to density of population. Graphs showing
