UNESCO'S CONTRIBUTION TO
L) BRAR) ES RECONSTRUCDON
AND DEVELOPMENT
IN the original conception of the Unesco Clearing House for Publi-
cation, no provision had been made for the operational distribution
of books by Unesco. In many instances, the Clearing House was,
however, obliged to accept actual book gifts for distribution to libraries
throughout the world, because the donor was unable or unwilling to
do more besides actually donating the books. This was for instance
the case last year when the French Government offered 25, 000 volumes
EGYPT AND NETHERLANDS
JOIN BOOK COUPON SCHEME
A student In Alexandria aran noworder valuable r ferenoe books
from Amsterdam, and pay for them
with Unesoo Book Coupons. This Is
the latest development In the Unesco
Book Coupon Soheme launohed in
December 1948. Egypt and the Ne-
therlands have announoed their part-
cipation.
Egypt has Joined the Scheme both
as book-buyer and book-supplier, and
wi) i receive immediately a first alto-
cation of book coupons worth
$15, 000. As the agenoy responsible
for the sale of ooupons In Egypt, the
Egyptian Government has designated
the Administration of Qenerai Cutture
of the Ministry of Education at Cairo.
All Egyptian booksellers can now
accept book ooupons In payment fo
tnelr publications.
The Netherlands have Joined the
Scheme as book-suppliers only. The
Stiohting Qransch Export Centrum,
N. Z. Voorburgwal 5S-60, Amsterdam-
C., has been appointed as centralizing
agenoy, to which anyone wishing to
buy books, published In the Nether-
land, with Unesoo book coupons,
should send his order.
NINE COUNTRIES NOW INCLUOED
THESE two latest additions bringi the totai number of countries
benefiting from Unesco's Book Cou-
pon Scheme to nine, namely : Czecho-
slovakia, Egypt, France, Hungary,
India and the United Kingdom (all
book-buyers and book-suppliers) ; the
Netherlands, Switzerland, and the
United States of America (book-sup-
ptiersoniy).
Another important development has
been announced by Unesco. The
validity of book coupons already in
circulation, which originally had to
be liquidated within a ten-months'
experimental period, has now been
extended untie the end of 1950. Yet
In Czechoslovakia, a very active mem-
ber of the Book Coupon Scheme since
its inception, the first allocations of
sale-and gift-coupons, totalling
$27, 000, have already been exhausted,
and the central Czechoslovak distri-
buting agency has applied for another
$20, 000-worth of coupons for sale to
libraries and institutions. Other
countries are expected to present si-
milar requests at any moment.
of French classics for distl'ibutwn
through Unesco.
Almost daisy, the Clearing House
now circulates. Lists o {publications
offcred for distribution by libraries,
learned societies and individual
donors. On the basis of request, 
then receive, publications change
their owners. and, in promoting Nis
continuous flow of publications
from country to countn}, the
Cleariru} House takes an active role
by supplying infOJ'mation on needs
and transpórt facilities, and ver ! !
often ceen pa ! IS fOJ'the shipment of
donated books. Duplicate and sur-
plus copies, lvhich lvould otherwise
have bcen scnt to the paper mill for
pulping are thus again coming intu
the hands if readers for whom
thcse books would have been lost.
Of particular importance in the
field of libraries'rcconstruction a1'e
the national book centres, created
01'sponsored by Unesco, such as the
British National Book centre, the
Canadian Book centre and the
United States Book Exchange, Inc.,
the fOJ'mer American Book Center.
A considerable cont1'ibution tv
l {bro'1'ies' reconstruction u'ill also be
made by the CARE/Unesco bouk
p1'ogramme lchich u'as started in
1949, and which, leith an ultimate
tQ1'gèt of m01'e than $2, 000. 000 will
play an immensely Wnpo1'tant role
in supplying libraries in war
damugc·d areas'u'ith the nccf'sson}
literature in the fields of Health
and Welfare, Nursing, l, [edicine,
Dentistn}, Ag1'icultitral science, Ve-
tcrinan} science, biology, chemistn},
cngineering, geology, library ad-
ministration, mathematics, physics.
physiology, psychology, socioloy !/
and statistics.
19
