: ar ! RUSSELL
(United Kingdom)
... Academic freedom I am sorry to have to mention as a separate
heading, because I should have hoped that it might be taken for
granted. Any State or any university which demands that its
teachers should accept, or that they should reject, the doctrines of
Marx or of Thomas Aquinas or of anybody else from Confucius to
Stalin, is failing in its elementary duty, and cannot be admitted tothe comity of the world of learning. The battle for academic freedom
was long and arduous ; in the nineteenth century it seemed to be won.
Now, alas, it is explicitly repudiated over a large part of the earth's
surface, and is in danger of being forgotten in many other parts,
though not, I hope as yet, in Western Europe. Its importance, r
believes, is greater in our age than at any former time.
... There should be in as many universities as possible an international
club. These clubs should form a network, and every member of one
of them should receive the hospitality of any other during any au-
thorized period abroad.
... The main stress in history should be on world history, treated-
as for instance, in lWel1s'''Outline of History"-in a manner to
exhibit the collective development of mankind, and to make wars
appear foolish rather than glorious. I do not mean that there should
be a dull and colourless neutrality, still less a concealment of things
discreditable to this or that country. What I mean is that the
emphasis should be on humanity in general, not on any one nation,
and on collective achievements rather than on the virtue or prowess
of one's own country.
I do not, of course, deny children must learn more of the history
of their own country than of that of others countries, but it should
be taught in an international setting, and not made to seem more
important than other history.
... 1 suggest that, in place of the national flag, schools should display
an international nag. And in place of the national anthem they
should be taught to sing a new international anthem.
IWOUld like to say to begin with, that I consider
this a matter of thp very greatest importance,
in the long run the possibility of peace depends
upon the existence of friendly feelings between
nations more than upon any other one factor, but
in the creation of such feelings education must play
a major part.
