TT T is nine months since I took up my duties as Director-General. Ninc
months is a short time in the history of an organization, and often
no mor  than an episode in a man's life. But no period is short for o e
who must use every single moment for the maximum amount of
action.
As I drafted the report you are about to discuss, I thought at every
stage of the seriousness of this occasion ; in which I meet the General
Conference of Unesco face to face. And so this will be on my part an act
of self-examination ; Unesco would be but a mere bureaucratic mechanism
if it did not also provide the opportunity for frank and fruitful exchange
between those who have faith in its future.
unseen dividend
I will not here reiterate my report. You will, in looking through it, havebecome suffìcienllv aware of our endeavours and of our failures.
I might dwell on the former, but feel it my task rnther to stress the
tatter, so as to conceal nothing of the obstacles we have so far failed to
overcome.. This is, of course, scarcely the usual way for a managing
director to give an account of his stewardship to his board ; but Unesco
is no commercial undertaking. Investments in this venture-the contri-
Imlions of your peop) es, the work of our Secretariat-have as their
single purpose to assure to every man access to education, culture and
science, to the end that every man may in this way reach true personal
fultilment ; thus understanding others better, and be enabled in more en-
lightened fashion to serve the cause of human brotherhood.
Such benefits are not reckoned in francs or
dollars or pounds ; and yet, without this unseen
dividend, how precarious is the signilicance of
the others ! These material attributes of peace,
war can destroy at a stroke ; even in peace they
may be endangered should a mechanical inter-
dependence of material forces prevnil over a
faith and a hope based upon the moral solida-
rity of mankind and free cho-operation of men's
minds.
Facing these prospects, which Unesco may
only ignore at the cost of wif-alJdicat ion, you
will understand Why I am less struck by results
achieved than by obstacles not yet overcome.
woe must act quickly if we are not only to
reach our nearest goals, but to strengthen the
moral authority of our Organization.
In the course of my various travels this year
I met many who knew nothing of Unesco. They
were forthright and honest men who would not
wish to judge us with the elegant scepticism
adopted by certain high priests of culture ; they
were modest, vulllPI'aiJle men like ourselves ;
our brothers, for whom Unesco was created-
and yet to whom our very purpose is unknown ;
men to whom we have not stretched out our
hands to draw them to us, though they would
be our most devoted and ardent helpers and
friends, if they could only be made aware of
our existence.
This, gentlemen, is my real report to you. The
document you have in your hands details our
work in these past months (1) ; it is the Direc-
tor-Generat's account. But I am now adding my
report to you as a man ; and this I can do in a
handful of words : Unesco is still for the most
part a blueprint, and to bring it to full and
selective fruition vve must redouble our efforts.
Each year in conference we trace anew on
lhe blueprint the outlines of the building,
we adjust some detail of the fabric or the
plan, we debate the niceties of departmental
functions, we sum up what the Secretariat has
achieved and regret that it has been unable to
do more. But Unesco is not a Secretariat alone ;
il is an institution whose influence must extend
over the whole world, the Secretariat being no
more than as it were the nerve centre. Of
course it has its own part to play ; but first of
all it should help the other participants, above
all the Member States, to play their parts. Its
tasks are to receive and pass on the views of
the National Commissions, to see to it that no
requests and no replies go astray. We cannot
conch : vie a nerve centre, except in terms of the
living organism whose cohesion and action it
ensures. Yet in our case it is often as though,
my some strange physiological paradox, the ner-
vous system were still in search of its physical
organism.
BIueprÍnt and Fabric
r-]'HERE an'already, it is true, a number ofJ. Natio l Commission . But how many
of them meet regularly ? How many have
attempted to start local branches ? How man'
answer our enquiries, or endeavour to carry
out our programme ? Observers may say that
we are asking too much ; that our question-
naires are too numerous and end by becoming
a burden. And there is no doubt that we must
still improve the methods of work of the Se-
cretariat. Our documents would gain by being
more concise, and vve should allow more time
for answers to reach us. I will do my best to
bring about these improvements. Tlie Secre-
lariat should keep in constant touch with those
bodies which are the sources of its strength
and authority. Where National Commissions
are active and powerful, Unesco has begun to
break down the blank wall of general indiffe-
rence. Where Commissions do not exist, or
are out of touch with the realities, Unesco is
no more than a token.
The very nature of this Organization demands
that the peoples of all its Member States make
a similar effort-though graded to their
means-to participate in our work. Hence I
feel it my duty at the outset of this Fourth
Session of the General Conference to make an
appeal to you. Your discussions will give me
guidance and lines of policy. lour decisions
on the most important items on the agenda,
such as programme priorities-which govern
the distribution of the budget-the total of
the budget itself, the plan for technical assis-
lance for the economic development of the less
fortunate countries, will be of exceptional im-
portance for our future.
But the fundamental problem remains un-
touched : how are we to breathe purposeful and
varied life into these various nationat Unescos
in the several countries, whose steady partici-
pation can alone enable the international Unes-
co to develop ? You are about to examine the
duties which fall upon the State in regard to
education, science and culture, for the purpose
of ensuring a better understanding between
peoples. May I here stress once again what I
wrote at the end of the Report which is before
(1) A summary of this report'U'as published in the
special 32-page Conference issue of the Courier last
1/month.
you, and say onceagnin how much benefit
Unesco may draw from your debates on this
theme ?. '"
No Laboratory of Illusions
OF two truths I am convinced, and neitheris.. COllplet yitheut he other :. of thehistoric mission of Unesco, and of the
sincerity of the countries which have under-
taken to carry out that mission. I hope there-
fore that no one will misunderstand the
frankness with which I underline weaknesses
which are temporary and remediable. I trust
rather that you will mark in this outline of
mine, far from any pessimism which I would
deny, my concern for objectiveness.
I have a deep faith in Unesco, and that is
why I will not have it regarded as a collection
of symbols and a laboratory of illusions. The
idealism expressed in our Constitution is not
a smoke-screen, designed to conceal the hard
facts of reality from the simple-minded. We
are not merchants of day-dreams. The cam-
paigns we have launched against the economic
obstacles which impede the free circulation of
printed material is not an abstract struggle
waged with phrases and speeches, but a concrete
undertaking employing concrete means, namely,
international agreements submitted to govern-
ll1ents for signature.
.. Our Book Coupon Scheme, designed to enable
soft-currency countries to obtain books and
periodicals published in hard-currency coun-
tries, is hardly a metaphysical speculation. Our
educational missions to the Philippines and to
Thailand have had-just as the one now in
Afghanistan-to get hold of the human truths
underlying the problems they were sent to solve.
Whether or what action will be taken as a
result of their findings is not for us to deter-
mine. But the eager and trustful welcome ac-
corded to these missions in these countries
which had asked for them encourage us, since
it demonstrates that frontiers are not always
impassable barriers tao'positive international
action.
Mere Symbolist
THERE is nothing illusory, either, in the workof our scientific cooperation oflìcf's. The
requests for information and for advice
which they receive, the facts they have provided,
t the contacts they have established, are all rea-
listic and beneficial achievements. And wliat
could be more practical than our efforts
to increase the number of fellowships,
than our surveys of technical needs of
press, film and radio, than our endeavours
to improve the techniques of fundamental edu-
cation, or to mobilize private organizations on
behalf of the rebuilding of devastated countries ?
Without claiming undue credit for such emer-
gency help as woe have ourselves been able to
afford, I should like to remind you that this
very year, thousands of Arab and Greek chil-
dren have learnt to utter the name of Unesco
with affection.
Thus we do not \york in the abstract. And
yet we must acknowledge that, through inade-
quacy of means, our action is sometimes so
re ; ; : t ricted a ; ; : to appear merely symbolic.
In an undertaking such as ours, worldwide
in scope, quantity is often the pre-condi-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

AN ACT OF SELF-EXAMINATION
-
There is here a living presence which governs all our
tasks : Twentieth Century Man. His presence, though
unseen, is our spur It spurs us because it commits us ; and
committing US, will judge us'
(Continued from page 9)
tin both of quality and of reality. Slated in
another way, tne question we face in our work
is not so much that, of taking initiative, as or
having the means-means in terms of men.
technicians and experts, in terms of finance.
cash and materials. without a concurrent and
combined increase in all these means, what we
call the concentration of our programme could
not but lead to sheer surrender. To concen-
trate is not to contract ; even less is it to para-
lyse..
I should not forgive myself if I allowed the
slightest doubt to exist as to my view of this
matter. I am in favour of concentration of our
programme ; we have been straining for months
towards that end. Even if we should concen-
trate all our projects into a single resolution
- for example, for the provision of fundamen-
tal education, which hundreds of millions of
men and women still lack-Unesco's existence
would still be justilied. But it would no longer
be justified if, having confined ourselves to this
single field, we further limited ourselves, as
we have far too often had to do in other parts
of our work, to the drafting of memoranda, the
despatch of prospectuses and bulletins, the
sending hither and thither of experts unprovi-
ded with the means to carry out the education-
al campaigns draw up on paper. We need only
thus reduce the notion of concentration of
programme to its absurd conclusion (0 see how
vital it is to give Unesco's work firm roots, and
II believe in the future
to go to the heart of situations which we have
hitherto done hardly more than catalogue.
There are still not very many fundamental
education. specialists,. some may object. But it
is not for us to direct the necessary funda-
mental education campaigns on the national
level. This requires a political authority which
we du not possess, and linanclal means to which
we cannot aspire. what is expected of us on
the international plane is that we should help
in planning campaigns, in perfecting techniques
and above all in increasing the number of spe-
cialists. That is indeed our purpose. Before the
Economic and Social Council's resolution of
4 March 1949, we had already devoted much
time and a not inconsiderable part of our re-
sources to technical assistance tasks. Yet if we
are to train qualified experts in sufficient num-
bers to avoid a Iragie failure to meet the world's
needs, we must prepare for immense efforts,
have the necessary time, and hp given increased
linancial resources.
The deeper we go into the problem which
at first we had to be content merely to skim,
the more clearly we realize that if L'nesco is to
serve the cause of peace, it must concentrate
on mankind's concrete needs. It must he
neither an academy preaching the virtues of
theoretical pacifism without considering the
ways of attaining peace, nor an institutiun
which, in the name of the primacy of the in-
tellect, regards culture as end in itself, ar-
lilicially set apart from the economic and social
factors which govern its growth.
Our mission then is both militant and prac-
tical. It rules out all « conformism ». There is
nothing less conformist than the programme
of our Organization. Is our aim to enable all
men to read and write a conformist one ? Or
our effort to make the Rights of Man known
in every teaching establishment ? Or our cam-
paign in favour of the free circulation of ideas' ?
If there is such a thing as a cultural force of
social change, then we are indeed the instru-
ment of that force. If there is a bold courageous
kind of peace-the antithesis of a peace of
resignation-then it is indeed that heroic
peace prescribed for all men in the Final Art
signed in London in 1945 not a truce imposed
hy weariness, but. a real peace, based on justice
and understanding. a peace built on the sense
of responsibility of each and all.
Let me dwrll on this point. The concord
which it is our duty to cement through educa-
tion, science and culture will be as nolhing if
the peoples of the wOrld do not found it on
freedom- freedom for all men, But can we
imagine effective freedom unless all men are
invested with genuine responsibility ? Let
others dangle before the unknowing the illusion
of freedom unearned, of rights without duties,
of
of such deceit. For our duty of all duties is II
understand, and to make it understood. that all
the problems of mankind merge into the one
/,/'II1, lI'lII of man's freedom ; and hat every free-
dom implies. whether for the community or the
individual. inescapable responsibilities. It was
in Paris under siege that the aged Miechele
repeated, with all The conviction of his youth,
his is famous utterance, that admirable profession
of faith in the fertilily of fl'ee will and. eIf-
decision : <&lt; I I believe the future. because
I make it >&gt;.'
But how can we inspire in every man the
consciousness of his responsibilities, if we do
not ourselves begin with a definition of those
which fall to this our own Organization ?
All those assembled here know and feel how
necessary Unesco is. More than ever before, the
clauses of the Constitution acquire the strength
of commandments. Neither politics nor ambition.
nor even the thirst for knowledge nor love of
the arts have brought us together. What binds
us together is the betief that the peoples must
understand and help one another. But it is vital
that this belief should remain continually live
within us and should inspire all our views and
policies.
Unesco, which will one day become the
living Republic of Minds, the organic hond be-
twern all men serving truth consciously, is
as yet in many respects no more than a piece
of administrative machinery. We know the dan-
get that has always beset all administrations.
They all too easily degenerate into soulless
mechanisms, where life is stifled ; where words
swallow up meaning, the letter destroys the
... because
I make it'
Michelet
spirit. other men's faces fade into mere concepts
the most moving experience dissolves into a
speech, into vague and lifeless affirmations.
Our first duty, in this mission which is assi-
gned to us is vigilance. We fighl against the
force of habit. The vigil on the eve of battle
is doubless often an occasion of austere gran-
deur. bul nobler still is the determination of
those who are conscious, as we'must all be
conscious, of taking part in the'night-watch
that precedes true peace.
Not from Olympus
Our eyes must remain wide open. Everyitem in the programme must remain
living, a fraternal inspiration, it is
in that spirit that the United Nation adop-
ted the Universal Declaration of the rights
of Man. The authors of that documents
did not sec themselves as historians. sub-
mitting for the applau"e of peciailists a
survey of our legislative inheritance. They
threw down a challenge ; and in that challenge,
though in thi language of lawyers, lives the
cry of man. Every right is a basic demand of
the individual, or of society ; it is an act of
defiance to the forces of injustice. These rights
do not flow down from Olympus as mysterious
gifts of benevolent lawgivers. They spring from
the peoples'needs. They voice the peoples'
deepest, desires.
when we enumerate man's rights, we are also
enumerating duties to be accomplished. None
touches us more nearly than the right to edu-
cation. Who can remain unmoved on reading
Article 26 of the Declaration :
« Everyone has the right to education.... Edu-
cation shall bc directed to the full development
of the human personality and to the strengthen-
ing of respect for human rights and funda-
ing. tolerance and friendship among all na-
tions...»
To these words, in our conscience others
echo : two-thirds of all men are illiterate, two-
thirds of the children alive today still await
schools and teachers to help them to become
responsible citizens, to make them free. They
still await the time when the right to education,
which now they ar unable to claim in writing,
To Concentrate is not to contract,
even less to paralyze
Human Rights and education go hand in hand. The
Preamble to Unesco's Constitution proclaims that
"wide diffusion of culture and the education of
humanity for justice and liberty and peace are
indispensable to the dignity of man".
ceases to be a phrase and becomes a reality.
Perhaps the) look to Unesco for just this Only,
it must be clearly underslood that this Unesco
to which the eves of mankind are turned is not
a house in the Avenue Kleber, nor a team of
technicians, nor a gathering of learued people,
nor an academy of thinkers :-it is, first and
foremost fifty governments.
What is true for education is similarly true
for culture and science.
« Eecl"yune >&gt;, stateS Artlicle 27 of the Decla-
ration, ( has the right freely to participate in
the cultural life of the community, to enjoy the
arts and to share in scientific advancement and
its benefits.
Culture  and Bread
Mex need culture in fact as much as they
need bread. They want their share ofmankinds spiritual inheritance, they de-
sire themselves to live its change and growth,
to attempt to enrich it. That must cume to
pass it they are tu be, in the full sense, men,
it the culture of their countries is to bp some-
Ihing Jibing. The future historian may admire
our puets, our painters, our musicians ; but it
is to be feared that he will add : thee great
wen were isolated individuals, living apart,
unknown of the people-of the <&lt; masses » as
the saving was. Those ( « masse » were born.
worked and died without sharing in a culture
for the sake of which they were nevertheless
asked from time to time to surrender their
possessions and their lives.
As to science, it is true that research has
blossomed impressively in certain lands and
brought them a plemtude of well-being and
power. But it is far from having developed
equally everywhere. There are other lands in
which all that is knawn of modern science is
the havoc which its wrongful use can cause.
The task is therefore in the first place to spread
the benefits of science everywhere, and still
more to foster the desire for science every-
where, to nurture the scientific spirit, to build
the foundations of science everywhere. To do
this, it is not enough to distribule manufactures
and to familiarize people with mere techniques.
What matters is that all peoples should be
able to equip their own laboratories and li-
braries, train their own specialists, inspire their
own research workers. Until these aims are
achieved, there can be no talk of the equality
of men before science.
What are you going to do, gentlemen, to
meet such great needs and such high duties ?
I can only listen to your debates with tense
expectancy. But, this expectancy will be more
t. han the natural concern felt bv evry inter-
national official for the future of his organiza-
tion : it will be the anxiety born of the faith
which I have placed in the will of the people
and the respect I hold for the indomi-
table hope that fills men's hearts. There are
doubtless hundreds of millions of men who
know nothing of the aims of this Conference
or of the verb purposes of Unesco. But it is
demanded of (his Conference, as it is demanded
of Unesco as a whole, not to answer these
miHions'unknowingness by knowing them not.
There is here a living presence which governs
all our tasks : Twentieth-Century Man, for whom
we must open the path of intellectual and
moral solidarity, which our Constitution pro-
claims as the essential foundation of world
peace. His presence, though unseen, is our spur.
It spurs us because it commits us ; and com-
mitting us, will judge us.
