PUBLICATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTI FIC AND CULTURAL ORGA. NIZATION
Volume II.-No 5.. Price : 10 Cents (U. S.), 6 Pence (U. K.), our 25 Francs JUNE 1949.
By UN for Technical Development Plan
SUM SUGGESTED FOR 2 YEARS IS FIRST WINTER-
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR UNDER-DEVELOPED
AREAS. UNESCO SHARE ESTIMATED AT $16, 855, 500
A plan to use more than $85, 000, 000
in two years for technical assis-
tance to under-developed countries
has been outlined in a report
issued by the United Nations at Lake
Success on June 2.
The plan is the United Nations're-
sponse to President Truman's call for a
"bold new programme"to make the
benefits of scientific advances and indus-
trial progress available for the improve-
ment and growth of under-developed
areas.
The 328-page report, issued by Secretary-
General Trygve Lie, is. the cho-operative
product of the Secretariats of the United
Nations and. eight Specialized Agencies,
and is now being submitted by the
Secretary-General to the Economic and
Social Council and by the heads of the
Specialized Agencies to their respective
governing bodies.
[As this issue of the Unesco CourIer
goes to press, the Executive Board off'
Unesco is in full session in Paris to
cons'der the technical aid programme and
the proposals for Unesco's participation
during the co) 7ttnsr years, j-
The estimated cost of the technical
assistance described in the programme is
$35. 862, 576 for the first year and
$50, 079. 807 for the second ear. These
figures are in addition to what govern-
ments of recipient countries are expected
to pay as their part of the cost of the
technical assistance that they receive.
Unesco's share Í : 1 the programme has
been estimated at $6, 150, 000 for the first
year and $10, 705, 500 for the second year.
The proposed cost of the first two year
programme submitted by the United
Nations and the Specialized Agencies may
be summarized as follows :
First Year Secondyear
$ $
United Nation 4, 855, 500 7, 643, 500
Joint UN-Specialized
Agencies projects... 1, 084. 500 1. 601, 500
International Labour
Organization 4, 678, 400 6. 793. 500
Food and Agriculture
Organization......... 9, 425, 456 11, 345, 383
Unesco""''''''''''''''6, 150, 000 10, 705, 500
International C i v i I
Aviation Ore."""516, 200 1, 007, 400
World Health Organi-
zation.................. 9, 152, 520 10, 983. 024
Total......... 35, 862, 576 50, 079. 807
In addition, the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, the
International Monetary Fund, and the
International Refugee Organization will
co-operate in the programme, but do not
envisage asking for special funds.
Local Participation
-HE purpose of the programme, theU, N. report states, is to assist
under-developed countries to achieve
for themselves the material and social
benefits of sound, balanced economic
development. Realization of this pro-
gramme will require full use of the
scientific and technical advances which
have already so changed the economics
of more highly developed areas. The
report warns, however, that patterns of
economic development which fit the
economic and social structure of the
technically more advanced countries
cannot be applied without modification
to those which have remained under-
developed.
Furthermore, In every country develop-
ment must be brought about mainly
through the efforts of the local popula-
tion, with the help of domestic resources,
and by means of appropriate changes in
economic and social structure. If economic
development is to achieve its purpose of
increasing the security and welfare of
the great mass of mankind, its benefits
must be widety distributed.
The report notes that the rate of
economic development must be fast
enough not only to keep up with popular
tion growth, but to exceed it by a
substantial margin. The amount of
scientific and technical knowledge avail-
able for this task is constantly increas-
ing. The problem immediately at hand is
to organize this knowledge and direct it
into the channels where it can produce
the speediest and most constructive
results.
The report goes on to say that. while,
in the past, private initiative and capital
have in most countries been the principal
agents for economic development, today
an increased responsibility rests on gov-
ernments of, countries seeking rapid de-
velopment. For each country the first
step in economic development must be a
realistic appraisal of its special condition
and needs.
Nature of the Programme
THE report states that the increasedrole of government initiative and
direction in economic development
suggests that the provisions of large-
scale technical help will usually involve
some sort of inter-governmental arrange-
ments. These arrangements will be either
on a bilateral basis or through interna-
tional organizations.
The report adds that a sound internal-
tional programme must make use of the
experience of many nations with different
social patterns and cultural traditions
and at differeat stages of development.
It lists a certain number of basic requisites
for success of the technical assistance
programme as follows :
,.
$ 85, 000, 000 Proposed

$ 85, 000, 000 PROPOSED
For Technical Development
(Continued from Page 1)
. 1. A practical approach-development
in each country must grow out of that
country's particular needs, desires, and
potentialities.
. 2. Personnel-an adequate supply of
qualified experts.
. 3. Supplies and equipment-adequate
amounts of both.
. 4. Continuity-expanded technical as-
sistance programmes are essentially long-
term undertakings, and need concerted
efforts for many years.
. 5. A favourable environment-under-
developed countries must be willing them-
selves to take vigorous action to establish
the internal condition upon which sound
development depends. The report insists
on this responsibility of, recipient coun-
tries, and adds that obsolete systems of
land tenure as well as traditional methods
of agriculture may have to be modified.
The report recalls that in a resolution
adopted at its Third Session, the General
Assembly of the United Nations laid
down that technical assistance furnished
shall not be a means of foreign eco-
nomic and political interference in the
internal affairs of the country concerned
aad shall not be accompanied by any
consideration of a political nature.
Fields of Work
A balanced programme of economic
Development, according to the
report, can best be achieved on
the basis of a comprehensive develop-
ment plan, but in many countries eco-
nomic development may, at the outset,
have to be limited to a few activities.
U. N. E. S. C. O.
SINCE, it is recognize that increasedeconomic development lends momen-
tum to increased educational opportunity,
Unesco proposes to site technical assis-
tance in the fields which its experience
has already shown under-developed coun-
In. X- ;.. ; !'.
Help for war-devastated and under-
developed areas. Here, locomotives are
whipped to the Far East under a U. N.
scheme.
All under-developed countries wish to
expand and diversify their industrial
activities. The adoption of more up-to-
date industrial methods will increase the
output of goods and promote higher
standards of living. Improved agriculture
is essential to produce increased quan-
tities of food, raw materials for industry
and products for export. Transport and
communications must be bettered to
promote the mobility of labour and the
availability of goods, Basic education and
technical training must be coupled with
the development of labour practices suit-
able for a more compJex economy. And
the maintenance of adequate health con-
ditions is essential to progress in any
son ; 1d economic development scheme. In
all these fields technical assistance is an
essential forerunner to economic develop-
ment.
Forms of Technical Aid
THE report describes the wide varietyof forms technical assistance for
economic development may take,
such as : technical advisory services ;
practical demonstrations or modern
techniques ; provision of improved oppor-
tunities for training within the under-
developed countries or abroad ; dissemina-
tion of information.
The report recommends that the ad-
ministrative committee on co-ordination-
composed of the U. N. Secretary-General
and the Executive Heads of the Specializ-
ed Agencies-establish a central clearance
point called the Technical Assistance
Committee (TAC). to be made up of a
representative of each of the organiza-
tions. Organizations would submit their
part of the total programme to their
own governing bodies in the usual way,
for appropriation of funds. Governments
seeking advice or technical assistance
could approach either individual organiza-
tions, or the Secretary of the TAC, who
would turn over the request to the ap-
propriate organization.
In connection with the financing of the
expanded co-operative programme, the
Secretary-General and the Executive
Air Force for Health. In its anti-
malaria drive, WHO uses planes for
spraying unh'atthy swamps to rid
them of disease carrying mosquitoes.
A Co-operative Project
Heads of all the interested Specialized
Agencies agreed that each Specialized
Agency, which considered it necessary,
would establish a special budget for tech-
nical aid for economic development and
would invite its member governments to
make contributions to thi$ budget over
and above their contributions to its nor-
mal budget.
1M"HE second part of the 328-page re-port describes in detail the kinds
of technical assistance which the
United Nations and Specialized Agencies
can make available. From these descrip-
tions a vivid idea can be had of the
almost unlimited range of benefits which
can accrue to the world from a well-
co-ordinated programme of technical as-
sistance, given the. steady and enlightened
co-operation of the advanced countries,
the recipient countries and. the interna-
tional agencies in a sustained effort over
a long period of time.
United Nations
THE U. N. proposes to focus its pom.gramme on fields of activity which
are not, or not yet. assigned to any
Specialized Agency. These include activ-
ities related to manufacturing and ex-
tractive industries, control and utilization
of water resources, inland road, rail and
water transport, as well as certain sectors
of the social field such as housing and
community planning.
An illustration of the tyoe of activity
envisaged is provided by industrial
research in tropical and semi-tropical
countries where there appears to be
e : J. ormous cope for experimentation in
the use of new raw materials existing in
these areas for making textile products,
etc.
I. L. 0.
THE kinds of aid which the Interna-tional Labour Organization : 1 proposes
to provide cover the relation of economic
development policies to labour income
and employment, including specifically
such problems as training, migration,
industrial safety, social security and
labour inspection, and labour and social
problems of the indigenous populations
of Latin-America.
F. A. O.
THE Food and Agriculture Organiza-tion proposes to provide aid in the
fields of agriculture, forestry and forest
products, nutrition and food management,
tries are likely to require. These fields
are : education (elementary, adult aid
technical) ; production and use of mate-
rials for education, including mass com-
munication materials ; the technical needs
of the press, radio and film ; training of
teachers and other specialized personnel ;
planning and organizing of scientific
research and training laboratories ; and
protection of national cultures.
Among the many projects being con-
sidered by Unesco is one which recom-
mends the establishment of scientific
laboratories to conduct technical research
on available natural resources, as well
as to use such laboratories as training
centres to educate local personnel in
modern scientific methods.
I. C. A. O.,,' : <,,
THE International Civil AviationOrganization would provide help in
carrying out surveys to determine a
country's air transport needs, to aid in
the design, construction and installation
of aenx : lrome5 and air navigation facil-
ities, and help devise operational
standards..
*it/..
W. H. O.
THE World Health Organization hasdrawn up a programme of work
relating to health demonstration areas,
malaria, maternal and child health, en-
vironmental sanitation, mental health,
venereal diseases, tuberculosis, ublic
health administration, nutrition, cholera.
and other diseases, technical training of
medical personnel, research on anti-
biotics, medical literature, and teaching
equipment. 
11 HE great task of raising the standardof living of the under-developed
countries of the world is a responsi-
bility to which the United Nations and
the Specialized Agencies have already
applied themselves within the limitations
of the resources so far placed at their
disposal for the purpose. What has been
achieved so far has been useful, but falls
far short of the need.
On March 4 of this year, the Eco ; comic
and Social Council, on the initiative of
the United States delegate and in pur-
suance of the Fourth Point of President
Truman's inaugural address, adopted a
resolution requesting the Secretary-
General of U. N. to prepare"a comprehen-
sive plan for a : J. expanded co-operative
programme of technical assistance for eco-
nomic development through the United
Nations and its Specialized Agencies,
paying due attention to questions of
social nature which directly condition
economic development", and to set forth
"methods of financing soch a programme
including special budgets", as well as
"ways of co-ordinating the planning and
execution of the programme".
In response to this resolution, Mr.
Trygve Lie at once entered into direct
consultations with the Executive Heads
and Deputy Heads of the I. L. O., F. A. O.,
Uneseo, I. C. A. O., W. H. O.. I. R. O.. the
International Bank. and the Monetary
Fund.
The report issued as a result of these
discussions stresses that progress in eco-
nomic development must be measured in
decades rather than in years, and that
the technical assistance projects described
in the programme are merely a patter : 1
for future action. The programme does
not claim to provide an overnight solution
for the economic problems of under-
developed countries, but is intended to
help those countries to help themselves
in developing their resources and their
productive capacity. Its success, the
report adds, in the long run will dope : 1d
in large measure upon the support given
to it by the under-developed countries
themselves. Throughout the process, the
domestic contribution by countries receiv-
ing technical assistance will have to be
much larger than any external aid they
may be given, and it will be expected
that these countries will create the con-
ditions under which the technical assis-
tance given can be made effective.
. FAO.)
Aided by the Food and Agriculture Ortramization, Chinese technicians are produem.
the new rinderpest vaccine at a laboratol')'neal'Nankinr.
rural institution and management, eco-
nomic and statistical services.
An example of the many projects en-
visaged by FAO is a campaign to eradi-
cate rinderpes in five to ten years
through the use of vaccines. Rinderpest
is a major livestock disease in Africa,
Asia and the Far East. It destroys an-
nually at least 2 million head Of cattle.
