MUST M Unesce's chief aim in Eduea-
tion is to help raise living standards
everywhere by encouraging the shar-
ing of the world's knowledge and using
aU the means we have for learning to
live together in peace, so Unesco's prin-
cipal aim in the Natural Sciences is to
help international collaboration among
workers in science and technology, to im-
prove man's understanding of the world
he lives in, and to overcome the inequa-
lities in living standards which are a con-
tributing cause t intet : uational war.
To promote international co-operation
Ìl. nd under. scan<1mg aillong SClen e.' : ;""and
to aid in the pooling and sharing of
existing scientific knowledge, Unesco's
programme includes a wide field of activ-
ities rang. no from Science Cm. operation
Offices spread around the globe to a
broad plan for financial assistance to
international scientific organizations.
Unesco provides a World Centre of Scien-
tific Liaison and has developed an exten-
sive programme for arousing public in-
terest in the impact of modern scien-
tific development on society.
.-
--
THE RURAL.-
SCIE]
WORLD CENTRE
OF SCIENTIFIC LIAISON
Aid to Organizations
in the Pure
and Applied Sciences
JrINCE its creation in 1946, Unesco hasrecogn : zed tile important contribu-
tion made by international non-gov-
ernmental organizations in the fields of
the pure and applied sciences in further-
ing the a ; ms and purposes of Unesco and
in showing how people of all countries
can work together on concrete problems.
Through grants-in-aids and contracts to
organizations, such as the International
Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) and
its ten federated Unions (Astronomy,
Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Crystallo-
graphy, Geography, Geodesy and Geo-
physics, History of Science, Pure and
Applied Physics. Scientific Radio. and
Theoretical and Applied Mechanics), the
World Power Conference, the World
Engineering Conference and various In-
ternational Medical Congresses. Unesco
has given renewed life and vigour to the
work of international scientific collabora-
tion.
In the fields of Agricultural and Medi-
cal Sciences Unesco's work is closely co-
ordinated with the Food and Agricultural
Organization and the World Health
Organization.,
Aid to Over 100 Enterprises
IN reviewing the effectiveness ofUnesco's grants-in-aid for the pure
sciences, the General Conference at
Beirut voted to increase the proposed sum
for 1949 from an originally planned S192.-
010 to $200, 000. and approved a substan-
tial amount for contracts for the applied
sciences. In this way. Unesco will stimu-
late greater teamwork between professors.
students, research workers, engineers and
doctors all over the globe and will fur-
ther help these groups to develop a truly
international spirit based on common
work and common ideals.
The grants-in-aid and contracts will
make possible over one hundred differ'nit
enterprises, including intemationat sym-
posia on important and urgent scientific
subjects, increased travel grants to enable
scientists to pursue work in countries
other than their own. the publication of
the reports of international congresses,
organizational assistance to nascent in-
ternational bodies, preparation of special
studies for Unesco. etc.
In April 1949, a meeting to create a
Permanent Council for the Cho-ordination
of International Congresses of Medical
Sciences will be held in Brussels. Belgium,
in collaboration with WHO. The World
Health Organization has allocated the
sum of $20. 000 for 1949 to assist in the
organization of this Council. The Coun-
cil will be an independent non-govern-
mental organization, with agreements
with Unesco and WHO. The Council will
press forward the publication of the re-
sults of the Congresses to spread new
medical knowledge to the widest inter-
national public.
Scientific Literature
 ONSIDERABLE progress has al-
1'-./read been made on the interna-
tionally vital problem of what is
called"Science abstracting". As in most
other parts of Unesco's programme, this
work is carried on in close co-operation
not only with other aspects of the Organ-
ization's programme (Libraries), but
with other Agencies of the United Na-
tions (WHO, FAO).
It is estimated that about a million
technical articles are published in differ-
ent countries each year. Since no scien-
tist can possibly hope to read all the arti-
cles even within his special field of in-
terest, abstracts or resumes of these
articles are published. However, some
articles are abstracted many times and
others not at ail.
Unesco has set itself the goal of at-
tempting to achieve a co-ordination of
the activitie ! l of different abstracting
organization. Already an Interim Co-
ordinating Committee on Medical and
Biological Abstracting has been formed
under the auspices of Unesco and WHO.
A world Conference on science abstract-
ins and other problems concerning scien-
tific literature will be held in Unesco
House i ! 1- June 1949.
Muiti-Iingual
Scientific Dictionaries
DURING the next twelve months,Unesco will also begin preli inary
studies for the preparation of authorita-
tive multi-lingual scientific dictionaries by
establishing co-operation between pub-
lishers and scientific bodies. Such co-oper-
ation is greatly needed at the present
time and its scope is such that on ! y an
international organization such as Unesco
could successfully stimulate it.
In collaboration nvith FAO, Unesco will
aid in maintaining and operating the
Library of the International Institute of
Agriculture in Rome during 1949. Unesco
will provide an emergency grant of $15,-
000 towards the upkeep of the Rome
Library.
is estimated that approximately 50 per
cent will be spent on scientific equipment.
Credits will be allocated to various insti-
tutions in these countries for the pur-
chase of scientific equipment, of their
own choice, through Unesco.
SCIENCE CO-OPERATION
OFFICES
HROUGH its four Science Co-opera-tion Offices. located in the Middle
East (Cairo). East Asia (Nanking
and Shanghai), South Asia (Delhi) and
Latin America (Montevideo). Unesco is
overcoming the feeling of isolation and
even abandonment in which many scien-
tific groups still find themselves in vari-
ous parts of the world.
These stations or science"bases"will
continue to aid scientists and technicians
to raise the local standards of living and
to facilitate the exchange of scientific
knowledge and information within the
regions and with the rest of the world.
The peoples in the regions are thus given
a feeling of being a part of the. world
community and of taking part in its
modern development.
In view of the success of these Offices,
the Beirut Conference agreed that such
activities should be maintained"as an un-
dertaking of the highest priority in the
Natural Sciences programme".
Scientific Apparatus
IIE Beirut Conference approved thefurther development of the Scien-
tific Apparatus Information Service
(SAIS), whose establishment was recom-
mended by the Conference of Allied Min-
isters of Education in London. Thy novel
service answers queries concerning scien-
tific and technological apparatus for edu-
cation and research. ;
In order to extend the available services
of information. assurances of close co-X
operation have been obtained from repre-
sentatives of scientific equipment manu-
facturers in nine countiies. Such contacts
are being further extended to include
universities, research associations and
international scientific organizations.
There has been a long-felt need among
science teachers the world over for an
internationally agreed standard of basic
equipment for teaching science in pri-
mary and secondary schools, universities
and technical college.
To meet this need Unesco has obtained
the services of experts in five leading
countries to compile such inventories, and
it is planned to publish them during
1949 in French. English and Spanish and
later in Chinese and Arabic.
Scientific-'leconstruction
tm-\ URING 19M Unesco purchased abouta quarter of a million dollars worth
of scientific equipment for the war-
devastated countries of Europe and Asia.
In addition to this Unesco has been asked
to spend a quarter of a million dollars
for Educational Reconstruction on behalf
of the London Lord Mayor's Fund.
In 1949 a sum of S175000 has been set 8
aside by Unesco for Reconstruction of
war-devastated countries. Of this sum. it
scientific theme of current international
importance. For 1949 the theme selected
is FOOD AND PEOPLE (for further de-
tails see Mass Communications. Projects
Division, Page 7 of this Supplement.)
Conservation of Resources
and Protection of Nature
II N July 1949 the United Nations iscalling a Scientific Conference on
the Conservation and Utilization of
Resources. Unesco has participated in the
preparations for this Conference especial-
SPECIAL PROJECTS
Popularization of Science
and its Social Implications
HE principal goal of Unesco in thefield of science popularization is to
make available to the general pub-
lic information on new scientific and
technological discoveries and to spread
understanding of the scientific attitude
and methods.
During 1949 it is planned to dissemin-
ate reports prepared by experts familiar
with popularization of science through
the press, radio, films and museums. It
is also planned to call a meeting of
science club organizers to consider ways
of increasing the international effective-
ness of such clubs and to co-operate in
the development of Unesco's Adult Educa-
tion programme.
At Mexico City Unesco decided to
launch a programme to initiate in Mem-
ber States discussions each year on a
ly concentrating on the prob : ems of edu-
cation for conservation.
Unesco is calling, jointly with the new-
ly established International Union for
the Protection of Nature, an Interna-
tional Technical Conference on the Pro-
tection of Nature. It will be held in the
U. S. A. immediately following the United
Nations Conference.
International
Scientific Institutes
HE International Institute of thejj Hylean Amazon is expected to start
on its first programme of research
during 1949. At Beirut a $12, 000 subven-
tion to the new Institute was approved to
cover projects of special interest to
Unesco.
A new venture along this line was pro-
posed by India and approved by the
Beirut Conference. During 1949 Unesco
will study the possibilities of establishing
an INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE OF
THE ARID ZONE which would devote vets
efforts to the problems of the ever-ex-
panding desert areas that now cover one-
fourth of the earth's surface.
Another new aspect of Unesco's 1949
programme in the Natural Sciences will
be a preliminary study towards the pos-
sible establishment of an international
computation centre.
Today few countries possess modern,
high-speed calculating equipment capable
of making complex computations needed
in many branches of pure and applied
science. An International Computation
Centre, especially available to countries
lacking specialized equipment, is con-
sidered of great value.
-'.".'",-",

- THE SOCIAL
..
NGES
on has now reached a stage
zit in his history where he can
study scientifically the causes
of the tensions that make for war". Eight
prominent social scientists, brought to-
gether by Unesco during 1948. worked out
and signed a common statement on the
causes of world friction beginning with
the words just quoted.
"modern wars between nations and
groups of nations", this 12-point statement
continues,"are fostered by many of the
myths, traditions and symbols of national
pride handed down from one generation
to another".
Study of Fascism in Germany
and Italy
As part of its broad programme onTensions Affecting International
Understanding, Unesco is undertaking in
1949 an important study of some of these
myths, traditions and symbols of national
pride which lay at the root of Fascism in
Germany and Italy.
It is true that the origins of German
Nazism and Italian Fascism have been
the subject of study by individual before.
Unesco feels, however, that by getting
social scientists from all parts of the
world to work together on this subject,
and by organizing intensive research with
documentary material now available but
not yet adequately exploited, it will be
able to achieve new and more revealing
results. In this way, Unesco hopes it can
assist in the early recognition of similar
movements of this kind in the future.
Community studies
he study of the origin and develop-ment of Fascism is only one new
development In Unesco's"Ten-
sions"progmmme. In 1949, Unesco will
also undertake a series of : ntensive
studies of individual commu'''es to
"determine the distinctive character of
the various national cultures".
These enquiries will be arranged as a
number of"pilot studies"in four coun-
tries-France, India, Hungary and Aus-
tralia-presentjn widely varying cultur-
al patterns. In each country at least two
distinctly different communities wHl be
selected for study to determine whether
"national"characteristics emerge in
spite of the differences between one
community and another. The studies will
be carried on under the direct super-
vision of scientific organizations in these
four countries.
A preliminary meeting of a small group
of special scientists-anthropologists,
social psychologists and psychiatrists-
will be held at Unesco House from
January 24-28, to prepare the way for
this whole investigation. Among these
experts will be representatives from the
WHO and the World Federation of Mean..
al Health.
"Way of Life"series
THE community studies will in no wayduplicate or replace the"Way of
Life"series begun in 1948 which will be
continued in 1949. They will serve rather
to supplement that series by the use of
more intensive methods.
Early in 1948, Unesco enlisted the co-op-
eration of the International Studies Con-
ference to prepare a series of monographs
on the"Way of Life", of various peoples
of the world, including France, Norway,
Poland. Switzerland. Canada. India and
Hungary.
A number of additional countries are
being asked to prepare similar memoranda
during the next twelve months, and
Unesco will publish several volumes in
this serves.. _
Population and Technological
Change
ANTHER new aspect of Unesco's 1949"Tensions"programme deals with the
relations between population problems
and technological changes on the one
hand. and international tensions on the
other.
Two'studies will be undertaken in this
field. One on the effect of modern tech-
nology on international tensions (in collab-
oration with the International Labour
Organization). The other on the relation
between population problems, especially
as related to '1inority and immigrant
groups, and international relations. This
latte1"work will be carried out in collab-
oration with ECOSOC.
What do you think of your
neighbours ?
DURING the past twelve months Unescoasked various organizations to help
in studies to find out what people in one
country think of their own and other
nations.
A number of surveys of the"public
opinion"type were conducted in the
U. S. A., France, U. K., Australia the
Netherlands, Norway, Italy, China and
Mexico. Studies were also completed of
the treatment of certain foreign groups
in U. S. films and in the American press
and radio. The results of these studies
w ; qj be published in 1949.
) g N all of its activities in the field oftensions", Unesco is seeking to en-
courage and facilitate co-operative
international research by social scientists.
It is gathering together and examining
critically the results of such research and
is serving to make these results available
to social scientists. educators and others
throughout the world.
As the social scientists who drafted the

statement on the causes of tensions which
make for war so aptly put it :
"The social scientist can help make
clear to people of all nations that the
freedom and welfare of one are ultimat-
ely bound up with the freedom and
welfare of all. that the word need not
continue to be a place where men must
either kill or be killed".
Standards of political science
TOURING 1949. the Social SciencesDepartment of Unesco will continue
research into the technique of internat-
ional conferences in order to develop more
effective methods of planning and con-
ducting such conferences.
Unesco will also continue its work on
the methods and techniques in Political
Science. A report, stressing recommenda-
tions for the promotion of international
standards in political science, will prob-
ably be published in 1949
SOCIAL scientists have long feist theneed for a world organization, similar
to the International Council of Scientific
Unions, which would knit their work
together on an international level and
increase their effectiveness.
Unesco is actively engaged in aiding
three of the principal social sciences
(economics, sociology and political
science) to set up international associa-
tions-for the first time in their History.
In each of these three discipline an in-
: ernational Congress is planned for 1949.
By this means Unesco hopes to advance
the scientific standards in each of these
fields, and to promote the setting up of
national associations of economists, sociol-
ogists and political scientists in countries
where no associations at present exist.
Eventually, Unesco hopes that an Inter-
national Council of the Social Sciences
will also be created which will speak for
social scientists as a whole the world over.
