"We Must Raise the Moral
And Intellectual Conditions
...'......."'-'Of h M".'. <:' :  ; t e. asses.-"-, i,
TORRES BODET
THE following is the complete text of the inaugural address delivered by Dr.. JaimeTorres BOdet, Director-General of Unesco, on the occasion of his presentation to
the Third Session of the General Conference Of Unesco at Beirut, Lebanon, on DecemtJer
10, 1948 :
I wish first of all, Gentlemen, to express my deepest and sincerest
gcatitude.
I am profoundly moved by th  honour you have shown me in
appointing me Director-General of Unesco. I am quite aware that I
should regard this honour, above all, as the symbol of a great responsibi-
lity, which I should not be justified in accepting, untess I tried to deserve
it by my loyalty to Unesco and my devotion to the task before us.
Your confidence must be matched by the entire self-dedication of the
man in whom you rep06e it. I want to assure you today that I shall
dedicate myself unreservedly to Unesco's service.
I have always had the most complete faith in Unesco. Before assisting
at its birth, I had opportunities of appreciating the work of the Allied
Ministers of Education who, during their meetings in Great Britain, took
advantage of one of the darkest days of the struggle to reflect on the
destinies of a civilization which cannot be based on hatred and ignorance.
In 1945, I took part in the London Conference, as delegate of Mexico. In
transmitting the good wishes of my country to that Assembly, I renewed
my assurance that I would do my modest best to advance the noble.'st
cause of humanity : to establish peace in truth, on truth and by truth.
NO DIVIDING LINE BETWEEN
EDUCATOR AND DIPLOMAT
IN Mexico, I have been Minister of Education and Minister for ForeignAffairs. In these two posts, I came to realize that there could be no
sharp dividing line between the duties of the educationist and the
obligations of the diplomat. If the teacher trains the new generations to
intolerance, in obedience to a blind and exclusive nationalism. the
diplomat in his turn will be compelled to pursue a policy of aggression or
revenge.
Peoples, in their international conduct, show themselves no other than
they are in their school class-rooms, in their books, in their dramas, or
in their laboratories. It is therefore futile for diplomats to seek to shape
the figure of concord in the perishable clay of treaties, if the educationist
continues to mode ! the spirit of the mighty into the countenance of
despotism, or to carve into the minds of the weak the features of
abnegation.
Truth is universal. Those who deny that first principle and found their
hegemony on biased and incomplete reasoning preach lies. Hence the
importance of Unesco's task, because Unesco, truth and peace constitute
essentially a single enterprise.
A serious and disquieting doubt at present prevails among all nationsabout the power of our. Organization It would be a betrayal of the
ideas we preach to ignore this doubt. To recognize its existence, as I do
now however, in no way implIes that we share it. Quite the contrary. But
we must realize that many of the aims which inspired us in creating
Unesco are now in jeopardy. Nonetheless, far from allowing ourselves
to be disheartened, it is our duty to work with added zeal to restore the
real value of those aims. The United Nations are the body politic of a
new world, anti Unesco is its conscience. Unless that conscience triumphs,.
it will be difficult for the new World order to assert itself durably.
In pondering over the present world crisis, we realize that the discords
of the time constitute the most eloquent proof of the distress of the
peoples in their efforts to attain at one bound, to the three aims : Liberty,
Equality, Fraternity, proclaimed by the French Revolution. There are
still individuals and groups who place the ideal of liberty above that of
equality. Other groups and individuals set the ideal of equality above that
of liberty.
Both of them suffer, for both of them forget that, without equality of
opportunity, liberty becomes a vain symbol, to the advantage of the
readier and more powerful ; and that. without individual liberty, equality
would speedily become a sorry, undistinguished thing.
Furthermore, how is it possible to achieve fraternity without a proper
balancè between equality and liberty ? Looking back over a century and
a half. we now perceive clearly the necessity which just : fied the indis-
soluble link between the three great principles enunciated by the men
of 1789.
THE most distressing feature in the drama of our civilization is that
the two main actors are society, on the one hand, a joint and
inseparaole whole, which it is, alas, so difficult to guide and
stimulate in one direction ; and, on the other, individual Man. In other
words, the whole and the individual, the universe and the atom, the
discourse of the ages and the syllable of a moment...
In the endeavour to reconcile these two terms, the world has. after
every great struggle, believed that a saving formula had been discovered
in a treaty of international co-operation. The 1914 war led to the Treaty
of Versailles, the war of 1939 to the San Francisco Charter
The League of Nations. The United Nations. But how can secure an
effective union of nations without a previous union of the minds which
are the common denominator of each nation ? And how can these be
united, and their individuality safeguarded, without the help of education,
science and culture ?
The machinery of the State must constitute a bridge for good under-
standing between man and humanity. This is Unesco's goal, since the
promotion of the spirit of peace-which Unesco must encourage every-
where-aims at a single victory by way of a double achievement : the
happiness of man and the progress of mankind.
`-E were well aware, when we founded Unesco, that the new institu-
tion would be faced with obstacles of every kind. We never soughtto hide the formidable difficulties inherent in the fulfilment of
its purpose :"to determine the general aims of man's education"-
difficulties due to the cultural diversity of the modern world, a diversity
which is further emphasized by the imminent crisis in every culture.
Ne also knew that Unesco's ideals could not be attained if, although
supported by the teachers, scientists, artists and poets, they were under-
rated in the prevailing economic and political systems. Let me say, in
passing, that this shows how unjust it would be to hold Unesco alone
responsible for the inadequate results so far achieved.
Of all the various international bodies which have been established,
Vnesco Is the only one which claims to touch man directly. It is not
unfair to say that the others regard human conditions in their external
manifestations, seeking to prevent or to remove sources of conflict.
UNESCO, in its turn, owed its creation to the belief that"wars beginin the minds of men'. Unless we accepted this postulate, our institu-
tion would be meaningless. Peace, like war, is above all, a state of mind.
We have no hesitation in affirming that to all of us who went to London
at the request of our Governments, this was our fundamental idea.
We believed, and still believe, that In whatever philosophy man
seeks the reason for his being, he is a living centre of self-
dermination. Neither the backwardness of material life, nor the
evolution of science eould urge man irresistibly to war, had his
mind not already been invaded by a hostile determination.
That being so, the essential purpose of the United Nations : "to
save succeeding generations from the scourre of war", will be vaiu
and sterile unless we strive te dislodge war from its most secret
stronghold : the human mind. It is a rood thinr to organize a
security system, ready to mobilize all the resources of constraint
to combat any threat te peace. It is clear, however, that measures
of expediency are not enough;
else, is a sound foundation.
INTERNATIONAL action to promchas its field in the deep forces of
mere intellectual agreement has prc
century the mistake was made of thú
automatically follow if the peoples
reality of scientific truths.
For this reason, we gave Unesco a
culture, which covers both man's intell
of his aesthetic sense and moral ind
the preamble to Unesco's Constitution
the intellectual and moral solidarity
. INTELLECTUAL SOLIDARITY
achieve. Scientific truth, indeed, com
which is comprehensible to all and'
problem here is to discover the b
knowledge as widely as possible
exchanges of books and information
measures.
.. MORAL SOLIDARITY, on the
and we might easily be discouraged)
systems and the variety of ways of lo
We do not, of course, claim that a
should agree on the philosophical pri
be a naive illusion and would imply
desirable If there has been talk of a
not of this type. But it would be enou
maxims, such as respect for freedom
conditional preference for a peace fm
as an instrument of hegemony, the c
but an end, the condemnation of a
religious discrimination, and similar
"WE ARE MOV
ANEWH
THE interdependence of peoples, aconfined to the political and e
te the spheres of culture and it
voices proclaim that we are moving to'
that we can no longer accept, unmodi
that classical hmnanlsm bequeathed 1
Each day brings home to us more
based almost exclusively on the intel
acceptance. It has not eves succeed
problems peculiar to our Western civ
all its latent energies in the field 4
