UNESCO COURIER
FREE MOVEMENT Of PERSONS AND OF
EDMATMNAt SHENHEK AND (DlrDRAl MATERIAl
UNESCO has drawn the atten-
tion of its Member States to
a recommendation passed by
the3 General Conference in
Beirut that they examine
existing national regulations and
practices governing the importation
and purchase of educational, scienti-
fic and cultural materials, in order to
introduce or extend especially favou-
rable treatment to such material. A
memorandum was alfo sent on Eco-
nomic Obstacles and Privileges per-
taining to [he free flow of educational,
scientific and cultural materials, defin-
ing in general terms the obstacles
under examination.
The suggestion was also made by
Unesco that Member States should
examine certain regulations and prac-
tices insofar as they affect the impor-
tation and purchase of such mate-
rials. They are : foreign exchange
coatrols ; customs duties ; quafltltative
restrictions ; sales taxes and similar
internal taxes ; and export regulations.
At the same time, Unesco put for-
ward suggestions for remedial action.
Unesco Schemes.
UNESCO has also embarked on a
number of schemes designed to
reduce Or eliminate certain eco-
nomic obstacles to the free flow of
educational, scientific and cultural
materials, and in the light of the
surveys undertaken, a plan of work
for consideration by the Conference
has been worked out. This plan
derives from the efforts of Unesco in
two directions :
(A)-to reduce tariff barriers
applying to educational, scientific and
cultural materials by seeking the
assistance and advice of the Third
Session of the Contracting Parties to
the G neral Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (GATT) Conference ;
(B)-to lessen the effect of foreign
exchange difficulties by formulating,
in collaboration with the Economic
Commission for Europe, a scheme for
meeting the requirements of European
countries through the conclusion of
trade agreements on such materials.
Unesco took the opportunity of the
: neeting at Annecy, France, of the
Third Session of the GATT to obtain
consideration of measures to reduce
these obstacles. The Director-Gen-
eral submitted to the Conference a
memorandum on trade barriers
affecting the import and export of
educational, scientific and cultural
materials, together with a list of items
falling in these categories. He ask-
ed GATT to include there items in
its negotiations and take into account
the desirability of achieving a maxi-
mum of international trade in mch
products. He also submitted for
study the text of the Draft Agreement
to facilitate the international circu-
lation of books, newspapers and perio-
dicals which Unesco prepared, and
sought the advice of the Conference
on it. Finally, he requested GATT to
advise Unesco on the additional prac-
tical measures it might take to im-
plement its mandate to reduce trade
obstacles affecting the flow of edu-
cational and scientific items.
The Annecy Conference agreed to
discuss these proposals and established
a working party to examine the mo't
practical means of studying and for-
mulating solutions of the questions
raised by Unesco.
In response to Unesco's request.
special attention was also given to the
reduction of customs duties through
bilateral negotiations on certain cate-
gories of educational material, and
the Conference put it on record that,
in future tariff negotiations, Govern-
ments would, as far as possible, try
to assist in furthering the objectives
sought by Unesco.
The Working Party on Unesco un-
dertook a careful examination of the
questions raised by the Director-Gen-
eral and concluded that a most
effective method for Unesco to ac-
complish its objectives in this field
would be to sponsor an international
agreement to consolidate and expand
the favourable treatment at present
accorded to educational and scienti-
fic materials in many countries. The
Party then drafted the tentative text
or an Agreement on the Importation
of Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Materials which has been transmitted
to Unesco and is being submitted to
the General Conference for discussion.
E. C. E. Help.
AT the same time, Unesco has
endeavoured to lessen those
obstacles to the free circulation
of educational and scientific materials
which derive from currency and quota
restrictions. Thus, Unesco and the
Economic Commission for Europe have
consulted together on plans to meet
the requirements of'European coun-
tries in such materials. A working
arrangement was reached between
the two Secretariats on the course of
action to be followed.
Under this plan, Unesco will submit
to the E. C. E. a list of scientific
material and apparatus, as well as
materials for elementary education
which are required in many European
countries. The E. C. E. will send this
list to its member-states and discuss
it privately with trade representatives
in order to bring together potential
importing and Exporting countries.
As [Oon as a willingness to buy in one
country is matched against a willing-
ness to sell in another, the E. C. E. will
bring the parties together and
facilitate agreement.
The first list will be limited to
items of importance to scientific and
elementary education. If it elicits a
favourable response, Unesco will stub-
mit further lists on items such as
press, film and radio equipment, tech-
nical literature, etc. which will be
dealt with in a similar way by the
E. C. E.
In the light of experience gained,
it is proposed to extend the same
working relationship as exists with
the E. C. E. to the Economic Commis-
sion for Latin America and to the
Economic Commission for Asia and
the Far East.
Movement of Persons.
THE problem of the obstacles im-
peding the free movement of
persons between nations has
been examined by Unesco, and parti-
cular consideration given to the work
done on this subject by the Economic
and Social Council of the United
Nations and its Commission on
Transport and Communications.
The conclusion reached by the Se-
cretary-General of the U. N., as a
result of the above-mentioned work
was that it was advisable to keep the
matter under review for a longer
period before recommending that any
further steps be taken on the interna-
tional level. This seems to indicate,
therefore, that for the time being no
substantial change in the general
: situation can be expected, at least
insofar as these formalities apply to
people wishing to travel irrespective
of identity of profession.
From the point of view of Unesco,
however, it is desirable to distinguish
certain categories of individuals tra-
velling for educational, scientific and
cultural purposes who, through their
professional status or purpose of tra-
vel, might benefit from a minimum
of special treatment in passport and
other formalities. Unesco, therefore,
considers that member-states might
give special facilities with regard to
visa and frontier formalities to per-
sons or groups travelling for educat-
ional, scientific or cultural purposes.
Member-states might also support any
measure : : aiming at facilitating tra-
vel for educational or scientific pur-
poses when the question of movement
of persons comes up again before the
Transport and Communications Com-
mission.
Financial Obstacles.
PASSPORT and. frontier formali-
tiec, however. are not the only
or necessarily the most i por-
tant barriers to the movement of per-
sons for Euch purposes as unèSco
stands for. Under existing condition,
the financial problem is the most
serious obstacle. Although this diffi-
culty would be lessened by a general
improvement in the international
currency situation, Unesco feels that
attempts might be made within each
interested country to increase the
amount of currency allocation gran-
ted to persons traveliing for educatio-
nal, scientific Or cultural ends.
These difficulties could a'so be alle-
viated by an increase in tiie number
of fellowships or other grants to fuch
persons from abroad and buy a more
universal effort towards providing
special reductions in transport costs.
Furthermore, host countries might
consider the possibility of making
generous fellowship grants to foreign
students and scholars, in order that
their foreign currency resources might
be supplemented.
These are the problems which the
delegates to Unesco's General Confe-
rence have to discuss with regard to
the free movement between nations of
persons and of educational, scientific
and cultural materials.
