SCIENTIFIC STRIDES
OF MODERN INDIA
By S. N. SEN
Registrar, lndian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Calcutta.
II NDIA'S outstanding contribution to
abstract philosophical and religious
think ; ing often tends to o scure her
equally important contribution to posi-
tive sciences. In fact, the study of scien-
ces in India is as old as her civilization
itself, which is contemporaneous with
that of ancient Sumer and Babylon. The
savants who meditated and experiment-
end on the banks of the Ganges and the
Indus not only enriched life morally
and intellectually, but also made living
easier through their many inventions and
discoveries in mathematics and astro-
nomy, chemistry and metallurgy, medi-
cine and botany. These have left their
permanent mark in world science.
Cross-fertilization of ideas among men
of science from different lands, as an
essential conditions of progress and
advancement, has been a characteristic
feature of Indian Science, as of other
fields of knowledge, over the centuries.
India has given to others as much as
she has received from them. Thus Arab
mathematics was considerably influenced
and enriched by India's progress in this
science, and learned Indian mathemati-

cians were invited to the Court of the
Caliphs to translate the monumental
mathematical works bearing the general
name"Suryya Sidhantikas". It is well-
known that the concept of the zero and
imaginery numbers, which originated in
India, reached Europe via the Arab world.
In a similar way, Indian astronomy, par-
ticularly the experimental and observa-
tional astronomy, as then existed, came
under the strong influence of contem-
porary Persian developments.
Modern Science Comes
To India
I N recent years, the flood-gates ofmodern science have been opened to
irrigate her fields of thought and intel-
tectual activity, which long remained
barren and unproductive. Already there
is the unmistakable sign of her returning
fertility. The brilliant crop of scientists
she has produced during the last fifty
years permit us to hope that before long
India will contribute to the general body
of science as effectively as any other
nation.
In experimental and mathematical
physics, Indian sc : entists have already
found an honoured place among the
international community of physicists.
The late J. C. Bose carried out some of
the earliest research in wireless trans-
mission and on the sensitivity of living
plants. C. V. Raman who was awarded
the Nobel Prize, gained world fame for
his work in the scattering of light and
molecular and crystal physics of M. N.
Saha in nuclear physics ; H. J. Bhabha
developed the first. convicing theory of
cosmic rays and fundamental particles,
while the. noted Subrahmanyam Chan-
drasekhar, now in the United States, has
contributed to stellar dynamics and
astrophysics.
(Continued on page 9)

SCIENTIFIC STRIDES
... (Continued for page 7),
The late P. C. Ray. the doyen of Indian
science, was almost singly responsible
for building the present Indian schools
of chemistry, now led by such brill) aunt
chemists as S. S. Bhatnagar, J. C. Ghosh,
N. R. Dhar. J. N. Mukherji, K. Venkatu-
raman, P. C. Guha and others. In the
capable hands of Bhatnagar, Ghosh,
Dhar and Mukherji, physical chemistry
in particular has made remarkable pro-
gress in recent timers..
Expanding Research
THIS sweeping reference to the nameand work of a f w prominent
scientists selected at random by no
means represents either the volume or
the intensity of the research now being
carried on in India in various branches
of science. Nor is it intended to attempt
such an account here. What is impor-
tant to note is that efforts to cultivate
the modem sciences, which are hardJy
fifty years old in India, have already
begun to bear fruit.
Thus. judged by the comparatively recent
availability of research facilities and the
extreme poverty of scientific laboratories.
India's scientific achievements which
include one Nobel Laureate and eleven
Fellows of the Royal Society, the highest
scientific distinction in the British Com-
monwealth of Nations. are itself a
glowing tribute two her inventive and
creative genius.
T eclmology
And Industrialization
II NDIA has, however, been less suc-
cues furl in applied research and
technology. The development of these
is closely related to the economic condi-
tion of a country. The primarily agricul-
tural economy of India, with little or DO
development of industries, has so far
militated against the development of
applied sciences. From the experience
of other countries and also from India's
own experience, it is clear that her fu-
ture economic progress will be impossi-
ble of achievement without substant : al
industrialization.
At the same time, it is also true that
the success of industrialization will largely
depend on the country's scientific and
technological ability.
Both the scientists and the statesmen
are now keenly alive to this fact. Prime
Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, who himself
received early training in science, has
given a fitting recognition to the su-,
preme importance of science in nation-
al welfare by creating a full-fledged
Government Department of Science,
directly under his own responsibility.
One of the principal organs of this
Department, the Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research, has planned a
chain of national laboratories. A num-
ber of these Laboratories have already
been established under the directorship
of able and internationally known scient-
ists, both Indian and foreign.
Closer Ties With Other rations
II NDIA is passing through a momen-) t tous period of her history. Her
scientific ability is the greatest asset in
all the steps she is now taking for future
development. Need for intensive collabo-
ration with other nations in the fields
of pure and applied sciences is greater
than ever. For this reason, she specially
welcomed the establishment of Unesco
and of its Field Science Cho-Operation
Offices, one of which is now functioning
in India and has already proved of great
service. Such scientific collaboration will
not only benefit India but all the nations
of the world.-
-,',"L'.." S. N. SEN.
