THE term <&lt;clas'Oical stuàles>&gt; has
not that world compass for
which Unesco strives, being
confined to studies of ancient
Greece and Rome. All the same, I be-
lieve that the development and the
international organization of classical
studies are of considerable importance
to'Unesco.
Europeans cf earlier days learnt
from the Greek school to look upon all
people of non-European civilization a :
barbarians, and the Romans invented
the notion of Pax Romana, which
f-ancticns the rule of a single people
destine, by its superior civilization.
to play the part of protector of all
nations wishing to live in peace. Al-
though these ideas, had. no doubt un-
fortunate effects, they nevertheless
contributed greatly not only towards
creating the spiritual community of
Europe, but also towards fostering the
concept of a civilizing vanguard, which
did so much for the tremendous
expansion of Europe with results
which will end either in the un : fica-
ton or in the suicide of our unhappy
plar. et.
For a long time now the European
mind has been, if I may say so,
omnivorous and, but for that western
appetite for knowledge and study of
all civilizations in the world. The
idea of creating Unesco would n : : t have
been conceived,  Now this attitude,
unique, I think, in the work c'f a l ? r : g
series of gre. Europeans, who from
their studies of the Greeks became
By
CARSTEN HOEG
stEEped in the ideas of cosmopolita-
nism, respect for every man and every
individual people, and universal under-
standing.
Finally, if Unesco can hope to bring
about world understanding, it is be-
cause European civilization, building
upon the achievement of the Greek
philosophers and their successor, has
provided it with the elements of an
ideological world community, which.
despite the ambiguity of such terms
as liberty and democracy, is opening
the way to fruitful discussion. This, in
the world of the mind, represents the
utmost measu : e of agreement that can
be desired.
Aftêr these promises, which I must
! j, pologize fo : havir. g thus condensed, I
would like to add one remark of a
more special character. There is no
denying that Unesco must approach
the great periods of civilization with
the most complete objectivity. At the
same time. the almost overwhelming
greatness cf its ultimate goal must
make it humble in the setting of its
immediate : targets, There ie therefore.
reason for satisfacticn that Unesco
appears to realize the neod of a certain
selection of limed fields and un under-
stands that slow and indirect results
a : e often more effective than rapid
ard direct ones.
From thess considerations T con-
clude that Unesco has the right and
the duty to give entire encouragement
to efforts aimed at preserving the
supra-nationa : ist and peaceful essence.
the life and strength, of the civilization
which was born in Greece, grew up
under the name of European civiliza-
tion and d conquered half the world.
This means bhat its common history
must he made known and appreciated,
To take an example, we cannot
ignore studies Which endeavour to
t. hrow light on the sources common
to Stalinist communism (wich is link-
ed with G'reek civilization through
Byzantinirm and Hegelian philosophy),
to American idealism and to Unesco's
own Constitution.
Nothing, in fact, can better serve
the aims of Unesco than a re-awaken-
ing among Europeans, and among
those of kindred civilization, cf a
general interest in their common past.
And it is natural that Unesco should
undertake to represent the interests
cf that Greco-Roman civilization
which has no seat among the delega-
tions to the United Nations.
Nothing, however, would by more
disastrous than to imagine that we
can serve up the cream without regard
for those who do the work and milk
the cows. The study cf classical antiqui-
ty is continually renewed by subtle
interplay between observer and observ-
ed. Consequently, any efforts towards
popularization whioh are not based
urn solid and recent research will
have at the best a purely ornamental
value.
Philologists, archaeologists and classi-
cal historians ar aware of their
responsibility. Without neglecting re-
search, which is their spiritual daily
bread, they seek to provide the public
with a better knowledge and under-
standing of classical civilization and of
its relations with the civilizations of
today. Research workers in every pats
of Europe (including Russia) and in
the Americas and Australia have been
working for centuries in this common
field ; no profession has such a long
international tradition as c'assjcal
philology (witness the use cf Latin, the
first international language of the
West). Modern conditions, however.
call for the development of new forms
cf internationalism. We need an
international organization to secure
bibliographical service any the
establishment Or continuation of
certain great ccilective enterprises, to
rationalize and stimulate the editing
and publication of classical texts, to
organize meetings and congresses, to
enccarage the production of good
popular books, in a word, to ensure,
in forms adapted to modern needs, the
supra-national character which has al-
ways teen the mark of classical
studies, and to help disseminate the
preven knowledge of our European
past and thus contribute to that work
of mutual understanding and of peace
which is Unesco's prcud device.
That is why in 1948 we established
an International Federation of
Societies fcr Classical Studies. That
is why we are delighted to be
affiliated with Unesco. We hope tha. t
cur Federation, among the many
institutions grouped around the parent
organization, will occupy the position
which is due to the heir to such a
splendid legacy.
5
