Ulleseo SalutesIJitcsc Satuts
HE world is celebratingthis year the bicentenary
of Goethe's birth. In such a
celebration, Unesco sees cogent
reasons for persevering in the
work of promotin under-
standing between cultures
which has been entrusted to
it. It is proud to salute
Goethe's memory and to re-
cognize in it an imperishable
testimony to what the human
mind can accomplish when its
desire for knowledge, that is
for analysis and awareness, is
combined with the power of
understanding, that is to say,
of harmonizing and reconcil-
ing. That, exactly, is the spirit
which animates Unescn
Unesco wishes to demon-
strate its profound respec :' for
a creative writer whose thirst
for knowledge remained un-
quenched until his death, and
whose whole existence was an
heroic effort to achieve that
inner balance, at the same time
noble and constructive, which
men and nations attain only
by vigilant insistence upon
clear thinking and by seeking
a culture that shall free them
from their prejudices. Accord-
ingly, Unesco has decided to
publish a volume in which a
number of distinguished think-
ers, artists and writers will pay
homage tao the author of Faust
and Wilhelm Meister.
Goethe was a great Euro-
pean. He was also a great uni-
versalist. He sought out extre-
mes, not in order to delight in
their opposition but to mea-
sure the distance between
them and, as often as he
could, to endeavour to span it
with his genius. He cared pas-
sionately for every form of
culture and his curiosity ex-
tended to every kind of scien-
tific investigation. His human
apprenticeship lasted l. ntiì he
was eighty. He never ceased to
feel strongly that the essence
of science and cultuie consists
in the fact that they are bene-
fits wh : ch exist only in so far
as they are transmitted. Hence
his determination to be an'
educator and hence his mar-
vellous fitness for the role.
- A REMINDER
"The General Confer-
enc instructs the Direc-
tour-General to negotiate
with Member States and
National Commissions in
order to develop plans for
wider circulation of the
"Courier" ; such plans
should include proposals
for facilitating the repro-
duction of the"Courier"
by Member States or
National Commissions,
either in the present
working languages or in
translations provided by
them."
Resolution adopted by
the General Conference of
Unesco at Beirut, Noventr
ber 1948.
if HERE is a very complete fusion in Goethe's own mind of his life as living experience andhis poetry as an expression of that experience. This idea is conveyed in the title he
gave to his autobiography, Dichtunu und Wahrheit. It is admirably summed up by
Eckermann in words which may seem today to confuse the role of public man with that 01
ooet striving towards a kind of public objecti vity.
o'a"
BY
STEPHEN
SPENDER
HOEVER's task it may be to
We have charge of many ac-tivities. to judge, to lead, he
must also endeavour to gain as many
insights as possible into these many
tasks. Thus a prince and a rising states-
man can never make himself sufficiently
many-sided : many-sidedness appertains
to his craft.
"Likewise the poet must strive for a
multifold awareness. For the whole world
is his material, which he must hold urn-
der his hand and learn to create in
speech."
We must squarely confront ourselves
with the fact that Goethe was a poet
of the world. This is the fact above all
that puts him among those princes of,
poets. Dante and Shakespeare and Ra-,."'.'.,..,  :'cine. who used for their poetry
the material of the whole world
of their time. and which dis-tingu'shes him from the poets
 T E P H E N who followed him.A very wi e experience of what
it meant to rule, to be at the apex
of the learning of a cultivated
aristocratic class in Europe, was
the da : ly experience which flowed
through Goethe's mind and body ; and it was out of this
that he made his poetry.
Now it is scarcely too much to say that in his own time,
and ever since, people have hated Goethe for beir. g in tihs
position. The revolutionaries hate him because they consider
him counter-revolutionary : the democrats because they con-
sider him a snob ; the devout because they consider him
worldly ; the romanic because they consider him bourgeois ;
the sick because they consider him well ; the partial because
they consider him impartial ; the aesthetically minded"art-
for-art's-sakers". because they consider him a philistine.
It is doubtless the fault of society that no poet since
Goethe has been at the centre of the experience of his time
m the way that he was. But the impossibility of being like
him should not detract from our appreciation of his posi-
tion. Looked at in this way, Goethe was the last of the poets
into whose minds their whole time flowed : its power, its
knowledge, its faith. The tormenting struggle and anguish
by which an age orders men's lives and prepares the mind
of a whole generation of men to create and build and
believe and then pass on into death, seemed to stir in the
(works of these poets like motes of dust in a beam of light.
Since then we have had greater poetry than Goethe. But
it has expressed other, more peripheral attitudes : rebellious-
nests. sickness, renunciation, resignation, disgust, quietism,
nightmare, mystical belief.
Goethe's acceptance of the social forms ot his time went
beyond his being a nationalist or even a defender of the
aristocracy. He did not like the French revolution-but he
cared for the attempts to restore the monarchy still less.
He did not like the invasion of Germany by Napoleon, but
nevertheless he wrote no nationalist diatribes against it, and
he accepted the invitation to the famous meeting with
Napoleon.
(Copyright by Unesco and Stephen S. pender.)
