Page IT-UNESCO COURIER
GRLEK REFUGEES MUST HAVE AID
EACH member of a Greek refugee
family receives 1, 000 drachmae
f. (l0 cents) and 115 grammes of
bread per day. Only a miracle
of moral and physical resistance
has so far enabled these masses of
human beings to survive in the condi-
tions to which they have been subject-
ed. Il the refugees are not resettle
by next winter, it is to be feared that
under-uourishment will be followed by
serious epidemics.
The gravity of the refugee situation
in Greece and the urgent need for
relief measures on an international
scale were brought home to Unesco's
Executive Board on September 15, by
facts such as these, contained in a
report on Greece made by Professor
Paulo de Berredo Carneiro, of Brazil,
following a special mission to the war-
wracked country in July.
After hearing the report, the Exec-
utive Board submitted a resolution
for the approval of Unesco's General
Conference, now meeting in Paris,
recommending that a world appeal be
made to raise the S 47, 500, 000 required
for Greek educational and cultural
reconstruction. It also suggested the
creation of a special fund, under
Unesco's administration, and into
which contributions in response to
Unesco's appeal would be paid.
Professor Carneiro emphasized that
any educational reconstruction pro-
gramme would also require the solu-
tion of the larger problem posed by
the re-settlement of 700, 000 refugees
driven from their homes in Northern
Greece. The Executive Board there-
fore suggested that Unesco should call
on the United Nations to study the
possibility of providing international
help for this re-settlement work, for
which a total of S 93, 000, 000 is still
required.
IF the general situation in Greece istragic that of the refugee children
is particularty pitiful ; most have
never known any other way of life
than that of war and semi-starvation.
Professor Carneiro reports that 338, 000
boys and girls, one third of them
under six years of age, have emigrated
from the Northern provinces.
BEFORE THE WINTER
« nearly all these children are,
together with their families, refugees
in camps or communal dwelling)},
he says. ( (I have been able from my
contacts with them and from further
information... to gauge the fuli extent
or their phYJ ! cal misery and moral
dtstress.
( Their only food consists ot a
small ration of milk in the morning
and soup and bread during the day.
Owing to the lack of space, they live
in clæe quarters-width the adults, in
tents or rooms accommodating any-
thing between 6 and 10 persons.
« (Their extreme emaciation, pale
faces and terror-stricken look create
an extraordinary impression. From
dawn till dusk, these phantom chil-
dren wander hungrily around their
camps barefoot, with their clothes in
shreds, and their elders looking yon
compassionately but powerlessly...
« The little orphans and stray
children are looked rafter by the Organ-
ization that Her Majesty the Queen
of Greece has set up to assist them.
It is responsible for 18, 000 children,
wtco are accomodated in 52 colonies
(Paldopolis).
( (It is a moving thing to see the
ìlhys ; cal and mental transformation
which the children admitted to these
colonies undergo)}, adds Professor
Carneiro.
DEALING with the general problem ofrefugees and its repercussions, Pro-
fessor Carneiro stresses the extre-
me difficulty of the economi con-
dltions facing the Greek Government.
(\ The total number of men, women
and children who are refugees...
amounts to somewhat over 700, 000, or
10 % of the population. >&gt;, he says.
« (Thf' immediate result of their exodus
was a deep economic depression...
Impoverishmg about 1, 000, 000 : nhab :-
tants elsewhere.
«In all, 34 % of the population
today live on appropriations from tw
national budget... showing it is
impossible four Greece of itself to meet
the claims on its financial resources.
« The maintenance of these 700, 000
refugees has solar cost the GreeTi ;
Government a sum equivalent to
: : ; 85, 000, 000. If this state of things
were to continue, there would be no
hope of securing such international
assistance as would save Greece From
irreparable catastrophe. >&gt;
« rhe po ! : t ! cc s : tMat : 07t o : ues( (The political. situation gives
grounds for hope that the refugees
well gradually be able to return to
their fields and villages. This process,
however, will be extremely costly. The
refugees will be largely returning to
a scorchEd earth area ; they will have
to be gwen new homes, cattle, farm
buildings, clothing and agricultural
implements. Until the next harvest
the State will have to feed them.'
{ the total sum required to carry
out the resettlement IS $ 138, 000, 000.
Such is the economic and financial
problem that faces the Greek
Government and that it must settle
at an early date if worse is not to
befall. A sum of $ 50, 000, 000 has been
set aside from Marshall Plan funds as
a reserve for this purpose, but it
remains to find $ 93, 000, 000. >&gt;
« It would be useless to try to'
improve present educational and cur.
tural conditions in Greece before the
material recovery of the country as a
whole hand been brought about >&gt;, says
Professor Carneiro, { (If Unesco wants
to accomplish anything useful, sit
must first obtain from the United
Nations and its Specialized Agencies
the necessary help for the technical
re-equipment and resumption ot
Greece's agricultural and industrial
product n, >&gt;
THE Greek crisis, which is due to
the international troubles that
nave tragically affected the
country's political and economic life
since 1940, will only be solved with the
assistance of a world that is conscious
of its duties.
« It is in the name of culture that
Unesco must issue its appeal to the
whole world on behalf of Greek chil-
dren >j, concludes Professor Carneiro.
« Unesco is a cultural organization
and cou ; d therefore find no better
patrons for : ts enterpr : se than the
towering shades of those illustrious
Greeks who gave fresh impulse to art
philos') phy and science.
( (The little Greek who for threr
years has been a refugee in a camp tun
Epirus or Macedonia is the descendant
of this liTle of leaders that ushered tn
a new era for mankind.
« (Unesco will remind the children
of the world, who daily delight in the
songs af Iliad and the Odyssey,
contemplate the beauty of Greek
statuary, take their first lessons in
sreometry or astronomy, or revive the
debates of the Academy or the
Lyceum, that this mount at which
they quench their athirst has its source
: 7t the same Greece that asks of them.
to-day, a gesture of gratitude and
friendship. »
