UNESCO COURIER
GERMANY
A MEETING OF THE UNESCO ASSOCIATION WITH JAPANESE MINISTERS OF EDUCATION AND FOREIGN
AFFA ! RS. iN TOKYO. A JAPANESE PUBLICATION G ! VtNG UNESCO WORLD NEWS'.-
SINCE Jhe beginning. of 1949 Unesco
has been going steadily ahead with the
work of extending certain of its pro-
gramme activities to Germany and Japan,
within the limits indicated by the
General Conference at Beirut,) last Decem-
ber.
Based on the results of surveys and expe-
riments carried out during 1948, the confe-
rence decisions enabled Unesco to put into
action those projects which appeared to be
most suitable for the two countries.
The first task was to establish effective and
regular working relations with the Allied
authorities and interested individuals and
groups in both countries. For this purpose,
three offices, which are also to act as Unesco
Information Offices, were opened at Mainz,
Stuttgart and Düsseldorf in the Western Zone
of Germany, under the direction of Dr.
J. W. R. Thompson.
Unesco's work is, in fact, still confined to
Western Germany despite attempts, made as
long ago as 1947 and again in 1948, to
obtain authorization for its extension to the
Eastern Zone. On June 29, 1949, however,
M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Director-General of
Unesco, made a new request for this autho-
rization in a letter he addressed to the Mili-
tary Governor of the U. S. S. R. Zone of Oc-
cupation.
As one of the first steps in its 1949 pro-
gramme for Germany, Unesco undertook the
wide distribution of its publications and
documents in order to make its aims and
achievements known to German individuals,
cultural groups, libraries, universities, news-
papers, educational and cultural journals.
Exchange of publications
THE programme already carried out hasalso included assistance in exchanging
publications between German institutions
and those of Unesco Member States, a
study of text books in connection with the
project for the world-wide revision of text
books and teaching materials, the translation
into German of several Unesco publica-
tions, the invitation of German specialists to
conferences called by Unesco and a survey
of the opportunities which exist for the ex-
change of persons between Germany and
other countries.
In May, a committee of experts set up by
M. Torres Bodet, to advise him on questions
concerning present and future Unesco acti-
vities in Germany, held its first meeting in
Paris.
After reviewing the work already carried
out, this committee formulated a series of
recommendations for future Unesco action in
Germany, calling for Unesco fellowship
opportunities for Germans to study abroad,
the extension of Unesco's Book Coupon
Scheme to Germany, participation of Ger-
man scholars and teachers in text book revi-
sion programmes and the active participa-
tion of German individuals and institutions
in Unesco's work in their country. These
recommendations for the expansion of
Unesco's programme in Germany during
1950 were submitted to Unesco's Executive
Board last June.
The experts committee held a second
meeting at the end of August and made sup-
plementary recommendations which will be
considered in the formulation of a pro-
gramme for Unesco's activities in Germany
during 1950. The final decision on this pyro.
gramme will rest with Unesco's General
Conference which opens in Paris on Septem-
ber 19.
In the case of Unesco's work in Japan,
responsibility for providing liaison with the
occupation authorities and implementing
the General Conference resolutions was
entrusted to Professor Lee Shi-Mou, who
arrived in Japan last April.
Unesco in Japan
UNESCO'S aims and activities in Japanare similar to those for Germany and in
the development of the work Unesco has had
full support from the allied authorities and
from Japanese organizations.
One of these, the National Association of
Student Clubs for Unesco, has a membership
of about 10. 000 and the other, the Federa-
tion of Co-operative Associations of Unesco,
whose membership numbers about 200. 000,
has active committees established in most
important centres.
On the initiative and at the expense of
the allied authorities, the appropriate Japa-
nese Ministries and private organizations,
some twenty Unesco publications have al-
ready been printed in English and Japanese.
In addition, a large number of tracts pro-
duced in Japan to publicize Unesco have
been issued in Japanese and widely cir-
culated.
Unesco is therefore already well-known in
Japan and. the Japanese official agencies.
particularly the Ministry of Education, are
keenly interested in its work. In 1948. for
example. the Ministry of Education set aside
30. 000 yen for work associated with Unesco
and in 1949. this was increased to 6. 000. 000
yen, or approximately $12. 000.
and
JAPAN
On May 19th, a fresh impetus was given
to Unesco's work in Japan by the holding of
the first National Conference on Unesco
which was attended by 2, 000 delegates.
As in the case of Germany, a Committee
of Experts was set up to advise M. Torres
Bodet on the execution of the programme
approved by the General Conference for
Japan. This committee met in Tokyo last
May and again last month and its recommen-
dations will be given full consideration in the
development of Unesco's programme in Ja-
pan in 1950.
An indication of the extent to which
Unesco hopes to step-up its work in both
countries during 1950 is shown by the bud-
getary estimates to cover the proposed acti-
vities, which are to be submitted to the Ge-
neral Conference. These represent an
increase of some $60, 000 over those of
1949.
