IN BRAZIL
EDUCATORS STIRRED
BY NEW APPROACH
TO CONTINENTAL
CAMPAIGN"
AGAINST ILLITERACY
Unesco-sponsored Seminar
launches I global'attack for
education of 70 millions
adult illiterates and
79 million children with-
: out schools in the Americas
. 0"
THE mid-winter months of. July and
August, the tourist books say, are
the most delightful periods tu
visit Rio de Janeiro. Fur a small
group of educators, who had come. to
participate in the Inter-American Semi-
nar on Literacy and Adult Education,
the pleasant Br winter, however.
was no holiday.
They began to arrive, mostly by
plane, towards the end of Juhly. At the
Santos Dumont airport in the heart of
Rio, they werc bundled into high-
powered, spacious taxis and whisked
through the Federal Capital past the
Sugar Loaf and Guanabara Bay. Two
hours later, still breathless and dizzy
from the winding, tortuous road trip
through the Organ Mountains behind
Iso, they were deposited at the door of
the sumptuous Hotel Quitandinha, near
Petropolis Here. they remained for tivc
full wseks. from July 27 to September
2, to examine one of the most burning
problems of the entire.American conti-
nent : 7 :. 0. 000. 000 adult illiterates and
19. OOO. OOO. American children deprived
of s.
To the Inter-American Seminar, or-
ganized jointly by Unesco, the Organi-
zation of American States (OAS), and the
Brazilian Government, came some of
the most distinguished educational
leaders from the New and the Old
world : the originator of Mexico's fam-
ed « Cultural Missions >&gt; for literacy
Professor Guillermo Bonilla y Segura
known throughout his country simply
as (< El Maestro >&gt; young, energetic
Ismael Rodriguez Bou, educational re-
searcher from Puerto Rico : witty Er-
nrsto Nelson, statistical giant of Argen-
tina : Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget :
literacy primer specialist Ann Nolan
Clark, of the United States ; and Colo-
nel George Selwyn Simpson, bringing
with him 35 years experience in literacy
teaching in the British Army.
For the occasion, the Brazilion Gov-
ernment called in some of its best. edu-
cational experts : Fernando Tude de
Souza, Antonio AImeida Junior, Mario
Teixeira de Freitas and Mario Paulo de
Brito.
Dr. Lourenço Filho, directur of Bra-
zil's hignly successtui 2 1/2 year cam-
paign against illiteracy, left his desk.
on the fourteenth floor of the ultra-
modern Ministerio de Educacao e Saude
to take over leadership of the interna-
lional seminar. with him were (uiller-
mo Nannetti. 39-year old former Mi-
nister of Education uf Columbia and
special OAS representative, and Dr
Frederick J. Rex, eminent American
educator and Cnesco's field representa-
tive, in Fundamental Education.
Fresh Ideas
And Techniques
In spile of this impressive team of
educationists the Seminar sought
and achieved no miracl s. The
70. 000. 000 adult illiterates still remain to
he integrated into the life-stream of
Latin-American communities and na-
tions. But from the careful, five-week
exchange or ideas and experiences there
emerged a series or new ideas, new
methOds and techniques, which have
set the bases for the first co-ordinated
attack ever planned on a continental
scale against what Torres Bodet has
termed'"one of the most disquieting
problems of our century".
During recent years, a number of
Latin-American countries have made
special efforts to combat illiteracy
among their urban and rural popula-
tions. In spite of successful advances
in some regions, progress in most Latin-
American Republics has been slow.
what was needed, it was felt. was a
linking up of forces, a pooling of ex-
periences, the weading out of out-mod-

THE SECOND ABOLITION. 102-year old Senhor Cequeira of the littie town of
Guaratingueta is a symbol of the desire of Brazilians to benefit from the nation-
wide adult education campaign against illiteracy. (Photo « 0. Cruzeiro".
S. Paulo).
ed methods and techniques, and a
fresher approach to the entire problem.
This the Unesco-sponsored Seminar
at Quitandinha definitely provided.
II provided, above all, a fresh
approach to the continental problem of
illiteracy by inspiring all participants,
in all five groups, with the new con-
cept-for Latin-, America-of Adult
Education, which aims at raising the
general living conditiuns of lite peuple
through the improvement of health.
agriculture, and family and community
life, with literacy training as only one
step towards the accomplishment of
that end.
In this respect. the inspired contribu-
tion of Dr. Guillermo Nannetti, as lea-
der of the working group on Literacy
and Adult Education, won the admira-
tion and enthusiastic praise of the en-
tire Seminar. This vast and unexplored
Üeld in Latin America, came alive in the
short space of five weeks and took on
breadth and force. By the end of the
Seminar, 30 educators and experts,
working under the guidance of Dr.
Nannetti, had produced the first Hand-
book on Adult Education ever to appear
in Portuguese and Spanish. This 65-page
volume, which represents the most am-
bilious achievement of the Seminar cov-
ers an extensive range of subjects.
ranging from the role of the media of
mass communication and agricultural
extension in adult education to labour
organizations and co-operatives.
Most Heated
Debate of Seminar
PERHAPS ; the most important and cer-.
tainly the most heated debate of
tle Quitandindha Seminar was
touched off when the working group
studying literaq'teaclling metllods, ld
bv Dr. Frederick Rex, presented its
findings and conclusions to the final
plenary session of the Seminar.
For five weeks, the group of educa-
tors had studied and analYzed the dil1er-
ent methods for eaching people to
read and write. This included the metal-
od most widely used and adapied in
Latin-America and in other parts of the
world-the Laubach method-based
on the use of"picturahle words rela-
ted to groups uf sounds". The educa-
tors also made a detailed and careful
study of the "Global or Sentence Meth-
ed"-based on the principle that the
student first understands the meaning
of a sentence or thought before he
knows and analyzes its parts (i. e.
words, letters and groups of sounds).
In its conclusions the group went on
record unanimously favouring the Glo-
bal Method.
when these conclusions were pre-
sented to the plenary meeting of the
Seminar the "battle of the methods"
raged for over three hours. Tempers
rose, nerves were frayed. But in the
end, the Global Method was upheld by
an overwhelming majority of Seminar
participants, who agreed that :
Concerning the problem of method, the
Seminar wishes to go on record that It
accepts the scientific evidence in favour
of the sentence or global method for
teaching children to read. On the ba-
sis of objective data and corroborative
evidence of the psychology of aduits,
of their interests and ways of teaning,
the Seminar recommends the same me-
thod for the teaching of adult illite-
rates until such time as the results of
research and controlled experiments
prove the contrary. This preference
does not suggest, in any way, the in-
advisability of extensive experiments to
strengthen, modify, or change the me-
thodological position expressed by the
Seminar.
Teacher of the
Americans
IT way fitting that Dr. Lourenco Filho,
whose work as leader of Brazil's
succcsful literacy campaigns has
won him international recognition.
should have taken over responsibility of
one of the most important working
groups of the Seminar on The Organi-
zation of Literacy Campaigns. At the
end of the five weeks, Dr. Lourenco,
with the aid of his small group, had
completed a series of basic papers
which will be invaluable to any govern-
ment or Organization seeking to under.
take or improve a eompaign for literacy
in an y given part of Latin-America.
For his leadership at the Inter-Ameri-
can Seminar, for his unselfish devotion
to the cause of education, not only in
his own country but in all the Ameri-
can Republics, every member of the
Seminar acclaimed Lourenço Filho as
"El Maestro de las Americas".
Already, the influence of the Inter-
American Seminar has left its mark.
During the final days of the plenary
meetings, the State Representatives of
the Brazilian Literacy and Adult Edu-
cation Campaign met at the Hotel Qui-
tandinha for their annual conference.
As a result of their direct contact with
the participants at the Seminar they vot-
ed tu put into application immediately
one of the final resolutions passed call-
ing for the organization of national
seminars whose aim would be to studY
the application in each country of the
conclusions reached at the Rio de Ja-
neiro Seminar. The first national semi-
nar to be held in the Americas will take
place next month in the city of Sao
Paulo.
Finally, the participants unanimoush
voted a recommendation calling for the
creation of a Centre to train writers
and illustrators from different coun-
tries to prepare basic, supplementary
and general reading materials, as well
as a Centre to train teachers uf adull
education.
