Adult Education lucation
By Jean BLOCH - MICHEL
Special 'Courier' correspondent at Elsinore
'ONCE OF THE MOST IMPORT-
ANT QUESTIONS OF OUR DAY
AND ONE LIKELY TO HAVE
THE MOST FAR - REACHING
CONSEQUENCES"
(Torres Bodet)
ON a tongue of land part of the sea-
port of Elsinore, stands the castleof Kronborg. It was here, "un-
der the kindly shade of the genius of
Shakespeare", that the first international
conference on adult education opened on
June 16, to discuss what M. Torres Bodet
has called "one of the most important
questions of our day and one likely to
have the most far-reaching conse-
quences".
For, as the Director-General of Unesco
declared in one of his major addresses
of the year, inaugurating the conference,
"the aim of our Congress Is... the awaken-
ing in the consciousness of every adult of
an awareness both of his personal res-
ponsibility and of his intellectual and
moral fellawship with the whole of
mankjnd".
On the day following the opening
speeches by M. Torres Bodet and M.
Hartvig Frisch, the Danish Minister or
Education, the work of the conference
proper began in Elsinore at the Inter-
national People's College-one of the
many Danish institutions devoted to adult
education.
For a period of almost tWJ weeks, from
June 16 to 25, almost one hundred and
fifty delegates from 29 nations, speaking
Dearly as many different languages. liv-
ed and worked together at the College
to see how their individual experiences
and working methods could be poo : ed so
that adult education, through interna-
tional co-operation, could be employed
for the betterment of all mankind.
ON the morning of June 17, in a greathall, decked with the flags of all
of the countries represented, the
first plenary meeting of the adult educa-
tion conference was opened by Dr. C : a-
rence E. Beeby, Assistant Director-
General of Unesco and head of its Educa-
tion Department. Dr. Beeby pointed out
that although the conference had been
convened by Unesco. its success depend-
ed on the delegates themselves and the
30 international organizations. devoted to
adult education questions, which they re-
presented. He drew their attention to the
fact that. on the basis of the work they
accomplished, Unesco was going to pre-
pare a handbook on adult e cation
which would serve adult educators
throughout the world. Unesco's actual
lWork would begin, Dr. Beeby said. where
the Elsinore Conference ended.
After hearing the Assistant Director-
General, the delegates elected the officers
of the Conference : M. Novrup, had of
the Danish delegation, was elected Presi-
dent, and Mr. Pei-Ching Tang, China's
representative and M. Muschin Adil Bi-
nal. of Turkey. Vice-chairmen. M. Bus-
sière and M. Lengrand, of the Unesco
Secretariat were named respectively Secre-
tary-General and Rapporteur. Four com-
missions were set up to discuss the "con-
tent of adult education", "agencies and
problems of organization", "methods and
technique", and"the means of establish-
ing permanent international co-operation"
in adult education.
DURING the second week of the con-ference, two distinguished visitors
arrived at Elsinore. at the invitation
of Unesco, to present to the delegates
their personal views-as wor : d thinkers-
on adult education.
The first, Sir John Maud, Permanent
Under-Secretary of Education in the
United Kingdom, spake on the signifi-
cance of adult education, which he des-
cribed as the means man has of getting
away from the oppressive feeling of soli-
tude in an inhuman world.
"We can help individual men and wo-
men to find more significance in their
lives", he said."in their work. in their
citizenship, both as members of their na-
tion and of the world community-to
be more significant and to feel more
significant... in other words, to be able
to help free men from a sense of insig-
nificance".
A few days later, the noted French
writer and professor. M. Jean Guéhenno,
addressed the conference. He stressed
the importance of distinguishing between
culture and"all the noise being made
about culture", and of giving men a
desire for THE truth even when it was
not THEIR truth.
In the course of its meetings, the Elsi-
nore Conference defined the content of
adult education as"the dual ! function of
not only providing certain useful ideas
which will help the individual to play
his part in economic, social and political
life. but also of enabling him to develop
for himself within his community, a better
integrated and more human life... It is
more than anything a spiraual condition,
a thirst for knowledge, a desire for men-
tal and social freedom, an urge to parti-
cipate in cultural development".
Results Achieved
WHAT are the practical measures,
however, which have emergedfrom the ten-day meeting in
Elsinore last month ?
A number of specific, concrete steps,
designed to be carried out either as im-
mediate or long-term programmes, was
adopted by the Conference at the end of
its deliberations, so as to promote perma-
nent world co-operation in adult educa-
tion.
(Continued on Page 8)
Personal contacts between delegates did much to ensure the success
of the Elsinore Conference in Denmark. Above, two adult education
specialists exchange ideas between Conference meeting in the People's
College at Elsinore.

ADULT EDUCAT ! ON
..-
. ;".-.,'. t {9ne o. ttfie mø. ðt ! Jmp4dant
lfueðtÜJnð ; o. t o. Wi datj and one liftdtJ
to. liatte tlie mø. ðt fwt-uacliing con-
sequences."
(Continued from Pace 5)..
One of the basic resolution, ; passed by
the Conference calls on Unesco to set up,
an, the earliest possible moment, a Consul-
tative Committee on adult education to
act in an advisory capacity to the Adult
Education Division of Uneseo, and to
carry out the recommendations of the
Elsinore Conference.
"... If the aims of this Conference and
of Unesco are to be achieved", the resolu-
tion states,"there must be developed an
effective writ-wide adult education move-
ment... How,'ver, at this time it would be
premature f r the Conference to recom-
mend the establishment of a permanent
world organization for adult education.
"ion order to realise the aims of Unesco
and to carry out the r,"Commendations of
the Conference (it is suggested) that
machinery be established'or securing can-
operation among the organization and
leaders of adult education throughout the
world. It is recognized that any suah ma-
th'nervy should at this time function
through and use the facilities of Unesco."
Seminars Urged
th. second important resolution voted
A'-bey the Conference stressed the im-
portance, for adult education move-
ments throughout the world, of setting up
international seminars which would study
particular topics in the field of adult
education."This we regard as a func-
tion of Unesco", the resolution states,
"and we strongly recommend that
Unesco be urged to organized a seminar
forthwith, to be held if possible in 1950.
The topics requiring most urgent consider-
ation are in our view. the study of inter-
- tional relations or of some specific
international problem, and methods and
techniques in adult education."
To facilitate the circulation of mate-
rial between one country and another,
the Elsinore Conference on Adult Educa-
tion asked Unesco to act as a central
focal point in receiving publications and
providing a regular abstracting service,
condensing, translating, and disseminat-
ing information on adult education activ-
ities.
In addition, the deleates approved a
resolution recommending the publication
by Unesco of a Bulletin on the latest
developments in adult education."The
dissemination of news about fresh
developments in adult education", the
resolution reads,"could best be under-
taken by the periodical issue of a Bulle-
t'n. If such a Bulletin could be issued
not less than quarterly, the information
< ! ont. a. inro therein could be used by the
national journals published b\'adult edu-
cational bodies and disseminated over a
wide international field.
Missions
THER programmes recommended bythe Conference call for the sending
of missions from countries with a
rich experience in adult education to
countries where it is less developed. For
particular types of adult education, such
missions might be organized by the adult
education bodies working in that special
field. For adult education ; n general, the
Conference agreed, the responsibility
should be with Unesco.
As a project requiring long-term plan-
ning, the delegates agreed that Unesco
should seek to serve adult education by
the translation and production of existing
significant material in various languages.
The Elsinr.'e Conference also recom-
mended the extended use Jf radio in each
country to provide instruction in foreign
languages, emphasized the part played by
museums and libraries in adult education
work, and agreed that science, in the
widest sense, had an important part to
play in adult education programmes, par-
ticularly as regards the neej for explain-
ing the social implications of science on
modern society.
Living Culture
I.-J EFORE the close of the Congress. inIJ a spec : al broadcast from Denmark
to the peoples of all Spanish speak-
ing America, M. Torres Bodet eloquently
summed up the fundamental meaning of
the Elsinore meetings.
"What the distinguahed educators here
assembled are really do. ng in planning in-
ternational co-operation in adult educa-
tion", he said,"is to lay the foundation for
a new way of life in better soc : al condi-
tions, in which Man, bringing a sound and
conscious technique to the services of his
social instincts, may profitably cultivate
the single smiling field of brotherhood
and peace.
"Today all true culture must spring
from life itself. A living culture has its
roots primarily in the life of the in-
dividual and thereafter in the life of
society and of the world. The assumption
that even the humblest of men may be
enabled to attain to fuller and deeper liv-
ing through science, philosophy or art, ac-
cording to his circumstances, is a new
approach. Culture is the road to an art
of shelf-expression and an art of execution...
Adult education-living culture-helps
each worker to live his life by giving him
the means of becoming more fully a
man..."
