M. Georges BIDAULT
(Head of French
. Delegation)
THE unity of the world has become a
necessity and the small communities must
make he e for  to merge into the single
community, for henceforth everything is on a large
scale and universal.
This means that a new duty for the State has
come into being. It has not only to consider its own
people ; it must consider all, even if only for thesarety or us own people.
It is not so easy, and it is not self-evident in advance that a person
who knows a foreign country will be friendly-disposed towards it. In
some cases, this is so. In others, the reverse is true. Knowledge may
be converted into love, but equally, ignorance may be nearer to love
than knowledge. Nevertheless, ignorance becomes love only through
ignorance, and love based on knowledge is always preferable to the
ether. Thus, when all is said and done, Montaigne was right : it is
necessary for us all, assembled here from so many different countries,
to try to know one another ; it is perhaps more difficult to love each
other when we know each other, but love without knowledge is a less
hardy growth. It is, in any case, essential to understand and, if need
be, to allow tolerance. Not all differences between countries deserve
to be calmly accepted, but neither do they deserve to be rejected. We
have to try to bring out the likenesses between our peoples.
When Giraudoux sent his Suzanne across the Pacific, he made her
a little poem, which I venture to read to you only because he is the
author of it..'What have you seen on your travels in Rome, Vienna,
Bergamo and Calcutta ?"asked Spencer's wüe."Nothing,"he said.
"If you wish to discover the world, Rosamond, close your eyes."That
is Giraudoux. But the gentle Joubert put the idea in almost the same
words, in a maxim which, like all good maxims, has been entirely
forgotten, when he said :"'Close your eyes and you will see."
Man exists in all men, and that is one thing which I think Unesco
might proclaim : that differences are not fundamental and that all
men can be found in the mind and heart of every man.
