A FTEB considering the reports drawn up by the Secre-
lariat on news agencies the press, the film and the radio
in'the fourteen countries covered by the 1949 survey,
the Commission on Technical Needs, which met from
25 July to 3 August 1949, spent a week in drafting very specific
conclusions and) recommendations to Unesco, in the light of
information gathered in forty-three countries over a pericd of
three years.
The Commission emphasized, in the first place, the impor-
tance it attached to Unesco's surveys being continued so as to
cover the whole world.
Documents gathered and the findings of the Commission
enable Unesco to assist in the vigorous, promotion of the free
flow of information. As a source of reference, the importance
of the assembled data cannot be over-estimated and the Com-
mission noted the value of this documentation to many Depart-
ments of Unesco, to government services, professional associa-
tions and private workers in the press, film and radio who have
asked for either information or advice. The Commission was of
the opinion that eventually, when the world survey was com-
pleted, the collected reports, carefully brought up to date, should
be published as four separate volumes dealing respectively with
new agencies. press, film and radio. Subsequently, annual sup-
plements should be issued keeping the information up to date.
Fruit/ul Cooperation
THE Commission was glad to note the fruitful co-operationestablished between the Mass Communications Department
and the appropriate organs of the United Nations and the Spe-
ciJalized. Agencies, and particularly with the Sub-Commission on
Freedom of Information and of the Press, the FAO (in. ques-
tions related to newsprint), the Economic Commission for
Eurqpe, the International Trade Organization (GATT) and the
International Telecommunications Union. The Commission
asked that this co-operation be developed to the greatest pos-
sible degree.
It alSo recommended that the survey reports and the recom-
mendations as a whole should be taken into account in the
plans for technical assistance and economic development at
present being considered by the JUndted Nations and its Spe-
cialized Agencies.
Experts considered that the information collected by Unesoo,
<&lt; which presents a unique picture of the existing facilities for
the diffusion of ideas by word and image» : should be brought to
the knowledge of persons and organizations that could make use'
of it. The reports published after each survey, and the annual
supplements could obviously contain only apart of all the
information collected. The Commission considered that Unesco
should use this non-published information by arranging for
the publication of pamphlets on a number of special subjects.
Professional Training
THE Commission laid particular stress on professional train-ing. Thus iJt reaffirmed and supplemented the suggestion
made by previous commissions especially as regards the
establishment of an International Institute olf Press and Informa-
tion. The Commission regarded it as essential that a beginning
be made with this project in the course of 1950.
It was also recommended, firstly, that missions of experts
should'be sent to the more needy countries and should help
them, at their request, to institute new services or develop those
already in existence, and secondly that Unesco should organize
a number of seminars for radio and film personnel.
The Commission furthennore suggested a number of supple-
mentary enterprises, regarding the : use of printing characters
for printing in Asiatic languages ; the organization of collective
listening, etc.
Finally, it4 suggested the setting up of <&lt; permanent advisory
committees... composed of persons throughout the world who
have a specialized knowledge of these individual and technical
subjects : ».
It should be noted that the experts of the Commission on
Technical Needs were careful to suggest to Unesco only concrete
and practical tasks that could, for the most part, be carried out
with the appropriations and staff available to the Mass Com-
munications Department and certain other Unesco Departments
directly concerned.
