TASKS FOR
THE mO. <t important new feature of Une. <co'. < Fourth General
Conference in. Paris, last month, was an international debate at
which members of the public were able to"sit in"on discussions
. of one of to-day's fundamental problems : what are the duties of
the State in the modern World ?
The idea for Unesco to hold a discussion o/this Aind. coinciding M) tth
the General Conferences. was proposed by the French delegation at last
year's Conferences. in Beirut.
One purpose of the debate was to broaden the scope of the Conference
by bringing the public, as it were,'"inside", and the interest shown in the
discussions, which took place at the Maison de la Chimie, in Paris, on
September, 27, 28 and 29, gave ample proof of its success and emphasized
the significance of the subject being debated.
Each evening, three eminent personalities from among the members of
delegations to the General Conference, presented their points of view on
the following question :"What are the duties of the Sta (e in regard to
education, science and culture four the purpose of ensuring a better under-
standing between peoples, and what practical steps should be taken to
discharge those duties ?" Following these speeches, five or six"debaters"
from different countrtes, took part in a discussion on the views that had
been expressed.
In addition to associating the general public more directly with the
activities of the General Conference, the debate helped to define the
prospects open to Unesco in the present day world.
This hope was expressed by M. Torres Bodet,. Director-General of
Unesco, in his report to the General Conference in which he said :
"The very existence of Unesco shows that States, bearing an immense
responsibility, have felt the desire to break the vicious circle of the
old struggles for power in order to accept in full measure their duty
towards humanity.
"We may therefore hope that the discussion will allow us to decide on
a more accurate conception of the economic, social, political and legal
functions in relation to spiritual considerations."
Lack of space prevents the Courier from publishing the full texts of the
speeches made by delegates from many countries, particularly representa-
ing page, of the main opinions put forward, includes passages from
speeches made by delegates from many countries, particularly represents.
tive off different cultures...
The speakers who took part in the debate were : M. Georges BIDAULT
(France), Dr. Reinhold NIEBUHR (U. S. A.), Prof. E. Zerega FOMBONA (Vene-
zueIlt), Prof. Ozorio de ALMEIDA (BrazU), Prof. Giuseppe VEDOVATO (Italy),
Dr. BEAGLEHOLE (New Zealand), M. Jamal FARRA (Syria), Dr. Los SANTOS
(Philippines,,), iProf. Jean PIAGET (Switzerland), Prof. F. HERCIK (Czeeho-
slovakia), Mr. U BA LW1N (Burma), Mr. Tara CHAND (India), Prof Adam
Schaff (Poland), Prof. FRISCH (Denmark), Prof. Roberto IBANEZ (Uruguay),
Dr. B. Ernst BUSCHBECK (Austria), Earl Bertrand RUSSELL (United King-
dom), Rector* SIASSI (Iran), Prof. E. Gustave DUPREEL (Belgium).

WORLD UNDERSTAND) NG DEF ! NED
AT UNESCO INTERNATIONAL DEBATE

It is the close relation be-
tween human rights and the
duties of the State, and the
need for defining States'du-
ties so as to safeguard man's
universal rights, which inspir-
ed Unesco to choose the sub-
ject for the debates. Public
recognition of its importance
was shown by the large num-
ber of people who came to
the Maison de la Chimie,
each evening. Conference
delegates from all parts of
the world were there to hear
their colleagues speak.
