BUT THIS QUESTION I
THE WHOLE PROBLEM
THE value of the film for the popul-iarization of science ; s closely bound- ; 
up with its future development as (
a tedium. Because it has been widely j
associated with entertainment and j
entertainment techniques. its other uses 
as a medium have been impeded. t
A vivid presentation of the human
skeleton as depicted in a British Ministry
of Health educational farm.
Today the enormous appeal of the
public cinema is not utilized to any full
extent for po. pularization, Some countries
have taken the step of introducing
legislation requiring the inclusion of one
documentary film in every cinema pro-
gramme.
There are other develo. pments, particu-
larly the production of films in a group
or series,'A group of films is easier to
market commercia ! ly, and has the merit
of achieving a greater cumulat've effect
on the public. For example, the Amer-
More use

Must Be Made Of Te ruIìG Cinema
IS BOUND UP WITH THE WAY IN WHICH
EM OF SCIENCE IN EDUCATION IS TREATED
ican March of Time and the British
) This Modern Age series, as well as s, pe-
cialized magazines like This Is Britain,
for audiences overseas ; Mining Review,
for coal miners ; and the shell Cinema-
gazine. ( It should be noted that none uf
these magazines deal spec jically with
science, the exception bering provided by
t the Soviet Union where special scientific
, film magaz'nes are produce,}
The newsreel, too. has the merit of
by
ARTHUR ELTON
Director of the Br : tish Film Institute
, and
SINCLAIR ROAD
Secretary of the Film Centre, London
continuity and could be utilized to a far
greater extent to present regular items
or general scientific interet,
The feature film, generally speakmg,
M tiot prouef ! a SM <abe ? Hed ! M ? ; :. 0 ? thas n t proved a su'table medium, (On
the other hand, its power to encourage
and maintain unscientific attitudes re-
quires constant attention on the part of
scientists.)
1 A great deal can be done to devflopthe use of films about sc'ence among
community organizations. This non-
theatrical dtftribution is not, however,
economically self-supporting.
It requ'res a large measure or public
3upport in the provision of library facili-
to ties and projection machinery. Because
lInon-theatrical audiences are prepared to
pay much more attention to the f : lems
they see, money and effort put into this
kind of distribution can be of far more
lasting t : alue,
The encouragement of local film gfoups
is also of the utmost importance, as
fM'RH as of national sc. cntific film asso-
ciations-along lines on which the Inter-
Knt : ona !, Sc : eK< !/M F ! ! M ssoc : a< ! 0t : national Scientific ilm As ociation is
already working.
In the production of films popular-
izing sC'ence, the maximum amount of
9oer7 ! me ! t< a ? t ( ! 7 : oM-. <70 : ; er7tmeKt spoM-g vernment and non-government spon-
sorship should be encourage. Sponsoring
organizations, particu : arly public bodies,
should realize the value of develo. ping an
understanding, not merely of the facts
of sc'ence and its amJlication to parti-
cular areas of activity, but also the
actual everyday use of scientific method
as well as the citizen's responsibility fOT
the ultimate use and control of the dis-
cover : es of science.
Greater care should also be taken to
relate subjects described to what is
within audiences'experience, since a cer-
tain familiarity is an essent'al basis for
further understanding.
Finally, national and international
scientific : nstitutions could profitably pay
far more attention to the value of mass-
meftta. Authoritative statements by such
bodies about the actual and potential use
0/films on science could influence very
positively governmental and other agen-
cies responsible for film, production,
But, ultimately. the fate of sctentifïc
<popularization, whatever the lIIedil1m
used, must depend on the seriousness
tpifyt M/nc/t fe M/ : o ! e OMest : 07t o/se {encewith which the whole question of sci c
in education generally is treated in
each individual country,
