SEEKER AFTER PEACE
By
Prof. Jacques HADAMARD
Noted French Mathematician
For ten years now, Einstein has sought
by every means in his power to cement
the world into Ol', ! international com-
unity. He has fought what divides
the world. and he ha"fought towards
an undiv : ded worlP-. He has been the
proudest member in the ancient and
international brotherhood of science ;
and his one wish remains to be as
proud a member of the new interna-
tional brotherhood of man.
Professor Jacques Hadamard, recalls
some of Einstein's struggles jor peace.
II shall not sDeak of Einstein's greatcontribution to the development of
modern physics. I shall not speak
either of his mathematical methods, in-
teresting as they are, or of the powerful
way in which Einstein uses them in his
theory of relativity.
Of all his discoveries, this is the theory
which has caused the greatest sensation.
However, the theory of Relativity was
known only to scientists at the time that
the war broke out in 1914. Two ideas of
the world then stood face to face. That
which inspired the Germans was ex-
pressed in the manifesto of the ninety-
three intellectuals, which. has remained
infamous from that day.
A Manifesto Signed by Three
IT UT the human conscience replied. Acounter anifesto was signed by
Einstein and only two others. By
this gesture, the man whom scientists
already knew to be great, showed himself
no less so in his humanity.
Neither of these two characteristics of
Einstein-his scientific genius and his
high moral vision-. was then known to
the general public. That did not happen
until 1919, when the Royal Society pub-
lished the astronomaticàl findings which
strikingly confirmed Einstein's prediction.
Then his scientific fame at once became
universal : but at the same time it exposed
him to the most violent attacks.
There were scientists, even d : stinguished
scientists, who believed that his theory
ccntradicted commonsense. And non-
scientIsts spoke a more violent language.
Einstein was a Jew. He had also chosen
Swiss nationality as a youth (for he had
already disliked the moral climate of
Germany), And that was enough to have
his theories called"un-German"and to
make him unpopular in Germany.
I\t this very time, his theories were
being attacked in France because their
author was called a German. And
elsewhere, so-called philosophical and
political attacks joined forces : Relativity
was called"Bolshevism in physics",
A Turning Point in his Life
IF INSTEIN has never ceased to doL important scie tific work, but from
that time this was no longer his
only work. Indeed, his courageous counter
manifesto of 1914 marks a turning point
in his thought and his life. From that
moment his mind was filled with a
horror against war.
"My pacificism is not based on any
intellectual theory,"he said,"but on a

Einstein leaves a New York hospital after a recent operation.
deep antipathy to every form of cruelty
or hatred."
At one time he was ejected a member
of one of the Commissions of the League
of Nations. Fee1i : 1g that the League did
not take a strong enough stand against
the mUitarily powerful states, he resigned.
But he returned, because he decided that
what is good must
be supported even
though it makes
mistakes.
It was about
this time that
Einstein came to
Paris, in 1922, at
the invitation of
the COllège de
France. We in the
college were still
afraid that there
might be demon-
strations against
him by national
fanatics-the ve-ry
men who later in
1940 collaborated
with the invaders
of our country. So
we even kept his
address in Paris a
secret.
But our peaceful discussions were not
interrupted, however, violent were the
polemics outside the college. And though
peaceful, our discussions did not lack
loveliness : there were still sceptics who
thought the new theory self-contradictory,
and who did not understand that the
contradiction was only between Relativity
and their own deep-seated habits of
thought. I am proud to have taken part
in these discussions, and there to have
argued with my dear and illustrious fried
Painleve.
.'"Simplicity and Music
IIì UT I also had the pleasure of more: intimate conversations and closer
contacts, in which I learned to
know Einstein in yet another light ; the
youthfulness, the almost disingenuous
youthfulness of his look, and that great
simplicity which marked even his deepest
and most fruitful ideas.
To this pleasure was added that or a
common love of music. It was a delight
to have that great scientist reveal him-
self in my home as a first-class violinist
. with a rare musical gift, and to see the
pleasure which he took in taking part
in our musical reunions.
