Reconstructing the Damages
INCE the end of the last war, the world has been
faced with two critical problems of educational
reconstruction : a material problem of rebuilding
and re-equipping destroyed schools and universities, mus-
eums and libraries ; a human problem of rebuilding
the shattered lives of thousands of children and young
people who have been almost totally deprived of normal
schooling.
Unesco's basic role in educational reconstruction is to
punt down the facts, find out what human and material
reconstruction is needed, and where, and bring this
information to the attention of the public.
By this"brass tacks"method of procedure, Unesco
has been helping to arouse public opinion in many
countries and to stimulate the efforts of voluntary
organizations which in 1948 alone contributed over
$100, 000, 000 in funds and materials. The job, however, is
far from completed.
Here is how Unesco intends to tackle the two problems
of human and material reconstruction during 1949. Let
us look first at the human side of the problem.
The Human Problems
Aid to Youth
Is ETWEEN 1939 and 1945 thousands of children sud-denly found themselves without om s and
without parents. Many of these war orphans
wandered about the war-torn countries and were later
found and given care and attention in spontaneously
oreated"Children's Villages","Children's Communities"
and"Children's Republics'.
Today, however, these same children are no longer
ehildren. They are grow. ng up and are ready to learn a
useful trade as citizens of society.
Unesco strongly feels its responsibility in facing the
problem of the education of these young workers. In
1949, therefore, in co-operation with the ILO and the UN
Social Commission and other Specialized Agencies,
Unesco will devote part of its attention to the organiza-
tion of the technical and professional training of adoles-
cent workers. This. Unesco believes. is a matter of urgent
necessity.
Until now, intelnational and national voluntary agen-
cies which have organized work camps have drawn
largely on student and teacher groups. Unesco feels that
young workers and young farmers should also be in-
cluded in the work camp movement.
DURING 1949, Unesco will consequently approach tradeunions and workers'educational associations as well
as the United Nations organization mentioned above, to
arouse their interest and inspire their collaboration in
the apprenticeship problems of wa-handicapped adoles-
cents.
At the same time Unesco will seek to broaden the
recruitment basis for youth camps so as to include these
groups of the younger generation which until now have
not received sufficient attention.
In addition Unesco will expand its overall programme
of aid to work camps generally through greater assis-
tance to these organizations in developing their educa-
tional programmes, supplying libraries on international
affairs and other subjects.
Youth Camp Leaders
ONE of the weaknesses of the youth camp movementlies in the present lack of trained leaders. To meet
this need in part, Unesco, working with the organizations
responsible for such movements, will publish in 1949, the
of War
first handbook of its kind in the world for camp leaders.
This handbook will treat all the varied aspects of the
organization and work of voluntary youth camps.
Unesco had already begun preparation, with the Inter-
national Federation of Children s Communities,'created
by Unesco last year, for the organization during the
summer holidays of 1949, of a big international children's
convention as well as a holiday camp in cne of the French
"Children's Republics". This convention will Ocing together
boys and girls from different national children's villages
to get them tc learn one another's way of living.
Child Editors
UNESCO also hopes to be able, with the Federation, toinitiate the publicat : on of an international children's
newspapers, in which children themselves-all citizens of
different"villages"and"communities"-will be able to
express their ideas and build an international chain
of friendship and brotherhood.
Plans for this newspaper are being worked out as part
of a proposed World Community Centre to be built in
Pestalozzi Village, Switzerland. The Centre would se. J : ve
as a meeting place for educators engaged in work on
war-handicapped children, and as a nucleus of speciaL
training courses for camp leaders.
Refugees
OTHER new phases of Unesco's"human"Reconstruc-tion programme, as formulated by the Beirut Con-
ference, include assistance to refugees driven from their
homes by military operations in the Middle East and aid
to refugee intellectuals everywhere.
In collaboration with officers delegated by r, he UN to
examine refugee problems in the Middle East, Unesco
has already completed a study of the educational needs
of 800, 000 refugees. Of these, 200, 000 are of school age.
The study will be used for stimulating campaigns to
provide these refugees with basic educational needs.
Unesco will also co-operate with the IRO in order to
find suitable employment for refugee intellectuals. Unesco
Member States will be asked to call upon their educa-
tional institutions to aid this employment programme.
The Material Problems
'mA/HEN microscopes and other scientific equipment
arrive by plane over the waters of the Pacific
and start a run-down Phiiippine laboratory going
again ; when a standard library with its 30 books becomes
a prized possession of an Austrian university and rapidly
achieves a long waiting list of readers ; when a scientific
review received in a youth camp library is prized as the
only copy in all northern Italy and helps, in its small
way, to bridge the years of intellectual isolation caused
by the war, Unesco feeis that the laborious job of re-
building and rye-equipping the damaged institutions of the
world is achieving results.
Millions of people in many countries have found in
educational reconstruction a positive, concrete way of
expressing their goodwill towards other nations and their
fervent desire for a decent and peaceful world.
The core of the problem, in reality, lies in what
Americans ca. ll"know-how''-that is in knowing and
ensuring that the right things are sent to the right
places.
Through its fact-finding surveys, Unesco has been
attempting to bring to light the"right things needed
in the right places".
Thus, Volume II of the Book of Needs, which will
appear early in 1949, as a result of Unesco's 1948 surveys,
will point up the acute shortages and the pressing prob-
lems of the devastated countries of Asia.
In a similar effort to give the facts and arouse the
people's conscience to the needs of the war-hit countries.
Unesco will publish, eaorly in 1949, a series of booklets
showing how libraries, art ga ! Ieries, museums and
scientific laboratories have suffered as a result OÍ war-
damage. Special pamphlets will also appear on the prob-
lems of child war victims and children's communities.
, In collaboration with the United Nations Film Board
and the United States National Commission, Unesco is
preparing two films for 1949. The Lrst will depict the
vast cultural destruction suffered by invaded countries
and efforts being made to repair those losses. The second
film will tell the tragic story of child victims of the, war.
Emergency Aid
OF Unesco's budget for 1949, $175, 000 has been set asidefor its Emergency Aid Fund to meet some of the
special high-priority needs Gf the war-hit countries.
This necessarily limited contribution, however, can meet
only a tiny fraction of the total needs. Even if the entire
Unesco Reconstruction budget of $420, 000 were ear-marked
for direct re-builaing purposes, it would hardly suffice to
build one up-to-date school.
The main task of raising funds and 0rganizÏng othec
forms of aid had been undertaken by national and inter-
national voluntary organizations, with Unesco assisting
them as a stimulating and co-ordinating agent. We have
already seen that, thanks to this effort, over $100, 000, 000
was collected in 1948.
Unesco will therefore continue to encourage national
campaigns and help voluntary agencies to increase their
already outstanding efforts.
Many of these agencies are now working in unison as
members of the Temporary Council for Educational
Reconstruction (TICER) whose headquarters are located
at Unesco House in Paris and whose secretariat is provided
by Unesco. TICER member-agencies now total 28 and
represent over 700 national organizations in more than
60 countries.
Unesco will also continue to work closely with the
International Children's Emergency Fund so that part
of the funds raised by its campaigns is devoted to educa-
tional needs.
Transition to Construction
The Beirut Conference, while fully recognizing that
the needs of devastated countries must continue to have
priority, resolved that Unesco will, in future years, effect
a gradual transition from reconstruction to a long-term
constructive programme of development of education,
science and culture in all countries and in under-
developed areas in particular.
During 1949 Unesco will accordingly develop a study-
plan,. with the International Bureau of Education, to
determine the needs of countries which have been unable
for social and economic reasons to reach adequate educa-
tional levels. This study will give preliminary indications
as to the degree and time of Unesco's transition from
reconstruction to construction.
'  n F  Tt t )     
. On the Threshold of 1949.....,..'
- A
The New Unesço. Program e
