By
WILLEM
VAN VLIET
o reach EI Shune. We
left Amman early one
morning while it was
still cool. Traffic on
the road to Jerusalem
was rather quiet now
that there were no
troops. Occasionally,
when a herd of goats
barred the way. our
car had to come to a halt, but.
w. th much shouting and arm waving the
shepherd drove his charges to one side
of the dusty highway and we were away
again.
We passed a sign marked"sea level"
and it began to grow hotter and hotter
as we drove down into the vallsy. leaving
behind us the few colourful villages of
Transjordan.
Towards eleven o'clock we arrived at EI
Shune, a cluster of low-built huts on the
edge of the Jordan Valley. On out left lay
the shimmering Dead Sea, while on our
right stretched the endless rows of white
tents, dazzling under scorching sun. This
was the El Shune refugee camp. where
20, 000 people were barely subsisting on a
ration of 1, 500 calories a day-about half
the normal requirements.
Baking Hot Sand
II was welcomed by the camp manager,) t a young Hungarian volunteer, who
'ed the way into a tent and in-
troduced me to the Danish camp doctor
and his team of British nurses. From them
I heard the latest news. That morning two
refugees had been kidnapped by a Bedouin.
tribe and 300 men had set out to rescue
them. There was the usual crop of snake
bites to attend to, they told me, and they
had heard rumours that the camp might
be moved further north.
Outside the heat had become unbearable
for it was now midday. With the camp
manager, I trudged across the sand
towards the camp"school."The use of the
word school would only be justified by
the definition"a place where children are
taught,"for I saw none of the things one
usually associates with a school.
There were no buildings, nor were there
any at all within a fifty-mile radius or
more, This was the desert where John the
Baptist had lived and wandered,"a vo : ce
crying in the wilderness."
There was nothing for the children to
sit on but the baking hot sand. We went
from class to class ; from group to group
of boys and girls of different ages. For
the litt : e ones there were tents, but the
rest were being taught in the open air
under the blistering sun.
Teachers and pupils alike showed great
imagination and resource. They had to,
because there was nothing to write on.
Wr : ting was reduced to spelling and all
their arithmetic was done mentally.
Sap pox fable
Ne class of thirty boys was learnIngI, nglish and Ðhe difference between
the spelling and the pronunciation
of this language has perhaps never been
more painfully realized than by the young
Palestinian teacher in charge. After each
Aidt Middle
East Refug' Sl ? h'ls
 )  JRMgee c
tNttNnBNf
Fattah Nounih,
Desert Headmaster
of El Shune
The
School-
1."1
Bell In The Wilderness
MR. WILLEM VAN VLIET, a member of Unesco's Reconstruction Depart-ment. recently returned fro  the Middle East after spending one
month visiting Lnesco-sponsored refugee schools, set up by voluntary
organizations, in Lebanon, Syria, Palestine and Transjordan.
In the following article, he gives a graphic account of some of the
things he saw during a visit to one of the camp schools at El Shune, in
the Jordan Valley, and describes similar problems facing educational
workers in oth'r parts of the Middle East.
Not evn the scorching desert sun can
diminish the"education hunger"of these
Arab boys in a"classroom"of a Unesco
refugee school in the Jordan Valley.
new word he would ask his perspiring
chargès :"How do you spell it ?"
"L-A-U-G-H""Good, now"S-P-E-A-K"-
"How do you spell that ?"...
There was not even a blackboard at El
Shune to lighten the'r task.
After inspecting all 32 classes in the
school, we made our way to the tent
where Mr. Fattah Nounih, the head-
master, had set up his office. Here, im-
provisation was still an essential factor,
for the headmaster was obliged to use an
old soap box as a writing table.
Mr. Noun : h's immediate worry that
morning was the fact that the two note-
books in which he kept his school records
were almost full. Each morning, he to'd
me. his 32 assistant teachers handed in
their attendance figures for the day and
that particular morning. 1. 946 boys and
g'rls had answered the roll call.
I took notes on the equipment needed
in the El Shune school : 32 blackboards,
6. 000 copybooks, 2. 000 pencils. Arab
readers, English New Method Readers.
When I had finished, Mr. Nounih added
wistfully."And a school-bell, please".
I thought he was joking."Do you really
want me to note that too ?" I asked."Oh
yes."he replied emphatically,"a school-
bell is most essential"
Two weeks later, when I had returned
to Paris. I could hear Mr. Nounih's in-
sistent voice :"and a school-bell, please."
A school-bell ! It seemed such a bizarre

request. A school-bell ringing in the
wilderness.
I also thought of the other schools I
had vis : ted in Transjordan, in soithern
Palestine and in the Lebanon. Some were
in army barracks, some under tents and
others in the open air, vet everywhere
the picture was essentially the same-
children sitting on the ground, the com-
plete absence of equipment, but in spite
of this. the attention with IWhiah the
children followed the lessons.
'Education Hunger'
1-= EVERYWHERE I went I found theL same symptcm of" ducati n hun-
ger". I remember the girls in the
Neuserath Camp school, r. ear Gaza, in
southern Palestine, who had just been
vaccinated against typhus. When their
teacher told them they could go home
not one of the girls would leave."We
have had enough holidays,''they pro-
tested.
One of the reasons for this "appetite"
for education is, I believe, that the people
had grown to appreciate the value of edu-
cation long before they became refugees.
The school system under the British
administrat'on in Palestine was above all
a practical one ; basic instruction was
given in elementary schools, with lessons
in agriculture and often school garden-
ing.
Palestine teachers in refugee camps
are now trying to copy this system as
closely as possible.
The impression which remains upper-
most in my mind is something I felt
rather than saw or heard in the camps.
It was the striking difference between
the undoubtedly better moral in camps
where educational activities had been
started and that in camps still without
emergency schools.
Unesco, together with the Lord Mayor
of London's Appeal for Children, and the
Norwegian UNAC have provided over
11, 000 of the refugee children with desks,
notebooks, pencils, textbooks and black-
boards. But more than 15. 000 children
are still attending schools which have no
equipment and an additional 150, 000 re-
ceive no instruction at all.
