Urgent Problem of Post-War
Child Vagrants Studied
at Charleroi Conference
ONE of the greatest and perhaps the most pathetic of problems left by
the Second World War is that of the host of vagrant children to be
found in many parts of Europe and also in those areas of Asia which
have known War for ever a decade.
Idle for the most part, often homeless or housed in hovels, eking
out an existence through various forms of petty crime, most of these children
would appear to have little to hope from life.
A hope exists, however, thanks to the numberless people who are working
to help them and to show them how to become useful members of the commu-
nity.
Some cf these people met last month at a two-day conference, called by
Unesco, in the Children's City of Mareinelle, Charleroi, Belgium, to discuss
this vast problem of re-adjusting vagrant or war-orphaned children to social
life.
The conference, first of its kind since the war, brought together magistrates,
psychologists, social welfare experts, and directors of children's communities.
These expert ; exchanged views, presented on-the-pot reports of every phase of
this vast problem of social and psychological causes of vagrancy, outlining,
practical ways and means for educating vagrants and dealing with youthful
gangs, and providing assistance for badly-placed children and their families.
Various Children's Communities of Europe, important post-war centres in
the struggle to alleviate the problem of juvenile vagrancy, were represented at
the Charleroi meetings. Other interested international associations, the Red
Cross, International Union for the Protection of Children, and United Nations
agencies, sent delegates to the conference.
The dramatic facts of the present-day plight of these children and their
elders were laid in # : lccesion before the assembled experts, first in a moving
survey from M. Jean Chazal, a magistrate and a leading authority on the
subject, from his day-to-day dealings with children in the Seine Court.
FROM Italy, Dr. Maria Venturini,
. presented a heart-rending pic-
ture of conditions i  her
country."Even before the war",
she said,"many people lived in slum
conditions, in a single room below
street level, where the only light came
through the open doorway, and
where anything from four to ten
people were huddled together like
animals. But those days now seem
like a past Golden Age to the poor of
Naples.
"The war has destroyed 100, 000
houses, and half a million people live,
if it can be called living, in hovels,
in barrack yards, in caves. There are
even cases of eighteen people from
two or three families living together
in a single room, often without
windows. There is frequently only
one water-closet for ten or twenty
people, and, as a rule, none at all.
"There are three caves at Capodi-
mento and at Mergellina", she went
on,"where more than one hundred
families, or at least five hundred per-
sons, live together. There are long
passages dug out of the hillside,
without air or light. Water and
hygienic facilities are all at the en-
trance to the cave".
No Help From Family
will always remain beggars and
thieves from those who, once they
have food inside them, are capable of
something better. In our cowardice,
we gamble on the chance that despair
may not drive these children into the
courts, where it is they who will have
to answer the charge."
The Friendship Teams
F GUNDER of the"Friendship
t-t Teams", M. Dacier-Falque, des-
cribed to a journalist-observer of
the conference the preventative
methods of the teams."The Friend-
ship Teams", he said,"are made up
of young people from every class.
Outside their ordinary work they
devote themselves to re-educating
gangs of children. Under Various
While emphasisinq the tremendous scale of modern child vagrancy problems. the Char-
leroi Conference also revealed the efforts being made to save these children. Our photo
shows two young people, typical of thousands in all parts of Europe, who must be helped
back to a decent and useful life.
pretexts, they win the children's
confidence and encourage them to go
in for sport, camping and work. In a
year and a half, this new kind of
Salvation Army has transformed eight
gangs of such children into useful
apprentices".
Unesco has been asked to give
material support to these Friendship
Teams, to enable them to extend
their work, and set up homes to
shelter these children from the street.
"W HE, RE are the children when
they are not forced back
into these icy tombs by
rain or sleet ?" asked Dr.
Venturini."In the street, where they
can at least play in the sunlight. The
eldest go further afield to beg in
districts where people have money in
their pockets. I think Naples is the
only large city in the wor : d without
public gardens.
"The family is no help. Why
should families wish to share the
hazards of the street with their chil-
dren, who haunt them by expressing
the mere instinct of self-preservation.
No, their families send them into the
street to play and to beg. The family
exploits children because it has sunk
so low, because it is so poor. They
teach them to pick up cigarette ends.
knowing that all the rest can be
learned in the streets. The police
know all about it, so do the law courts.
"Children convicted in juvenile
courts should theoretically be sent to
reform schools, but there are none.
But in this respect there are countries
much worse off than Italy.
"Police and magistrates therefore
close their eyes, waiting for some
crime to be committed, since it will
then be easier to pick out those who

In a few months time the first
Friendship Home is to be established.
From it, the children will leave daily
for their factory or training centre,
and will find a large measure of
freedom in their new home.
Honorary chairman of the Charleroi
Conference was M. René de Cooman,
Vice-President of the International
Federation of Children's Communities.
Experts from several war-devastated
countries in Europe and the Far East
contributed to the useful exchanges
that took place.
These experts included : M. Jean
Chazal, Children's Magistrate of the
Seine Court (France) ; Professor De-
motre Caranicas of the University of
Salonika (Greece) ; Dr. Maria Ventu-
rini, a prominent Italian child psycho-
logist ; Mr. U Ba Lwin of Burma ;
M. Jean rranois ; Inspector-General
of the French Educational System and
Dr. Preaut, President of the Intern-
tional Federation of Children's Com-
munities. Chairman of the confe-
rence was Mr. Maurice Millaud, a Eu-
ropean representative of the UN De-
partment of Social Affairs.
"Understand Then Act"
THE importance of the Conference
was stressed by the Press of
many countries. Alexis Danan,
a leading authority on the pro-
blems of neglected children, wrote in
the French daily"Franc-Tireur., :
"The general public knows little of the
wide range of work Unesco is carrying
out to solve the manifold problems of
neglected children. Its mission is not
confined to investigation : the practi-
cal results it has achieved are asto-
nishing.
"And while giving immediate assis-
tance to relieve proven needs, it spares
no efforts to assess requirements
throughout the world. It has corres-
pondents and information agents in
every country and organizes working
conferences to which it invites anyone
able to give useful advice. Its motto
might well be :'Understand then act'".
A report is being prepared from the
conference, on which further action to
improve the tragic existences of these
young vagrants of Europe and Asia
will be based.
