AN INDEX CARD
STOPPED AN EPIDEMIC
L A5T winter a strange disease paralysed the largest automobile factory
in France. In one week, 500 workmen were off the job their eyes
sWQIlen shut by a burning, blinding inflammation. The disease had
never before been seen in France. Scientists at the famed Pasteur Institute
suspected it was a rare tropical malady known as keredo-conjunct : vitis.
Searching their files for a clue to check the epidemic, they found a small
white card. This card mentioned a magazine article in an American medical
journals. issue of January 1943.
A scientist observes the Heavens with a Schmidt telescope at the world-famous
Observatory on Mount Palomar in Californi. With this telescope, an Atlas of the
Heavens is being made. Through Unesco's aid, many international research stations are
doing similar pioneer work in the field of the Natural Sciences.
From the article, which because
of the war they had never seem, the
French scientists learned that the same
eye infection had struck d) e huge
Kaiser shipyards of California during
the war.
Doctors at Columbia Medical
Center had developed a cure, and
fully described it in the magazine
article. Thus, in less than) an
hour-thanks to the liule white
card-the French scientists had a
tool to work with. In a few weeks
they stamped out the epidemic at the
factory.
The small white index card
contained what scientists call an
cornet. An abstract is a summary
or short description of a longer article.
Today a man would have to spend
his full 40-hour week merely to read
the titles of the million or so articles
appearing each year. That is why
in every field there are periodicals
devoted to printing abstracts, and
that is why most scientists make it
their business to read through the

abstracts concerning their chosen
field.
For example, 16, 500 scientists
subscribe to a monthly bulletin called
"Chemical Abstracts". When a
cheminal engineer-say in Czecho-
slovakia-scans the pages of this
bulletin, he learns about some 5, 000
articles appearing in some 4, 300
periodicals published in 31 different
languages. E. ven if he knew 31
languages, it is doubtful that he could
afford to subscribe to all these
journals, much less find time to read
them through. Scientists use abstracts
like detectives use fingerprint-to
identify and ferret out subjects of
special interest.
Abstracting services try to link up
the various fields of human know-
ledge ; to bridge the gaps of time,
space and language. For lack of
abstracts on Japanese science, Dr.
Anderson-an American who Won
the Nobel Prize in 1937 for work
on cosmic rays-knew nothing of a
valuable article on the subject that
a Dr. Yukawa had published two
years earlier in Japan.
Nearly), 000 organizations
throughout the world produce science
abstracts. Yet of all the scientific
articles appearing each year, fewer
than half are ever abstracted. Howf-
ever, many are condensed over and
over again by different abstracting
services. Of all the sciences, only
chemistry is fully and systematically
covered ; others-meteorology, stat-
istics, fisheries, and important
branches of botany and zoology-are
hardly abstracted at all.
A recent Unesco survey of scien-
tific articles published in the Middle
East revealed dozens of journals un-
known to Western scientists. And
only a lucky accident brought to a
Chinese nutritionist's hand the abstract
of an article from Jamaica on the use
of yeast as a food to curb famine.
To tackle such shortcomings in-the
network of science abstracting,
Unesco held a world conference in
Paris last month. One hundred and
forty-seven scientists and librarians
from 28 countries-speaking) 15
languages-attended. They decided
that world-wide, consulting machinery,
such as exists among abstracting
services in the fields of medicine and
biology, should be set up for the other
sciences, physics and engineering,
chemistry, agriculture.
