INDIA
IN THE
WORLD
TODAY
Mahatma Gandhi greets an old Muslim peasant during a
tour he made in 1947 in an effort to bring about Hindu-
Pandit Nehru, Indian Prime Minister (rich) with Maulana
Axad, Education Minister (third from might) and Sir S.
Radhakrishnan (head partly shown on lett), at last months
inaugural meeting of the Indian National Commission
for Unesco.
LAST month, the Indian National Commission
M for Co-operation with Unesco held its inaugural
meeting in New Delhi to affirm the increasingly
important role that India and the countries of
Asia are playing in the development of education,
science and culture.
"Already, India is numbered among the greatest
States of an ancient Continent which history now
summons to new responsibilities. Already, under the
enlightened leadership of H. E. Pandit Nehru, she has
played a worthy part in the United Nations and their
Agenc : es," Dr. Torres Bodet stated in a message to the
Indian Commission.-----------
"You havc a rich and ancient culture."
the Director-General of Unesco wrote,
"and a conception of Man's nature and
destiny which is a rampart against the
materialism which stalks mankind today.
"India has her appointed place within
Unesco. Her consequence will grow yet
more and I myself expect great things
from her. I : will be the high duty of your
Commission to secure the co-operation
from your thinkers, scientists and artists
which We need to sustain and enrich us."
Echoing the spirit of Rabindranath Ta-
gore. Dr. Torres Bodet continued :"To the
universal goa1s Unesco seeks, there is but
one path-the of joint effort by all cul-
tures, to which they bring, not the drab-
ness of uniformity, but the fullness of
THE Indian National Commission, at its finalmeeting, unanimously adopted a resolution recog-
nizing that"Mahatma Gandhi Was the greatest
exponent of peace, non-violence and international
understanding"and that"in the troubled state of the
world today, the people in all countries need his
message and methods,"and agreed to set up a com-
mittea to"initiate, direct and stimulate the 5tudy of
ideas and techniques expounded by Gandhiji."
In the light of these studies, the resolution added.
a world-wide programme of action to promote universal
peace and goodwill among all nations should be
Asian culture is a vast mosaic,with a discerning nucleus is India.
That mosaic has, through the ages, been put together and taken aplJrt,
many times.
Last month, the Indian National Commission for Unesco was olficially
inaugnraled in tloe presence in the leading thinkers, scientis's andstates-
men of India and Asia.
To mark this occasion, the Unesco Courier is devoting this special
SUI. plement to some of tloe aspects of education, science and cnlture
which are shaping the New India of today..
their rich diversity, with mutual understanding to
cement the whole.
Gandhian Ideals for Peace
"Of all the men of our day,"he said,"he whose
whole life best exemplified the ideals of peace and
human brotherhood was your own Mahatma Gandhi.
May I, then, pass on to you his definition, for Uneseo,
of the moral and philosophic bases for a universal
declaration of human rights :
"I learned from my illiterate but very wise
mother that all rights to be deserved and prescryed
came from duty well done. Thus the very right
to live accrues to us only when we do the duty
of citizenship of the world.'
"We have taken to our hearts that message." the
Director-General concluded."It will guile our future
efforts, as it will-I know-your own."
prepared for presentation to the Fifth General Con-
ference of Unesco, to be held in May 1950.
Inaugurating the Indian National Commission
Pandit Jawharlai Nehru, Prime Minister of India, told
the meeting-which was attended by over 300 persons
from different parts of Asia-to look at. world problems
against the massive background of rapidly changing
Asia. He stressed the new and vital importance of
Asia in the world today, and the need for moral and
spiritual values, and. an understanding of the basic
problems which have caused"the vast upsurge in
men's minds all over Asia."
"We are today passing through a very vital and
important stage in world history,"Pandit Nehru
declared,"when another shHt takes place in the centre
of gravity. What happens in Asia is likely to have a
powerful effect not only on Asia but also on Europe
and the rest of the world."
In the past. he said, the great problems of Asia
were rather neglected and enough attention had not
been paid to them either in the political or economic
sphere.
ana Africa, but spreading out in the
Eense that it has descended from the
'ivory tower'attitude."
Noting that most people, in the world
today, do not have some standard by
which they can judge events or policv or
even their actions, the Indian Prime
Minister said :"Unless you find some yard
measure, some standard of values, it will
not be good for us or for humanity. I
think it is the business of Unesco to see
to it that these values are maintained."
N an impressive extemporaneous
Sir S. Radhaknshnan,chairman of Unesco's Executive
Board and one of the leading thinkers of
India today, stressed the non-political
character of Unesco, reminding his
audience that if they had a quarrel with cerain
political leaders this did not mean that they
were quarrelling with the literary figures of those
countries. H cited Goethe and Kant, Tolstoy and
Dosto Dostoevsky as examples. must learn."he
said."if it wishes to survive-and the only wav it can
survive is by surrendering part of its sovereignty and
serving a common world society."
If humanity desired to develop a world society, he
added, it must develop and educate people in world
citizenship and make them understand that that their
national loyalties must be subordinated to the patriot-
ism of the whole human race.
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, Minister of Education,
in his inaugural address, expressed the hope that the
Indian Commission would serve as the focus of the
nation's educational, scientific and cultural activity,
that it would help to enrich national life in those
fields and also make for better co-operatioa and
understanding with other countries.
OW", he went on."things have happened in
N the. world which have resulted in giving
an inevitable importance to Asia and that
importance is likely to be greater and greater.
"I know that there is a good deal of goodwill and
a desire to help, but what I want is a mental apprecia-
tion of the fact that Asia will be dominant in the
sense that certain problems dominate the world."
Behind the political aspect, Nehru continued. lay all
kinds of mass upsurges and there Unesco could do a
tremendous job.
"I am glad that Unesco is spreading out more and
more, spreading out not only to the countries of AsiaL---...
