A TRIBUTE
TO
FRÉDÊRIC"
CHOPIN
FREDERIC CHOPIN, the Polish composer whose workrepresents the acme of pianoforte composition, did : J
in Paris on 17 October 1849, in an apartment in the
Place Vendome. The first centenary of his death is being
commemorated this year throughout the world, but on a
particularly large scale in Potand. and in France, the country
where he lived and became famous.
Unesco could not let this centenary pass without paying
its own tribute, and since the beginning of the year projects
have been under preparation :
(i) the foundation of two scholarships in Paris for young
Polish composers.
(2) the publication of a complete catalogue of the
recordings of the works of Chopin,
(3) the organization of a concert consisting of compositions
specially written for the occasion by a number of prominent
living composers.
SCHOLARSHIP,
THIS project entaicls the financial co-operation of the
International Music Fund, of which Serge Koussevitsky,
the conductor of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, is
the Chairman. Thanks to ! t. two young composers from
Chopin's own country will come to Paris, as the master
himself came in 1831. to benefit from the wonderful environ-
ment the city still provides for artists from all four comers
of the earth.
So far as Chopin is concerned, there are few other
composers so many of whose works have been so
frequently recorded and played, for that purpose, by
so many different artists. Unesco has embarked on drawing
up as complete a catalogue as possible of theses recordings.
By the time this issue of the"Courier>&gt; goes to press, this
catalogue will have already appeared in the shape of a
240-page volume edited by M. Armand Panigel, with an
introduction and commentary by M. Marcel Beaufils.
A CONCERT
ON 3 October, two days before the closing of the
Fourth Genera/Conference of Unesco, there will be
a concert at the Salle Gaveau, consisting of the first
performance of"Homage to Chopin", a series of ten pieces
of chamber, vocal and instrumental music. These works have
been specially written for the occasion at Unesco's request,
in memory of Chopin, by the following composers :
Lennox Berkeley Bohuslav Martinu
Carlos Chavez Andrzej Panufnik
Oscar Esp) a Ftorent Schmitt
Jacques Ibert Alexandre Tansman
G.-F. Malipiero Heitor Villa-Lobos.
These masters of contemporary music, have expressed, in
music, their admiration for the great Polish composer. The
concert of 3 October is beIng arranged in association with
Radiodiffusion Francaise, any will be broadcast both in
France and abroad, the following artists taking part : the
pianists Hélène Pigna.-et and Arnaldo Estrella, the singer
lrène Joachim, the cellist Maurice Maréchal, the Ca ! vet
Quartet and the Marcel Couraud Choir.
FRÉDÉRIC CHOPIN
Pencil drawing by Lehmann
freedom off=
