The Role Of
Cheap Books
IN planning to use books to spreadinformation about Science we have to
think realistically, quantitatively, in de-
tail-
What sorts of people, and how many
of them, are reading books on science
now ? Does the price of a book in actual
fact stop some from reading it ?
What is our aim in spreading scientific
enlightenment ? A statement of our
ideals indicates for whom our cheap
books must be written, and what book-
lists we should develop as publishers.
. bY
J. L. CRAMMER
Editor of pengu'n Science News
Finally, why do books cost so much ?
The answer to this may help us to pro-
duce them more cheaply,
I am going to discuss these questions
in turn. using British experience.
The first group of questions is unfor-
tunately difficult to answer because very
little research has been done on reading
habits, and little is known about the
sort of people who buv books and why
they buy them. But something of the
situation can be gathered by collecting
a few statistics from publishers and
comparing their sales with the size of
the population (see Tab ! e I).
Fven from the few figures of this
table one or two conclusions are indicat-
ed. Firstly, price is not in itself a deter-
mining factor : the book with a record
sale is the most expensive of the three,
while the medium-priced one sold more
than a cheaper book by the same author
(Sir Arthur Eddington) until the latter
was published by Penguins. Most scion-
tific Penguin books sell editions of
50. 0M to 100. 000 copies, so it did well.

Secondly, it looks as though we are
doing we) ! if 1 in 500 of our population
buys a book. Is this good enough ?
Another way of trying to gauge pubEc
interest in Science is to study what
kinds of books are borrowed from free
Public Lending Libraries. Table 2 gives
a few figures for a city I happen to
know Quite well, one which is industrial,
with a University Cohere, a technical
school, and many ordinarv schools.
The issue of science books actually
includes a certain number of textbooks
borrowed by students for their academic
work. But, ilmoring this. we see that
under conditions where the books are
free. only 5, 6 0/0 of those taken for
reading are on science, and the number
of these could be accounted for entirely
if the educated groups separately listed
in the table drew five books each in the
year.
Or take it on a national scale. If a
Penguin book of a medical interest sells
50, 000 copies, how do we know that it
has not been entirely bought up by the
doctors of the country, just to see what
it is like ? If this is really what happens
the effectiveness of our popularization
leaves something to be desired.
So we come to the question who are
these popular books for, who are the
people we want to reach ? Insofar as a
TABLE 2
(all figures approximate)
T. tal population : 278, 000 (all al'es)
consisting of
Doctor ! ll.................................... ]30
Druggists 80
works chemists........................ 50
(traduate teachers..................... 350
Noun-graduate teachers............... 390
University, faculty and students... 500 1, 4M
Cent : ral ùndlng Library. total Issues of
non-friction 0946-47) : 121. 500 ; Issues of
science books only : 6, 800.
high standard of living may make for
peace and democracy, science can cer-
tainly brinj ? : this high standard of using.
To do so, in an undeveloped country,
more than a few scientists are needed.
The political leaders must be aware of
what science can dO for their country,
and there must also be a nucleus of
trained technicians to work the factory
processes and the new agriculture.
(continued on Page 8.)

The Role Of
Cheap Books
(Continued from p. 7)-
Popularization has. therefore, an im-
portant jOb to do in attracting recruits
for training as technicians and scientists.
A target we must always have in mind.
therefore, is the older boys and girls at
school, and the students in collpges and
universities.
The older the man the harder he is
to convert to a new idea. Our popular
books are therefore often better aimed
direct at the senior schoolboy, rather
than at the master who teaches him.
It is an interesting fact that many
popular scientific books are read by pro-
fessional scientists. The reason is that
modern science has become so vast and
specialized that an expert in one field
is often completely ignorant in twenty-
nine others, and quite unable to follow
developments in subjects which would
not only interest him but quite possibly
influence his own scientific work if he
: was aware of them.
Popularization has ft role of growing
importance to play here in preventing
the threatened fragmentation and col-
lapse of the scientific world through
extreme specialization. I know from
experience that a periodical such as
"Penguin Science News"serves this func-
tion. though it was not started with that
intention-in fact, when we began we
were ignorant of the need.
Soon we begin to see that the purposes
of popularization may be well served
without our reaching the major part of
the population. Because we refer casually
to"the people"of a country we must
not be footed into thinking of them as
all equal units of individuality.
Some are housewives, some are sailors.
or greengrocers, or schoolboys, or nurses.
or lawyers, or bankclerks, and each
group within the democratic community
has a different education, a differer. t
experience of life, different interests and
different influence in society. Some are
not interested in science and never will
be. or are even antagonistic to it because
it makes more fearful war weapons, or
is complicated and difficult to under-
stand, or upsets cherished beliefs.
But we do not need to worry unduly
over these antagonisms, which it will
take more than cheap books to alter in
any case. If we can reach the young
and the administrators and the scientists.
we shall be going a long way to achieve
our aims.
Finally, finance. Publishing as a
business is beset with difficulties. The
bookseller takes one-third (in some
countries, half) of the selling price of
a book for himself, whatever the size
of the selling price. In consequence, he
is not interested in selling cheap books
it he can sell expensive ones, and som
booksellers refuse to stock the cheap
ones altogether.
Of they money the publisher receives,
a great deal goes for printing and paper,
and the author gets very little, quite
possibly less than he would if his book
had appeared more expensively and sold
fewer copies. In periods of unstable pri-
ces and inflation the cheap book with
its de : icate costing and verv marrow
profit margins is likelv to turn into a
liability overnight, where a more expen-
sive volume can weather the financial
storm.
Then there are all kinds of interna-
tional difficulties : tariff barriers to the
importat : on of foreign-printed books in
some countries ; difficulties of exchange,
where dollars are scarce ; extravagantly
high local labour or printing costs. There
is work here for Unesco : to smooth out
some of the barriers.
