future society which,

wv

from all

“The odolescent—more thon man is ot any other age—it influenced by his environ-
ment. This environment.., is not merely the family, the school, the town or the fother-
lond. Whether we like it or not, the odolescent of today is thrown into the moelstrom

EDUCATORS MUST HELP TO ESTABLISH

"TECHNIQUES OF PEACE”

ringing adolescent life into touch with international society so that adolescents

in their turn might become part of world society was one of the vital tasks

of modern education cited by M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Director-General of
UNESCO, speaking at the annual seminar of French Directors of Secondary
Education, held at Sevres, near Paris, last month,

“It lies with teachers to initiote their pupils —not dogmotically but by procticol and
octive means —into the greot problems of civic life, so os to bring home to them the
dilemma of our time: — a world united or a world destroyed,” he 30id,

“The odolescent must be made to live a3 a citizen of the world, the forerunner of ©
ich, recognizing formally the fact of our interdependence, knows how
to find a peaceful issue for international differences, to the grectest happiness of monkind.

“A technique of peace is in the making”, soid M. Torres Bodet. * What con be more
stimulating then to see it born and grow up, ond to help to estoblish i”

“Peace is not @ coword's ideal”, he went on, “for it cells for more heroism thon
does wor. It con ottroct the young ond must inspire them to the greot adventure of
shoping the future, It might be oid of peace whot Alain soid of idess: They ore in
danger of losing their validity the moment we grow sotisfied with them.”

"The new conditions of life coll for new trectment —new teaching. It is cleog thet
the internationol world in which young people now find themselves, demands o new type

of civic educotion on @ world scole.

“Civics to-doy,” said M. Torres Bodet, “must transcend notional boundaries, show
the pupil that his very life depends upon the lives of other peoples, that his responsibility
extends beyond the frontiers of his own country ond thot he is @ member no longer of
one country only, but of 0 world community.”

A FEW HINTS
. ~~ FROM UNESCO

n France, under the far-sighted guidance of its Director-General, secon
dary education was beginning to benefit by the introduction of the active
method, which must be carefully adapted to different requirements. In regard to
international civics, however, it might seem difficult to apply the active method.

“Here,” said M. Torres Bodet, “UNESCO is in o position to offer you © few proc-
published

or enquiry.

“As for os circumstances permit, visits could be poid to the headquarters of o porti-
cular organization, to on Internotionol Conference or to on exhibition, such os the one
we have orgonized ot the Musee Golliera on the
be taken to concerts or exhibitions of doncing

“I might odd,” said M. Torres Bodet, “thot UNESCO hos published use 0
series of pamphlets entitled « Towords World Understondings. fof your
ony suggestions or experiments of yours known cutside France,” he odded.
