A DUAL DUTY FOR UNE ;
!
We publish below the full text
of Dr. Julian Huxley's final address
as Director-General of Unesco, to
the Third Session oj the General
Conference in Berut, delivered on.
December 10, 1948 :
I CANNOT help feeling some
regrets at leaving an infant
whose dev lopm nt I have
heiped to foster and to guide, just
when it is becoming really interest-
ing. I cannot claim, like some of
those here present who took part in
the discussions of. the Committee
of Allied Ministers in exile during
the late war, to have known
Unesco from the time when it was,
if I may say, no more than"a gleam
in its father's eye" or, if I may
adopt a paraphrase, no more than
a reaction against the glare of the
bombs falling on London ; but I
have now been serving the Organiz-
ation for nearly three years, and
some regrets are, as I say, inevit-
able.
However, any regrets that I feel
are much tempered by the know-
ledge that I am handing over my
office to a man of the calibre of
H. E. Señor Torres Bodet. You all
know his distinguished record ; as
what I may call an international
statesman ; as Minister of Forign
Affairs of his country ; as Minist ? r
of Education, in which function e
rendered notable services to the
cause of education, not only in his
own country but in the whole
world ; as poet ; as writer.
But I would like here to pay my
personal tribute to him. I have had
the good fortune to have had deal-
ings. with him on three several oc-
casions : in 1946, when I visited a
few Latin-American countries on
behalf of the Preparatory Commis-
sions, in the early summer of 1947,
when I was helping to urepare for
the Conference in Mexico City, and
again during the Conference itself ;
and can testify to his deep personal
interest in education in its broad-
est sense, including matters such as
the necessity of educating all the
peoples in regard to the conserva-
tion of natural resources, a question
too often neglected by educators I
can testify to his broad culture, his
intellectual energy, his deep sincer-
ity ; and thus in passing over the
reins of office, I am happy to be
doing so to a man whom I not only
respect, and admire but one whom
I am happy to be able to call my
friend.
HUXLEY'S PAP
A Call To
For Self'
I would like to take this opport-
unity of making a few observations
here which, while retrospective
from my point of view, may per-
haps have some prospective value
for my successor.
First of all, I think I am expressing
not only my own opinion, but that
of the great majority of delegates at
this Conference, and indeed that of
the Organization as a whole, that
the progress made by Unesco in the
first two years of its life has been
not merely encouraging but remark-
able ; and that it has been equally
remarkable to note the degree of
agreement-indeed of cordial
agreement-attained in the dis-
cussions and operations of Unesco as
compared with that attained in
some other Organizations and Ag-
encies of the United Nations.
While this happy result is due
largely to the interest and energy
of our Member Governments, of
their delegations and National
Commissions, of the international
non-governmental organizations
which aid us in our work, of the
general public, and of the Secret-
ariat, it is, I am sure, also proof
of the fact that Unesco fills a vital
need in the present circumstances
of our planet, the fact that the
world has become ripe for the em-
ergence of an international organ-
ization dealing with the things of
the mind and spirit.
Individuals and governments who
disagree elsewhere and on other
matters find that they can agree
here on the practical projects includ-
ed in Unesco's programme. They
find that they can agree upon a
common aim, in trying to make a
more civilized world : a world which
can become more civilized as it be-
comes more unified, but also can
become more unified as it becomes
more oivilized. There is no common
ideology involved in this, but a
common practical idea ; and find-
ing that all can agree on such a.
practical idea and participate In
such a common aim is undoubtedly
proving a source of inspiration.
We Must Reduce
Psychological Distances
Between Peoples and
Nations
I WOULD like to reiterate herewhat I said on other occas-
ions, namely that no peace will be
permanent unless it is based on
co-operation in scientific and cult-
ural affairs. To achieve this may
be a long and not always spectacul-
ar job, but it is none the less a ne-
cessary one. As was well said during
discussions at this Conference, to
have reduced the physical distances
between countries is of no avail,
unless at the same time we reduce
psychological distances between
peoples and nations. In fact, in the

1 ; what Is needec !, above everythlnr
note friendship between the peoples
f feeling and thought. In this respect,
roved inadequate. In the nineteenth
'inking that peace and concord would
s could unite in. demonstrating the
t task not only in science but also in
actual progress and the development
tarnations. We therefore affirmed in
>n that peace"must be founded upon
; y of mankind".
'Y is, in appearance, the ea"ier to
Lsists of a body of objective evidence
whose validity all must admit. The
,. means of disseminating scientific
rbis depends on educational policy,
m, and the taking of other similar
e other hand, bristles with difficulties,
by the number of different existing
looking at the world and at life.
all men, in every part of the world,
inciples of their conduct. This would
! y a degree of uniformity not even
1 philosophy of Unesco, it was surely
mgh to agree on a certain number of
ism, the renouncing of violence, un-
. nded on justice, as opposed to war
conviction thai man is not a means
L sexual, racial, linpistk, social or, universal standards.
VING TOWARDS
[UMANISM"
an overriding necessity today, is not
economic fields ; it applies all much
the mind. In every pact of the worM,
awards a new humanism. This means
lifted, the idea of man and of eulture
to us.
e. clearly that humanism, which was
'Beet, no longec commands universal
ded, as can be seen, in solving the
vilization. The intellect has exercised
of technology, in the subjection of
nature to man, but has proved incapable of firing the train of virtue
and harmony.
AFTER centuries of nationalism, disilIusionmer. t witb rationalism baaeaused many to fat ! a prey to the irrationalism of dictatorship. What,
therefore, has to be done is,"ithout sacrifidnr the intellect, to eombine it
harmoniously with other human virtues, which we may learn from cultures

CO AND ITS MEMBERS
TING WORDS-
All Nations-. .
'-inquiry
long run, peace depends on Unesco.
Here I would go further than. ; tome who assert that Unesco IS not
merely devoted to the cause of
peace, but itself depends on the
maintenance of peace ; on the
contrary, I b : tieve that if-which
God forbid-a new war should
, wreak out, Unesco would still con-
, tinue to exist (as did the ILO dur-
ing the First World War) and be
ready to begin its fruitful work
again immediately afterwards.
Twelve Probing Questions
This brings me to my second
main point. It has often-and
rightly been said that Unesco can
only operate efficiently WIth t..'1e
active co-operation of Member
States-through their governments.
their National Commissions, t. heir
specialists and experts in the fields
ßf education, science and culture,and the general mass of their
peoples.
In relinquishing my office, I
would like to thank all Member
States for all that they have done
to make it possible for us on the
Secretariat to get on with the exe-
cution of Unesco's programme. But
[ would also like to ask them to do
something more, namely to exa-
mine critically and dispassionately
what they themselves are doing In
! education, science and culture,
igainst the yardstick of the aims
md purposes laid down in onr
onstitution, and the directives sit
Iorth in our programme, and't ! so
LS measure against the achieve-
nents of other nations.
I will give a few examples of
rhat I mean :
. ARE YOU EXAMINING
; CIENTIFlCALLY YOUR PROßL-
; my OF GOVERNMENT AND OF
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC OR-
GANIZATION, with the aid of ad-
vice from the best social scientists
and economists, and in a QJspass-
ionate spirit of science ; or are you
treating them ad hoc on an essen-
tially political basis, and in the light
of emotional or material interests ?
Are you profiting by the exper en-'e
of other countries in the field of
administration, by studying their
methods and sending your young
men to be trained abroad ?
ARE YOU ALLOWING THAT
FULL FREEDOM OF PRESS AND
OPINION, OF EXPRESSION, RE-
SEARCH AND TEACHING, which
is laid down in our Constitution ?
. Are you profiting by the expe-
rience of the various countries which
have been attempting, in such fields
as radio or film to combine freedom
in presenting different pOInts of
vi : w with some reasonable degree of
control ?
. ARE YOU ATTEMPTING TO
USE NATURAL SCIENCE TO THE
FULL-whether in education to
give to your citizens a proper under-
standing of the method and the act-
ual and potential achievements of
science, or in practice, in the act-
ual solution of concrete problems ?
I may mention that my own
country has recently made a survey
of the number of trained scientists
it requires and has decided that it
must attempt to double the output
of scientific graduates in the next
twenty-five-years.
ARE YOU TAKING STEPS
TO PRESERVE THE POPULAR
TRADITIONS OF YOUR COUN-
TRY in ballads and songs, in cos-
tume, in art and craftmanship, and
to adapt them to the changed con-
ditions of modem lire. so that these
rich sources of cultural achieve-
ment, in all their diversity, shall not
perish from the face of th earth ?
HAVE YOU TAKEN ADE-
QUATE STEPS TOWARDS THE
CONSERVATION OF NATURE IN
YOUR COUNTRY-whether for
economic, or social, or aesthetic
reasons, a question one asks oms-
elf with added force in this region
where mountain sides which we
know in biblical times were covered
with forests are now largely bare
where great regions of once fertile
land which helped to nourish Rome
are now barren or even desert, nd
where birds and beasts have de-
creased to such an alarming extent.
. WHAT HAVE YOU DONE TO
PRESERVE AND MAKE KNOWN
YOUR CULTURAL HERITAGE ?
Have you taken steps to preserve
your h : storieal and ancient monum-
ents, to unearth further remains of
your past history, to exhibit its
treasures and mal[ them known
to the world at large-another ques-
tion one asks here, in this region of
ancient history and incomparable
cultural diversity, still too litt ! 
known by the peoples of other
lands.
. HAVE YOU TAKEN STEPS
TO REMOVE THE SCOURGE OF
ILLITERACY FROM YOUR
PEOPLE ; and have you profited to
the fullest extent by the experience
of other nations in this important
field ?
SPEARS AND SHIELDS OF SOVEREIGNTY
r VERY often, WOI'ds have little relation to the true i : nplications of
ideas. A disastrous gulf has opened between slJeech and action. In
the presence of this danger, Unesco must build up a rampart of
truth against the eloquence of officialdom, will too ready to make promise
but tardy in keeping them.
The difficulty in this, as in so many other matters, is due t, he
atmosphere of transition m which we aore now living. Undivided sov-
ereignty of the State is today a legal survival which there is no eluding.
The strong brandish it like a spear ; the weak shelter behind it as behind
a shield. So internationalism is as yet merely a noble hope for'he future.
To expect Unesco, by its mere existence, to change the innermost nature
of men, is to expect a miracle which Unescc can never perform. We do
not possess a magician's skill, but we have our principles. For the ful-
filment of our mission to advance the welfare of man, a path has been
marked out for us which we cannot ignore. To follow this path, we must
have the consent of governments.
The National Commissions, it is truce, make up for certam constitutional
restrictions upon our Organization, but have we made sure that in all
countries the National Commissions are able to operate on the scale which
the problems of our times require ?
This is a very delicate task. Unesco has no fight to interfere in the
domestic affairs of governments. We have neither the power nor the wish
to transform the Organization into a world Ministry of Education. Nor do
we want to burden the impoverished countries still further with unjusti-
fiable bureaucratic machinery. :. ;. ;. ;....
YOUR., work must be based, above all. on two factors for which nosubstitute has so far been found : the good faith of governments and
the persuasive force of principles. We shall continue to demand these
essential conditions, for, without them, it would be wiser to postpone our
hopes to better days.
Fortunately, that is not necessary We do not view the future with
pessimism. Much has been accomplIshed by Unescn since the London
Conference. It is only fair to recognize that all the members of the
Executive Board, as well as the whole staff of the Secretariat, have
contributed in a market degree to these successes ; ? nd I will ask them
to collaborate with me in the same spirit in which they worked with mY
distinguished predecessor, Dr. Huxley
In naming that eminent representative of contemporary learning, I
realize how much Unesco has lost by his departure. For us, the memory
of Dr. Huxley's gifts and authority will be imperishable. Unesco owes him
the highest possible tribute.
The applause which follows him as he goes brings home to me the
tremendous effort I shall be called upon to make. And, in the accomplish-
ment of that effort, I shall need your constant goodwill and support.
i
THE MINES OF INTOLERANCE
r ENTLEMEN, during the summer of 1947, we read of an event which
'7 filled our hearts with dismay. I refer to an accident that occurred
off the coast of Italy. Some fifty children, on holiday, were taking
a sea trip, when their boat struck a mine laid during the war. All the
unhappy victims were kIlled by the explosion.
This posthumous act of vengeance by the war may serve us as a
symbol. Conflicts never cease at a given time or in a given place. Those
responsible for them leave concealed in the waters, theoretically restored
to peaceful traffic, many deadly mines. The most dangerous of them all
is intolerance.
To perpetuate intolerance would be to allow our way to be strewn with
a mechanism as fearful as that which caused the death of those Italian
children on that bright summer's day. But, in our case, should we forget
our duty, we should be risking the final destruction of the basic principles
of human civilization, the abandonment of all hope in a new world. To
remove the lurking mines of enmity and discord is surely the duty of all
men of gooclwilI.
Let us shoulder'thM dutI, centlemen, aod thus fulfil Unesco's aollle
mission.
other than our own. Classical humanism was at one time restricted toe the
Mediterranean region. Modern humanism must know no limit or frontiers.
It is Unesco's supreme task to help to bring this new type of humanism
to birth.
lr HE SpeciaJized Agencies 01 the United Nations for education, eco-nomics and health respectively, form a tr : ple front in the battle
against the greatest enemies of human progress-ignorance, hunger and
disease. I have already had occasion elsewhere to emphasize the value
f these Agencies.1 then said that for the purpose of consolidating peace there had been
no hapPIer idea than the founding of the Specialized Agencies as an
integral part of the structure of the United Nations. If 1 return to the
theme today, it is because the good wcak of these Agencies cannot be
sufficiently emphasized ; that work is often forgotten in the concentration
of most men's interest on political problems.
ßy connecting culture with health and economics, I want to stress thehumanitarian and, in the broadest sense of the term, democratic
character of Unesco. We must never forget that the intellectual and
moral solidarity at which we aim will be but a beadtiful dream so long
as men lack health and sustenance. Nor must we lose sight of the fact
that, just as Unesco sister organizat : ons are concerned with man's
essential needs. Unesco too must work for the good of the greatest number.
If leading scientists and educationist are to pool their efforts
within Unesco, the object of this is not to form a centre of
intellectual co-operation for the benefit of a select minority, but
to improve the moral and intellectual conditions of the great malNl
ef the people.
, .
"LET US KEEP TO ESSENTIALS"
...'"ANY difficulties lie in Unesco's way, one of which is particularly
 dangerous : the multitude of projects and programmes which have
so far not commanded popular acceptance. We must make a
choIce and try to set to work without undue hesitation. The peoples
expect of Unesco concrete work. which shall make a direct and immediate
appeal to the wishes of mankind in general.
SINCE we know the limits of our resources, let us not be diverted
to too many projects, and so dissipate our energies and resources. Let US
keep to essentials and, if need be, reduc' the area of our activities so as
to be able to pursue them thoroughly and to a finish.
. THE SECOND difficulty is the idea, to my mind false, that Unesco
has become an instrument of propaganda for one way of thinking and
in favour of one system of cultural policy. I do not think I need spend
much time over such a completely wrong and tendentiou. s view as this.
There is and always will be room among as for all schools 01 thought,
as long as they contribute loyally to international understanding and 18
friendly association between culture, in an atmosphere øf peace. Chinese
and Peruvians, Arabs and Frenchmen, Australians and Turks, Czechs and
Poles. Anglo-Saxons from Great Britain and from the United States,
negroes from Liberia or Indians from Mexico or Bolivia-all make their
own distinctive contribution.
We are persuaded that only by respecting the individuality"
each country and by hearkening to its characteristic accent shall
we attain to that full co-ordination which is essential to any concert,
be it of instruments, wills, races or doctrines.
Our one wish is to set a faic and just goal to private ambitions, namely,
service to man as man. Unesco does not claim to impose peace on a world
permanently based on victors and vanquished. Born of the war, its mission
is to fight against war. And it is precisely the slender nature of the means
available to us in this fight that brings me to the third difficulty.

HUXLE. Y'S PARTING WORDS
A Call To All Nations
For Self-Inquiry
(Continued from Page S)
And so I might continue with
questions in respect of the various
fields of Unesco's work. However,
I will merely ask one final but over-
riding question.
HAVE YOU LOOKED AT
YOUR PROBLEMS FROM A
UNESCO ANGL&-that is to say
not merely as national problf'm
but as part of a single world prob-
lem, where the several nations must
learn to make adjustments in the
interest of the whole body of na-
tions ? I think of such problems as
over-population, facilities for study

abroad, the utilization and conser
vation of-natural resources, the malt
ing available to the world the tr<, as
ures of national art and history, the
removal of those sources of social
discontent which are too often the
seeds of war, and so forth.
In this regard as well as in meas-
uring your own achievements a-
gainst those of other nations,
Unesco's Secretariat, through their
clearing house functions, can be of
real service.
It has been my privilege to assist,
with your aid and that of my ecr-
etariat, in the first phase of
Unesco's development, when the
broad outlines of its structure andits mode of working have become
established, and it has been able io
embark on a number of valuable
and practical projects. I venture to
suggest that an essential further
step in its growth will be for it to
develop, in addition, the maturer
functions of reflection and self-
criticism, and that these can be r·c-
ercised through the process of crit-
ical but constructive stock-taking
which I have just outlined.
World Citizens
of the Human Mind
Above. Esplanade of the Flags, Main Street of Unesco site in
Beirut. Buildings will be used to house future Lebanon University.
I am very glad that this Confer-
ence has agreed on one step in this
direction ; that at our next Confr-
ence in Paris there should be dis-
cussion of one or two themes of gen-
eral importance, and that we should
call on distinguished public figures
in their individual capacity, to take
part in these discuSSl (). I,/. : >.
However, I believe that we should
go further, and deliberately adopt
The poilcy of relying wherever pos-
sible on these citizens of the One
World of the human mind, and
helping them to find their plae
in some form of organization which
would make it possible for them to
render help more efficiently to
Unesco and to the cause in which
it and they believe.
I have every confidence that
Senor Torres Bodet will enjoy the
fullest success in directing the
further development of our youths it
but vigorous organization, and in
that confidence, I welcome him.
here, on your behalf, as well as my'
own, as the man on whom will fail, 
immediately after the close of t, hit.
Conference, the responsibilities ·t--
the Director-Generalship.-'
Another forward step which, in
my belief, it is essential that Unesco
should soon take, is that it should
adopt the policy of calling upon
distinguished men and women in
their individual capacity to assist
in its task. As I suggested in my
report, there are limitations to
what delegates at our Conferences
can say or do-limitations imposed
by the very fact that they are offic-
ial representatives of Governments.
But there do exist writers and
scientists, artists and philosophers,
who bar2 by virtue of their indi-
vidual genius become truly citizons
of the world, who are in advance of
individual Governments and of the
common manin their thinking.
We need to call on them to give us
il lead in our thinking, to give us a
bold clarification of our general
aims and of th : paths we should
pursue in realizin2'them.
