View of main Conference HaU of the"Palais de t'Unesco"in BeinI&
Director-General
WHEN the President of the Beirut Conference, M. Hamid Bey Frangie, Lebanese Minister of Educa-
tion and Foreign Affairs, rapped the gavel 00 the evening of December 11. 19M, he entrusted
Unesco to another Foreign Minister and Minister of Education, Dr. Jaime Torres Bodet of Mexico.
The new Director-General, who was elected by the delegates to the Third Session of Unesco's
Genera ! Conference on November 26, succeded Dr. Julian Huxley whose term of office as first head
of the Organization had ended. The Conference also elected seven new members of the Executive Board,
which, in turn, voted Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (India) its Chairman, and Dr. C. Parra-Perea
(Venezuela) and M. Roger Seydoux (France) Vice-Chairmen for 1949.
Immediately following the election of the new Director-General, M. Frangie cabled to Dr. Torres
Bodet in Mexico, on behalf of the Conference, invit ing him to come to Beirut, to participate in the
closing days of the Session.
On December 10, the newly-
elected Director-General made his
appearance before the delegates
to the Third Session. In his in-
augural address he assured his
listeners"that I shall dedicate
myself unreservedly to Unesco's
service"and stressed that Unes-
co's most urgent duty was to
defend the moral and intellectual
rights of man. (The full text of
Dr. Torres Bodet's address will be
found on the centre page of this
issue).
For three and one half weeks,
from November 17 to December
11, the Third Session worked
methodically in elaborating the
new programme during morning,
afternoon and often evening
meetings of Plenary Session.
Commission and Sub-Commis-
sions. In a similar fashion, ques-
tions concerning Unesco's budget,
administration and external rela-
tion were the subject of careful,
detailed examination and study.
At the end of their delibera-
tions, the delegates agreed not
only on specific, practical activ-
ities for the year 1949, but on a
broad educational programme for
the years to come, which would
assure centi : laity in Unesco's work
and facilitate greater understand-
ing and participation by the gen-
eral public. (For details of Unes-
co's new programme please see
special SUPPLEMENT).
THE General Conferences openedwith an impressive flourish.
As delegates poured into the Con-
ference Hall, cameras clicked and
movie men filmed the proceedings.
Inside Klieg lights occasionnally
intensified the lighting for the ca-
meramen.
Dr. Francisco del Rio y Canedo.
Mexican Ambassador to Paris and
chairman of the Mexican delega-
tion delivered the opening speech
as temporary President Of the
Conference. He was followed by
M. Hamid Bey Frangie. who was
later that day to be elected Presi-
dent of the Third Session.
(Continued on Page 8)

"Unesco Month"in Beirut
Attracts Thousands of Visitors
(Continued from Page 1)
H. E. Sheik Bechara EI-Khoury,
President of the Lebanese Re-
public, then began his stately
address in French with a quota-
tion from a Lat : n poet ;"I am
a man ; nothing human is alien
to me."He welcomed the Confer-
ence to"this soil of ancient,
civilizations, this... crossroads of
Eastern and Western cultures."
Towards the close of his speech,
he touched upon the"intellectual
spiritual and human efforts which
may one day clash with the law
of force, that ultima ratio regum
of old, with the unleashed forces of
atomic e : lery." But he assured
his audience that"the stakes are
worth the effort and that the risk
deserves to be run since these
stakes are world peace."
Among the many eminent per-
sonalities who attended the Gen-
eral Conference-were Mr. D. R.
Hardma : 1, Permanent Parliamen-
tary Under-Secretary to the Brit-
13h Ministry of Education : Mr.
George V. Alien. U. S. Assistant
Secretary of State for Public
Affairs ; M. Georges Bidault.
former Prime Minister of France :
M. Camille Huysmans, Belgian
Minister of Education ; M. Paul
Rivet. Director of the French
a co-ordinated programme of
mutual aid for the coming :
months."This", Dr. Eisenhower
remarked,"is an important even
in current history."
1950 Conference in Italy
The General Conference voted
to change the time of year of its
annual meetings, beginning with
the 1950 Assembly which will be
convened in Italy, following an
invitation extended bv the Italian
Government. This has been done
to comply, with a United Nations
recommendation that all SpecIal-
ized Agencies hold their an : dual
conferences in the first half of
the year.
Because of this change, the
1949 Conference will be held at
Headquarters in Paris, during the
autumn, and will devote itself to
a more limited number of con-
siderations.
Unesco Month
As has been the case in previous
Conferences one of the more col-
ourful highlights of the Beirut
Conference was the organization of
a special"Unesco Month"pro-
gramme by the Lebaaese Govern-
ment and particularly Monsei-
gneur Jean Maroun, his country's
delegate to the Unesco Assembly.
Over 22, 000 people attented the Plenary Sessions of Unesco's General
Conference in Beirut. Above, a large audience in Main Conference Hall.
Musée de 1'Homme ; M. Nadj : b
UUah Khan, Afghaaistan Min-
ister of Education, and Mrs. Anne
O'Hare McCormick, world-famous
journalist.
Toward the close of the Third
Session, the General Conference
paid its tribute to another dis-
tinguished personality : its first
Director-General. A resolution.
passed unanimously,"pays tribute
to the striking contribution which
Dr. Huxley has made to the de-
velopment of Unesco since the
days of the Preparatory Commis-
sion and during the first two
3'ears of its existence."
"If Unesco is today established
on firm foundation", the resolu-
tion continues,"and is beginning
its concrete achievements in alas-
wer to the hope which men of
goodwill have placed in it. this
is mainly due to the indefatigable
work of the pioneer who was its
first Director-General"
Prior to the opening of the
General Conference, members of
32 National Commissions gathered
in Beirut"not as official spokes-
men for our governments", as Dr.
Milton S. Eisenhower. President
of the meetings, pot : ted out."but
as representatives of the educa-
tional, scientific and cultural for-
ces of our countries."
This was the first time that a
meeting of this kind had ever
taken place. It afforded a unique
opportunity for pooling ideas con-
eraing the development of Na-
tional Commissions, and permitted
the representatives to formulate
This year"Unesco Month"was
principally devoted to the theme
of Arab culture. It included. a
series of lectures on the cO : ltribu-
tions of Arab science, literature
and art, to world civilization, ex-
hibitions on the History of the
Lebanon, on Lebanese and Middle
Eastern artists, a : led educational
exhibits devoted to books, science
and various aspects of education
in the Arab countries. By this
means, delegates and visitors were
afforded an unusual opportunity
to study and appreciate the rich
cultural heritage of the Arab
countries.'
That the Lebanese Government
succeeded in arousing the interest
of the public in the work of
Unesco and in"Unesco Month'
was shown by the fact that more
than 20, 000 people attended the
specially organized lectures given
by delegates and other person-
alities, ZJ, Ooo persons attended
Unesco's Plenary Sessions alone.
and over 70, 000 people visited the
exhibitions
To thank the people of the Le-
banon for the hospitality, co-
operation and interest they had
shown in the work of Unesco, the
General Conference, at its last
meeting on December 11, voted 1\
resolution establishing t h r e e
fellowships, to be known as
"Unesco Conference Fellowships".
These are to be awarded to qual-
ified citizens of the Lebanon to
study abroad for six months in
subjects related to Unesco's pro-
gramme.
