In the « Deep South a an old « mammy » waves a handful
01 cotton which for so many years was the material symbol
01 her people's servitude. In abolishing slavery, the world
was to learn how to ensure the triumph of human rights :
by lulliling a duty that was both national and international.
THE RIGI :
Black slavery continued to flourish until almost the close of the 19th century. For years courageous men fought against this
vicious exploitation of man by man which had begun in the lEth century. An enlightened public opinion finally resulted in inter-
national conventions putting a stop to this inhuman tragic (shown above) followed by total emancipation in one country after another.
HOMO HOMINI LUPUS.-Thus Plautus expressed his idea that man is a wolf to his fellow men. Seventeen
centuries later. Hobbes voiced the same idea : in our times, it even became the principle of a criminal state
policy, for which a new word « {genocide)) had to be coined. Does this mean that « the more it changes the
more it's the same thing ?)) And yet we have advanced far along the road since the « code)) of King Ham-
mourabi, of Babylon, who coldly condemned to death the son of the architect when a house collapsed
and killed the landlord's son... since the disillusioned statement of Plautus... since the revolt caused by the
quartering of Robert-Francois Damiens (engraving upper left) for having struck King Louis XV with a pocket
knife. It is this increasing struggle of the human conscience which will one day testify that « no one shall
be subjected to torture, or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment)).
Mars. Eleanor Roosevelt, Chairman of the
United Nations Human Rights Com-
missions, following the adoption of the
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, declared :
"A great satisfaction should permeate the
thoughts of all men, for the great documents
declaring man's inherent rights and freedo : ns
which in the past have been written nationally,
are now merged in an international universal
declaration."
To the right, some of the national Documents of
Freedom which have marked the fight for human
rights during the past thousand years.
We must never forget recent scenes such
as these if we wish the Declaration of Human
Rights to be anything but an expression of
good intentions which could again pave the
way. to the hells of concentration camps.

FIGHTERS
for
FREEDOM
Six Leadèrs A. Tnollg the
Countless Thousands
lL'ho have det'oted their
Lives to the Cause of
é. :
, 3
GROAT BRITAIN
MAGNA CART A (1215),
ONE of the outstanding European landmarks inthe constant struggle for individual liberty,
the Great Charter has been a source of inspiration
10 many who, in lale.-years, dedicated themselves
: 0 the cause of freedom. It defined the condi-
<- ; !'OM unr ! f.'/ ! : c/t tax'M ! / : t 6e/f ! ,/or&eï' : ions under which taxes might be levied, forbade
illegal imprisolllnent or seizure of property.
-"".",'J :., ;,'.
MAGNUS
LAGABOTERS LANDSLOV (1275)
F RO. ; W early times, every free man could speakat the lawmaking councils of Norway and
before the law all men were equal. The Landlov
was a re-codification by King Magnus the
Law-Mender of earlier provincial codes and
defines the powers of government and the sanc-
tity of man's person. It expressly forbids trial
m ! !/ ! OMf M procM ! o//a ! U aM MrM/ ! 0rtywithout due process of law and assures liberty
of the [-ress and of trade.
(NEMINEM CAPTIV ABIMUS ACTI
(1430)
THIS charter which may be compared withthe British Habeas Corpus Tact, expressly
forbids the imprisonment of any individual
without fair trial and thell only in accordance with
oro !  !/ !  tmprt ! OMMMf o/an_y : ? !  ! t) : Ma/
<f/ ! OMf/a !'  : r ! o/ aM r/ ! H o /y t'M accordaMM ! f !'t/ !
the laws of the land.
THE DECLARATION
OF INDEPENDENCE (1776) \
LARG EL Y the composition of Thomas Jef-
ferson, the Declaration set forth in powerful
prose the rational 18th century concept of the
"natural rights"of míw. As its author pointed
out, it was not intended to express any boldly novel
thought but rather to crystallize the prevailing
sentiment of the time. Its eloquence and force
produced a profound impression on {eoples of other
nations.
mmD
DECLARATION OF THE RIGHTS
OF MAN (1789)
DURING the first summer of the French Re-
volution, Frenchmen produced this state-
ment of t he liberties to which an Ùldivid
entitled. It maintains that men are born free
t1/id equal, proc ! aÙlls free-don ; G : f speech, se. : urity
and defense àgainst uppression,. it maintains that
laws are the expression of the general will of the
people, that no individual can exercise authority
over his fellow men unless elected by the people
and defines liberty as power to do anything that
does not injure others. This document was one
of the chief sources of inspiration 10 people in
other lands also srruggling to achie'L'e freedom.
EQUALITY OF THE SEXES-After a long
i. struggle, women in many parts of the world
have won equality with men. Today, women are
distinguishing thèmselves in business prafes-
sions, the arts, the sciences, medicine and
public hairs. Research workers, doctors, am-
bassadors or musicians, women are henceforth
on am equal footing with men... : 7. Times
"hote.',. j
INFERIOR BEING....,
Slave or goddess, treated-
either as a simple child or as an animal,
women for centuries have sought to win recognition
of their own human worth and dignity. The law
established the inequality of the sexes-and man
remained the master. <&lt; Thy banjo. nall feel the
measure of my blows 9 says the French text of
the engraving reproduced above.
HTS OF MAN
THROUGH THE AGES
