Professor Jean
PIAGET
(Switzerland)
I contend that international education, mass
Education, the education of youth, is a task
hat Unesco must emb rk on and must be
able to demand of States, and is no more than a
Copernican revolution in intellectual and moral
attitudes in every field of spiritual life. And that
is why the problem of international education
which I was asked to speak of tonight is such adifficult one, infinitely more SO than is generally supposed. This
education entails a total change in the instinctive attitude of the mind,
a complete reversal of instinctive egocentricity and socio-centricity in
the direction of reciprocity.
00'zit is quite hopeless to depend on specialized education for the
building up of world-mindedness if the other branches of education do
not inculcate a sense of the solidarity and interdependence of peoples.
I am thinking of history lessons. Provided history is not regarded
simply as the story of kings and of battles, but, as is generally accepted
today, a history of civilizations, their coincidence or lack of coincidence
in time and their interdependence-then nothing can be of greater
help to the development of an international sense. The teaching of
geography seems particularly designed to rid us of the egocentric
illusions I have mentioned. The teaching of languages and of litera-
ture can help us to read the soul of foreign nations. In the teaching
of science, the close interdependence of research and discoveries, and
their striking international character, proceeding simultaneously in.
different countries, with repercussions from one country to another,
and also the interdependence of techniques-these are all fields that
illustrate this solidarity.
... Our generation has known only gropings and setbacks in inter-
national life and that is not a stimulating example for the generations
to come. International teaching and the introduction to international
life must therefore be based on careful study of the complexities of
the problem.
