UNESCO COURIER
ORGANIZATION OF WORK
OF THE GENERAL CONFERENCE
ttt HE Executive Board has allotted two days fordiscussion of the Director-General's report by the
General Conference. A limit of fifteen minutes
is recommended for speeches on the report. This
would allow about forty speakers to take part in the
discussion.
The remaining work of the Fourth Session may be
sub-divided as follows :
PLENARY MEETINGS : These should be concerned
with the organization of the Conference, with the
adoption of decisions regarding Unesco's general
policy (particularly in the discussion of the Director-
General's report and the reports of Member States, and
in the discussion of a general theme) and with the
decisions based on the work of Commissions and the
recommendations of the Executive Board. Provision
has been made for 16 plenary meetings.
COMMISSIONS AND SUB-COMMISSIONS : The
Board has recommended the establishment of three
main commissions on which all member states should
be repre ted : Programme and Budget Commission
(with 1 eduled meetings). Administrative Commis-
sion (wi eight meetings), and Official and External
Relations ommission (with seven meetings).
ion. flour commissions are provided for,
which establish the various bodies of the Con-
will organize. control and coordinate their
lials Committee. Nominations Committee.
mitten. and General Committee.
THE fourth session of Unesco's GeneralConference opens at the Organiza-
tion's headquarters in Paris on Sep-
tember 9th and is scheduled to last until
October 5 the
The Conference, which is the supreme
ruling body of Unesco, will, thi$ year, chiefly
be concerned with the administrative aspects
of the programme rather than with the formu-
lation of new ideas and fresh projects. A
number of new schemes will, however, be
presented to the delegates. The decision to
give the meeting this character was taken at
last year's session in Beirut, Lebanon, when the
delegates approved a long-term work plan for
the organization, which wi'll not require re-exa-
mination o. ditions every year.
It is expected that some three hundred de-
legates will attend the Conference for which
Ínvitations have been sent to the 48 member
states of Unesco, to the members of the United
Nations and of the Specialized Agencies which
are not members of Unesco as well as to the
U. N., the Specialized Agencies, international
and national organizations.
Among the main questions on the agenda
are an Extraordinary Programme and Budget
Estimates for technical assistance to under-
developed countries, a draft code of policies
and modifications to Unesco's ordinary pro-
gramme, and a public discussion on the cultu-
ral duties of the State.
The Conference will also discuss the
Director-General's on Unesco's activi-,, 1949 and the Budget for the next
cial year as well as electing six new mem-
bers to the Executive Board.
Technical A. id Programme
UNESCO'S plan for an extended program-me of technical assistance to under-
developed areas is outlined in a special
report by the Director General. In it he says
that the object of Unesco in entering into the
United Nations plan will be to furnish to eco-
nomically under-developed countries, terri-
tories or areas, at their request, such advice,
technical skull, training facilities, study groups.
pilot projects and other help, as may fall
within Unesco's sphere.
The plan of the Secretary General of the
United Nations, says the report, is one for
Technical Assistance for Economic Develop-
ment. Economic development is, therefore,
the end. and technical assistance the means.
The proposals laid by Unesco before the
Conference are only concerned with these
means. Such assistance, at the present time and
in the light of the relevant resolutions, does
not imply direct financial assistance. The
scheme envisages financing by means of volun-
tary contributions by donor Governments.
(For more details see page 3.)
Cede of foHcies and Budget
They define the chief aims and general policy
to be followed in planning and implementing
the programme of the Organization.
In addition, certain amendments to the
ordinary programme will be submitted to the
Conference for approval. They are either
deletions of resolutions. on which action will
be completed in) 949 or changes in programme
emphasis or orientation which experience has
shown to be expedient for the better imple-
mentation of Unesco's programme.-
The 1950 Budget which the-Director- Ge-
neral is submitting to the Conference totals
$8, 8_47, 000, being an increase of $1, 067, 000
over last year's budget. The budget increase
relates soiely to programme activities and, in
consequence, there is an appreciable reduction
in the proportion of administrative expenses.
General Debate
A GENERAL debate on what every nationcan and should do to ensure a better
understanding between peoples will take
place during the Conference, and the final
details will be worked out by the General
Committee.
The theme chosen is"What are the duties
of the State in regard to education, science
and culture for'the purpose of ensuring a bet-
ter understanding between peoples, and what
practical steps should be taken in order to
discharge these duties ?"
The debate will be held in a large Parisian
hall, La Maison de La Chimi-e, and the three
evenings of September 27. 28 and 29 have
been set aside for it so that Conference dele-
gates, intellectual groups, student organiza-
tions and the general public may hear distin-
guished speakers discuss the subject. The
names of the speakers have not yet been an-
nounced. The discussions wiH be broadcast
by the Radiodiffusion Francaise and interna-
tional radio hookups will make the program-
mes available to listeners in other parts of the
world.
This Supplement includes summaries of two
separate reports by the Dir (ctor-Geæral on the
work of Unesco in connection with Interna-
tional U/iorq C (JJmps and Children's Communi-
ties, from their inception to the present time.
It also deals with Unesco's practical efforts to
facilitate the free movement of educational,
scientific and cultural material and the inner-
national circulation of publications.
THE major original feature of the new pro-gramme of U esco is the inclusion of a
code of eighteen directives designed to
lay down the principles governing the organi-
zation's practical activities (See page 16,)
These directives were amended and approved
by the Executive Board at its June session.
A REMINDER
« The General Conference in-
structs the Director-General to
negotiate with Member States and
National Commissions in order to
develop plans for wider circulation
of the Cou rier ;, such plans should
include proposals for facilitating
the reproduction of the Courier
by Member States or National
Commissions, either in the present
working languages or in transla-
tions provided by them. >&gt;
Resolution adopted by the
General Conference of Unesco at
Beirut. November 1948,
13
The Cblc : e iihedtèd, nd on October 4.
