THE United Nations plan for
an expanded programme of
technical aid to economicallv
u n d e r-developed countries
through a pooling of the worid's tech-
nical skills was brought a step nearer
completion on August 15 when it
was approved by the Economic and
Social Council (ECOSOC) meeting in
Geneva.
This scheme for extending techni-
cal assistance, which is the United
Nations response to President Tru-
man's call for a <&lt;bold new pro-
gramme to help the peoples of the
under-developed countries, was first
outlined in a combined UN-Specia-
lized Agencies report issued at Lake
Success on June 2.
(A summary, of this report des-
cribing the provisional plan under
which it was proposed to use more
than $85, 000, 000 in two years for
technical assistance, appeared in the
June issue of the Courier (Volume
It, neo 5.)
The plan described in the com-
bined report was designed to pro-
vide technical assistance on a scale
never before attempted so as to am-
plify and augment existing projects
and to meet accumulated requests
from governments which it has not
to date been possible to satisfy.
ECOSOC considered this re-
port during the latter part of its
forty-one day session and on Au-
gust 15 approved, by 15 votes to 0
with three abstensions, a co-ordina-
ted programme of technical assistan-
ce together with recommendations
for its organizational machinery, fi-
nancial arrangements and principles
to be applied in its execution.
The programme is now therefore
ready for final approval at the 59
nations United Nations General As-
sembly which opens at Lake Success
on September 20,
Aid Conference Proposed
ONE of the ECOSOC recom-mendations which the UN As-
sembly must consider is for a general
conference on technical aid to he held
at UN headquarters during or im-
mediately following the Assembly
Session. All UN members and non
UN members who have joined the
specialized agencies would be invited
to the conference with the right to
vote.
This proposed conference would be
called upon to (a) determine the to-
tal amount of Voluntary contributions
which might be expected during the
first year of the programme and (b)
approve the proportionate sharing of
contributions among the participating
agencies.
To co-ordinate the activities of the
specialized agencies-the World
Health Organization, the Internatio-
nal Labour Organization, Unesco, the
Food and Agricultural Organization
and the International Civil Aviation
Organization-EGOSOC recom-
ties of the specialized agencies, it was
decided, should be on a voluntary
basis, and the need to make the
most effective use of both converti-
ble and non-convertible currencies led
ECOSOC to the decision that
contributions should go into a cen-
tral receiving pool known as the
<&lt;special account for technical assis-
tance for economic developments.
Under the plan approve by
ECOSOC. the first ten million dollars
mended the formation of a technical
assistance board-an administrative
body-comprising the executive
heads of these agencies. It also re-
commended the setting up of a com-
mittee to discuss policy matters, on
which all ECOSOC m e m b e r s
would be represented, thus consti-
tuting a governmental body.
Financing of the increased activi-
contributed would automatically be
distributed to the participating or-
ganizations according to a percentage
scale.
Seventy per cent of the next ten
million dollars would be similarly
distributed, the remaining thirty per
cent being placed in a reserve fund.
All receipts over twenty million doze
lars would also be held iu reserw
to be allocated by the technical as-
sistance board. This scale of alloca-
tions will be one of the matters for
review by the UN General Assembly
and the special conference.'-
Priority for Food
DECIDING that technical aid toincrease food production and to
reduce malnutrition should be gran-
ted the greatest share of the initial
contributions, ECOSOC r e c 0 m-
mended that the Food and Agricul-
tural Organization should receive
twenty-nine per cent.
Its other recommended percentage
allocations were : The United Na-
tions, twenty-three per cent, chiefly
for use in industrial development ;
World Health Organization twenty-
two per cent ; Unesco, fourteen per
cent ; International Labour Organi-
zation, eleven per cent, and Inter
national Civil Aviation Organization,
one per cent.
As for the principles which should
determine the spending of the funds
ccntributed for the increased tech-
nical a i d, ECOSOC considered
that assistance should only be given
to countries requesting it and that
it should not be the means for any
foreign economic or political inter-
ference. Countries receiving assistance
should normally assume responsibi-
lity for a substantial part of the costs
of technical services with which they
are provided and do their utmost in
"self-help".
The Council also recommended
that universities, technical schools,
foundations and research institutes be
encouraged to release specialists to
help in the programme. The partici-
pating UN agencies, it considered.
; hould aim at increasing
productivity of materials and
resources. The aim should also be to
achieve a wider sharing of the bene-
fits of higher living standards.
Although much administrative and
planning work will remain to be done
after the UN Assembly has dealt
with the technical aid programme.
the action of ECOSOC has al-
ready taken the project a measura-
ble step on the road to its realization.
This was stressed at the Council's
closing session on August 15 by the
President, Nor. james Thorn (New
Zcalandl who said : <&lt;A new note has
been struck. The under-developed
areas are now to be regarded as
within the sphere of influence of the
United Nations, >)
