Costumes, such as the ones shown above worn by Indians of Latin America,
are an important source of information to scientists tudying the evolution
of ancient civilizations. Recently in connection with the Congress of
Americcmiats, an exhibition of North American Indian costumes was heldart the Brooklyn Museum, New Yolk.
CONGRESS OF
AMERICANISTS
extends international
-.' cultural ties
DID relations by way of the Pacific exist in far-off times betweenthe people of America and those of Southern Asia ?
This was one of the questions raised at the Congress of Ameri-
canists which recently brought together distinguished American spe-
cialists in the historical sciences, archaeology, anthropology, ethnology
and history at the Natura ! History Museum of New York.
The Congress, in addition to studying-the linguistic problems pre-
sented by the Indian languages and the results of the civilizations Of
Peru (Inca and Pre-Inca), considered the parallels between Hindu Art
and the Mayan Art of the Central American regions.
The research so far carried out reveals a striking coincidence of
artistic ideas, religious symbols and ornamental themes in large monu-
ments and In the industrial works of art, as well as in the sculptural
decorations and friezes of the temples and in ceramic decorations.
At the same time, various exhibitions were held in order to give a
comparative picture between Asian archaeology and that of the New
World. The exhibits came from China, Indo-China and the Facitlc Regions
and included magnificent bronze vases, ceramics and jade ware from
the time or the Shang dynasty-the second half of the second mille-
nium B. C.-and from the Shul dynasty, dating'from the last centuries
of the same millenium up to several centuries before the birth c, f
Christ.
Another exhibition, held In the Brooklyn Museum, contained a
collection of North American Indian costumes, which traced the historical
evolution of Indian wearing-apparel over a period of 1. 500 years.
From the International point of view, the Congress was of great
Importance as a factor In relations between the New and the Old
Worlds through Its adoption of the constitution of the International
Committee of Americanisms. This committee will be a permanent member
organization of the Union of Anthropological and Ethnological Sciences
which forms part of the International Council for Philosophy and Huma-
nistic Studies, which was established under the auspices of Unesco.
In other words, the old cultural relations between the organized
institutions of America and Europe will gain in importance by belrg
extended to the whole of the American continent.
Professor Pedro Bosch-Gimpera, Head of Unesco's Division of Philo-
sophy and Humanistic Studies who attended the Congress, reported
that he was very satisfied with its results, and particularly with the
readiness shown by American investigators in general to try to streng-
then their research and co-ordinate it with that of their colleagues in
Europe and in other parts of the world, in accordance with the aims
of Unesco.
Much of the work of the Congress, whose president was Professor"
Paul Rivet, was concerned with chronological research and the ines-
tigations of the American archaeological groups. The Congress, in fact,
served to emphasise the progress which nas been made m the use of
chronology for the study of ancient American civilizations.
