
RITCHIE CALDER, world-famous science writer,
tells the behind-the-scenes story of a four-years-long scoop
..
Lord Boyd-Orr He) ped To
Make An A1 Nation
SCIENCE correspondents, like all jour-nalists, are interested in scoops-the
new discoverv or development which
"makes the headline". But this is an
account of a"scoop"which took four
patient years to achieve.
IN 1932, I was doing a series of sc : en-- *-tific articles on what was happening
in British laboratories, and, without
much enthusiasm, visited the Rowett
Research Institute, Aberdeen, to discuss
animal nutrition-"menus for pogs", as
I irreverently called it.
NOR was the Director very enthusiasticabout my visit. Indeed, his attitude
made me curious and over a reluctant
cup of coffee I remarked,"Dr, Boyd Orr,
you seem to be a man with a chip on
your shoulder". And discovering that he
had a sympathetic listener, he told me
what that"chip"was..
IMPORTANCE OF
NUTRITION
zit can persuade farmers to take an in-terest in nutrition,"he said,"because I
can prove to them that it pays dividends
in terms of their stocks and herds. But I
cannot get them interested in the nutri-
tion of their own children, let alone the
children of other people. Yet I can prove
as a. scientist and as a doctor that
that would pay incomparably gaeater
dividends'"
Science Through Film
The Popularization of Science Unit
is regularly furnishing the Field
Science Offices in China, Egypt and
Uruguay with news on scientific and
popular scientific films. It has pro-
cured films for China, Denmark and
several Latin American countries. It
has furnish : d newspapers and week-
lies with special material on scientific
and popular scientific films.
He told me of his rankling frustration.
He had fed 200 children, of underpaid
miners in Lanarkshire, on milk for a
year. He had a control group of similar
children, who did not receive supple-
mentary diet.
The contrast between the two groups
conclusively proved his argument. The
milk-fed children"blossomed before his
eyes". But in the depression years, when
the lesson was even more important, the
scientific surveY had been"lost". Dr.
John Boyd Orr was an unhappy man,
Why couldn't be get the public to listen ?
As I told him, that was my job. The
immediate article on"The AI Nation of
Tomorrow"put his argument before two
million readers at a critical moment. It
awakened popular interest in nutrition,
as something more thftn"f'\if't"or a
vitamin cult.
That was not as impo. rtant as the
sequel. Subsequent discussion helped to
Science Through radio
The Popularization of Science Unit
has, from Unesco House, arranged
broadcasts to the United States, oY'r
the C. B. S. network. It is a steady
contributor to the Unesco World Re-
view. It has made recorded broadcasts
from N. B. C. and the Lowell Coopera-
tive Broadcasting Council available
to Radio stations in Europe and else-
where. Several European radiostations
have been given help in planning
Popular Science programs.
stimulate an interest in the scientific
aspects of the Government's programme
for the revival of agriculture, in terms
of human needs, and Dr. John Boyd Orr
undertook a classic social survey of the
relation of food. health and income.
The results, as they emerged, were
starting and would, at any stage, have
made good journalistic copy. But for
four vears I had to practise a self-
denying ordinance until the facts were
fully marshalled and scientifically ao-
praised.
In 1935. I"got my scoop". Dr. Boyd Orr
announced his results at the British
Association. As his confidant I acquired
journalistic merit by the fullv informed
account, with all the significance that
others missed, and with social repercus-
sions which are still reverberating.
A MAY-NOURISHED
. POPULATION
THE"Food, Health and Income"survey.- scientifically documented, showed
that in Britain half the people did not
then have incomes which would gua-
rantee them the diet necessary for
health and well being, and that one-
tenth of the population was definitely
under-nourished.
The impact on Britain was immediate.
Committees Against Malnutrition sup-
ported by eminent scientists and public
figures began a drive which had political
effect. The international outcome was
the Mixed Commission of the League of
Nations, which"married"health and
agriculture, and in : tiated in Member
States a series of similar survey.
That in the United States of America,
the richest country in the world, paral-
leled Orr's results. Elsewhere the evi-
dence was even more disturbing.
In Britain, this investigation and the
popular interest it created prepared the
"climate"for the painless and specta-
cularly successful rationing system which
brought Britain out of six years of war
a healthier nation than when it had
entered it.
RESULTS FINALLY
SEEN
THEN international results were seenin the Hot Springs Conference and in
the foundation of the Food and Agri-
culture Organization of U. N. at Quebec,
where Sir John Boyd Orr was elected
the first Director-General.
When, at the Famine Conference in
Washington, Sir John Boyd Orr made
his final speech which roused the weary
delegates to enthusiasm and acclamation,
Sir John asked me what I thought of
his speech. My reply was,"I have liked
it better every time I have heard it for
the last fourteen years".
With that remarkable constancy which
has made Lord Bovd Orr a world
scientist-statesman, he was saying in
that vital assembly (which delivered
70. 000, 00 people from the threat of
privation), with more-facts but DO more
emphasis, what he had said to me at
the Rowett Institute when I arrived in
quest of"menus for pigs".
