THE INTERNATIONALIST
"it T is most natural and appropriatethat the United Nations Educa-
tional, Scientific and Cultural
Organization should pay a tribute to
Albert Einstein. z on the occasion of his
seventieth birthday. Indeed, for the
whole of humanity Einstein's name
stands pre-eminently for that search to
extend our knowledge and deepen our
understanding which is not only the
spirit and object of science, but which
forms the very foundation of ail human
civilization.
Through Albert Einstein's work the
horizon of mankind has been immeasur-
ably widened, at the same time as our
world picture has attained a uaity and
harmony never dreamed of before. The
background for such achievement is
created by preceding generation of the
world-wide community of scientists and
its full consequences. will only be revealed
to coming generations.
Man's endeavours to orient himself in
his existence beyond the immediate neces-
sities of life may be traced back to the
widely spread birth-places of our civiliza-
tion like Mesopotamia, Egypt, India and
China and, above all. to the small free
communities in Greece, where arts and
science rose to a height unsurpassed for
long ages. During the Renaissance, when
all aspects of human culture again
flourished, most intense and fruitfui con-
tacts between scientific endeavours all
over Europe took place, as we are remind-
ed by the names of Copernicus, Tycho
Brahe, Kepler, Galileo. Descartes. Pascal
and Huygens, men of many countries
whose achievements created the basis of
By
Professor Niels BOHR
the edifice of which Newton's genius is
the pinnacle.
New Insight
lr HE great. advance of natural phi-losophy at th t time, which came
to exert a deep influence on all
human thinking, consisted above all in
the attaiament of a rational description
of mechanical phenomena based on well-
defined principles. It must, however, not
be forgotten that the idea of absolute
space and time formed an inherent
part of the basis of Newton's work and
that also his well-known coacept of
universal gravid. 1tin constitutes an ele-
ment so far not further explainable.
It was just at these points that Einstein
initiated quite a new development, which,
in an unforeseen manner, has deepened
and rounded our views and given us new
insight and power of comprehension.
The way leading to this turning point
was paved by the development during the
nineteenth century, of our knowledge of
the electromagnetic phenomena which
has brought such a great increase in
human facilities and created the modern
means of, world-wide communication.
This development was furthered by an
ever more active international co-opera-
tion, the extent of which is recalled by
such names of many nations as Volta,
Cersted, Faraday, Maxwell. Hertz, Lo-
rentz and-Michelson. Gradually, however,
the growth of knowledge in this new field
disclosed more and more clearly the
difficulties and paradoxes inherent in
absolute space-time description.
A quite new outlook was here opened
by the genius of Einstein, who changed
the whole approach t the problems by
exploring the very foundation for the
description of our experience. Thus,
Einstein taught us that the concept of
simultaneity of events occurring at
different places was inherently relative,
in the sense that two such events which
to one observer appear simultaneous, may
seem to follow each other in time from
the standpoint of another observer.
This recognition of the extent to which
the account of'phenomena depends
essentially on the motion of the observer
proved, in the. hands of Einstein, a most
powerful means of tracing general phy-
sical laws valid for all observers.
In the following years, Einstein even
succeeded in attaining a viewpoint wide
enough to embrace the gravitational
phenomena, by extendin his considera-
tions to the comparison of the effects
experienced by observers with accelerated
movement relatively to each other. Out
of Einstein's novel approach to the use
of space and time concepts grew gra-
dually a wholly new attitude towards
cosmological problems, which has given
most fertile inspiration for the explora-
tion of the structure of the universe.
Although simplicity and beauty are
the principal marks of Einstein's fU : : 1-
damental ideas, the detailed treatment
of complex problems often demands the
use of abstract mathematical methods
like non-Euclidean geometry. As often
before, it has here been most fortunate
that such tools were ready as the fruit
of the work of older mathematician) *.
(Continued on page 7t"

Internationalist
By
Professor Niels BOHR
On His 70th Birthday,
(Continued from page 1)
The names of Gauss. Lobachevsky,
Bolyai. Rietnann, Rieci and Minkowski
here again remind us of the fertility of
international co-operation in all fields of
science. And the same may be said of
Einstein's other outstanding work.
For example, his explanation of the
irregular motion of small bodies in
liquids, ba. sed on the ideas of Maxwell,
Boltzmann, Smoluchowski and Gibbs,
made it possible for Jean Perrin accu-
rately to count the atoms of which
substances are built.
We find our-
se ! vestodayina
new epoch in
physical science.
in which exper-
imental discov-
eries and theoric-
al methods have
led to a rapidity
and fecundity of
progress made
possible only by
international co-
operation of an
unprecedented ac-
tivity and extent.
It is not possible
in this occasion
to disentangle theDr. Bohr
contributions of individual workers, but
mention must be made of the guidance,
at almost every step, which Einstein has
given us by his Relativity theory and
by his analysis of elementary quantum
phenomena.
Altogether, this short exposition of
Einstein's scientific achievements aims at
giving an impression of the extent to
which his originality of outlook has made
him an innovator i : 1 science. At the same
time, I have attempted to remind you
that all scientific endeavours are parts
of a great common human enterprise.
The gifts of Einstein to humanity are
in no way confined to the sphere of
science. Indeed, his recognition of hith-
erto unheeded assumptions in even our
most elementary and accustomed con-
cepts means to all people a new en-
couragement in tracing and combating
the deeprooted prejudices and com-
placencies inhtrent in every national
culture.
With his human and noble personality,
characterized equally by wisdom and
humour, Einstein himself has through all
his life, and not least in these latter
years, worked for the promotion of inter-
national understanding. On his seven-
tieth birthday evidence of the veneration
and'gratitude our whole generation owes
to him will reach Einstein from many
sides, and we all want to express the
wish that the hopes for which he has
lived and, worked may be fulfilled to the
benefit of all mankind..
