
Four Zones of Germany To Profit
,. :',..'.."..-.'... ;
From Unesco-Created Book Centre
Book Exchange Centre in Germany,
A'-which will enable libraries in the
four occupation zones to inter-
change publications with countries all
over the world, was officially established
on May 1, on the initiative of Unesco.
Arrangements for the creation of a sim-
ilar centre in Japan were also complet-
ed last month in Tokyo.
Located in Bad Godesberg, in the West-
ern zone, the newly-created German Book
Exchange Centre (Tauschstelle), will be
financed by the Notgemeinschaft der
deutschen WissenBchaft (Emergency Coun-
cil for the Promotion of German Science)
and a possible grant-in-aid from the
Rockefeller Foundation
Plans to create the German Centre
were drawn up at a meeting convened by
Unesco at Bad Godesberg on April 12,
which was attended by librarians from
almost every university library in Western
Germany, In addition, a representative
from a Book E'I (change Centre in Gte
Russian sector of Berlin also attended
the meeting and agreed to assure close
co-operation between the new Tausch-
stelle and the Berlin Exchange Centre.
Thus, between them, the two Centres
will cover the four zones of Germany.
The Bad Godesberg Centre will work
directly with Uneco in arranging the ex-
change of publications between Germany
and Unesco Member States. In particular,
it will supply information on German
institutions seeking publication exchanges
in any given subject and will dispose of
complete lists of German publications for
exchange.
Unesco will shortly distribute the first
lists of such German institutions to the
appropriate agencies in other countries.
In many instances, the newly-establish-
ed Tauschstelle can already furnish rel-
evant information on exchanges. En-
quiries concerning such exchanges with
Germany should be addressed to :
TauschsteUe. ? o Notgemeinschaft der
deutschen Wissenschaft. Buechlerstrasse
55, Bad Godesberg. Germany.
'if * *
IN Japan, the National Diet Library inTokyo has been designated to act a. s
cho-ordination centre for publication ! ex-
change, and has already supplied Unesco
with lists of learned societies, scientific
institutions, universities, public libraries,
agricultural experimental stations and of
Unesco clubs in Japan, all of which desire
to enter into international exchange
agreements.
These lists which comprise nearly 800
institutions, will be circulated by Unesco
in all parts of the world, and will be
followed by lists of Japanese publications
available for exchange.
Those interested in establishing ex-
change arrangements with Japan, or wish-
ing to obtain bibhographical information
frem that country, are advised to com-
mrmicate with the National Diet Library
(attention of Mr. T. Kanamori, Chief
Librarian), Akasaka, Tokyo.
The two new Centres have been creat-
ed as an important part of Unesco's edu-
cational, scientific and cultural pro-
gramme for Germany and Japan and
bring to 5 the number of National Ex-
change Centres create in direct response
to Unesco efforts. The other 3 are locat-
ed in Canada, the United Kingdom and
the United States.
