 Care'To Ship Books
To Schools. Librairies
GIFTS of U. S. technical and scientificbooks will be sent to foreign schools
and libraries in Europe and Asia under
a new programme sponsored by CARE,
the Co-operative for American Remit-
tances to Europe.
The programme was announced at the
second U. S. National Conference for
Unesco by Mr. Murray B. Lincoln,
President of CARE.
Mr. Lincoln declared that the book
programme is a practical way in which
the people of the United States can aid
Unesco's efforts towards educational re-
construction. He said that the latest &nd
best U. S. books will be selected to meet
needs in countries who : th suffered from
The American relief agency"CARE"which has distributed
over 7, 500, 000 food and clothing packages to needy countries,
will now also ship technical books abroad.
the war. These needs have been deter-
mined by CARE missions in co-operation
with Unesco, foreign ministries, education,
and other authoritative sources. CARE
will be guided in its selections by a com-
mittee headed by Luther Evans, head of
the U. S. Library of Congress.
Included on the committee will be
members of the American Library Asso-
ciation and the U. S. Book Exchange.
"I feel there will be popular support
for this programme, for the people of the
United States have given CARE 75 million
dollars in the past for food and clothing
packages,"Lincoln said."For the new
book programme, the publishers have
assured CARE of their support and co-
operation by giving a discount on the
books purchased."
Mr. Lincoln pointed cut that during
the past two years his organization has
distributed more than seven and a half
million, food and clothing packages
overseas.
M : ! ton S. Elsenhower, Chairman of the
U. S. National Commission for Unesco,
heartily endorsed the new book pro-
gramme, which is scheduled to s : art on
May 15. Present plans are to send the
books in block shipments to institutions
designated by Unesco and other agencies.
The general categories of books to be
sent overseas include health and welfare,
nursing, medicine, dentistry, agricultural
science, veterinary science, and English
language instruction. In the field of
applied science there will be books on
biology, chemistry, engineering, geology,
mathematics, physics, physiology, psycho-
logy, and sociology.
Countries to which CARE will offer the
book programme include Austria, Belgium,
Czechoslovakia, Finland, Italy, France,
Greece, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland,
Great Britain, the American, British and
French zones of Germany, Berlin, Korea.
and Japan. Only unused books will be
shipped.
