carved Indian pipes from British Columbia.
(Musee de 1'Homme Collection. Paris.)
POPULAR Arts, a term which
includes not only the collective
N expressions of those civiliza-
tions having a conscious and
personal"Art", but also the
artistic expressions of so-called pri-
mitive cultures, are being abandoned
in many parts of the world today.
The seriousness of this decay and
neglect has been realized in many
countries where efforts are being made
to stimulate both their preservation
and development.
Unesco itself cannot afford to ignore
the danger threatening these folk
arts, in a world which seems to be
heading towards uniformity, and re-
cently, it called a meeting of experts
at Unesco House, to discuss what
contribution it could make to this
work of preservation and develop-
ment.
Unesco also has a special interest
in this question through one of its
main activities, fundamental educa-
tion, whose object is the raising of
living standards in economically
backward countries.
But the peoples who most need aid
are often those among whom the po-
pular arts continu9 to nourish, and
thus, the very success of a funda-
mental education project may en-
danger a whole artistic tradition,
bound up with customs and beliefs
that are doomed to disappear. In a
very large number of civilizations the
traditional arts are rapidily dying out,
for where industrialism has taken
firm root. standardized and cheap
output destroys craftsmanship.
With too many new needs to be sa-
tisfied, people are no longer able to
attach the same value as formerly to
articles whose manufacture calls for
patient workmanship. Big industry,
by removing men from their native
soil, has in its turn helped to destroy
their taste for objects and amuse-
ments characteristic of their place of
origin ; social levelling and the popu-
larization of culture have also greatly
contributed to the decay and neglect
of the popular arts.
Danger of Community
"Inferiority Complex"
if N far-oS countries where arts ofhigh quality survived, the decline
of popular arts inevitably resulted
from those countries coming into
contact with our own civilization.
These arts were the fruit of a specific
culture and met particular needs.
Where they were associated with reli-
gion, for example, they disappeared
along with belief in the ancient deities.
Modern techniques, which foreign
FOLK ARTS IN
THE PATH OF
CIVILIZATION
By Dr Alfred METRAUX
peoples have eagerly adopted, facili-
tate labour output, but have a disas-
trcus effect upon the beauty of form
and perfection of workmanship that
characterized the old-time products.
One of the commonest reasons for
the abandoning of folk arts is bound
up with the psychological factor,
commonly known as"the inferiority
complex". Many communities tend to
look upon the practice of traditional
popular arts as something derogatory
which ranks them with a backward or
barbarous people. On this point the
Expert Committee found much sup-
porting evidence. All over the world,
peoples who are beginning to absorb
the customs and practices of our civili-
zation, are rejecting aethestic expres-
sions, of which they were very proud a
few y) ears ago. One example is Haiti,
where Voodoo songs and dances are
banned by the educated classes and
condemmed as relics of barbarism.
These are disappearing as the working
class adopts the same ideas. Those
who wish to preserve an artistic tra-
dition must therefore try to dispel
this sense of inferiority and convince
those who still cultivate folk arts that
there are many forms of beauty. More-
over, they'must be shown that they
will be esteemed rather than despised
for maintaining their traditions.
Unfortunately, such appeals alone
are not enough to preserve the popu-
lar arts intact. As the living expres-
sions of cultures, they represent a
"living and changing reality". To
try to maintain them in their existing
state, when culture is changing
would be to resist the will of a com-
munity and therefore to condemn arts
to an artifical and sterile archaism.
An example of this very real danger
was the pressure brought to bear on
the Indian tribes in America to adhere
to ancient forms and motifs. This
led to a shoddy art, devoid of all vi-
gour or interest. When the condi-
tions which favoured the flowering of
A bronze head from Benin, capital of what
was once one of the most highly organized
states on the West African coast. The people
of Benin, who first had contact with
Europeans at the end of the l5th century.
possessed a culture rare among native races.
(Charles Ratton Collection, Paris.)
artistic creation disappear, it is fool-
ish to perpetuate its memory.
In this connection, the Committee
of Experts rightly emphasized"that
the attitude towards popular art must
not be that of the archaeologist
concerned with the preservation of the
past, but rather that of a sociologist
who records the changing forms of a
social state and tries to look into the
future".
Nevertheless, it would be a mistake
to abandon all interest in the fate of
the popular arts on the plea of avoi-
ding misguided interference. Facing
new conditions, the producers of
works of art need help. They work
for a different public nowadays and
have to satisfy different tastes. They
therefore need to be informed about
the demands of their new customers
and. to be protected against exploita-
tion. All too often, an art that was
once vigorous degenerates in pander-
ing to the bad taste of buyers. In
such cases the public must be made to
understand and appreciate other
forms than those to which they are
accustomed. There is an unfortunate
prejudice in favour of grading the
arts, and as a result they are auto-
matically esteemed according to the
category in which they are arbitrarily
placed.
Why Preserve
Folk Arts ?
SOME people may ask, what is thepractical value of assuring the
survival of folk arts which are
bound to go down before the
advance of industrialization ? Others
will question the possibility of Unesco
being able to do-anytliing to arrest
this movement.
There are several answers to these
Questions and objections. In the first
This carved stool is another example of the
popular arts which Hourished in Dahomey.
especially during the period of thehierarchical monarchy.
(Musee de 1'Homme Collection Paris.)
These carved heads from the Solomon Islands
reflect the influence of"secret societies,
which exist in all parts of Melanesia. Such
carvings have been developed from the masks
which are widely used in the rites of these
societies.
(Musee de I'Homme Collection, Paris.)
place the preservation of folk arts-
the. products of various cultures-
is needed in order to avoid the fright-
ening uniformity that is growing in
the world. The industrial civilization
of today with its great capacity for
expansion, gains ground every year,
and everywhere imposes identical
habits, needs and tastes. If there is
no reaction against this universal
standardization, the sources of fresh
inspiration will run dry, for cultures
are ren8wed by contact with and bor-
rowings from other cultures.
Economic Recovery of
Navaho Indians
N 0 culture, however complex andbrilliant, can embody all man's
potentialities. Each of them
specializes in one or more fields,
which it endeavours to bring to per-
fection. A single culture embracing
the whole universe would lose the be-
nefit of the diverse efforts which each
culture makes for its own needs.
There are other, though less impor-
tant, reasons for preserving the pour
lar arts. They express a communi-
ty's cultural personality, and are often
Statue of King Gezo of Dahomey, French
West Africa, who during his reign (1818-
1858) raised his kingdom to the height of its
power and prosperity, thus providing a
favourable stimulus for the native arts.
(Musee de 1'Homme Collection, Paris.)
a factor in social cohesion. Their
disappearance is responsible for much
of the weakness and demoralization
to be found in many native tribes.
Very often the practice of folk arts
has an economic aspect of some
importance. Many non-industrialized
peoples Ciilnnot afford the products
which would improve their living
conditions. The popular arts can
very directly contribute towards rais-
ing the standard of life in many com-
munities. The recent history of the
Navaho Indians is a good instance of
this factor. The revival and deve-
lopment of goldsmith's work and
weaving among these people helped to
restore their collapsing economic si-
tuation. Such a result, however, calls
for a careful study of the local or
foreign market possibilities, for all too
often, efforts and enthusiasm have
been raised, only to be eventually frus-
trated and disappointed.
What can Unesco do to preserve the
artistic inheritance of the many com-
munities whose ways of life are now
being transformed ? The International
Institute of Intellectual Co-operation
asked itself the same question and car-
ried out a large-scale enquiry into the
problem. The solution of the imme-
diate problem lies, of course, with
each country, but Unesco can do some-
thing to guide individual efforts. As a
start, it can compile a ( balance
sheet ? of existing popular arts in the
world. The fundamental educational
campaigns initiated by Unesco will
devote much attention to popular
artistic activities and will use them to
bring the message and purposes of
fundamental education to under-
privileged peoples.
Freedom of Artist
Primary Condition
THE Committee of Experts also
recommended that an appeal be
made to certain specialists in
this field to combine in book
form their respective studies of parti-
cular problems.
The Committee said in its report
that"regard for the present must be
accompanied by a wish to preserve the
memory of artistic expressions in pro-
cess of disappearance". Many com-
munities today despise their arts, but
the day will come when they will che-
rish their past and regret the loss of
these works. It is, therefore, the
duty of those who realize the value of
these traditions to save them.
One of the most striking aspects of
the meeting of international experts
was the unanimity with which they
condemmed all"dictatorship"in art.
Proclaiming the need for the freedom
of the artist, of whatever race or leveJ
of culture, the experts protested
against the tendency in some quarters
to give the arts too much protection.
since, in their opinion, a"style that
enjoys too much. outside protection
becomes sterile and disappears".
