
A COLONIAL
ARTS COUNCIL ?
t MONG the most sfriking"'alll
festations of the « Colonia !
Month>&gt; which ha  recently co-
me to an end were the exhibitions
of primitive art from the colonies-
in point of fact, mostly from negro
West Africa. When 1 was in Africa
in 1944, I was deeply impressed by
the range and variety of its tradition-
al art, and above all by the vigour
and high quality ; and these exhibi-
tions revived those impressions with
renewed force.
West Africa gives us the bronzes
and terracottas of Ife, whose classical
style, unique in black Africa, poses
fascinating historical questions, the
subject of correspondence in preced-
ing issues of the <&lt;Sunday Times>&gt;.
It gives us the delightful gold weights
of Ashanti ; the rich costumes of hun-
dreds of native rituals ; the bronzes
of Benin in which barbarism touches
the heights of splendour ; wood-car-
vings with the natural strength and
sense d form after which modern
Western sculpture is striving ; masks
in endless variety, some of what we
are accustomed to think of as pure
negro type, others recalling the style
of the Far East, others reminiscent
Of Red Indians or of sophisticated
night-clubs in New York, comic masks
with hinged jaws looking like Charlie
Maoarthy, horrifying masks (If the
gods of disease, ivory masks with a
The The tragic thing. however, is that
in West Africa, as almost everywhere
else, this primitive art is rapidly dis-
appearing. The objects themselves
are disappearing, through neglect, or,
in the case of masks and wood sculp-
tures, through being eaten by ten.
mites ; the traditional skills of the
carver and the weaver are dying out ;
the old religions rituals are ceasing
to be practised as the old structure Of
African society crumbles before the
impact of our Western civilization-
or rather of the disruptive economy
cal and technological forces which
emanate from it, for the civilization
itself has not taken root in negro
Africa.
The colonial Powers, it seems to mr.
have a serious responsibility in this
matter. To begin with, they should
be much more active than they arc
in collecting and preserving all they
can of the traditional arts of the pri-
mitive peoples under their charge, and
publishing accounts of them.
But even if all art specimens of
all the colonies were properly housed
and preserved and published, primi-
tive art itself might well disappear ;
that would be Hke what has happened
with the Dodo and the Great Auk.
If something is not done, primitive
peoples all over the world run the
risk of becoming debased into a new
kind of proletariat-a geographical
appendage to the central core of in-
dustrial civilization. They will lose
an important means of self-expres-
medieval dignify, animal-masks with
astonishingly effective simplification ;
figures with an Etruscan look, a Me-
lanesian look, a look as of ancient
Mexico.
Art and Life
T HERE are even new and unfami-liar art-forms : as post-Renais-
sance Europe invented the headless
and limb'less torso, so Southern Ni-
geria. invented the armless figure-
and made an aesthetic success OIl it.
Anather thing was brought home
to me in West Africa. The art of the
region was not just a collection of
museum p'eces or objects for exhi-
bition in a gallery ; it was related to
Me. The Ash, anti gold weights were
used in the business of weighing gold.
The masks and costumes were used in
tribal and secret society ceremonials ;
they both canalised and expressed
powerful emotions. I myself saw one
ritual in which an astonishing figure,
completely concealed in a cylindrical
<&lt;dress>&gt; and surmounted by a head-
dress covered with woedcarvings,
seemed to express the very spirit of
life in the equatorial forest, from
which it impressively emerged ; and I
was shown photographs of ceremonies
in which the dancer and costumes
conspired to give an overpowering ex-
pression to the strange overtones and
mysterious depths of savage life.
Change and Decay
T 0 say that West African art isprimitive does not. of course,
mean that it is crude art or poor art :
primitive art is a descriptive term
meaning the traditional art of peoples
who have not been industrialised and
indeed have not reached the technical
levels of organization that the socio-
logists call civilization. Furthermore,
its tradition is not necessarily forma-
lized ; up till quite recently, much of
the West African art has been deve-
loping and changing with a remarkabte
degree of vitality and variety of ex-
pression.
sicn, an essential outlet, both for their
individual selves and for their group
consciousness and their national pride.
It is obviously nO good trying just
to preserved the arts in their tradi-
tional form when the social and reli-
gious basis far them has disappeared.
That would be to turn them into
living fossils, mere museum pieces
without relevance to the life around
them. Somehow the tradition must
be developed and adapted to the new
conditions. The peoples must be proud
of their traditions and past achieve.
ments, but their arts must be adapted
so that they have significance for the
present. The individual artist and
craftsman must : be able to live by his
art ; and the group must become. aware
of fhe social value of the arts for its
OW1I1 evolution.
Adjustment
IT is not true to say that traditionalart is inevitably doomed to extinc-
tion. Here and there it has been de-
literately given a new lease of life.
While travelling on behalf of Unesco,
I found that in Peru, for instance,
and Guatemala, and among some
North American Indians, the old tra-
ditions have been more or less success-
fully adapted to prosper in the mo-
deln wcrld ; and in West Africa itself
traditional music is being adapted and
used as a means of providing expres-
sion to the new society that is taking
the place of tribalism.
But in general, all too little is being
done or even attempted. The Western
world seems blinded to everything that
is not quantitative. The volume of
exports and imports ; the proportion
of children attending school ; the mum"
ber of hospitals ; the size of the popu-
lation ; these are the priorities. The
arts are treated as the Cinderellas
of Education Departments, or tidily
preserved (after killing) in museums.
We have set up an Arts Council
in Britain, and it has done a great
deal to make the arts come alive in
the life of this country. But there
are more people in the Colonies than
in Britain, and their arts are in gra-
ver danger than ours are or ever were.
Why not an Art Council for and in
the colonies ?
(Reprinted from
the « Sunday Times &, London.)
