"SCHOOL broadcasting is becom-
ing an institution which is
needed by the children of to-
day. It stands at the side of parents and
teachers as a well-informed friend, acting
swiftly and surety, cooperating in the
creation of an atmosphere favourable to
present-day children."
The former director of school broad-
casting in Czechoslovakia who wrote
these words was expressing, in general
terms, the importance which this branch
of radio is now assuming in world
education.
Yet despite the importance. the progress
made in its developments by different
countries has been far from uniform.
Some have reached full stature, others
are now learning to walk while there are
many who have still to take their firststeps.
THE school broadcasting services ofsome countries, Great Britain, the
United States and Canada, for example,
can now be said to have reached their
full maturity, due in part to their
extremely flexible school programmes,
which are easily adaptable to school
radio.
In other countries, the"rigidity"of
school programmes accounts for the
relatively underdeveloped state of such
radio programmes or even their non-exis-
tence. Finally, there are countries where
the defectiveness of the school system
and the lack of teachers hampers the
rational development of a system of
school broadcasts, which could meet the
needs fif the school population as a
whole.
In many of these countries, however,
there is a strong interest and a general
wish to start producing radio programmes
for schools.
What prevents them from following
the lead of others ? Sometimes thev have
not sufficient funds or equipment to set
up the specialized organization which is
required, or else their school syllabi make
it difficult to fit in broadcasting periods.
There is even a psycholonical obstacle to
overcome-opposition to the idea because
of its novelty.
Oblltacles to School Radio
ONE of the greatest obstacles, however,is lack of knowledge on how to
organize a school radio service, knowledge
which bee British Broadcastine Corpora-
tion and other well-developed radio

SCHOOL BROADCASTING
Experts Urge Creation of Unesco World Information Centre
To Spur Development of Radio Programmes for Children
organizations have gained through 15
years' experience.
The need to prepare and supply data
to broadcasting organizations in order
to promote the development of education
by radio was stressed last year by the
Radio Sub-Commission of Unesco's Com-
mission on Technical Needs in Press.
Film and Radio.
Following up its recommendations,
Unesco approached some of the radio
organizations, having thorough experience
in the field, for information on every
aspect of school broadcasting, so that
this knowledge could be passed on to
other nations wishing to start new services
or expand existing ones.
From its survey. which covered Belgium,
Great Britain. Poland. Sweden, and
Switzerland, in Europe, and Canada,
Mexico, the United States and Brazil in
the Americas, as well as India. Australia
and the Union of South Africa. U7esco
received sufficient material to fill an
850-page report.
Twelve Countries Report
LAST month, therefore, Unesco calleda meeting of its Consultative Com-
mittee for Educational Broadcasting for
a study of these factual reports from 12
countries and for a general study on
school broadcasting prepared by M. Roger
Clausse, Assistant Director-General of
the Belgia : 1 National Broadcasting
Institute.
Of the five members of this committee,
three were heads of school broadcasting
services : Mr. R. Postgate (B. B. C.) : Mr.
A. Oakkenhaug (Norway) and Miss J.
Waller (N. B. C., Chicago), the others
being M. N. Lakshmanan, Director-
General of All India Radio and M. R.
Dovaz, Director of Radio Geneva.
Three observers. M. Nieto Caballero
(International Bureau of Education),
Miss J. Coombs (New Zealand) and Mrs
Victoria Corey (U. S. A.) followed the
meetings at Unesco House.
After going through the reports.
these experts formulated a number of
recommendations which, together with
the reports of the survey, will be pub-
lished for the benefit of all governments
and broadcasting organizations. Before
this is done, however, more information
on specific problems will be obtained from
other countries than those already covered
by the survey. In the 12 nations surveyed,
the accent was on long-term experience.
but there are other countries which in a
relatively short time have organized
educational service of a high order.
CHILE, for example, began school broad-casting only in 1943 and although
the S : ate does not own a single radio
station, it is putting out one of the
most varied educational programmes in
the world. The commercial companies in
Chile, which operate the radio stations
grant part of their programme time to
broadcasts prepared by a special service
of the Ministry of Education for trans-
mission to schools, teachers, students in
technical, professional and commercial
and colleges and to parents.
There are other small countries like
Chile which would like to introduce school
broadcasting. To assist them. the experts'
committee suggested that Unesco set up
a Wor : d Documentation and Information
Centre at its headquarters in Paris.
The centre will include a general and
specialized bibliography, backed up by a
library, an international register of
periodicals, programme booklets issued by
broadcasting organizations, a selection of
scripts and recordings of school pro-
grammes and general infonnation on
educational broadcasting collected by
Unesco.
