 CULTURAL CT<WTy
. :.'"",."-
Philosophy and Humanistic Studies
ALTH-OUGH : n the jield oj the
A'-Natural Sciences Unesco's ideal is
unqualified universal'ty. the same
principle cannot be applied in the fields
of the Humanistic Sciences. Here diversity
is legitimate ant any attempt at artifICial
levelling would spell death for cultures,
which are the natural produäs of the
history and livfng conditions of every7 ;Mtot'y K  u ; ns' condtt ! 07 :s o/eer. 
human group. Here too, however, Unesco
has a ritul role to play in securing univer-
sality Of a kind, but the an'versality which
must"be sought is that oj mutual under-
stan ( ! : Kf/ a ? tf ! not o/ ! eucH ! f.t ding and not oj levelling.
In organizing its PhilQsophic Round
Tables Unesco's aim is to consult the best,
the clearest, and the most sensitive minds
of the contemporary world, to enable them
to clarify its work, and to associate them-
selves with its endeavours. These Round
Tables will supply a meeting place for
people in different fields : writers, artists,
scientists, men of action, or philosophers,
and they will have as their subject these
problems of values which are central to
Unesco's task.
IN 1949 Unesco will organize a RoundTable discussion on the complex ques-
tion of the freedom and responsibility of
the artist. This will be designed to isolate
the undcrlying significance of the concept
of freedom of artistic creation, without
neglecting the concomitant problem of the
rf) ationship between the artist and the
public, and of the artist's responsibility
(see next page''Freedom of the Artist").
In another series. Unesco will endeavour
to convene leading men of letters and
thinkers, and will ask them to determine
the position of modern intellectuals
towards the problem of peace in a world
which has never been more highly con-
scious, but which at the same time, has
never been more disturbed.
Inquiry into Ideological Conflicts
"WHERE are some problems so graveand complex that more elaborate
methods must be adopted to explore
them properly and to arrive at conclusions
capable of application in the present state
of international affairs. A mere d. scussion,
however profound, between prominent
personalities would be inadequate in such
a matter as the misundel'8tandings so
often implicit in the use of the commonest
political concepts.
Words like"democracy","equality",
"law"seem clear enough. In fact. however,
each is a tangled complex of ideas which
must be patiently unravelled in order to
eliminate the powers of suggestion and
the possibilities of discord which arise
from the ambiguous use of such words.
It is with this in mind that l'nescc will
complete, in 1949, an inquiry begun in
1948 into the varying connotations of
democracy. Unesco has chosen the concept
of democracy because it has felt that it is
the most important stake in contemporary
political discussions.
Unesco drafted a detailed. precise ques-
tionnaire which was sent to National
Commissions and to a large number of
specialists in Member States. During the
coming months, a Committee wit ! study
the replies received and sum up its
findings. The result t wii ! provide a veri-
table catalogue of the accepted meanings
of the word'democracy", and of the
misunderstandings revealed by the in-
quiry.
Comparative Study of Cultures
IH OWEVER, if the study of politicalconcepts is at the core of the
whole task of pacification, it must
not be forgotten that these comparatively
clear and easily defined ideas are only a
small part of the complexity of a partic-
ular culture.
It is often said that civilization is pay.
sing through a crisis, that mankind is
no longer agreed on the content of a
common civilization which all nat. ons
could adopt, and which teachers could
propagate ; each people feels that. it has
an original contribution to make two the
jo : nt creation of the human civilization
of to-morrow. But what is that contribu-
tion ? And how frequently is the idea of
an original contribution clouded by pride
or an inferiority complex-both 01 which
are often inter-related ?
In view 01 this, Unesco has undertaken
an inquiry to determine how far the
cultures of the various who. old areas either
do, or without much difficulty could, in-
fluence each other. Conversely Unesco
wants to find out how much mutual
understanding, and a possible pooling of
certain elements, are checked bv deep-
seated antipathies which could be isolated
and eventually eliminated.
Scientific and Cultural History
of lUankind
) m t NESCO feels that a scientific andcuìtliral history of mankind, pre-
pared with a truiv international
spirit and Jß keeping with all modern
scientific data is strongly needed to-day.
Such a history, Unesco feels, should be
widely distributed throughout the world,
once it is completed.
This. however, is a long-term task which
can best be carried out in two stages :
first the preparation of small textbooks
for pupils and teachers in schools all over
the world. These textbooks would tell the
story of man's progress, not by citing
examples of wars, or Qûlitical deals devoid
of any humane significance, but by show-
ing the slew rise of civilization through
the combined efforts of all peoples.
The second stage would utilize aU
modern scientific means to draw up a
great synthesis of the history of mankind
from the point of view of scientific
progress and cultural achievement.
International Council
lr 0 accomplish all these t. asks it isnecessary that. Unesco bring together
the world's best minds as often as
possible. More than that, however, it
must also encourage and support the
great international learned societies of the,
world which can ensure the continuity of
relationships and exchanges necessary for
the creation of a common outlook trans-
cending national frontiers and the strict
confines of particular subjects.
Unesco. therefore, will continue in 1949
the work begun in 194a f the foundation
of an International Covpcil of Philoscphy
and Humanist : c Studi. To this end it
will encourage the formation of intern-
ational societies or federations of philo-
sophers, historians. linguists, anthropo-
logists and archaeologists, and wil) asso-
ciate them in a Council where the various
groups may exchange notes and strive to
"-void the perils of ecessive specialization.
December 1948-January 1949 UNESCO (." () (J1fn< :  SUPPLEMENT S
