
CARTOONS'ANI)'FILMs
IN
CHINA
A TEACHING technique which hasproved its value in education Is
the use of audlo. visual mate-
rials such as films, filmstrips, radio
and charts. Such materials, capable
of conveying basic ideas and know
ledge without the use of written words.
are of special use in fundamental
education.
There is, however, a grpat shortage
of materials suitable for this branch
of education and it was this need that
prompted Unesco, towards the end 01
1948. to launch n project for the pre-
paration of sample audit-visual ma
terials for fundamental education.
In view of the promising work
already carried out in this field by
China. Unesco asked Mr Hugh Hub-
bard, its regional representative there,
to discuss the project with the Chinese
authorities.
The original plan was to make the
experiment a joint enterprise between
Unesco and three Chinese agencies-
the Chinese Mass Education Move-
ment, the Kiangsu Provincial College
at Wusih and the Audio-Visual Centre
of Nanking University.
EARLY this year, however, comma.E nieation  between Eastern and
Western China became extremely dif-
ficult owing to the war in China and
it was decided to carry out the project
in the experimental"field"of the
Mass Education Movement at Pehpei,
about 25 miles north of Chungking.
Here, in West China, virtually cut
off from the coast where most of the
technical facilities are situated, the
project team is forced to work with
very limited equipment and facilities.
The purpose of the project was to
prepare sets of filmstrips and posters,
slides, cards, plays or other dramatic
Mr Norman McLaren. o (Canada's National Film Board, recently arrive) n
China to join Unesco's Audio-Visual Project team. Above, he applies his
original technique of drawing cartoons directly on film. (C : NFB rhot,,).
at Huang Ke Chen where a campaign
for vaccination, without the use of
visual aids, was launched by the Mass
Education Movement a few weeks be-
fore the experiment. As a result of
the use of audio-visual aids, many
more people came in and asked to be
vaccinated.
To test the effectiveness of the new
materials, two local areas, Shih Tze
Hsiang and Kuang Ke Chen have
been chosen, each having a popula-
tion of about 11, 000 people. The
surveys in these areas will be carried
out by the sociology department of the
College of Rural Reconstruction at
Pehpei, which co-operates closely with
the project activities.
Although the material limitations
l1h'an hardship for the staff, the value
of the project gains by the fact that
the experience obtained will be useful
ill the future, for technical facilities
are likely at best to be rudimentary
III most"fundamental education"
arenas.
The audio-visual project will pro-
bably be completed by the end of 1949,
after which a report on the work will
be published and samples of the mate-
rials produced made available to the
governments of Unesco's Member
States.
media with human or puppet actors,
recordings for broadcasts and a short
16 mm. animated cartoon film.
As one of China's greatest needs is
"education for-health", the topic
chosen for the project's productions
was"A Healthy Village"so as to illus-
trate, simply but vividly, to the Chi-
nese peasants the rules of hygiene and
means of protection against disease.
Later, it was decided to prepare
materials on such subjects as smallpox
and vaccination, trachoma, safe drink-
ing water and food, the use of D. T. T.,
health habits and tetanus.
By the end of May, the team hadproduced three hand coloured
filmstrips ; four wall posters, hand-
bills and a connected plctun'on vac-
cination ; five sets of drawings for Him
strips, posters, handbills and a picture
story on trachoma. Work is now
being done on the subjects of safe
drinking water and food.
In August, Mr Norman McLaren,
head of the Animation Department of
the National Film Board of Canada,
flew to China as a special technical
adviser to the project staff, which
includes six Chinese artists. During
his four months'assignment, Mr Mc-
Laren will train the artists in anima-
tion techniques for the eventual pre-
paration of a cartoon film.
The first practical application of the
materials already prepared was made
