* ONE fifth of the world's people live in India. * YET annual increase in population is 5 millions.
* OVER 10 million people die every year in India. * 70 % of India's people depend on agriculture.
* FORTY percent of chi ! dren die before age of 5. * YET only 53 percent of land is SOWl1 with crops.
Population Problems Of India
by Dr. Sriþati Chandrasekhor
PART. II
In our April issue, Dr. S.
ChaMdrasethar, head or the
Department at Economics, Anna-
malai Universit1l. Chidambaram,
Indian, discussed some ot the main
causes underlying the population
problems of Pakistan and India. ! pn : x o/PcMtan OKd 7 ? : dt0.
We pub ; ish below a second
article in which the author
examines possible answers to
these problems. The two articles,
in expanded form, will shortly be
published as part of the Unesco-
: : ponsored"Food and People"
pamphlet series.
Last months, Dr. Chandrasekhar
concluded b1l stating that the
population problem has to be
considered in relation to the means
of sustenance, main'y food supply.
II NDIAN agriculture is characterized,
by primitive methods of farming,
dependence on the vagaries of the
monsoon, sub-division and fragmen-
tation of land, consequent on the Hindu
, and Moslem laws in inheritance (which
, enjoin the succession to immovable pro-
. perty by all male heirs, usually in equal
, proportion) leading to uneconomic hold-
ings and to excessive dependence by the
majority of the people on land for
livelihood.
The primitive technique of Indian
'farming is responsible not only for the
low yield per capita, even when compared
to countries like Japan and China, but
also for the gradual deterioration of land
with soil erosion and deforestation.
This does not mean, however, that
there is no scope for improving Indian
farms and their yields. According to 1939
official statistics, one third of the culti-
vable land in both India and Pakistan
lies idle-not fallow.
Thus of a cultivable area of 432 million
acres, only 53 per cent is sown with crops,
11. 8 per cent is fallow, and no less than
35. 8 per cent of land is cultivable but
left waste.
India has, therefore, not exhausted thejléifpply of her cultivable land, and what
is cultivated appears to be eroded and
exhausted because of the primitive tech-
nique of farming. With modern methods
or agricultural science, of erosion preven-
tion and soil reclamation, the cultivated
land can be made to double its present
yield and bring much of the so-called
; cultivable waste under profitable culti-
. fvation. Such an improvement is welcome
; but it will touch only a fringe of the
problem.
''while increased yield and more acreage
. (if cultivation are possible with the aid
., off science, they cannot by themselves
afford a better standard of living to the
Indian population, or completely solve the
population problem, unless and until a
substantial number of people now depen-
dent on land are transferred two some
other productive employment like indus-
trtes.
lndustrializaiion
INDUSTRIALIZATION is often offer-ed as a stock remedy for Indian popu-
lation problems. The industrialization
that has taken place in India durin the
last thirty years, however, has not helped
to ease population pressure because it
has been piecemeal and unplanned, and
the percentae of population gainfully
employed in modern industry has been
less than one per cent of the total popu-
lation.
Only planned large-scale and rapid in-
dustrialization and the development of
cottalte industries-there need be no con-
flict between these two-can keep pace
witil the growling population and siphon
and Pakistan
off the surplus population from the over-
crowded land to factories.
India's industrialization is important
in the solution of her population prob-
lems for two reasons. It will increase
the oroductivity of labour and create an
abundance of badly needed commodities
and services and transform the present
economy of scarcity into an economy of
abundance. Secondly, and this is probably
more important for India, industrialization
will encourage the development of new
urban patterns of living which lead to
the control of the high birth rate.
Migration
WHAT about migration as a soln-
tion to the Indian population
problem ? As far as external or
international emigration is concerned,
there seems to be no opening, because
the World has not reached the stage for
the adoption of an international migra-
tion policy based on the just needs and
available resources of various countries
and peoples. And once we grant, as we
must, that every country must have the
right to determine the composition of
her population, India cannot object to
the unwillingness of certain countries,
however thinly-populated they may appear
to be, to receive large numbers of Indian
immigrants.
Nor does India want to create unhappy
minority problems as in the Union of
South Africa. The total number of In-
dians settled overseas as permanent
immigrants to-day number about four
and a half million, but the annual in-
crease of India's population is about five
millions. Even were emigration outlets
available, it is unreasonable to expect a
major portion of this increasing popula-
tion to leave their homeland. For India,
such relief may not even be a permanent
solution.
As for the possibility of internal migra-
tion as a method oi relieving the popu-
lation pressure, there is not much scope
either, because there are no empty spaces
within the geographical confines of India
and Pakistan.
CERTAIN patterns of inter-provincial
migration established in India dur-
ing the last thirty years show that
inter-provincial migration has been
constantly going on. We have no reliable
figures, but these population movements
are more of a seasonal migration and do
not have any permanent effects. And
then. when one group of people have
moved out of a certain province, another
group of people seem to be moving in.
So the net result of such inter-and-
intra-provincial movements does not seem
t'constitute any relief to the pressure
on the land.
If migratory movements between differ-
ent regions are to be explained as a
response to the"pull"of prosperity from
less crowded areas, rather than the
"push"of poverty from overcrowded areas,
there are no regions in India where the
standard of living of the masses is
markedly higher than in the rest of
India. Thus, whatever the internal mi-
gration that has taken place in the last
thirty years in India, this has been in
response to rigorous famines or the con-
struction of new irrigation projects and
canals, rendering the cultivation of more
land possible.
In these circumstances, internal migra-
tion offers no substantial relief from
population pressure And the partition
of the country, which has already forced
upon both India and Pakistan communal
migrations, renders the prospects of inter-
provincial migration dim.
Birth Control
he last and the most importantsolution is that of Birth Control.
It is too late in the day for India.
to discuss the pros and cons of Birth
Centre !. The arguments for and against
contraceptives have been advanced and
the scientific verdict has been injavour
of it. Birth Control appears to De an
important solution. It certainly has &
vital role to play in India's population
policy, along with the modernization of
agriculture and the industrialization of
the Indian economy.
Apart from the general rural conser-
vatism of the masses that offers resis-
tance to every reform, there is no orga-
nized resistance either by the government
or the church as in some countries. Nor
are the Indian religions opposed to
planned parenthood It will not be &
hard task, therefore, to enlighten the
public mind in India as to the benefits
ot Birth Control.
Human Conservation
ESPITE the unprecedented scientificadvances in the world during the
last thirty or forty years, there is
an enormous human loss in India from
conception to old age. With all the avail-
able resources of scientific knowledge,
skill and facilities for protecting people's
health, and curing or alleviating the many
ills and disabilities to which people are
exposed, India continues to waste thou-
sands of human lives.
Despite our belief in the intrinsic value
of human life as a central value of our
culture, we have offered resistance to
certain reforms that encourage healthy
and purposeful living. Human erosion and
loss, therefore, persist long after they
have become unnecessary because of
certain traditional ideas and beliefs that
still linger from the past.
While belief in"fate"as a controlling
factor is slowly tending to disappear, it
has not disappeared completely. These fate,-
listic beliefs persist in every society, but
much more so in India, long after they
have been rendered obsolete bv scientific
knowledge which is powerless to displace
them.
The way out in thi3 matter is to give
up clinging to archaic ideas and practices
that are no longer valid according to
present knowledge, nor compatible with
democratic affirmation of human values.
