THE ROLE OF SCIENTIFIC-.,
ABSTRACTING JOURNALS
(l'r HE scientist is a person with
,, unique requiremEnts as regards
M the dissemination of information.
Whether he be a bacteriologist or phy-
biologist or chemist working in a labora-
tory. or a field worker, such as a geologist
or an expert in tropical medicine, his
efforts, if successful, result in the dis-
covery of new facts of value to mankind.
Yet his discovery, great or small-his ad-
dition to the stockpile of man's knowledge
- would be ineffective and useless unless
communicated to his fellow-scientists.
If. for example, his work results in the
discovery of a new antibiotic substance
useful to medicine in the treatment of a
tropical disease, it becomes immensely
important that all physicians and health
officers in the tropics, wherever the
disease may exist, be promptly informed.
No one knows how many scientists are
at work in the world's laboratories and
field stations. No one knows how many
scientific reports are published. The esti-
mates of experienced documentalists and
librarians vary greatly.
r ONSERVATIVELY it has been
M, estimated that at least 750. 000 re-
ports (scientific papers) are pub-
lished annually-and some authorities
place the number as high as 2. 000. 000
annually. Some of these research reports
appear as technical books, dissertations,
and bulletins. but mostly they appear as
articles in scientific periodicals, and such
per : oaicals number possibly 50. 000. No
library possesses all of them. hence, inter-
library borrowing and the distribution of
photographic copies of documents are im-
PQrtant features in the dissemination of
information among scientists.
The process of discovery itself is enor-
mously facilitated by information passed
on from one research worker to another.
An item of information possessed by a
bacteriologist in Prague may prove to be
precisely the item required by a researcher
in New Yolk to bring his experimentation
to a successful conclusion.
The attack of science upon the evils of
disease and malnutrition and poverty
could be immensely facilitated if more
effective devices were available to promote
By
Dr. JOHN E. FLYNN,
Editor-in-Chief, Biological Abstracts,
Philadelphia.
the dissemination of information and the
sharing of experience.
The sheer magnitude of the published
record of the sCIences is perhaps the
greatest impediment to its effective use.
A man undertaking research on the con-
trol of typhus, if he attempted to read all
that h ; s fellow-scientists engaged on the
same and similar problems were pub-
lishing, might spend all his waking hours
locating and reading the published record
- and still miss important information.
"w 0 conserve the researcher's time formore productive labour. yet g. ve him
full information as to the progress
others are making, scientists of many
nations h ve developed organizations for
the perusal and abridgement or"abstract-
ing"of scientific reports in the various
departments of science. These organiza-
tions, known as abstracting or indexing
services, are usually non-profit organiza-
tions set up by scientific bodies, sometime. s
assisted by goveu-nmental subsidy. Typi-
cally they consist of research workers or
members of university faeuities. working
on a part-time basis, gratis or for merely
nominal compensation, reading and
abridging the scientific papers in their
own fields of competence for the benefit
of their fellow-scientists.
Many of the abstracting services employ
highly trained specialists to evaluate as
well as to abridge the reports assigned to
them for study. Since scientific papers in
large number appear in languages not
commonly understood, as Finnish. Hun-
garian, Turkish, Arabic and Japanese.
many of the abstracting services emu ; soy
scientists who are also skilled linguists
to abstract such papers in the languages
more commonly in use.
T HERE are several hundred such
abstracting services m existence at
the present time. Some are local. or
restricted to the service o ! & limited.
branch of knowledge ; others are far-
flung organizations with thousands of
readers and scores or even hundreds of
part-ume editors. Accordmg to a survey
recently carried out by the International
Federation for Documentation, there are
font-two such services publishing 4. 000 or
more abstracts per annum. Many fields of
research lack such services, others ace
poorly served. Scientists and documental-
ists generally agree that scarcely any
domain of man's knowledge is adequately
served, and that improvement and ex-
tension of the abstracting and indexing
services is imperative if important ad-
vances are not to be wasted and remain
unused.
Scientist of all nations, Unesco and
mankind generally, have an important
stake in this process of the publication of
whatever is discovered In the laboratories
throughout the world. Speed in the publi-
cation dissemination and application of
whatever is new is of the utmost im-
portance, in medicine, in public health, in
agriculture, in chemistry, and in fact in
all the disciplines in which scientists are
working. The stockpile of man's recorded
scientific knowledge, increasing daily.
must be freely available to all who need
the information it contains.
