by
Trevor THOMAS
IN recent years there has been agreat increase of interest in the
part which art can play in educa-
tion, not merely as subjects such
as painting, music, dance or drama in
the school syllabus but as a principal
means towards education. We all need
the arts in our daily lives and they play
a much more important par tin our ge-
neral well-being than many of us rea-use.
Apart from the
ways in which we
decorate our homes,
or choose our
clothes or layout
our gardens, most
of us go the theatre,the cinema, the concert nail, tl1e aance
floor, or even sit at home alongside the
radio, in order to relax from our
regular routine. These are mostly
forms of passive relaxation but is
through the most active forms of
artistic creation that the greatest per-
sonal satisfaction can be found, as
one world-renowned statesman has
recently testified in his war memoirs.
One of the projects which come wit-
hin the framework of Unesco's aim in
promoting international understandingIS concerned with the role of the arts
in general education. It is intended to
find out what is being done by various
people in different parts of the world in
reference to art education, in order to
circulate this information.
Unesco has just published the flrst
issue of a Bulletin entitled « Arts and
Education)) (Publication NO 349) which
in future will be published quarterly as
separate issues in French and in Eng-
lish. In the first issue there is a gene-
ral account of this project, the range of
subjects which it covers.
Towards World Peace
do. Thomas Munro, of the Cleveland. : \Museum of Art, U. S. A., contributes
the main article, an authoritative
account of interchange in the arts as
a means to world peace and of the
place of the arts in education. He
writes that underlying the Unesco pro-
ject is"a belief that the arts can and
should be used as a means to interna-
tional understanding... and to develop
mutual tolerance and friendship". He
advocates that the arts should be used
in a systematic way under some such
administration as that of Unesco, and
points out that it is"not enough to
train and encourage artists themselves,
or even to help circulate their works
among the general public".
Of the other items in this Bulletin,
one of the most stimulating is an ac-
count by M. Marcel Cuvelier, Director-
General of the Brussels Philharmonic
Society, of the creation in Belgium in
1940 and extraordinary subsequent de-
velopment of the movement known as... Jeunesses Musicales"which aims at
encouraging young people to appreciate
and perform good music.
Forbidden by the Germans, this move-
ment carried on clandestinely during
the occupation, spread its influence to
other European countries and North
Africa, and after the war held the first
Congress of the International Federation
of Musical Youth which has now be-
come an annual event with its own
international orchestra of young mu-
simians.
From the Museum of Modern Art in
New York, Mr Victor d'Amico sends an
account of two major activities sponsor-
ed by the Museum in the interests of
art and education. The first is the Com-
mittee on Art Education which is an or-
ganization of teachcers, parents and
students acting as a forum for the ex-
change of ideas through its conferen-
ces. It has workshops and groups for
the discovery and development of
new and improved
methods.
But perhaps it is
the second activity,
the People's Art
Centre, °organizedLO nelp satIsry me
creative needs of the community",
which is of the widest interest because
it provides classes for children and
adults in which they can receive expert
guidance of a practical character.
Schools, institutions and individuals
who want or can provide information
on the arts and education are invited
to communicate with the Programme
Specialist for Arts and Education at
UNESCO House, 19, Avenue K) eber,
Paris-16'.
