III ow can we ensure that the one
to two million articles. published
M) each year in abo t 50, 000 sci ntific
journals and reviews, are really
brought to the notice of all scientists
throughout the world ?
Peihaps the best way is through the
publication of scientific abstracts. But
though more than 500 internauonaHy-
known journals are already performing
this task, the result is still far from satis-
factory. For it is well known that certain
bcanches of science and certain countries
are badly neglected bv the abstracting
services.
"No scientist should have to read more
than two general abstracting journals
or more than three specialized ones",
p"0t"es50r J.-D. Bernal, of the Research
Laboratory of Birkbeck College. London
University, recently declared. At present,
however, any specialist, interested In a
new branch of science, such as crystallo-
graphy, frequently has (0") hunt through
a whole series of publications intended
mainly for physicists, chemists, mathe-
maticians, biologists or docrors in order
to find the information he needs.
Moreover, that omissions occur in
abstracting journals was found last year
by Unesco's Field Science Co-operation
OHice in Cairo, when It was compiling
its"List of Scientific Works Published
in the Middle East". This list revealed
to scientists v.-ho actually specialized in
Middle East studies, the existence of a
considerable number of works which had
been unknown to them before. Those
who were not specialists in this field
learned of periodicals which they had
never heard of before
.... Ir AN the scientific world afford
,) to run the risk. remote as it
(may appear. of remaining
ignorant for years of scientific works
which may be of considerable importance.
as we know happened in the case of
Mendel's discoveries on hereday ?"
This question was the central theme
of the speech made by the eminent
French scientist. Professor Pierre Auger,
head of Unesco's Natural Sciences
Department. at the opening f the Inter-
national Conference on Science Abstract-
A Problem
Of Vital Concern
To All Scientists
SWAMPED BY Two MILLION ARTICLES A
YEAR, RESEARCH WORKERS SEEK RELIEF IN
ABSTRACTING SERJ7ICES. UNESCO PARSLEY
MAPS WORLD PI, Al"S TO BIPROJ7E EFFECT/FE.
NESS OF SYSTEM
ing held at Unesco House from June 2 ()
to 24.
The extensive preparation made by
Unesco for this conference and the par-
ticipation of 147 specialist from 29 coun-
tries, who represented 24 world scientific
organizations, clearly demonstrated the
international importance of the problem.
This point ways stressed by M. Torres
Bodet, Director-General of Unesco'when,
at the close of the conference, he praised
the delegates for the steps they had
taken to ensure"better international cho-
ordination of abstracting services".
"It is in the very mterests of peace",
he sa : d,"to prevent the sciences from
isolating themselves in special watertight
compartments."
THE conference. which was underthe chairmanship of the soli'd
British scientist. Dr. Alexander
King, recommended as one of its steps.
the creation of a number of committees
to be responsible for coordination of
science abstracting services in different
countries or regions and in the various
specialized fields.
The main task of the regional com-
mittees would be to ensure the proper
abstract : ng and indexing of scientific
works published in these regions and see
that scientists working there can obtain
abstracts of articles published abroad.
Already, a regional committee has been
set up in. Britain. Recently, a British
scientist, Professor Sampson Wright,
made the interesting suggestion that, in
addition, national committees be [ !'Ì up
to undertake the abstracting of scientific
art : cles published in their own country

which would be of interest to other
countries.
"This system", wrote Dr. Therese Grivet
in a detailed report specially prepared
at Unesco's request for the conference,
"already appears to be work : ing in
Switzerland. Italy, Hungary. Finland,
Norway and South America and should
be extended and generalized."
The purpose of the specialized com-
mittees would be the international co-or-
dinaLon of abstractmg Sei'v : ces deaJlng
with the pure and applied sciences,
physics and the engineering science,
chemistry and agricultufe. Other special-
ized committees, to cover abstracting ser-
vices in such fields as mathematics and
crvstallography, might also be set up later
on if It were found desirable. The con-
ference suggested that Unesco and the
International Scientific Unions help in
setting up these committees.
In suggesting this procedure, the dele-
gates pfobably recalled the excellent re-
sults already obtained by the co-ordinat-
ing committee on medical and biological
abstracts.
Indeed, before the conference came to
an end. a 16-man committee of physical
scientists was officially set up along the
lines of the medical and biological
abstracting committee.
Publication of General Journal
lr HE conference also called for thepublication of a gener l abstracting
journal for both pure and applied
physio, under the auspices of a single
internationally controlled organization.
The delegates recommended"that a com-
mission composed of representatives of
organizations now responsible for publish-
Jl1g abstracts (including the Institution of
Electrical Engineers and the American
Phys_cal Society) and representatives of
interested international scientific unions,
be convened for carrying out thIS pro-
ject".
Perhaps one of the most important
resolutions passed by the Conference on
Scientific Abstracting, calls on all scien-
tific periodicals to publish synopses In
English or French of original articles in
all languages appearing in their publica-
tions. This scheme, which has already
been applied by a number of scientific
periodical, would, if adopted universally.
have far-reaching consequences in speed-
ing up the time required for publishing
abstracts. This factor would be parCcu-
lazily appreciated by scientists in the
midst of specific research tasks.
'Who's Who'in Abstracting
THE delegates suggested, finally, thatstandard termmology and present-
tion be adopted by all abstracting
journals, and pointed to the need for
publishing a complete directory ot in-
dexing and abstracting serv. ces. contain-
ing hsts of all periodicals abstracted by
the various services. This would be the
f : rst'Who's Who", as it were. in abstract-
ing ever produced.
Though scientific abstracting remain
a complex and difficult problem, appre-
ciable improvement in the services can
be achieved through intecnat : onal action,
a, he Unesco-sponsored conference una-
nimously agreed at its final meeting. For
it is this common effort that will ulti-
mately put an end to the shortcomings
of present-day abstracting services, ar. d
eliminate the barriers which seriously
hamper scientific research in many coun-
tries of the world.
During the period of the conference, an
exhibition to both delegates and the gen-
eral public, portrayed the major problems
of scientific abstracting. Diagrams, photo-
graphs and charts dealt with the func-
tioning of abstracting and documenration
services, as well as the difficulties involv-
ed in their publication and distribution
in different languages. Aids to abstracting
on display included microfilm cameras
and readers, and devices for the mechan-
ical selection of documents.
