Unesco Maps Aid Plan
. ST month, the Unesco Courier
published an account of the
broad UN plan to use more
than $ X5. 1) 00, 000 in two ycars
/or technical assistance which
had been outlined in a report
issued by the United Nations
at Lake SM ; csss.
Unesco's partic'patzon in the
joint plan was approved in its---
entirety by the Executive Board ar its meeting in Paris
on June 10. The Executive Board appointed a five-
member wor/dng party to aid the Director-General in
drafting a special programm. e and budget which will be
subs, pitted to the General Conference in September.
In view of the importance of this subject, the Unesco
Courier is devoting this page to a summary af the
proposals adopted by the Execut"ve Board for Unesco's
Iparticipation in the technical aid programme. Unesco's
plan provides for an e5timated budget off. $ 6, 150, 000 101'
the first year and $ 10, 703, 500/or the second year.
Under the extended programme of technical assistance
it will be for the recipient countries to determine in what
particular fields they want help. Unesco, therefor, has
presented the general yields in which it is competent to
give technical aid and the methods which it is ready to
use in giving such assistance.
I.-TECHNICAL EDUCATION
ANY economic development scheme that sets out really
to help an under-developed country to do something
for itself, will. sooner or later, lose its impetus if it does
not incorporate a scheme for educational development.
Most economically under-developed countries have in-
adequate systems of education, and few of them will oe
able. without technical help from outside, to keep pace
with the demands for skilled personnel that a successful
economic plan will create.
The first educational demands from economic develop-
ment schemes are likely to be for technical education.
Help and advice will be asked for at all levels, from
training III elementary handicrafts to the education of
engineers and other specialists in technological institutes.
Many under-developed countries have no knowledge,
personnel, or traditions with which to build up a technical
school system adequate to their growing needs, and want
help in such matters as organization, equipment, textbooks
and technical periodicals, the training of teachers, curri-
cula. teaching methods, the use of audio-visual aids, and
the integration of technical schools with industry. Unesco
is qualified to advise on the establishment within the
education system of laboratories and"shops"for the
practical tfaining of engineers and other higher technical
staff, and on their relationships to Universities.
II.-ELEMENTARY EDUCATION
*W ECHNICAL education worthy of the name is impos-M s. ble unless b sed on efficient and widespread ele-
mentary education. Few under-developed countries are
capable of profiting, without expert help, from the hard-
won experience that other countries have gathered in
this field over the past hundred years. They commonly
need advice, not only on such relatively concrete matters
as schcols buildings and equipment and school administra-
tion and finance, but also on the more subtle problems
that arise when a community begins to change its way of
life and when a school system tries to break away from
sterile formalism and to adapt itself to those chang : ng
needs. Many under-developed areas are in desperate need
of assistance on teaching methods, textbooks, curricula and
the training of teachers. It is rare for a narrow and
formal school system to produce educators who are
capable, unless helped from the outside, of adapting their
schools readily to the changing demands of the economic
and social system.
liXESCO METHODS : Exptora-PAST EXPERIENCE :'Unesco
tory missions, advisers, fellow-is the only agency operating in
ships, training and p. fod ? ction this field, and has had ('XP4
centres, seminars, publication of, rience in it with practical at)teachers'man al ; nd reviews,
distribution of books and ma- the methods mentioned imme-trtbution of books and ma-
terials. diately above.
III.-FUNDAIUENTAL ADULT EDUCATION
- = CONOMIC devclopment schemes, however, can
IL rarely afford to wait for a new and educated genera-
tion to gr-ow up. An attempt must be made. to educate
adults. It is a fact that some two-thirds of the human race
are unable to read and write. Whilst bare literacy is not
the end and may not even be the beginning, of education,
yet the printed word is one of the most potent means of
conveying ideas and of stirring the sleeping minds of a
people. The mind of the illiterate is often closed to ideas
that may be essential to economic and political develop-
ment. Great advances have been made during this century
in methods of literacy teaching, but so slow and uncert3in
is the spread of educational methods that many illiteracy
campaigns are even now making use of methods that were
out-of-date thirty years ago. Technical assistance would,
in most cases, save time, money, and dreary, wasted effort.
Mere literacy teaching is not enough : education must
also develop. in both children and adults, the knowledge,
the skills, and the attitudes of mind that are essential
in any under-developed community that has to preserve
its values and learn to control its own affairs durin
a period of rapid economic expansion. With Unesco must
lie some of the responsibility for ensuring in any com-
munity a reasonably balanced development.
Uaesco is prepared to offer advice and assistance on
fundamental education services generally. Since its
t-staolishmen :. its has tried to make itself competent on
such matters a.. she conducting of illiteracy campaigns for
the improvement of health, of agricultural methods and
soil ccnservanon. and of local crafts and small-scale indus-
tries ; the prods : lion and use of books, films, film-strips,
exhibits, and radio programmes adapted to use in such
four {ward Areas
.,., IfEW subjects excite the imagination more than economic development,"said Willard L.
JB-Thorp, of the United States, at a meeting early this year of the Economic and Social
Council.
Technical assistance to under-developed countries, as a contribution to peace and stability,
became a subject of special interest when President Truman, in his Inaugural Address, listed it
among the four major points of a''Bold new programme for making the benefits of our scientific
advances and industrial progress available for the improvment and growth of under-developed
areas."
''More than half of the people of the world,"the United States President stated,"are living In
conditions approaching misery. Their food is inadequate. They are victims of disease. Their economic
life is primitive and stagnant. Their poverty is a handicap and a threat both to them and to more
prosperous areas.
"For the first time in history, humanity possesses the knowledge and the skill to relieve the
suffering of these p<, ople," he said, adding,"This should be a co-operative enterprise in which all
nations work together through the United Nations and its Specialized Agencies... It must be a
world-wide effort for the achievement of peace, plenty and freedom."
campaigns ; the educational possibilities of libraries, co-
operative enterprises, and community centres ; and the
methods of conducting social surveys preparatory to over-
all community projects.
UntSco will, in many of its adult education activities.
bye dependent upon the close co-operation of s ; ster agencies
with special competence in health, agriculture and in-
dustry. In return, Unesco hopes to be able to assist other
Agencies with the educational and materials needed for
their work.
UNESCO METHODS : Explora-
tory missions, advisers, feUows-
ships. demonstration areas, pu-
blications, research exhibitions
and clearing-honse services.
PAST EXPEDIENCE : Unesco',
experience in this field is wide.
It has sent exploratory mis*
sions and advisers. organized
pilot projects, conducted semi-
nars and conferences, produced
exhibits and publications, and
carried on extensive clearings-
house services.
IV.-MASS COMMUNICATIONS AND EDUCATION
MATERIALS
IF HERE is serious need for research into the use ofN books, fiims, film-strips, the press and the radio, in
the service of economic deve : opment schemes. These are
powerful media, which have, up to the present, been
very largely neglected for th's purpose. Even the printed
word has only in relatively rare instances, been adapted
to the needs of under-developed peoples ; the number of
really good books and pamphlets specially written for
them is surprising : y small.
The film, film-strip, and radio seem to be ideally adapted
to the purposes of winning popular support in under-
developed communities. But the techniques involved are
extremely difficult : even the adaptation of the press to
the needs of the barely literate is by no means simple.
Most under-developed countries will need outside assis-
tance if they are to make much progress in the use of
these media.
UNESCO METHODS : Advisers,
research and production cen-
tres, demonstration areas, semi-
nars and other training meth-
ods.
PAST EXPERIENCE : Unesco is
making rol1ectif) n of books and
pamphlets produced throughout
theworldforuseinunder-deve-
loped areas, and is already
supporting two relatively small-
scale regional experiments in
the production of books, films
and film-strips for fundamental
educative campaigns.
V.-TECHNICAL NEEDS FOR PRESS, FILM AND
RADIO
MANY under-developed countries, however, have more
material difficulties to overcome before they can
make full use of mass media. Th ? y lack the equ : pment,
materials, any personnel to develop the us- of the press,
film and radio in the service of economic development
and education. Many of them have most inadequate
resources in such materials as paper and film stock, and
such equipment as flat-bed presses, linotype machines,
typewriters and linotypes with letters in the alphabet
of the country, radio recording equipment. rad : o receiving
sets. cine-cameras, and film projection apparatus. Most
of them lack information about source of supplv of the
kinds of materials and equipment suited t.") their needs,
and about methods of training personnel.
UNESCO METHODS : Missions,
advisers, and CrIlowships.
PAST EXPERIENCE : Unesco
has made special studies in 4t
countries to obtain information
on the operation and needs of
the press, film and radio. It has
also gathered information on on
sources of supply of matetiat
and equipment and on methods
of train : n available in 1he more
highly developed countrie. and
has given information on these
matters in response to requests.
VI.-TRAINING OF TEACHERS AND OTHER
PERSONNEL
m tNESCO'S most extensive contribution to economicdevelopment will almost certainly been the training
of workers from under-developed countries in the fie : ds
of education, science, and the educational uses of mass
media. In fundamental education, for example, the
number of really skilled persons in the world is pate-
ticaJly inadequate ; and, in technical education, even the
most advanced countries are dangerously short of
teachers. The supply of scientific workrs for under-
deve : oped countries is equally insufficient for the task
ahead. The same applies to trained librarians and docu-
mentalists. When we turn to the radio and the film
we find even fewer people with the knowledge and skill
to use these media effectively in the service of economic
development.
An under-developed country can scarcely hope, without
assistance from the outside, to make much progress
towards meeting its needs for educators, scientists, and
technicians. It is for this reason that schemes of training
loom lacge in Unesco's plans for technical assistance.
Nearly every agency will need to make plans for train-
ing schemes within its own field of competence. Unesco
will have the additional duty of being a centre of in-
formation on training techniques in general.
UNESCO METHODS : Training
centres, feltowships and scholar-
ships, seminars and symposia.
demonstration projects, scientific
and industrial institutes.
PAST EXPERIENCE : Unesco's
experience covers : seminar.
symposia, fellowship, demons-
tration area, production cen-
tres, and the establishment of
one region at institute.
VII.-RESEARCH AND TRAINING LABORATORIES
18= CONOMIC development. s bound up with technical t
IL development and cannot be considered as durable if.
it is not backed by a certain amount of scientific and
technical research. This research serves a double purposes :
first, it provides for the necessary adjustment and amend.
ments to established techniques so that they can be
applied successfully under new conditions ; secondly, the
research laboratories provide the best kind of training tor
the highest technical staff and for future professors and
teachers in higher technical education.
The organization, equipment and programmes of the
laboratories must be very carefully planned by a team of
skilled scientists, whose services must be made available
over a considerable period.
UNESCO METHODS : Advisory
missions, Field Science Offices,
Fellowships, Scientific andTech-
nicaiResearchinstitutes.
PAST EXPERIENCE : Unesco't
field science offices have already,
within the limits or their powers.
given advice on the organiza-
tion of research laboratories.
Scientific Information
j
 ROGRAMME of economic development. will create a
18-'growling demand, in under-developed countries of
the world, for scientific information and liaison serv. ccs.
These can be most easily provided by international agen-.
cies. Information will be requested on scientific material
of all kinds, including material needed for scientific and,
technical teaching at every level and material for research
laboratories. There will also be a demand for information.
on scientific literature, and in most cases for the supply
of scientific books and journals and for advice on library
methods. These services will keep scientists and research.
workers within the regions in contact with recent deve. : gap.
ments in their respective fields throughout the wc'-Id.
A scientific information service has a second function,
that of helping the general public in an area to a deeper
understanding of the scientific principles and practices
that will play an increasing role in their lives as the
economic development scheme progresses. Without some
such education in the meaning and place of science in
everyday life. the inhabitants of an undeveloped area are
unlikely to be willing and intelligent participants in.
development schemes based on technical advances. Exh :-
bitions, pamphlets, science clubs and the like, will be
amongst the methods used.
UNESCO METHODS : Field
Science Offices, distribution
centres (nor books and period-
cats, advisory missions, publica-
tions and exhibitions.
FAST EXPERIENCE : Unesco
has had useful experienee in
these matters, through it field
science offices and its division
for scientific literature. The
book-coupon scheme has served
the same purpose,
VIH-REGIONAL PROBLEMS RAISED
BY INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
p OR many country, es economic development means
II some measure of industria) ization making for a more
complete use of all possible natural resources. The
earliest secondary industries to be developed will, in
general be those based on mining and agriculture. To be
really effective such industrialization necessitates an
inventory of all thy available natural resources, backed up
by a systematic study of the pecial problems encol'nte :-'e'd
in each type of area. Very often, local authoraies could
proceed with plans to develop these regions.
Economic development naturally produces quite dLf.
ferent problems in diiferent areas. These areas can be
classified in a small number of basic categories. The ism-
portant problems peculiar to each type of region need an
all-over scientific study in order that its economic develop-
ment can be founded. on a really sol. d basis of technical
knowledge. We can classify the regions as : the arid zone.
the humid tropical zone, the high altitude plateau, and
the coastal region. In each case it will be necessary tO
(Coøt : oued OR Pare 11),","þ.,
others, but it includes the oran-
ization of missions covering
technical education, and the
giving off advice through field
science offices. It is a) so con-
ductin ;- an f'xtensive snrvry in
the teaching of science, and has
given assistance to trchnical
schools in war-devastated areas.
UNESCO METHODS : Use of
exploratory missions, tC3ms of
advisers, field science offices.
feliowships. and general clear-
ing-house services. (See B.
bl ! low).
PAST EXPERIENCE : Unesco's
past experience In this field is
not as extensive as in many
The Scientific Instruments Ser..
vice has provided extensive in-
formation on research appara-
tus to meet local needs and on
its availability (catalogues. des41
criptions, prices). The Rccons-'
truction Department has bought
and shipped apparatus in large
quantities.

Unesco Maps Technical Aid
(Continued from page 10)
make a study of the conditions of human and animal life,
of the production of energy, of hydrography, of the use of
vegetable and mineral resources, and of the relation of
each of these fields to all the others. Such studies could
best be made in institutes peculiar to each type of region.
Unesco could be responsible for the initial organization
and operation of such institutes. They cùuld be used for
the training of specialists who could evenwaJly take over
the direction of the institutes.
L'UNESCO METHODS : Explora-
tory missions, adviser. field
science co-operation offices,
institutes of technics ! itnd scien-
tific research, symposia follow·
whips.
PAST EXPERIENCE : Unesco
took the initiatÎvf'in the estab-
lishment of the Hylean Amazon
Institute, the research program-
me of which will be directed
towards the development of a
region which has all the char-
acteristics of a tropical humid
zone. Through its Field Science
Offices, Unesco has been able
to help solve special local in-
dustrial problems.
IX.-PROTECTION OF LOCAL CULTURES
UNLESS education accompanies technolOl1 ; ical de-velopment programmes, the cultural values of a
country are almost necessarily undermined, and the
cultural values of the nation oc nations giving the assis-
tance are subtly substituted for them. But not any or
every form f education will avert this ev : I. Even educa-
tion can be a disruptive force unless it is geared to the
cultural and social needs of a particular people. Other-
wise, it can lead merely to the creation of a class of
uprooted intellectuals.
History furnished dramatic examples of societies thrown
into upheaval-sometimes with grave consequence for
the world-by unbalanced programmes of industrializa-
tion. The gravest examples come from lands where what
was mistakenly assumed to be"progress"was brought
from without.
Such examples make it obviously necessary to associate
with projects of economic development specialists with
experience in anthropology and sociology. Their advice
wit ! help to ensure that the economic development scheme
conform to the way of life valued by the people them-
selves The assistance of social scientists is obviously not
enough in itself to enable a scheme to avoid all the
risks inherent in major social change.
When a mission is sent to survey the technical needs
and problems of a given country, an expert should be
included in the team to conduct on the spot a survey of
the cultural and sociological factors involved and to call
attention to the sociological implications on the projected
assistance programme. The primary function of this
expert should be to advise on protecting the native
culhje, as the protection of national cultures is one
of Unesco's duties.
In addition to protecting the native cultures, the
services of experts can often be useful in stimulating
local industries based on native arts crafts. Technical
assistance need not and should not be a one-way process.
The under-developed areas have much to contribute to
the lest of the world, not only through increased pro-
duction in the economic field, but in the cultural field
as well. Already there is a considerab : e market in the
industrialized countries for the products off artists and
clafTsmen in certain of the under--developed areas. This
market could be greatly expanded if native artists and
craftsmen were taught to adapt their traditional tech-
niques and designs to fit trade needs in the industrialized
countries, without at the same time lower'. no the artistic
quality of their works. Preserving them not only helps
protect the culture as a whole, but also conserves
potential economic resource and ultimately makes
available to members of other cultures valuable items
in the general cultural heritage of mankind.
UNESCO METHODS : Use of
sociologists and anthropologists
and authorities on native arts
and crafts as members of expio-
ratory missions and as advisers
to lovernments engaging in
economic development schemes.
PAST EXPERtEXCE : Through
its activities in the field of
the social sciences Unesco Is In
permanent contact with nations-
al and InternatJenal orlaniza-
tions of anthropolosists, seeio-
legists, and other soda. l 1 ('lea--
tists It bas also bren onerD-
end with studies on the relation-
ship of technolo :, y... BOcial
tensions, which ('  Inv. lve maD}..
the problems that will be en-
countered in economic develop-
ment schemes. ( : nesce bu
already carried out three into=
dTe antbropolð, kal.. r., eya..
the type referred to aMTe,...
JlrOJlo. e. t. publi5b a 
.. sarvey methods.
\ N unusua) little book, wr'ten by a Rio de Janeiro journalist,
named Raimundo Souza Dantas, is now being printed by the
Brazilian Ministry of Education for distribution to students
in adult illiteracy classes throughout Brazil Souza Dantas, who is only
28 years old, is the editor of one of Rio most important daily
newspapers. And yet, less than it years ago, he was totally illiterate :
In the book. which the Brazilian Government is publishing, Senhor
Souza Dantas te)) s how his entire life was suddenly transformed and
new horizons opened to him after he had learned how to read and
write.
Ag aiDs t
Illiteracy
