A BROAD EDUCATIONAL
., ,
 FOR PEOPLE
,'I 'l : : #...."
t... :'"...'FO R,", . PEOPLE
'.. ', <.. ' : ; :'"-'-.---.-.",,'l.'"-.'}' &_.. , < : -. -'... C-.
OF ALL AGES
M N his inaugurat address on December10. 1948, before the General Con-
ference in Beirut, Dr. Torres Bodet,
Director General of Unesco, pointed out
that"no clear-cut line can be drawn
between the duties of the educator and
the obligations of the diplomat".
"For", he said."if the former brings up
new generations to believe in intolerance,
in conformity with some inhuman form
of nationalism, the diplomat in his turn
will find himself compelled to pursue a
policy of aggression or to practise tactics
"dictated by spite or envy. Peoples, in their
'-international conduct reveal the same
characteristics that they have revealed in
the class-room at school."
Unesco feels, in effect, that by getting
teachers to think internationally and to
understand other customs and habits, it
will be paving the road for global thinking
by the younger generations.
The Beirut Conference called upon all
teachers and educationists to make every
effort"in primary and secondary schools...
both in teaching and in framing pro-
grammes of study, to avoid inculcating
by word or implication, the belief that
lands, peoples and customs other than
one's own are necessarily inferior, or are
otherwise unworthy of understanding and
sympathy".
International-Minded Teachers
UNESCO itself has mapped out a pro-gramme designed to encourage inter-
nationaJ-mindedness amongst teachers
and young people alike, through educa-
tional seminars. the revision of textbooks.
educational missions. competitions for
youth and through its work towards an
Educational Charter foe Youth.
Unesco will, of course, continue to
develop its overall programme to im-
prove educational standards generally
throughout the world, by serving as an
educational"exchange and mart", and
providing information on the contributions
of each country and its most pressing
needs in education.
Among the more active methods which
will be carried out during the next twelve
months for bringing about this cross-
fertilization of educational ideae. are the
ioUowmg.
t Schools and Youth
'u NESCO will attempt to find ways ofassociating th  youth of the worldwith all of Unesco's pr gramme in
general. Last year, for example, the Or-
ganlzation launched two competitions-an
essay and a Dostec contest-to arouse
interest in Unesco's work. Entries for
these competitions must be posted before
July 1, 1949, and later in the year Un=
will announce the winners and make the
awards. These will consist of grants for
travel abroad, either for study or to
attend a conference on world affairs, or
to purchase books and other educational
material.
Unesco, however, is onlv one part of the
family of the United Nations. The
Teachers'Seminar held in New York last
year prepared a large number of materials
to help in teaching about the UN and its
Agencies. These are now being edited and
will be sent to Member States early in
1949, along with a forthcoming publications
on"Suggestions and Recommendations on
Teaching about the UN and its Agencies".
During 1949. Unesco will place special
emphasis on the development of inter-
national understanding through geography
teaching. A Teachers'Guide, showing
how, by using an historic approach, pupils
between 15 and 18 years of are can be
interested in the DECLARATION OF
HUMAN RIGHTS will also be prepared.
Unesco will continue to work toward an
international Charter for Youth.
This Charter, which would complement
the Declaration of Human Rights, would
specify that distinctions of colour. race.
sex or religion should not operate against
any groll9 of young people and that no
young person should be deprived of in-
struction suited to his capacities by reason
of financial handicap.
In many of its activities to encourage
education for international understanding
in schools. Unesco will continue to work
in close collaboration with the United
Nations itself, and with other interna-
tional orga. nizaWms slICh as the Interna-
tional Bureau of Education (IBE) in
Oeneva.
Educational Missions
E of Unesco's chief functions in thefield off Education is to find out the
most urcent needs of its Member States
and to help out, where it can, in meeting
these needs.
Several of Unesco's Member States have
asked the Organization to send"Educa-
tional MißSions"to help them survey and
improve their educational systems. Two
missions have already been arranged for
1949 to visit the Philippines and Afghanis-
tan.
The Philippine Government is considec-
ing the re-organization of its Educational
system, and with this in view, has asked
Unesco to undertake a survey of its
elementary, secondary and adult educa-
tion. The mission will probably begin work
at the end of January 1949.
The Afghanistan Mission will study the
vocational education system of the country
as well as elementary and secondary
education.
It is hoped that a thicd Mission will be
organized in 1949...,'--'r."
Educational Seminars.
./HAT started out as an experiment
two years ago in bringing teachers
and educators from different parts
of the world together to talk over their
special problems and getting to under-
stand one another's ways, has had such
success that Unesco's General Conference
in Beirut decided to put its international
teachers'Seminars On a more permanent
footing.
Unesco will therefore arrange for two
more Seminars in 1949 and prepare for a
further two in 1950.
The first 1949 Seminar, to be held in
India, will discuss adult education in rural
areas. The second (in Brazil) to be
planned as a joint enterprise of the Pan
American Union, the Government of
Brazil and Unesco, will have as its theme
the problem of combatting illiteracy.
In addition, Unesco will begin the prep-
aration of materials and documentation
for the two 1950 Seminars, one on the
teaching of geography in relation to inter-
national understanding, and the other on
the revision of textbooks, with special
emphasis on history books.
.
Improvements of Textbooks
THIS Seminar on textbook revision willundoubtedly serve to'highlight the
work carried out by Unesco in. 1948 and
1949 in the general field of textbook im-
provement.
Unesco has already worked out a set
of principles and criteria as well as a
Model Plan that will help countries to
analyse their school textbooks to prevnt
exaggerated national bias. These criteria
and the Model Plan will be published as a
handbook by the end of January 1949.
Work with Universities
AS another step in its programme tobring word educators together to talk
over their problems and learn each other's
ways, Unesco called a conference of
university leaders in 1948. This meeting
decided to create a world Universities
Bureau which will be set up in 1949 and
will serve as a clearinlr house for all
matters of interest to colleges and uni-
versities the world over.
WI< : have seen that Unesco is strivingVv to buud the will for world peace
by reaching out to the minds of
young persons in elementary and secon-
dary schools, that it is drawing teachers
and university leaders together from all
corners of the globe.
Unesco's aim, however, is to reach out
to the minds of ordinary citizens every-
where. This means that Unesco cannot
neglect the education of the whole adult
population and that it must look to the
needs of the millions who still lack the
very basic elements of education (Funda-
mental Education).
Adult Education
AN important change has taken placein recent years in the very conception
of Adult Education. In many countries it
was originally conceived to fin the gaps
left by inadequate schooling or to provide
apprenticeship training for a trade.
Today, adult education is also concerned
with meeting the needs for further edu-
cation of those who have even had a
university education.
,. Today adult education activities range
from evening courses to musical and
dramatic performances. It includes do-
mestic and technical training and
nourishes such leisure-time interests as
the arts and crafts, folk-dancing and
hobbies.
Unesco feels that the time is ripe for
the pooling of techniques and experiments
in this rapidly developing field. To provide
workers in adult education with their first
opportunity since the war for exchanging
ideas on the most characteristic develop-
ments in each country and to ensure
among them a feeling of common respons-
ibility, Unesco is calling a Conference on
Adult Education in 1949.
Every country in the world-whether a
member of Unesco or not-will be invited
to send representatives to the meetings
which will be held in Denmark. To prepare
adult education leaders for this con-
ference, Unesco has already published an
attractive pamphlet on Adult Education
which Is being distributed throughout
Member States..
In addition. Unesco has been gathering
information on adult education develop-
ments alt over the world which will be
incorporated into an International Direc-
tory on Adult Education, to be published
in 19411.
Fundamental Education
IN many parts of the world, millions of- *-men. women and children still live
in the most primitive ignorance and su-
perstition. These people lack the basic
intellectual tools of modern existence. Not
only must they learn to read and write,
but they must also be taught how to
check disease, how to use machines, how
to grow their food more efficiently. They
must also acquire the ability to govern
themselves. Only thus can they become
useful partners in a world community.
The Fundamental Education campaigns
carried out during the past years by coun-
tries such a. s China. Mexico, and Turkey
represent only a"dcop in the fundamental
education bucket", as it were.
Similar experiments are being carried
out effectively in many remote spots on
the globe. Until now, the results of these
efforts have not been available in system-
matic, co-ordinated form, to that work in
one country has rarely benefitted workers
in another.
Unesco's Clearing House in Funda-
mental Education is an attempt to pool
such information, analyze it and make
it available to field workers everywhere.
In 1949, Unesco will begin publication of
a Quarterly Bulletin of Fundamental
Education as well as a : Monthly Abstrad
Service of articles to fill this much-needed
gap.
HAITI PILOT PROJECT : In 1948. Unesco
undertook preliminary surveys for a
Pilot Project in the Marbial Valley of
Haiti. Pending a report from the
CARTOONS FOR EDUCATION :
in IMS, unesco began work on a Fun-
damental Education experiment, rich
in potentialities, in which an animated
cartoon specialist will attempt to
"marry"the work of Chinese artists
with Western techniques of animation.
In this wholiy new enterprise, Unesco
is co-operating with Jimmy Yen's
famous Mass Education Movement in
China in the production of sample
films, film-strips, charts and other
materials for the education oi illiterate
adults.
The first theme on which materials
are being prepared for 1949 is"A
Healthy Village". The Mass Education
Movement in China will provide a
testing ground for all the teaching
materials produced.
United Nations Mission to Haiti, on
which Unesco was represented, final
decisions as to the nature and scope
of the project was held up. In the
meantime, however, there has been
quite a remarkable upsurge of spon-
taneous activity amongst the inhabi-
tants of the Marbial Valley as a result
of Unesco's preliminary survey. During
the coming year it is hoped that this
undertaking will be able to show posi-
tive, definite results.
