THREE MONTHS PROGRESS IN UNESCO'S WORLD TASK
NOVEMBER 1949-
JANUARY 1950
Education
WOMEN In co-operation with
Unesco's Education Department, dele-
gates of 16 women's organizations dis-
cussed the problem of women's access
to education, and called for action to
bring present laws into line with the
educational needs of modern woman.
ADULT EDUCATION An in.ternational catalogue was completed if
organizations, teachers and specialists
working in this field.
CHINA The experimental funda-
mental education centre at Pehpei
continued to carry out its work. The
Centre is producing interesting film-
strips in colour.
ASIA The needs of Burma and
Thailand in Fundamental Education
are being studied locally. At the same
time work begun in Thailand and the
Philippines last year will be followed
up. These countries are asking Unesco
for its help in training their own spe-
cialists.
MISSIONS On the request of Bur.
ma, Bolivia and India, Unesco is pre-
paring to send missions to study their
educational problems.
SEMINARS Two semlhars are now
being prepared for this summer, one
in Canada on the teaching of geogra-
phy, the other in Brussels on the im-
provement of textbooks.
Exchange of Persons
FELLOWSHIPS The fellowship
programme for 1949 concluded with
provision of eight grants financed and
six administered by Unesco. Altoge-
ther Unesco financed 33 and admin-
istered 87 during the year. The crea-
tion of five new scholarships to be
awarded in Asiatic countries by Unesco
and the Netherlands Government was
announced at the end of the year.
Volume II of Study Abroad, Unesco's
comprehensive handbook of fellowships
and student exchanges throughout the
world, describing in detail more than
21, 000 fellowships, was published.
REFUGEES Unesco referred to the
International Refugee Organization
requests, submitted by Member States,
concerning 200 specialists and experts
in the fields of education, agriculture,
medicine and technical work. IRO is
now studying how to satisfy the re-
quests. Unesco continues to forward
suggestions to IRO about the orienta-
tion, adaptation and the material
well-being of the specialists after they
arrive at their new posts.
Mass
Communications
BUND A Committee for the Blind
met at Unesco House to discuss unifi-
cation of Braille and recommended the
creation of a world Braille Council.
This organization would co-ordinate all
possible future measures and would
form national or regional committees to
co-operate with the central council. The
Committee also formulated proposals
for the composition and agenda of the
International Congress of Experts on the
unification of Braille to meet in Paris in
may.
TECHNICAL Unesco is continuing
It investigation into
technical facilities of
mass communication in the United
States, Great Britain and Eire. Unesco
experts have already left to begin simi-
lar investigations in countries of
Europe, the Middle East, Africa, Asia
and Oceania.
CONVENTIONS Fifteen States
have already signed an agreement to
facilitate the international circulation of
visual and auditory material of an edu-
cational, scientific and cultural charac-
ter.
ARID ZONES In collaboration
with the London News Chronicle,
Unesco has sent the scientifIc editor of
that newspaper, Ritchie Calder on a sur-
vey of North Africa and the Middle East,
to study problems and resources of theArid Zones.
MARCH OF TIME On Unesco's
recommendation,"March of Time"has
made a film highlighting reconstruction
work in several European countries, as
well as their present needs.
Cultural Activities
MUSIC The first volume of the
Unesco Archives of Recorded Music
has been published and is dedicated to
the works of Frederick Chopin.
The Organization turned over to the
Ccnservatoire National de Paris a gift
of $4000 from the International Music
Fund, and inaugurated a monthly ra-
dio programme presenting the works
of young contemporary composers.
ARTS The International Review of
the Arts is being prepared, and will
soon be published. A second catalogue
of colour reproductions, devoted to
painting prior to 1860. has now been
completed. A second album of repro-
ductions, prepared with the co-opera-
tion of the Vatican and devoted to Ra-
phael's frescoes, will soon appear. Ne-
gotiations are in course with the
Australian Government to publish two
albums on Australian aboriginal art.
EXHIBITIONS Travelling exhi-
bitions organized by Unesco are being
shown in Australia, Brazil, Ecuador,
Haiti, India, Mexico, Norway, Iran, Tu-
nisia, Uruguay and in the British Afri-
can territories. Many others are being
prepared.
LITERATURE Discussions with
the PEN Club have led to a plan for
co-operation including organization of
an international gathering of writers
to take place in Edinburgh in August.
MUSEUMS Work is now under
way for the reconstruction of museums
in Austria and Italy, and also in con-
nection with the popular arts in Latin
America. In Turkey, a programme in-
volving Byzantine and Moslem ar-
chaeology is being drawn up, and will
be submitted to the Turkish Govern-
ment.
UNESCO COUPONS The sys-
tem of Unesco book coupons has been
extended to educational and scientific
films, and to scientific equipment.
Italy has joined the Book Coupon
Scheme, and its usefulness is steadily
becoming greater in all parts of the
world.
COPYRIGHT Unesco has con-
cluded its enquiry on bilateral agree-
ments in the field of copyright. The
results will be published shortly.
Natural Sciences
SCIENTIFIC EDUCATION III
the field of Natural Sciences. Unesco
has undertaken the preparation of ten
volumes on the teaching of science,
especially designed for under-deve-
loped countries. It has also completed
plans for a scientific museum to be
opened by the City of Montevideo in
Uruguay.
Unesco also held an important confer-
ence on the co-ordination of medical
science congresses, and work continues
for the foundation of an International
Institute of the Arid Zone, and the esta-
blishment of an International Computa-
tion Centre.
Social Sciences
SOCIAL RESEARCH A com-
mittee set up by Unesco to make a
study of the origins of Fascism, has
completed plans for a forthcoming
bcok on this subject.
At the request of the Government of
India. Unesco has appointed a coun-
sellor to direct a study on social ten-
sions in India.
Reconstruction
RELI EF Twenty-four relief projects
prepared by Unesco provide principally
for the supply of materials on adult
education, handicapped children, mu-
seums, and the provision of scientific
and artistic equipment.
"ORADOUR" In collaboration
with Unesco, the French National
Commission for Unesco is now examin-
ing a project to create a children's vil-
lage in"Oradour"-the French Lidice-
for orphans of deportees and political
prisoners who died in captivity.
MIDDLE EAST Donations re-ceived by
REFUGEES Uneseo during
the past three months bring to
$113, 907, the funds provided for educa-
tional assistance to child refugees in
the Middle East.
GREEK CHILDREN Twenty in-
ternational organizations have decided
to collaborate with Unesco in its
programme of educational assistance
for Greek child refugees.
WORK CAMPS Two projects  projectsfor voluntary
IN THE LANDES work camps in
the fire-regions of the Gironde and the
Là'ndes are at present under study with
the French National Commission.
Germany and Japan
Unesco's aims and activities are
being explained to the German people
through special exhibitions and lectu-
res. The creation of a Liaison Com-
mittee on Unesco is being considered.
The anniversary of the Declaration of
Human Rights was celebrated both in
Germany and Japan.
