ECOSOC RESOLUTION
ON KOREA ;
UNESCO EXECUTIVE
BOARD MEETS
The following is the text of a resolutionunanimously adopied by th  Econo-
mic and Social Council of the United
Nations, meeting in Geneva, on August
14th.
THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL
COUNCIL,
Profoundly concerned over the hardship
and suffering wrought upon the people of
Korea by the unlawfu I attack of the North
Korean forces.
Determined to do everything in its power
for the relief and support of the civil popu-
lation of Korea.
Having given due consideration to the
resolution adopted by the Security Councli
on 31 July 1950 and the request addressed
to it in that resolution, under the terms
of Article 65 of the Charter,
Bearing in mind the agreements between
the United Nations and specialized agencies
which provide for the co-operation of these
agencies with the Economic and Social
Council in rendering such assistance to
the Security Council as that Council may
request, and
Deeply conscious of its functions and
responsibilities under Chapters IX and X
of the Charter,
A.
1. Declares its readiness to provide for
such assistance as the Unified Command
may request in accordance with the
above-mentioned resolution.
B.
2. Requests the specialized agencies and
appropriate subsidiary bodies of the
United Nations to lend their utmost
support in providing such assistance as
may be requested by the Unified Com-
mand through the Secretary-General for
the relief and support of the civilian
population of Korea, and authorizes the
Secretary-General to transmit directly to
them such requests for assistance as
fall within their respective fields of
competence ;
3. Invites Governments Members of the
United Nations, the Secretary-General,
and appropriate non-governmental orga-
nizations, particularly those in consul-
tative status with the Economic and So-
cial Council, to assist in developing
among the peoples of the world the
fullest possible understanding of and
support for the action of the United
Nations in Korea and requests the
Secretary-General to seek on behalf of
the Council the co-operation of special-
ized agencies as appropriate for this
purpose ;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to
Invite appropriate non-governmental or-
ganizations to give such help as is
within their power for the relief of the
civilian population in Korea, and requests
him to make suitable administrative
arrangements in this connection ;
c.
5. Requests the Secretary-General to
render progress reports to the Economic
and Social Council on action taken under
this resolution and to include when
appropriate such other information and
observations as may be helpful for the
consideration of longer-term measures
for economic and social assistance to
the people of Korea ;
D.
Decides not to close the present ses-
sion when the Council has disposed of
the present agenda but to adjourn it
temporarily, and authorizes the Presi-
dent ; yin consultation with the Secretary-
General, to reconvene the Council at
United Nations Headquarters whenever
necessary in connection with matters
requiring action under this resolution.
As this editiQn of the Courier was
going to press, Unesco's Executive
Board began a special meeting called
by the chairman on the request of
eight members to discuss : <&lt; The
contribution of Unesco to the action
of the Unite'll Nations and Speciali : : ed
Agencies following the aggression
against Korea. >) The Board was also
due to consider the concentration of
Unesco's 1951 programme and the
extent of the Organization's actil'ities
in Germany.
