MURDER OF PEOPLES OUTLAWED BY U. N. ACTION
GEN OCIDE CONVENT I ON EFFE CTIVE JA NUARY 12. 1951
THE United Nations Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide-the deliberate mass extinction of
human groups-has now been approved by a sufficient number
of countries to bring it into force on January 12, 1951.
On October 14, five states ratified or acceded to the Convention,
bringing to 24 the number of states who have become parties-four
more than was required to bring it into force.
The text of the Genocide Convention was adopted by 58 nations
at the General Assembly of the United Nations in Paris, two years
ago.
Nations adhering to it confirm that"genocide, whether committed
in time of peace or in time of war, is a crime under international
law which they undertake to prevent and to punish."
The Convention defines Genocide as acts committed with intent
to destroy a national, ethnical, racial or religious group by killing or
causing serious bodily or mental harm to its members, inflicting on
them conditions likely to bring about its physical destruction,
imposing measures to prevent births within the group or forcibly
transferring children of the group to another group.
In addition to genocide itself other acts related to it which are
punishable under the terms of the Convention are conspiracy, incite-
ment, attempts and complicity in genocide. The Convention also pre-
scribes that persons committing genocide shall be punished, whether
they are constitutionally responsible rulers, public officials or private
individuals. ;
The States which had submitted instruments of ratification or
accession to the Convention by October 14 were the following :
RATIFICATIONS
Australia, Ecuador, EI Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Guatèmala,
Haiti, Iceland, Israel, Liberia, Norway, Panama, Philippines
(with reservations regarding Articles IV, VI, VII and IX ;,
Yugoslavia.
ACCESSIONS
Bulgaria (with reservations regarding Articles IX and XII),
Cambodia, Ceylon, Costa Rica, Hashemite Kingdom of Jor-
dan, Korea, Monaco, Saudi-Arabia, Turkey, Viet-Nam.
