ONE of the aims of iruly internationaltinkers is that history should she
written and taught, as a glohal
subject. The story of man's strug-
gle up to his present stage of culture
should context of the whole
study of human history.
This is not a new idea. Suggestions
for revising history textbooks were agreed
upon shortly after the First World War
when experts cited the fact that a third
of most hbtol'Y hooks was devoted to the
study of wars. Schemes for such revision
have been under way for many years, and
have been carried out with good results
hetween Scandinavian countries, Canada
and the United States, between several
Latin-American nations, and on a limited
scale, between some European countries.
It should be noted that these agreements
for the revision of history teaching took
place before \\'orld \\'al'II.
\\'e can still say truthfully Ihatltiston-
teaching is improving. But it is a slow
process to reduce ultra-nationalistic tend-
rncies in both writing and teaching
history. A child can be taught to regard
history as an account of the evolution or
customs and traditions. He can learn
something of peaceful developments
without, losing slight of the destruction
naused by wars.
There are many distinguished interna-
tional authorities on education who believe
Ihe basic principles for teaching history
should he changed. Some of these people
met recently at Unesco House, in Paris, to
consider draft outlines of a handbook for
history teaching which may bring about
this change. The history instruction
handbook will he printed first, next Sum-
met, after it is analyzed by a seminar on
lextbook improvement at Brussels.
Since The Time Of
Thucydides
THE draft. oulline for this work was pre-pared for tile Unesco meeting by
Mme. M. T. Maurette, of the Inter-
national School of Geneva, setting forth
some ideas on the teaching of history
which might hclp harassed teachers to
present a halanced interpretation of
human events. She agrees with Paul
Valéry, who felt that history-teaching
which encourages mistrust of all"foreign-
ers"is so had from the world harmony
viewpoint. Ihat it might be better if history
were not taugh at all.
"Since) the time of Thucydides the
writing of history has been a continual
striving toward the truth", her outline
states. "But whereas he tried to esta-
blish it for his small world of Greece, we we
must now try to establish it for the whole
world."
Mme. Maurette would like to slow up
the process of history instruction for the
young, and limit, a child's study to "pre-
paratory " work before the age of 12.
initialty, a student would concentrate
upon the history and international deve-
lopment of floods, clothes, habitation.
transportation, and the modes of play
among children of all the world. Concen-
tration upon these "centres of interest"
replaces the old system of administering
large and rather indigestible doses of
dates and trends. Then pre-history would
follow. including comparalive study of
living primitive peoples. teaching thc chid
how our species came to its present state
of culture. In early adolescence the
pupil should hegin to sludy his national
history, and world history, either combined
of separate.
An "Eye-Opener"-
For Children
IN each case, Mme Maurelle emphasized,instruction should dhere firmly to a
policy of showing "the increasing in-
ter-dependence of the peoples of the world
in cultural, technical, economic and poli-
tical fields", and or making children
aware of "prejudices, intolerance, and
national sellistiness. and of the necessity
to overcome them". Specific teacher-
methods were included for the classroom
on each of her points.
Under this system the teaching of
history would be carefully graded to match
the progressive development of the pupils'
capacily for understanding.
Adopting the general outlines of these
suggestions, the experts at Unesco House.
who had come from six different coun-
tries, added the following suggestion in
the further hope of safeguarding the
history student of the future :
Page 7-UNESCO COURIER
A special section should be included,
called Aims and Purposes to stress "cultu-
ral interpenetration, the importance of a
balanced presentation of the contributions
of different parts of the world, un under-
standing of foreign relations, the impor-
tance of the teacher's attitude...
And finally an emphasis on " the absence
in the classroom of any tendency to ridi-
cude other groups".
In short, let's have a teaching of history
that is adapted to the mental and psycho-
logical development of the child and
which at the same time helps to open his
eyes to the world.
UNESCO
SEMINARS
A NEW
APPROACH
TO WORLD
HISTORY
IN producing this Handbook, Unesco has
provided its Member States with a
basic guide for their textbook impro-
vement activities.
First major publication of Unesco's
Textbook Improvement Project, it follows
a previous booklet, Looking at the World
Through Textbooks ("Les Livres de Classe
et la Découverte du Monde") published
in 1946,
The first part of the Handbook tells the
story of efforts to improve textbooks,
beginning after the first World War when
the movement "took on the spirit of a
crusade, with teachers organizations and
peace societies in the vanguard.
During this period, the League of
Nations had its International Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation working on the
problem, and in Scandinavia, the Norden
Association developed its unofficial system
of criticizing history textbook manuscripts.
And there were dozens of other private
groups working to make textbooks into
instruments of peace.
Part Two of the book outlines Unesco's
programme for textbook improvement,
and gives a Model pan which suggests
techniques of analysis : It also includes a
specific proposal to Member States that
they begin by increasin their textbook
coverage of the United Nations and other
international agencies which have existed
since 1918.
A set of recommendations, varied
enough to suit the conditions found in
all Unesco's Member States are contained
in Part Three, as well as a bibliography
of books and articles in eight languages
which provides ample material on the
background of the textbook revision move-
ment. Finally, two appendices reproduce
the texts of "textbook" treaties between
different countries and the League of Na-
tions'famous Casares Resolution of 1926
together with its later amendments.
The major part of the publication was
prepared by Dr. 1. James Quillen, Profes-
sor of E'ducation at Stanford University
(U. S. A.), during his year's service in
Unesco's Department of Education,
editorial assistance being given by
Mr. George H. Kelly, formerly of the
Department of Political Science at Stan-
ford University, who prepared the chapter-
on textbook treaties.
This Unesco Handbook, whose present
English language edition will be followed
in March by one in French, will serve as
a"bible"for Member States and edu-
cators who are active in textbook impro-
vement.
