ON BEHALF OF 7, 000, 000 BLIND...
UNESCO EXPERTS PAY TR ! BUTE
TO LOU) S BRA) LLEr-----i
Millions of blind persons are today able to"see"because LouisBraille, a young Frenchman and himself blind from the age of
three, evolved a method of raised character writing which more
than any other step has helped to free the sightless from their prison
of perpetual darkness.
The debt owed to Louis Braille by
the world's 7, 000, 000 blind persons
was expressed on their behalf last
month by a group of men and
women who met at Unesco House it
Paris for the International Braille
Conference. Using the Braille sys-
tem as a basis for their work, the
delegates began to discuss on March
20th how best to work out a single
unified system of writing for the
blind men and women in all parts
of the globe.
But before these discussions
began the 21 delegates-more than
half of whom were blind themsel-
ves-spontaneously agreed to con-
clude their work by a visit to
Coupvray, the little town in the
Seine-et-Marne Department where
Louis Braille was born in 1809.
Their symbolic pi) grimage was
intended both as a tribute to Braille,
liberator of the blind, and Braille
as a man of exceptional courage
*
U'NESCO
HUMAN RIGHTS EXHIBITION OPENS
IN HAITI
This year, Port-au-Prince, capital of the
Republic of Haiti, is celebrating its bi-cente-
nary with an international exhibition in which
Unesco is participating. To present the story
of Human Rights to the people of Haiti,
Unesco shipped exhibits to Port-au-Prince
which were a reproduction of the Human
Rights Exhibition it organized in Paris, last
year. (For more details see the February
issue of the"Courier", Volume III, N. 1.).
The photo below was taken outside the
Unesco pavilion at the official inauguration
of the international Exhibition at Port-au-
Prince in February. It shows, M. Dumarsais
Estimé, President of the Republic of Haiti,
accompanied by Madame Estimé, cutting
the ribbon at the entrance to the Unesco
pavilion.
who refused to accept the often
helpless and hopeless life led by
most blind persons of his time.
Jungle of World Languages
When he was ten, Braille beganstudies at the Institution Na-
tionale des Jeunes Aveugles in
Paris. An ardent musician, he learn-
ed to play the organ and became
organist at a Paris church. It was
when he was a professor at the
Institution that he undertook the
task of evolving a system of writing
for the blind, using as his starting
point, the work already done in the
same field by Captain Charles
Barbier, a young cavalry officer.
In 1829, Braille published the
system of writing which since then
has brought new hope and a new
life to millions of handicapped men
and women who have been taught
to"see"with their fingertip.
Five years later he presented deve-
lopments of his method, but it was
not until two years after his death
M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Direc-
tor-General of Unesco, speak-
ing to the International Meeting
on Braille Unilormity, at Unesco
House, on March 20th :
"There is something deeply
moving about this ingenious
script, those raised dots on the
paper by which the world's
thought is brought to the fingel'-
tips of the blind. Some civiliza-
tions seem inaccessible to others
simply because of their peculiar
alphabets, but the blind, at least,
have a chance of overcoming
such barrier."
in 1852 that the method was
generally accepted.
In 1878 the International Confe-
rence of Workers for the Blind mat
in Paris and adopted the policy of
using Braille and its adaptations as
a basis for efforts to bring writing
for the blind in all the world's lin-
guistic areas into a workable rela-
tionship.
In the present jungle of world
languages, with their multiplicity
of scripts and alphabets, the experts
are seeking the most practical pos-
sible approach to uniformity in
writing for the blind. By so doing,
the blind will, to some extent at
least, have taken a step beyond their
sighted brothers and sisters.
