,'T HE problem we have to face", said Dr. Francis Bourrey, leaning
against one of two huge silver trucks towering above him in a
Paris garage,"is to hunt up sick people ourselves, instead of
waiting for them to come to us".
Dr. Bourrey was speaking in his capacity as president of the
Social Affairs Commission of the Assembly of the French Union, where
he represents French Nigeria.
As the result of his efforts over the past four years, a travelling X-ray
laboratory and doctor's office will
spend the next two-and-a-half years
picking its way over the dirt roads
of French Nigeria to track down the
country's sore spots of disease and
ill-health. The trucks left France
late in April and were due to"report
for work"in Nigeria during May or
early June.
The roving laboratory belongs to
the people of Nigeria, the national
assembly of French Nigeria having
voted to finance the purchase of the
two trucks and their equipment.
Dr. Bourrey led the way inside
one of the huge seven-ton vehicles
and pointed to a map of French
Nigeria on the wall of the room
which will serve as office for Dr.
Claude Vigan, chief of the mission.
Away From the Highways
A LONG the border separating
French and British Nigeria, the
map was well sprinkled with
towns and intersected by highways.
'''The m. ission does not plan to
cover this area", he said."There
the population is stable and we
know just what its requirements
are in the'way of hospitals."
He ran his hand over the interior
of the country, where roads were
only faint dotted lines on the map.
"here is where the mission is
going", he said."There are frout
500. 000 to 600. 000 people living
he ?'e, many of them as nomads.
\Ve plan to map this area again, but
on the basis of where its popula-
tion is in the greatest need of medi-
cal care.. Then'we can go in ana
build hospitals where they will do
the most good."
The mobile laboratory's first mis-
sion is to combat tuberculosis and
syphilis. To accomplish its task,
the crew headed by Dr. Vigan has
at its disposal X-ray facilities equal
to those found in many permanent
One 01 the Nigericm Medical Mission's pri-
mary objectives is to combat tuberculosis.
This photo shows the X-ray room 01 the
medical truck, with (top and bottom) the
rails ou which the viewer slides out and
(right) the insulating lead screen. X-ray
plates will be developed in a darkroom
housed in the second truck.
This overhead drawing shows the two trucks 01 the medical team which will shortly go into
action in the most isolated parts 01 French Nigeria. The medical truck (on left) houses the
doctor's office and X-ray camera. with em operating table lot emergency cases. The second
truck has hOWlÌn ! l iaciUtiea"easily comparable with those lound in many small homes".
hospitals, as well as supplies of
penicillin.
Previously, said Dr. Bourrey, doc-
tors have run into strong opposition
from the nomadic population of
French Nigeria when they attemp-
ted to conduct large-scale health
examinations. The Nigerians were
suspicious of strangers.
To help overcome this suspicion,
Ihe mission is using the tried tech-
nique of motion pictures, but with
It new approach. One of the trucks
rarries a motion-picture projector
and supplies of films, mostly ani-
mated cartoons, on health and sani-
tation subjects.
A Voice They Know
WHEN the trucks arrive in a vil-lage, Dr. Bourrey said, the
films will first be shown to the
chief of the, area and explained to
him. Then, he will make a com-
mentary in his native dialect which

will be taken down on a wire recor-
der.
Later, when the film is shown to
a native audience, it will he explain-
ed to them in the voice and on the
authority of their own leader, in a
language they can understand.
After the showing, the audience
will be examined for tuberculosis
and given blood-tests. This year,
it is hoped that 100, 000 will past
before the X-ray CameI'll in tile mis-
sion's medical truck.
Dr. Bourrey expects the mission
to accomplish its survey at the end
of two-and-a-half years, covering
more than 25, 000 miles each year.
During the rainy season, when
French Nigeria's roads become im-
passable, the mission will make its
headquarters in a city and examine
the local population.
Both trucks were specially de-
signed and built for the job. One of
them is used as the laboratory,
while the other serws mainly as
living quarters.
The laboratory truck is divided
into two main rooms, housing the
X-ray camera and the doctor's office.
This truck is a) so equipped with an
operating table for emergency cases,
although surgery is not part of its
mission.
An Example For Others
THE second truck is equipped
with housing facilities easily
the equivalent of those found
in many small homes. One room
incorporates a double bunk, an elec-
tric stove, a refrigerator and a
shower bath as well as closets and
cupboards. This truck also con-
tains a darkroom, for the develop-
ing of X-ray plates, and a 10-kilo-
watt electric generating plant.
Both of the vehicles are atr-com-
ditioned and built with four layer
of insulation to permit their person-
nel to work in Nigerian tempera-
tures, which often reach 115 degrees
Fahrenheit.
The front ends of both trucks are
Luilt in two stories, one servin ! 5' as
the driver's cab and the other as'a
compartment big enough to seat
four persons or sleep two.
In operation, the two trucks will
he parked near eac. t other with a
tent stretched between them. The
area under the tent will serve as a
waiting room.
"This praticulOl'mission is inten-
ded only to serve Nigeria", Dr. Bour-
rey said."But we hope that its
example will bring other African
countries to follow suet."
"1Ve have based OUI'carnpaign Oil
principles similar to those laid down
by CNESCO in its fU11damental edu-
cation profJl'ommc-that is, it is
as important to teach people to be
healthy as it is to teach thern to read
and wrote."
