COMMITEE FOR UNESCO ACTIVITIES
- ESTABLISHED IN WESTERN GERMANY
NEW PRICE FOR COURIER
IN U. S. AND CANADA
Due to increased costs, the
subscription price of the Courier
in the U. S. and Canada will be
increased from $1 to $1. 50, effec-
tive January 1st. 1951. The single
issue price will correspondingly
be increased from 10 cents to 15
cents.
THE people of Germany will be ableto pia)"an increasingl)'active part
in Unesco's work and make a
greater contribution to international co-
operation in the fields of education,
science and culture through the forma-
tion of a German Committee for Unes-
co activities, in Frankfort, last month.
Germany thus becomes the first non-
member state of Unesco to set up a
representative group whose composition
and functions compare with those of
the National Commissions formed in
member states of the Organization.
A) though the German Committee wiìl
not have the official international sta-
tus of a National Commission, it will
neverthe) ess be able to contribute effec-
tively towards the achievement of Unes-
co's aims. and its work will be watched
with interests in other countries.

The sixty members of the Committee
include prominent men and women and
representatives of organizations in the
fields of education, SCience and culture,
representatives from the federal and
state governments and from women's
organizations and trade unions. A simi-
lar committee for \\'estern Berlin was
also set up last month.
Three International Centres
THE constitution of the new GermanCommittee, whose pr sident is
Professor Erbe, Rector of the Uni-
versity of Tubingen, pledges its mem-
bers-representatives of all the large
and influential German organizations-
to work towards the accomplishment of
L'nesco's aims.
Amok/ the projects for Germany,which Unesco has prepared for i951,
are the setting up of three international
centres-for the Social Sciences, four
youth activities, and for pedagogical
work. The newly formed German Com-
mittee should be able to give substan-
tial help in co-ordinating the work of
the three centres.
1t is planned to finance the project
by contributions from private and pu-
blic funds in Unesco member states-
outside normal Unesco budget contribu-
tions-as well as from German sources.
The first contribution for this work has
already been made by the Lebanon.
The international character of the
three institutes will be reflected in the
choice of staff, the composition'of the
governing bodies and in the types of
problems with which they will deal.
Their activities will include the organi-
zation of studies, conferences, exhibi-
tions and seminars and they will work
particularly to help German youth in
overcoming the manv problems facing it
today.
