Young Egyp tians
find new beauty
IIN'llIHIIE ANCllJENll
CLAY OF THE N ! LE
Last month, an exhibition of sculptures tapestriesand drawings by youngEgyptians was opened at UNESCO House, Paris, by H. E. Ahmed
Saroit Bey, the Egyptian Ambassador in Paris and by M. Jaime Torres
Bodet, Director-General of UNESCO.
This exhibition, which created something of a sensation amongst the
critics and the general public, was organized by UNESCO'S Department
of Cultural Activities, as part of its project for the Arts in General Edu-
cation. This project is concerned with ways in which the arts are used
throughout the world as a means to education.
worked to bring about in recent years
an extraordinary change in the atti-
tude towards the aims and methods
of education.
Habib Gorgi, as an educator in a
responsible position, was well aware
of these developments. In his official
capacity he succeeded in introducing
many changes in the methods of
training teachers and of teaching the
arts in Egypt. Aided by his wife, he
also carried out special experiments
in methods of art teaching in his own
home and in a few small private vil-
lage schools for small groups.
"ARCHAEOLOGIST"
OF THE MIND
E has been compared by onewriter to an archaeologist, but
an archaeologist of a very special
kind. searching not for antiquities in
A young Egyptian boy making a tapestry
on a simple loom set against a wall. He
first made his own design of"Saint George
and the Dragon"which is fastened above
the loom for his guidance. He uses wool
which he has dyed himself in vegetable dyes,
and, slipping the fingers of his left hand
between the long warp threads he passes
his simple shuttle backwards and forwards
with his right hand, weaving each small
part of the. design in a different colour.
WARE of the great value of the
yak arts both for developing indivi-dual cultural appreciation and
expressicn and promoting inter-
national understanding, Unesco works,
to promote wider diffusicn of the arts,
and to encourage greater apprecia-
tion of their significance as instru-
ments of education. It pursues this
aim particularly thrcugh its project
for the Arts in General Education.
Unesco therefore welcomed the
opportunity of sponsoring an exhibi-
tion whichßo admirably demonstrated
what can/be done, even with the sim-
plest materials and equipment, to de-
velop the natural artistic abilities of
children, provided they are taught and
encouraged with sympathetic insight
and understanding.
These are qualities which particular-
ly characterise Mr Habib Gorgi.
chief inspector for art in the Egyptian
Ministry of Education. An inspired
teacher, an artist of considerable abi-
lity, he has a rare gift of understand-
ing children on their own terms. He
has known which children to choose,
both in and out of Egyptian schools.
to share with him an adventure of
discovery in the world of art.
His name must be added to the many
who by precept and practice have
For the teacher it was fascinating to see an
8-year old boy make this Head of a Prophet.
Unlike the older children who model all in
one, shaping details with a stick or a straw.
he first made the rough-shaped head. Then
with concentrated, almost fierce intensity be
added the eyes, the ears and finally pushed
on the norse. And the result is nearly terri-
fying in its primitive force and powder..
the sands of Egypt, but in the sub-
conscious minds of his young compa-
triots for traces of that great art
which characterised ancient Egypt.
Gorgi, in accord with Jung's theory
of the collective unconscious, believed
these traces could still be reached
through his pupils if only he could
give them the right conditions.
To decide en the right conditions
In her modelling of this figure of Meditation, showing an Egyptian peasant woman in
contemplative thought, 19-year old Sayeda Missac achieves an extremely moving
work of art. Texture of clay, quietly flowing tines, justly disposed weight of the body,
sensitive hand. a whole inner world of the spirit reflected in the gentle farce, every-
thing contributing to a sense of inward depth and withdrawn repose.
was a difficult problem. Habib Gorgi
does not accept the modern attitude
which, as he puts it"permits the child
to become his own master with unres-
tricted liberty. In practice, this theory
has to be modified. In art especially,
the majority of children do not profit
by this unbridled freedom. They
often indulge in a precess of unceasing
self-repetition".
Gorgi realized that the crux of the
problem lay in the teacher-child
relationship. Whilst the teacher
should neither impose a standard of
aesthetic values nor kill enthusiasm by
misguided criticism, it was his respon-
sibility deliberately to create situations
in which the child could decide upon
the appropriate reactions.
The existing attitudes and conditions
in the schools scarcely allowed for
such experiments, and so Gorgi
worked on his own.
STORY OF SAYEDA
AND THE LION
HE went to that part of the popu-lation where life had undergone
no basic change since the time of
the Pyramids-to the peasant class.
He tells a delightful story of the day
he found Sayeda Missac, who lived in
cne of the poorest districts in Cairo.
She and her many brothers and sisters
lived largely by their wits-playing
and begging. As soon as a school
was opened in the neighbourhood
Sayeda enrolled. There one day Gorgi
found her"struggling to sculpt
Daniel in the Lion's Den. She had
never seen a lion. but she closed her
eyes and asked for the power to make
something very ferocious", What
she produced was a creature with
little resemblance to the kind, of
beasts, but easily excelling him in
ferocity..'"'
Subsequently Sayeda lived its. bib
Gorgi's household for seven years.
Sometimes she goes back to the excite-
ment of the crowded streets and to
a life of idleness, but she always comes
back in chastened mood and, of her
own accord, works harder than ever.
She was the first of many eh11dren
who came to stay and work in the
favourable environment of the Gorgi
household, in company with his own
children.
REFLECTION OF AN
ANCIENT TRADITION
FOR working materials, Habib Gor-gi has given the children paper
and crayons, and there are many
examples in the Exhibition of their
drawings. These, apart from the local
Egyptian subject matter, have the
same basic characteristics as those
which distinguish children's drawings
everywhere. But it is interesting to
find that linear and pictorial expres-
sion did not altogether suit the needs
of these children. So Habib gave
them clay and also let them make
tapestries on primitive looms.
It is above all clay and sculpturing
that seem to suit them best, and it is
through this medium that they find
true freedom, and at the same time
most obviously reflect the subconscious
memory of their own Egyptian artistic
traditions. Similarly, in the low-relief
carvings in white stone there is the
strongest echo of the subtlety of the
finest ancient Egyptian friezes and
panels.
The teaching technique is something
difficult to describe in words, for like
all good educational methods it does
not eonsist so much of a rigid formula
as of a mutual relationship. It does
not depend on Habib Gcrgi imparting
his knowledge to the children. He
says that his function consists mainly
in creating an atmosphere and a
situation"which will liberate the
child of stored images and make him
richly productive, and at the same
time protect him from the influence
of undesirable elements".
In practice he may tell them tradi-
tional fairy tales and mythological
stories ; he encourages them to draw
inspiration from the scenes and events
of their daily lives, but most of all he
depends upon establishing the right
relationship between himself and his
children. He says :"We sit upon the
ground in our big room and we work
together ; we are all working and
singing and we are happy."