TWO UNESCO SEMINARS
GIJIDE EDUCATION TOWARDS
INTERNATIONAL UNDERSTANDING
To develop in children a < : onsciousness of the unity of mankind is one of the mainconcerns of responsible educators in all countries. Many teachers, however, are
only now beginning to discover suitable methods of making young people aware
that nations are inter-dependent. There is also a vast amount of work to be done in
"judging"textbooks : the revision of those"guilty"of bias or excessive nationaHsm,
and the preparation of new ones that stress the constructive work of mankind, teach
children about the international organizations of today, and the services they can render
to world peace and prosperity.
How to improve both teaching methods and textbooks to help this education for
international understanding were the subjects of two Unesco Seminars held recently.
The articles on this page describe the work done by the educators who met in Brussels,
at the Seminar on"The Improvement of Textbooks, Particularly History Books", and
those at Montreal where the Seminar subject was,"The Teaching of Geography as a Means
of Developing International Understanding".
Textbooks that speak
with a constructive accent
ONE of the most immediatelyimportant results of the Unesco
Seminar on"The Improvement
of Textbooks, Particularly History
Books", held recently in Brussels,
was a plan to put the history books
of nine countries"on trial".
The 45 specialists from 24 coun-
tries including, for the first time at a
Unesco Seminar, representatives of
Germany and Japan, laid down the
main lines of bi-lateral systems of
exchange and criticism of history
textbooks between groups of experts,
similar to those already being carried
out by the German Teachers Union
with associations of historians in
Britain and France.
These new plans will enable the
examination and mutual criticism of
history books to take place between
Belgium and Holland, France and the
United States and between Germany
and the following countries : Bel-
gium, the United States, Norway,
Holland, Sweden and Switzerland.
As a pattern for these exchange
systems, the members of the Seminar
used the successful work already
accomplished by the Norden Asso-
ciations, which were founded after
the first World War by Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and
Sweden to promote mutual under-
standing between the peoples of the
Nordic countries.
The system these countries deve-
loped to ensure that their school
history books were both factual and
fair was based on the three cardinal. principles of textbook improvement
- that it should be international,
mutual and positive. In other words,
that each country should examine the
books of another, and that not only
should offending passages be remov-
ed but each country should make
a complete and constructive study
of its neighbour's history with a
view to improving the coverage in
its textbooks.
Seminar's work was directed by
Professor Alfred Weiler, Director of
the Lycée Experimental Henri IV, at
Montgeron, France.
Technical problems of the impro-
vement of textbooks in all subjects
were dealt with by Group 1, directed
by Professor P. A. Lauwerys of the
University of London Institute of
Education. Its members studied
reports on such varied textbooks as
historical atlases, literary antholo-
gies, song-books and geography and
history texts, all of which showed
an undue degree of nationalist bias.
The group therefore recommended
that all types of textbooks should
be studied with the same critical
care usually reserved for history
books.
NO TEXTBOOK SLAVES
GROUP 11, directed by ProfessorHaakon Vigan er, of O l ,
author of the Unesco booklet
on Nordic textbook improvement,
concentrated on textbook problems
in the classroom. Among the con-
clusions they reached on this subject
was that the key to reform lay in
training teachers to evaluate text-
books and to develop initiative in
the use of varied materials. At all
costs, they said, teachers must not
be the slave of the textbook.
Problems both of writing scienti-
fically sound history textbooks and
their psychological effects on
children were dealt with by
Group III, conducted by M. Georges
Panchaud, Director of the Lycée Mu-
nicipal de Jeunes Filles, at Lau-
sanne.
To achieve objectivity in history
textbooks, the Group recommended
that texts should be submitted,
before printing, to historians of other
countries, as was done under the
"Nordic"system. Unesco was asked
to help provide authors with reliable
source material.
The last group, directed by Pro-
fessor F. W. Wood of Wellington
University, New Zealand, studied
such problems as the relationship of
national to world history.
Unesco's programme of textbook
improvement was outlined to the
Seminar by Mr. Richard M. Perdew
and Mr. Marcel Vanhamme, directors
of this programme in the Department
of Education. The final report of the
Seminar's work will be used as a
basis for two projected publications
and will also provide Unesco with
some useful suggestions for future
activities in the textbook field.
FROM EAST AND WEST
THE plans drawn up at the BrusselsSemi ar for mutual exchange
and criticism of history books
should give a new impetus and
guidance to the movements for
textbook improvement in all the
countries represented there.
In addition to most of the Euro-
pean Unesco Member States, educa-
tors came from Canada, Mexico and
the United States in the New World ;
Egypt, Iraq, Israel, Syria and Turkey
in the Near East ; and from Thailand
and Japan in the Far East. The
An exhibition 01 teaching aids and equipment was held at MacDonald College, near Montreal,
Canada, in connection with the Unesco Seminar on"The Teaching of Geography as an Aid
to International Understanding."Here. M. Jean Guiton, Deputy Head 01 Unesco's Education
Department, explains to a member 01 the Seminar the details 01 a planisphere constructed by
the young pupils 01 a Paris technical training school. The planisphere was designed to
illustrate the interdependence of all countries and its execution provided a series of lessons
on people 01 other lands for the youngsters who built it.
66 WORLD"
Geography lor all thW orld
No man today can escape being
a geographer. His whole
life, even to his most every-
day activities-the despatch of
the products of his work, the get-
ting in of supplies, keeping up-to-
date with the latest news-is
bound up so closely with what is
going on in countries that were
merely names to his forbears, that
he cannot help but acquire a great
deal of knowledge concerning all
parts of the world.
In former times, men may have
had a fair knowledge of their dis-
trict, their country and the neigh-
bouring states (particularly those
with which they had, all too often,
to go to war) but they knew little
about the rest of the world. Today,
when almost unknown places may
overnight become of world-wide
importance, the scope of geogra-
phICal knowledge has been greatly
extended and the stock of such
knowledge needed by the average
person has become much larger.
It is wrong, however, to tax the
memories of children with masses
of miscellaneous and ill-assorted
names and facts. What they
should know are those geographi-
cal facts which give a true picture
of life in other countries, for one
of the essential purposes of geogra-
phy and its teaching is to correct
wrong ideas about other lands and
peoples. In creatin good relations
among nations, this is an urgent
necessity.
Ways in which geography teach-
ing can best encourage world-mind-
edness and international under-
standing were studied by nearly
50 teachers and specialists who met
recently at a Unesco Seminar, held
at MacDonald College, near Mont-
real, Canada.
False Values-Few Maps
UNDER the direction of bir C.Delgado de Carvalho, the Bra-
zilian geographer and sociolo-
gist, these educators, from 22 coun-
tries, pooled their knowledge and
experience in discussions on the
improvement of teaching methods
and materials.
Making a comparaliye study of
geography teaching in the schools
of different countries, the Seminar
members came across many pro-
blems arising out of faulty empha-
sis in teaching or lack of suitable
equipment.
Many geography instructors have
to rely on their own initiative to
give their pupils a true picture of
the world, for wall maps and atla-
ses are lacking in many schools.
Even when maps do exist, the co-
lours and perspectives used often
give them a disproportionate value,
some countries receiving too much
prominence and others not enough.
Links Between Teachers
A ! \lONG the recommendations ma-de by the Se inar nd ai ed
at overcoming such difficulties
was for a textbook on geography
teaching to be widely circulated so
as to keep teachers, in countries
lacking such information, in touch
with activities in other parts of
the world. Another was that an
"international"atlas, printed in
colours, but without place names,
be produced and sold at cost price
to editors who would then complete
it for the schools in their countries.
Each member of the Seminar
worked with two groups, one
studying geography teaching in
relation to the mental development
of children in different age groups
and the other examining the main
aspects of geography teaching-
the training of teachers, teaching
aids, programmes and methods,
geography and international under-
standing etc.
Members of the Seminar are now
back in their home countries put-
ting into practice the individual
plan of action that each one pre-
pared before leaving MacDonald
College. These activities include
interviews with representatives of
educational authorities, parents'
associations, and programme pre-
paration committees, and the for-
mation of special groups to conti-
nne the work begun at the seminar,
including the publicizing of the
work and needs through newspa-
pers and the radio.
From the Seminar reports and
documents, a British expert, Mr Ne-
ville Scarfe, is to produce an
overall work on Geography and
International Understanding, which
will complete the handbook prepar-
ed as a working document for the
Seminar by a group of French geo-
graphers.
The most important feature of a Unesco Seminar is a small, informal study group in which information is exchanged, ideas and methods are
discussed and solutions to specific problems are suggested. This particular group at the recent Brussels Seminar studied the technical pro-blems of the improvement of textbooks.
