As for the museums,"with the exception or that
in Istanbul, they have all been established in recent
years. Previously, a country's treasures went
abroad, but today these museums, thanks to recent
excavation, contain fine and growing collections.
Finds which can be moved are fairly divided, so
that both the cottntry of origin and that or the
excavators gain prom each discovery".
The palaces of Istanbul and the mosques of
Ispahan are regaining their ancient splendour.
Syrian frescoes are being restored to their original
beauty. The bas-reliefs found in Persepolis will
be preserved on their original sites. In the museum
at Bagdhad, the remains of a 7, 000 year-old civili-
nation can now be studied by school-children. As
Education advances, the peoples of the East are
themselves bringing to light their cultural heritage.
There is, however, a big task ahead. The
excavation, strengthening, restoration and safe-
guarding of such finds are extremely costly.
Archaeologists often work in isolation, museums are
short of money and there are still too few techni-
cians. International co-operation, however, can
provide the help, which is needed, reports M. van
der Haagen.
Buy (awarding study feUowships to young archaeo-
logists from the Near East Unesco has already given
a lead in such collaboration. More opportunities
of this sort must be provided, as they can be, by
the generosity of the wealthier nations, all of
whom owe some debt to those lands which were
once"the cradle of Western civilization".
RE ( ; LAIMS ITS CULTURAL
B E B IT AGE
FOR thousands of years, men strove to
mould the face of Asia and, later, the
shores of the Mediterranean. From
Sumer to Islam, from Egypt to Byzan-
tium, succeeding civilizations destroyed or
mingled with one another, each leaving
behind some trace of its passage. Temples
towns, palaces, records and pottery, statues and
paintings, accumulated like great alluvial
deposits.
It was only about three hundred years ago
that artists and, later, scientists began to delve
among the ruins. They came from the Ne-
therlands, France, Italy, England, Germany,
Poland or Russia and, later on, from America,
each expedition vying with the others in
knowledge and resource. In this.'scramble
for discoveries"archæologists set out to explore
history in the same way as pioneers opened
up Africa or the Far West of the United States.
They brought to the East their insatiable
scientific curiosity, their historical sense, and
their constantly improving technical resources.
Ranging from the work of Champollion to that
of Arthur Evans, from the Luxor excavations
to those at Persepolis, expeditions-famous
and obscure-transformed the study of ar-
chaeology, enriched the world's knowledge of
its past, and brought to life long dead civili-
zations.
The removal of the treasures they found
saved many of them from destruction, but, in
the excitement of their discoveries and their
anxiety to learn from their finds, few of the
scholars had thought seriously of how to de-
monstrate their value or to teach how they
might be preserved.
Apart from their aesthetic qualities, these
archaeological treasures meant little more to
the uninitiated than a date or a mysterious
name on a map. Thus there was a danger
that the net result of some discoveries would
These guardian winged bulls at the gate ot Xerxes in Per-
i. epotis have watched men as wet) as the elements destroy
this ancient Persian City. But today, men are guarding
the remains of Persepolis and a museum haa been set up
on the citv's site to receive treasures brought to light by
new excavationa.
be a tragic loss for the artistic heritage of the
East, with no real gain for the world as a
whole.
A Universal Message
T ODAY that danger has passed. Modern mus-
eums enable us to follow the development
and inter-relations of bygone civilizations.
The archaeologist's message is a universal
one, and the results of his studies are avalfable to
all. Moreover, the peoples of the near East many
of whom have only recently regained their indepen-
dence, have realized the great cultural value of the
treasures hidden in their cities and villages, their
mountains and deserts. And they are more than
interested in this wealth of history ; they have
taken it into their care.
Foreign missions, whose technical and financial
assistance is still required, are now collaborating
with local authorities. A clear picture of this
radical change in attitude has been reported by
M. van der Haagen, Head of Unesco's Museums and
Historical Monuments Division, following a trip he
made recently to Turkey, Persia, Lebanon and Syria.
"In most of these countries", he writes,"there
are local specialists, many of whom have been
trained in Europe and the United States of Am-
nca. Everywhere, one finds officials in chCJ1'ge of
antiquities who are enthusiastic and energetic..."
Fifty years ago, Pierre Loti. the French writer exclaimed
"what a dismal ruin', as he stood before the MadrCJse Mader
E Shah (above) in Ispahan. Were he alive today Loti might
fail to recognize the same building. Thanks to patient work
this mosque school now looks exactly as it did when built
in the loth century.
potters had no wheels neither had
their vehicles.. Yet they built some
of the finest architecture in Ame-
rica ; made roads-produced incom-
parable sculptors, ceramists, wea-
vers and above all painters and
jewellers who rival those of China.
and the Italian Renaissance. They
invented writing in America and
excelled in the fields of astro-
nomy, arithmetic, chronology and
history.
