A HUNDRED GROUPS
WITH A COMMON AIM
This is the second in a series of special articles describ-
ing the work of some of the 100 international non-
governmental organizations whose co-operation with
Unesco helps the accomplishment of its programme.
"E ENY-MEENY-MINY-MO..."most of us chanted these words
numberles times when we were children. Are they, as
we may think them now, n thing but a m aningless
children's litany ? Or do they remain, not simply from
our childhood, but from the very childhood of man ?
One theory holds them to be survival of a Neolithic numerical
system used over 10, 000 years ago, but, whatever the origin, their
equivalents are to be found the world over, in civilizations which
have no common language heritage.
It is such curious heritages as these which link us together
beyond national boundaries and the passage of time and which,
with songs, customs, dances and dress, make up the world's
folk-lore.
As a formal study folk-lore is barely 100 years old, but in that
time it has become so widely developed that the International
Commission on Folk-Arts and Folk-Lore-the international body
formed in 1928 to co-ordinate the activities of folk-lore groups--
to-day has nearly 1, 000 members in more than 50 countries.
This year, the International
Commission, now working with
Unesco under a system of consult-
ative arrangements, will produce,
with Unesco's help, the first
volume of a publication on folk-
lore. Each issue of this publica-
tion,"Laos", will deal with diffe-
rent aspects of folk-lore. In one
there will be a series of studies
on masks and their development
and use in different civilizations.
Another, for example, will consist
of comparative studies on gestures,
and another on lullabies.
Of what interest are masks,
gestures and lullabies to Unesco ?
They are such small parts of our
lives that we take them for
granted. And it is for this reason
that they make up the folkways
or systems which have held
societies together throughout their
evolution from pre-history to
modern times.
Eventually they form a record
of what is essential to man in his
collective and individual life.
Through comparative studies,
research workers recognize reli-
gious, political and language differ-
ences, not as fundamental, but as
alternate solutions to the same
basic problem.
"Mo Run Geal Og"
To give scholars access to thet scientific facts established in
the century of folk-lore
research is one of the purposes of
the International Commission on
Folk-Arts and Folk-Lore.
In any field of specialized study
a comprehensive bibliography is
essential and work on such a
bibliography in folk-lore has been
in progress since 1917. Now, with
the aid of Unesco, it is nearing
completion.
Unesco is also encouraging the
preparation of a multilingual
glossary of terms used in folk-lore
and ethnology which, when
completed, will give definitions and
equivalents in thirty languages.
Folk music is a specialized field
in the study of folk-lore itself.
Last year, the International
Commission called-a meeting in
Geneva to discuss a uniform system
for notations in folk music. The
classical European method of
writing music cannot be used, since
it makes no provision for marking
quarter tones, which exist in some
folk music, and cannot deal with
certain other folk variants of
timing and rhythm.
One of the International
Commission's member organiza-
tions, the Folk-Lore Institute of
Scotland, is now at work on a
linguistic survey which includes
musical study. Equipped with
recording machines, its members
are tracing, through songs and
stories, the remnants of the old
Gaelic language still found in
Scotland.
"Mich [arla nam bratach bana...
Mo run geal og..."these are songs
which are the last representatives
of the ancient music of the Hebri-
des, in the archaic pentatonic
scale. It is through the preser-
vation of such heritages that cul-

Tales of fantastic exploits are legion among the folk-loire songs and stories handed down
from one generation to another. The adventures oaf Sinbad the Sailor, Jack the Giant Killer
and Gulliver may all once have had a certain basis of fact, but time and the human ima-
gination have embroidered them to a point that makes us dismiss them as incredible. It
was under the title of"Gulliver Revived"that the adventures of a more recent raconteur of
atories, Baron yon Munchausen, were published in France in 1787. These illustrations are
taken from the first French edition of this collection of the Baron's experiences.
tures live on, even as small groups
in countries which have swallow-
ed them, as the Basques in Spain,
the Bretons in France and the
Flemish Scots.
Eventually the International
Commission on Folk Arts and Folk-
lore hopes that history will be
taught, not as a series of battles
and conquests, but as the daily life
and languages, agricultural and
technical achievements of differ-
ent peoples, their dances and
poetry.
Understanding On All levels
UNESCO is being helped towards
another important goal--
bringing advanced civiliza-
tions and under-developed regions
closer together, to secure for both
the benefits often lost through
misunderstanding and ignorance--
by another organization, the Inter-
national Union for Anthropologic-
al and Ethnological Sciences.
Members of this organization,
now working under consultative
arrangements with Unesco, include
groups studying the native peoples
of America the South Sea Islands
and the primitive cultures of
Africa. One of these, the Inter-
national African Institute, has
been working on a series of special
studies which will help Unesco's
work on inter-cultural studies.
Values and traditions among
African societies often differ sub-
stantially from those of European
civilization. To-day, African peo-
ples who, until a generation ago
lived an entirely un-industrialized
life, are playing an increasingly
important part in world econo-
mics. To eliminate the conflicts
which have arisen in the past,
there must be understanding on
every level of dealing between
Africans and representatives of
western civilization.
To this end, the African Institute
is preparing a volume on African
social and cultural values, and
African reactions to western atti-
tudes and techniques.
Then again, family relationships
play an important part in African
societies, and embrace a long range
of rights and obligations which
are not always understood by
other peoples. Such understanding
is, however, necessary to the
smooth running of the new poli-
tical and economic role which
Africa is entering on in world
affairs.
Avoiding Past Mistakes
UNDER contract with Unesco,the African Institute has
been at work for almost a
year on a study of African kinship,
marriage and family life, to be
published in French and English.
This work will anticipate causes of
friction likely to arise under condi-
tions of economic change.
Extensive fleld studies, to inves-
tigate African social organization,
moral and religious ideas have also
been proposed. The history of
African affairs is largely a record
of trouble resulting from misunder-
standings on the part of outside
civilizations which have dealt with
them. We must not, today, repeat
the mistakes of the past through
ignorance.
The work done by the Inter-
national African Institute has been
so satisfactory that Unesco has
contracted with the International
Union for Anthropological and
Ethnological Sciences, to begin
similar studies among the native
peoples of America and the South
Sea Islands.
Through such practical applica-
tion of research and experience,
the free exchange of educated
opinion among peoples of different
cultures will form common ground
for the foundations of a lasting
peace.
