JOSÉ CLEMENTE.'i >)',
OROZCO
- MANKIND W AS
HIS HERO
AT the close of UNESCO'S Fourth General Conference in October, Mr David Hard-
man, leader of the United Kingdom delegation, paid a tribute to the Mexican artist
Josh clement Orozco, whose death occured a few weeks previously.
"This Conference"said Mr Hardman"cannot be insensitive to the loss to the culture
of the world that the death of Orozco has caused. Born in 1886 for more than a gene-
ration he covered the walls of the palaces, churches and public buildings of Mexico with
his tremendous frescos, one of which, indeed, as many here will remember, adorned the
walls of the Escuela Normal, where our Conference was held in 1947.
"Through his frescos he sought to express his understanding and the yearning of the
common people of the world for all we, here, are searching to foster---for education in
understanding."
After M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Director-General of UNESCO, and Dr Antonio Castro
Leal, leader of the Mexican delegation, had replied to Mr Hardman, the Conference adopt-
ed the British delegate's suggestion that a message of condolence and regret be sent to
the Government of Mexico.
As a further tribute to this great Mexican artist, the"Courier"is presenting on this
page, an appreciation of Orozco written by Jean Cassou, the distinguishd French Hispanist
and Art Critic,.. ogether with reproductions of two of the artist's works.
THE history of European artduring the second half of the
19th century is a succession
of rebellions and adventures. It is
a story of heroic stature, and the
great artists who have played their
part in the making of it have an
aura of tragedy about them. Each
of these men carried his individual-
ism to a point of extremity. The
artist of the time occupied an
unfortunate social position, outside
society, and against society.
Gauguin and Van Gogh are
examples of the artist cast out
from society.
But, however much we may
admire them, these are not
examples to be followed indefinite-
ly. The unfortunate position of
the artist is not inherent in the
nature of things. He may come to
wish for a movement of co-opera-
tion between himself and society.
Today this co-operation works by
way of compromise and expediency,
such as snobbishness, fashion and
the speculation of dealers and art
collectors.
A broader, better coordinated and
more firmly established co-opera-
tion can be conceived, through
which society as a whole, rather
than a privileged minority, would
benefit from the artist's effort.
This society of the future would
entrust the monuments of its cul-
ture and tradition to the artist's
hand. The artist would be called
upon to construct the great public
buildings dedicated to the civic,
cultural and social activity of the
people.
This would be the ideal form of
reconciliation between the artist
and society. Modern art, which
formerlv was individualistic and
ostracized, will have reached its
perfect expression when it becomes
monumental. Art which limited
itself to small canvases will find
new forms of expression in mural
decorations and frescoes, as it did
during the great periods of history,
in the centuries of great civili-
zation.
And then this succession of
marvellous inventions and prodi-
gious innovations which we have
witnessed will find its glory, its
justification and its reward.
ART AND SOCIETY
HARMONIOUSLY BLENDED
AN important social development,bringing about a new regime,
will soon tend toward that mo-
-,----. our..--,,,",. .,---",----1.'.---. .... l
m his"Martyrdom of St. Stephen". Orozco jolts the spectator into an arena of wild emotions,
his bold. stark designs, often adapted from the abstract violence 01 pre-Columbian art.
reinforcing the action. By choosing brutal themes and developing them to deliver the
sharpest impact. painters ot social reality like Orozco1 create new beauty in tragedy.
It was in depicting the past and present history 01 his country that Orozco portrayed the his-
tory of man's suffering, struggles and fulfillment. This painting illustrates one of the events in
Mexican revolutionary history when the'Zapatistas'. followers of General Emiliano Zapata.
revolted in support 01 aqrczrian reforms. at the beginning of this century. (Oil on canvas,
1931-Museum of Modern Art Collection. New York.)
Forelllu in this renaissance is
Diego Rivera, who, as a young man,
travelled in Europe and lived in
Paris, where he mingled with the
first Cubists of the : French school.
He has thus participated in the
experiments and innovations of our
modern art-that insurgent and
ostracized art-and his vast mural
epic is its ctimax and synthesis.
With him, modern art reaches mo-
numenta ! proportions.
His fellow countryman, Jose Cle-
mente Orozco, who has recently
died, came to know Europe later in
life. But he intuitively understood
and assimilated the efforts, the dis-
coveries and the daring trends of
modern European art, particularly
of French painting, and they have
served him as a point of departure
for his great compositions.
Jose Clemente Orozco was born
in 1883. He studied in Mexico and
witnessed his country's revolution.
He painted his first frescoes in
I ! J22. The problems which he faced,
which are the problems of mural
art, i. e. of social art, are the assi-
milation of style and expression. It
was necessary to transpose the sty-
lised, simplified, synthetic, geome-
trical, abstract vocabulal'v of
modern art into an expressi, : e Ian-
gunge and epic themes which could
he understood by the masses.
S IG : \'IFICili'\'T among his work bhis gigantic figul'e of Prome-
Iheus (1930), which must have been
a fascinating subject for Orozco. He
must have felt the necessity to
project this powerful religious
image-the image of human reli-
gion-of truly michelangelesque
character, for himself as well a
for his people.
Two years iater. upon hi ; ; return
from Europe, hê undertook the
freswes in the Dal'lmouU, CoJlege
Library, and following tliat.)) its
famous work al-Guadalajara and
Jiquilpan. Each new work added
to the scope and power of his art.
His last work, the vaults and walls
of the church of the Hospital of
Jesus (1942-1944), reaches new
heights of movement and grandeur.
CHRIST DESTROYING
HIS CROSS
THE revivalist dream wllkh ani-t mated Eu ope and particularly
France in the 19t century, and
which tried to express itself in
decorative painting, achieved real-
ity in the frescoes of Jose Clemente
Orozco. The history of man, por-
traved in this history of the Ame-
ricnn man, appears in all its dialec-
tical grandeur in those powerful
work. A continents and its II1vst er-ires transform their energy in the
drama of revolution. Prometheus
plays his heroic part against the
gods, man suffers, struggles and
fulfils himself ; it can be likened to
a symbol which belongs to Orozco's
carty work : Christ destroying his
cross.
The work of Orozco, this extra-
ordinary epic narrative of truly
hemispheric dimensions, reveals
the Mexican soul. Its forms, its
eombinations of forms, its plastic
sections, display a certain quality
of hardness, rigour and strength
which are profoundly characteristic
and correspond to deep organic
necessities. But this message is of
universal interest and concerns us
all. The Mexican man becomes the
cosmic man.
"Through the language of meta-
phors, signs and symbols", writes
his fellow countryman, Justino Fer-
nandez,"Orozco tells us that the
human reality is movement, con-
stant renovation, disintegration and
integration, death and resurrection."
When an artist, inspired by his
country's past and present history
and inspired by the genius of his
country, achieves a work of such
philosophical scope and such broad
significance, he raises himself and
his country to universal stature.
With Orozco, Mexican art, if it
remains rooted in its native soil,
reaches out bevond the frontiers and
becomes a message to humanity.
numental self-expression. A new
regime, will be ambitious to match
its great predecessors in history
which have left their mark upon
their century and have given it its
style.
But such an ambition is not
always very readily satisfied. The
example of the Mexican Revolution
is a noteworthy exception. This
revolution has had its artists from
the very beginning, and they have
known how to respond to the oppor-
tunity which was opened to them
to create a great social art. They
used the monumental form to
express the revolution, the spirit
of the people who had made it, their
past and present history, emotions
which they shared, and their des-
tiny. The contemporary Mexican
frescoes are one of the great achie-
vements of world civilization. In
them, art and i'society find them-
se) \es harmonious) y btended.