WIZ FINEST COLOUR P
To help bring wider understandingand enjoyment of outstanding
works of art to the largest
possible number of persons, Unesco
has published a 180-page catalogue of
fine colour reproductions of great
paintings done before 1860, which are
available at moderate prices. More
than 500 years of painting are
represented by 418 of the works of
170 masters, chosen from among more
than 2, 000 reproductions offered by
the principal publishers of the world.
The great majority of people in the
world can never hope, for geographical
reasons alone, to enter the museums
and galleries where most of the
famous art treasures are housed,
points out Dr. H. Gerson, Deputy-
Director of the National Bureau for
the Documentation of Art History,
The Hague. Dr. Gerson, one of the
experts who made the selection of
reproductions for Unesco, wrote in
his introduction to the catalogue :
"Unesco, an organization whose
scope is world-wide and which is
unhampered by prejudice or the
burden of any particular tradition, is
acting on behalf of the millions of
people who live far from museums and
galleries".
The standards of choice of the
reproductions contained in the catalo-r
gUe were the significance of the
artist, the importance of the painting,
and the fidelity of the reproduction.
But the element which makes the
work an especially useful instrument
in Unesco's programme of demo-
cratization of art is the revelation
that colour reproduction of some of
the world's finest paintings are
available at low prices. There are
Fra Angelicos, Bellinis and Goyas
which can be bought for 25 cents
each ; a dozen different Giottos at
$ 1 each ; and even the more costly
reproductions are priced no higher
than $ 15 to $ 20.
The working party of experts who
made the selections at meetings held.
at Unesco House in Paris, was nomin-
ated by the International Council of
Museums. It included, in addition to
Dr. Gerson, Charles Sterling and
Hélène Adhémar of the Louvre in
Paris, Sir Philip Hendy of the National
I 2 3
t The Birth of Venus" (detail), Sandro"BOTTtCELL (1444-1510), It ly.
2."Georges Washington", GilbertSTUART(1755-1828), U. S. A.
3"The Tribute Money", TITIAN (1477-. 1576), italy.
d'portrait of Moretto", Hans HOLBEIN. (1497-1543), Germany.
C Don ManuetdeZuniga", Francisco"'de GOYA (1746-1828). Spain.
A the Judgement of Paris", Anton Van"DYCK (1599-1641), Flemish.
7 A Man and a Tea House Maid", KIYO-. SAGA (1742-1815), Japan.
"man in Red", SHAH MUHAMMAD. (Tabr z SchoolXVlth century), Persia.
"man with Golden Helmet", REM-"BRANDT (1606-1669). N therlands.
"the Forest of Coubron", Jean-Baptiste'-'COROT (1796-1879), France.
7 8
171615
1281

Gallery in London, Professor Mario
Salmi of Rome, and Professor J. Pijoan
of Chicago.
Each reproduction is printed in the
catalogue in black and white, accom-
panied by precise details in French,
English and Spanish about the
painting, the painter, and also the
reproduction. In each case, the
reader can learn exactly where he can
buy the reproduction and at what
price.
The catalogue brings to completion
a Unesco project of compiling a list of
good available colour reproductions
begun last year with the publication
of a similar volume, containing 423
separate items covering the period
from 1860 to 1949. It was pointed out
by Jean ICassou, Director of the
Museum of Modern Art of Paris, who
wrote the introduction to the earlier
volume, that"Colour reproduction
stands in the same relation to visual
art as does the radio or gramophone
record to music : it is an inter-
mediary".
Unesco aims to do more than to
help make more pictures available to
more people. For one thing, the
catalogues draw the attention of
publishers of colour reproduction to
the fact that many great paintings
have never been properly reproduced.
Publishers have already begun to fill
in existing gaps.
Another purpose is to encourage
publishers to improve the standards of
colour prints. Three-quarters of the
prints submitted for use in the second
volume of the catalogue had to be
rejected. It is hoped that publishers,
recognizing in the catalogues a
potential frame of reference of excel-
lence in the field, will seek to bring
their prints up to a standard meriting
inclusion in future editions.
