IN October nineteen hundred and forty, M. Marcel Cuvelier, Managing
Director of the Brussels Philharmonic Society, set to work in
German-occupied Brussels to carry out a plan he had been
considering for some time-the organization of a musical movement
for the youth of Belgium.
His original aims had been to interest boys and girls in music, to
form their musical taste and to offer them concerts at prices they could
afford. But now, he had a further aim-to compete for the interest and
devotion of Belgian youth against the Nazis, who had already begun to
set before young Belgians the example of the Jugendbewegen, the Nazi
youth movement.
The initial phases of the plan had
to carried out discreetly, and its
patriotic purpose had to be well
camouflaged as"non-political". Still
anxious to ingratiate themselves with
the Belgian people, the Nazis did not
interfere with the plan in its early
stages. Quickly it grew so popular
that they could not interfere-
without giving up all ; hope of
"winning"the youth of the country.
The mere whispered announcement of
the plan, circulating through the
schools, brought together in one
season more than two thousand young
people to listen to four symphony
concert programmes ranging from
Bach to Stravinsky.
During the second season of the
Jeune5Ses Musicales (Junior Music) as
the movement was called, its member-
ship increased to three thousand-and
the seed sown almost in secret pro-
duced a surprising harvest.
The movement began to spread to
other countries. In 1941, René Nicoly
founded in Paris the"Jeunesses
Musicales de France". Finally, the
Liberation made possible the found-
ation of the International Federation
of Junior Music, created in 1946 at the
Brussels Congress to which six
countries sent delegates or observers.
The distance travelled along the
international road by Junior Music
was marked at the Federation's fifth
congress held recently in Vienna,
attended by delegates from branches
of the movement in eight countries
For Youth-boy Youth
THE reason for this success is not1 only the enthusiasm shown by
the leaders, but the movement's
fundamental principle that
all members take an active
part in the life of the group.
All activities are worked out
for young people by young
people-membership is
limited to those aged bet-
ween 12 and 25 years of age.
Members are not"herded"
to concerts. They are free to
go or stay away as they
please and are able to express
their disapproval or congra-
tulations to the Directorate
on the concerts, music and
other programmes which are
arranged.
Junior Music in Belgium
has formed its own orchestra
and choral society and pu-
blishes a regular magazine.
"Les Cahiers J", which em-
braces the theatre, cinema
and poetry as well as music.
In Brussels, where there are
now more than ten thousand
members, they have formed a
council of delegates.
The members of this coun-
cil-boys and girls elected
in every school-do the
administrative work, encou-
rage in their fellow members
the appreciation and study of
music, and arrange gramo-
phone concerts, singing com-
petitions and reading courses.
This delegate system reinforces the
freely accepted discipline which is
one of the best features of the
movement combined with the team
spirit which continually inspires new
ideas and fresh ventures.
In Junior Music, young people find
that the realms of art are no longer a
closed book for them, restricted to
their elders and, horribile dictu, thrust
down their throats as lessons. They
can get as enthusiastic about a piece
of music as they might about a sport-
ing fixture or an expedition with their
Scout troop.
An Edueational Force
BELGIUM'S Junior Music, recentlycelebrating its tenth birthday,
was abtê to look back on an im-
pressive record of concerts, lectures,
meetings and classes. Although it has
never set itself up as a school or a
league, its educational effects have
been profound.
Its appeal is directed toward arousing
the intelligence and discrimination of
young people and not the awakening
of a short-lived enthusiam among
them. Instead of trying to force
them to accept hard and fast cultural
Among the recent celebrations organized by Belgium s
"'Jeunesses Musicales"to mark the tenth anniversary of
its foundation was an exhibition in Brussels on the
movement's growth and achievements. This photo
shows Queen Elizabeth of Belgium visiting the eodn-
bitioD accompanied by M. Marcel Cuvelier (right),
founder of the movement. Behind, examining em exhibit
is the painter, M. Creten George, who was responsible
for the artistic arrangements of the exhibition.
standards, it brings them in contact
with culture that is continually
developing.
One of the deeper implications of
the movement was summed up by its
founder, Marcel Cuvelier, when he
wrote :"We f1 that the extension of
'Jeunesses Musicales'to an increasing
number of countries wit do much to
draw nations closer toeGer and will
make a tangible contribution to the
building of Peace.".
