MODERN society is the result of man'sincreasing but still incomplete. conques  of nature. Technology
and engineering are powerful weapons
in effecting this conquest. Historically,
there are good reasons for the advanced
technological society of the West.
Today, however, as the Dutch historian
R. J. Forbes has written :"IF e live in
a stage of human history in which the
answers to the common problems that
occupy metf's attention at every point 0/
the globe are no longer limited to certain
areas and artificial lines on a map. The
new science has established an interna-
tional brotherhood 0/scientific thought".
It is this recognition which accounts
for the key role played by science in
all programmes for technical assistance.
As the Indian monthly journal, Science
and Culture, has said (speaking for all
under--developed territories) :"We are
convinced that the only way to achieve
economic independence and regeneration
would be through intensive application
of science and technology to all pro-
ductive endeavour".
The Republic of India is indeed
moving into action along these lines.
Prime Minister Nehru has declared :
"1 believe that all problems, both world
problems and national, should « ue a
scientific approach". India herself has
a great scientific tradition. In recent
by
Maurice GOLDSMITH
years, great Indian physicists like Sir
C. V. Raman and Professor H. Bhabha,
and chemists such as Sir Shanti Swarup
Bhatnagar, have made unique contri-
butions to world science.
To Na.... ow A Gap
THERE is much to do in India, acountry with a population of over
300, 000, 000, and natural population
increase larger than any nation in
Europe (with the exception of Russia).
Taking the amount of energy available
per head of population as an index of
the level of technical civilization, India
uses yearly the equivalent of less than
one-fifth of a ton of coal per head as
compared with the USA's 9 tons and
Britain's 4. The technical assistance
programme is designed to help narrow
this gap for countTies whose ill-
nourished millions demand the material
means for better lives.
Unesco will make available to India
$229, 000, a large share of its technical
assistance budget for the first year.
Specialists will be engaged by Unesco
to assist India in several aspects of her
own national programme. For example,
In this Indian jute research laboratory, an expert examines fibre bundles to determine the
strength and extension of the yarn. Information from such research centres will be"digested"in the giant bibliographical centre which Unesco is helping to set up in India, and
then made available to scientists and technologists in South-East Asia generally.
Professor Turner Alfrey, of the USA, is
to set up a division of plastics and high
polymers in the National Chemical
Laboratory. This is but one of the many
new research institutions now being set
up.
Three scientists are to go to India's

National Physical Laboratory to do
research in low-temperature physics.
The technical equipment is to be
provided by Unesco. Other scientists
- specialists in marine engineering, naval
architecture, dam design and geo-
physics-are to work at the Indian
Institute of Technology.
In addition, Unesco is to aid India in
·wetting up a giant bibliographical centre.
This will be designed to keep Indian
scientists informed of all aspects of
activity. Its facilities will also be
available to other United Nations
technical assistance missions and to
scientists in South-east Asia generally.
One of this Centre's major tasks will be
to"digest"more than 12, 000 scientific
articles published yearly in India alone.
The wise use of science in such
countries as India can make the technical
assistance programme meaningful, and
demonstrate to the world how the
conquests of science can help liberate
all mankind from many of its ancient
ills.
