DECEMBER 1950 Page 7-UNESCO COURIER
o SHOW MAN'S
J HIS RIGHTS
FREEDOM OF RELIGION
THE right to freedom of conscience andreligion is an achievement of modern
times. This right has conflicted less
with material interests than with deep
and traditional beliefs. From time im-
memorial, men convinced that they possess
the truth have thought it their duty to
impose it, by law or by force, on other
men whose idea of the truth was different,
and those who serve one god have called
those who serve another god"infidels."
It was to the eighteenth century,
essentially the century of the emancip-
ation of the human person, that fell the
honour of fighting religious intolerance
unremittingly and defeating it almost
everywhere, at least legally.
The 1948 Universal Declaration of
Rights was not content, in its Article 18,
merely to reassert the individual's right
to freedom of thought, conscience and
religion, and his right to freedom to
change his religion or belief. It explicit-
ly added"freedom, either alone or in
community with others and in public or
private, to manifest his religion or belief
in teaching, practice, worship and observ-
ance."
We should not however forget that, if
the spirit of persecution is declining in the
matter of religious beliefs, it has never
been more aggressive in the political and
the social sphere. In various places in
this respect, the final conquest of the
rights of the human person in our world
of today, is far from having been
achieved.
that it is a sign of strength in authorities
to grant all citizens a wide measure of
freedom of discussion and that to suppresfj
that freedom is a sign of fear and there-
fore of weakness, Article 19 of the 1948
Declaration will readily find its place in
national legal systems.
THE RIGHT TO EDUCATION
THE right of every human being toeducation is, of all the rights affirmed
by the United Nations Declaration of
1948, one of the least contested.
Article 26, which deals with the right
to education, was adopted unanimously
with two abstentions. The terms of the
article are couched in no uncertain lan-
guage, although nations and families are
given all reasonable freedom in inter-
preting it : elementary education must be
free and compulsory, technical and profes-
sional education must be made generally
available, and higher education must be
equally accessible to all, on the basis of
merit.
This is the culmination of a century
and a half of effort made in almost all
countries with a view to a truly demo-
cratic distribution of education. A
hundred years ago the idea of making
education accessible to all appeared, to
many, to be dangerously Utopian.
In our times, whole continents, where
lower standard of living seemed insepar-
able from an equally low standard of
education are now adopting popular
education, accessible to all. This, as Jef-
ferson said, is essential to any democratic
régime based on popular endorsement.
FREEDOM OF THOUGHT
AND OPINION
AT all periods, the progress of civiliz-ation has been retarded by lack of
freedom in the dissemination of
ideas and opinions. An idea cannot be
killed by censorship or prohibition, but its
advance can long be delayed. For whole
centuries, intellectual life and social pro-
gress have been checked and sometimes
paralysed by the concerted will of
churches and princes, closely united to
maintain a status quo favourable to their
privileges. The invention of printing in
the fifteenth century placed a formidable
weapon in the hands of innovators and
reformers, whose resources increased with
the spread of pamphlets and, later, pe-
riodicals.
While with the press, the film and the
radio there has been an increase in the
means of propagating ideas, the means of
controlling and checking this propagation
have also become much more refined. In
the past, authorities were, in a way,
powerless against ideas communicated
from man to man. Today, great news-
papers are more vulnerable than were the
slim pamphlets of the past, and the polic-
ing of frontiers has everywhere become
far more effective.
There is no doubt that, in certain parts
of the world, freedom of information is
in retrogression. On the other hand it is
noteworthy that the new Republic of
India has through its Constituent Assem-
bly proclaimed the right to freedom of
speech and expression for all its citizens.
When it comes to be generally admitted
PARTICIPATION
IN CULTURAL LIFE
THE right to education is completed bythat to"participate freely in th  curl-
tural life of the community", a right
stated in Article 27 of the Universal De-
claration of 1948. Works of art and the
benefits of scientific progress should be
accessible to all. It would be difficult, in
this regard, to lay down strict laws,
applicable in all cases and to all persons.
But what the Declaration seeks to estab-
lish is quite clear. It is equally clear what
it seeks to prevent-that cultural life
should be made the privilege of certain
groups ; that material or financial obsta-
cles should come between a work of art
and men of good will who wish to
approach it ; and that the results of
scientific progress should be monopolized
for the profit or enjoyment of a few.
At all periods, culture has been demo-
cratic in some of its manifestations, e. g.
games and athletic competitions, popular
songs and dances, and performances at
which the people were at once spectators
and actors.
But the outstanding cultural feature of
modern times is the diffusion of the
printed word. Gutenberg's invention (of
which the Chinese were the forerunners)
greatly increased the individual's oppor-
tunities of acquiring culture without
depending upon collective manifestations.
Books are not expensive, and this has
made the personal conquest of knowledge
possible, without reliance on the rather
exclusive schools of the past. Books have
been the great liberators of modern man.
WHEN HUMAN RIGHTS WERE VIOLATED. Under Hitler's rule in Germany, human rights were syste-
matically violated, all individual liberty was suppressed and all questions affecting morality, human rights
and human dignity, were subordinated to the lust for power of a so-called"master race". Aggressive
diplomacy soon led to war. Frontiers were violated, provinces annexed, peoples enslaved. Nearly all
nations were involved in the conflict. The war took a total of forty million lives-the civilian victims of
mass murder in concentration camps (above, right), and the soldiers who left their homes to fight and die
(above, leftrso that enslaved countries might be liberated.
FREEDOM OF CREATIVE WORK
ARTICLE 27 of the Universal Declarationof 1948, which deals with the right
of everyone to participate in cultural
life, also mentions everyone's right to"the
protection oj the moral and 11Ul. terial in-
terests"resulting from"any scientijic,
literary or artistic production or which he
is the author".
The application of this principle is ob-
viously less extensive than that of the
rights of all readers, listeners or specta-
tors, I. e. everyone as a whole. Here, only
the actual creators, writers, artists or
scientists, are concerned. But their pro-
tection means the defence of all civiliz-
ation, and thus, indirectly, everyone pro-
fits by it.
The creator, as a man, must enjoy to
the full those rights that belong to all,
including the right to choose his place
of residence and his occupation, and to
be guaranteed a standard of living that
ensures his dignity (Articles 13, 23, 24 and
25) ; thus protected, it is for him alone to
bring his available thought and effort to
bear upon the work he has chosen. The
less the rest of mankind intervenes in
this choice, the sounder and purer this
choice will be.
The better a civilization understands the
place occupied in its destiny by thinkers
and artists, the greater the number of
recognized creators there will be, and the
greater will be the facilities offered them.
THE RIGHT TO PARTICIPATE
IN GOVERNMENT
THE civic rights of the individual under-lie all other rights, because they Jnake
it possible to obtain those other rights
peacefully.
They also guarantee them against the
arbitrary action of authority.
This is stated by the 1948 Universal
Declaration in its Article 21, which is of
fundamental importance :
"Everyone has the right to take part in
the government or his country, directly
or through jreely chosen representatives.
"Everyone has the right oj equal access
to public service in his country.
"The will oj the'people shall be the
basis oj the authority of government ; this
will shall be expressed in periodic and
genuine elections which shall be by uni-
versal and equal sufjrage and shall be
held by secret vote or by equivalent free
voting procedure."
One hears in these words the echo of
principles affirmed at the end of the
eighteenth century, at the time of the
American and French Revolution, prin-
ciples underlying the national constitu-
tions of all democratic countries, that is,
the majority of modern nations. The
peoples now know what it costs to be
deprived of such rights ; it 4s to be hoped
that the cruel and disastrous experiment
of the twentieth-century dictatorships
will not too soon be forgotten.
*
WE have seen that the Universal De-claration of Human Rights, adopted
by the Third General Assembly of
the United Nations, sets a milestone of
progress in two respects.
First, it lays obligations upon forty-
eight countries, whose official representat-
ives approved it. If it leads to an inter-
national Covenant,'the position bf
hesitant States will become iIDore and
more difficult to justify and to maintain.
Second, the Declaration courageously
states certain ideas that are only of recent
origin ; as regards these, it has shown that
the world was further forward than many
people imagined.
Still one justifiable question must be
answered :"So much lor rights, but what
about duties ?"
The answer is simply that the De-
claration of Human Rights tacitly in-
cludes a complete Declaration of Human
Duties ; there is, indeed, no right that does
not imply a duty for others to respect and
defend it. And all the duties are foreseen
and defined by the recognition of the
rights of others.
Many of these duties, admittedly, are
negative :"Thou shalt not deprive others
of their liberty,""Thou shalt not per-
secute others on account of their. opinion :'
"Thou shalt not arbitrarily exploit the
work of others."But what a progress it
would be, in this world of ours, if all men
practised their negative duties !
If and when the rights of the individual
are fully applied, every man will be faced
by a supreme responsibility, that of direct-
ing his own fate. He will have lost but
one right, that of regarding himself as a
helpless victim in a world where freedom
of decision does not belong to him. There
are still men who prefer irresponsibility,
and have proved it. All men are not yet
ready for so full a measure of liberation,
but their children will become accustomed
to it.
tv ABOLITION OF INHUMAN PRACT ! CES. Vengeance first regarded
1, as a right to be freely exercised by the individual, was later replaced. bypublic vengeance. The law of an ye for an eye and a tooth for
'. a tooth was the source of much cruelty in the penal system and
, poison conditions, as Illustrated In this 17th century engraving of a
cell in the Pastille. Reformers have succeeded in driving home
'he idea that prison IS not enough ; a criminal needs re-educating.
THE RIGHT TO PARTICIPATION IN CULTURAL LIFE. Books
are a link between man and man for they enable people to share
in the whole cultural heritage of mankind. In ancient times libraries
were rare and only the priveleged had access to them. Today,
travelling libraries like this Canadian one (above) make regular trips,
bringing books within reach of those who live far from cities.
UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE. The attainment of Universal Suffrage for
men and the elimination of property requirements for the right to vote
was a long and difficult process. The struggle was only half won,
however, until the right to vote could also be extended to the other
half of humanity-women. The victory was only generally achieved
during our own century. Japanese women (above) obtained this
right after the Second World War.
