One 01 the most important decisions taken by Unesco's Fifth Qensrui
Conference was to establish a long-range bc :. : ; i" programme for the
r. ext several years as distsyisned from the work plan for 1951.
Tr'UE, Unesco's ol : > !  : : :  ; ves for next year are part of a long-term plan,
cov : : ; y itle policies and main lines of work of the Organization.
InclUded in the basic programme is a 10 point list of tasks fo ;
Unesco. These are :
1. To eliminate illiteracy and encourage fundamental education :
2. To obtain for each person an education conforming to his aptitudes
and to the needs of society, including technological training and
higher education :
3. To promote respect for human rights throughout all nations :
4. To remove the obstacles to the free flow of persons, ideas and
knowledge between the countries of the world ;
5. To promote the progress and utilization of science for mankind :
6. To remove the causes of tensions that may lead to war ;
7. To demonstrate world cultural interdependence ;
8. To advance through the press, radio and motion pictures the cause
01 truth, freedom and peace ;
9. To bring about better understanding among the peoples of the
world and to convince them of the necessity of co-operating
loyally with one another in the framework of the United Nations :
10 To render clearing-house and exchange services in all its fields
of action, together with services in reconstruction and relief assis-
tance.
The basic programme resolutions are grouped under seven different
heads : Education, Natural Sciences, Social Sciences, Cultural Activities,
Exchange of Persons, Mass Communications and Relief Services. As lack
of space prevents publication of these resolutions in full, the Courier pre-
sents on this page a summarized version of the basic programme.
B E'l7ER ethds of education 8 : 
wider diffusion of o ; ;- ; : : ácy are
not. end_  ; 1 themselves. The
fiji object must be to equip man
lÁ> play his part harmoniously in the
modern world. It is not enough for
him to know his own land and his
own people ; he lives in a network of
relationships that go beyond frontiers.
Today, all nations are interdependent,
and they must learn to recognize it.
1. IMPROVEMENT OF EDUCATION
THROUGH THE EXCHANGE OF
INFORMATION
More progress can be achieved, and
; rakp .'a'1} J  ! t : :   ;."viû. tG.. if ine experi-
ments being made throughout the
world in education and psychology are
better known. Unesco collects inform-
ation about such experiments, ana-
lyses it, and promotes its distribution,
to help improve methods of teaching
and to further the international pur-
poses of Unesco.
2. EXTENSION OF EDUCATION
Unesco has the duty of helping
Member States to ensure for everybody
whose education has been neglected,
interrupted or impeded, the chance to
overcome his handicaps. Unesco must
pay special attention to fundamental
and adult education, and to the train-
ing-of handicapped children.
3. EDUCATION FOR INTERNATION-
AL UNDERSTANDING
Consciousness of the unity of man-
kind is still rudimentary. Teachers are
only beginning to discover suitable
methods ; textbooks need to be im-
proved. Schoolchildren know little
about the international organizations
of today and the services they can
render to world peace and prosperity.
Unesco must therefore help to promote
education In world citizenship.
The natural and exact sciences,
being objective and impartial,
of fer a particularly suitable field
for action by Unesco.
Laboratories and research institutes
influence the development of human
communities. All men should benefit
from discoveries that can raise stan-
dards of living. Once men are in a
position to improve their living condi-
tions, they are able as never before
to grow in mutual understanding.
1. DEVELOPMENT OF SCIENTIFIC
COOPERATION
Scientific research benefits from a
widespread exchange of information.
Unesco must help international orga-
nizations of scientists by encouraging
the meeting and movement of experts,
to help in the co-ordination of inter-
national scientific congresses, to pro-
mote the classification and analysis of
specialized publications and to over-
come difficulties of language by stan-
dardizing scientific terminology and by
encouraging multilingual dictionaries.
To ensure speedier exchanges between
scientists, Unesco maintains Scientific
cooperation offices in areas where thev
are most needed.
2. AS$ISTANCE Tn nSEARCH FOR
"t"UVEMENT OF THE LIV-
&.. ti CONDITIONS OF MANKIND.
Unesco can render genuine service
by detecting gaps in the development
of research and helping to fill them.
Thus, for example, it encourages insti-
tutes for the study of biological factors
in different climates or the develop-
ment of certain wide areas, and it par-
ticipates in the plans for creating
United Nations laboratories.
3. TEACHING AND POPULARIZ-
ATION OF SCIENCE
All men need access to basic scien-
tific knowledge in order that they hiity
better understand their world. They
should also know that such knowledge
depends in large measure on the result
of international cooperation. The ob-
ject should be to develop an attitude
of mind and an understanding of the
effects of applying science to modern
conditions and to the development of
human society.
No attempts to better the lot of
man can meet with success un-
less they take account of his en-
vironment. Unesco must there-
fore place social science in the fore-
ground of its field of study. Inter-
national cooperation is itself a pheno-
menon deserving scientific study.
The major international organiz-
ation established in the first half of
the twentieth century are especially
worth studying. In a world becoming
more complex, and more highly organ-
ized, the study of international coo-
peration may make it possible both to
improve that cooperation and to ex-
tend it to new fields.
1. AID TO INTERNATIONAL SCIEN-
TIFIC COOPERATION
There are three ways in which
Unesco can help in the teaching and
development of the social sciences.
These are by meetings which may re-
sult in new contacts and exchanges of
views, through translation and docu-
mentation services, and through the
standardization of technical termi-
nology.
2. STUDIES OF SOCIAL TENSIONS
International Cooperation must be
brought to bear on particular studies
related to the purposes of Unesco-
such as that of social tensions. Re-
search results must be disseminated
as widely as possible to prevent or
arrest the growth of mass mental atti-
tudes that endanger peace.
3. STUDIES OF INTERNATIONAL
COOPERATION
The organs of international cooper-
ation have sufficiently developed to
make a study of them by the methods
of Social Science worth while.
UNESCO'S first task is to foster
international relations by ar-
ranging for thinkers, writers,
artists and their ideas to move
freely across national frontiers. Unes-
cn forms a meeting ground for the
cultures of the world. It stimulates
nations to develop their literature, art
and science and see them as parts of
a world heritage. It helps Member
States to protect works of art from
neglect or violence and from the ra-
vages of time, and it assists in bring-
ing artists and writers before the world.
It uses every means to ensure that all
people shall have access to the best
works of every land and every age.
1. INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
Gatherings of experts or of interna-
tional associations of scholars, can do
a great deal for cultural cooperation.
Unesco accordingly aids and encou-
rages such meetings, at the same time
associating these experts and associ-
ations with its own programme. The
exchange of specialized information de-
pends largely on documentary and
bibliographical services : here again
Unesco can do much useful work.
2, PROTECTION OF CREATIVE
WORK AND ITS AUTHORS
For the preservation of works of art
and historical monuments every State
is responsible both to its own people
and to mankind. But international co-
operation is also necessary to spread
wide the knowledge of method. Unesco
encourages and helps this activity,
offering technical assistance and, in
exceptional cases, where resources are
inadequate, aid in the raising of funds.
The creation of new  : : úsophical,
artistic or lite :  ; work, should be
foster,,"DY the assertion and defence
of the independence of the thinker,
writer and artist. Unesco seeks to
promote international cooperation in
order to ensure respect for this inde-
pendence throughout the world. Unes-
co is endeavouring to bring about the
conclusion of a universal convention
that will give equal consideration to
the interests of the authors, the in-
dustry, the workers and the general
public.
3. DISSEMINATION OF CULTURE
The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights affirms that"everyone has the
right freely to participate in the cultur-
al life of the community". Unesco will
assist Member States by providing in-
formation, carrying out studies, mak-
ing recommendations and, where ne-
cessary, itself taking practical action to
direct the education of both youth and
adults towards a better understanding
of the culture of mankind. Finally,
means should be found for improving
the quality of the reproduction and
translation of artistic and literary
works and for their wide dissemin-
ation.
STUDY abroad not only gives in-
sight into new discoveries and
techniques but also helps the i -
habitants of one country to adapt
themselves to the ways of life and
thought of another. Accordingly,
Unesco encourages people with differ-
ent national, social and cultural back-
grounds to visit other countries either
for general education or for profess-
ional training.
The world today suffers from a
shortage of experts and technicians in
almost every field of activity. Unesco
is accordingly doing its best to multi-
ply fellowships as well as facilities for
short periods of study. It is itself able
to award annually a limited number
of fellowships.
1. CLEARING-HOUSE
The Clearing-House makes inform-
ation available to Member States, go-
vernmental and other organizations,
institutions and persons concerned
with education in order to advise those
wishing to study abroad, to ensure a
closer co-ordination of already existing
activities, and to stimulate new pro-
grammes. In the publication of the
volume"Study Abroad"a methodical
attempt is made to list all facilities for
study abroad available to students :
2. PROMOTION
To encourage interr. ational exchange
of persons, Unesco seeks to increase
facilities for those requiring financial
assistance and to promote broader and
more varied programmes. It also sug-
gests how programmes of study abroad
can serve the cause of international
understanding.
3. FELLOWSHIP ADMINISTRATION
The award of fellowships enabling
qualified candidates to study abroad
helps Unesco to implement its own
programme, inasmuch as holders of
travel fellowship financed by Unesco
can be associated with its projects and
activities. Unesco can also give help
and advice to institutions planning
international fellowship programmes
and it furthermore organizes interne-
ships for students
TRESS, radio and film can do much
to help international understand-
ing. Understanding depends on
information, and in a free world
the right to this is part of the right to
education.
Unesco's first task is to make a sur-
vey of the present resources for mass
communications, as the basis for im-
prOVIng them. Unequal technical de-
velopment in various countries has
often led to such disparities that what
should be normal for all is often
in fact the privilege of the few.
Unesco is therefore building up a
clearing-house for the exchange of
data on public information systems so
that all may benefit from one an-
other's experience. Unesco must also
encourage the scientific study of the
problems of mass communication and
promote professional training to meet
modern needs. Nor do knowledge or
training solve all the problems, so long
as ideas and technical materials can-
not freely cross national frontiers.
Unesco in its survey of present resour-
ces also collects data about such obsta-
cles to a free flow, and sePU o sur-
mount them by International agree-
ments or íl otlier ways.
according to its Constitution, Unesco
collaborates"in the work of advancing
mutual knowledge and understanding
of peoples through all means of mass
communication". Throughout the
world, consequently, it stimulates the
uses of press, film, radio and related
media to promote social progress and
international understanding and uses
them to enlighten the public about its
activities and objectives.
1. IMPROVEMENT OF MEANS AND
TECHNIQUES OF INFORMAT10N
Unesco has set up an information
clearing-house to deal with all pro-
blems concerning mass communic-
ations, including professional an\
technical training and the techniques
and influence of the press, radio and
aim. Exact information is collected
by field surveys.
2, REDUCTION OF OBSTACLES TO
THE FREE FLOW OF INFORM-
ATION
Progress in the field of mass com-
munication requires the reduction and,
if possible, the removal of certain ob-
stacles. Means of overcoming them
must be investigated and adequate
measures recommended to Member
States, to whom appropriate inter-
national conventions must be submitted
for ratification. The free flow, which
Unesco thus seeks to promote, should
cover not only ideas and news of an
informative nature but all audio-visual
material serving educational, scientific
and cultural purposes.
3. ACTION THROUGH PRESS, FILM
AND RADIO
While encouraging, within the scope
of its capacities and the limits of its
programme, the practical activities of
the press, cinema and radio. Unesco
intends also to employ the facilities
they offer for the purposes laid down
in its Constitution. It encourages di-
rectors and producers through dis-
cussion and the supply of material, to
take due account of the services to be
rendered to international understand-
ing in the fields of education, science
and culture. It also keeps them in-
formed of its own activities and sup-
plies them with appropriate material
ready for immediate use.
ALL those things we hold valuable
in education, science and culture
are from time to time thre tened
by disaster-whether natural or
at the hands of man. Help for the
victims of such misfortunes, if it is to
be really effective, must be co-ordinat-
ed and directed where it is most
needed. Unesco has undertaken, with-
in the sphere of its competence, to
collect, analyse and distribute inform-
ation about the nature and extent of
the help required.
This documentary service provides
a basis for three types of action : first-
ly, Unesco gives direct aid to devastat-
ed countries by gifts of material or by
the provision of services, drawing for
this purpose on a Relief Fund to which
it contributes from its own budget.
This direct aid is supplemented by
campaigns for voluntary aid in which
Unesco unites its efforts with those of
other organizations pursuing similar
aims. These campaigns are capable
of producing substantial results.
Lastly, Unesco encourages voluntary
work camps conducted in accordance
with the aims of Unesco and engaged
in reconstruction tasks to become
centres of international understanding.
