One of the non-governmental organizations helping to give form to Unesco's objectives is
the International Theatre Institute (IT !) which works to encourage the setting up of National
Theatre Centres in Unesco's Member States. Next month the ITI is holding its Third Annual
Congress in Paris in conjunction with a conference and exhibition on theatre architecture in
different countries. This photo shows M. René Thomas, secretary of the exhibition (left) and
M. Pierre Soarel. a Paris architect, inspecting theatre plans and models for this exhibition.
WITHIN the last century common
interests of humanity have led
v V to the formation of more tña
1000 international organiz-
ations all over the world. Of these over
900 are non-governmental. They in-
clude church and professional groups,
philosophers and educators, scholars,
lawyers, youth and women's organiz-
ations.
The United Nations is now working
closely with many of these indepen-
dent groups through its specialized
agencies, WHO, FAO and UNESCO.
At present 100 independent non-
governmental organizations are work-
ing under consultative arrangements
with Unesco, bringing their specialized
work and knowledge to help in the
accomplishment of Unesco'a pro-
gramme.
Architecture, women's rights, folk
music and philosophy, African affairs
and applied psychology-what com-
mon ground could there be for such
diverse interests as these ? The answer
is Unesco's objectives :
For instance, Unesco sets out to
protect the rights of the author, and
at the same time to promote the free
circulation of ideas. No author
wishes to let his work appear, un-
protected, where it may be pirated, re-
written or translated so badly that it
no longer bears much resemblance to
what he created, and fails to bring him
the rewards he deserves.
Maze of World Copyright
EXPERT advice on world copyrightproblem"was necessary for
Unesco to turn its resolution into
actuality. The International Literary
and Artistic Association was founded
in France in 1878 under the honorary
presidency of a great author. Victor
Hugo. This group, with members in
Belgium, Denmark, Egypt, France and
more than a dozen other countries,
working with Unesco, held meetings
of its national committees and prepar-
ed a report on the extension of world
copyright protection for the inform-
ation of Unesco's member states.
Expert opinion and professional ad-
vice were given by the International
Confederation of Societies of Authors.
and, in the interests of composers of
music, by the International Feder-
ation of the Phonographic Industry.
With this information at its disposal,
Unesco is now prepared to hold a
world conference on copyright law, to
straighten out the maze of internation-
al legal difficulties which expose
authors to unfair treatment and hinder
the free exchange of their work.
Consultative arrangements enablp
independent organizations to send ob-
servers to Unesco General Conferences,
to participate in meetings and technic-
al conferences held by Unesco on
subjects which interest them. But the
most important part of all the work
accomplished between Unesco and
these non-governmental groups is the
attainment of common objectives
Women's Access
To Education
FOR instance, a number of interna-tional women's organizations sub-
mitted special reports to a Unesco
conference studying problems of equal
educational opportunities for women.
Some of these groups provided resolu-
tions, such. as that made by the Inter-
national Alliance of Women, the In-
ternational Federation of University
Women, and the Open Door Inter-
national, that Unesco encourage go-
vernments to promote the organization
of educational and professional guid-
once for all, without prejudice to wo-
men.
Resolutions like these have given the
world such advances as woman surf-
frage. The work of these organiz-
ations, done now with Unesco sponsor-
ship, will be extended to countries
through their government, where the
fight'might have been long and bitter
for a non-governmehta ! organization
working alone.
One of the first requirements or
organizations working on a basis of
consultative arrangements with Unes-
co grants to. help them continue their
work Or carry through specific parts of
Unesco's special projects, is that they

A HUNDRED GROUPS
WITH A COMMON ATOM
A JliEW feature of Cnesco's Gencral Conference in Florence thismonth will be a 1III'etiny for l'epl'I'SI>ntati/'I's of the iOO inter-
Iwtional non-got'ernmental or'lani : :. ations Ichose co-opcration with
CIU'SCO helps the accomplishment of its PI'O !/I'amll/e,
How these ol'qanizations find in Cnesc ()'s aill/s a common fielll
for their individual reSOUl'ces and knowledge the Coul'iel'will
describe in a sel'ies of speciKÛ articles, tlte fil'st of which is
published below.
be truly international in their scope,
and that their objectives conform with
the general principles in Unesco's
Constitution. Thus one of the Com-
mi5sions of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union is working with Unesco on the
analysis and improvement of text-
books, which too often in the put have
set mistaken grounds for national pre-
judices.
In some cases, Unesco has promoted
the creation of over-all federative
bodies, which directly relate the work
of independent groups to Unesco's pro-
gramme. One of these, the Interna-
tional Council of Philosophy and
Humanistic Studies was founded in
1949. Some of its member organiz-
ations are made up of smaller groups
which represent special fields of cul-
tural studies. One of the most repre-
sentative is the International Acade-
mic Union, founded in 1919, with a
membership now of 22 countries.
Of what interest is a Dictionary of
Terminology of International Law ? If
we give this a moment's attention-
Unesco has given it the encouragement
of a grant-its importance becomes
apparent. No legal agreement can be
reached when jurists of different
nations attach different meanings to
the same word in translation. This
happened when an important inter-
governmental agreement on admi-
nistration was being grawn up, when
the French word mandat, meaning a
legal contract in which one party is
subordinated to the other, was used for
the English word trusteeship.
A Living, Working Peace
THE International Federation forJL the Societies-of Classic l Studies
wcrks towards the accomplishs-
ment of a major Unesco project-the
translation of great books-by sub-
mitting a list of Greek and Latin texts,
with existing translations and books
about these classics.
The works of these 100 international
organizations are as varied and
specialized as the forms of human
curiosity, thought and work can be.
In each case, the very quality of their
interest calls for international co-
operation, and in Unesco's resolutions.
working toward a living, working
peace, which is not just an absence of
war, they find common gro'md.
"
