SCHOOL IN THE MAILBOX
Australia's"Phantom Schools"
Serve 18, 000 Children
By Walter GEORGE
EEL'CATION in Australia is free and compulsory, and yet 18, 000children don't go to school. Instead, the school goes to them by
way of His Majesty's mails. ion each of the Commonwealth's
six capital cities there is a school, complete with complement of
teachers, yet no pupils are to be seen ; a kind of phantom school.
If you ask, you'll be told that its pupils are all over an immense
land-in the mountains and forests of Victoria perhaps ; in the tropics
of Queensland, or the Northern Territory ; in the far north of Western
Australia-anywhere, in fact, where Australian children need educa-
tion and are out of reach of Australian schools.
These are the Correspondence Schools. Since early in the first
World War, they have been taking education to children, and to
some adults. Some pupils lived in lonely, outback homesteads or
prospector's camps, or were isolated in lighthouses, or travelling
with some circus. Others were bedridden or in hospital.
Several years ago, two children did a full course while travelling
with their mother through England, Europe, and America.
In Victoria, for example, educa-
tion by correspondence began in
1914, when a countryman who lived
more than eight miles from the
nearest school asked the Education
Department if anything could be
done to teach two of his boys. The
Chief schools'inspector passed the
question on to the principal of the
Teachers'Training College, who
put it to some of the students.
Five of them volunteered to try
teaching the boys by correspond-
ence, each one making himself
responsible for a subject. Before
long, they were sending out lessons
to a younger brother as well, and
soon afterward,, there were so
many requests for correspondence
work that the student teachers
could not cope with them.
That was when the correspond-
ence schools officially came into
being. Other States soon followed
suit, and now, although there is
some slight variation between
States, the broad plan is Common-
wealth-wide.
At each of the headquarter,, ;
schools, those phantom schools at
the State capital, is a headmaster
or mistress with a staff of one
teacher to about every 40 or 45
pupils enrolled.
Keynote of the work is a friendly
personal interest, and letters and
gifts that come to the schools show
what a happy bond exists.
The schools usually provide three
courses of instruction. The primary
course covers all the 1Iormal
subjects children learn during their
first seven years at school, and in
the last two years the girls learn
plain sewing and cookery. In the
super-primary course, children
prepare for the Qualifying Cer-
tificate (common entrance) exami-
nation, and most of the work is in
English, with craft-work like
fancy stitching, free-hand drawing.
elementary design, some applied
arts, knitting, and crocheting. The
secondary course is for those
preparing for the Intermediate
(junior local), and Leaving Cer-
tificate (matriculation) examina-
tions.
Pupils receive a set of lessons
once a fortnight, or once a week
in some States. These are usuallv
in the form of instructional leaflets,
which take the place of textbooks.
Only for English literature and
geography subjects are textbooks
needed, and these are available in
cheap editions. Each child has
three note-books for each subject,
so that while one is being correct-
ed, the second is in the post. and
the third is being used.
Postage is free both ways. The
correction of books is very care-
fully done, with lucid explanations
The teachers call the children by
christian name, praising what has
been done well, gently reproving
untidiness, and usually including a.
little message for mother or super..
visor.
,
Parents Learn Too
All this brings about a closefriendship between teacher,
parents, and pupils, for
teachers sometimes have to instruct
supervisors as much as they du
children.
Usually the supervisors are
mothers who, despite the many
duties of the outback housewife.
are willing to do anything to help
their children receive an education.
It is noticeable that the less
educated a mother is, the more
determined she is that her children
shall learn their lessons.
One mother wrote :"I will du my
best to keep the children's wurk up
to stamlard, but when I tell you
that I have five children between
the ages of five and cleven, as well
as a tiny baby, yuu will understand
just huw difficult it is at times tf)
cupe with everything".
One mother could read only very
little herself when she applied to a
school for lessons for her first
child. When the first set arrived,
she learned the lesson herself
before giving it to the child. After
a few weeks she managed t 0 get
one set ahead. She carried on like
this for years until, in fact, her
child passed the Qualifying exami-
nation. Eventually her five children
completed the course.
Many of the children, too, do
their work under great difficulties.
One little girl who could not walk,
did everything up to the Leaving
examination hy correspondence.
Another, who lived far out on the
Nullarbor Plains, in Western
Australia, was left motherless at
the age of nine. She carried 011
bravely with cooking, bread-making.
sewing and mending for the family.
and found time to do her own
correspondence lessons and super-
vise those of her two brothers. Her
lesson books were always a model
of neatness.
One hov who was totally deaf
from birth reached grade four
after three years of correspondence
work. With inrredihle patience.
and helped by a special course of
Je""uns, hi"l1IuLher laught him to
speak and to follow the speech of
others by lip reading.
At regular times during the
week, the Australian Broadcasting
Commission gives school broadcasts,
and at times these are by a corres-
pondence school teacher. In such
case the children listen delightedly
to people they know so well by
letter, but usually have never seen.
One little girl always puts on her
best frock and brushes her hair
nicely before sitting down to her
radio lesson. Even the boys feel
that the occasion is a special one,
and habitually wash and tidy them-
selves is honour of it.
Sense Of t'olDlDunit"Life
S U\IETL\IES, of COllI'se. lIle childrelldo meet their teaehers. for
"* families are encouraged to
visit the school when they come
down to the cities, and hundreds of
them do so. In this way, close
personal attachments grow. and
teachers come to be regarded us
distant members of the family.
Besides giving formal instruction
in school subjects, the correspond-
ence schools do a great deal to
foster a sense of community life
among outback children, and to
lead their interests into wider
fields.
Not onlv children learn from the
schools. Many adults have taken
advantage of the lessons, and the
school rolls include well-sinkers,
opal miners, station hands, and
alien immigrants rivho want to
learn English.
These, then, are the correspond-
ence schools Their work is not
as well known as it should be in
the cities, but they have a very
real place in the'hearts of the
country people. This is easy to
understand, for the schools bring
friendly help to harassed mothers,
education to children who other-
wise would be untaught, and
eniIghtment where it has been
previously shut. out.