Then 1 accep-ted in Janua-
ry 1947 my
appointment a s
Deputy Director-
General, 1 speci-
fied that my con-
tract should b
for not more than
two years. At the
time of your elec-
tion as Director-
General at tn"
Beirut Conference
in 1948, 1 submitt-
to the United States after my two years with Unesco. You asked me then, and on
subsequent occasions, to continue my work through the 1950 Conference, sche-
duled to be held in Florence in the spring of 1950. I feel now that, contrary to to
suggestions that I should remain until the end or the year, you should definitely
not count an me after 30 June 1950.
I shall of course cantinue to serve you and the Organization to the best of
my abi1ity until that time, but I hope that you will proceed with finding my
successor, so that he may take over when I depart.
In the meantime, if you agree, I believe that this letter, together with any
reply you may care to make, should be made public.
Sincerely yours,
Walter H. C. LAVES,
Deputy Director-General.
Dr. Walter H. C. Laves. Deputy Director-General of Unesco since 1947 and top-
ranking American member of the staii, will leave the Organization at the end
of Juno. following the close of the Florence Conference, it was announced at
last month's meeting of the Unesco Executive Board.
Dr. Laves was a member of the U. S. delegation to the First General Conference
of Unesco in 1946. and was appointed Deputy Director-General the following January.
serving under the Organization's iirst Director-General, Dr. Julian Huxley.
During the formative stage of the Organization. Dr. Laves was largely concerned
with creating the staff machinery and the means to carry out Unesco's programme.
This included the preparation of a programme for recruiting personnel, establishing
staff regulations, budget and administrative procedures, and the creation of a system
of financial controls. He assisted the Director-General in the development of Unesco's
programme, and was charged particularly with ensuring its coordinated execution.
Dr. Laves represented Unesco at various international meetings and undertook a
number of important missions on behalf of the Director-General. He handled the
top-level negotiations with the military commanders of the three Western zones of
Germany which resulted in the development of Unesco's German programme. At
Lake Success and Geneva he played a leading role in assuring greater co-ordination
in the work of the United Nations and Specialized Agencies.
A social scientist by training, Dr. Laves, who was born in Chicago in 1902, has
behind him a career both as educator and administrator.
During the war, he held advisory and executive posts with the U. S. Government-
among others with the Co-ordinator of Inter-American AHairs and the Office of Civilian
Defence. He served as adviser to the U. S. delegation to the U. N. Conference in San
Francisco, the first Assembly of the U. N. in London, the Economic and Social Council.
the International Labour Organization and the first General Conference of Unesco.
My dear Dr. Laves,
IT was with very sincere regret thatI learned From your lett r or t e
5th January that you had deci-
ded to leave us on the 1st July of this
year.
Several times in the past, as you
yourself recall, I have urged you to
stay in the Organization which you
have served so well and which owes
so much to your efforts. I should
have liked to think that we could con-
tinue together the work which we both
have so much at heart. But in the
light of the personal reasons which
you mention in your letter, I realize
that I cannot do otherwise than ac-
cept your decision, although I do so
with very great reluctance.
When you leave, you will have the
satisfãction of knowing that you have
succeeded in your mission and that
you have nursed the Organization
through is infancy at a time when
it stood most in need of your help.
My dear Director-General:
Dr. Laves
ed to you my resignation as Deputy
Director-General, effective at your con-
venience. I did this, not only in order
to give you a free hand in planning
and selecting your top personnel, but
also because I felt that, tor family and
professional reasons, I should return The organization and discipline
which Unesco possesses today and which are essential in an institution as com-
plex and many-sided as this is, are due in large measure to your initiative and it
is no exaggeration to say that its whole being has been deeply influenced by
your personality. Your devotion and enthusiasm combined with your outstand-
mg qualities of leadership and administration wilt remain a source of inspira-
tion for all of us.
I myself shalt remember you as a colleague for whose counsel and help I haze
had the highest esteem and regard. I know that you will always be a firm
friend of Unesco, and I trust that, in the important duties to which you may be
called, I shall be able to count on your co-operation.
I shall of course lay your better together with this reply before the Executive
Council at its next session.
Let me say once again how sorry I shall be to lose you and accept on behalf
of myself and the Organization sincere good wishes for your future success.
Yours very sincerely,
JAIME TORRES BODET.
Dlrector-General.
