"M ÜN : : ; IEUR PASCAL having at an early age abandonedtlt t study of mathematics, physics and othcl'
profane science... began in abuut the thirtieth
year uf life tu apply himself tu loftier ana 1/1OI'e serious
matters..."Preface to the 1670 edition of"Les l'cnsées"
to a place of honour in the his-The cO/llple : l'ily of modern élec-
tory of scientific thought-but tronic calculators can only add
now, in the Palais de la li, J- 10 the glory o {the inventor or
COllverte, we have the oppor-the arilllll/elica/IIwc ! linc".
of Pascal.
This was the common opi-
nion held by learned men about
Pascal-and about the"pro-
fane"labours of mathematics
and science-eight years after
the death of one of the world's
many-sided scienust-phi) oso-
phers.
His prodig'ous mind had
many facets, but posterity is
still inclined to think of Pascal
above all as the moralist phi
losopher of Port-Royal, who re-
marked,". 4 great many thingb
I have known ; can I name
one of them that will make me
more equitable,'Wiser, more
human or even more content-
ed ?"
Now, nearly three hundred
years after he spoke, a remar-
kable ('xhibition,"TilE SCIE. V-
TIFlC ACIIlEVE, tlENTS OF
BLAISE PASCAL A. VD TIIEIR
RESULTS THREE CE. vTlJRIES
LATER", has been organized
by the University of Paris at
the Palais de là Decouverte.
The exhibition serves to sue-
gest that Paseal might not h. lve
advanced so far in the study
of the human condition if he
had not first exercised in other
spheres a remarkhly liberal
and inventive mind.
"At an early age he abandon-
ed the study of profane scien-
ces", we are told. True, but 
was also at an early age that
he first became interested in
science-he was so young, in
fact, that his father, Etienne
Pascal, deliberately tried to
keep him from the study of
p". I ! I) clry.
Exploded Vacuum
Doctrine
nE day, however, thatwell-intentioned man was
"terrified"to discover his
son demonstrating on the floor,
with a crude figure drawn with
a piece of coal, a theorem cor-
responding to the 32nd in the
First Book of Euclid (the sum
of the angles of a triangle is
equal to two right angles).
Pascal was then twelve years
old.
When he was sixteen he
wrote an Essay on, Conics, the
most learned treatise on the
subject since classical times.
To help his father, a Normandy
tax inspector, he invented hIs
"arithmetical machine", : mces-
tor of the electronic calculator.
at the age of nineteen. Four
years later, he exploded a
piece of doctrine in physics
which since Aristotle had been
regarded as sacrosanct : nal-
tura horret vacuum ("nature
abhor a vacuum"). He de-
monstrated experimentall)'tl1át
air hays weight. He even con-
ceived a public transpo^t sys-
tem for Parisians, the five-
penny carria. qes and Paris is
indebted to him for having or-
ganized its first omnibas net-
work.
Voltaire's
« sublime Lunatic"
AT school, we casuallyIcarn about P a s c a 1's
achievements and vague-
ly realize that they ('niHIl'him
THE FIRST MECHANICAL CALCULATING MACHINE. When he wae 19.
Blaise Pascal invented the"Arithmetical Machine" (above} and became
the first man to carry out a mathematics ! calculation by mechanical
means. Pascal considered that mathematical calculation only required
an initial use 01 intelligence and a choice 01 method and that the rest
was merely an automatic mental process. The modern adding machine
which accepts numbers through its keyboard and"remembers"them by
the selling 01 its mechanism owes something to the work 01 the 17th
century French mathematician.
THE THINKING MACHINE. Modern electronic computing machines like
the Mark 111 (above) in Harvard's Computation Laboratory, look like
the insides oi large, complicated radio sets, and have"'magnetic me-
meries"housed in the last-spinning aluminium cylinders shown in this
photo. They can take on complicated jobs which are beyond human
capabilities. One recently took 103 hours to produce the answer to a
problem that would have taken a human being 100 years to solve. The
mathematical and scientific concepts of Pascal were indispensable in the
development or such machines.
"-..., (Photo : Time Magazine.)
tunity of seeing his work ad-
mirably illustrated and minu-
tely defined.
yet the organizers of the
exhibition have aimed at giving
us more than that. Relating to
each of Pascal's inventions, nu-
merous galleries display a pa-
norama of modern discoyûries
and methods that may legiti-
mately be regarded as proceed-
ing from the contributions to
science made by the man whom
Voltaire culled ;'a sublime luna-
tic born a century too soon".
In the preface to the catalo-
gue of the exhibition, the emi-
nent French savant, Louis de
ßroglie, invites us to meditate
on the astonishing intellectual
fecundity of this theorist, a
thinker and experimenter."His
contributwn to mathematics was
considerable and entitles him
to be called one of tñe fathers
of the theory of probability...
In physics, his lcork is of no
lesser importance, for it was he
who transformed into a cohe-
rent science 1chat his day knew
of hydrostatics...'lcho, using
primitive equ-ipment, conducted
experiments that even in our
day must be deemed admirable.
Silent testimony to the pu-
rely material aspects of Pas-
cal's genius consist, at the exhi-
bition, of modern developments
in city transportation., meteoro-
logy, diving helmets, methods.
for artifical rescusitation, pres-
Imrized airplane cabins, hy-
draulic braking systems, radio
valves and many other things
- all of them owing something
to the 17th Century thinker.
Broglie's
"Audacious Thiuker"
To quote Louis de Broglieonce again :"This mO ! ling,
audarwus thinker was
above all a great scientist, for
only Pascal's scienti {ic training
and the exceptwnal intellectual
qualities he evinced in his ma-
thematical and physical re-
search can account {or the rest
o {his work. Without them he
iuould not have attained the
same heights in his medita-
tions : on every page o {the
Pensees, we recognize the man
! clw has thought long on the
properties of numbers and the
laws of nature."
