A hundred years ago... About a thousand years ago... Almost every chapter In history
begins rather like a fairy story."Once upon a time"opens the door to dreamland,
or oonjures up the vision of a golden age. The celebration of anniversaries is also
the key to untold treasures ; through them man may learn more about himself and
gain strength for the future.
We could Indeed honour, every day of the year, some illustrious or little-know
predecessor who has helped shape our fives. We must however make a selection from
among this host of philosophers, artisans, poets, scientists and martyrs and from among
the events without heros, the less renowned discoveries. The choice will be arbitrary
and the reader will be able to add many other historic occasions to those noted each
month In this column.
1 Oth FEBRUARY."I am master ofsuch a vast kingdom a. nd hold
the reins of power In my hands :
nevertheless, true greatness consists In
carrying out the Will of God."These
words were written four centuries ago by
the Great Mogul. Akbar, holy king and
emperor of India. Records Indicate that
In February 1575, he ordered the con-
struction of a building for the use of diffe-
rent schools of philosophy and theology.
He was at that time an orthodox Moslem.
Three years later he admitted Hindus and
Christians to his seminary. Akbar che-
rished a great Ideal which he revealed In
1582 : the creation of a universal religion.
11 th FEBRUARY will be celebratedall over the world as the three
hundredth anniversary of the
death cf René Descartes. Few other men
have had more Influence all modem
science and thought. Anyone re-reading
his Meditations, his Treaties and his letters
cannot help forming a vivid picture of the
man himself. As Paul Valéry said :
"There lies the most striking trait of the
strong and rounded personality of Des-
cartels. and this trait distinguishes him
from the majority of other philosophers :
In none of their works does character.
that is the reaction of the whole man.
show itself more vigorously than In his
speculations".
15 t-.) FEBRUARY. On this day 150t years ago, the Morning Heraldof London stated"The Attor-
ney General asked permission to present
a Bill to the eHect that the law
suspending the Habeas Corpus Act be con-
tinued for a limited time. Sir Francis
Burdett rose to his feet :"I fear that by
suspending the Habeas Corpus Act we
shall end by suppressing It entirely. If
this Act. the strongest support of our
Constitution, Is abolished, our liberty goes
with it. I cannot adequately express
the anxiety I feel at these repeated sus-
pensions. Until now, It was regarded
as the most precious principle of our Con-
stitution that the poor man's cottage
should be as Inviolable as the prince's
palace. Protected only by straw from the
wind and rain, the King himself would
not have dared lay a finger upon it."
Born in 1770. Francis Burdett had tra-
velled much and had been profoundly in-
fluenced by the French Revolution. He
later devoted himself to the suppression
of laws discriminating against Roman
Catholics, to defending freedom of expres-
sion and to electoral reform. As early as
1818, he proposed universal suffrage. When
he died in 1844, he had seen all these aims
achieved.
17t FEBRUARY : Giordano Brunowas burned to death by the
Inquisition in 1600, Born in
Naples, he spent most of his life in exile.
being driven from town to town. In
his books and teaching, he attacked with
equal vigour Ar1stotle's logic or Ptolo-
met : s astronomical theories, the philoso-
phy of. the scholars or Christian dogma.
Deep ! 8rlfluenced by Raymond Lulle. Pla-
to, pp. nd above all by Nicolas de Cuse.
his doctrines are the fruit of an impas-
sioned learning. They greatly influenced
other pantheists, and made of Spinoza.
Shelling and Hegel his spiritual heirs.
In 1592 the Inquisition in Venice threw
him into prison, where he stayed for six
years until his extradition was granted.
Brought before the Governor of Rome,
the Cardinals and the advisers of the Holy
See, he was excommunicated, degraded
and handed over to the secular authorities.
but he refused to confass any guilt :"Th&
sentence you have just passed,"he said,
"probably causes you more sorrow than
me to hear it."On [7th} February 1600,
he was led to the Campo dei Fiori and
burned.
-,
22 d FEBRUARY. How Is energy dis-tributed between the variousradiation in the light spec-
trum emitted by a black body ? A
black body being a substance capable of
absorbing all radiations, except when heat-
ed.) In 1900 Max Planck, Professor of
Physics In Berlin, set himself this dl1ficult
problem, which engrossed at the time more
than one scientist In Harvard ; Oxford,
Paris and St. Petersburg.
Late in February. FCanck proposed a
theory, which has become classic, to
account for these releases of energy : any
source of light radiates or absorbs energy
Intermittently In multiples of a basic unit
called the"quantum", the amount being
equal to the frequency of radiations. His
theory announced a universal proportion.
since known as Planck's constant.
The celebrated physicist thus upset
established theories, introducing discon-
tinuity into both the theory of waves and
radiation of light and conceptions of the
structure of the atom. He prepared the
way for Einstein, Ixmi. s de Broglie and
Niels Bohr.
