ARTISTS-HOW THEY LIVE IS HOBODY'S BUSINESS
IT is normal and expected for a work of
art, whether picture, symphony, poem,
statue, novel or medal, to find recogni-
tion and honour. In speeches and
press it is haiied, along with"culture", as
an expression of the soul of a nation, as a
justification for man's sojourn on the
earth.
So far so good. But the twentieth cen-
tury cares relatively little for the creators
of those same works of art to which, singly
or as a whole, we attach such importance.
The interest and concern that are lavished
on art are denied to the artist. There are,
it is true, a few painters or writers who, in
later life, find themselves in easier circum-
stances-a tardy reward for their years of
struggle.
Financial recognition comes much more
easily to music-hail singers and film actors.
But those whose work will go to enrich the
museums and libraries of tomorrow are
lucky if they escape the sneers of their
contemporaries. How they live is nobody's
business, to use a popular phrase.
Official opinion has another name for
that indifference : it cans it"freedom".
Artists are absolutely free to write, paint,
sculpt or compose ; but the poems are not
sold, the pictures are not shown, and
where are the statues ? The painter has no
studio, the composer and the poet cannot
pay (as pay they must) to have their works
printed. They cannot pay their rent,
either, Is that what freedom means ?
"BETTER TO STOP WORKING"
S freedom is, to say the least, some-what abstract, and we should hesitate
to dwell on its theoretical nature-
sometimes so tragic-but for solemn assu-
rances by people who say that"poverty is a
good school"and "genius will out". Here
are some of the views expressed by artists
in answer to Unesco's enqu'ry.
A poet says :"I write what I like, but
have to pay all publishing expenses out cf
my own pocket."
A painter :"I am given no encourage-
ment, eilher private or official. My sole
inspiration is my own wretchedness."
A writer :"In my country many writers
are living in dire poverty whilst publishers
and booksellers grow fat on lhe proceeds
of their works."
One grievance is common to them all :
"Our profits are minute, and we are faxed
as though they were hUge and regular, on
the ground that we are exercising a liberal
profession."
Even those authors that seem most suc-
cessful, whose books are published in
large number, would therefore support
Hpnri Trovals statement :"The incidence
of taxation is appaHin. q. Once you reach a
certain figure, is better to stop workinq."
Jean Cocteau admits :"we are. ground
under taxation to the point of discourage-
ment.'.'the engraver Jean Chieze says ;
"The artist is forced by taxation to stop his
output at a certain point" ; and Glenway
wescott :"The present system of taxation
is unfair tO writers ; it puts obstacles in the
way both of their artistic development and
of their integrity."
"BREAD AND BUTTER JOBS"
Advice often given to writers and artistsis :"why don't you earn your living
some olher Il'ay and pursue your art
in your spare time, free from financial
worries ?"
Some artists have already done so, and a
few of them are pleased with their choice.
Pierre Hamp, who published a large num-
her of volumes on"La Peine des Hommes"
(The Tribulations of Mankind) depicts him-
self as a former pastrycook's assistant,
deputy station-master, factory inspector
and civil engineer, and declares :"The
writer must subject his vocation and his
'personality to his ideal and sacrifice all
else fo the attainment of that ideal."
To the majority of artists, however, a
"bread and butter job"is a slavery that
robs them of opportunities for the pro-
longed reflection and careful attention to
detail required by any work of art."You
cannot write a symphonv in your spare
time", says a young musICian ; and many
an artist will flnd his own case reflected in
the following lines by a French writer :
"For twenty years I have followed a
profession, and I realize that the exercise
of another profession is the greaiest obsta-
cle to creative writing. But to give up
that second profession may mean starva-
If he managed to get the marble in spite
of all and finally made a statue, would
that work of his hands be free ?
Hardly more so than he is, it seems.
CURTAIN OF OFFICIALDOM
WrITERS, painters and musicians are. unanimous on this point : both
usage and laws are a hindrance to
the circulation of works of the mind.
A curtain of officialdom in many countries
- chaotic laws on copyright, customs bar-
riers, sales at a loss owing to the greed of
certain persons involved, mysterious admi-
nistrative complications-seems to cut off
the artist from the public that he once
hoped to reach.
An Israeli novelist, Zalman Schneour,
complains of "customs and financial re-
gulations under which books are treated as
ordinary goods and subjected to clearing
and quota restriction". A Swiss painter,
the disposal. of painters, sculptors and
engravers.
"Should aid for writers come from the
State ?" asks Henri Pourrat."It should
come rather from an independent body,
concerned exclusively with thought, art
and freedom. Surely some better organi-
zation of the book trade could be tried ?"
Accommodation problems are common
to all branches of art. One writer may say
that she needs nothing but"a, table, af
pencil and some paper", while others com-
plain that they have nowhere to put their
books. Sculptors and painters are particu-
larly hard hIt ; they search in vain for stu-
dios ; both in America and Europe owners
are accused of letting their studios to"any
one but artists". But who is going tO
build ?
Many poets, painters or musicians like
the Swiss violinist Paul Druey hope that
our present-day world may he brought to
. 1.-,. ; ; . _.


THE ARTIST ANI
Modigliani, who with such painters as Utrillo.
Derain, Vlaminck. and Picasso renewed"paint-
ing at the start of this century, once sold his
canvases in the cafes of Paris-for one franc
each. He died at the age of 34. and with his
death came wide public recognition. Even at
his funeral collectors approached his friends,
offering high prices for his paintings.
tion, for society takes no interest in the
fate of artists. Well, I have given up my
second profession ; I have begun my real
life work at the age of 40 ; and I shall try
not to starve." (Maurice Toesca.)
FREEDOM TO WORK
To be free is to have full freedom ofaction. To the writer and the artist.
this means conditions that will make
it possible-in the physical sense, to begin
with-for him to create the work that he
has resolved to bring to completion. Thus
a French writer, Andr6 Dhõtel writes :
"Obstacles seem to be put in the way of
the very exercise of thought. Time in
which to work is not recognized as a
normal requirement. The need to exercise
a second profession makes it impossible to
embark on a task of any length ; whilst the
lack both of time and of means prerents an
ar/equate storing up of knowledge. Where
such freedom obtains, there is no place for
study."
And this is what two Indian painters
say :"brushes, paints an canvas are very
expensive. I am often unable to buy
them." (Mahitosh Biswas.)"We have nu
gallery." (Azurat Ullah Khan.)
Then, an American composer, Arne Old-
berg :"l would have to spend a thousand
dollars on getting my symphony per-
formed."
There is no end to the cases that might
be quoted, but they all fit in with the
remark of one sculptor, who has to work
for a firm of monumental masons in order
to keep his family :"If I were less tired in
the evening, I should be free to do my own
word: and if i hay some money left at the
end of the month, I should be free to buy
some marble."
