History is often regarded as a fixed collection of standard facts, which it would be
all but sacrilegious to think of"rewriting"-yet it is just that task of rewriting
history which is one of the main concerns of responsible educators in all countries.
The job of correcting textbooks, and improving teaching methods ; of deciding
that this or that event is of greater or less importance, is truly an unending one. At this
mid-point of the 20th century, more attention is being paid than ever before to the
urgency of that task-whose importance is suggested by other stories on these pages. More
recently recognized, but equally vital, is the proper teaching of geography, to make young
people aware of the day-to-day interdependence of peoples.
Accordingly, UNESCO has convoked two seminars, dealing with closely related aspects
of the same job, to be held at the same time, in Brussels, Belgium, and at McGill University,
Montreal, Canada. At Brussels, from July 12 to August 23, more than one hundred
experts from many countries will discuss"The Improvement of Textbooks, Particularly
of History Textbooks."
The principal aims of this group will be to increase the emphasis on the teaching of
world history as the basis for national histories ; to focus more attention on the construc-
tive work of mankind, particularly through the great foe, milky of international organizations ;
to eliminate or at least reduce"jingoism"and deprecatory statements about"foreign"
nations and peoples.
Similar broad purposes will guide the experts meeting at Montreal on"The Teaching
of Geography as a Means of Developing International Understanding."
"If you have three
hand grenades..."
boy in Germany, who first learned
to read between 1933 and 1937.
learned fro  his first school books
that other boys had been born to
be his slaves ; that the lands of other
men had been stolen from his fatherland ;
that the rightful victory of his country
had somehow been"stolen"10 or 14
years before he was born.
He was taught to burn the books that
could have helped to save him and all
mankind from what was to follow.
In 1949, that boy and his surviving
classmates were asked a series of questions
by interviewers for the French Institute
of Public Opinion. Here are some of the
answers :
A majority of German university
students, aged 18 to 22, said Hitlerism
still expresses the spirit of their nation
and that it will return to power ; that
there were"objective"causf'S for Nazi
Robert Ley, the Nazi leader, once said :"We
begin with the child when it reaches the age
01 three. As soon as it begins to think, a
little Bag is placed in its hand."After the war,
the healinq of wounded minds was an impera-
tive task. In the French Zone 01 Germany.
production 01 revised text-books had reached
4. 000. 000 volumes by 1947. Shown above
is a demonstration class in the Teachers
College at Stuttgart, in the U. S. Zone where
teacher* study modern methods and receive
guidance from specialists.
race prejudices ; thAt the Allied powers
had no right to try men as war criminals,
and that they have no right to enforce
de-Nazification of the country.
From the first day of their schooling,
the minds of these young men and their
contemporaries in Italy and Japan had
been flogged by slogans :
"BELIEVE, OBEY AND FIGHT !...
WAR IS LIFE !... THE STATE IS THE
ONLY REAL BEING... THE LEADER IS
ALWAYS RIGHT !... A BOOK AND A
MUSKET !... WAR IS THE FATHER OF
CREATION AND THE MOTHER OF
CULTURE."
Even their elementary arithmetic books
had problems like this :"If one of our
bombers... If one of our soldiers... If you
have three hand grenades..."
Finding the Happy Medium
ONE must not infer from this thatonly the f rmer Axis power have
been guilty of bias in their textbooks.
In the school histories of nearly every
country,"we"have fought purely to
defend justice and civilization, and
"they"have had only sordid motives.
"We"have generally won-or lost-
against"overwhelming odds".
The history of cooperative efforts to
remove bias from schoolbooks records
victories of a better kind. It was natural
enough that soldiers returning to their
countries after World War I should have
been revolW by schoolbooks which
glorified war, and that they led in efforts
for reform. It was natural, too, for
Anatole France to oversimplify the pro-
blem, in addressing a Congress of French
Elementary School Teachers at Tours m
1919 :
"BURN THE BOOKS WHICH TEACH
HATRED ! BURN THEM ALL !"
Gradually the negative approach gave
way to positive action, as teachers
within their own countries worked to im-
prove teaching materials. Increasingly
they arrived at certain common conclu-
sions :
In history books it was important tur
writers to eliminate fiat falsifications 01
fact, but also to become aware of and
eliminate their own unconscious bias and
prejudice. War as a topic was greatly
over-emphasized-taking up more than
30 per cent of most textbooks-but it
was realized that an arbitrary"de.
emphasis"could distort truth as badly as
the prevailing jingoism.
It was agreed that new and revised
textbooks should contain more informa-
tion about the building of cities, the de-
velopment of inventions, the expansion of
industry, the spreading of railroads and
she peaceful trading between nations. It
was felt to be very important to devote
more attention to the history of inter-
,'national peace organizations.
Mutual Fairness
In School Books
BUT how, for example, could even themost conscientious historian elimi-
nate his own"unconscious bias" ?
The answer was found in making t'leer
studies international.
Children throughout Europe, with intimate memories of war, are likely to produce
the ugly shapes of bombs instead of Bowers, when asked to draw a garden ; to depict
a demon torturing mankind, when asked to illustrate"life to-day"The examples above
ing for mutual fairness in school books.
The first such treaty was signed by the
Argentine and Brazil in 1933,
The most comprehensive job of all was
accomplished by the Norden Societies of
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and
Sweden, from 1919 onwards. Working in
close consultation, the Societies studied
compared and revised all the history
books used in their schools-to provide
factual and non-provocative material
about these countries and the past rela-
tions between them. All proposed new
history texts are now submitted to all
the Norden Societies.
On the initiative of Germain teachers,
How German seven-your-olds were taught arithmetic in 1936. Alter being shown the number of
aeroplanes in a light. a squadron and a wing, the children were asked :"How many planes in
squadrons ? in 2. 4. 6. squadrons ? Three wings make a group. How many planes in a group ?"
Considerable perspective was gained on
the War of 1812 when the Canada-United
States Committee on Education made a
joint study of U. S. textbooks which
described it as a fight fc r"freedom of
the seas"and of Canadian books which
spoke of it as.'a stab in the back... delhi-
vered when Britain was fighting for the
freedom of the world".
Similar groups worked in the same way
to improve understanding among a
number of Latin American countries.
Where governmental authority over the
school system permitted, formal treaties
were agreed to between countries provid-
THIS IS WHAT
.. EDUCATION"HAS BEEN
From the SONGBOOK of a German
Day Nursery, 1933 :
( (We believe our leader,
We live for our leader
And die far our leader
Until we are heroes.) >
From"WE LEARN TO READ",
afirstgrxdeprimcr. ! 933 :
( When the Fuehrer commands, we
soldiers go to war. Our Fuehrer does
not want to make war at all, but the
enemy forces him to do so. There is
no staying at home for a true solder.
I want to go as well.»
French and German historians met in
Paris in 1935 and reached agreement on
39 disputed points about Franco-German
relations from 1789 through the signing
of the Locarno Pact in 1925, Where
complete agreement was impossible, they
took note of each other's reservations.
An extensive programme for encourag-
ing revision of books in the two countries
was agreed to, but the German Govern-
ment withdrew support for the project
and the findings were disavowed.
Many studies were stimulated by the
International Institute on Intellectual
Cooperation, whose work for textbook
revision was jointly supported by the
French Government and the League of
Nations. The signing of international
treaties was encouraged, but it was found
that the educational systems of the larger
countries were too decentralized to be
bound by such treaties. In other words
- international understanding by pupils
had to be reached through international
understanding among the teachers, his-
torians and writers.
The Real Fruits
Of Civilization
UNESCO has taken on a leading roleU inthe fight for better understanding
through better textbooks. In 1946.
the Preparatory Commission of Unesco
published"LOOKING AT THE WORLD
THROUGH TEXTBOOKS". Since then.
Unesco has done many things, among
them the following :
1. It has distributed to all Member States
copies of"A MODEL PLAN FOR THE
ANALYSIS AND IMPROVEMENT OF.
TEXTBOOKS AS AIDS TO INTERNA-
TIONAL UNDERSTANDING". This
work, prepared by Dr. 1. James Quillen.
of Stanford University provides a large
number of practical proposals for the
"TESTING"of books and encouraging
higher standards of writing and selec-
tion.
2, Unesco has encouraged special studies,
by Member States of the treatment in
their own textbooks of agencies of
international cooperation, from the
founding of the League of Nations to
the present.
3, The Organization has given specific
assistance to nations, groups and indi-
viduals working on projects for texts- !
book improvement. In this connection.
Unesco has recently published"A
HANDBOOK FOR THE IMPROVE-
MENT OF TEXTBOOKS AND TEACH-
ING MATERIALS".
As such work progresses, fewer and
fewer young people will be tramed to
believe they were born to avenge ima-
ginary.'historic wrongs"and that nam : ;-
throwers and dive bombers are thc finest
fruits of civilization.
More and more of them will understand
that the reality of history lies in such
dramatic fights as that of the Food and
Agriculture Organization against starva-
tion ; of the World Health Organization
against plagues ; of the United Nations,
Unesco, the International Civil Aviation
Organization, International Postal Union
- and a score of others-for a better
world.
To-day, millions of boys and girls are
learning to read and the race is on-
to give them books which will encouraged
them to build and not to dcstruy.
