UNESCO COUtUER-P 4 DECEMBER 1950
ON 9 December 1948, in Paris, the
General Assembly of the United
Nations unanimously approved
a Convention on Genocide,
under which the nations solemnly
undertook to prevent and punish the
crime of genocide, whether committee
in time of peace or war.
The following are the three main
articles, in which genocide and the
actions incurring international penal-
ties are described :
* Article II. Genocide means any of
the following acts committed with intent
to destroy, in whole or in part. a natio-
nal, ethnical, racial or religious group
of human beings :
(a) killing members of the group :
(b) causing serious bodily or mental
harm to members of the group :
(c) deliberately inflicting on the
group conditions of life calculated to
bring about its physical destruction in
whole or in part ;
(d) imposing measures intended to
prevent births within the group :
(e) forcibly transferring children of
the group to another group.
Article 1C. The following acts shall
be punishable :
(a) genocide :
(b) conspiracy to commit genocide :
(c) direct and public incitement to
commit genocide ;
(d) attempt to commit genocide ;'
(e) complicity in genocide.
Article IV. Persons commiting geno-
cide or any of the other acts enume-
rated in Article In shall be punished,
whether they are constitutionally res-
ponsible rulers, public officials or pri-
vate individuals. *
A Courageous Proclamation
THERE are two extreme views onthe subj ct of this Convention.
Some regard it as a praiseworthy
but ineffective gesture-a mere ideo-
logical"pointer"-serving no other
purpose than to indicate the lines of
future reforms and of future institu-
tions to be established.
Others see in it a most courageous
proclamation of the primacy of inter-
national morality over individual
sovereignty.
Holders of the first view maintain
that, by refusing to include political
minorities in the groups to be protect-
ed against extermination, the Assem-
bly failed to carry out the essence of
its task. They also affirm that the
mention of an"international penal
tribunal", which is not yet in being,
strengthens the impression of futility
created by the Convention. Its value
is, this school says, confined to the
ethical sphere. It is only the expres-
sion of a desired aim and not an
achievement.
Holders of a more positive view
attack such criticism as being symp-
tomatic of the permanently sceptical
attitude of those who under-estimate
the dynamic value of principles and
written instruments. They recall that,
at the outset, neither the 1789 Decla-
ration of the Rights of Man and the
Citizen, nor the Communist Manifesto
of 1848, nor the United Nations
Charter itself were anything but
documents enshrining principles. Yet
who can be blind to the growth of
concrete achievements from these
documents ?
A document of this type will be of
historic value if men translate its aims
into action. In the meantime, the
great importance of the Genocide
Convention is that it has been una-
nimously agreed to by 55 countries
which in other matters are gravely
ON January 12, the United Nations Convention on the Prevention andPunishment of the Crime of Genocide-the deliberate mass extinction
of human groups-will come into force, having been ratified or acceded
to by over 20 countries.
The Convention will give legal effect to important principles of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights for it can be linked not to one, but to many of the
Declaration's articles ; such articles, for example, as the one which enjoins men to
act to one another in a spirit of brotherhood, that which provides for equality of
treatment for all peoples, that which guarantees for all men the right to life, liberty
and security of person, that which prohibits torture, cruel or inhuman treatment
and a number of others.
The Convention on Genocide, therefore, fits well into the great task undertaken
by the United Nations to ensure basic human rights and freedoms to every human
being and to establish a world rule of law.
divided. It places legally in the
wrong any persons who try to repeat
the experiment of systematically exter-
minating an entire group of human
beings.
Examples of the extermination of
whole populations-a town, a tribe or
or a sect-are only too frequent in
history. In the earliest times, the
victor doubtless often found it more
convenient, and safer, simply to anni-
hilate the vanquished. Periods re-
corded by history on the other hand,
if carefully studied, show that the
result of a victory was more often the
subjection than the total extermin-
ation of the defeated party.
Conquering empires were more con-
cerned to increase their wealth and
the number of their subjects and
slaves than to make deserts of the
lands they had overrun. Alexander,
Caesar, and even Attila, sought first
and foremost to collect allies and
vassals ; and Caesar, when there was
a revolt against him, sold the rebels as
slaves. Only when the subject peoples
were permanently rebellious were the
"guilty"massacred.
With the growth of fanatical reli-
gious passions, like that inspired by
Islam in its first period of expansion,
or by the Christianity of the Cru-
sades, it became a general practice to
exterminate"infldels". This practice
was adopted not only by lawless
WHEN GENOCIDE BECAME AN INDUS-
TRY". Under the Nazi occupation, millions
of human beings were slaughtered on such
grounds as :"The final solution of the
Jewish question means the complete exter-
mination of all Jews in Europe."Extermi-
nation"facilities"-camps where men,
women and children were tortured, starved
and worked to death- were organized on
a scale large enough to accomplish the
plan of exterminating or permanently weaken-
ing entire racial and national groups of
Europe. Ovens were built to burn the
bodies of the victims (above). Only the
victory of the United Nations forces in
Europe and Asia put an end to these crimes
against humanity ; but not until i2. 000. 000
men,. women and children had been done to
death by order of the German and Japanese
authorities.
soldiery but, as part of a deliberate
policy, by princes and religious author-
ities themselves.
Thy earlier massacrings of rebels,
from the time of the slaughter of the
Albigenses and of the victims of
Saint Bartholomew's Night in France
up to that of the pogroms in Eastern
Europe and the killing of the Arme-
nians, were due to blind fanaticism or
pitiless policy. But it is only in our
own days that we find cold-blooded,
systematic, total extermination, on a
scale never before practised.
Crimes Against Humanity
THE number of men, women andchildren-manly Jews and Chi -
eye-done to death by order of
the German and Japanese authorities
has been officially put at 12, 000, 000 (1).
After the victory of the United Na-
tions, the principal war criminals re-
ceived the punishment that was de-
manded by outraged public opinion
the world over. But the legal appa-
ratus set in motion to deal with these
"crimes against humanity"was more
than a mere expression of the world's
anger. What was new was the solemn
statement that henceforth there were
certain acts that could be excused
neither by necessities of war nor by
the plea that they were carried out
as a result of formal orders received.
In future there would be a human law
overriding any instructions issued by
national authorities, and individuals
no less than heads of States would
have to answer for any atrocities com-
mitted.
This innovation of capital import-
ance establishes the duty of refusing
obedience on grounds of loyalty to the
elementary principles of humanity.
It is part of a tremendous movement
in contemporary thought in the di-
rection of restoring the primacy of
personal rights which were introduced
two centuries ago by the founders of
modern democracy, but which con-
siderations of collective efficiency and
achievement of the maximum"results"
had gradually destroyed. The Uni-
versal Declaration of Human Rights,
adopted on 10 December 1948 by the
General Assembly of the United
Nations, is one of the signs of this
rehabilitation of the essential princi-
ples of all civilized society.
Crusader Against Genocide
THE Nuremberg and Tokyo tri-i bunals, however, were nl  com-
petent to deal with crimes com-
mitted during the war. They refused
THE CONVENTION ON THE PREVENTION
AND PUNISHMENT OF GENOCIDE has now
received the necessary numbers of instru-
ments of ratification or accession to enable
it to be brought into force. Shown above
are representatives of states who ratified the
Convention on October 14. They are :
(seated ; left to right) Dr. John P. Chang, of
Korea ; Dr. Jean Price-Mars, of Haiti ; Ambas-
sador Nasrollah Entezam of Iran ; Ambassa-
dor Jean Chauvel, of France and Mr. Ruben
Esquivel de la Guardia, of Costa Rica.
Standing, left to right : Dr. Ivan Kerno,
Assistant Secretary General for the Depart-
ment of Legal Affairs ; Mr. Trygve Lie, Secre-
tary-General of the U. N. ; Mr. Manuel Four-
nier Acuna, of Costa Rica and Dr. R. Lem-
kin, crusader for the Genocide Convention.
to deal with the flagrant persecution
that took place before 1939, when the
totalitarian regimes were extending
their power. Yet the danger of so-
called"undesirable"minorities being
exterminated is almost as menacing in
time of peace as in time of war. It
was intolerable that acts of this type
should be protected by the institution
of national sovereignty, and that the
civilized world should continue to have
no legal remedy against atrocities that
regimes subject to no control might be
tempter to commit.
A certain man decided to vindicate
the idea of setting up some inter-
national legal authority to punish and,
more important, to prevent such acts
of total extermination, no matter when
committed or attempted. Ever since
1933, Professor Lemkin, of Yale Uni-
versity, a Pole by origin who was a
legal adviser at the Nuremberg trials,
had devoted himself to th1s cause. To
him we owe the term genocide,
meaning the killing of persons who
have committed no other crime than
to belong to a given race or group of
human beings. Thanks to the grue-
some revelations of 1945, he finally
achieved his aim.
At the General Assembly of the
United Nations in 1946, the delegates
of Panama, India and Cuba agreed to
move a resolution against genocide.
This resolution has been, and is,
respected by the overwhelming major-
ity of States. It has on occasion, as
we know, been violated. But in the
period from 1919 to 1939 international
obligations were respected by 60
sovereign states, and violated by
only 3. This small minority was suc-
cessful, for the time being, in evading
their obligations only because the
penalties prescribed for such action
were not applied. More recent hap-
penings, however, show that to-day
the United Nations are less tolerant
towards breakers of undertakings.
And perhaps it is not altogether vain
to hope that, should the crime of
genocide threaten to re-appear, the
governments and peoples will succeed
in using the clear and stringent terms
of the Convention to prevent any
fresh essays in mass extermination.
Thus not only the"good pleasure"of
princes, but also that of States, has
had to yield ground in favour of the
rights of the human person and,
indeed, of the rights of Law.
(I). 4s,'eflal'ds Ihe Jeu's, xlf/tis/ies for fl
Iulal of some I ã EIII'o/lCan e'''l/Ill'ies ore a..
fottows :
letvish w}/IIla/iulI ill 1939 : 8, 301, 000.
Killed belwel'lI 1940 alld 1 ! 1 Ci : ã, 978, too.
The IIlImb ('I' of killed Ihus amounted 10
7 % % of Ihe 11"/10/1'. III Polamt the/'e II'el'f !
:/, 800, 000,'ic/ims (8ã % of the Jeu's) ; ill
uccll/lird IIllssia,. 2, 100, 000, etc, (I'OI/1/1l11et
C (u III'. Joeol, L {'/cllinsky, published by till'
WOI'ld Jewish Congress, ill ElIglis/. (wd
french, Febl'/IUI'y-Jlllle 1916.)
CORRECTION
In a story published in the last
issue of the COURIER, relating to
the work of Unesco in efforts to
improve and rationalize the com-
plexities of mtemahonal copyright
law, it was stated :
"This work... is intended to
unite international conventions
now in force into a singe
convention.-"
It should be made clear that
the intention is not to replace or
supersede any present conven-
tions on copyright, but only te
supplement them.
