BEFORE picking up this issue of
the Courier perhaps you were
reading one of the 218, 000, 000
copies of newspapers which are
published each day throughout the
world. Next to you, as you read this,
either silent or speaking with words
or music, may be one of the world's
160, 000, 000 radio sets.
These, of course,-the newspaper,
the radio, together with films-are
the main sources of the information
and ideas reaching people everywhere.
Whether or not a country is well or
poorly supplied with newspapers,
radio stations and receiving sets and
cinemas, determines in large part the
opportunities for enlightenment and
entertainment enjoyed by its citizens.
of the world's apparatus for commu-
nication has been presented in simple,
direct fashion...,..,.-
Did You Know That 1...
THE volume begins with 20brightly coloured and illustrat-
ed pages of maps and charts.
It continues with brief descriptions of
the facilities and organization of
communication in more than 160
countries. There are many interesting,
sometimes surprising facts.
How well informed are you about
the modern media of information ?
Did you know that ?-After the
informational or documentary films is
Canada.
Out of the 10, 412, 000 radio sets in
Asia, over 8 million are located in
Japan. And, did you know that in the
U. S. S. R., newspapers are published in
more than 70 different languages ?
Unesco undertook the preparation
of this volume at the request of the
United Nations Sub-Commission on
Freedom of Information and of
the Press. It was prepared in the
Division of Free Flow of Inform-
ation, the section of Unesco which
joins with the U. N. in efforts to
promote the freedom of information.
The Sub-Commission made use of the
book at its annual session, which took
place at Montevideo last month.
For the first time, information on
the world's facilities to see and hear
by means of press, radio, films and
television has been assembled in one
volume. Unesco has just published a
lively, illustrated book entitled :
W orId communications : press, radio,
films, which gives an assessment of the
world's total equipment for spreading
information and ideas by these
methods of mass communication.
This volume will interest many, and
not just the experts, for the appraisal
United States, India is the world's
largest producer of entertainment
films, producing about 250 feature
films each year. That the country in
the world that reads the most news-
papers is the United Kingdom, where
1 newspaper is sold daily for each 2
people.
In the United States there is better
than 1 radio set for every 2 people,
while in Ethiopia there is 1 radio set
for every 2, 000 inhabitants. One of
the world's leading producers of
On-The-Spot Surveys
THE collection of facts and figuresthat went i to the maki g of the
volume was carried out under the
direction of a young Canadian profes-
sor of political science, Albert A. Shea,
who has been studying the question of
communication by press, radio and film
for a number of years. Available to
him were the result of on-the-spot
surveys of press, radio and film faci-
lities, carried out by Unesco's Technic-
al Facilities Division in 43 countries
and being extended to  the entire
world.
The book opens with a series of
coloured maps, charts and pictographs
showing at a glance how the world's
peoples are served by their communic-
ation systems.
The next section highlights the in-
dividual pattern of communication for
every country-number and circul-
ation of newspapers and periodicals,
news agencies, schools of journalism,
distribution of radio transmitters and
receivers, developments in television,
number of cinemas, film production,
film imports and other basic inform-
ation.
The third section consists of detailed
data, mainly statistical, for the reader
seeking facts and figures on mass
media in any area.
Facilities And Freedom
IN a foreword, Unesco refers to itsefforts to help people increase and
improve their knowledge of one
another through such means as press,
radio, films and television.
"Enjoyment of the right to inform-
ation requires, as a first step, that
technical facilities shall exist for
receiving information". The foreword
adds."It also requires that the
facilities, where they exist, shall be
used freely and fully to inform."
"This report assembles the basic
facts. From the facts, action must
follow. Millions of people, in vast
areas of the world, have little or no
modern means of communication. They
must be helped to obtain them. And,
at the same time, those engaged in
press, radio and films must enjoy the
freedom, and demonstrate the respon-
sibility, which will enable these
potential links between peoples to
serve peace and international under-
standing."
The book is available to the general
public and can be obtained through
Unesco sales agents. It is priced at
$1. 20 or 7s. sterling or 350 French
francs.
During the last war, micro-
films 01 letters despatched by
air helped to span the dis-
tance between millions 01
people in the fighting services
and their relatives at home.
Microfilming was, however,
first put to practical use 80
years ago by the French en-
gineer Dagron, who used it
to get news out 01 besieged
Paris. This poster described
the postal service 01 films car-
ried by pigeons. The mes-
sages were projected on a
screen for reading as shown in
contemporary engraving which
depicts journalists at the re-
ceivinq end.
Page 5-UNESCO COURIER
