To interrupt the cruel cycle ofsickness, hunger, weaS'-
ness, lassitude, ignorance
- and again the sickness
and hunger-Unesco during H) 49
organized an experiment in
collaboration with the Chinese
Mass Education Movement, which
was already carrying out practi-
cal fundamental education work
there.
The purpose of the project was
to prepare sample materials-
particularly audio-visual aids for
fundamental education-which
could be of use to educators in
other parts of the world. The
subject to be dealt with was given
the title of"The Healthy Village",
and the international team car-
rying out the project set out to
produce, with the help of local
artists, materials designed to en-
courage hygiene and defeat
disease.
By May, these artists, adapting
themselves to entirely new condi-
tions, had produced a first series
of posters, mobile posters, book-
lets and film strips dealing wit !)
the causes of and protection
against such diseases as small-
pox, trachoma and tetanus.
It was difIicult at first to per-
suade the Chinese artists to draw
anything as repulsive as a child's
face marked with smallpox or
eyes inflamed with trachoma.
But, once convinced that people
must be shocked into action by
seeing the terrible effects of these
diseases, they brought to their
work the patience and delicacy
which characterize the Chinese
artist.,-
Filmstrips Without
. A Camera
owE months later, Unesco sent
out to China Norman McLaren.
a young Canadian who had
been working for several years
with the Canadian National Film
Board. Under his guidance and
inspiration, the art centre at
Pehpei produced an impressive
total of static and mobile posters,
wall sheets, picture books and film
strips all teaching a simple but
vivid lesson in hygiene and the
prevention of disease.
When these materials were
"tested"in the local villages it was
found that the greatest effects
were achieved through the use of
film strips and mobile posters.
McLaren therefore began to ex-
periment with new methods of
filmstrip production. His efforts
led to some striking results by the
use of direct art work on the film.
Instead of using the normal film-
strip technique of drawing pictures
and then photographing them,
McLaren and his team did their
pictures directly on 35 mm motion
picture film.
Pictures were made on both
clear and black film by two basic
methods : (a) applying ink, paint or
colour to the film with pen or
brush and (b) removing the black
photographic emulsion (also ink,
paint or colour applied to the film)
by etching or scraping with a sharp
instrument. Cross combinations of
these methods produced a further
variety of mixed methods.
One advantage in using this di-
reet method was the speed of pro-
duction. This was found to varv
between one quarter to one tenth
the time required by the standard
method. In other words, the same
idea executed by painted drawings
CHINESE AR. T ! STS
And Unesco Experts
Find New Roads To
"THE HEALTHY VILLAGE"
One of the most successful audio-visual devices to teach health lessons
developed by the Unesco Project in China was the rotating wheel poster. This
photo, taken near Pehpei. shows a health worker demonstrating one of the
posters illustrating in eight stages how eyes inflamed by trachoma become
bright and healthy again with regular treatment. After a talk on trachoma.
the Unesco health worker would examine and treat people, leaving the poster
for the crowd to look at and operate themselves.
form when the village was visited
a second time.
Seeing themselves on the screen
was a novelty which attracted the
people in hundreds and created a
warmth of interest which helped
them, to understand why they
should get vaccinated against small-
pox and continue regular treatment
for trachoma. Above all, it made
them health conscious and more
ready to co-operate in the cam-
paign.
All Educators Will Benefit
THE work of the Pehpei project
has come to an end, but world-
wide use is to be made of the
reports which cover the adminis-
t. rative, art production, field work
and health activities carried out by
its members.
The reports, illustrated by pic-
tures taken during the work, are to
be published by Unesco in the
form of a monograph and made
available. to all educators in the
field of fundamental education.
Copies of the audio-visual mate-
rials prepared by Norman McLaren
and his team are being made and
Two-way posters were used by the Unesco team in Pehpei
to convey two alternative and contrasting health messages.
such as"Do"and"Don't"on a certain topic, or"The good
way"and"the bad way". In these photos, the two posi-
lions of the same poster show (left) a trachoma victim
who failed to take regular treatment and (right) the same
man when his trachoma was cured after a 21-day treatment.
These posters successfully brought home the lesson.
Instead of using the normal filmstrip method of drawing
pictures and then photographing them, Unesco Project artists
drew directly on 35 mm film. The Chinese artist (above)
is working on clear film on which ink, paint or colour can
be applied with paint or brush. h second method (above,
right) was to use black film. making pictures by the
removal of the black photographic emulsion (also ink, paint,
or colour applied to the film) with a stylus or kniff.
and later photographed which took
six weeks to carry out would take
about six days if translated directly
on film.
The fastest production at Pephei
was an 84-frame filmstrip made in
1 days and even the longest, a
6i frame filmstrip, only took six
days.
Put To The Test
arEa completed these filmstrips
were taken with other audio-
visual materials for testing
in local viHages. Members of the
Unesco team, including Dr. Clara
Nutting, the American head of the
Health Department, Mr. E. J. Fan,
Chinese head of the Field Depart-
ment and a Chinese commentator
and projectionist, travelled to the
villages, their ear piled high with
films, equipment and medical sup-
plies.
In the evenings they put on
shows in the village schools or
squares showing four or five film-
strips interspersed with records ofChinese music. These ended with
an announcement telling people to
come back for a medical examina-
tion the next day.
Sometimes as many as 600 people
turned up to have their eyes exam-
ined for trachoma and often one
third of them were found to be
suffering from this disease which,
if left unchecked, can cause total
blindness. In one : period of
23 days, Dr. Nutting examined 6. 389
persons-47 per cent of the po-
pulation,--and found that 251%
had trachoma.
The ueasants themselves became
"actors in several"actuality"
filmstrips. Pictures were taken of
the village folk attending a film
show or receiving treatment and
these were then projected in slide
will be loaned to governments, or-
ganizations and individuals carry-
ing out other projects where this
type of work has started or is about
to begin.
Unesco filmstrips showing de-
tails of the various techniques used
by McLaren will be made and the
young Canadian is himself prepar-
ing a special post-project report
outlining the methods he developed
at Pehpei and the equipment he
used.
In breaking new ground, espe-
cially by developing the use of di-
rect art work on filmstrips and
filmslides, and by providing ans-
wers to some of the problems in-
volved in reaching and driving
home health lessons to large num-
bers of people, Unesco's Project has
done valuable work. Its results
will be appreciated and used wher-
ever men and women are striving
to help their fellow c to live better
and fuller lives.
