SWORDS INTO PLOUGHSHARES. At Ameland. 30 volunteers from 11
countries worked hard to turn a German radar station into a summer
holiday hostel. Toiling side by side with pick, shovel and paintbrush,
they did a constructive job in the cause 01 peaceful international relations.
They also left behind something symbolic 01 their work"A Song for
Ameland".
A THEME SONG FOR THE WORK CAMP. One night, Daniel, a French
volunteer lay on his bunk and played a few notes of a folk melody
recalled from his native Basque region. The other campers picked up
the song and by next day the camp triad a theme song to speed its
work along. Later, the villagers learned the song. Today, it still
reminds them of the young people who came to help from such far away
places as Indonesia and America.
A SONG FOR AME1AND
A MELAND, a little island off the Dutch
coast was marked on German staff
maps during the war as a strong
point on the"Atlantic Wall", with a
radar station to give warning of the ap-
proach of enemy planes and ships.
Although the steel and concrete defence, ;
were demolished after the war, the metal
frame and buildings of the radar station
were still there in 1949 on the site where
the Dutch Youth Hostel movement planned
to build a summer holiday camp.
Answering an appeal for help, issued
through the International Youth Hostel As-
sociation, volunteers from many countries
came to the tiny island during the summer
of 1949.
The way in which these young people,
strangers to one another, formed a living,
working community-doing a constructiv
job and providing an example of interna-
tional harmony-is the theme of a dramatic
French film,"A Song for Ameland", which
is to be released shortly.
The film was made after Jean Leduc and
CREDITS
Title :"A Song for Ameland".
Origin : French.
Production : Bernard Maurice, Spartacus-
Film.
Sorlpt : Jean Leduo and Pierre Mfgnot.
Direction : Jean Leduc, assisted by Daniel
Wroneok !.
Camera : André Dumaitre.
Music : Dlno Castro.
Commentator : Daniel Ce)) n.
Piei're Mignot, two young French film
makers had been advised by Unesco to go
and see what was being done in Ameland.
They quickly wrote a script and assembled
a production team which included as assis-
tant director Daniel Wronecki, a young ci-
nematographer, who had just completed a
Unesco Fellowship.
A Youthful Army
THE actors are mostly anonymous. Inaddition to Daniel and Nic le, two
French volunteers, Jose, a Spaniard,
Bill, an'American and Pino, a Greek, they
include an Indonesian and Belgian, English,
Danish, Norwegian ana Swedish youths and
girls-volunteers in a youthful army serving
the cause of international co-operation.
The 20-minute film shows that first con-
tacts between them were not always easy
because of differences in customs, language
barriers, a feeling of loneliness and home-
sickness and, to some extent, the reserve of
the local people.
Finally, it was a song, played on a mouth
organ one evening by Daniel, a young
Frenchman, sung in chorus the next day and
eventually adopted by the villagers of Ame-
land, that broke down all barriers of iso-
lation and created a real community spirit.
Using this simple story, the producers have
made an inspiring film distinguished by
some outstanding camera shots."A Song
for Ameland"has now been submitted in
scenario to Lake Success for United Nations
sponsership.
Unesco, through its Film Division and Re-
construction Department, gave both encou-
ragement and practical help to the film
makers.
