WHAT IS
RACE ?
Racial questions, iing racial pre\u. ciice. d anta9o, zúsms a\e among the major
problems affecting into1 understan\Ïing which Unesco is studying.
As one step in the preparation 01 an. educational campaiqn aimed at combatting
racial prejudices. Unesco last mð.. th cal1<1d a meeting ot experts study and select
scientific and historical texts as welt as moral and sociolC !'JiclII studies which can be,
used in this tight. 
The members 01 this expert committee who tttto diseusMd the diifusiom oi these texts
and the research lor new documents. included Protessor llumGyun lt41bir, 01 India. wbo.
in the following article discusses some of the concepts owt race which were examined by
the committee.
* * 
THE, broadest and perhaps least unaccept. l< ! de. soOP. t1o'tl cf ce is that itIs a group of Individuals with certain comjiÞon characteristics There is nothing
In the concept which precludes its app. llon to, other animals but usually it
Is restricted to man. Once, however, we pasayd a general description. agreement
between different theorists of race disappears.
The majority of anthropol< ? ts regard these cOD\mOll e} Jaracteri. 5tic. s : as certain
persistent physical features which. a group shares from generation to generation.
The more stable such a chaíllèterlstic, tbe greater Us value as an index for race
elassincation.''\'
Anthropologists have not, however, be. en t to describe Race only in
terms 01 physical difFerences. Some have used . terms to cover tinguisttc. religious
or cultural groups or even the va. cue conglb of men and women described
as a people or a folk. Its s aP} Jl1catlon to the. of language,, people or real-
'gin seems, however, altogether unjustified,
We have Instances of people speaking the e language, but dlffêriltrtin every
other way. Similarly, religion and culture eztend to diverse groups of people in
different parts of the world. What We describe as a people, fot ; ar n&tt<n k
Invariably composite and CCnsll ; , òf different strands'Which ca"'Urn.... oe
dls'inctiy differentiated.
ZOOLOGICALLY MANKIND IS 0
PHYSICAL anthropologlEts also differ a$ to which <tÞoafacter"Is've In'hedetermination of race. Stature, pigmentation, shape of held e proportion
between the various limbs, the texture and quantity of hair, hue all been tried
singly or In combination for dividing manktnd into di. 5ti : lgulshable .
It has been argued and generally conceded that su. ab physical differentiatIons
are carried from generation to generation through the ga. mèt\c chromo. somes-whlch
number forty-eight, the quota of each parentbecing. bÑf. Formerly regarded as
Impervious to changes. doubts have however been raised If"'I'ell these chromosomes
are entirely stable. They are romposlte and COJ) S1st of genes which in a sense are
ihe ultimate lactors of. heredity.
Sore, say that the genes themselves are subject to cbem1caI changes due partly
to geographical factors and partly to Interbreeding which brings together genes
, of diBerent types of chromosomes. Even tf we reject'he theory of chemical
changes In the genes the infinite possible permutations and combl. nat ! ons of the
chrom06Omes and the genes provoke doubts about the sta. b1l1ty 01 á racial type.
The fact of difference, whether physical. linguistic, cultural or ethnic, would
not by itself have mattered If It were not made the stasis of valuation. All theories
of race ultimately tend to the apologies for or condemnation of certain types.
Attempts are ana de to place races tn'he hutnan hierarchy in term. s of phY6kal
,,   >,"'Ä".. ; :"'' :'.','". , ^"
differences, 3 (nne extremÙits have even denied the unity of the huriran :
Others have regarded the v ! Alble physical d ; fferentlaUo1) S. as more superficial and
unstable criteria. In between we have all gradationsòftheoristS.
One : ! : Lng alone Is certaln, From the point of view of zoology, all men belong
to the same species. Unlike crosses of even nearby species'within the same
genus. those between various races of mankind are never sterUe.. ;
Beside. s. the various races of man overlap one another intheh'physical char-
acteristics. A Western European and a Chlaese may be sharp1y differentiated, hut
people of border areas show many common characteristics. This is due. par : liy
te the mixture Of blood and partly to the fact that the physical race characte-
ristics gradually blend into one another,
We nttist also remember that migration, conquest and trade have fed d to inter-
mixture between human being longing to different types. The factors of
attraction :"'and repu1. < ; ion betwéèn, different physical types have also operated to
make any existwg group of ílflli"lduals in any area of the world, he descendants
of various types and strains lroI1l. widely scattered sources.
THE attempt to rptate memtaItUt to phyMcal characteristics. has been the can. use of both misundernltng a falsees, Zoologically, : he huma. D. 
species Is one. and all r&. re, as ggesteve, of mixed ongtm. Geogra-
pbicaHy. races have moved  yast areas." :'H !. 5COriC, aJ. ly, d. iíIer.. ut , , th di, ff'er, ent racial characteristics have achieved
great truunphs at dltrerent,. 5 IúI ! I ; ory, It would therefore be unjustified tû
condemn 9. any race on'he gro\rlMft.'that it has till now contributed little or nothtng
to the culture of the or1d, We coultt., if wcho. se our dates with that end in
view. condemn any taCl ! on tbtlì. ore,..
We have also to remembe'r, t lhe d : tferenoe, bètween the highest and the-, 
lowest individuals within the aame racial, ethnic, ttnguistic. cultural or national
group is at times just as great  aot grea : er than the dinerences between tnembera
of different groups. 
The comparative retardatiQIJ"ÌI tn the devIopcient of certain human groups may
be as much due to lack ot'l or cultural opportunity. and tle inhlbit1ì ; >ns
which arise out of poverty 1jIl,. ita 8itendt, nt <factors as any intrtmie deMict :.-
", besides, even If tRe be c m. elltl characteristics assoced wltítcer"e. lu
'. phyalcal traits. we æ not y ! ft' :'Þow, enough 01 <biology or physical and social
anthropolGg}'to establish any 8 ! i ! inite correlatlonbetWi'en them,.J ;.
DIFFIDENCE IN JUDGING RACES 
To aum up, Human. beings may'be divided into races on theþasls alnerences I, p. phyìl1 ! al traits'Which ar  comparatively but not bsolutely. ble,
(1iì$\Qms arß habits grow largely in rei$t1on *o the physical and geographical
ètlvlrO ! i'$t. The environment and , ennut. rition to some extent modify'she
physical eSaracteristics. 
'Enln.. It be held that. certain peopteB tUtTe contrtbutea more to the civilization
ot the wortd tin COf, Te have to remember that recorded human history is on : y
about 11, 000 Years old and theft are traces of many citions which have been
lost. This should make us dlfftden. in Judging the achievements of any particular
race or type.
The attitude of the sclentUlc observer should therefore be that there are
dl1ferences among human beings that can}) e regarded 2. contributing to the varie'y
and complexity of the human spedes, ,',""""''"is 01 any judgment
of racial superiority or inferiority.


