UNESCO ACTS TO FREE BOOKS, ART,
FILMS FROM CUSTOMS CHARGES
Customs officials will stand aside and the beauty, wisdom andknowledge to be found in books, paintings, sculpture, music
and films will pass more freely from the creators to their
audience,'when the newest Unesco-proposed international agreement
is ratified by member states. For example, publications whose
price is currently increased by as much as 300 per cent will be
stamped"DUTY FREE", as the agreement enters into force. The
draft, already approved by delegates from 25 member states in a
two-'week meeting-in Geneva, covers books, newspapers, periodicals
and other publications. It also provides exemption for paintings,
drawings, sculpture and museum materials.
In a message to the Geneva Con-
ference, M. Torres Bodet, Unesco's
Director-General, declared :"No
protectionism could be more short
sighted than that which"protects"
the minds of people from the ideas
and attainments of the rest of the
world".
The text of the proposed interna-
tional agreement on the Importation
of Educational Scientific and Cultu-
ral material will be submitted for
adoption to the General Conference
of Unesco to be held in Florence,
Italy beginning May 22. If appro-
ved, it will take effect thereafter as
soon as it has been ratified by 10
nations.
Under the Agreement, approved
organizations would be freed from
tariff restrictions in importing
films, film-strips, microfilms and
recordings of an educational, scien-
tific or cultural character. Newsreels
would also be allowed to enter duty-
free.
In addition, scientific instruments
or apparatus for educational or
research purposes, if they are not
manufactured in the importing
country and if consigned to appro-
ved institutions, would be allowed
to move across frontiers without
payment of duty.
Among the other provisions of
the Draft Agreement is the grant-
ing of foreign exchange for the
importation of books and publica-
tions consigned to public libraries,
and publications and other articles
for the educational advancement of
the blind.
Easier Customs Clearance
Contracting States to the Agree-ment would also undertake to
facilitate the expeditions and safe
customs clearance of educational,
scientific and cultural materials and
to continue their common efforts to
promote the free circulation of
these materials.
The new Draft Agreement i-'
based on a text suggested to Unesco
by the 34 countries participating in
the Third Session of the Contrac-
ting Parties to the General Agree-
ment on Tariffs and Trade, which
met last year at Annecy.
Mr. A. R. Ashford, of the United
Kingdom, was Chairman of the
25-nation Unesco Committee, which
produced the revised Draft Agree-
ment.
In transmitting the text of the
Draft Agreement to M. Jaime Torres
Bodet, the Committee expressed the
view that, if adopted by the General
Conference of Unesco and ratified
by Member States,"this Agreement
will help substantially to redure
economic barriers hindering the cir-
culation of educational, scientific
and cultural materials".
