"The Start of a Great Mission"
Extracts from an address delive-
red by M. Jaime Torres Bodet,
Director-General of Unesco, on the
occasion of the fifth anniversary
of the proclamation of the Unesco
Charter, on November 6.
UNESCO is five years old today,
and I have asked you to join
with Us in celebrating the
anniversary..
In a human life, the first five
years reach only early childhood. In
historical time, they are but a brief
episode. Yet for Unesco, they have
been the start of a great mission, the
beginning of a task which affects
millions of men not only throughout
their lives but unto the lives of their
children and their descendants yet
unborn. And it has been with faith
and determination that we have
made a contribution, which we hope
will be lasting, to the progress of
the world.
Ignorance was our first and great-
est enemy. Even now, millions of
illiterates still make up a majority
of the world's population. To con-
quer mutual misunderstanding by
spreading knowledge was and still is
our major battle.
We sought the lessons of ex-
perience. Thus the pilot project of
the Marbial Valley in the island of
Haiti was launched. Hope seemed
banished from this valley : poverty,
illness, ignorance reigned there. But
now schools, hospitals and local in-
dustries have been created, and
among the inhabitants the will to live
has replaced resignation to fate.
And the experience permitted us
to work out and apply a tried and
tested technique applicable else-
where.
To Remove Mutual ignorance
HOWEVER, at another stage of the
evolution of the problems, mu-
tual tolerance and mutual res-
pect among men depend upon the
removal of mutual ignorance ; and
the first step is providing opportun-
ities for the meeting of those who
are or who will be their intellectual
guides. Thus We have fostered the
creation of study groups or seminars
which from time to time bring
together or into relationship with one
another either teachers or the re-
presentatives of all metal activities.
On the same plane of ideas, we
have drawn up under the title
"Study Abroad"an international
directory of scholarships and ex-
changes of persons. And on a
higher plane, in order to make
available universally the advantages
of research everywhere, we have set
up in various parts of the world six
regional centres of scientific research,
which regularly exchange the results
of their work.
But in order that the life of the
mind might become a link leading to
the universal fraternity which is our
aim, we also had to make sure that
no prejudice would at the very start
contradict this hope. Therefore, last
July, the most eminent biologists, so-
ciologists and geneticians, brought
together by Unesco, solemnly affirm-
ed that"racial discrimination has no
scientific foundation in biological
fact."The welcome given to this
proclamation of equality was univer-
sal.
MIND, alas remains dependentupon matter, and when condi-
tions of existence are too bad,
it is vain to advise men to educate
themselves. We cannot close our eyes
to certain of these conditions of exis-
tence, and we must undertake to
change them even while we, at the
same time, make knowledge accessi-
ble. That is why we have participat-
ed, to the extent of our competency
and our means, in the great plan of
technical assistance to which the
United Nations is denoting
$ 20. 000. 000.
In this connexion, we are sending
to countries whose governments re-
quest them missions of experts to
teach the techniques which lead to
improvement of the material and
moral condition of the disinherited. I
shall mention as examples of our
work in this field only the activities
of our representatives in India and
Ecuador, and call attention to the
fact that twelve other countries have
already asked our help.
A Door To The Future
THE perspectives which I havet just shown you are not inusoru.
I have merely lifted a corner of
the veil that hides the future. These
ideas have already taken on subs-
tance.
Indeed, our last General Con-
ference adopted a resolution which,
I hope, will open a door to the future.
Here it is :"The General Conference
resolves that the Director-General
be authorized to develop over and
beyond the regular programme of
Unesco certain extraordinary pro-
jects capable of making a large-scale
contribution to world peace and se-
curity, in the hope that such major
projects might become of such
consequence as to warrant special
financing from sources outside the
regular budget."
On the basis of this resolution, we
got to work and, profiting from the
experience we have acquired, we
elaborated a big project which puts
into effect the fundamental ideas
which I have set forth to you.
This project was given preliminary
approval by our Executive Board
which has just finished its meeting.
It will be submitted for final
approval to our General Conference
which will meet in Paris next year.
(Details of this world-wide fun-
damental education project are
given elsewhere on this page).
At the end of this road which we
are tracing and in which others will
follow after us, there is the immense
hope that exists in every man, in
every family, in every nation, the
hope that men's reason and in-
telligence, finally mature and en-
lightened, will be able to transform
into reality-peace among men.

A S 20, 000, 000 plan, to be carried out
by progressive stages over a
period of 12 years, for the
creation of a world network of
Fundamental Education Centres (1)
was approved by Unesco's Executive
Board last month.
The plan is part of a worldwide
drive against illiteracy and low living
standards. It calls for the establish-
ment of a network of six regional
centres in five of the areas of the world
where Unesco's Member States are
seeking help in their efforts to eradi-
cate illiteracy.
This scheme, which is to be financed
by private and government funds out-
side Unesco's regular budget, will be
submitted to the Organization's
General Conference for final adoption
next summer.
The centres are to be established in
Equatorial Africa, Latin America, the
Far East, India and the Middle East.
For the benefit of the countries of each
region, they will carry out :
Fundamental Education classes (above)
were organised in the Marbiat VaUey, on
tbe'island of Haiti, as \part ot a pilot pro-
ject launched by Unesco. Hope seemed
banished from this valley : poverty, illness,
ignorance reigned there. Now, schools.
hospitals and local industries have been
created, and among the inhabitants the will
to live has replaced resignation to late."
1 Research to determine the real needs'of the area and exp rim ntation into
new methods and media of fundamental
education suited to these needs.
2 Training In each centre of 100 spe-cialists, teachers and field workers for
a year, or a total of 5, 400 specialists In
the six centres by the end of 12 years.
3 production of locally adapted teachingmaterials, including literacy texts,
reading matter, guides to teachers and field
workers, filmstrips and f) ims, and radio
recordings.
4 Mobile misslona of experts to go intothe fields to help local governments t
apply the techniques involved, and the
materials produced, to their literacy
campaigns.
"Training By Chain Reaction"
THE centres have been conceivednot merely as training schools or
production units but as nuclei of
experimentation. One of the novel
features of the Unesco scheme has
been referred to as"training by chain
reaction". A large proportion of the
5. 400 specialists, who will have been
trained in fundamental education me-
thods at the end of 12 years, will
return to their countries in teams to
establish national or local training
centres ; thus the number of trained
personnel resulting directly or indi-
rectly from the work of the regional
centres will be multiplied through
the establishment of these branch
agencies.
Of the six centres, one will be spe-
cially equipped with a field unit for
the production of model educational
films. Another will be set up to
provide special research and training
in the production of radio programmes
for fundamental education.
The Unesco scheme for setting up
the fundamental education centres
will make a positive contribution to
the vast plan of Technical Assistance
for Economic Development recently
launched by the United Nations and
its Agencies. It will make available
specialists trained in new educational
methods and the tools needed to con-
vey to the masses of people in these
areas the rudimentary knowledge and
skills without which they cannot
achieve a higher standard of living.
(1) Fundamental Education is a tef"
coined by Unesco to describc M'at kind o/
minimlllll and generat education which
aims at the preparation of ehild/'CII and
adults deprived of propcr sclwoling for a
better participation in thc economic and
social progress oj lheÍ1' community and of
mankind as a whole.
