THE MOUNTAIN IS GREEN"
New French film
recounts life of
Victor Schoelcher
- fighter for
Human Rights
ON 20 May 1949 Paris witnesseda solemn procession which
brought the ashes of Victor
Schoelcher and Félix Eboué to the
Pantheon, the mausoleum reserved
for France's greatest servants.
Most Frenchmen remembered
Governor-General Eboué as the
man who was able to combine
championship of the people of
Africa with love and active loyalty
to France, but it is likely that the
name of Victor Schoelcher, libera-
tor of the slaves in the Antilles,
conveyed little to most of the
crowd that watched the cere-
mony.
Now, a little more than a century
after his greatest accomplishment,
worthy tribute is paid to
Schoelcher, one of the"'forgotten
men"in the struggle for human
rights, in a new French film,"'La
Montagne est Verte".
Slavery was finally abolished in
all French colonies in 1848. While
due honour must be paid to the fine
example of the Abbé Grégoire and to
resolute action of the Convention in
1794-the principal credit for
liberation must go to Victor Schoel-
cher.
Tittle : La Montagne est Verte.
Scenario and Direction : Jean Lehe-
rissey.
Production : J. ! (. Raymond-MiDet,
Paris.
Cast : Michel Vitoid, Jacques Hentey,
André Reybaz and the Folklore
Society of Martinique.
Length : 1, 000 metres36 mm.
Mission For Mankind
S CHOELCHER first visited Americaand the Antilles in 1829 as the
representative of an Alsatian
factory, and the condition of the
slaves in Martinique and Guadeloupe
filled him with horror. He deter-
mined to devote his life to their
emancipation, and launched a big
campaign to stir up French public
opinion. He had attended sales of
slaves by auction ; he had witnessed
floggings on the plantations ; he had
taken part in a man-hunt to recover
an escaped slave ; he had seen a
revolt of desperate slaves.
THE EMANCIPATOR AND THE SLAVE. Visiting the West Indian islands of Martinique and Guadaloupe in 1829. Victor Schoelcher was
horrified by the working and living conditions of the slaves there. Twenty years later slavery was finally abolished in all French colonies
largely as the result of his effort. In the film,"The Mountain is Green", the role of Schælcher is played by Michel Vitold (above, tell)
and the slaves he fought to free are portrayed by a Martinique folk-lore group.
The sight 01 slaves being examined and sold like cattle at public
Cluctions in the French West Indies and the harsh treatment
they underwent in the plantations stirred Victor Schoelcher to
work for their emancipation.
When it was learned in Martinique that the decree abolishing
slavery had been signed in. Paris, the beating 01 drums and
blowing 01 conch shells carried the news across the island.
Each year the people 01 the French West Indies honour the memory 01
Victor Schoelcher. Gathered around his statue they still sing the
simple, heat-Melt words 01"The Mountain is Green".
He saw slavery as an accursed
thing and understood that the only
remedy was outright abolition of a
shameful and degrading institution
which degraded masters as it did the
slaves.
Despite the mockery of a satirical
press, Schoelcher pursued his mission
without faltering and won to his
cause such men as Lamartine, Ledru-
Rollin, Edgar Quinet and Victor
Hugo. A month after the pro-
clamation of the Second Republic on
25. February 1848, Schoelcher, a
member of the provisional govern-
ment, was appointed chairman of a
commission to draft the decree of
emancipation. However, he still had
to fight temporizers and the adminis-
trative delays of even a libertarian
government.
Meanwhile the slaves in the
colonies were growing restive and in
May 1848 there was a revolt in Mar-
tinique of such dimensions that the
Governor proclaimed the abolition of
slavery at the request of the planters
themselves. In so doing, he did no
more than anticipate his orders, for
the decree of emancipation had
meanwhile, at long last, achieved
signature in France and very soon,
through Schoelcher's tenacity, there
were no more slaves on French soil.

Song Of Gratitude
A CENTURY has passed since thenand human memories are short.
Yet the coloured folk of the
Antilles do not forget their liberator.
Today, as on the day when their
emancipation was proclaimed, their
gratitude finds expression in a folk
song moving in its simplicity,"La
Montagne est Verte".
The name of the song was chosen
by Jean Lehérissey as the title of his
film of the life of Victor Schoelcher.
It is an historical documentary made
in the Antilles with the assistance of
the Folklore Society of Martinique,
with the historical rôles played by
French actors. The part of Schoel-
cher is taken by Michel Vitold. The
restraint and historical accuracy of
the scenario and the pictorial quality
of the photography deserve the
highest praise. Many scenes, such as
the announcement of the great news,
with the initial doubt exploding into
joy, or the birth of the first freeborn
Negro child, cannot fail to stir the
spectator, and make this film a great
and moving work of art.
CREDITS
