UNESCO'S Executive Board, meet-
ing in Paris, last month, unan-
imously re-affirmed that the
Organization, within its field of
competence, will give all possible as-
sistance to the action of the United
Nations in Korea, and authorized
Mr. Jaime Torres Bodet, the Director-
General, to continue to participate in
this action, including the work of the
United Nations Specialized Agences,
who may be called upon to frame a
long-term reconstruction plan for
Korea.
The Board authorized Mr. Torres
Bodet to incur the expenditures in-
volved in giving effect to this pro-
gramme and to furnish, at the request
of the United Nations, such services,
advice and any other types of aid as
may be required by the Unified Com-
mand or any United Nations mission
in Korea.
The Board at its previous meeting
had approved the opening of an initial
credit of $ n5, 000 for the re-establish-
ment of teaching in Korea and for an
educational programme specifically de-
signed to make known the work of the
United Nations and the principles of
collective security.
The Director-General, in his report
to the Board, made reference to
Unesco's support of United Nations
action in Korea.
Educational experts are collaborat-
ing on special pamphlets which will be
published in three editions-English,
French and Spanish. Different pam-
phlets will be issued to three separate
age-groups : 1) secondary school ;
2) university students ; 3) adult educ-
ation classes.
"ONE WORLD"MAP
THE Bureau of Current Affairs inLondon has drafted two projects
for school wall charts accom-
panied by explanatory leaflets. The
first is a world map on a projection
designed to show the idea of a united
world ; the second is a graphic repre-
sentation of the problems of maintain-
ing peace and the ways in which
various specialized agencies of the
United Nations are striving to promote
conditions favourable to peace. These
maps are flexible in design and can be
adapted not only to educational needs
and to methods of teaching in dif-
ferent countries, but also to changes
in world conditions and events.
In response to the Executive Board's
appeal to Member States, to National
Commissions and to non-governmental
organizations, Unesco has received
numerous indications of support.
The Swedish government and the
Swedish Committee for Unesco broad-
cast the Board's appeal to arouse pub-
lic interest and to obtain assistance
and contributions to the action of
Unesco on behalf of the Koreans.
INTERN TONAL
"WHELPING HANDS"
AMONG the non-governmental in-ternational organizations which
responded to the Board's appeal,
the Boy Scouts International Bureau
announced that it will endeavour to
re-establish its Korean branch which
was very active before hostilities.
The International Congresses of
Modern Architecture expressed its
wish to collaborate with Unesco and
will provide a list of the most qualified
architects in Japan for the work of
reconstruction. This organization has
also declared its willingness to help
Unesco in all general matters that
pertain to Korean aid.
The International Union of the Ca-
tholic Women's Leagues has asked its
various organizations to help the civ-
ilian population of Korea.
The World Organization for Early
Childhood Education proposed to
provide both material aid, in the form
of educational material, toys, etc., and
technical aid in the form of expert
advice on teaching, school reconstruc-
tion, training of teachers, etc. Its
various national committees have been
notified and a request has been made
to send in all data and suggestions
that might help the Koreans. This
organization has also authorized a
Korean specialist in pre-school educa-
tion to furnish a report on the edu-
cational needs of his country.
The Director-General, in his report
to the Board painted a vivid picture
of the state of teaching in Korea and
its history.
Educational problems, he declared,

will probably be as difficult as any
others that the Republic of Korea and
the United Nations will be called upon
to solve, but a solution must be found
if this country is to return to its
normal way of life and continue its
development. Present-day teaching in
Korea is the result of forty years of
Japanese rule. It was planned so that
no more than a few fortunate Koreans
could continue advanced studies or
receive training as teachers ; while
major benefits were provided for the
Japanese who were living either tem-
porarily or permanently in Korea.
SCHOOL SYSTEM
RYE-ORGANIZED
IN 1945, when the Allied militarygovernment took control of educa-
tion, Japanese was the only lang-
uage spoken in the schools ; the
administrative personnel, the college
heads, the principal teachers and
inspectors were, almost without ex-
ception, of Japanese nationality.
The military government, during
its four years control of Southern
Korea instituted various radical
educational experts and adopted by the
government of South Korea only a few
months before hostilities broke out.
Since 1945, the percentage of the
national budget devoted to education
has increased from 3. 6% to nearly 10% ;
the number of children attending
primary schools has risen from ap-
proximately one million and a half to
two millions and a half, and the num-
ber of pupils attending secondary
schools, from 62, 000 to 225, 000.
Upon the outbreak of hostilities,
there was a serious lack of teachers
and qualified administrative personnel,
the number of teachers available for
training being quite insufficient ; books,
particularly books in Korean, were in
very short supply, since almost all the
printing works were in North Korea.
Mr. Torres Bodet emphasized that
the havoc and destruction of the
present war have probably destroyed
all the progress made during the last
five years and that the Korean Repu-
blic, unaided, would be in no position
to re-organize its system of teaching,
least of all to develop or improve it.
One thing is clear, he pointed out,
that only an action undertaken on a
large-scale by the United Nations can
help the Koreans to restore their
educational life.
NINETEEN NATIONS SIGN'
UNESCO-SPONSORED TRADE
PACT AT LAKE SUCCESS
t s this issue of the Courier
went to press, 19 nations
had signed the Unesco-
sponsored agreement removing
customs barriers to the move-
ment of books, newspapers and
a wide range of educational and
scientific materials across their
borders.
These signatures were obtain-
ed at Lake Success on November
22, when the pact Iwas opened
for signature.
The agreement will promote
"a better understanding anct HiM-
tual I'espect between states,"said
r. N. Secretary-General Trygve
Lie.
