G WORLD'S ENGINEERS
AK THE SAME LANGUAGE
It is to the skill of shuctural and electrical engineers that we owe the construction and
smooth running of hydro-electrical projects such as the one at Genissiat, France
(shown above) whose success is equally important to the worker and the housewife.
Work on the Genissiat Dam-the largest in Western Europe to-day-began in
1936 but was interrupted by the war. Completed and put into operation in 1948. this
dam is over 300 feet high, nearly 200 yards wide and has a base thickness of nearly
300 feet. Genissiat. which dams the River Rhone, is designed to produce an annual
output of 2. 000 million kilowatts. Another giant hydro-electric installation. Boulder Dam,
in the United States, has an annual production of 5. 000 million kilowatt hours. One of
the most striking examples of how this vital source of energy,"white coal"', as
the French call it. can be used, is the work done in the Tennessee Valley, United
States. Twenty dams, built over a period of ten years, transformed this once"dying
valley"into a rich and prosperous countryside. (Photo : United Press.)
FOR lack of a dictionary, a waterpower project may be delayed, or
the design of a machine to in-
crease production 01 tractors, or snoes
or telephones may be held up.
The reason is that the majority of
the documents on engineering are
published in very few languages. For
historical reasons, engineering has
been a specialization of a very few
countries in the main, and it is esti-
mated that 80 per cent of all the pa-
pers engineers should read are pub-
lished in French, English or Ger-
man. Thus it is necessary to have
accurate engineering dictionaries to
facilitate translation and permit
practical use of this material.
This technical civilization of ours
presents some special difficulties be-
cause it is easy to misunderstand
terms that are used in different
countries. Even among the world's
leading engineers, misunderstanding
may arise because they use the same
technical expression tor different
ideas. Therefore, to assist the free
now of engineering information, some
method must be devised to ensure that
what is meant is clearly and exactly
understood, and has the same meaning
to a II cnginpers.
This is the fundamental problem
discussed recently at Unesco House
in Paris by a study group of en-
gineers. The immediate need is not
10 increase the number of documents
available to engineers, but to help them
track down quickly the necessary
material to solve some new problem,
or to study some specific construction,
among the mass of documents con-
stantly being reproduced in a vast
number of journals and stored away
in an equally vast number of libraries.
When the documents are found, they
must be put at the disposal of the
engineer and he must be able to read
them.. Unesco can take most effective
action in helping to provide the necess-
ary tools for the understanding of
these documents.
Urgent Need For
New Dictionaries
BEFORE the war, technical diction-aries in six l nguages were avail-
able. But these are now difficult to
find, and would, in any case, need
drastic revision because of the great
progress made in scientific engineer-
ing. A number of international asso-
ciations are tackling the problem. The
Permanent International Association
of Navigation Congresses, for example,
has published five volumes of a series
of fifteen which, when complete, will
include all the terms needed by engi-
neers in this field. The International
Commission on Large Dam Construc-
tion has also completed preparations
for a dictionary. Similar projects are
being considered for bridge and struc-
tural engineering, electrical engineer-
ing, soil mechanics, and topography.
These projects are, however, making
slow progress. The publication of
a dictionary is rarely a profitable
commercial venture, and the lack of
general directives is also a serious
handicap. It is, of course, inevitable
that dictionaries of terms used in the
different branches of engineering
should overlap. and it is therefore es-

sential that the same terms appearing
in different dictionaries should have
the same translation. It is suggested
that there should be not only a trans-
lation but also a drawing, where pos-
sible, so that no doubt will exist as
to what exactly is meant.
The engineering experts therefore
recommended that Unesco consider
this task as a number one priority,
and proposed that a"dictionaries
committee"should be set up. These
recommendations are now being acted
on through the work of the Natural
Sciences Department of Unesco.
