POW E R-T HAT COM E S WIT H T H'E WIN D
MANY NATIONS
SEEK NEW USES
FOR"FREE FUEL"
WINDMILLS are going up again in various parts of the world.
But not the classical friendly-looking Dutch type with
which we are all familiar. The new mill  are designed
to capture the power from the wind and to translate it,
on a large scale, into electrical energy ! for use in homes and
industry. They are an expression of the fact that many countries
face increasing shortages of coal and oil and that wind power
may, in many cases. prove an admirable substitute for, or addition
other forms of power.
Countries such as the U. S. A., Denmark, France, the Netherlands
and Britain already have teams of experts investigating how the
winds which blow over their countries can be captured to produce
more electrical power.
The British have set up a Wind
Power Research Station in the
Orkney Islands, where it is propos-
ed to erect a 100 kwt. generator
which will be tied in with the
electricity supply servicing the
islands. It is estimated that the
western coastal districts or Britain
are among the windi, est in the
world, and experts say that only a
few hundred feet above the ground,
millions of horse power in the form
of wind cross the coasts on a
windy day.
Free And Inexhaustible
A KEPORT issued two years agoby the British Electrical and
Allied Industries Research
Association gave a tentative esti-
mate that between 7. 75 and 7. 5 mil-
lion kwt. hours of electricity might
be generated yearly in Great Bri-
tain by wind power. This'would
be equivalent to a saving of from
2 to 4 million tons of coal.
In these terms, wind power is of
distinct economic importance. Its
supply is free and inexhaustible.
The British expert, Mr. E. W.
Golding, points out that there are,
however, two main disadvantages
which must be met if it is to be
used economically for electricity
supply : the low energy content
per unit of volume of air, and its
uncertain availability at any par-
ticular time.
The first disadvantage is likely
to result in relatively high costs
for storage facilities which will
preserve the energy for use during
non-windy periods. It is Mr. Gold-
ing's opinion that storage should
be ruled out in large-scale opera-
tions, and that wind power should
be used as and when it is available.
The windmill must therefore be
erected on very windy sites in
close proximity to local networks
of electricity supply.
Mr. Golding calculates that, for
Britain, wind power can be
produced at a cost of. 24d. to. 38d.
per kilowatt-hour, which compares

The largest wind generator to be constructed so far (above) was an experimental
unit, built on a Vermont hill. in the United States. Its propellor swept a circle
175 feet in diameter. Photo :'"Discovery".
favourably with the cost of fuel
in a steam-driven power station,
at an average figure of 4d.
Denmark's Power Problem
THE Danish government hasbeen experimenting in. wind
power plants since the end
of the last century. Between
1900 and 1910, several hundred
wind power plants of 3 to 30 ikW
capacity were set up. These were
used partly to supply current to
big estates, and partly to supply
villages. These wind power plants
were based on batteries, small size
petroleum motors often being used
during calm weather. They were
in operation for 25 to 30 years
until the high tension plants
superseded them.
Now, as electricity has become
almost the main source of power
supply in Denmark, it has become
necessary to secure a steady
supply. This, in connection with
high coal prices and the difficulty
of importing fuel, is the reason
why the question of the rational
utilisation of wind power has again
been taken up. Wind power is, in
fact, the only natural large-scale
source of power in Denmark.
For the past three years, the
South East Zealand Electricity Co
has been doing researches in this
field. A trial mill has been built
and a wind power plant will prob-
ably be erected. These plants
Icill most profitably be set up on
western coasts and, in adequate
numbers, will be able to yield 60 %
to 70 % of the power supply needed
at any time in Denmark.
In Italy, researches in this field
began in 1940. The French have
installed more than 100 special
instruments in France, North
Africa and in certain colonial ter-
ritories. Preliminary results indic-
ate that the best areas in France
for wind power machines are on
the Mediterranean coast, along
the northern half of the Spanish
frontier, near the mouth of the
Rhone, in Brittany, and along the
coast near the Belgian frontier.
There is also an apparatus at the
top of the Eiffel Tower in Paris
to collect data on wind velocity.
Main interest at the moment is
in two types of windmills. In one,
instead of pumping water or opera-
ting a millstone, the drive shaft
turns an electric generator. The
other is : made up of'a hollow pro-
pellor with three blades, which are
open at the tips. When the propel-
lor rotates the air is expelled from
the tips by centrifugal force, which
creates a vacuum so that air is
sucked through the air turbine,
which drives the generator. The
advantage of this latter type of
windmill is that the generators,
weighing as much as 250 tons, are
kept on the ground and not, as in
other windmills, perched on top of
the windmill tower.
