, UNESCO ACTIVITIES IN GERMANY
- N 1948, following the General
t Conference resolution passed atM xico City in 1947, Unesco,
acting in agreement and co--
operation with the appropriate
Allied Authorities, extended its acti-
vities to Western Germany and
opened its first office in Stuttgart.
A year later further offices were
opened at Mainz and Diisseldorf.
One of the first tasks of these
offices has been to make known
the aims and purposes of the
Organisation, both to the German
public generally by means of press,
radio, exhibitions and lectures, as
well as by the distribution of Unesco
literature and pamphlets translated
into German for this purpose, and
also to academic and other interested
circles by means of free distribution
or sale of Unesco's more specialised
publications and periodicals, as well
as by personal contacts. Requests
for material for distribution in
schools, for student libraries, for
exhibitions or for special broadcasts,
to mention but a few of the pur-
poses, are constantly increasing and
the needs are fulfilled as far as iSI
possible by these three offices.
Other important fields of activity
extended to Germany within the
framework of Unesco's programme
include the exchange of publications,
the exchange of persons, the study
of textbooks and the social sciences.
The exchange of publications bet-
ween German libraries and the li-
braries of Member States has been
greatly facilitated by the creation of
an Exchange Centre at Bad-Godes-
berg, financed by the Notgemein-
schaft des Deutschen Wissenschaft
(Emergency Council for German
Science). The extension of the
Unesco Book Coupon Scheme to Ger-
many, where it will shortly come
into operation, will provide a further
valuable means for German libraries
to acquire much needed foreign books
and periodicals without the compli-
cated procedure and long delays
which are at present inevitable.
Frequent enquiries are received at
the offices in Germany concerning
the possibilities of exchange and
study abroad by students, teachers
and many young people anxious to
come into contact with young people
of other nationalities. Information
is given on exchange agencies in
other countries and where possible
contacts are facilitated. The hand-
book"Study Abroad"has proved a
much sought after publication in
German universities, and the offer
of the first Unesco fellowship-in
the field of Youth Education-in
Germany has aroused a large res-
ponse.
IN co-operation with the appro-priate rogramme departments f
Unesco several studies have been
initiated in Germany. One of these
has been concerned with the post--
war preparation and production of
textbooks. Within the field of
Unesco's Tensions Project a sociolo-
gical study is at present in progress,
which is particularly concerned with
the attitudes of youth. In addition
studies are being carried out on the
problems and experiments in dealing
with war-handicapped children on
the problems with which youth is
faced with the purpose of enabling
those concerned with youth ques-
tions to gain a better understanding
of the problems of youth in Ger-
many and of their relationship to
other members of the international
community.
The Director-General, following
the recommendation of the General
Conference at its Third Session, esta-
blished a Committee of Experts to
One of the aims of Unesco's work in Germany is to encourage the activities 01 orga-
nizations carrying out adult education there. One of these organizations i  the
Federation'n of German Trade Unions for Western Germany under whose auspices the
Ruhr Theatre Festival was held this Summer. During the Festival. whose aim is to
bring to the workers an understanding of European culture in its widest sense. German
actors (above) presented Shakespeare's'King Lear".
advise him on matters affecting the
programme of Unesco's work in Ger-
many, and this Committee convened
for its first session in May 1949.
The Committee is composed of re-
presentatives from Belgium, Czecho-
slovakia, France, Netherlands, Nor-
way, Poland, Switzerland, United
States of America and the United
Kingdom, who meet periodically to
study the progress of Unesco's acti-
vities in Germany and to advise on
its future programme as well as on
any special projects which might be
carried out in that country.
The Commitee of Experts met
recently in Unesco House, Paris, to
consider the creation of an inter-
national centre for youth activities,
an international social sciences ins-
titute and an international pedago-
gical institute in Germany. The
Committee welcomed Unesco's pro-
posal to support special projects in
these fields, but felt convinced that
if these projects were to be carried
out full collaboration from German
circles anxious to work in the inte-
rests of international understanding
would be essential. The Committee
made a number of recommendations
designed to ensure the permanent
and international character of these
institutes.
FROM the time that Unescostarted its activities in Germany
keen interest has been shown by
Germans in the Organisation's work
in their country. In response to an
increasing desire to participate more
actively, a group of personalities re-
presenting all spheres of cultural life
in Germany met last January in
Bad-Soden near Frankfurt to consi-
der the means by which Unesco's
activities could be furthered through
German initiative, and to this end
decided that preparatory work for
the creation of a German Committee
for Unesco Activities should forth-
with be undertaken. An Interim
Committee was formed and has been
co-operating since that time with the
Secretariat Offlces in Germany in
various fields of their ·nrk, such as
in the selection of participants for
Unesco meetings and seminars, in
many cases also providing financial
aid to such participants for their
travel. Assistance has also been
given in obtaining German contri-
butions to recent Unesco publications,
such as the Index Translationem
and the Catalogue of Photographic
Archives of Works of Art.
It is expected that the permanent
Committee will be finally constituted
at a meeting to be held at the end
of September. In order to cover the
various activities of Unesco the Com-
mittee will comprise the following
groups : Arts and Literature ;
Science : Education : Press ; Radio
and Film. It will receive direct
financial support from the German
Federal Government.
It is hoped that the formation of
the Committee will lead to increased
active participation in Unesco's work
and afford to Germans greater
opportunities for partaking in and
contributing to international co--
operation in the fields of education,
science and culture.
