"CAN THE BLIND LEAD THE BLIND ? SHALL THEY NOT BOTH FALL INTO THE DITCH ?" (Luke, vi. 39) This was already an old question
in the time of Christ. The answer was obvious. In the time of Breughel, 1500 years later, the question was still rhetorical, and the
answer was the same-unremitting misery, fear and solitude, well illustrated by Breughel's painting (above)"The Parable of the Blind".
WORLD BRAILLE-AN ADVANCE
TOWARDS ONE WORLD
... An answer !
BLIND men and women who
read with their fingertips
scores of different languages
in all parts of the earth are closer
than seeing readers to a goal of
extraordinary value for internatio-
nal understanding-a single
script for the whole world. This is
the result of agreements reached at
a ten-day meeting in Unesco House,
Paris, of the International Braille
Conference attended by delegates
representing most of the world's
principal language areas.
More than half of the partici-
pants in the proceedings were blind
themselves. They came from
countries as far apart as Brazil and
India, from Pakistan, China, Egypt,
Ceylon, England, Greece, the United
States. For the first time in
Unesco's history, a Japanese took
part in the gathering as an official
member of an agency working
under the auspices of the organi-
zation, and also for the first time
representatives of Hashemite Jor-
dan and the Federation of Malaya
were present in official capacities.
The delegates decided that it was
not only feasible but both desirable
and practicable to create a broadly
uniform Braille system for all lan-
guages and scripts. This is to be
called World Braille and will be
based upon the original system of
raised-character writing for the
blind developed by the Frenchman
Louis Braille, himself blind, more
than a century ago. The esta-
blishment of a World Braille
Council to maintain uniformity in
the future and to work out techni-
cal details in specialized fields of
Braille was strongly recommended..
A NEW ERA FOR THE BLIND
THE achievements of the meetingconstituted an important mile-stone in the history of Braill  be-
cause they permit further practical
and concrete measures to establish the
greatest degree of uniformity in a
single system of writing for the blind.
The delegates, who included Braillists,
linguists, phoneticians, blind educatio-
ists, and representatives of Braille
printing houses, agreed that the re-
sults of their talks were not only
extraordinarily satisfactory but better
than the most glowing optimist could
have expected.
Dr. Helen Keller, world-famous Ame-
rican blind deaf-mute, in whose ho-
nour a special session of the Confer-
ence was held, told the delegates that
through their work a new era for the
blind was beginning, for, she said, they
were"lifting the blind throughout the
world from age-long darkness into the
light of culture and knowledge".
Through them and through Unesco's
activities on behalf of the blind, she
added."the voice of the blind is being
heard in words that are to be put into
concrete assistance throughout'iI. world
of good will".
To reach agreement, the delegates
had to obtain the co-operation of
spokesmen for various groups of
Braille readers who, because of con-
flicting methods in adapting Braille in
the past, would now have to sacrifice
what they had learned-over periods
of many years-and begin all over
again. One example was S. T. Dajani,
principal of the Alaiya School for the
Blind, Ramallah, Hashemite Jordan,
who volunteered to scrap twelve years
of hard work in order to help world
unity. Another example was C. K.
Helen Kelier, the American b) ind deai-mute,
depending only upon the sense of touch.
using Braille as a powerful tool, has become
one of the world's outstanding persons. She
spoke to delegates to the International
Braille Conference at Unesco House in
English-but can also express herself yin
French, German, Italian and Spanish.
Dassanaike, principal of the School
for the Blind, Mount Lavinia, Ceylon.
who made a similar offer.
TRADITIONS TAKE
SECOND PLACE
ONE of the achievements of the con-ference was an agreement by re-
presentatives of the various forms
of the Perso-Arabic languages spoken
in Hashemite Jordan. Egypt, Iraq,
Persia, Pakistan and MalaYa to recom-
mend to all countries in their lin-
guistic group that Braille writing in
the future be read from left to right,
instead of from right to left as in the
usual visual script for many centuries.
A spokesman for modern Hebrew, Dr.
Michael GeSner, of the Jewish Braille
Institute of America, concurred in the
change. Other formidable obstacles
arising from Braille codes built of
traditional practices in visual scripts
tied to historical religious and senti-
mental backgrounds also were over-
come.
Another achievement was an agree-
ment to begin the formulation of a
uniform Chinese Braille based on
Mandarin, but retaining a considerable
degree of sound relationship with tra-
ditional Braille. There are four main
spoken forms of Chinese, of which the
Pekin Braille code has 408 characters ;
while Union Mandarin has only 54
characters.
In addition, it was agreed to recom-
mend that mathematical and chemical
symbols should be represented with
greater uniformity throughout the
world ; that the degree of uniformity
already existing in musical notation
should be extended ; and that efforts
should be made to restore and main-
AN INTERNATIONAL TRIBUTE TO LOUIS BRAILLE
At the close of the International Braille Conference in Paris, on March 29th, delegates visited
the little town of Coupvray. where Louis Braille was born and where he is buried. Standing
at his graveside, these men and women, many of them blind, paid tribute to the man who
evolved the method of raised character writing that bears his name. Representing the
world's principal language areas, the delegates expressed by their gesture, the debt owed
to Louis Braille and those who adap1ed his system to the world's languages by countless
sightless persons who as a result have been able to live fuller and more useful lives.
LOUIS BRAILLE
There was still no basic change in the lot 01
the blind, when the great blind Milten wrote
angrily."0 dark, dark. dark. amid the blaze
of noon, Irrecoverably dark, total eclipse,
Without all hope 01 Day !" (Samson Ago-
nistes.) It remained for Louis Braille, in the
19th Century, to offer the blind something
better than the old question, and the old
and ugly answer. He gave them the script
which bears his name, and opened to them
a whole new world 01 hope and happiness.
tain world uniformity in punctuation
signs.
In the World Braille whose creation
was recommended, each sign will
as far as possible be used for the
same or nearly the same sound as in
. the original Braille, will represent thesame letter or will fulfil the same or
a similar function. Except where the
complexities of ideographic scripts
make it impossible, a Braille symbol
will be provided for each visual letter,
with the understanding that the
sound value of the symbol be identical
with that of the visual letter of the
a. lphabet of the particular language.
The effort will be made to make World
Braille a complete tactile repres-
entation of visual scripts, and to bring
about the maximum degree of con-
sistency among the Braille systems of
the various language groups.
The delegates decided that a truly
phonetic World Braille was not prac-
ticable for general purposes, but re-
commended that a panel of experts
be set up to make suggestions on the
possibility of improving the Braille
form of the International Phonetic
Alphabet. Another panel was recom-
mended to work out an international
classification of sounds of letters and
toue marks.
ANNUAL TRIBUTE ;,-
TO LOUIS BRAILLE
DESPITE the recommendation toform a World Braille Council, the
Conference voted that"it is still
of paramount importance that Unesco
should continue to play a vital role
in the Braille problem in view of
its educational and cultural commit-
ments"and that"a liaison should be
maintained permanently with Unesco.
In expressing its deep appreciation to
Unesco, the Conference asked that the
General Conference of Unesco to be
held in Florence in May should make
provision during the remainder of
1950 and in 1951 for the technical com-
pletion of the task it has so effective-
ly undertaken. These plans include
the holding of regional conferences
for areas using the Arabic script, for
Spanish and Portuguese speaking
areas, and for the languages of eastern
Asia.
In tribute to Louis Braille, the Con-
ference recommended that workers for
the blind in all parts of the world
observe his birthday as an annual ho-
liday, and that a world commemor-
ation be arranged for the centenary of
Braille's death, in 1952.
