AVICENNA
An engraving by A. Thévet. after a
medieval portrait in the Paris Me-
dical School.
DIETARY deficiencies in national or regionalcultures may result from two common causes.
One of these is the loss by a people of their
own historic heritage of the arts and crafts and
wisdom of their ancestors. The other is the barrier
ofcuttura) isotation-mutua) ignorance of the wealth
created by unknown men and women, in unknown
places, surrounded by the fence of unknown langua-
ges. On this page are described two current
projects-each aimed at one of the"hidden hungers"
of modern man. Libraries throughout the world
will contribute to the work of the Institute for the
Restoration of Arab Manuscripts, in restoring,
preserving and making available the written records
of Arab culture-for the benefit of Arab lands, and
finally of all lands. The work of the Beirut Com-
mission, translating Islamic works into Western
languages-and Western classics into Arabic-wit)
create new"cultural vitamins"for the whole of
mankind.
THE debt owed to Islam by Western science and philosophy is often forgottenand, at best, is but vaguely understood-although the Influence uf Moslem
mathematicians, physicians, physicists, chemists, astronomers and mystics
appears everywhere. Without some knowledge of them it would he difficult
to account for the"renaissances"of the)) th,) 3th and 16th centuries. But
when students wish to turn to the ori-
ginal texts of these scientists and philo-
sophrs, they find themselves at a loss.
Many people would like to know
more of the profound and audacious
philosophers of Baghdad or Cordova.
the picturesque and erudite geogra-
phers of Damascus and historians of
Tunis. But there is no bookseller to
supply them with what they want.
Most of the treatises, memoirs, en-
cyclopaedias and meditations have
never been translated. Some of them
appeared a long time ago in Latin. Of
this immense literature, only a few
isolated fragments, in large libraries
and specialized reviews, are available
. to anyone who does not read Arabic.
This regrettable state of affairs is
now being changed. A Commission,
consisting of three Unesco represen-
tatives and three Lebanese experts,
has been working for a year in Beirut
to provide the world with translations
of the most representative works of
Islam.
The Commission's programme is a
big one. To inaugurate it, two great
names have been chosen-As Ghazali
and Avicenna.
Few translators have devoted them-
selves to the philosopher of Tus,
although Al Ghazali is particu-
larly close to European thought, on
which he exercised a far-reaching in-
fluence. Thanks to the Pugio Fidei of
Raimundo Marti, this influence ways
extended first to St. Thomas Aquinas
and later to Pascal. His life, which
was dominated by a dramatic conver-
sion, had points of comparison with
the author of Les Pensees.
Lawyer and Philosopher
BORN in 1058 A. D., Al Ghazali devot-jt ed his prodigiOus technical ability to
the study of law and philosophy. As
a professor at Baghdad, the elegance
of his scepticism made him famous.
In 1095, at the height of his popularity.
when his teaching consisted of doubt-
ing all religious truths and the possi-
bility of absolute knowledge, he under-
went a profound mystical crisis, which
resulted in a complete mental break-
down. When he recovered, he re-
nounced his position and fortune and
became a dervish. Surrendering him-
self to God, he led a wandering, asce-
tic life devoted to prayer and writ-
ing. He died in 1111.
His best books date from the last
phase of his life : the voluminous
Summa theologian, Ihya Ulum al-Din ;
his compilation of moral exhortations,
A pholograph 01 the Ilrel AYtcenna manuecrlpl published in Latin in Eulopt.
Ayuha I-Walad, on the insufflciency
of knowledge if not accompanied by
charitable work ; and his spiritual au-
tobiography, Al Munqidh Min al-
Dalal, frequently compared with the
Confessions of St. Augustin. In the
near future, the Beirut Commission
will present French translations of the
last two, works.
Avieemna's Last Work
IT might be expected that Avicenna'swork would be better known in the
West. His philosophy is accepted
as being intimately related to Thom-

ism. Yet, of his 355 works, only his
books on medicine are really widely
known. Up to the 18th Century, these
were standard works in all European
universities.
His philosophical work is represent-
ed in European languages only by
extracts or summaries made at second
hand. There has never been a full
translation of the great book he wrote
at Ispahan in the last years of his
life, in which he departed considerably
from the Aristotelianism that had go-
verned all his previous writings. This
book, Kitab al-isharat wat tanbihat,
represents the final development of
Avicenna's thought and shows ration-
ilistic tendencies that preclude his
mysticism from being regarded as
purely religious.
It is this book-the first unabridged
 verslOn-tnat WlH De PUDllShed by the
Beirut Commission. Translated into
French by MIle Goichon, it will enable
the West to arrive at a more accurate
appreciation of the remarkable con-
tribution of the great Persian writer.
The fourth work which the experts
will probably translate is a book by
Ibn Khaldun, the great 14th century
Tunisian historian. The plan is to
publish his Muqaddama, the preface
to his Universal History, in which Ibn
Khaldun, a predecessor of Montes-
quieu, studied the rise and fall of
empires.
Great Books of the West
qp HESE undertakings do not exhaustthe activities of the Commission.
To make the great works of Islam
known throughout the world, and first
of all in the West, is but one of its
aims. It also intends to ensure a wide
circulation of representative examples
of Western literature translated into
Arabic. Heading the list of works is
Aristotle's Politics, of which Islam has
never had a faithful translation. Next
comes Don Quixote, Descartes'Dis-
course on Method, Shakespeare's A
Winter's Tale. Bacon's Essays, and
La Storia della Colonna Infame, a.
moving work by Manzoni.
Although these activities are con-
centrated in Beirut, their purpose con-
cerns the whole Arab world. As the
entire project develops, it is expected
that all the Arab states, in collabor-
ation with the Cultural Committee of
the Arab League, will be involved. Sy-
ria is already about to take part in
the work of the Commission, and
places have been assigned to repre-
sentatives of Egypt, Iraq and Saudi
Arabia.
