THE SCIENTIFIC BASIS FOR HUMAN UNITS
Unesco Publishes Declaration By World's Scientists
The following statement was published by Unesco on July y) 8 th.) t was prepared by the Unesco Committee
of Experts on Race Problems, at Unesco House in Paris, and was drafted by the following scientists : Ernest Beagle-
hole, New Zealand ; Juan Comas, Mexico ; L. A. Costa Pinto, Brazil ; Franklin Frazier, United States ; Morris
Ginsberg, United Kingdom ; Humayun Kabir, India ; Claude Levi-Strauss, France ; Ashley Montage, United
States. The text was revises. by Professor Montagu after criticisms submitted by Professors Hadley Cantril, E. G. Conklin,
Gunnar Dahlberg, Theodosius Dobzhansky, L. C. Dunn, Donald Hager, Julian S. Hux ! ey. Otto Klineberg, Wi ! bert Moore.
H. J. Muller, Gunnar Myrdal, and Joseph Needham.
SCIENTISTS have reached general
agreement in recognising that
mankind is one : that all men belong
to the same species, Homo sapiens.
It is further generally agreed among
scientists that all men are probably
derived from the same common stock ;
and that such differences as exist between
different groups of mankind are due to
the operation of evolutionary factors of
differentiation such as isolation, the drift
and random fixation of the material
particles which control heredity (the
genes), changes in the structure of the : e
particles, hybridization, and natural
selection. In these ways groups have
arisen of varying stability and degree of
differentiation which have been classified
in different ways for different purposes.
From the biological standpoint, the
species Homo sapiens is made up of a
number of populations, each one of which
differs from the others in the frequency
of one or more genes. Such genes,
responsible for the hereditary differences
between men, are aiways few when com-
pared to the whole genetic constitution
of man and to the vast number of genes
common to all human beings regardless
choose to describe as a race. Thus, many
national, religious, geographic, linguistic
or cultural groups have, in such loose
usage, been called"races", when obviously
Americans are not a race, nor are En-
glishmen, nor Frenchmen, nor any other
national group. Catholics, Protestants,
Moslems, and Jews are not races, nor are
groups who speak English or any other
language thereby definable as a race ;
people who live in Iceland or England or
India are not races ; nor are people who
are culturally Turkish or Chinese or the
like thereby describable as races.
National, religious, geographic, lin-
guistic. and cultural groups do not ne-
cessarily coincide with racial groups ; and
the cultural traits of such groups have
no demonstrated genetic connection with
racial traits. Because serious errors of
this kind are habitually committed when
the term"race"is used in popular par-
lance. it would be better when speaking
of human races to drop the term"race"
altogether and speak of ethnic groups.
Now what has the scientist to say
about the groups of mankind which may
be recognized at the present time ? Hu-
man races can be and have been dif-
RACIAL HARMONY-NEW ZEALAND In New Zealand the Maori population morethan doubled between 1896 and 1936 and
today Maoris number about one twentieth 01 the total population. Not more than half of
the Maoris are 01 pure Maori descent and the number 01 those of mixed blood appears to
be increasing rather more rapidly than those of unmixed race. Maoris made an important
contribution to New Zealand's war effort and to-day are participating more and more in
the economic and political life of the country, one important development being the increas-
ing number entering the teaching profession.
of the population to which they belong.
This means that the likenesses among
men are far greater than their diffe-
rences.
A race, from the biological standpoint,
may therefore be defined as one of the
group of populations constituting the
species"Homo sapiens."These popul-
ations are capable of interbreeding with
one another but, by virtue of the isolat-
ing barriers which in the past kept them
more or less separated, exhibit certain
physical differences as a result of their
somewhat different biological histories.
They represent variations, as it were, on
a common theme.
In short, the term"race"designates a
group or population characterised by
some concentrations, relative as to fre-
quency and distribution, of hereditary
particles (genes) or physical characters,
which appear, fluctuate, and often disap-
pear in the course of time by reason of
geographic and/or cultural isolation. The
varying manifestations of these traits in
different populations are perceived in
different ways by each group. What is
perceived is largely preconceived, so that
ea h group arbitrarily tends to misinter-
pret the variability which occurs as a
fundamental difference which separates
tr> ! t g-roup from all others.
These are the scientific facts. Unfor-
tunately, however, when most people use
the term"race"they do not do. so in the
tense above defined. To most people, a
race is any group of people whom they
ferently classified by different anthropo-
logists, but at the present time most
anthropologists agree in classifying the
greater part of present-day mankind into
three major divisions, as follows :
i\longoloid, Negroid, Caucasoid
The biological processes which the clas-
sifier has here embalmed, as it were, are
dynamic, not static. These divisions
were not the same in the past as they
are at present, and there is every reason
to believe that they will change in the
future.
Many sub-groups or ethnic groups
within these divisions have been deserio-
ed. There is no general agreement upon
tneir number, and in any event most
ethnic groups have not yet been either
studied or described by the physical
anthropologist.
Whatever classification the anthro-
pologist makes of man, he never includes
mental characteristics as part of those
classifications. It is now generally reco-
gnized that intelligence tests do nof in
themselves enable us to differentiate
tafely between what is due to innate
capacity and what is the result of envi-
ronmental influences, training and educ-
ation. Wherever it has been possible
to make allowances for differences in
environmental opportunities, the tests
have shown essential similarity in men-
tal characters among all human groups.
In short, given similar degrees of cul-
tural opportunity to realise their poten-
tialities, the aVel'aj ; e achic\'ement,) f
the members of each ethnic group is
about the same. The scientific investig-
ations of recent years fully support the
dictum of Confucius (551-478 B. C.)"Men's
natures are alike ; it is their habits that
carry them far apart".
The scientific material available to us
at present does not justify the conclusion
that inherited genetic differences are a
major factor in producing the differences
between the cultures and cultural
achievements of different peoples or
groups. It does indicate, however, that
the history of the cultural experience
which each group has undergone is the
major facter in explaining such differ-
ence. The one trait which above all
others has been at a premium in the
evolution of men's mental characters has
been educability, plasticity. This is a
trait which all human beings possess. It
is, ind'ed, a species character of"Homo
sapiens."
So far as temperament is concerned,
there is no definite evidence that there
exist inborn differences between human
groups. There is evidence that whatever
group differences of the kind there might
be are greatly over-ridden by the indi-
vidual differences, and by the differences
springing from environmental factors.
As fer personality and character, these
may be considered raceless. In every
human group a rich variety of personality
and character types will be found, and
there is no reason fer believing that any
human group is richer than any other in
these respects.
Biological Facts and Racial Myths
WITH respect to race-mixture, theevidence points unequivocally to
the fact that this has been going
on from the earliest times. Indeed, one
of the chief processes of race-formation
and race-extinction or absorption is by
means of hybridization between races or
ethnic groups. Furthermore, no con-
vincing evidence has been adduced that
race-mixture ef itself produces biolo-
gically bad effects. Statements that hu-
man hybrids frequently show undesirable
traits, both physically and mentally, phy-
sical disharmonies and mental dege-
neracies, are not supported by the facts.
There is, therefore, no biological justi-
fication for prohibiting intermarriage
between persons of different ethnic
groups.
The biological fact of race and the
myth of"race"should be distinguished.
For all practical social purposes"race"
is not so much a biological phenomenon
as a social myth. The myth of"race"
has created an enormous amount of
human and social damage. In recent
years it has taken a heavy toll in human
lives and caused untold suffering. It
still prevents the normal development of
millions of human beings and deprives
civilization of the effective co-operation of
productive minds.
The biological differences between
ethnic groups should be disregarded from
the standpoint of social acceptance and
sccial action. The unity of mankind
from both the biological and social
viewpoints is the main thing.
To recognize this and to act accordingly
is the first requirement of modern man.
It is but to recognize what a great
biologist wrote in 1875 :"As man advances
in civilization, and small tribes are united
into larger communities, the simplest
reason would tell each individual that he
ought to extend his social iilstincts and
sympathies to all the members of thesa e nation, though personally unknown
to him. This point being once reached,
there is only an artificial barrier toprevent his sympathies extending to the
men of all nations and races."
These are the words of Charles Darwin
in"The Descent of Man" (2nd ed., 1875,
pp. 187-188). And, indeed, the whole of
human history shows that a co-operative
spirit is not only natural to men, but
more deeply rooted than any self-seeking
tendencies. If this were not so we should
not see the growth of integration and
organization of his communities which
the centuries and the millennia plainly
exhibit.
We now have to consider the bearing
ef these statements on the problem of
human equality. It must be asserted
with the utmost emphasis that equality
as an ethical principle in no way depends
upon the assertion that human beings
are in fact equal in endowment. Obvious-
ly individuals in all ethnic groups vary
greatly among themselves in endowment.
Nevertheless the characteristics in which
human groups differ from one another
are often exaggerated and used as a basis
for questioning the validity of equality in
the ethical sense. For this purpose we
have thought it worth while to set out in
a formal manner what is at present
scientifically established concerning indiv-
idual and group differences.
(The fmal conclusicns of the scienUsts
are published on page 1.)
