DECEMBER 1950 Page S-UNESCO COURIER
WORLD FIGURES GREET SECOND i i ANNIVERSARY
OF THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS
"Jo help all
men forsee
a futere
Message From
M. Jaime TORRES BODET
Di rector-General
Of UNESCO
T. wo years ago the General
Assembly of the United
. Vations, meeting in Paris,
adopted the Universal
Declaralion of Human Rights.
Can we say that the existence
of the Declaration has in any way
changed our mode of life during
these two years ? Some people
will point out regretfully that it
has not presented breaches of
the law, nor the resort to
violence, nor the stagnation of
certain political and social con-
ditions. Undoubtedly, the criti-
cism is justified. But is it
reasonable to expect that any
Declaration, however nobly ins-
pired, could at once solve all
problems ?
The main role of the Declar-
ation is, in fact, to help all men
foresee a future toward which
the governments can guide their
activities In a common endeavour.
If at times the cruel irony of
events makes us doubt the sin-
cerity o {the Declaration as a
splendid affirmation of princi-
ples. let us not forget that it
provides the basis of the concrete
activities already undertaken by
the United Nations on behalf
Human Rights. Let us bear in
mind that it has played a part in
the judgment of not a few courts
of law; ; and that inevitably its
influence on morals and opi-
nions, already great, will be
more and more directly felt, even
in the field of law-making.
Human Rights Covenant
THE United Nations is now
. working on an Interna.'ional
Covenant of Human Riqhts
which, unlike the Declaration,
will have binding force on all the
signatories. This Covenant will
be the first document of uni-
versal scope to establish a com-
mon pattern the attitude o/
States toward private citizens.
Naturally, therefore, its import-
ance will be enormous. But we
should not be led by this fact to
forget the great value inherent in
the Universal Declaration o/
Human Rights.
There are, no doubt, some peo-
ple who may be tempted to be-
lieve that the Declaration should
have begun with a strict de/i-
nition of the minimum commit-
ments which states should and
could undertake, instead of with
an affirmation of principles.
But, had this minimum been
fixed, the states might have con-
tented themselves merely with
showing the boundaries beyond
which barbarism could not pass.
A proclamation of the ideals
which clearly and positively
e, establish the frontiers of civiliz-
ation might have been postponed
until a remote future..
Chart For The Future
FOR example, would a simpleagreement on commitments
have included articles on
social security, on the right to
education and culture ; and
would it have given the coer-
cive force ? How many countries
would have been able to under-
take such commitments ? Let us
not forget that all nations have
noi reached the same stage o/
economic development, nor have
they all the same cultural and
social traditions,
Let us bear in mind, too, that
this Declara ! ion, which charts so
bright a future for mankind, was
adopted on tlte morrow of atro-
cities whose barbarism awakened
our generation from its mood of
complacency, To proclaim hu-
man Rights was to propose a
positive civilization; it was to
affirm that mankind has enough
confidence In such a civilization
to overcome the difficulties in its
path, and to survive.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 8
"DECLA-
RATION
HAS
ALREADY
HELPED
THE
CAUSE
OF HUMAN RIGHTS"
IAM very happy to have thisopportunity to say that I feel
the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights has already helped
us to progress in the observance of
human rights in many parts of the
world. Both the Constitution of
India and that of Indonesia bear
the stamp of acceptance of these
rights and there are an increasing
number of people who refer to the
Declaration in their speeches and
even though it is not a legally
binding document, it has been
referred to in court decisions.
I realise that it will take some
time for the education on the real
meaning of human rights and res-
pect for the human personality to
he accepted In the same way
throughout the world, but I cannot
help feeling that we have already
moved ahead a long way.
There is much more to do and
nobody can afford not to be
concerned about the future work on
human rights and the actual change
in human nature which must take
place before these rights are fully
implemented, but we have made a
beginning and I believe we are
moving forward.
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT
Chairman of the United Nations
Commission on Human Rights.
"WORK
FOR THE
FUTURE"
"UNITED
NATIONS
GAVE
HUMAN
RIGHTS
MESSAGE
A NEW FORCE"
F ROM the very beginning of theFrench R volution in 1789
when the Declaration of the
Rights of Man and the Citizen was
proclaimed, not only the liberties of
French nationals were defined, but
those of every person in every
nation of the world.
Its message was universal and
overcame alt frontiers.
Though widely circulated and
rousing the deepest interest among
all peoples during that period of
almost fanatical fervour, it was not
until a century and a half later-
150 years of continual sacrifice-
that'this appeal on behalf of Man
and his liberties became trulv
universal
The United Nations gave the
message a new force. Their
Declaration, now two years old,
not only reaffirms the rights of all
the members of the human family
hut clearly states, in the light of
all the trials and warring of nations
and men, the conditions of human
dignity on all social levels and the
most noble aims of twentieth
century civilization,
As long as these rights and these
liberties are accorded universal
respect, the peoples will be freed
from war, ignorance, fear and
misery. In other words, the
nations who have solemnh reco-
gnised these rights and liberties,
have no greater nor more urgent
task than to ensure that they
become living, sincere and effective
realties.
M. VINCENT AURIOL
President of the French Republic.
IN a world.which is full
of conflict
and hatred ann
violence, it be-
comes even
more necessary than al any other
time for us to have some anchor
to our faith in human destiny.
The solemn proclamation by the
United Nations of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights
provides such an anchorage, if
only we hold on to it. I welcome,
therefore, the celebration of the
second anniversary of this Declar-
ation and I hope that it will
revive in peoples'minds all over
the world that there are certain
positive values in life which we
must respect and hold on to, if life
is to be made worth living. The
present may be bad, but the present
passes, giving place to the future.
If the future we work for is full
of hope for humanity, then the ills
of the present do not matter much
and we have a justification for
working for that future.
So I welcome this anniversary of
an event important in man's history
and I send greeting to all those who
work for the realisation of those
human rights which we have
proclaimed.
JAW AHARLAL NEHRU
Prime Minister of India.
"THE
WORLD
HAS NOW
SPOKEN"
FEWnow content
the opinion
that the Univer-
sal Declaration of Human Rights is
one of the historic documents of
our epoch. Already in scores of
significant international as well as
national encounters it has been
appealed to in authoritative justifi-
cation of certain causes or com-
plaints. A growing body of
jurisprudence is building up
around it. As an objective standard,
the Declaration serves at once as
a potent ferment of ideas, as a
disturber and judge of actual
practice, and as a solid ground to
which movements of reform can
anchor themselves.
That organized humanity was
able after three years of responsible
debate to arrive at this impressive
definition of what belongs to man
as man, without a single opposing
voice in the final voting, was a
tremendous event. The world has
now. formally spoken for the first
time a to'what constitutes the
proper digility and worth of man.
For the thoughtful student, the
debates that attended the elabora-
tion of the Declaration would
prove perhaps more important than
the Declaration itself. It was in
these debates that the dialectic of
idea and attitude among the
effective cultures of the present
world became manifest.
The present elaboration of the
Covenant, the next stage beyond the
Declaration, is meeting with some
difficulty. But no matter how
much the nations, whether
understandably or not, fight shy
of a strong binding Covenant, the
Declaration, which has already
been debated and decided on bv
them. will forever serve as a
goading reminder of the ideals to
which they have alreadv solemnly
pledged themselves.
CHARLES MASK
Minister of Lebanon3n the United
States and Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights.
"THE FREEDOMS
FOR
WHICH
WE
STAND "
NOW, whenit is more
than even
necessary to def-
end those freedoms or which we,
in the community of the United
Nations stand, we welcome the
opportunity which is given in these
columns of the Unesco Courier to
re-affirm our belief in the Declar
ation of Human Rights on this
second anniversary of its signature.
MR. GEORGE TOMLINSON
Minister of Education
for England and Wales.
"FOR
AN
OPEN
WORLD"
IN the Univer-s a I Declar-
action of
Human Rights
aspirations are set forth which
unite all humanity in spite of the
deep-rooted divergencies which
exist in the world to-day as to how
common ideals can best be realized.
In order that these divergencies
"hall not prevent the fulfilment of
the hopes embodied in the estab-
lishment of the United Nations
Organization, it appears most
urgent that efforts be undertaken
from all sides to encourage a free
exchange of information and ideas
between nations without which
co-operation in true confidence
cannot be achieved.
In an Open Letter of June 9th,
J 950, to the United Nations, dealing
with the challenge to civilization
presented by modern developmenls
of science and technology I have
tried to stress this point, and at
the present occasion I would like
to quote the following passages :
"An open world where each
nation can assert itself solely by
the extent to which it can contri-
bute to the common culture and is
able to help others with experience
and resources must be the goal to
be put above everything else. Still,
example in such respects can be
effective only if isolation is
abandoned and free discussion of
cultural and social developments
permitted across all boundaries.
"Within any community it is
only possible for the citizens to
strive together for common welfare
on a basis of public knowledge of
the general conditions in the
country. Likewise, real co-opera-
tion between nations on problems of
common concern pre-supposes free
access to all information of im-
portance for their relations. Any
argument fo/'upholding barriers
for information and intercourse,
based on concern for national
ideals or interests, must be
weighed against tlie beneficial
effects of common enlightenment
and the relieved tension resultiny
from openness.
"In the search for a harmonious
relationship between the life of the
individual and the organization of
the the community, there have always
been and will ever remain many
problems to ponder and principles
for which to strive. However, to
make it possible for nations to
benefit from the experience of
others and to avoid mutual
misunderstanding of intentions,
free access to information and
unhampered opportunity for ex-
change of ideas must be granted
everywhere.
Professor NIELS BOHR
Danish Physicist.

UNESCO COURIER-Page 6 DECEMBER 1950
UNESCO EXHIBITION-ALBUM 1
UNENDING FIGHT TO GAl
Human rights, as proclaimed in the Universal Declaration adopted by the United Nations GeneralAssembly on December I 0, 1948, are the outcome of a struggle that has been going on since
the dawn of history. The scope of the Declaration's thirty articles cannot therefore be
properly understood without some knowledge of the great efforts and sacrifices they reflect.
As part of its collective campaign of education and information aimed at showing both chil-
dren and adults the help they can derive from the Rights and the corresponding duties they must
fulfil in return, Unesco is publishing and will distribute a special Human Rights exhibition-album.
On these pages, the Courier is reproducing a few of the album's 276 illustrations which depict
'struggles and victories in the history of human rights as well as brief extracts from an accom-
panying 40-page booklet from which teachers can supply the historical background that throws
light on the meaning, circumstances and scope of the events to which the illustrations refer.
The illustration. and corresponding texts, which are taken from the Human Rights Exhibition
organized by Unesco in Paris last year, have been selected so as to form miniature reproduc-
ticn of large sections of this exhibition.
Nearly 12, 000 copies of the album are being published. A number of these are being sent to
Unesco Member States and National Commissions for use in schools, libraries and adult education
centres. Other copies will be obtainable from the Unesco Sales Agents, listed on page 2 of this
issue, as from next January, priced at S3, or 16/-or 800 French francs.
THE ABOLITION OF SLAVERY
AT the beginning of the nineteenth cen-tury slavery was still a basic institu-
tion in a number of great and other-
wise highly civilized countries. In 1835 it
flourished in the colonies of all the great
European countries, and in North and
South America. Immense economic inte-
rests and a complete social system were
based on it. The supporters of abolition
were treated as dangerous Utopians, when
they were not prosecuted and punished as
criminals.
Yet within half a century slavery was
everywhere abolished.
The history of the abolition, in a rela-
tively short space of time, shows that an
idea which is apparently Utopian but is
basically true can be speedily translated
into fact when men who are at once cou-
rageous and discerning will take a hand
in public affairs. It is on this that the
authors of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights have based their reasoned
hopes.
FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
VERYONE has the right to Freedomof movement and residence within
the borders of each State.
"Everyone has the right to leave many
country, including his own, and to return
to his cotftttry."
So states Article 13 of the Universal De-
claration. Like many other articles, it
lays down principles that, though readily
acknowledged in theory, are far from
being put into practice everywhere. It
might even be said that, in the twentieth
century, freedom of movement has suffer-
ed a setback, despite the tremendous de-
velopment of the material facilities of
transport from one part of the globe to
another.
It would seem that the first fourteen
years of the twentieth century marked the
apex of man's freedom of movement on
earth. Not only were time, cost and in-
security then reduced to a minimum, but
the obstacles placed in the way of travel-
lers by States had almost entirely vanish-
ed. In 1913 one could travel without a
passport in all Europe, with the exception
of Russia and Turkey.
But after the 1914-1918 war, human
obstacles to freedom of movement increas-
ed ; passports, formalities and restrictions
reappeared. The New World was partially
closed to immigrants. After the 1939-1945
war, difficulties became general, and were
added to by financial regulations. Today,
despite marked improvements in aircraft
and automobiles, the delightful freedom of
movement of 1913 is no more than a
memory.
Freedom of movement is a perfect
example of a principle that men are at
one in proclaiming but render nugatory in
practice. Only international agreement
based on firm, clear-cut undertakings, will
suffice to remove, for the benefit of the
majority, the present obstacles which
profit scarcely anyone.
THE ABOLITION
OF INHUMAN TREATMENT
THE revival of torture on a vast scale, inour own times and i  countries pos-
sessing a high degree of culture, proves
that our advances in civilization are not
too sure, and that constant vigilance, aid-
ed by clearly defined laws and the means
to see that they are enforced, is the only
way of preventing nations from returning,
with terrifying ease, to the worst practices
of the dark ages.
Article 5 of the Universal Declaration is
short and categorical in this matter :
"No one shall be sUbjected to torture
or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treat-
ment or punishment."
The history of the world is only too full
of examples or atrocious tortures applied
to punish actions, beliefs, or utterances
that today we regard as harmless, legiti-
mate or even, on occasion, praiseworthy. It
is remarkable that so many great men
should have suffered torture in the name
of some law that now seems absurd to us :
Savonarola, Macchiavelli and so many
others, not counting innumerable"here-
tics"and"witches"who were simply burn-
ed alive, from Joan of Arc and John Huss
in the fifteenth, Michel Servet and Gior-
dano Bruno in the sixteenth, to the
"witches"of New England in the seven-
teenth centuries.
It was by a slow, very slow process,
that civilized humanity finally abandoned
these practices.
PROTECTION AGAINST
ARBITRARY ARREST ;
EQUALITY BEFORE THE LAW
A brief examination of ancient lawsand custo s will reveal the state of
personal insecurity and social injus-
tice in which our fathers lived. The con-
quest of the rights of the person is a mo-
dern enterprise, far from complete and
constantly threatened with setbacks. The
progress so far made, however, justifies
the further efforts that are incumbent on
the men and nations of today.
THE DECLARATION OF THE RIGHTS OF MAN
is one of the world's historic human rights'docu-
ments. Produced during the first summer of the
French Revolution, it maintained that men are
born free and equal, and proclaimed freedom of
speech, security and defence against oppression.
It was one of the chief sources of inspiration to
other peoples also struggling to achieve freedom.
established institution, disappear from
English, French, Russian and American
soil within a quarter of a century <1838-
1865). It may be that, in another twenty-
five years, nothing Utopian will be seen in
Article 25 of the 1948 Declaration :
"Everyone has the right to a standard Of
living adequate for the health and welL'
being of himself and of his family, includ-
ing food, clothing, housing and 7TU ? dical
care and necessary social services, and the
right to security in the event of unem-
ployment, sickness, disability, widowhood,
old age or other lack of livelihood in cir-
cumstances beyond his control."
During the last hundred years, nume-
rous laws have improved the living con-
ditions of the less favoured classes
throughout the world. Hospitals have
been modernized, and social welfare enter-
prises have increased. The world has be-
come accustomed to the idea that a nation
is fully responsible for the lot of each of
its citizens, no less than to the democratic
principle that each citizen must assume
some responsibility in public affairs.
THE PROTECTION
OF FAMILY LIFE
AND OF PROPERTY
A s the idea of the rights of the perso,, :has developed, rights that we now
regard a true criterion of civilization,
the status of women and children has
evolved in the direction of an ever greater
freedom to determine their own fate.
Legal or customary restrictions, which in
early times were very severe, are tending
to disappear.. 
This development is illustrated by ArtiJ.
FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT. For a long period, widely separated civilizations developed in isolation,
unaware of each others existence. During the Renaissance, the discovery of America, commemorated
in this engraving (above), and the first voyages round the world brought these different civilizations into
contact. In the 20th century, freedom of movement has suffered a setback due to"human"obstacles :
passport visas, formalities and restrictions. Only international agreement can remove, for the benefit
of the majority, such obstacles.
In contrast with the brutal and unjust
practices that still subsist in many parts
of the world, we may quote the following
passages from the New Constitution of
India which is now in force, and frees all
citizens from the fear of arbitrary arrest
and wrongful interference at the hands
of the State :
"The people of India, solemnly resolved
to constitute India as a sovereign and
democratic Republic, undertake to gua-
rantee to all its citizen :
-" Social, economic and political justice ;
"Freedom of thought, expression,'opi-
non, faith and worship ;
"equality before the law and access to all
rights ; it further undertakes to promote
. among all men
"Fraternity, which ensures the dignity
of the individual and the unity of the
nation."
These words show us how far the fun-
damental ideas as to human rights have
progressed throughout the world.
THE DIGNITY OF LABOUR,
AND SOCIAL SECURITY
UNTIL a very short time ago, no matterhow much suffering or inequality
was caused by unemployment, differ-
ences in wealth, the misuse of power,
or other circumstances, it was generally
considered that each man had to"shift
for himself"to find work, and protect his
interests as best he could. It was only
when faced with the new economic and so-
cial conditions of the nineteenth century
that legislators were forced to acknow-
ledge that, where labour was concerned,
the absence of regulations led to new privi-
leges, fresh oppression, and an increasing
risk of disturbances and violence. In other
words, the task of freeing the human per-
son remained unfinished so long as the
fundamental principles formulated for
citizens in general had not been legally
applied to the protection of the worker as
such. To put it more briefly still, what
good were theoretical freedom and equa-
lity, if the only choice open to a man was
"misery or revolt" ?
The progress achieved, or still to be
achieved, in this matter follows logically
upon the civil and political progress made
during the last 150 years. It has been made
possible only by the establishment of un-
restricted universal suffrage, which is an
application of-the basic democratic princi-
ple of equality. This conquest of universal
suffrage has been largely due to the con-
stant and strenuous efforts of labour orga-
nizations themselves.
STANDARD OF LIVING,
AND ASSISTANCE
CERTAIN articles, the more daring, of theUniversal Declaration of Human
Rights have impelled many people to
exclaim :"But this is Utopian ! Unfortu-
nately, the world hasn't reached that
stage !"
True, the world has not yet reached
that stage. But the world is in process
of evolution, and that evolution depends
on men. We have seen slavery, a well-
cle 16 of the Universal Declaration of 1948,
which states that"men and women... with-
out any limitation due to race, natio7Uilit :'
or religion, have the right to marry and t
found a family. they are entitled to eqid.
rights.., Marriage shall be entered into
only with the free and. full consent of the
intending spouses."
To us, there is nothing revolutionary in
these stipulations ; but they would have
seemed so in the past. The novels and,
plays of the seventeenth and eighteenth
century alone show us the lengths to
which family and social tyranny could
proceed in such matters..
The notion of property, one of the ideas
most hotly discussed in our day, is dealt
with in Article 17 of the Declaration of
Human Rights, at least in a negative form :
"No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of
his property."
In former times a prince simply confis-
cated the property of some of his sUbject&., ;
as Louis XIV did in the case of the Pro :'&gt;
testants. In modern times, many a new
régime has done as much with the pro-
perty of individuals or social groups that
have fallen from power ; Hitler, for inst-
ance, confiscated the property of Jews. It
will always be difficult to draw the lin !
between arbitrary spoliation on the on
hand and legal expropriation (if the put.
blic interest demands it) accompanied buzz
fair compensation, on the other.
In the last resort, only the conscience\
of citizens can and must determine when
a legal act becomes an abuse of power. If
may even be said that this distinctio !
denotes the difference between a true an
a false democracy. f
THE EMANCIPATION
OF WOMEN \
THE story of women's rights is a fas-cina ing ne. Th y have been subject,
throughout history, to extraordinary
vicissitudes.
There have been periods of total eman
cipation, and periods of enslavemen'
beyond all hope of deliverance. Some
times men have placed women in a posi-
tion of eminence ; at other times, women
have had to win their own rights at the
cost of a long struggle against the dis-
trust, fear and derision of their contempo
raries. In Ancient Egypt, woman, thougt
for a time enslaved to man, very soot.
attained complete equality with him.
In Ancient Greece, especially with the
Boeotians and the Spartans, society long
adhered to the primitive law that regard-
ed women as veritable beasts of burden.
The great Renaissance, which began at
early as the twelfth century in Mediter-
ranean countries, was accompanied by a
great advance in women's emancipation.
We cannot recount the history of wo-
men's emancipation as it developed in
every country, but most nations have re-
cognized the principle of equal rights to !
both sexes. There is therefore nothing ir,
the Universal Declaration of 1948 that if
revolutionary nor Utopian, as would have
been the case fifty years ago. It simpl ;
lays down, for the whole world, principle
that have been established by different :
civilizations after centuries of effort ane
the gradual elimination of many injustice ; [ ;.
