TRIBUTES TO TWO GREAT
INTERNATIONAlISTS
LÉON BLUM HAROLD LASKI
IN remembering Léon Blum there isa temptation to accept the sur-
face picture of a politician pre-
sented by his thirty years of publlc
life. To do so would be to forget the
long years of preparation which pre-
ceded it, for Blum was already 47
when first elected to the Chamber of
Deputies in 1919.
A brilliant critic and poet, his lite-
rary work first brought him notice,
and his name, With those of Marcel
Proust and André Gide, appeared
among the contributors to"Banquet"
and"Revue Blanche", two public-
ations in which young men, later to
win important places in French lite-
rature, first"tried their strength".
After entering the ConseiId'Etat in
1905, Blum pursued a twofold occup-
ation of magistrate and man of let-
ters. At this time a long process of
thought and reasoning was leading
him to the ideas for which he was to
fight hard during the rest of his life.
It was the assassination of Jaures on
August 1, 1914 that robbed the French
Socialist party of its leader and led
Léon Blum to devote himself to carry-
ing on the work of his friend and
teacher. From 1919 to 1940, Léon Blum
was. both In the French parliament
and in the world, an outstanding
representative of Socialist thought and
one of the most single-hearted cham-
pions of a more Just and peaceful
society.
Accusers Became Accused
WHEN the Vichy Governmentbrought him to trial on a
charge of responsibility for the
French reverses, he sought to defend
less himself than liberty and demo-
cracy. He argued with such force and
conviction that his trial became the
trial of his accusers and they hastened
to suspend it.
Liberated from internment in Ger-
many In 1945 he returned to France
and in 1946 he served as President of
the First General Conference of
Unesco, thus again associating himself
with work for peace and co-operation
to which his life had been dedicated.
Blum's life was to close with a signi-
ficant act. Just before he died he set
his signature to a telegram appealing
for the liberation of a'group of poli-
tical refugees. Thus the end of his
ownlifefellintolinewiththeconclu-
sion of his last book :"When man
feels troubled and discouraged, he has
only to turn his thoughts to mankind."
FOR most people Harold Laski willbe best remembered for his work
as a Professor of Political Science
at the University of London, a member
of the Labour Party Executive, and
the author of brilliant books on demo-
cracy and socialism. But by Unesco
he will also be remembered as one of
the most ardent and valued collabora-
tors In several of its early projects.
In 1947 he was consulted, with other
philosophers and sociologists, on the
philosophic bases of a Universal De-
claration of Human Rights, and his
contribution was a brilliant and cou-
rageous essay. In It he summed up
his view on the world of the future
by saying that the Declaration"woUld
have to take account rather of the
possibilities struggling to be born than
of the traditions dying before our
eyes".
Like others he had been struck by
the sceptical Indifference bred In
peoples by a surfeit of hollow formulae
and principles betrayed, and so he
called for a declaration which would
be both bold In its general character
and concrete In Its detailed conduct.
Declaration Must Unify
OF the division of the moderntut rld he wrote :"Under cir-
cumstances such as these, the
issue of a Declaration of Rights would
be a grave error of judgment unless it
set out deliberately to unify, and not
to separate men in their different
political societies. It must, therefore,
emphasize the identities, and not the
differences, in the competing. social
philosophies which now arouse such
passionate discussion."
Later he joined the Committees of
Experts convened by Unesco to study
the question of Human Rights, and he
entered into their deliberations with
the enthusiasm he brought to every-
thing.
Militant, tenacious and combative he
was at all times, but with repeated
flashes of transforming humour, and
the felicity of expression that was one
of his gifts was also a part of his
own vivacity. His learning was prodi-
gious and ready to hand, with history
particularly the history of thought, at
his fingertips to support his views.
To it he joined a mercilessly critical
spirit ; there can rarely have been a
man more concerned with the clear
definition, of terms and their proper
use. In a word, he had exactly the
qualities needed in a good committee
man, and especially the gift of stimul-
ating debate and clarifying the issues
