T OWAI1I) tile clo : ; e of the last cen-tury ph'sical science, intoxicated- *-with its own success s, reached
a state of complacency seldom
attained before in any branch of intel-
lectual endeavour. The universe, it was
felt, is a great machine, and the laws
regulating its working had been disco-
vered and understood. Apparently the
many features of the inanimate world
- the courses of the stars, electricity
and its magic effects, the frenzied
jostling of the molecules of matter-
were all suhservient to the laws of phy-
sics as then kno. wn. 1'lwre was a gene-
ral feeling among physicists that tile
only tasks remaining to them were the
rounding out of details here and there
and the sharpening of measurements
wherever that appeared desirable.
Then, almost at the turn of the century,
the discovery of radioactivity, of -ra-s
and of electrons shook the world of
science. The era of modern physics
was born.
not long thereafter ca me the first hint
that something about our understanding
of the physical world was not quite in
order. The trouble was precipitated by
a study of the radiation of light from a
glowing solid object, such as a hot coal.
Classical physics, eminently successful
in accounting for the minute details of
light in all its other manifestations, was
apparently powerless to explain the
observed distribution of brightness In
the light coming from an incandescent
lump of solid matter.
Ellergy DOlle up
ill Packets
T JlE problcm was Iinally solvedsuccessfully by the theoretical
'"'physicist Max Planck in De-
cember of 1900. exactly half a century
ago, but the solution was haselI on
assumption so novel and so ultcriw
dilTerent from previous concepts tint.
the Hrst reaction of the world of
science was one of outraged scorn.
For, in order to make theory match
observation, Planck was forced to
assume that tote radiation of light is a
discontinuous, intermittent process-not
at all comparable to the smooth, steady
flow of water from a tap, but more like
the discharge of bullets from a ma-
chinegun.
The individual"lmlJets"of course
must he exceedingly small to give tie
appearanee of steady illumination ordi-
nail observed. Indeed, it turned out
that an average ImlJet-ol'quantum-
of visible light carried only about onc
millionth of the energy expended hy a
mosquito in climbing a. distance equal
to its own length.
If this novel idea of"energy done
up in packets"lIad succeeded only in
explaining the single phenomenon of
radiation from a heated solid it might.
have remained a mere scientific curio-
sity, provisionaily tolerated only until
the"true"l'xplanation should t. UI'll up.
Rut this ways not to be the case.
When, presently, the Danish physicist
Xeiis Bohr began to look for an explan-
: ilion of the radiation from individual
atollls and molecules of matter, lie
found that Planck's quantum idea gov-
erned this field also. Moreover, it did
so with a precision equalting that with
which Newton's gravitation described
the wheeling of the planets in space.
. \nd even earlier. Einstein, shrewdly re-
cognised that quanta were lurking be-
hind the operation of a photo-electric
eels-the now-familiar"electric eye"
that is the very heart of sound motion
pictures and television and that per-
forms automatically such practical
tasks as opening dOl\l's, SOrUJJg llIanuf ; IC-
urged product--.
warning of H"e
- all through
the medium of
a beam of
tight. Max Planck
Since 1900. physical theory and the practice of fire lighting have apparently developed along
contradictory lines. Only a half century ago, it was assumed that all energy"Bowed"
as smoothly as water from a hose, as in the picture on the left. Now it is known that
energy is communicated only in spurts,"bundles"or"quanta". as suggested by the drawing,
right, of an old-fashioned bucket brigade. The smallness of the units of energy, and the
rapidity of their succession, concealed the true process from generations of scientific observers.
V « <Mre*a Ieeep « <M<Nøt"re8 D f' ! eptio8
lJØDlø8""
A : \1) o in spite of the fact that it
was completely at variance with
the nolion of continuous How of
energy assumed by the older
physics, the quantum idea has become
- through its speetaeular successes-an
accepted and indispensable part of mo-
dern science. It might be said that
science has become resigned to the fact
that whenever energy is transported
from one place to another. Nature
allows it to pass only in separate, de-
taclled spurts, or quanta. We are
deceived inlo believing that we witness
a continuous rather than an intermittent
process, only because the individual
bundles are so minute and so numerous.
Yet, strange as it is, the quantum no-
tion fits into place alongside two si-
milar ideas with which science has long
been familiar,-the discontinuous na-
ture of both matter and electricity. The
fact that matter itself is not continuous,
but made up of individual particles-
atoms-was surmised by the ancients
and was convincingly demonstrated
about a century and a half ago. Not.
much later there arose the notion that
electricity, too, must be made up of
unassociated bits-a concept that finally
culminated in the discovery and mea-
surement of this ultimate unit, called
the electron.
Thus the quantum reinforces our
conviction that certain aspects of the
universe are, in a sense, granular. And
there may be other quantities besides
('upr ! !'\,. matter and electricity which
will be found to be of this nature, too.
Perna ps space itself is one of them ;
time may be another. But here, we
are st. ill in the province of pure spe-
culation.
It you are interested in I'eading more
about the Quantum J'heory, write to the
lJivision for the Popularization of
Science, Unesco, 19, avenue Kleber, pa-
ris, for a 6WfY bibliography on this sub-
ject, which will be sent free of charge.
