UNESCO COURIER-Page 10 DECEMBER 1950
IN THE SERVICE OF PEACE :
Andre HONNORAT
(1S68-1950)
by Georges. FRADIER
P AHISIA : \"S in the early twentieswere somewhat loath to
take their visitors on a tour
01 the city's southern borders. A
muddy street was all that separ-
ated the pleasant"pare Montsou-
ris"from the dismantled forti-
fications where, amidst rubble
and debris, the vacant lots of
suburbia aimlessly awaited the
speculators and their blocks of
tenement houses. Beyond, midst
the smoke and dirt of factories,
lay the"red belt"as Parisians
called it, a mass of corrugated
iron or tarred makeshift hotels,
sunk in the pitiless depths of
misery.
To this barren waste a man
sometimes came to ponder, a
distinguished-looking man whom
passers-by took to be an architect
or a poet. In point of fact he was
the Minister of Education. Yet
the passers-by were not mistaken,
for André Honnorat was both a
poet and a builder. He used to
wander through the brambles and
the rubble, a tall figure under the
heavy skies. His gaze seemed to
miss the ruins and the hovels ;
in their stead he saw a spacious
city, with buildings bordering on
tree-lined avenues, on wide sports
grounds. Down these avenues,
through the broad gateways, came
groups of young men and women,
laughing, talking together in
every known tongue.
An Instrument Of Peace
This was And ; ;-é Honnorat's dream :a city planned e tirely for stu-
dents, the pupils of the world's
most cosmopolitan school-the Uni-
versity of Paris. Striding over the for-
tifications with a friend, the Minister
was no longer a mere dreamer ; he
became a prophet : Honnorat could
almost count the students and mapped
his"cily"down to the last detail.
In the centre, he planned to baild
an International House, and a vast
Hall-Library to replace the humble
loth century church, traditional
meeting-place of the"nations"of
Paris University, which the mediae-
val students in their poverty had
dedicated to Saint Julian the Pauper.
The thousand year old Sorbonne
never failed to arouse the Minister's
enthusiam : his first gesture upon
taking office had been to restore
to the University the autonomy which
Napoleon had abolished. The Sor-
bonne of which he dreamed was more
than a seat of learning and research,
it was to become an instrument of
peace. The future of peace... the idea
obsessed Honnorat ; he dwelt upon it
in all his speeches, at every meeting :"Do yoM beHece that all the problems
which war has brought before the
human conscience can really be solv-
ed by Government action alone ? Is
not the best solution to teach the
peoples to understand each other ;
and to teach such understanding,
what better way can be found than
to bring the élite of the younger
generation into contact with one
another ?"
Enthusiasm Stimulated
Friends And Benefactors
FOR the general public the Ministerof Education was little more than
a respected politician. His career
was fairly typical of that of many
French public servants. Coming of a
poor family, he had started life as a
journalist and later had been secretary
to several ministers. For forty years
he represented his native"départe-
ment", the mountainous Basses-Alpes,
first in the Chamber and later in the
Senate. Yet his friends knew Honno-
rat to be an extraordinary man. He
was simple, loyal, sincere. These
LA CITE UNIVERSITAIRE, as André Honnorat visualized it and as it exists today : a city
planned entirely for students, the pupils of the world's most cosmopolitan school-the
University of Paris. Key to plan : 1. Administrative Building. 2. Medical Building.
3. International House. 4. United States Foundation. 5. Belgian Students House. 6. National
Institute of Agronomy Foundation. 7. japanese House. 8. Danish Students House. 9. Swiss
Foundation. 10. Swedish Students House. 11. College 01 Spain. 12. Franco-British Foun-
dation 13. Argentine Students House. 14. Canadian Students House. 15. E. and L. Deutsch
de la Meurthe Foundation. 16. Monaco Foundation. 17. French Provinces House. 18. Arme-
nian Students House. 19. Dutch College. 20. Indo-Chinese Students House. 21. Cuban
House. 22. Greek Foundation. 23, Sports Field.
qualities alone would probably not
have distinguished him. But the
nobility of his character, the warmth
of his human sympathy and his power
of vision were truly exceptional.
This creative imagination, which of
all human gifts is perhaps the most
rare, might have been enough in itself
to account for the statesman's extra-
ordinary achievements. A University
City in the heart of the"red belt" !
The very idea dismayed"serious"
people. Yet, in the space of a few
years, the dream was to come true.
By 1925, the now famous"found-
ations"were being erected. They
were to house hundreds and later
thousands of students. Gardens had
replaced the rubble and debris, and
sports grounds were planned.
The venture owed a large measure
of its success to André Honnorat's
gift for making friends. He never
once applied for Government subsi-
dies. His enthusiasm was such that
he was always able to stimulate
generosity in others and the Cite Uni-
versitaire came into being in much
the same manner as the mediaeval
cathedrals, thanks to the donations
of countless benefactors : Jean Bra-
net, David-Weil, Emile Deutsch de la
Meurthe, to name but a few of Hon-
norat's close collaborators. Finally,
in 1936, an imposing International
House was built ; it owed its existence
to another friend of the founder,
John D. Rockefeller Jr.
Such an undertaking would have
been the lif°_-work of any ordinary
man, but it was only one of Honno-
rat's many and varied activities.
These included th improvement of
public health and social insurance,
the promotion of international cultu-
ral relations and of historical research.
As member of Parliament, he worked
to give his constituency roads, post
offices and power plants.
ANDRE HONNORAT. founder of the
"University City", in Paris. The word"international"can be used to qualify
his every endeavour. Even the small-
est undertaking was an occasion for
him to overcome some obstacle in the
path of international exchange.
It was at his instigation that, in
1915, the French Parliament voted the
first sums for the anti-tuberculosis
campaign and it was thanks to his
efforts and to those of Léon Bourgeois
that the first anti-tubercular dispen-
saries were organized. As president
for many years of the National
Committee of Defense against tuber-
culosis, he launched the well-known
stamp campaign. This undertaking,
which came under heavy criticism,
raised 175 million francs last year for
French sanatoria and dispensaries.
"He Lived Intensely"
A GREAT lover of history, Honnoratundertook the task of preparing
the ground for future historians.
He could not bear to think that com-
ing generations should be hampered
in their research by the lack of indis-
pensable data, and he therefore set
about assembling and distributing to
competent bodies a heterogeneous
collection of contemporary objects,
including books, papers, catalogues,
statuettes and even toys and oil lamps
- which would be of vital interest
to future historians.
.. He lived intensely", said one of
his friends,"poised between past and
present". It can therefore be readily
understood that he had a particular
fondness for the Society of History
of the Great War and for the library
which he founded in 1916 and which
is called today the Bureau of Inter-
national and Contemporary Research.
International... the word recurs
again and again in each of Honnorat's
ventures. The smallest undertaking
served him as a pretext for breaking
down frontiers and for overcoming
some new obstacle on the path of
international exchange. At his instig-
ation, the Government adopted mea-
THE INTERNATIONAL HOUSE,"heart"of the University City and symbol of the idea
which inspired André Honnorat-"to teach understanding, what better way can be found
than to bring the elite of the younger generation into contact with one another".
sures to enable the children of French
immigrants in Mexico to complete
their education in France. This led
him to plan wider cultural exchanges.
He was responsible for the Franco-
Norwegian school at Rouen,, the
Franco-Norwegian and Franco-Danish
Associations in Paris, and was instru-
mental in setting up special bodies at
the Sorbonne for the study of Ger-
manic, Italian and Japanese civiliz-
ations. Finally, it was on his initia-
tive that the National Foundation for
the Study of Foreign Civilizations
and Sciences was created.
''You Have
A Responsibility"
THEN came the war of 1939, andAndré Honnorat saw the tempo-
rary destruction of many of his
achievements. Living in retirement,
he continued to work and hope, aided
by his wife and a few friends. With
the liberation of France he returned
to Parliament and to tasks too heavy
for his age and health. His life's
work was once more a living reality ;
yet Honnorat was not content to rest.
He felt the urgency of strengthening
and enlarging his accomplishments.
The Cite Universitaire, which had
been closed for five years, was reopen-
ed and students from thirty nations
filled its 22 houses.
Honnorat now sought to expand the
University of Paris, hemmed in by its
old walls. For this new project he
demanded 160 acres of land. Replying
to parliamentary critics who consider-
ed his proposals premature, he said :
"IN, in 1840, you had been asked to
appropriate land lor the Pasteur
Institute, you would have relused.
You have a responsibility towards the
scholars 01 a hundred years hence.
How are you going to accomodate
them ?"
André Honnorat was now an old
man of failing health, and the bur-
den of public office proved too heavy
for him. He was obliged to abandon
many of his ofncial duties. Though
he no longer had the strength to make
history, his power of vision was as
strong as ever. Courteous, sensitive,
understanding, he still made friends
wherever he went.
H was now over eighty but he
worked, as he had done all his life,
from four o'clock in the morning to
midnight.
Faith In"These Men"
TJ ARLY in the summer of 1950 hishealth failed and the doctors
ordered him to rest. But from
the room which he had finally accept-
ed at the Cite Universitaire he con-
tinued to watch over the freedom, the
welfare and even the finances of his
foundation. The war in Korea affect-
ed him far more than his own suffer-
ings... This world is mad", he said,.. these men want to die". Yet he
never despaired of.. these. men".. He
never lost faith in the United Nations
and international organizations and
tried to help them to the end. One
of the last things he said to his doc-
tor, between two painful attacks, was
this :.. You know, the more I think
about the World Health Organization,
the more I realize it must succeed".
He died on the 24th of July. Two
mouths earlier, disregarding all
advice, he left his sick-bed to receive
the Queen of Holland at the Cite
Universitaire. He wanted to talk once
again to"his students"to talk of
peace-."true peace, to which allmen aspire is not born of written
tex ? s alone, it must come from a new
attztude of mind... from new links
between the young minds of all
nation...
