! IALY, HOST TO UNESCO'S
CONFERENCE, WELCOMES
M. TORRES BODET
IT TALY, where preparations are being completed
for the opening of the Fifth Session of Unesco's
General Conference in Florence, on May 22n ,
gave a warm welcome to M. Jaime Torres Bodet,
Unesco's Director-General, during his short visit
there, last month.
On his arrival in Rome, M. Torres Bodet was re-
ceived by H. E. Signor de Gasper, the Prime Minister ;
H. E. Count Sforza, Minister for Foreign Affairs, and
H. E. Signor Ooner.'t, Minister for Education. The
same day, M. Torres Bodet discussed problems con-
cerning the Florence Conference with the authorities.
On Monday, April 17th. he held a press conference
at which he described the aims and activities of
Unesco.
During his recent visit to Italy. M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Unesco's
Director-General, broadcast from Rome on the aims and programme
of Unesco. This photo shows him (left) replying to the questions
of a radio journatist. Translated into 22 languages, his interview
was broadcast in many other countries.
While in Rome, Unesco's Direc-
tor-General was received in au-
dience by Pope Pious XII.
Addressing the recently formed
Italian National Commission for
Unesco. in the impressive setting
of the Palzzio de Venezia, M. Tor-
res Bodet told its members that
Unesco had a major part to play in
every problem of our age.
Dante's Noble words
OUR cause is that of every manon earth,"he said,"And
that cause was described more
than six centuries ago by one of
your own outstanding thinkers in
ringing words as fresh and true
today as when they were first
uttered :
"There is one activity proper to
the human race as a whole which
is the destiny of all men however
many they may be, but to which
no single man, family, village, city
or nation can attain alone. The
nature of that activity becomes
clear when we consider the quality
most characteristic of humanity,
namely the power p {knowing, the
intelligence.
"As such a power cannot attain
its full stature in any single man
or group, it is necessary that the
human species should consist of
many units. Given, then, that
humanity is designed by nature to
develop the total power of the in-
tellect... a first requirement is that
mankind should live in the tran-
ouillity of true peace that it may
the more freely and easily devote
itself to its appointed work. The
conclusion is that universal peace
is the greatest of all the good
thins which make up our felicity."
"Never", said M. Torres Bodet,
"his the connection between peace
and culture of the mind been
stressed more strongly than in
Dante Alighieri's noble words. And
so we find that in the very dawn
of Italian poetry and political
thought, Unesco's path is mapped.
Greatest History Lesson
« Y EST we should misunderstandthis aspect of the problems
of today,"he continued"we
should, however, add that, though
peace is necessary for the de-
velopment of the mind, a huma-
nistic training of thp mind is today
just as necessary for the strength-
ening of international peace.
"If peace is necessary for cul-
ture, culture is also necessary for
peace-and that, gentlemen, is the
greatest lesson that history should
teach us and it is also the ideal
of Unesco."
After leaving Rome, the Direc-
tor-General travelled to Florence
where he was able to inspect the
section of the Pitti Palace to be
used by Unesco's Secretariat dur-
ing the Conference, and the mag-
nificent'hall of the Pallazo Vec-
chio, in which the plenary sessions
will be held.
At Milan, which he visited be-
fore returning to Paris. M. Torres
Bodet was the guest of honour at
a reception given by Count Stefano
Jacini, a member of Unesco's Exe-
cutive Board and leader of the Ita-
lian delegation to the last two
Sessions of the General Conference.
Throughout his Italian journey,
M, Torres Bodet was accompanied
by H. E. Signor Mameli, Director-
General of Cultural Affairs at the
Italian Foreign Office, and by
Signor Alberto de Clementi, Italian
delegate to Unesco.
