A HUNDRED GROUPS
WITH A
COMMON AIM
This is the third in a series of special
articles describing the work of some of
the 100 international non-governmental
organizations whose co-operation with
Unesco helps the accomplishment of
its programme.
On the masthead of the Courier, and on an e'Ver-ir. ! creasing number of
. publications in the world of m. ts and letters, you sele Unesco's
insignia-the familiar Gree ! k temple, with the initials of the
oi'Ylwization fonning the columns ae1'OSS the fi'ont, This classic façadc
is not merely symbolic of Unesco's purposes in pi'omoting the free
Cfchange of knowledge and educated thought, but actually represents some
of the work which Unesco encourages.
In the publication Fasti Archaeolo-
gici, for example, one comes across a
picture of the restored temple of
Augustus, at Pola, Italy, an original
building in this architectural form
which we have inherited from ancient
Greece. This book, published with
Unesco aid, by the International Asso-
ciation for Classical Archaeology, sur-
veys the classical acquisitions of differ-
ent countries, with photographs of
restored monuments, statues, and bas-
relief, coins and pottery. Its purpose
is to familiarize specialists in the civi-
lizations of archaic and classic Greece,
pre-historic Italy and early Rome, and
ancient Syrian and Christian cultures
with the work that is going On in their
fields of study.
As anthropologists trace the origins
of myth and tradition, and linguists
the origins of language, archaelogists
uncover the physical aspects of the
past. The world they restore is one
in which distinctions of form and co-
lour, custom and language are not
barriers, but elements in the growth
and development of the modern world.
CORPUS VASORUM ANTIQUORUM
Most of the work done by the inter-national organizations which are
working under consultative ar-
rangements with Unesco is concentrat-
ed in specific fields of activity.
Sometimes their achievements mean
little or nothing to the average man,
but the results of their study and
research are reflected in many aspects
of life which he takes for granted. A
school of English decorators, for ins-
tance, is now studying artistic forms
dating back to the drawings of the
cave-men, to adapt them to modem
mural painting.
In the field of research in ancient
artistic form and design, an impor-
tant contribution is being made by the
International Academic Union, with
the help of a grant from Unesco.
This work is the preparation of a
series of books, the Corpus Vasorum
Antiquorum, on ceramic collections in
France, Italy, Spain, Greece and the
United States.
An instalment is being prepared in
England on early Australian and New
Zealand pottery. Another volume is
devoted to the Swedish collection of
ceramics of Mediterranean countries,
the Near East, Cyprus and Greece, and
a further one deals with the collection
of the National Museum of Copen-
hagen. These comparative studies in-
clude the origins of shapes and subject
matter of design, and the names of the
pottery-makers and designers.
FROM ALCHEMY TO AN ATLAS
An even better example of some ofth  highly speci lized work of the
International Academic Union is
the catalogue of Latin manuscripts on
Alchemy which it is compiling.
Unesco's interest in such a project is
its vital contribution to the history of
science, since alchemy has been called
the"prelude to chemistry".
This group is also at work on a dic-
tionary of mediaeval Latin, which was
the lingua franca, the international
language of scholars and artists for
over eight-hundred years of western
civilization's development. Ten coun-
tries are co-operating in this work,
which will be assembled at the French
Institute. France has already two-
hundred-and-sixty-thousand card-
index notes as its part of the work.
In this field of languages, the Per-
manent International Committee of
Linguists is working, with Unesco's aid
on the production of a highly-technic-
al linguistics atlas, which will indicate
the spread of cultural bounderies
beyond national frontiers, and the
inter-mixture of peoples beyond politic-
al barriers. This Committee is also
at work on a dictionary and grammar
of the almost extinct Tasmanian lan-
guage.
Other studies of extinct languages
have gone far to prove the vast extent
of migrations of pre-historic peoples,

movements of such tremendous scope
that they were not equalled again
until the fifteenth century. What is
believed to be the proto-Indian script,
for instance, has been found as far
east as the Oceanic islands-a remark-
able achievement of colonization for
people with the most primitive sea-
faring equipment.
MUSIC-A UNIVERSAL MEDIUM
But if artistic and linguistic studiestell of a universal inheritanc
from the past, how much more
universal a medium is music. In
January of this year, the International
Music Council was formed under
Unesco's auspices to co-ordinate the
work of independent musical groups.
At present, with the aid of such mem-
ber organizations as the International
Society for Contemporary Music and
the International Society for Musical
Research, the Council is working on
two Unesco projects, a world catalogue
of recorded music, and the establish-
ment of a universal musical pitch.
Even though we may never have
studied music and can hardly tell one
pitch from another, we would realize
that something was wrong if we heard
instruments at a concert playing at
different pitches.
Before a concert, we hear one ins-
trument, usually the oboe, sound a
note, and the other instruments tune
to the same pitch. But the"A"of
Paris is not quite the same as that of
London, and it is still slightly differ-
ent in Vienna. An internationally-
established pitch would not only ease
the work of musicians playing with
foreign orchestras, but would also
help instrument builders.
A CHANCE FOR YOUNG COMPOSERS
Each of the international musicalorganizations working with
Unesco was originally founded to
bring together men in specialized
fields of musical work. The Interna-
tional Society of Musical Research is
a group of musicologists, who special-
ize in such studies as the history and
theory of composition, counterpoint
and harmony. Their bulletin, regu-
larly published in the various langua-
ges of the members, contains articles
and reviews of new books on music,
and lists new musical publications.
Another group, the International
Society for Contemporary Music was
formed in 1922,
Successful concerts have been given
in Salzburg, the birthplace of Mozart,
and Vienna, Venice, Geneva and Ox-
ford, where young composers conduct
their own music. This Society is
making a choice of the works of
worth-while contemporary composers
for Unesco's projected record-library,
which will give young composers,
whose music is not yet played extensi-
vely by large orchestras, the chance to
be heard.
The history of music and art is a
record of talent enriched and deve-
loped through exchange of work and
ideas. These are the foundations on
which the independent international
organizations contributing work from
their specialized fields to Unesco are
built.
