A major proportion of this issue of thethe work which is to be undertake :
of the Secretary-General of the Uni
the Unesco Executive Board, to provide :
1) emergency relief and eventual rece'
and culture for the people of Konc
2) information, through Unesco medi.
facilities about the United Nations
cular emphasis on the necessity J
Accordingly on ! pages I and 3 are
Unesco Executive Board, 28 August 1950.
of the meeting of the Executive Board,
Torres Bodet, and a story of the work
teaching, to children and adults, of the pI
On page 5 are stories about post. woe
summary of the educational relief and)
prepared to undertake in, Korea and a pc
by Unesco in other war-devastated countri
On page 12 is a story about the andc
than 2, 000 years so little known in other
On these centre pages are publishec
ments in man's history, the Charter of {t !
cisco, 26 June 1945. Like other historic affj
and human dignity, this document is too
It is like them, too. in the fact that it hasg
in days which seem darkest, for it begin !
the United Nations are"DETERMINED I
scourge of war."
We therefore publish Chapter I, Arpc
purposes of the United Nations, and Cïe
with action with respect to threats to the
of aggression. The Security Council of t !
resolutions dealing with the situation ir
these pages resolutions adopted by the 84
and 31 July.

I, Unesco Courier is devoted to accounts of
, by Unesco. in compliance with the request
nited Nations and upon the instructions of
onstruction in the field of education, science
ea :
Mar and through all Unesco's educational
I and its Specialized Agencies, with parti-
for collective security.
, published the resolutions passed by the
Also on page 3 and page 8 are accounts
. a declaration by Director-General Jaime
: already initiated by Unesco to improve
principles of the United Nations.
Far educational developments in Korea, a
reconstruction activities which Unesco is
partial record of similar work accomplished
tries.
íÏent culture of the Korean people, for more
r parts of the world.
ad excerpts from one of the noblest docu-
the United Nations adopted at San Fran-
lfirmations of human rights, human freedom
 little known by the peoples of the world.
igreatest meaning and importance precisely
i1s with the. declaration that the peoples of
tao save succeeding generations from the
Me I, of the Charter, which sets forth the
aPter VII, Articles 39 through 43, dealing
) e peace, breaches of the peace, and acts
the United Nations has passed a series of
in Korea. Accordingly, we reproduce on
Security Council on 25 June, 27 June, 7 July
