"It was just a year ago to-day... It was ten
years ago... This is our Golden Jubilee... This is
the centeTtary... Just about a thousand years
age..."
The birthdays of a child, events in the lives
of individual men and women, commemoration
of the births and deaths ot men any women
who have lit torches along the road of history,
red-letter days marking the advance ot mankind
- these are dates traditionally noted in the arbi-
trary system of reckoning which we call the
calendar,
Not forgetting the unknown and unsung per-
sons and events, perhaps ot equal greatness,
making no claim at completeness, here are some
note-'Worthy dates in August, eighth month of
the Gregorian calendar.
WACLAW SIEROSZEWSKI
Sieroszewski was born on August 1st, 1860.
At the age of 15 he was an orphan, a lock-
smith's apprentice and had become a socialist.
He began his writing career while exiled in Sibe-
ria in the 1880's-a time when many Polish wri-
ters were developing their talents as exiles in
this part, of Russia.
For trying to escape from Siberia, Sieroszew-
ski was sent to Yakutsk where he began to work
both as a novelist and a sociologist. When he
published his"Twelve Years in the Country of
the Yakutsk", the Geographical Academy or
St. Petersburg awarded him a prize and
obtained for him the right to return to Poland.
From then on his life was divided between
writing, scientific expeditions and political
activities.
GUY DE MAUPASSANT
DULU ULl'l1. UgUIi Din,
1850. de Maupassant grew
up in solitude, became a
soldier then a govern-
ment official and finally,
a famous novelist whose
style short story writers
a) l over the world conti-
nue to imitate. Europe
and America eagerly
awaited the publication
of each of his books. He
was lionised by society,
yet his life was marked
by loneliness. De Maupas-
sant had admirable ]>0-
wers of observation and--L---. L .,,took an impersoJ ; 1al interest in the madness
which gradually clouded his brain.
He died in an asylum in his forty-fourth year.
BARTOLOMEO RASTRELLI
Of all the architects-German, Dutch. French
and Italian-who contributed to the beauty of
St. Petersburg, the most original was undoub-
tedly Rastrelli, born on August 7th, 1700. and
called by his contemporaries,"Rastrelli the
Magnificent."His memory is perpetuated in
such buildings as the'Winter Palace and the
Smolny Institute and also in the Church of
St. Andrew of Kiev. Rastrelli became the real
superintendent of imperial architecture, his
work being inspired by the French classical, the
Aùstrian"baroque"and the old Muscovite styles.
the latter country he abolished slavery with a
stroke of the pen. In 1822 he left America for
France where he died, almost forgotten by his
generation, at Boulogne-sur-Mer, on August
17th, 1850.
BALZAC
Honoré de Balzac died in Paris on August
18th, 1850.
(See page 10 of this issue for an article com-
memorating the centenary of Balzac)
NICOLAS LENAU
When this Austrian poet wrote an epic on
Savonarola it ways much less with the aim of
evoking a specific historical period than to
defend the idea of liberty. Again, in his famous
poem on the Albigensians, he stressed two
themes-tolerance and democracy. Lenau
yearned for a free life in the vast spaces of the
New World, but after spending an Autumn in
Baltimore and a winter in Ohio, he returned to
Europe. Lenau,', vhose work remains as an act
of faith in liberty, died near Vienna on August
22nd 1850, aged 48.
NIETZSCHE
On August 25th 1900 the death occurred of
Wilhelm Friedrich Nietzsche, the German philos-
opher. For a long time he had been
despondent and felt that his work had been
useless. But, in his last writings were these
prophetic words :"People will understand me
after the next European war."He had pre-
dicted the terrible war-clouded days that were
to come and ascribed a cause :"the corruption
of nationalism, the slow poisoning that causes
nations to draw away from other nations. *
He had hoped, with almost dangerous
obstinacy, for a renaissance. Sometimes enthu-
siastically, sometimes fearfully, he asked him-
self :"Is the ennoblement of mankind possible ?'
THE FIRST MEXICAN NEWSPAPER
Mexico's first newspaper-El Mercurio Volante
(the Flying Mercury)-appeared in 1680.
The founder was Carlos de Siguenza y Gon-
gora. born at Puebla. in 1645.
Geographer, historian and philosopher and
friend of the famous woman poet, Sister Juana
Inez de la Cruz. the founder of"EI Mercuno
Volante"was also the author of the first map
of the Gulf of Mexico.
Born on the banks of
the Uruguay and educ-
ated in Madrid, San Mar-
tin became a soldier in
the Spanish Army fight-
ing against Napoleon.
His life's work, however,
was devoted to the young
republics of the Plata and
the Andes. For ten years
he carried on in South
America an unrelenting
struggle against oppres-
sion and colonialism. His
goal was reached when
independence was won
for Chile and Peru. In
JOSE DE SAN MARTIN
