Ritchie Calder. ScienceEditor of the London
News Chronicle. re-
cently returned from a per-
sonal survey, carried out in
collaboration with the Na-
tural Sciences Department
of Unesco, of the work
going on to reclaim the
deserts of North Africa and,
the Middle East for human
use.
In its last two issues, the
"Courier"reprinted some
of the articles written by him
during his 15. 500 mile jour-
ney, which were distribut-
ed to newspapers through-
out the world.
On this page is reprinted
the last of the"Men Against
the Desert"articles in which
Ritchie Caller. cabling from
Cyprus, sketches some im-
pressions of his eleven
weeks tour against the back-
ground of an island where
men are winning the battle
against the desert.
MEN AGAINST THE DESERT
POSTSCRIPT TO A MISSION
By Ritchie CALDER
Science Editor, LondonÞ News Chronicle
*
"The immediate challenge
is that of the man-made
desert. What man has
done, man can by brains
and sweat undo."Effi-
cient damming controls
water-flow makes navi-
gation easier and saves
valuable land for culti-
vation. But this is a rare
example. Only too oftenrivers are allowed to go
as they please, erode fer-
tile land, rise in flood and
cut communications.
(Photos : Indian Air Sur-
vey and Transport Ltd.)
IN Libya an Eighth Army veteran who had stayed behindto wage war against the desert itself suggested to me
that in order to study desert problems schoolchildren
should construct sandtables-model terrain like those used
by the Army when planning operations.
Fans could act as prevailing winds (reproducing wind
erosion and advancing dunes overwhelming oases), water
trickles could show wadhi erosion, and matchsticks form
windbreaks, etc.
On a larger scale Cyprus could be my sandtable. An
island. half the size of Wales, it provides in miniature not
only desert conditions but what can be done about them.
That is why from next month a soil-conservation confe-
rence will be held by all Middle East countries to discuss
and see how deserts can be arrested.
On my journey I have seen two categories of desert-
climatic and man-made. The climatic desert is found
where rainfall is too low to sustain vegetation. Even that
is not hopeless when you remember Saharan scientists
saying"We are walking on water."
Underground lakes and underground rivers are await-
ing tapping,"Microclimate"-dew precipitation-is not
properly understood and not exploited.
Remember the dew-mounds, heaps of pebbles which sus-
tained civilization centuries ago in barren sun-scorched
Negev, where there is less than four inches of annual
rain. No, no, climatic deserts are not hopeless.
Ten Men Who Be ! ieve
BUT the immediate challenge is that of the man-made desert. What
man has done man can by brains and sweat undo.
One moonlight night on a desert plateau above the Kasserine Gap,
Charles Sausmagne, Tunisian Inspector-General, a veteran Man Against
the Desert, said to me :
"Tell me that there are ten men in the world who believe the desert
can be made to bear fruit and will redeem the stupidities 01 mankind,
and I will dine happy."
Now I can give him not ten but hundreds-men and women whom I
know by name slaving sacrificially in the desert.
d t 
ry  r rt t .)
One country where important victories have been won by men over the desert
is Palestine. Hard work by the desert"soldiers"-colonists like this Jewish
shepherd (above)-has transformed former arid ground into flourishing fruit
groves and lush grazing ground.
A JOURNEY ENDS-ITS LESSONS CONTINUE
THERE was a crowd of school boys waiting to welcome Ritchie Calderat Croydon Airport, London, when he landed there on the 30th March
after his 2 months long desert journey. Pupils of 15000 English
schools, and millions of readers in 28 countries have followed his 15, 500
mile trek from Beni Abbes in Algeria, along the North African coastline
to Egypt, Baghdad and Teheran, to the new Israel, and finally to Cyprus.
Man's fight against the desert in the vast water-starved areas of North
Africa and the Near East was the theme of his message. His running
commentaries from science outposts and field-stations captured the imagi-
nation of readers of some 40 publications in many countries which
published the Calder desert story. Sixteen thousand letters, mainly from
school boys, testify to the interest this project has already aroused.
The"Men Against the Desert"project was something more than an
important journalistic reportage ; it also introduced a novel aspect in
modern journalism-its direct utilization in schools and adult education
classes.
It was a co-operative enterprise, for whose success, Unesco, the United
Kingdom National Commission, the British Ministry of Education, the
London News Chronicle and many other publications-including esperan-
tist-have made important contributions.
Now the desert traveller is home again, but the material he and his
photographer collected has as yet, been far from fully utilized. Film-
strips to teach geography, history, classics, and religious history will be
made in co-operation with the English National Committee for Visual
Aids in Education.
Further articles will be written and lectures given on the subject, and
there is material enough for a book on the desert journey.
Tne Calder reportage, undertaken on the initiative of Unesco, shows
how journalists can serve Unesco's aims-by making man's fight against
a hostile environment known and understood, by showing how modern
science serves man in popularising the theme of"Food and People", and
explaining how other people live.
Above all, the"Men Against the Desert"articles are testimony of the
every-day drama and heroism which accompany man's progress-often
slow and painful-through education science and culture.
They not only believe, but are doing, acting
not only in faith and knowledge, but from
results.
From here in a forest look-out post, pinnac-
led 2, 000 ft., I see below my"sandtable",
Cyprus is not arid but the wet season rains are
a curse as well as a blessing. The unchecked
run-off scours the mountains leaving naked
rock, rips great gullies in her fertile soil and
flushes silt into the Mediterranean.
A grilling summer sun scorches the island
and burns the sand to dust. Man's wanton-
ness through the centuries has aided the
process of turning this rich island to desert.
But in the last twenty years man has
begun to make amends. Forest experts,
soil conservators, water engineers and the
British administration are carrying out in
concentrated form measures I have seen put
into action at various points throughout the
journey.
, From the pinnacle I see grim reminders :
Bald mountains, deep scars, gully erosion.
But I see also green hope-cropped plains
watered by the harnessed wadhis, groves of
olives, carobs and vine, The panorama is of
fields contour-ploughed on the slopes to check
soil sluicing, and terraces like great window-
boxes on the steeper hillsides.
The marching dunes are now manacled by
binding vegetation. But most significant are
the infant forests on the ranges below me.
Bare five years ago, ravaged by fuel-gatherers
and goats.
Wood was the only fuel for the islanders.
Limekilns, looking from the pinnacle like
young volcanoes, were stoked with trees until
the law made oilftring compulsory.
blosssoming here because Cyprus has checked wandering men, wandering
goats, wandering sand and wandering winds.
All through the deserts of North Africa and the Middle East I have
seen men triumphing against the desert. I have learned countless lessons
and found abundant hope.
Eagerly, scientists are grappling with the desert. They have welcomed
Unesco's proposed international co-operation and exchange and Unesco's
campaign to remind the world of the forgotten Men against the Desert.
Nature Reasserts Herself
PLANTED, self-generating-nature isreasserting herself. The cypresses of
Cyprus are being reborn. The deserts are
