RACE AI
TOWARDS the end of the last century,
a French anthropologist. Lapouge,
declared t at the day was drawing
near when men would slaughter
one another for a few millimetres'differ-
ence in cranium size. What may then
have seemed only a whimsical theory has
since become harsh reality with the per-
petration of appalling massacres during
the last decade in the name of racial
superiority. Thus our age has been given
the sorry privilege of verifying prophe-
cies, which not long ago would have been
regarded as ludicrous.
Unfortunately the evils of racial
discrimination have not disappeared with
the suppression of Nazi political power.
Although not applied in such ruthless
fashion it still causes immeasurable
suffering every day and continues to
affect the lives and futures of millions of
people.
Racism is one of the most disturbing
phenomena of the great revolution of the
modern world. At the very time when
industrial civilization is penetrating to all
points of the globe and is uprooting men
of every colour from their age-old tradi-
tions, a doctrine, treacherously scientific
in appearance, is invoked in order to rob
these men of their full share in the
advantages of the civilization forced upon
them.
There exists in the structure of Western
civilization a fatal contradiction. On the
one hand it wishes and insists that cer-
tain cultural values, to which it attributes
the highest virtues, be assimilated by
other people. But, conversely, it will not
admit that two-thirds of humanity is
capable of attaining this standard which
it has set up. Ironically, the worst
sufferers from racial dogma are usually
the people whose intellect most forcibly
demonstrates its falseness.
No"Pure"Races
FOR nearly a century, all genuinej'anthropologists have insisted o  th
purely conventional character of the
features chosen to classify the human

D CIVILIZATION
by Dr. Alfred METRAUX
species. They have reiterated that there
is no such thing as a pure race, that
racial differences are biological and pro-
bably do not affect character and mental
faculties, and that from the anthropolo-
gical point of view the human species is
one. But little attention has been paid
by the majority to their words.
How many cultivated, intelligent and
kindly people believe in all good faith
that Negroes inherit at birth an exu-
berant and primitive nature and that
rhythm and dance are theirs from the
cradle ? How many others, who believe
themselves to be free from any taint of
racial prejudice, credit the Jews with
intellectual qualities superior to those of
Chistians ? Every day, all too many
attest to the belief that racial groups
have hereditary virtues and defects, a
belief which is a commonly accepted
error, and which, if not discredited, comes
to be accepted as the truth.
Race prejudice thrives on the inability
of most people to make a clear distinction
between facts pertaining to civilization
and culture on the one hand and biolo-
gical facts on the other. Men are dis.
tinguished by their respective cultures,
which is that"complex whole which
includes knowledge, belief, art, morals,
law, custom, and any other capabilities
and habits acquired by man as a member
of society."As cultural differences are
frequently associated with. physical
differences, the latter have been regarded
too often as the cause of the former.
Culture Confused With Instinct
SOCIAL prejudice will not diminishuntil it is generally rec8gnized that
the real differences between human
societies are not due to biological here-
dity but to cultural environment. The
influence of culture on the individual is
at once so subtle ant strong, and it is
exerted from such an early age, that it is
apt to be confused with instinct.
The cultural factor plays a highly
important part in the workings of the
intellect. A poor. isolated group which
does not receive much stimulus from the
outside world may easpy be taken to be
congenitally inferior ; but another one in
the favourable atmosphere of a different
moral and economic environment, may be
regarded as a privileged specimen of
mankind.
Psychology and criminology have
taught us that delinquency is related to
social conditions. If we are convinced of
the importance of family and social
environment, why should we refuse to
recognize the part played by culture ? It
is too easily forgotten that there are
many cultural specializations and many
choices open to every culture.
Take for example the Australian abori-
gines. Their tools and economy are
those of our prehistoric ancestors. Like
several species of fauna in the country
they seem to represent an early stage of
evolution. Nevertheless, these primitive
people have developed a social organiz-
ation and a system of relationship of
such complexity and refinement that it
requires an able brain and a degree of
mathematical ability to unravel all its
intricacies. In comparison, some of our
systems are simple, even crude. Examples
from other sccieties could be multiplied.
Doubts About The Nordics
ONE of the essential features of culturesis their malleability. They change
rather rapidly and only remain static
in certain exceptional cases.
The racial composition of Europe has
probably varied very little in the course
of the last two or three thousand years,
but would anyone venture to affirm that
European mentality has always been the
same ? Would Englishmen of today
feel at home among the subjects of
Edward IlL ? In Japan the 19th century
saw the tremendous cultural revolution of
a people whose racial type was in no way
changed, for it is obvious that, biologic-
ally speaking, the Japanese of 1950 is
the same as his great-grandfather in the
days of Commodore Perry.
The United States of America provide
a very good example of the fact that
culture is more important than race.
Who has not been impressed by the
"typically American"mentality, gestures
and behaviour of persons springing from
the most varied races ?
It is a gross error to believe history
can be explained by race. Western
industrial culture does not owe its great
development and power to any innate
superiority of the white race. The Gauls,
as Julius Caesar describes them, were
scarcely superior to Western African
tribes, whom some people glibly declare
incapable of progress. Writers of the
ancient Mediterranean peoples frequently
expressed doubts about the capacities of
the Nordics, some of whom are inclined
today to disdain other races.
There is nothing hereditary or even
spontaneous in the antipathy felt by
members of one racial group for those of
another. Observations on the behaviour
of children show very clearly that they
express aversion for people of another
colour only under the influence of the
family milieu. The millions of half-
castes in the world are witness that
different races have in fact a particular
attraction for one another. Relations
between races are generally determined
by cultural tradition. History is there to
teach us that this tradition-has varied
greatly in the course of the centuries.
No Escape From Heredity
RACISM is a relatively new myth,dating back to only two or three
centuries ago. Before the colonial
expansion of the European powers, men
despised or hated one another for cultural
or religious differences, but did not claim
to be superior to one another because of
the colour of their skin or the shape of
their skull or their nose.
Morally, slavery was just as damaging
to the whites as to the blacks. The
whites made skin colour and other phy-
sical characteristics indelible distinguish-
ing marks. The Inquisition burnt the
Jews because they had crucified Christ
and because they were supposed to be the
enemies of the faith ; the Nazis did the
same because the Jews were said to belong
to a species which was inherently harm-
ful. The difference is of little importance
to the victim, but it means much from
RACIAL OPPRESSION-GERMAN-OCCUPIED POLAND. ce : : patioo :"ol ndt
Nazis decided to herd all Jews together in special walled-off parts 01 Warsaw and other large
cities. In Warsaw an eight loot wall (shown in this photo) topped with broken glass was
built to define the limits 01 a revived mediaeval ghetto. By 1941. over 450. 000 people were
crowded into the area, many being forced to share a room with a dozen other people.
the point of view of history. It is pos-
sible to change one's religious convictions ;
but nobody can escape heredity.
There is in this concept of race some-
thing implacable. The barbarity of our
time is more ruthless and more absurd
than that of the so-called Dark Ages ; for
racial prejudice is an un-intelligent and
unattractive myth. Its fiourishing deve-
lopment in the twentieth century will no
doubt in future ages be regarded as one
of the most shameful episodes in history.
Science versus Prejudice
RACIAL hatred and conflict feed onJ\. mistaken scientific notions and anti-
rational dogma. To show up these
errors and lessen their harmful effect, we
must use the means supplied by science,
culture and education. Unesco. better
than any other institution in the world.
is thus qualified to combat racial preju-
dice.
Any campaign for an ideological object-
ive must be based on a declaration of
principles. As regards race, what is
needed is not dogma or moral conviction.
but scientific data, in view of the fact
that the system of race discrimination
claims to derive from actual experience
and alleged biological laws. Before
making an appeal to common sense, to
charity, and even to the self-interest of
the groups affected by this plague, it was
necessary to ascertain the results of
scientific observation.
That is why a commission of anthro-
pologists and sociologists met towards
the end of last year at Unesco House for
the purpose of preparing a document in
which the attitude of science to the
racial problem would be clearly set forth.
This declaration, reproduced elsewhere.
leaves not a shadow of doubt, that the
specialists look upon racial dogma as a
myth.
The fight against race discrimination,
which figures in the Unesco Constitu-
tion, will be long. To combat an emo-
tional attitude as deep-seated and dan-
gerous as racial prejudice is not easy. but
by depriving it of. all scientific and
rational justification a great step forward
will have been made.
