owners to form a co-operative and
pool their resources for fifty years-
to work together on a planned basis.
Soon they bought up more land
around Saugnac and mapped out the
areas to be ploughed and to be
planted with saplings.
The young people's interest and
support was enlisted by forming a"Foyer Rural"-a cultural centre
which now has 60 members. But
the task facing Saugnac's 650 inha-
bitants was and still is, gigantic.
Before crops can be planted or even
new trees, the soil has to be restored,
the charred undergrowth removed.
NEW POST FOR U. S.
DELEGATE TO UNESCC
nYlNG village in the heart of the burned out Landes countryside
of southern France will spring back to life this summer when
volunteers from the wo ld's work camps meet in Sa gnac-et-
Muret to help the local people restore their homes.
For Saugnac-et-Muret, once a happy village of 1800 inhabitants, and
now deserted by all but 650, as a result of repeated forest fires, has been
chosen as the site for the most representative work camp project ever
planned. Young men and women from all over the world will meet there
this summer to build farms, repair houses, construct roads, restore the
soil and turn Saugnac into a model village.
Behind this ambitious Unesco
supported project, being carried out
under the auspices of the French
National Commission for Unesco,
with the financial backing of
International Rotary, is an intense
young man with dark curly hair and
weatherbeaten cheeks-Jean
Guichot.
It was Jean Guichot who, by his
own example, first started things
moving in Saugnac. If he had
stayed in Agen, 150 kilometres away,
instead of returning to his grand-
mother's farm in Saugnac ; if he
had continued his studies and
become a doctor like his father and
grandfather before him, attention
might never have been turned on
this little village in the Landes, and
it would have sunk further into
desolation and decay.
SCORCHED EARTH EXODUS
tt UT, in 1942, Guichot and hisfamily did return to the old
homestead. That year fire
struck the village. And again the
following year. Thousands of pine
trees, the collection of whose resin
forms the principal means of
livelihood for the people of the
Landes, were destroyed. And more
and more villagers, their homes and
livelihood gone, moved away to the
towns.
Minding his sheep and riding over
the charred land, Guichot thought
up ways of solving the problem. To
check the fires, he decided, the
"LaTtdaM"must resort to the
practices of their ancestors-keep
20 per cent of the land under
cultivation, breed more sheep which
would eat up the undergrowth, plant
trees less densely, and make
clearings.
When vast stretches of the Landes
were destroyed by fire last year and,
with his neighbours, he had spent
three weeks fighting the flames, Jean
Guichot decided the time had come
to put his plan into action. He called
a meeting and, with the help of
French officials, persuaded land-
There are roads to build, houses and
farms to repair, and a centre for
youth activities and culture to be
created.
Jean Guichot's plan will also be
the starting point for the carrying
out of plans for the development of
the Landes already drawn up by the
French authorities.
NEW HOPE IN THE LANDES
G UICHOT put his plan beforeUnesco's Reconstruction De-
partment and Unesco's French
National Commission."Wtth. the
help of international youth", he said,
we can gain valuable time. You can
help us greatly by arranging for
volunteers and funds and providing
Us with cultural facilities".
The project was put before the
third conference of organizers of
international work camps which met
at Unesco House last month. The
Co-ordination Committee, set up by
Unesco, suggested that all the
organizations take part, and all the
representatives present agreed.
Details are now being worked out,
but already it has been decided to
organize three work camps in
Saugnac this summer. Three French
organizations-Jeunesse et Recons-
truction, Pax Romana, and Service
Civil International-have under-
taken to run them. Other organiza-
tions, like the American Friends
Service Committee, the International
Youth Hostel Federation, student
groups from England, Denmark,
Switzerland, Sweden and Germany
will send volunteers.
These camps will herald a cultural
and educational campaign in the
Landes through the use of travelling
libraries-and scientific exhibitions
and educational films.
M. Guichot, who came to Pari
early in May to put his ideas and
plans before the organizers, returned
to Saugnac a happy man. Soon his
village will be bustling with activity,
echoing with the sound of hammers
and saws, and of many tongues.
And Saugnac-et-Muret will become
a symbol of new hope for the people
of the Landes.
