A HUNDRED"
GROUPS WITH
A COMMON AIM
This is the fifth in a series of special articles describ-
ing the work of some of the 100 international
non-governmental organizations whose co-operation
with Unesco helps the accomplishment of its
programme.
GOETHE, whose bi-centenary was celebrated last year, has been
called a"universal man", for as it was said of him :"his
was the last of those universal minds which have 
able to compass all domains of human activity and know-
ledge... he stood on the brink of an era of rapidly expanding know-
ledge which has made forever impossible the universality of
interest and sympathy which distinguished him".
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, the genius of one
man could embrace extremities, for besides writing his great drama
Fault, Goethe made scientific studies lof colours, assembled one
of the most complete mineral collections of his day (there is even
a mineral, Goethite, named after him), and conducted extensive
experiments in chemistry and biology.
Today, the world of science has
expanded into a universe, and the
work in each sphere is so wide
that all scientists must be spe-
cialists. No one man, in fact, has
time to read all the publications
which appear in his own particular
field, let alone follow the full
advance of scientific accomplish-
ment.
Recently, for instance, aerodyna-
mics experts had been working
with wind-tunnels in studies of
turbulence, experiments of great
value to astronomers in observa-
tions they had made on the passing
of one dust cloud through another.
The astronomers, however, could
not understand the terms used by
the wind-tunnel experts. A sym-
posium Was held between two mem-
ber organizations of the Interna-
tional Council of Scientific Unions
(ICSU) to work out agreements in
terminology, making possible the
application of the results of the
laboratory studies to theories based
on astronomical observation.
"Human Chain Reaction"
THE International Council ofScientific Unions is a federa-
tion of selfgoverning groups
of scientists in particular fields,
such as astronomy, mechanics,
crystallography, radio-science, geo-
graphy, geodosy and geophysics.
The Council's main purpose is co-
ordinating the work of these
specialists, as it did in the sympo-
sium on terminology between mem-
bers of the International Astrono-
mical Union and the International
Union of Theoretical and Applied
Mechanics.
Unesco was extremely fortunate
in finding the ICSU already in
existence, with fifteen years'expe-
rience in its difficult work of admi-
nistration and correlating the
results of scientific research. The
two international organizations
entered into a formal agreement
of co-operation in 1946, and since
have rendered valuable services to
one another.
Since the exchange of theories
and ideas is the foundation of
scientific progress, Unesco's most
important contributions to ICSU
have been in the form of travel
grants to academic scientists, and
calling conferences and symposia
on specific problems.
One of the most important
aspects of scientific conferences is
the element of actual contact among
the participants. Such contact

Some of the groups of scientists whose work is co-ordinated by the Council of
Scientific Unions, have permanent stations of research and information centres
to assist specialists. The International Bureau of Physico Chemical Constants.
maintained by the International Union of Chemistry with Unesco aid, is a
stockroom of chemically pure substances which fills one of the most important'
scientific needs.. standards which are internationally recognized, and which are
invaluable to the work of these chemists (above).
fosters a"human chain reaction",
the development of an idea which
a scientist may pick up in discus-
sion with other specialists in his
own field, a nascent idea which
might never have appeared clear
to him in simply reading the
reports of those same men.
Most modern scientific advances
are made on the borderlines between
the formally-divided sciences. The
ICSU, with member unions repre-
senting nine special branches of
scientific work in forty nations,
has established international Joint
Commissions to study such"bor-
derline sciences".
Rheology, the study of viscous
substances, from the movement of
earth's crust to the flow of the
blood and the rise of sap in plants,
calls for research in physics, geo-
logy, chemistry, mechanics and
biology. Problems in terminology
so that the specialists concerned
could understand one another, were
dealt with in a special ICSU report.
Like many specialized sciences,
rheology may sound far removed
from our everyday life, but the
plasticS, fo7wiohich ivy have so many
uses are a product of this"border-
line science"which has contribute-
ed much to help a world short of
materials.
Standards For The World
SoME of the permanent servicesare joint commissions in them-
selves, ans exist for reasons
which make international co-opera-
tion a vital necessity. The boiling
point of water, the hour of the day,
the latitude of a certain point of
the earth cannot be determined by
a national law. The International
Time Bureau and the International
Latitude Service call for the work
of both the International Astrono-
mical Union and the International
Union of Geodosy and Geophysics.
This second Union also maintains
the International Seismological
Summary, the result of several
decades of research, which makes
possible the prediction of the paths
of earthquakes and the sending out
of early warnings.
Each of these Unions exists as
a permanent authority to assist
specialists, and the centres of
information and standards they
maintain are invaluable to scientific
work.
With the passing of the"uni-
versal man", we have entered a
world in which little progress can
be accomplished without the work
of specialists, a world whose future
depends upon their co-operation.
