W. 1LECTRONIC science has broughtschool directly from distant class-
rooms to more than 1, 000 American
children kept from normal physical
attendance because of handicaps resulting
from serious illness or disabling ac-
cidents. By means of two-way voice
communication over telephone wires be-
tween electrical devices in school class-
rooms and in rooms of homes or hospitals,
the crippled children have been able to
get the full advantages of regular educ-
ation as well as the psychological bene-
fits of indirect contact with schoolmates.
The system, which is described in The
Crippled Child, official magazine of the
American National Society for Crippled
Children and Adults of Chicago, Illinois,
has been in use for ten years in 10m and
other parts of the middle western region
of the United States. A portable two-
way radio"et in the classroom picks up and transmits every spokt'n
word over a leased telephone wire to the crippled student's bedroom.
There, over a similar radio set, he answers the class roll call, recites his
lessons and maintains voice contact with the teacher and his classmates.
The classroom radio unit is plugged into outlets in the various rooms of
the school, permitting the pupil at home to.'move about".
Stimuiu ! To Recovery
T Hie'''electrical school"has not only successfully brought education toshut-in children, but has helped the chances for recovery, through
psychological stimulus, of many young victims of infantile paralysis,
arthritis, tuberculosis and cardiac ailments.
A number of the crippled pupils have not only kept abreast of their
fellow pupils who attended classes in the ordinary manner but have out-
distanced them in reaching high scholastic achievement. One boy from
Mason City, Iowa, who never saw the insidt : C of his school, was elected
president of his class. Three high school students of different schools
led their classes.
A 16-year old victim of arthritis, who lived on a farm near the town
of Ottumwa. studied for four years at the.'electrical school"after three
and one half miles of special telephone construction had been carried
out to make her"attendance"possible.
Other kinds of schooling problems due,
not to disease, but to distance, are also
being solved by modern methods of com-
munication elsewhere in the world.
In such diverse places as New Zealand.
France, Nigeria and China, radio has
been a vital element in bringing learning
to those who would otherwise be deprived.
New Zealand has combined radio lectures
with recitations by mail for children in
inaccessible places.
In Paris, the Scrbonne providers courses
by radio-an enormous advantage to
. many who cannot attend classes, notably
the mothers of small children.
Both in Nigeria and China, as well as in
other relatively underdeveloped areas,
collective radio listening has brought
vital knowledge-of health, better living
and wider cultural horizions-to children
and grown ups alike.
SCIENCE BRINGS SCHOOL
TO CRIPPLED CHilDREN
