A VIVID PICTURE OF A NEW COMET photographed by an 18-inch camera
with a 5-minute exposure at California's Mount Palomar Observatory. The
short streaks of light are stars, for the comet moves quickly and it is that which
was followed.
,
By Maurice GOLDSMITH
RADIO waves from the great Nebula of Andromeda have
recently been received on earth. This is a scientific
fact of the greatest importanc  in the centuries'long
story of man's attempt to understand his universe.
Yet, the facts about this impressive piece of research work
and an explanation of its significance have not yet appeared
generally in the Press. On the other hand, many newspapers
were recently responsible for a great public disservice when,
with scare headlines, they declared that an unknown body in
outer space was approaching the earth at great speed-and
that there was danger of a collision.
Any science writer, had he been consulted, would have
described this story as"bunkum". He might instead have
suggested that the Press tell the story of how two British
radio astronomers, using the world's largest radio telescope,
found, a few months ago, that Andromeda was"broadcasting"
on a wavelength of 1. 89 metres.
Radio astronomy, a new branch of science, although it dates
back 20 years, is opening ap a new"window"in the earth's atmo-
sphere for us.
Until recently, astronomy was a visual science, with obser-
vations made by the naked eye and the telescope. The new
"window"is provided by the radio waves which find their
way to the earth. (See Unesco Courier, March 1951.)
vur nearest ; nelgnoOUrmg umverse
is the Great Nebula of Andromeda.
In magnitude, in number of stars,
and in structure it is similar to our
own galaxy. The more we learn
about it, the more we shall know
about ourselves. In fact, wnen we
look at Andromeda we are looking out
into space and back into time, for it
is about 800, 000 light years away-
which means we see it not as it is
now, but as it was before our ances-
tors were men.
90 MINUTES IN THE LIFE OF THE STARS : Above is shown
the result of a simple photographic experiment. On a clear, moon-
less night, a camera was aimed at the Pole Star and the shutter
was left open for one and a half hours. The result is shown above,
each star having described its track in the form of an arc. The Pole
Star is responsible for the thick track a little above the centre of
the photograph. As the earth rotates on its own axis,
all the stars seem to rotate around the Celestial Pole. In the fore-
ground is the outline of an astronomical dome with its shutters
open and interior illuminated.
What Happens in Space
WE have learned a great dealabout our planetary syst m
since the day three and a half
centuries ago when Galileo, applying
his eye to the first optical telescope
devised by himself, began to see in
the heavens the proofs of the Coper-
nican theory-a theory that was to
make a tremendous revolution in the
thinking of mankind. We know now
that we live on one of the smallest
satellites of a dwarf star in a local
system of one of millions of Milky
Ways.
Our scientists seek every opportunity
to find out what is happening in inter-
planetary space. That is why great
interest was shown in the report of
the recent discovery in the barren
lands of Ungava, in Canada's Nor-
thern Quebec, of the biggest meteorite
crater in the world. From a study
of this, and the region above the
earth's surface whence it came, we
shall obtain more information of the
kind that will eventually help us to
travel in outer space.
A crater helps us to find out what
is happening in outer space, because
it is blasted out of the hard earth by
a meteorite, which is a cosmic
"bullet"come to earth. Those cos-
mic bullets that do not fall on land
are known as meteors. They can be
seen on any clear, moonless night
darting across the sky as flashes of
light.
The only living persons known to
have seen a meteorite hit the
earth are the inhabitants of the
Siberian vil'age of Novopokrovka, a
few hundred miles from Vladivostok.
It was at 10. 35 in the morning, almost
four years ago, when"startled by a
brilliant flash like a bolt of lightning
from the sky, children from the local
village school hurried out of doors.
Against the blue of the sky they saw
a ball of light as brilliant as the sun
and about the size of. the full moon.
It travelled across the sky towards the
south, shedding showers of sparks and
carrying in its immediate wake a
brightly coloured track which quickly
turned into a thick black trail. Wi-
thin four or five seconds, the object
had disappeared in the general direc-
tion of the Sikhotaalin Mountains of
Eastern Siberia". (This is the descrip-
tion given by Dr. Otto Struve, Profes-
sor of Astronomy in the University
of California, in the"Scientific Ame-
rican"for June, 1950.)
A scientific expedition from Moscow
investigated the region where the
meteorite had fallen and found a
series of more than 100 holes, some of
them 30 to 40 feet deep, and as wide
as 75 feet at the top. All around
there was tremendous destruction
caused by the"rain of iron". The
ground was strewn with pieces of
meteoritic iron-some weighed seve-
ral hundreds of pounds ; others were
specks. The meteorite originally
must have weighed about 1, 000 tons
and had a diameter of some 30 feet.
Meteors Can Help Man
VISIBLE meteors are related tocomets and to the cosmic dust
clouds of the Milky Way. A me-
teor makes bright flashes because of
the speed at which it travels. When'
it enters our upper air it may be
moving about 25 miles a second. The
further it falls, the more resistant the
air becomes and the meteor is slowed
down by the atmospheric friction.
The study of this slowing-down of
meteors has become of importance in
recent years with the development of
new techniques (the radio astronomer
has made some interesting studies into
meteors). It has been possible, for
example, to get an idea of the tempe-
rature of the upper air. It has been
discovered that it is much hotter 40
miles up than at the earth's surface
- a surprising fact in view of the sub-
zero temperatures in the stratosphere.
As Dr. Harlow Shaply, Director of
the Harvard College Observatory, has
said :"Precise information on this
region of the atmosphere is exactly
what we need for the development of
high altitude, jet-propelled airplanes,
as well as for the rocket ships of the
near future."
Is not this whole story mon
exciting than the nonsensical fabri-
cations that are sometimes published.
and which horrify readers, who art
unaware of the limitations of science
and the significance of its routinp dis-
coveries ?

THIS CRATER was blasted out of the earth in Arizona by a meteorite which fell in prehistoric times. This single huge hole in the ground is
about a mile across and several hundred feet deep.
Cosmic bullets
Reveal Secrets
Of Our Planet
And Universe
