"JUSTICE EST FAITE
MR. FILM CENSOR...
"Must Everything in the Garden Be Lively ?"
by Charles SPAAK
President, Screen Writers Guild of France, 1950-51
"RETOUR A LA VIE"
or can the cinema help in fosteringmutual understanding and, hence,
mutual esteem, between the na-
tions of the world ? This is an inspiring
subject for people who are given to long
speeches, and one which inevitably calls
forth the most optimistic platitudes.
Of course it could serve those ends, but
the organization and censorship of film
production is such that the result is quite
different. It is precisely because the
screen could give us an intimate insight
into the life of people in other lands
that governments take such vigilant care
to ensure that only an official picture
is given of the areas under their control.
It should not be forgotten that, of all
media of expression, the cinema every-
where enjoys the least freedom, being
the victim of two equally detestable
censorship measures : firstly, with regard
to the home production of films, and
secondly, with regard to the showing
of foreign films. In the first case, there
must be no allusion to any controversial
topic ; in the second case, whenever a
problem which the government consi-
ders dangerous is touched upon, the
people in one country are not allowed to
find out what their neighbours think of
it. So, each nation says to the other :
I should like to have the ideas that your
government allows you to impart, but
only if your ideas are exactly in line with
what my government allows me to utter.
So long as this is accepted, nations are
very willing to exchange information, to
get to understand and esteem one an-
other. Yet in all solemnity, responsible
people wonder what part the cinema can
play in the lofty task of fostering friend-
ship between the nations by helping them
to understand each other's social, intel-
lectual or religious characteristics.
Both entertainment and documentary
films are victims of the same system.
The latter which, as their name implies,
should contain only documentary evi-
dence, are subjected to an even more
rigorous control than the others, and
very little confidence can be placed in
their objectivity.
Everywhere censors suppress films
whose purpose is not in accordance
with accepted tradition, and film
producers are paralyzed by fear of
censorship. What can the Anglo-Saxon
countries have learnt, for instance, from
films produced in Paris during the past
ten years ? That you can sit at tables
on the pavement in front of all the big
cafes, that exotic dance steps are per-
formed in cellars, that married couples
insist on sleeping in the same bed, and
that some depraved individuals have a
misguided affection for ladies whom they
have not married. All that amounts to
very little. But what have they revealed
of France's problems and struggles ?
And what film producer would dare to
allude to such matters ? When Autant-
Lara, producer of Le Diable au corps
wanted to tell the story of a conscientious
objector, when André Cayatte, producer
of Justice est faite-I am deliberately
quoting only well-known films-tried
to describe the Seznec affair (the unfor-
tunate Breton who did twenty years'
hard labour for a murder which no
one now believes he was guilty of), they
both met with such difficulties that they
had to abandon their original ideas.
Don't mention war, don't mention jus-
tice ! If they are not religious, but want
to express their views on religion, if they
wish to describe social conditions which
they consider unsatisfactory, if they want
to express opinions on money, freedom,
love, life or death, let them beware, for
the censor's eye is on them !
What information value, then, can
films have abroad if they reflect
nothing but official or conventional
views ?"Everything in the garden is
lovely..."It is always the same story. In
our comfortable seat in the darkened
cinema, we are lulled into thinking that
all is for the best in the best possible of
worlds ; any uneasiness aroused by the
newsreel is dispelled by the documentary
film and the feature film that follow.
Although they have revealed so little
of the nation's inner, secret life,
have French film producers man-
aged, at least, to further international
understanding through films inspired by
a generous desire for reconciliation with
a former foe ? A film which leaps at once
to the mind is La Grande Allusion. In
that aim, Germans and Frenchmen, at
a time in history when they should have
been implacable enemies, faced each
other without hatred. It was banned in
Germany. And when immediately after
the last war, it was shown in France, the
press launched a violent campaign
against it, trying to get it withdrawn. In
all honesty, it must be admitted that the
cinema which is nationalistic in inspira-
tion does little to advance the cause
of free international exchange of infor-
mation which, by its very nature, it could
do so much to help.
I am all the more sorry, when I think
of the splendid purposes which this
remarkable instrument for the spread of
knowledge could serve. It is not my
fault if men today, like animals shrink-
ing from their own reflection in a mirror,
are afraid to see themselves portrayed
with brutal frankness on the screen.
