ASPECTS OF SCIENCE
IN THE FRIGID REALMS
OF ABSOLUTE ZERO
THE human spirit thrives onj challenge, and scientists are
human. Small wonder, then,
that experiments striving to obtain
a knowledge of nature at extreme
conditions attainable in the labo-
ratory have always had a parti-
cular fascination for many
pioneers of science. So it has been
with the attempts to examine and
understand the behaviour of
matter at extremely low tempe-
ratures. The struggle to attain
the absolute zero is the laboratory
counterpart of the fight to reach
the poles of the earth or to scale
Everest, but with one difference :
The physicist knows from the start
that his attempt will be in vain.
What do we mean by the abso-
lute zero of temperature ? Modern
science has established beyond all
doubt the notion that"tempera-
ture"is merely a rneasure of the
ceaseless, frenzied dance of the
molecules of which all matter is
composed-the"minute vibratory
motion of the particles of bodies"
in the words of Newton. Heating
an object means giving its myriad
molecules a higher average speed,
cooling it means reducing their
speed. While there is no apparent
upper limit to temperatures attain-
able in the universe (the centre
of a hot. star is probably at about
40, 000, 000 degrees), there is a
theoretically fixed lowest tempe-
rature-the absolute zero-where
all molecular motion would cease.
To attain this condition, the whole
of the chaotic movement of the
molecules would have to be stilled.
The Air Turns Blue
WATER freezes at 0 degreesCentigrade (32 degrees on
the Fahrenheit scale) ;"dry
ice", or solid carbon dioxide is at
73 degrees below the Centigrade
zero (-100 deg. F.) ; by compres-
sing it and then removing heat by
means of flowing water, ordinary
air can be converted into a bluish
liquid at-183 deg. C (-300 deg.
F. The absolute zero would fall
at-273 deg. C., or--460 deg. F.
Scientists have not quite attained
it in practice-and there are good
theoretical indications that they
never will-although they have
come within a few thousandths of
Low-temperature research is one of the most
fascinating frontiers of modern-day physics.It has brought about such things as household
refrigeration and the mass production of
liquefied gases, used for liquid-fuel rockets
and supersonic aeroplanes. liquid hydrogen
may also be important in future experiments
in interplanetary rocket propulsion. Drawing
shows a helium refrigerator which maintains
full tanks of liquefied-gas propellants for use
in rocket experimentation.
Research in low-temperature physics has
increased at a striking rate since the end of
the last war with the development of a helium
liquefier devised by Prof. S. C. Collins of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. With
this apparatus (alongside) it is possible to
proceed directly from the temperature of cold
tap water to that of liquid helium, without the
aid of special cooling agents such as liquid
hydrogen or liquid air. Whereas prior to 1946
only two U. S. laboratories were doing low
temperature r search, there are now over three
dozen such laboratories and a score in several
other countries. (Photo Arthur D. Little Inc.).
by Ira M. Freeman
a degree of this mark. This they
do by starting with liquid helium,
which is only about 4 deg. C. above
absolute zero.
Cotton Gets Dangerous
EARLY in the last centuryMichael Faraday, the English
experimental genius, first
succeeded in changing an appa-
rently"permanent"gas, chlorine,
to the liquid form ; by the end of
the century oxygen, nitrogen and
hydrogen had been liquefied allow-
ing experimenters to reach as
low as 20 deg. above the absolute
zero. Helium, the last hold-out
among the gases, yielded to
fl. Kamerlingh Onnes, working at
the famous low-temperature labo-
ratory in Leyden, in 1908. By
making liquid helium evaporate
rapidly, Onnes reached down to
within a single degree of the abso-
lute zero. From this jumping-off
point, modern methods making
use of magnetism can chill sam-
ples of matter to within perhaps
0. 001 deg. Modifications now in the
planning stage carry the promise
of narrowing the gap to about
one-millionth of a degree, but the
experimental difficulties are for-
midable.
The last few degrees of the ther-
mometric range are of tremendous.
interest to science, because in this
region matter behaves in quite
unexpected and puzzling ways.
Already at liquid-air temperature,
peculiar things happen. Rubber
becomes as brittle as glass, and
shatters in thousands of pieces if
dropped on the noor. Cotton that
, has been immersed in liquid air
explodes like gunpowder when
lighted with a match. These
things are demonstrated in school
science laboratories.
However, one of the most inte-
resting phenomena is that of
super-conductivity, shown by a
number of metals when brought
to within a few degrees of absolute
zero. A weak current of electri-
city is passed through a wire of
the metal. Then, as the tempe-
rature is lowered, a critical point
i. s reached where the metal ceases
to oppose the flow of the current
altogether. Under these condi-
tions, if the current is merely
started and the battery then dis-
connected, the current will con-
tinue to flow virtually for ever.
Equally curious things happen with
respect to the magnetic behaviour
of metals in the weird lower
reaches of the thermometric scale.
Since many practical electrical
devices involve magnets and elect-
rical coils, the possibilities fore-
shadowed by these discoveries are
being watched with great interest
by engineers.
. Zero'Brings Warmth
BUT the most anomalous andenigmatic behaviour of all is
shown by the very substance
that enables us to descend to the
lowest levels of temperature-li-
quid helium. By rapidly pumping
away the vapour rising from this
liquid, its temperature can be
lowered to little more than two
deg. above absolute zero. At this
point its behaviour becomes like
that of no other known liquid. It
finds its way with ease through
the smallest of holes. It further
resists attempts at confinement by
creeping up the sides of its con-
tainer, to escape over the rim.
Again, this coldest of all liquids
is, paradoxically, a remarkable
conductor of heat. When one side
of a vessel containing liquid
helium is warmed, a surge of heat
is rapidly conveyed to the other
side. From the analogy with the
transmission of sound waves
through the air, the Russian ex-
perimenters who first noticed this
phenomenon called it"second
sound."Although a general in-
terpretation of these unique obser-
vations can be given in terms of
the quantum theory (see the
Courier for November, 1950>, there
is undoubtedly much yet to be
discovered in the frigid realm of
the absolute zero.
Readers desiring a free copy of
a brief bibliography on Low Tem-
perature Physics should write to the
Division for the Popularization of
Science, Unesco, 19, Avenue X ! eber,
PARIS <16'), France.
Most of us are familiar with two differ-
ent scales of temperature and two
definitions of zero : Fahrenheit and
Centigrade. Scientists, however, have
been working for some time with a third :
the Kelvin or Absolute Zero scale.
The three scales more or less reflect
the history of man's understanding of
heat and cold. Gabriel Daniel Fahren-
heit, the German physicist who manu-
factured meteorological instruments, set
zero at the lowest emperature he could
then obtain by freezing a mixture. On
this scale"absolute zero"is-459. 6
degrees F. In 1742, six yeafs after
Fahrenheit's death, the Swedish astro-
nomer Anders Celsius proposed a new
scale with the freezing point of water at
normal atmospheric pressure as zero
and its boiling point as 100. This scale,
usually called Centigrade, was officially
renamed the Celsius Scale four years
ago by an International Conference on
Weights and Measures In Paris. Since
the abbreviation C. is retained, the
change Is not too important for the
layman. On the Centigrade or Celsius
scale, absolute zero is-273. 16 degrees C.
Both the Fahrenheit and Celsius scales
are essentially arbitrary, like the kilo-
gram, the pound, the mile or the metre.
In 1848, with the increase in low-tem-
perature research, the British scientist
Lord Kelvin proposed his"absolute"
scale. This retained the Celsius degree
but shifted zero to the lowest tempera-
ture imaginable (the total immobility
of mo ! ecuies). Absolute zero, therefore,
is zero degrees in the Kelvin scale, which
is usually abbreviated K. The above
thermometer shows significant empera-
tures in respect to the absolute zero
in the Kelvin scale. Thus water is
shown, as boiling at +373 degrees K.
and freezing at +273 degrees K. All
other figures are indicated in the Kelvin
scale and can be converted to the Cen-
tigrade or Celsius scale by subtracting
273 degrees.
AFTER FAHRENHEIT
AND CENTIGRADE :
THE KELVIN SCALE
