Knowledge and understanding of the principles ofthe Universal Dec-laration of Human Rights and their practical application must begin
during childhood. Efforts to make known the rights and duties they
imply will never be fully effective unless schools in all countries make
teaching about the Declaration a regular part of the curriculum. One of
the countries where such action has been taken is the Republic of the
Philippines whose Education Department has prepared a simplified
version of the Articles of the Declaration, for use in schools. This
children's version, which we publish below, is written in easily under-
stood terms and shows the place of the rights in every-day life.
ARTICLE 1.-In this world, all persons are like brothers and sisters in a
family ; so you should be kind, friendly and polite to others.
ARTICLE 2.-Your rights have nothing to do with your riches, family, religion,
sex, colour or political beliefs.
ARTICLE 3.-You have the right to be alive and to stay alive.
ARTICLE 4.-No one can make you a slave.
ARTICLE 5.-You cannot be hurt or punished in any shameful way.
ARTICLE 6.-Your rights as a person must be respected everywhere you go.
ARTICLE 7.-You have the same rights as any other person has in the eyes
of the law.
ARTICLE 8.-If anyone takes away any of your rights, you can go and ask
the court to get it back for you.
ARTICLE 9.-You cannot be arrested, put in prison, be sent away from your
town or country if you have not done anything against the law.
ARTICLE 10.-If you are blamed for having done something against the law,
you can get a fair public trial in a fair court.
ARTICLE 11.-You must be considered not guilty until you are found really
at fault. You cannot be punished for an act that was not against the
law when you did it. Nor can you be given a punishment heavier than
that allowed by law when you did the act.
ARTICLE 12.-No one, without good reasons allowed by law, can open or read
your mail, or enter your home without your permission.
ARTICLE 13.-You are free to come and go in your country, to leave your
country, and to return.
ARTICLE 14.-II you do not feel safe or are treated badly in your country
you are free to go and live in another country. You can do this if you
have not done something wrong.,
ARTICLE 15.-You have the right to belong to a nation. No one can take
this right away from you or stop you from becoming a citizen of another
nation if you want to do this.
ARTICLE 16.-Men and women, when of age, can marry anyone they choose
and have a family. No one can be made to marry against his wish.
ARTICLE 17.-You can own property by yourself or with others. Your
property cannot be taken away from you against your wish. It may be
taken away from you if the Government needs it for the use of all the
people.
ARTICLE 18.-You are free to think, to choose your own religion or to
change it, and to tell what you think of it.
ARTICLE 19.-You may say or write anything you want, and give and receive
ideas in any way.
ARTICLE 20.-You have the right to have meetings with others and to form a
society so long as you do not make trouble. But no one can make you go
to the meetings of any society or become a member if you do not want to.
ARTICLE 21.-You have the right to vote and hold office and to share in all
the good things your Government does for the people. The wishes of the
people shall be respected by the Government.
ARTICLE 22.-You have the right to live with honour and to enjoy the good
things given to protect the people from hunger and sickness.
ARTICLE 23.-You may look for any kind of work you can do. You have
the right to good pay, to equal pay for equal work, to good working
conditions, to protection from being"laid off". You can form or join a
trade union.
ARTICLE 24.-You have the right to rest, to have fair working hours, and
every now and then to enjoy holidays with pay.
ARTICLE 25.-You have the right to have good food, clothing, shelter, medical
care and pension when you are sick or too old to work. Mothers and
children should be given equal protection and special care.
ARTICLE 26.-You have the right to study in free elementary schools and to
continue studying in higher schools if you can do the work.
ARTICLE 27.-You may share in the enjoyment of the arts and sciences.
You may receive any gain from your writings and from any work that
you have done in the arts and sciences.
ARTICLE 28.-You have the right to live in a quiet, happy world where all
these rights can be had.
ARTICLE 29.-You must do your own duty to society, but in doing so, be
sure you do not step on the rights of others.
ARTICLE 30.-No one, whether a person or a nation, has the right to destroy
any of the rights listed in this Declaration.
"... You have
the right so
live in a
quiet, happy
, ld"
world."