AT HAøDONG, AR T
AND AGRICUL TURE
GO HANDøINøHAND
JANUARY 1951
IN July 1940, a group of twenty Indo-
Chinese agriculturists and craftsmen
met at Hanoi to discuss how they
might improve living conditions for
themselves and their families.
Having decided that co-operative
methods of work and the sale of their
products through a common pool offer-
ed the best chance of increased pros-
perity, they formed an association
which they named :"The Small
Craftsmen and Agriculturists : Mutual
Aid and Progress."
As their emblem they chose two open
hands, symbolising handicrafts, hold-
ing two shoots of rice, representing
agriculture, and for their motto :"In
our two hands we hold a treasure."
During the troubled times that Indo
China has experienced since then, the
Association has saved hundreds of re-
fugee families from starvation by pro-
viding them with a means of livelihood
and with temporary homes.
In this work, the Association had a
benefactor and counsellor, Hoang
Trong Phu, a leading citizen and offi-
cial in Tonkin, who throughout his
career worked to improve the standard
of living of his fellow countrymen in
the heavily populated delta region.
Hoang Trong Phu, devoted the last
years of his life to helping the Asso-
ciation and his advice and encourage-
ment were invaluable during its early
days and again during the difficult pe-
riod after the war.
HAVEN AT HANOI
IN 1947, two members of the Group-
Le Van Nghiep and Le Van Dinh-
organized a reception centre at Ha-
noi in two large sheds which they had
repaired. They received families by the
hundred, all seeking work and some
form of shelter, after fleeing from vil-
lages ravaged by civil war. The com-
munity soon overflowed into neighbour-
ing houses, also damaged, but which
were repaired by their new inhabi-
tants.
At the beginning of 1948, there were
about ten handicraft workshops and an
agriculturists'group at Ha-Dong, a few
miles from Hanoi, and during the
Spring of 1949, a farm school and a
new handicraft centre were also set up.
More and more families came to seek
refuge at the Centre. Some only
stayed a short time, for they wished to
return to their villages as soon as the
situation there improved.
Others, having become
accustomed to the region,
were content to stay at
the Centre and to fashion
a new life for themselves,
especially as the town of'
Hanoi offered regular
openings for their produce.
With the same care and concentra-
tion he used to carve the gracefully
beautiful lines of the statuettes seen
on his right, the craftsman puts the
finishing touch to a tobacco pipe.
These people today work at the Cen-
tre under a flexible system of control
whose aim is to advise, guide and help
them through advances of money and
materials. The agricultural work and

A fine example of lacquer work on a
wooden panel by craftsmen of the
Ha-Dong Centre, whose ingenuity and
talent spring from their innate sense
of artistry.
that of the craftsmen is supervised by
the head of each family, who acts at
his own discretion and in accordance
with local customs.
HELPMG THE PEOPLE
NEARLY two hundred families are at
present living between Ha-Dong
and Hanoi ; eighty of them are
craftsmen-weavers, workers in wood,
ivory, and lacquer, and metal and iron
workers. The peasants also make bri-
quettes of peat.
The lacquerers are perhaps the most
skilled of the craftsmen. With patient
: : are they produce magnificent panels,
whose traditional patterns are enhanc-
ed by the beauty of the colours, the
depth of tones and the highly polished
surface.
M. Le Van Dinh, Director of the City
and President of the Association envi-
sages two separate stages o : develop-
ment for the future. The first will
continue the present policy of giving
individual initiative free Ten in the
production and sale of goods, with the
Association merely providiDg technical
aid and opening channels o ! trade. The
second stage will aim, through the cor-
porative and social education of the
producers, to encourage thlm to form
a fully co-operative Association in
This craftsman and his wife symbo-
lize the"family"spirit and patient
skill of the workers of Ha-Dong.
which individual advantages and res-
ponsibilities are combined.
In the social fields, the primary school
which is already well attended, will be
improved and enlarged, medical assist-
tance extended, and the lesson of thrif-
tiness inculcated as widely as possible.
Perhaps the most encouraging sign
for the future of the Ha-Dong Centre
is the spirit which animates its work-
a spirit springing from professional
pride in the quality of its products.
The Centre's work has already served
as an example elsewhere in Northern
Indo-China, for it is simply helping
the people to help themselves.
