INTER-AMERICA
CULTURAL COUNCIL PLANS
EDUCATIONAL CAMPAIGN
FOR A CONTINGENT
by Michel Dard
ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT, the famous
19t century German naturalist and traveller,
who once called Mexico,"the treasure house of
the world," was probably thinking of its precious
metals, its opals, jades and turquoises.
Today, not only Mexico, but the whole Latin American
continent is regarded as a treasure house, but of a
different sort, for its modern riches are the infinite
possibilities for development which have earned for it
the name of"the continent of the future."
Recently, however, when the Inter-American Cultural
Council held its first meeting in Mexico, observers were
struck by evidence of still another form of wealth
enjoyed by Latin America-its tremendous store of
spiritual energy.
This showed itself in determination expressed by
Conference delegates to develop and share the rich,
varied and ancient cultural traditions of the continent ;
in the recognition of responsibility for bringing the full
benefits of human progress to those communities which
do not yet enjoy them ; and also in the stressing of inter-
American solidarity in face of the world situation.
The Inter-American Cultural Council is the third of
the specialized bodies set up by the Organization of Ame-
rican States (O. A. S.) which groups all States in the
Western Hemisphere with the exception of Canada, and
which works in close collaboration with Unesco.
Some weeks before the Cultural Council's conference
in Mexico, Dr. Lleras Camargo, Secretary-General of the
O. A. S., declared :"Unless the various cultures draw
closer together and get to know, understand and respect
one another, all the other acts of Inter-American co-
operation will not avail to increase the friendship of the
peoples, or strengthen the solidarity of the continent."
The justification for this"priority of the mind,"as
it has been called, was clearly expressed by M. Jaime
Torres Bodet, Unesco's Director-General, who addressed
the Council's opening session."No man,"he said,
"will defend with all his heart a fictitious liberty or a
social order which does not command his sincere
allegiance, nor a truth which demands of intellect,
and sometimes of his instincts, the denial of his spon-
taneous and incommunicable sense of culture."
"In the name of an Organization dedicated to the
conciliation of the peoples of the world through the
minds of men, I should like to express the hope that
the Council's activities may strengthen not merely the
cultural solidarity of the world, but also the confidence of
the world in the cultural solidarity of the Americas."
The programme drawn up by the Cultural Council
provides justification for this hope. Made up of some
fifty resolutions which include projects covering educa-
tion, literature, art and science, it is broad yet precise ;
ambitious, yet based on a realistic view of the continent's
needs.
One of the main problems before the delegates was
illiteracy. In the Americas, there are some 70, 000, 000
people who cannot read or write, and 19, 000, 000 children
for whom there are no schools. The adverse effects
of this situation on the well-being, cultural progress.
civic life, and agricultural, industrial, and technical
development of the continent are enormous.
Delegates also stressed the fact that as long as
millions of Americans remain ignorant of their cultural
heritage, the continent will be unable to claim to have
reached the goals of liberty, hope and peace.
To meet this challenge, the Cultural Council decided
to launch a large-scale educational campaign. This
will go much further than mere literacy teaching, for,
as M. Torres Bodet pointed out, fundamental education
embracing basic instruction in civics, home economics,
agriculture and hygiene must more and more replace
literacy teaching as such. In this continental effort,
the aid of governments, employers, trade unions, families,
churches, teachers and pupils, army instructors and
cinema and radio organizations will be mobilized.
The Council also urged member states to allocate
sufficient funda to ensure free and compulsory primary
schoo1ing for all, for unless these facilities are made
available, the ranks of the illiterates will continue to
grow and fundamental education projects will never
achieve lasting results.
The Council's programme not only harmonize8 with
that of Unesco, but in many ways represents it on a re-
gional basis. To combine all efforts and to avoid over-
lapping of activities, and consequent wastage of resources,
the Council asked the Organization of American States to
suggest to Unesco the setting up of a commission
charged with co-ordinating the work of both Organiza-
tions on projects of common interest. Through
agreements and administrative arrangements this could
lead to the pooling of resources and experiences.
D. H. Lawrence, who wrote one his finest novels against
a Mexican background, once compared humanity to a
giant tree which, having been felled, was lying with its
roots in the air. "We must replant ourselves in the
world,"he wrote.
In such a task there is a vital need for the close colla-
boration of two organizations which represent two reali-
ties of our time ; the effort to achieve a universality of
the human mind and the need for authentic national
cultures which are, in the words of Unamuno, the great
Spanish thinker,"an immanent covenant, a real but
unrecorded social contract, which is the true inner conati-
tution of every people."
---.
