ORGANIZING FOR PEACE
. A"PR06RESS REPORT"
To prepare studies on the subject of collective security directedprimarily to an audience at the college and university level, Unesco
commissioned three distinguished authorities from different
countries.
These three authors were : Dr. Andrew Martin, international lawyer
and lecturer at Ruskin College, Oxford (English text) ; Professor Georges
Scelle, professor of international law, University of Paris, and Secretary-
General of the Academy of International Law at the Hague (French text) ;
and H. E. Antonio Castro Leal, Head of the Mexican Delegation to
Unesco (Spanish text).
The three authors discussed the work and agreed on a general plan
as a basis for the texts, but each is writing in his own language with a
maximum freedom of expression and interpretation.
In the following article, written specially for the Courier, Dr. Andrew
Martin explains why he is casting his version of the Unesco monograph
in the form of a.. progress report".
IT is a somewhat perilous adventure
to write aboul collective security at
a moment of challenge and crisis ;
the writer is in constant danger of being
overtaken, by kaleidoscopic changes in
the situation, and of losing his perspec-
tive. Yet, from the point of view of
education in world citizenship the op-
portunity is unique.
Since 1919, most of the universities
have treated the problems of security
as fit only for the advanced student
specializing in international law or the
history of international institutions.
Now, all of a sudden, the subject has
become full of life, one which trans-
cends the traditional ljnes of demarca-
tion between the faculties, and by sheer
force of circumstance, is pushed right
into the focus of the attention of all
young people whatever may be their
particular line of study.
It is the common experience of many
teachers that the average student has
a preconceived attitude to collective se-
curity. There are, first or all, the"idea-
lists"who have unbounded respect for
the printed word of international ins-
truments, point with confidence to the
text of their Charter and say in effect :
"Collective security is an accomplished
fact. The machinery is streamlined
and automatic. It is bound to work
once it is properly run in."
There are, on the other hand, the
"realists", animated by an unconcealed
mistrust of international wars since
1945. For them, the Charter is a hollow
pretence and collective security in an
unfederated community of States a
mere figment of the imagination.
It these attitudes are, as I believe
'them to be, typical, there is a strong
. case for providing two propositions :
firstly, that in the past fifty years we
have made considerable and at times
revolutionary progress towards a work-
ing organization for peace ; secondly,
BY
Dr. ANDREW MART ! X
Dr. Andrew Martin is by training and
profession an international lawyer.
He was Political Correspondent to
the European Division of the BBC
during the war and has been teach-
ing International Relations at Rus-
kin College, Oxford, since 1945.
His"Commentary on the Charter
of the United Nations", written in
association with Professor Norman
Bentwieh, was, in 19S0, published
simultaneously in England and the
United States and his"Introduction
to International Relations"is short-
ly to be published in London. He
is the author of a number of articles
and papers on the economic clauses
of the Peace Treaties, the codifica-
tion of Human Rights and other
related subjects.
U. N.'s NEW HOME and New York's latest skyscraper-the new, 39-storey headquarters of
the United Nations international secretariat.
that if we want to cover the distance
which still separates us from the target,
the essential requirements of the. sys-,
tern must be understood and actively
supported by far wider sections of pub-.
lie opinion than is at present the case.
In keeping with this conception of
collective security as an organization
still in the process of evolution, I have
cast my own version of the textbook.
commissioned by Unesco in the form of
a"progress report".
Security is the sum total of interna-
tional activity in three interdependent
fields : regulation of armaments, pacif-
ic settlement of disputes, collective
action against breaches of the peace.
The evolution of ideas and institutions
in these three sectors has been neither
steady nor uniform. Progress in one
field has been frequently accompanied
by stagnation, indeed by retrogression
in one or both of the others. Yet, on
balance, there is a definite overall pro-
gress to record and I have attempted to
assess its nature and size.
To set in proper perspective the three
technical surveys which form the main
body of the book, I have tried to trace,
in an. introductory chapter, the funda-
mental change of our ideas about the'function of international society in rela-
tion to the. prevention of violence ; to
define the political impact of economic,
social and cultural co-operation within
the united Nations system ; and to
argue the case for a better appreciation
Of the moral and PSì'chological condi-
t ions of security.
