International Team Sets Up Work Camp
For Assams Educational Reconstruction
With Aid From
On August 15 last, the worst earthquake of modern times ravaged
the province of Assam in north east Indian, Earth tremors and the
floods that followed caused tremendous damage to homes, schools
and means of communication.
As a token of sympathy for the plight of Assam's earthquake victims,
Unesco's Executive Board voted S15, 000 for educational relief assistance.
Two-thirds of this sum is intended for the relief fund of the Governor
of Assam, earmarked for textbooks and other school supplies. The
remaining 85, 000 is being used by the Service Civil International Organ-
ization to help in the organization of voluntary work camps for the repair
of damaged schools and educational buildings in the devastated area.
The aims and work of the Service Civil International, and in particular
the efforts now being made by one of its international teams of volun-
teers to aid the rehabilitation programme in Assam, are described in
the following article.
L A,. ; T 111llnth, <I lIlitltlle-<lgetl
building worker named Leon
Bensimon left his home in
Morocco to take up a new job
6, 000 miles away in north east In-
dia. As a member of the Service
Civil International organization,
Bensimon had already put his
experience as a worker in reinfor-
ced concrete to use at work camps
in France and Switzerland, but the
job awaiting him in India is undou-
btedly the biggest he has helped
to tackle so far.
When he arrives in the hill
country of Assam, he will join a
Service Civil International team
which has already begun helping
in the reconstruction of homes
and schools damaged by the devas-
tating earthquake which occurred
there last August.
Like Léon Bensimon, other volunteers
are due to leave different parts of
Europe for Assam shortly, to join the
international team which already in-
cludes a Swiss, a Dane, an American,
and two British as well as Assamese
members.
The task facing the authorities in
Assam, with whom the team is co-
operating, is a formidable one. When
the earthquake occurred on August 15,
hills crumbled, and giant boulders
crashed down slopes carrying away
houses and blocking roads. RIverbeds
heaved up and rivers changed their
courses.
For two or three days, the river Su-
bansiri was blocked by boulders high
up in the mountains. \\'hen the rocks
gave way, a great wall of water swept
down the river, flooding the region of
North Lakhimpur. Thousands of people
In the low-lying areas were caught by
the flood, and their houses were wash-
ed away.
Educational Losses
M AXY educational institutions weredamaged r destroyed. Dr. A.
Wolsky, Principal Scientific Of-
ficer of Unesco's Science Co-operation
Office for South Asia, in Delhi, reported
after visiting the area that he had per-
sonally seen between 40 and 50 damag-
ed schools, cultural and religious in-
stitutions.
For several flays after the earth-
quake communications were comple-
tely cut with the rest of India. Gra-
dually, relief supplies began to arrive
and the Indian Government, together
with relief organizations, began to dis-
tribute food, milk, clothing and tools.
At that time, a small team of Euro-
pean Service Civil International volun-
teers was working in another part of
India. Its members were later sent up
to Assam where they at first assisted
with the emergency relief.
Today, they have begun work on two
reconstruction projects near PathaH-
pam, where a relief camp of bamboo
huts and tents has been established for
homeless people.
The first work camp project is the
construction of a primary school in a
newly opened reserve forest about three
miles from the camp. As villagers are
re-settling the area, a school building
is badly needed.
A second project, in the same area,
will provide a home for widows and
orphans at present living in the tem-
porary camp. Plans provide for a per-
manent centre to include living quar-
ters, a dispensary, an Office, a school,
a workshop, kitchens and bathrooms. A
third will probably be the rebuilding of
the Girls High School at Lakhimpur,
some 25 miles to the South West, which
was completely destroyed.
Working Against Time
'T* HE urgency of reconstruction tasksin northern Assam is increased
by the approach of the monsoon
which is due in March. With the huge
displacements of land caused by the
earthquake, fresh landslides may be
started by the rains and other commu-
nities endangered. Villages have had
to be moved from the plains to new
areas on higher round where sites
must be cleared m the forests and
construction begun as rapidly as pos-
sible.
The Service Civil International team
which is cho-operating in this work, Is
now being joined by Indian volunteers,
both from Assam and other parts of
the country.
This vital task in Assam provides the
Service Civil International with a new
opportunity for furthering jts primary
arm-the aim of all international work
camp organizations-which is to create
goodwill between peoples through the
medium of voluntary manual work.
The Service was founded on this basis
soon after the First World War. when
French and German volunteers and
other nationals worked together two re-
house peasants in the district of Ver-
dun. As the idea spread, camps were
set up in Switzerland, France, England,
Norway and other countries to help the
victims of disasters. TheSccon (t\\orId
War limited work camp activities, but
since 1945 the movement has expanded
rapidly.
"Education For Peace"
THE guiding spirit for such activitieswas recently expressed by the
Organization's Joint International
Secretary in a letter to Unesco's Re-
construction Service. She wrote :"2 ? e-
sides the contributions which these
camps can make to the material rehabi-
lita/ion Qf Assam, tee believe they have
another value, more difficult to define
and to assess...
"The small S. C./. team which hats
heen working in India since February
1950 has already had a number of
I ndian volunteers working with it ; all...
have stressed the same two ideas : first
the wlue to them personally of this new
experience of voluntary manual work
undertaken in a spirit of disinterested
setrice together u ; ith men and women
uf other nationalities, other creeds ; and
secondly, the effect that the presence
and the work of the team had on the
people among whom they were work-
ing, the new sense of a human solidarity
wllich has no regard fOI'differences of
race, nationality religious or political
creeds, profession or social class.
"It is because tve are convinced that
lCork camps can have a very real edu-
calionalva/ue and that they can be a
) Josìtive and effective'education for
peace'that we are particularly happy
to have the support of Unesco for the
u'ork camps in Assam."
Unesco
