THE AUTHORITY OF THE UNIVERSAL
DECLARATION
Delegates to the United Nations General Assembly met in the main hall of
the Palais de Chaillot, Paris on the night of December 10, to vote the adoption
of the ! Universal Declaration of Human Rights. M. Emile St. Lot of Haiti,
Rapporteur of the Third Committee, who presented the Declaration to the
Assembly, described it as"the greatest effort of humanity to find new moral
and juridical bases founded on liberty, equality and fraternity."
ON 10 December 1948, the General Assembly of the United Nationsadopted and proclaimed the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights'''was a common standard of achievement for all peoples and
all nations, to the end that every individual and every organ of society,
keeping this Declaration constantly in mind, shall strive by teaching and
education to promote respect for these rights and freedoms and by pro-
gressive measures, national and international, to secure theist-universal
and effective recognition and observance, both among the peoples of
Member States themselves and among the peoples of territories under
their jurisdiction".
It was approaching midnight when the vote was taken. The repre-
sentatives of fifty-six Governments were seated in the main Assembly
hall of the Palais de Chaillot in Paris. After two years of laborious
study and discussion, after countless meetings of drafting groups, com-
mittees, and commissions, after seemingly endless hearings and debates,
after hundreds of amendments and a thousand statements, a single final
document had emerged bearing the symbol number A/777. It was the
draft text of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. One after
another the representatives rose to present the viewpoint of their govern-
ments on this proclamation of human rights. Although opinions varied
as to its substance and form, the Declaration was adopted without a dis-
senting vote by the supreme organ of the international community (1).
One representative after another affirmed that what was being done
was of immense historical significance, destined to have far-reaching
effects on the lives of men and of nations. This was not only the view-
point of individual representatives. It was the sense of the Assembly
itself in formally resolving that"the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights is an historic act, destined to consolidate
world peace through the contribution of the United Nations towards the
liberation of individuals from the unjustified oppression and constraint
to which they are too often subjected".
Within the short time since its proclamation the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights has had a marked impact on the thought and action
of individuals and organizations, on teaching and education, and on
progressive measures, both national and international to promote a more
effective recognition and observance of the rights and freedoms proclaim-
ed therein. These are the developments the Secretary-General of the
United Nations had in mind when he said in October 1950 that'''it 1s
becoming increasingly evident that the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights is destined to become one of the great documents or. history".
rights, racial persecution will be end-
ed". A series of pronouncements-in
the Atlantic Charter, 1941, in the
United Nations Declaration of 1943,
and at the Dumbarton Oaks Confer-
ence, 1944-gave expression to the
aspirations of the Allied nations that
in the postwar world the promotion
and protection of human rights should
be an accepted aim of national and
international conduct.
The Charter not only affirmed faith
in human rights-it required the
United Nations to promote them. It
imposed a legal obligation on all its
Members to take joint and separate
action in co-operation with the United
Nations Organization for the achieve-
ment of this purpose. It established
machinery to perform the functions of
promoting human rights. The Charter
of the United Nations, in fact, laid the
foundations of a plan of human rights,
conceived, drawn up and put into
effect as a part of the most widespread
attempt at international co-operation
of all time. The first part of this
plan, and so far the most important,
was the drafting and adoption of the
Universal Declaration or, Human
Rights.
The Aroused
Conscience of mankind
IN the Charter, the Economic andSocial ouncil was required to set
up a commission for the promotion
of human rights. This was done early
in 1946. After its establishment the
Commission on Human Rights began
its monumental task of incorporating
the aims and aspirations of the peoples
of the world into an international bill
of rights. It was the first time such a
task had been contemplated or at
thorized by the organized who. ;
community. It was agreed that t1iè
bill of rights would consist of a
universal declaration of human rights,
a covenant on human rights and
measures of implementation.
The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights in the opening words of its
Preamble reflects the actual conditions
from which it emerged. It speaks of
the fact that"recognition of the
inherent dignity and of the equal and
inalienable rights of all members of
the human family is the foundation of
freedom, justice and peace in the
world". It then goes on to recall how.. ard and contempt for human
rights have resulted in barbarous acts
which have outraged the conscience of
mankind", and how"the advent of a
world in which human beings shall
enjoy freedom of peech and belief and
freedom from fear and want has been
proclaimed as the highest aspiration of
the common people". These passages
- the last taken from the Atlantic
Charter-provide the first reason for
the unique authority of the Declara-
tion : it was born out of a life and
death struggle of the peoples of the
world against tyranny and oppression.
It represented the highest aspirations
of the common people.
Rights Without
Discrimination'
BUT a second element contributed toits unique authority. Its applica-
tion is universal. The rights pro-
claimed are rights to which everyone is
entitled,"without distinction of any
kind, such as race, sex, language, reli-
gion, political or other opinion, na-
tional or social origin, property, birth
or other status". This is a list of
things that cannot or should not inter-
fere with your rights. It is taken
from Article 2 of the Universal
Declaration. The Article prescribes
full equality. Everyone is entitled to
all the rights and freedoms set forth
in this Declaration without distinction
of any kind. The list that follows
enumerates the grounds or pretexts on
the basis of which enjoyment of rights
at one time or other, in some place or
other, has been denied. It is not an
exhaustive list. It merely enumerates
the most frequent cases of discrimina-
tion.
The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights stands firmly against all types
of discrimination and proclaims rights
and freedoms for all. It may be noted
that special reference is made to one
(1) The Declaration was adopted by forty-eight VO"te8 in against and
eight abstention.
THE struggle for human rights has1 gone on fr m the beginning
of recorded time. History has
marked the efforts of the seers and
prophets, the philosophers, the saw-
givers, the statesmen and the martyrs
in voicing demands for a larger
freedom. But the nerve centre or. the
struggle for human rights is to be
found in the people themselves, tn the
attempts of ordinary men and women
to establish their claim to a decent,
unmolested life in the face of des-
potism and bigotry, of ignorance and
intolerance, of superstition and
tyranny. Sometimes the struggle has
been hard-fought and the casualties
have been high. Sometimes it has
surged forward on the irresistible tide
of a free and responsible democracy.
The establishment of the United
Nations was a high point in the age-
long battle for human rights. For in
its Charter the representatives of all
the signatory States pledged their
governments"to promote universal
respect for and observance of human
rights and fundamental freedoms for
all without distinction as to race, sex,
language or religion".
The rise of Fascism and Nazism had
been a ruthless challenge to the
advance in the democratic process
which assured the individual of an
"'-broadMftbg'1llâ for the exercise
of his rights at a free person. In
Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany, and
the countries brought under their
domination, the individual was stripped
of his civil rights, subjected to police
tyranny and condemned to brutal
oppression on grounds of race and
religion. During the Second World
War, a campaign of systematic
extermination was directed against
members of the Jewish community in
Germany, a savage campaign for
which human history can provide
few parallels. Political freedom dis-
appeared ; the power of the State
became absolute.
As the war progressed and war
objectives began to form, the leaders
of the Allied nations, reflecting the
aroused conscience of their peoples,
Insisted that the foundations of peace
must be built on a respect for human
rights. President Franklin D. Roose-
velt expressed such an objective in his
Four Freedoms message to Congress in
1941-"freedom of speech, freedom of
worship, freedom from want and fear,
everywhere in the world". The Pre-
sident's statement was matched by
that of Winston Churchill, Britain's
war-time Prfme Minister, who prom-
ised that"when this struggle ends
with the enthronement of human
very common type of discrimination-
discrimination practised against groups
of people who belong to a territory
which is not fully autonomous. The
Declaration states in Article 2 that
"no discrimination shall be made on
the basis of the political, jurisdictional
or international status of the country
or territory to which a person belongs,
whether this territory be an in-
dependent, Trust, Non-Self-Governing
Territory, or under any other limita-
tion of sovereignty".
New Rights and Old
A THIRD feature of the UniversalDeclaration which adds to its
intrinsic authority is the broad
range of the rights and freedoms it
proclaims. For the first time in history
a comprehensive system of human
rights is given international recogni-
tion. The Declaration not only incor-
porates the great victories of the past- victories in the field of free thought
and opinion, victories which won for
the common man the right to free
assembly and association, to freedom
from arbitrary arrest and the right to
a fair trial. These great traditional
rights had already been proclaimed in
the historic declarations of human
rights and were, of course, Included in
the Universal Declaration. But the
Universal Declaration points beyond
these traditional rights to the more
recently defined and recognized social,
cultural and economic rights-the
right to work, the right to l sec-
urity, to education, to healthy. and an
adequate standard of living, to full
parttciJ) ation in the cultural life of the
community.,
Many national constitutions drawn
up in this century offer guarantees of
employment, unemployment insurance,
old-age and sickness benefits, and free
education. Moreover, in recent legisla-
tion is. many countries, increasing
stress has been laid on these gua-
rantees. But the economic, cultural
and social rights set forth in articles
22-27 of the Declaration have not yetbeen fully realized. The Declaration
defines with clarity and with authority
those rights which have, in a sense,
been created by the very complexity
and change of social and economic
conditions of the twer. tieth century. It
attempts to match newly recognized
needs with norms of conduct arising
out of the awakened social conscience
of mankind. The articles in the Dec-
laration setting forth these rights
mark an evolution in social and juri-
dical thinking and at the same time
define a goal,"a standard of achieve-
ment", by which mankind may judge
its progress.
There is a fourth reason for the
unique authority of the Universal Dec-
laration, and perhaps it is the most
significant of all. At the time of the
adoption of the Dec1aration, the Pre-
sident of the General Assembly, Her-
bert Vere Evatt of Australia, said :
"It is the first occasion on which the
organized community of nations has
made a declaration of human rights
and fundamental freedoms, and it has
the authority of the body of opinion
of the United Nations as a whole, and
millions of men, women and children
all over the world, many miles from
Paris and New York, will turn for
help, guidance and inspiration to this
document".
Herein lies the greatest significance
of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights : it is a Declaration, not of one
person or group of persons, not of one
nation or of one people, but of the
organized community of nations and
of all the peoples throughout the
world.
The General Assembly in the open-
ing paragraph of the Declaration itself
set as the goal of this new inter-
national action"that every individual
and every organ of society, keeping
this Declaration constantly in mind
shall strive by teaching and education
to promote respect for these rights
and freedoms and by progressive
measures, national and international,
to secure their universal and effective
recognition and observance".
Terts on this page were selected from
"The Impact of the Universal Declaration
of HI/man Rights", published by the United
. Vations Department of Social Affairs,
