Benjamin
Constant
Fighter For Freedom,
IDefender Of The Press
By Jean Bloch-Michel
Scientific and cultural progress has
always been made along the road of
freedom of thought. Similarly, the
path leading to real democracy based
on mutual understanding among men and
peoples depend in its essence on free
availability of information and the freedom
of the press.
It was in this spirit that the United Na-
tions Commission on Freedom of Infor-
mation met at Lake Success in January
and February this year. Representatives
of fifteen countries : Saudi Arabia, Cuba,
Ecuador, Egypt, France, Great Britain, In-
dia, the Lebanon, Mexico, the Netherlands,
Pakistan, the Philippines, the United States,
the U. S. S. R. and Yugoslavia, drew up a
convention which will be submitted to
member states of the United Nations and
forwarded to the Economic and Social
Council for adoption at its session In July.
The article below recalls the inspiring
struggle waged more than a century ago
by a champion of freedom of the press,
the French thinker, Benjamin Constant.
"I SHALL find my life only within
myself"wrote Benjamin Cons-tant in his personal diary during
March 1805. Nine years later, how-
ever, on 7 July 1814, he wrote :
"I must become something !" Constant.
a dreamer who wished to become a
man of action, was perpetually torn bet-
ween a taste for working in seclusion,
and an urge to be famous. Based on
such inconsistency, his life was inevi-
tably chaotic. But under this façade of
inconsistency, behind a series of appa-
rent recantations, the life, which he
found"only within himself", never-
theless produced a profound unity in
the ideals of Benjamin Constant.
Under the Directoire he publicly and
enthusiastically affirmed his regard for
freedom. But, when the First Consul
treated the Tribunate to maintain his
authoritarian regime, Benjamin Cons-
tant demanded and then obtained a
place in it. An act of self-betrayal ? In
his first speech before this assembly
he attacked Bonaparte's policy so vio-
lently that he was not only forced to
quit the Tribunate, but obliged to leave
France and follow Germaine de Stael
into exile.
When Napoleon returned to France
in 1815, Benjamin Constant in a cele-
brated article, which, unfortunately for
him, his contemporaries did not forget,
loudly proclaimed that he would not
serve"the tyrant". But, when he was
summoned by the Emperor to the Tui-
leries a few days later he agreed to
draft the"Acte Additionnel" (a supple-
mentary act to the Empire Constitution,
introducing certain reforms). Another
act of self-betrayal ? Constant did not
think so and seized, what he described
in his journal of 30 March, 1815, as"a
chance for freedom". And at the end
of the"Hundred Days", he wrote with
bitterness :"The wretches ! They served
him with enthusiasm when he way
crushing freedom. When he establishes
it, they abandon him."
A Partisan
Of All Freedoms
\V7 F. cannot judge such behavioura cording to today's standards
created by a century of parlia-
elected as Deputy for the Sarthe Depar-
tement, and undertook to carry on his
fight in parliament. For a long time.
he had been"someone". Now, he had
finally become"something".
At that time, there were not many
clear-cut ideas on the subject of press
freedom. The opinions of those favour-
able to complete freedom"had disap-
peared", wrote Pasquier in his memoirs,
"during the long silence imposed by
the imperial regime, and discussions
concerned little more than the extent by
which repressive measures would be
increased."There were demands that
these should be extreme."It is In the
nature of man to be dependent", said
Duplessis de Grenedan, adding,"free-
dom is not the goal of government."
"Wherever the press is free", said Fon-
tanes, the former Grand Master of the
Imperial University,"I will never look
upon myself as free."
"contempt of State religion". He de-
monstrated the difficulty in discriminat-
ing between contempt and simple cri-
ticism of certain bodies or ecclesiastical
institutions. Speaking of the Jesuits, he
said :"If the statements he once made
agamst these associations were written
by Pascal today, he would undoubtedly
be condemned under the terms of this
law."
Every year, when the budget was
being voted, or press laws were being
renewed or altered, he returned to the
attack. Not only did he speak in par-
liament, but he asked the public to
judge his cause, by publishing his work
"The freedom of booklets, political pam-
phlets and newspapers considered from
the government's viewpoint."
During his 10 : lg and assiduous efforts,
he made many statements expressing
the basis of his ideals : For instance, on---.-.--
March 7, 11 ! 20, he said :
" ! have always looked
with envy upon those
friends of freedom,
who, when a revolu-
tionary struggle began,
were the first to suc-
cumb. Their fate pre-
vented them from wit-
ness'ng more frightful
events."
mentary democracy. In the time of
Constant, one served a master or a po-
lacy. To a French royalist it was of
little interest that the Emperor ruled
in a manner resembling that of
Louis XIV. He had usurped the throne,
and between him and his subjects the
bonds of hereditary dependence inherit-
ed from the feudal system no longer
existed. If. on the other hand. one
served a policy, it made little differ-
ence which regime applied it. This
attitude was illustrated by the case of
Talleyrand ; other less brilliant figures
also adopted it.
Benjamin Constant appears to have
been strongly influenced Þy the doc-
trines of Bentham, especially the one
which taught that regimes and consti-
tutions are only empty frames. Accord-
ing to Bentham a monarchy can be libe-
ral, a democracy despotic ; all efforts
towards freedom must be made within
the framework of the state, and with-
out consideration of the kind of consti-
tution. These were the ideas that druid-
ed Benjamin Constant during his whole
life. He was a liberal, a partisan of all
freedoms, and his most consistent
struggle was for the freedom of the
press.
In 1819, he managed to get himself
The Press Must Be
A Common Possession
B E : \'JAIIIIN CONSTANT strongly oppos-ed such attitudes. On 14 A ril,
1819, when he spoke for the first
time to the Assembly, it was to defend
in forthright fashion the right of the
press to express itself freely. On
1 and 5 May of the same year, he de-
manded that Parliament reject the law
of"security", under which anyone
printing a newspaper was obliged to
make a preliminary payment and give
certain guarantees."It has been esta-
blished", he declared,"that the press Is
a weapon and as thus it must remain
a common possession. The common
law demands that anyone who misuses
a weapon to commit a crime or offence,
be punished, but the common law does
not ask anyone to give a guarantee that
he will not misuse it."
In spite of his opposition, the law
establishing"security"and restraining
press freedom was approved. The
following year, Benjamin Constant
again took up the cudgels when he
spoke on the penalties contemplated for
"Neither
Executioners
Nor Victims"
BENJAMIN CONSTANTwas not a revolu-
tionary. All attacks
on freedom, no matter
what the principle mo-
tivating them, horrified
him. And if he denied
other political parties
the right to oppress
anyone, he also denied
such rights to his own
with the same vigour.
"We struggle against
all censorship", he de-
clared at the tribune on
7 July, 1821 ;"not like
greedy pretenders who
destroy what they can-
not seize, but as men
who will neither tole-
rate nor employ means
of oppression ; as men who desire for
others, as for themselves, freedom,
security, justice..."
In these words, Benjamin Constant
defined, not so much a politico ! attitude,
as a moral position. Circumstances may
change, society may take on another
appearance, economies, frontiers, modes
of life, civilizations may alter, but the
words of Benjamin Constant will never
be denied. The defenders of liberty
will always be those who wish"neither
to tolerate nor employ means of oppres-
sion", who refuse to become either
executioners or victims.
On the 10 December, 1830, at the age
of 63, Benjamin Constant died. Some
days earlier, he had accomplished the
last act of his parliamentary career.
This had begun on 14 Capri !, 1819, when
he made a speech on uio freedom of
the press. It ended after he presenter
a draft bill, later rejected, on the free-
dom of the printers'trade.
All the honours refused to him during
his life-time were rendered him after
death. His coffin was carried to the
Pêre Lachaise Cemetery in Paris,
escorted by the national guard, and
followed by ministers, members of
Parliament and a huge crowd.