0Oft'tMst
IN the time of Pericles the average Athenian wasfirmly convinced that the Boeotians were dull-
witted, the Cretans liars and the Asiatics effe-
minate and uncivilized.
Such clichés as these have now lost their
offensive connotation, although literature has
nevertheless kept them alive for 2, 500 years.
During this time, however, countries and commu-
nities have invented many others. Those in
common use today, and there are hundreds, are
not lacking in virulence. Ask anyone, in any lan-
guage, to complete slogans like"The Germans are...
The Jews are... The French are...", and, as likely
as not. he will not hesitate to give the usual hasty
judgments. The opinion varies with the nationa-
lity of the person expressing it : those who are
regarded as"scientific and hard-working"by their
neighbours in the West may be no more than
"militaristic and hyprocritical"to Eastern eyes.
IF scientifically controlled examples are neededthere are plenty-scandalous or diverting
according to the mood of the reader-in a
book by Professor otto Klineberg, which the Social
Science Research Council has published in New
York. This book, which gives results of research
into"Tensions. Affecting International Understand-
ing", is a contribution to the work undertaken by
Unesco in the field of Social Sciences. The pur-
pose of this work is clear when one considers the
abounding errors and misconceptions, even between
countries which regard one another as friendly,
in their statements and discussions. Errors and
misconceptions cause resentment and tension, and
the result is too often catastrophic. The first need
is for understanding, for prejudices must be ana-
lysed before they can be destroyed. And what a
jungle of pseudo-science must be uprooted, full
of slogans, illogical ideas, and clichés !
Before dealing with these cliches-or, as a
sociologist calls them, national stereotypes-Dr.
Klineberg is honest enough to ask if they do after
all contain a"kernel of truth". When ten or
twenty million people regard their neighbours as
either frivolous, witty or lazy, should not their
opinion be accepted as the starting point for
an investigation of the existence of such qua-11.... _t T., . .... L :.... : L, ... alities ? In practice it seems wrong
to rely on opinions. Those who
express them may be in1iuenced by
even the most anecdotal history,
while propaganda exerts an even
more powerful sway. To upset these
unstable opinions may only require
the effects of a few novels, films, or
vague fears. Politics is another
important factor.
If economic interests become in-
volved, an entire race can find itself
regarded in a different light over-
night. Dr. Klineberg recalls the
history of the Chinese in California.
(He has taken an example from his.".""., 4,." 1", 4 mh, 4 4ho"r, ninrvown country, but what other nation has not had
similar experiences ?).
A hundred years and more ago, California gave
these Chinese a cordial welcome. The white gold-
hunters wanted to get rich quickly and they
needed good workers and servants."The Chin-
ese,"said the papers of that era,"are very
capable, sober, tractable, inoffensive, law-abiding...
The most worthy of our newly adopted citizens."
The 1860's arrived, with industrial upheavels, an
influx of population from the centre and the east
- and unemployment. At the elections of 1867
the two parties were promising to"protect the
Californians against Mongolian competition."The
Chinese were now described as"unassimilable,
criminal, debased and servile, deceitful and
vicious."In short, they had outlived their use-
The illustrationst Brotherhood e
Burbank, Caiitornié
film is based on
and Gene Weltfish
protagonist of eac
which sneeringly 
resolved by the na !
illustrations are cOI
O One night Henry, an ordinary. friendly American, dreams ofvisiting far-off strange lands.
A henry gets up and finds a number of exotic landscapes right
in front of his own window.
The men from far-off lands peer out of their respective win-
dows in mutual surprise.
O HenlY tries to convjnce his new neighbours that HIS way oflife is the best.
A FInally everyone isgOLng around in agry circles, scratching,
fighting and palling.
A But then they stop and begin to wonder why they are fighting, II
Because they are different ? ?
& Physically, men are a lot more alike than you might think ;
Si/witness the matter of biood'type".
When they meet, fully grown, they're amazed how environ-
ment has more to do with development than anything else.
`.'when these two women-for experiment's ake-exchange
babes, the children develop according to environment.

I itS/
By Georges FRAD/ER
fulness and were to be got rid of. In stereotypes
of this kind the kernel of truth appears microsco-
pic. Some enquiries have indicated that more
often than not it can be reduced to nothing.
: rations on these pages are reproduced from the animated colour-film
erhood of Man produced in 1945 by the United Productions of America,
California, on the initiative, of the United Automobile Workers-CIO. The
sed on the pamphlet Races of Mankind written by Ruth Benedict
Weltfish of the Department of Anthrolopogy of Columbia University. The
it of each racial group in Brotherhood of Man has a Green Devil alter ego
'ering ! y suggests the old racial prejudice slogans. As each question is
) y the narrator, the green devil retreats from the normally happy person. All
IS are copyright by UPA and may not be reproduced without prior permission.
A number of universities submitted to their
students a list of different ethnic groups through-
out the world and asked them to state what
degree of like or dislike they felt towards each. In
the long list the names of three entirely imaginary
peoples were introduced-the Danireans, the
Pirineans and the Valonanians. The results were
invariable. Each time a minority of students
abstained from judging these imaginary peoples ;
but the others did not hesitate to record their like
or distrust. Usually the Danireans were regarded
with disfavour and sometimes the Pirineans and
the Valonanians were held in greater esteem than
real peoples. It is true that if these unfortunate
students had never seen a Valonanian, neither
had they ever come into contact with, for example.
Hindus or Arabs.
This is the root of the problem : None of them
had ever seen the Arabs. But, then, who will ever
see the Americans ? In former times, a classical
education did at least inculcate the simple rule nnt
to attribute to all, the qualities of the indivi-
dual ; in extolling the virtue of Penelope, it
remained silent on the general fidelity of Ithacan
wives. Thus it was hoped that a man of culture
would be recognized by his refusal,in all circumstances, to give force-
ful judgments on peoples, races or
vague ideas in general.
Today most people are willing to
admit their folly in talking about
things of which they know nothing
yet fail to recognize that such
chatter is dangerous. Dr. Kline-
berg notes that"those wbjects
who reacted unfavourably to minor-
ity groups were, on the whole, those
who reacted in term of the stereo-
type. They were the people who
said,'The Jews are...''The English
are...'The very willingness to speak
rl t. rrn. < : : on tl1p h. < : : i. < : : nf l1nvprifipnin such general terms on the basis of unverified
and frequently unverifiable assumptions is to be
regarded as suspect."
The word"suspect"seems inadequate when one
realizes that these unfounded assumptions form a
part-perhaps bigger than ever-of the edu-
cation received by children at home, in the street,
and even at school. Every parent is not a logician
and of course society must respect the basic truths
that are expressed around the family table. But
there is nothing to stop society from countering the
prejudices which, for instance, are created by
doubtful children's"literature".
Numerous studies have shown that a traitor or
the criminal in such literature must invariably be
a foreigner, and as often as not, a member of a
hated or despised group. When the adolescent no
longer reads these periodicals he finds the same
"diet"in popular magazines. Dr. Klineberg reports
an interesting analysis of national stereotypes pre-
sented by eight particularly successful magazines.
Close examination of 198 short stories in these
publications revealed that their characters played
their role only according to a strictly established
ethnic hierarchy : one nationality fits the gangster,
one origin the harlot, one skin colour the half-wit.
FOR the schools, Dr. Klineberg stresses"theextent to which textbooks can influence chil-
dren". After examining a number of these
books, and especially those dealing with history,
he declare. s :"The authors of secondary-school
history texbooks in all countries are substantially
in agreement that the leaders of their own country
were honourable and their soldiers noble and cour-
ageous ; when defeated, it was because of the
overwhelming force of the enemy ; the enemy,
whatever his identity, was treacherous and
cowardly."
Under Unesco auspices, numerous educators.
historians and geographers are trying to bring
about a reform of the textbooks in use ; the aim is
impartiality. The purpose of such a reform is not
to tarnish, in the eyes of young citizens, the
honour and glory of their ancestors, but only to
enable them ALSO to believe in the rights and
honour of their neighbours across the sea or the
frontier.
The unequivocal aim of all education worthy of
the name is to fight continually against the pre-
judices, ignorant misunderstandings and stupid
hatreds which daily invade the mind of the child.
But neither the teachers, nor the philisophers, are
enough to silence the sententious chorus which, at
every corner of the globe, and every level of society,
continues to express its distrust and fear of the
Cretans and Valonanians.
A Henry begins to feel a bit of doubt : will lie like thIs""w
environment and these strange peoples ?
ð : \, Long, long ago, life began on quite an equal basis with
'1 ! 1 Adam and Eve ; then people spread all over the world.
-  KnONing ! hese things, sensible people learn to live as
brothers is peace and friendship...
His Green Devil pulls at him and suggests ome unpleasant
thoughts about racial differences
A All the Green Devils start to work on their masters to cause
V trouble and dissension.
As things developed on the continents, the Asiatic civiliza-
tion grew faster than elsewhere.
t ! : \. Today, things are just about equal mentally for the three
races of mankind-white, yellow and black.
Heir ugly Green Devils of prejudice, hate and stupidity.
V (Copyright UPA).
they stop kicking each other around and instead apply he
point of their boots to the seats of...
