THE U. N. FIGHT AGAINST DISEASE AND DESPAIR IN KOREA
Two immense problems for the Unified Command in Korea-the protection of the civilian
population against epidemics and the care of refugees and orphans-are illustrated In these
photographs. To prevent oubreaks of sma ( (-pox, typhus, typhoid and cholera, mass inno-
culations have been carried out (above), (1) by Korean doctors under the supervision of the
Unified Command, which supplies the vaccines and medical equipment. Orphans found
wandering in the ruins of the Korean city (above), (2) are placed in a truck to be taken to
an orphanage by a U. N. Welfare Officer on the staff of the Unified Command.
EXECUTIVE BOARD APPROVES
USE OF $ 100. 000 FUND
FOR URGENT KOREAN
EDUCATIONAL NEEDS
ONE way in which Unesco responded to the United Nations appeal forsupport of its action in Korea last year, was to establish a special
fund for educational, scientific and cultural aid to the people of Korea.
Last month, after receiving details of Korea's"minimum, emergency'
educational requirements, Unesco's Executive Board decided to make an
immediate contribution towards the provision of the most urgent of these
supplies by offering this special fund of $100, 000 to the Secretary-Generalof United Nations.
The resolution approved by the Board authorized the Director-General
to put the fund at the disposal of the U. N. Secretary-General, when"h-8
shall have informed the Director-General that the situation in Korea
would permit the effective use of the fund for educational, scientific any
cultural aid to the civilian population of Korea".
The extensive list of educational supplies towards the provision of
which the fund may now be employed, was forwarded to Unesco by the UN
Secretary-General, Mr. Trygve Lie, from the Unified Command. It
included such items as newsprint, paper, blackboards, pencils and note-
books.
As accurate figures regarding the number of elementary school pupils,
classrooms and schools were not available, the items listed were based on
the needs of one million five hundred thousand pupils in approximately
4, 000 schools and represented"minimum emergency requirements".
As a result of the Executive Board's meeting, Unesco has asked
Mr. Trygve Lie to obtain information from the Unified Command as to
which items in the list have the highest priority.
Many voluntary agencies are anxious to co-operate in the relief and
rehabilitation of Korea. Unesco is therefore making every effort through
the machinery of the United Nations to secure information about specific
needs of universities and educational institutions there. Factual data and
background material of this kind are indispensable to these voluntary
aid organizations in launching fund raising appeals.
(J
