THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS
by H. E. Luis Padilla Nervo
Permanent Mexican Representative to the United Nations
H. E. Ambassador Luis Padilla Nert"o has made
a special sta ! eTMnt for this Human Rights issue
of the Courier, which we publish below. Ambas-
sador Padilla Nervo was elected President of tht
United Nations General Assembly in Paris on NOL'-
ember 6, 1951.
THE Universal Declaration of Human Rights.adopted by the General Asse bly of the
United Nations during its Third Session in
Paris in 1948, has brought a ray of hope to all
peoples. At a time in history when we all follow
with anxiety the international debates on whose
outcome the very issue of peace or war may
well depend, the Declaration exalts the best
traits and characteristics of the human person.
In this hospitable land of France, where.
brought forth by a revolution, the Rights of Man
were first proclaimed for all. the old and the
new Declarations of Rights stand side by side,
in Paris, the city where the Member States of
the United Nations unanimously agreed to pro-
claim their firm belief in man's dignity and in
the urgent need to guarantee the enjoyment of
those rights to all mankind.
The Declaration of the Rights of Man born of
the French Revolution inspired many peoples to
incorporate in their legislation those principles
whereby human beings have been protected in
many respects over the last century. The United
Nations also adopted several of those principles
of the French Declaration of Rights into their own
Universal Declaration.
Moved by a generous spirit of human under-
standing, the United Nations took into account
the suggestions made by the representatives of
their Member States and discussed at length the
minimum guarantees that were to be given the
human person as far as the enjoyment of rights
was concerned. The result of this painstaking
work was the Declaration of 1948, that stands
as one of the most constructive achievements of
the World Organization.
The Declaration is not a vague promise. Nor
is it a document deprived of effective force. It
is backed by a moral conviction which springs
from the general aspirations of all men ; it is
also proof of the will to live in peace, within a
spirit of social justice, that is common to all
peoples.
By affirming the rights of the individual and
appealing to governments and individuals alike
to respect the principles contained therein, the
Declaration emphasises the reality of the words
of Benito Jaurez, the great Mexican patriot, when
he said :"Peace is the respect in which one
holds other people's rights". By the effective
application of human rights peace will indeed
become stable and certain : history shows us
repeatedly that wars are the result of the abuse
of the weak by the strong, of the powerless by
the powerfuL
The right of a person to protection against any
violation of his individual guarantees is undoub-
tedly one of the most outstanding features of
the Declaration without such recourse against
any possible abuse of authority, the exercise of
human rights would have little or no foundations.
The principle of no discrimination, that makes
the Declaration really universal and applicable
in sovereign statee and non-seli-goveming tern-
tories alike, is also worthy of unreserved
backing. Discrimination not only degrades those
who are its victims, but dishonours those who
practice it. By guaranteeing privacy, freedom to
work, social security and education to all indi-
viduals, without distinction of race. sex, nation-
ality or political or religious belief (living them
at the same time access to a resource which pro-
tects them against any violation of individual
guarantees) the Paris Declaration fulfils the role
of guardian over the essential rights of men
everywhere.
The transcendent vitality of the Declaration has
already been proved by the incorporation of
some of its principles into the national legislation
of several countries which in these last years
have become politically autonomous. Such
examples are proof that the Declaration, though
not juridically bindinc : r for the Member States of
the United Nations, has already a moral
influence that, with time. can only strengthen the
respect of the human person as a foundation of
all socit. : orders. Good relations betwen gov-
ernments and peoples and the establishment
of a fair peace in which men can work to build
a free world, can also be strengthened only by
enforcing the principles of the Universal Decla-
ration of Human Rights.
