Millions of
women have
still to win
equality
By Georges FRADIER
discussed much less than it was fifty years ago, and because it is rarely
mentioned there is a tendency to consider the problem as solved-or
nearly so. Facts demonstrate the contrary, for while in many countries
women have the right to go to law and,
Women are still deprived of these rights.
It is not possible,  even in  1951, to speak in general of "the rights of
women in the modern world", and in any case, even the phrase "the
modem world " is illusory, used in this connexion. The English woman
or the Swede, for example, may with good reason point to the successful
evolution of her legal status, but she should not forget that millions of
other women are still no letter off in this respect than their female
ancestors of the Middle Ages, or even of the Stone Age, for that matter.
A clear distinction must be drawn between the two main problems
which concern the status of women. Firstly, in many countries women
have still to gain their political rights and, even in those countries which
have officially recognized and proclaimed them, their full application
still meets with many obstacles, In this connexion, therefore, the fight
which has long been waged must be continued with even greater effort.
Secondly, inequality expressed through attitudes and customs is most
deeply entrenched in human minds, and it is here that it must be rooted
out and destroyed. The leading place which women have filled in the
field of education gives them an effective weapon for this fight.
"""
Today, too, women have a means of bringing about international
action through the work of the Commission on the Status of Women in
the United Nations Economic and Social Council which can co-ordinate
the individual efforts of women in all countries.
This need for personal action was stressed recently by a member of
the Commission, who said :"It is up to all women to make equamity &alpha; a
reality."
ANY discussion on the subject of women's rights atmost invariablyresults in comparisons being drawn between the most favourable
of present day conditions and those of between fifty and one
hundred years ago. The resuits of such contrasts are usually
encouraging, for there is no doubt that in many countries women have
fought for and achieved their emancipation. Legislation in their favour
has been responsible for widespread changes and the idea, of equality
between the sexes meets with almost unanimous agreement. Yet how
justified is this satisfaction with the apparent progress that has been
made ?
To judge the real measure of what has been achieved one might do
better to compare even the most satisfactory of present-day conditions
with the text of a document that expresses on this subject the widest
and noblest aspirations of our time : The Universel Declaration of Human of Human
Rights. In this  Declaration, the United Nations laid down a common
standard of achievement to be aimed for by all peoples and all nations
at this midpoint in the 20th century. Its texts are not Utopian in concept.
They provide a precise definition of the legislation which should govern
all peoples in the light of present knowledge, technical progress and
economic conditions, taking into account social and juridical progress
already achieved.
Perhaps the spirit of their universality of purpose and application is
best framed in the solemn words of the Preamble which declares"the
peoples of the United Nations have in the Charter reaffirmed their faith...
in the equal rights of men and women".
Yet, in all honesty, one must admit that this "faith" in equal rights
too often remains a theoretical one that the rights named in the
Declaration are only partially applied, and that the status of women
remains far below the level defined by international legislators.
Nowadays, the social and political emancipation of women is
