done by the Bureau of Reclamation
Venezuela 1s only one of the na-
tions which have used the facilities
of the Denver laboratories. Ship-
ments of soil have come from
Australia for analysis and engi-
neers have travelled from Poland
to put their highway and road pro-
grammes to test in labora-
tories which determine how much
"punishment"concrete can absorb.
In addition to handling mat-
erials, the Denver engineering
centre also trains men. Today,
engineers from Chile, India, China,
France, Palestine, Thailand, Yu-
goslavia, and Egypt are studying
there under a programme which
has brought as many as 800
engineers and officials from fifty-
four countries to the United States
in one year.
KNOWlEDGE FLOWS
TWO WAYS
TECHNKAL ASSISTANCE
- A CASE HISTORY
LAST year, a three tons shipment of assorted soil and rock from the
Latin American Republic of Venezuela arrived in Denver,
Colorado, one mile up in the Rocky Mountains of the United
States, for analysis by the Denver laboratory of the U. S. Bureau
of Reclamation.
The story behind this rather unusual delivery started in a government
office in Venezuela, (where plans for the construction of a cement plant
were being studied.
Venezuelan ofncials wanted to be sure that raw materials on the site
chosen for the plant would ensure its economically sound operation. So
three tons of sample material were taken from the site and sent off to
Denver for examination by engineers and chemists.
This example of how engineers put into practice what is called
"technical assistance for economic development", is typical of the work
up to 300 inquiries a monthconcerning irrigation pro-
jects throughout the world
come into the Bureau and are
answered by the despatch of
experts or technical documents, the
latter going out in thousands of
copies yearly. Michael W. Straus,
Commissioner of the Bureau of
Reclamation, has pointed out that
this is not one-sided aid, since there
is a constant return flow of tech-
nical information from abroad
which is put to immediate use by
American engineers.
Engineers from the Bureau have
gone into the field on such jobs as
the reconstruction of canal systems
in Japan and Venezuela, the build-
ing of earth dams in southern
Rhodesia and the planning of a
hydro-electric power plant in
Greece.
In the Denver laboratories,
studies have been made for irri-
gation projects in New Zealand,
Guam, Portugal and Greece. En-
gineers have even made tests to
determine the design required for
an earthquake-proof dam in the
Himalaya Mountains in Nepal.
The manpower and material
resources of these laboratories are
enormous. The engineering centre
is a principal part of the Denver
Federal Centre, which spreads over
800 acres. The 2, 242 employees,
of whom 858 are engineers, have
at their disposal equipment valued
at $ 2, 505, 000.
BENEFm FOR BIMINITY
THE most spectacular equip-ment in the engineering
centre is a universal testing
machine, capable of exerting either
a squeeze or a pull of 5, 000, 000
pounds on a sample of steel or
concrete. The machine, which
stands fifty feet above the floor of
the laboratory and extends fifteen
feet below, was put into operation
last year to test materials under
compression or tension to an extent
previously impossible to carry out
under laboratory conditions.
Extensive use is made of scale
models in the study of such
structures as dam spillways, canals,
control gates, outlet valves and
pumps. Relief maps also are made
to bring out the physical features
of a project which may cover
hundreds of square miles.
The Bureau of Reclamation was
formed in 1902 with the task of
developing the irrigation, hydro-
electric and related water resources
of seventeen western states in the
United States.
Since then, it has constructed
160 dams and ninety-six reservoirs,
20, 000 miles, of canals, 200, 000
irrigation structures, 107 miles of
tunnels... the statistics seem almost
endless. Translated into human
benefits, these figures equal homes
and livelihoods for 900. 000 persons
through the irrigation of 5, 000, 000
acres of land. It has been estima-
ted that crops worth $ 6, 000, 000, 000
have been grown on the land irri-
gated through the Bureau's work
since 1902, at an investment of
$ 1, 500, 000, 000.
The work done by the Bureau of
Reclamation in a semi-arid area of
the United States stands as an
imposing proof of what can be
repeated elsewhere through tech-
nical assistance on an international
scale.
UNESCO SIGNS TECHNICAL AID AGREEMENTS WITH 13 NATIONS
"THE government will provide or permit
access to adequate information..,
... lDiU give fu l and prompt cons-
leratlon to advice received.., will undertake
'Sllstained efforts to carry forward the work
'initiated or recommended..."
These statements, taken from the texts of
'. greements recently signed by Unesco and
\ ! governments in Asian, Latin American and
Middle East countries, strike a harmonious note
in a world that has become too accustomed to
hearing declarations that this or that nation
has decided to raise still another barrier to
u-operation and the free exchange of informa-
tion.
The agreements, signed by the heads of 13
states or their representatives, enable Unesco
to send technicians to the countries concerned
n give advice and help for their economic
development-the first phase of Unesco's
contribution to the United Nations $20, 000, 000
expanded programme of technical assistance.
The signing of one such agreement-
between the Government of India and Unesco
- is shown in this photograph (left), taken
at New Delhi. It shows, seated, Dr. Malcolm
S. Adiseshiah (left), head of Uneseo's Technical
Assistance Service, and Dr. Tara Chand, Se-
cretary, Indian Ministry of Education. Stand-
ing, left to right, are C. L. Bhardwaj, govern-
ment information officer at Ne) w Delhi ; and
Drs. N. S. Junankar and G. K. Chandiramani,
educational advisers with the Ministry.
Under the agreement, Unesco will send ten
experts to assist India's large scale scientific
research programme in such fields as plastics,
electrical engineering and irrigation.
The twelve other countries which have also
signed agreements that will bring them tech-
nical aid from Unesco are : Ceylon, Columbia,
Ecuador, Iraq, Indonesia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Libya, Mexico, Pakistan, Persia and Thailand.
