THE first book to tell the dramatic story of what the
t United Nations and U. N. Specialized Agencies are doing
for the y ung people of the world ha  been written by
Eleanor Roosevelt, chairman of the U. N. Commission
on Human Rights, in collaboration with Helen Ferris,
American writer and editor.
Entitled"Partners : The United Nations and Youth"
(Doubleday & Co., Garden City, New York, $ 3. 00), the
profusely illustrated volume recounts the warm, human
stories of those who have been benefited in all parts of the
world by the activities of such organizations as Unesco, the
World Health Organization, the United Nations International
Children's Emergency Fund, the International Relief Organiza-
tion and the Food and Agriculture Organization.
.. young people are important in the United Nations", the
authors say.... In the year ahead, building a better world for
youth would be a part of all the United Nations does. U. N.
teams would travel far and wide, working with the many
governments so that young people and children might have
more fòod, better health, more schools, more fun".
The account of what has already been done for youth is
presented in a series of moving and exciting stories about
individual children in 35 countries, based on actual reports
submitted by U. N. personnel. For example, there is Hana
of Lidice, lost for five years, then brought back to her mother
through the help of I. R. O. ; Arturo, the Italian boy, who
helped teach his grandmother about the skim milk furnished
by UNICEF ; Abed, the Egyptian boy, who found out how
WHO fights and conquers dread ailments as old as his
homeland ; and Kyria, the teen-age Greek girl, helped to face
the problems of a new life by Unesco.
The stories, illustrated by scores of photographs, tell how
these and hundreds of thousands of other young victims of the
world's calamities have been helped to help themselves ; how
they learned to sew, cook, build homes, camps, roads ; how
they have vaulted the barriers of geographical, political and
social distance to become friends ; how they develop their
friendship by meeting at youth conferences and living together
in work camps and children's towns.
A substantial amount of the account of the U. N.'s partnership
with youth in the period since the end of the war is devoted
to the many and varied activities of Unesco, such as the step
which led to the organization of the International Federation
of Children's Communities and to the organization of Inter-
national Voluntary Work Camps. Several chapters describe
in vivid detail Unesco's efforts in such fields as extension and
intensification of education facilities ; the stimulation of
popular interest in the scientific development of the world
to-day and tomorrow ; the removal of barriers to fruitful
cultural exchanges ; and, perhaps most important of all, the
continuation of the age-old struggle for fundamental freedoms
and human rights.
