In this cemetery at Pusan lie
the dead of 15 United Nations
having fighting unils in Korea.
---
ONE YEAR AGO
THIS MONTH
THE NATIONS UNITED
TO DEFEND
COLLECTIVE SECURITY
xieties and uneasiness before the Janus-
head dilemma facing us all : Peace ?
War?
For we live in q word of magic paradox.
The genius of mon has offered us the
promise of an incomparably
Yet we also discern the warning.
of a catastrophe which could destroy all
progress and plunge our world into a new
 ?
age of darkness.
Is it surprising, therefore. that we long
for a We free from fear ? For we realize
today more than ever that this is the
primary need of all people. and that
security which is-a condition for freedom
from fear is the goal towards which we all
must work.
But how are we to succeed in our search
for security ? Not. as two world wars in
less than half a century have shown,
through the rule of force. For what
meaning would victory have in the face
of the devastatíon wrought by the
terrifying perfection of modern arma-
ments ?
The simple fact is that peace must be
based on international law or there will
be no true and lasting peace. Has not
history shown us the path of collective
action which has spread from family to
tribe, from city to province, then from
nation to nation, until entire continents
could live under the rule of law? ? It is
for us to extend Us sway over at the
world. To retreat would be to admit that
disaster is inevitable, or rather, to render
it so by our own actions.
Collective security is not a dream ; it
exists. It exists as a living reality ; il
exists in the United Nations which
was established by the co-operative effort
of the sovereign nations of the world and
it possesses the means to enforce respect
for international law when it is violated.
It is true that the prestige of the United
Nations has not in itself heen enough to
discourage all attempts at conquest.
Thus, exactly one year ago this month
and barely five years after the cease-fire
of the last war, the world was suddenly
faced with an act of aggression in Korea.
In the early days of the invasion of
South Korea, following the refusal of North
Korea to withdraw its troops, the Security
Council of the United Nations on June 27
1950 recommended to its members that
they "furnish such assistance to the
EVERY morningwhen we
pick up our
daily newspapers,
the headlines seem
to leap up at us to
sharpen our an-
War would rescue for the peace at least a
fraction of the mutual goodwill and
readiness to co-operate which made them
victorious. That assumption has proved
to be over-optimistic. Yet there was also
a second assumption, equally fundamen-
tal : that the United Nations must collapse
as soon as the peace is broken or
seriously threatened by a Great Power.
That assumption has proved to be over-
pessimistic. Peace has been overtly
broken. Yet the system has survived the
severe shock of the open breach. The
United Nations system will work in the
long run and, given sufficient moral
cohesion among the majority of Member
States, is cqpable even in the short-run of
curing the present ill-effects of its
imperfect implementation."
Peace is an unending creation. When
the United Nation$ decided to reinforce
measures for collective security contained
in its Charter and through united action
to reinforce fundamental conditions to
peace, it was looking far beyond the
present crisis.
"Enduring peace", read the General
Assembly's resolution, "will not be
secured solely by collective security
arrangements against breaches of inter-
national peace and acts of aggression."
Member States were therefore urged"to
respect fully. and to intensify joint action,
in co-operation with the United Nations'.
In other words, in order to prevent
aggression. Member States were asked
"to develop and stimulate universal
respect for and observance of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, and to
intensify individual and collective efforts
to achieve conditions of economic stability
and social progress".
"Collective security is both a material
condition springing from a given social
order and a moral one emanating from the
collective members of that same order."
This statement, made by Professor
Georges Scelle, sums up the fundamental'
questions on which depend the future of
humanity.
Real peace is won by victories over
ignorance, misery and ineauality, for it
can only exist in a world community in
which all members are able to achieve
their rightful places as free men and to
develop their ways of life peacably.
The war against wars continues. In
times of crisis, when international force is
needed to prevent aggression, it must be
fought with arms in hand.'But. at all
times it must be wage untiringly in
men's minds, and this is Unesco's mission
on the three fronts of knowledge, solidarity
and international citizenship.
S. M. S. M. KOFFLER.
Republic of Korea as may be necessary
to repel the armed attack and to restore
international peace and security in the
area."By the following month. 48 states
had responded, some pledging military
aid, others economic or medical assistance.
cor the past majority of countries realized
that peace is indivisible. that an act of
aggression anywhere in the world is a
threat to the whole world.
To this international action Unesco gave
its full support within the framework of its
competence. In August, in answer to the
appeal of the Economic cmd Social
Council, the Executive Board of Unesco
decided to take steps to fulfil the
"constructive role called for by the
United Nations. Unesco is prepared to
carry out educational assistance in Korea
and is ready to co-operate with the United
Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency in
the eventual reconstruction of the
country's educational facilities, as soon as
it is called upon to do so by the Unified
Command. Unesco has already had wide
experience in such work during the past
five years in countries devastated by the
second world war.
Unesco has yet another task to fulfil in
the field of education. It is to explain and
make widely known the principles of
collective security as the indispensable
condition of peace under law. Unesco is
therefore carrying out a special educa-
tional programme which includes the
preparation of pamphlets, wall charts and
other written and visual materials on the
question of collective securiiy. Produced
in different languages, these are being
distributed in Unesco's Member States for
use by schools. universities, and adult
education groups. The wall-charts.
designed and produced by the Bureau
of Current Affairs in the United Kingdom,
form a compact and colourful unit for
display in school classrooms, community
centres, youth clubs and factories. Three
studies on the subject of collective
security directed primarily to people at
the college and university level have been
commissioned from Dr. Andrew Martin,
international lawyer and lecturer at
Ruskin College, Oxford : Prof. Georges
Scelle of the University of Paris : and
H. E. Antonio Castro LeaL head of the
Mexican delegation to Unesco. They
explain the meaning of collective security
in the light of the United Nations action
which Unesco hopes will help create a
powerful and enlightened force of public
opinion in support of the world
organization.
Dr. Martin puts the essential problem like
this :"Our present system of collective
security was built on the assumption that
the principal allies of the second World
