CHILDREN ARE CREATIVE ARTISTS
BUT THEY NEED FREEDOM IN ORDER TO
EXPRESS THEIR IDEAS IN THEIR OWN WAY
How many proud parents looking at someexample of contemporary art, have been
known to observe that their child could
do better than that. The obvious answer then
is"why not let them ?" For even well-meaning
parents and teachers find it hard to allow
children to express their natural creative ima-
ginations without interference. Grown-ups
have their ideas of what they approve as"art"
and they try to impose them on children.
Probably more Children in the world today
suffer from not being allowed to give creative
expression to their feelings than from physical
cruelty. Although much has been achieved in
the past few decades to liberate art education,
much more remains to be done. Official
svstems of education need to be revised.
Individual attitudes towards children and the
arts must be changed.
Although child prodigies of painting are rare
and Mozarts of the brush few and far between,
it might well be that many children would
become future artists if parents did not spoil
it all by saving, for example,"Now let daddy
show you how to draw a train,"
thus at once undermining the
child's confidence in himself and
frustrating his desire to show his
own ideas. It is this adult desire to
show off by explaining how, that
so often nips in the bud the poss-
ible creative genius of the unspoilt
child.
This kind of adult attitude is
well illustrated by the story of the
small boy who one day came home
and puzzled his parents by b) untiy
announcing that he wasn't going to
school any more."But why ?" he
was asked, since he had always
loved school. That day, he ex-
plained, had been"the drawing
lesson"and the teacher had told
them to draw a fish. But he had
drawn a boat ; so when the teacher
saw what he had done she punished
him because he had not drawn a
fish."But I didn't want to draw a
fish... I wanted to draw a boat."
Unfortunately it is not always the
unenlightened teacher who fails to
see things from the child's point of
view.
by Trevor Thomas
order to give tangible expression to the emo-
tional forces within and to satisfy their urge
for communication.
It is the gradual recognition, in the light of
psychological discoveries, of the importance of
that need to communicate, and its value for the
whole growth of human personality which has
charaeterized the change of attitudes upon the
part of teachers and parents towards art
education. The change has been two-fold, on
the one hand involving the prestige of the arts
as subjects which should be taught and on the
other directed towards different methods of
teaching the arts. Formerly, the arts were
regarded either as decorative accomplishments
for young persons of leisure, to be taught less
seriously out of school, or as technical skills
necessary to equip young people for industry,
to be taught drearily within school hours. The
change-over of the past fifty years has been
eharacterized by a swing from an emphasis on
technique to the current emphasis on creative
I ? OR instance, I remember visitingthe children's art group in a
progressive art gallery. The young
teacher, a recent convert to the
"new art education", first showed
the children colour slides of works
by Braque, Picasso and Matisse.
then close their eyes while she
played a record by Stravinsky.
Then they were told to open their
eyes and, as the record was played
again, to use their big brushes on
big sheets of paper wit !)"iots of
lovely colours". Naturally, most of
the children produced echoes of the
slides they had just seen, except
one small boy who drew a lively-
looking house with masses of smoke
pouring out of the chimney. The
teacher looked at him reproach-
futiy, saying,"But Johnny, why did
you do that... you know I told you today was
abstract day. *'
Neither of those extreme attitudes, both fun-
damentally wrong in their attempts to impose
ideas on the children, would be regarded today
as the best modes of child art education. But
just what is meant now by the term'''ant edu-
cation" ? Surely we all did drawing at school
when we were young and there was not all
this fuss about what we did and why we did it ?
Jt is true that there has always been some
form of child art wherever there has been any
kind of education. Yet while the children's
innate artistic abilities have remained the
same, the attitudes towards them have chang-
ed considerably, not a little affected by trends
and fashions in adult art appreciation. Some-
thing of a minor revolution in methods of art
for children has taken place in the past half
century.
P OSSIDLY one of the best. forms of art educa-tion occurs in those simple communities
where children watch and imitate their mothers
making baskets and pottery or their fathers
working in metal and carving in wood. woe
may hazard a guess that prehistoric children
tried their hands at cave paintings, dipping
their fingers in the pigment and making those
marks we now admire so much. Every child
given materials suitable for making a mark
will quickly leave his mark, as most parents
know to their chagrin, usually on new) y paint-
ed wafts. And if suitable materials arse not
accessible, it is astonishing the ingenuity most
children show in making unsuitable things
such as sand and stones and milk from their
pudding, serve their compelling purpose in
expression. In education generally, the former
bias towards intellectual book-learning has
given place to approval of educative experience
which has meanlllg for the child rather than
for the teacher. And art education plays an
increasingly important part in meaningful
experience. Education which is enjoyable,
which involves learning by doing, is proved to
be more effective than knowledge which is
drummed in by rote.
THOSE die-hards who believe that to sparethe rod spoils the child, that school-days
should be spent in being grounded in reading,
writin and arithmetic, naturally look with
suspicion if not active disapproval on these
newer art education methods. Do these new
approaches mean that the teacher can just give
the children plenty of art materials and then
sit back to make up the attendance register or
write home to mother ? On the contrary. It
was the methods of making children copy a
copy of a stereotyped design, or of setting up
for'drawing those formidable arrays of chem-
ical apparatus and those dreary combinations
of cones, cubes and cylinders, which demanded
least of the indifferent or over-burdened
teacher.
The contemporary art teacher, trained as an
artist, pedagogue and psychologist, has by far
the more difficult task and must be as wise
and intuitive as a mother, endeavouring, as
far as any adult can, to enter into sympathetic
understanding of what the child is thinking
and feeling. He or she must be capable of
indicating objectives within the range of the
child's experience, guiding rather thus pushing
are some aspects of the aims andintentions of contemporary approaches to
art education which a number of specialist
teachers, coming from some twenty countries
of the world, will be studying at a Unesco
Seminar on the Visual Arts in Education
which is being held at the University of Bristol
in the United Kingdom from 7 to 27 July.
Fot months they have been preparing reports
on art education conditions in their own
countries and collecting representative example, ;
of children's painting which are to be shown
at an exhibition in Bristol during the Seminar.
From these national reports and drawings it
is possible to sketch a revealing
picture of what has been done and
of what is happening in the sphere
of art education. In some countries
the physical conditions of the
schools, the lack of suitable mate-
rials and, even more, the unsympa-
thetic and unenterprising attitude
of the educational authorities,
means that little in the way of
results can be seen. In other
countries, where the attitudes may
be progressive, the material re-
sources are not available as a
consequence of war devastation.
Fortunately, there are a few coun-
tries where attitudes and resources
are favourable and where especially
effective work is being produced
and where serious researches of
immense value are being conducted.
The value of the first Unesco
Seminar in the field of the visual
arts is that it will enable people
coming from countries at all these
various levels of development, to
meet together, to share their
experiences and knowledge to their
mutual advantage, and to consider
new ways in which the arts can in-
crease international understanding.
school master who, in asmall village school in France,
found that the arts solved his
problem of how to teach all of his
ten pupils, ranging from four to
fourteen, in the confines of one
small classroom, will have some-
thing to tell and to learn from the
high-school teacher in Montreal
who has a modern, well-equipped
art room for her thirty pupils
who are all in the same age-group.
The Swiss who has sent in delicate
flower paintings, as precise as the
works of a watch, may find it
strange to compere notes with the
artist whose children Droduce such
boldly dashing designs in Paris. Perhaps the
teacher from Japan, with its ancient traditions
and modern techniques, will want to confer
with the administrator from Australia, where.
traditions are young and intentions ideal. Will
the teacher of those children in Norway wvho
have made such delightfully fresh, clean water-
colours want to try out the dirty clay so mag-
nificently modelled by the children in Egypt ?
So the exchanges will go on from one
country to another. Perhaps we are too
readily inclined to say that art is a universal
language ; but, as in other fields of international
co-operation, it is a language that must be
learned. Although there may be some basic
elements in child art that could be found
anywhere from northern snows to tropical
forests, the children of each nation produce
paintings that are uniquely and characteristic-
ally their own, individually and collectively.
That is one of the most desirable and
valuable aspects of art as a means of education
because, in an age of increasing standardization,
it allows the individual to develop as an in-
dividual, at spiritual and emotional levels,
within the framework of his own national
cultural pattern. Yet at the same time, it
nurtures in him a true sense of judgment, a
respect for the creative work of other people,
and an awareness of values which are universal
and imperishable. For in the long stern
judgment of centuries of time, a civilization
is remembered and the quality of its culture
is assessed not by reason of its political and
economic achievements but bv virtue of its
works of art. That is why every child has the
right to the opportunities for creative expres-
sion.
him along the path of learning, holding a
watching brief yet ready to encourage and give,
not impose, technical information when it is
asked for and required. The learning is not
merely for the sake of learning, but in order
to prepare for a life which may be lived with
judment and poise, with pleasure and partici-
paten, richly and welt.

Tangible proof that he is a worthwhile person.

This ! s what) saw at the circus.


Do it your own way. Don't worry how others are doing it.
It is how much we feel inside that really counts,
From among the most timid children will come
some of the finest painters.
I closed my eyes and seen an angel and made one like I seen it.
Block prints capture the child's own feelings
and have a charm and beauty all of their own.

TURKEY : Our class-room. Aged 11,
ITALY :"Peasant Carnival in the rain", by a boy of 10.
Art is a basic impulse.) It exists everywhere and always, among children.
Every child-not just the specially talented-can express himself freely
through the arts if given a chance. He will be personal and not copy or repeat
- as the examples on this page, drawn from many countries, show.
THE PAINT BRUSH
,.'.'.
- OPEN SESAME TO
A CHILDREN'S WORLD
'-',','"'''..-..
AUSTRIA : My Village, Boy of 12, Ist Prize, senior class
in ECA'S recent European Child Art competition.
U. S. A. : Cowboys I saw at the Rodeo. Aged 9.

NEW ZEALAND : 10-year-old girls.
'NETHERLANDS : The Canal. Girl aged 10.
FRANCE : Boy of 7. Ist prize, junior class, ECA Child Art competition,GREAT BRITAIN : Bedtime story. Girl of 11.CANADA : The train at the station. Aged 7.
AUSTRALIA : Village dance. By 14-year old Negro boy.
NORWAY : Me in the country. Aged 8
