THANKS TO THE CINE-CAMERA
SCIENTISTS ARE UNCOVERING A STRANGE,
WN WORLD
At first glance we are sure this is a painted African mask worn by some Negro warrior brandishing his arms
in a typical ceremonial dance. In reality it is a magnified close-up film of an African cricket from the Cameroons.
by Maurice GOLDSMITH
THE film was born to do scientific work and
not originally to entertain. Before theinvention of the cinema, the French astro-
nomer Pierre Janssen in 1874 photograph-
ed phases of the track of the planet Venus and
about six years later the French physiologit
Etienne Marey studied the fiight of birds with
a specially designed camera.
But the most impressive experiment that
really begins the story of the scientific film was
the demonstration in California by the pioneer
British-born photographer, Edward Muybridge,
that. a trotting horse has all its four legs off the
ground at the same time. It was Muybridge, in
fact, who gave the first demonstration in Europe
of scientific films. That was in 1882 in the
theatre of the Royal Institution in London.
His lecture on"The Science of Animal Loco-
motion in its Relation to Design in Art"
confounded critics who had declared that the
reproduction of a satisfactory photograph of a
rapidly moving object was absolutely outside the
bounds of possibility. Their surprise was
expressed by a writer in the IDustrated London
News, who described how"by the aid of an
astonishing apparatus called a zoopraxiscope...
animals suddenly became mobile and beautiful,
and walked, cantered, ambled, galloped, and
leaped over hurdles in the field of vision in a
perfectly natural and life-like manner..."
Today the aim has an honoured place not
only in research and investigation as a scien-
tific tool, but also as a basic method of popu-
larizing science and presenting its social impli-
cations.
In the research laboratory the cine-camera
is an indispensable tool because it is an unob-
served and undisturbing observer ; it is insensi-
tive to atmosphere and fatigue ; it can function
for hours on end with a non-sleeping eye,
without producing confusion and overlapping
among successive images ; it can delve into and
uncover a strange, unknown microscopic world.
In addition, the camera can act as a time-
expander and as a time-condenser ; and it can
see things in wave-lengths invisible to the ordin-
ary eye.
UNKNO
LINES
AND
IRe L E S
n o
BrLi
The eye of the crab (1) is (almost) enough to make the lover of shellfish lose his appetite ; white the eyes gleaming above the
huge mouth of this gentle little fish from Madagascar (2) are not very reassuring either. We can only see four of the many eye
of the spider (3) but they are definitely unpleasant. The sea anemone (4) boasts a secret weapon : a deadly liquid hidden ire
hundreds of tiny"buttons"covering its wriggling tentactes. The tail of a shrimp (5), seen under the microscope film camera, :
has the warlike appearance of a hedgehog ready to attack. The camera clarifies what the human eye cannot distinguish.,

Baby Seahorse : horizontal. When the baby seahorse is born it assumes the horizontal position
normal to all fishes and acquatic creatures.
Adult Seahorse : wertteat. But when it reaches maturity the seahorse suddenly assumes a
vertical position. It is the only vertebrate creature known that lives and moves in this position in
water. Another curious fact : the male seahorse-not the female-gives birth to its young. The
female lays her eggs in a pouch below the male's stomach where they remain for 40 days, and are
fed by the male's blood until birth. Photo shows two male seahorses.
The Lobster and the Flea. The lobster's claw' (left) bears a striking resemblance to a parrot's
beak or a Commed ! a deH'Arte character. The fresh-water flea (right) reproduces by parthenoge-
nesis since no male : <ist in this species.
Scientific photography is nearly
half-a-century old, and as one writer
has said"has brought many reve-
lations of the beauty and harmony
of the physical universe, and some
notable extensions to our knowledge
of it."In astronomy, for example,
the film has added greatly to our
knowledge of what is happening on the
sun, particularly in the behaviour of
solar prominences-so much so that
far more problems have been raised
than it has been possible to answer.
In an American film Explosions on
the Sun"it is possible to see in a few
minutes changes that have taken
hours to occur, and to marvel at an
eruptive arch expanding at the rate
of about 1, 000 miles a second. In a
field at Paracutin, in Mexico, in Fe-
bruary 1943, a volcano suddenly came
to life. Within a short while scientists
came along with a camera and began
a unique record of the birth, life and
decline of this tremendous eruption of
nature.
In the biological sciences, the first
film was made by the Frenchman,
Jean Comandon, some 40 years ago.
"In our days", he wrote,"motion pic-
tures are a necessity to the scholar
who wishes to demonstrate to his col-
leagues transitory. phenomena, delin-
eate experiments or the general
observation of things, beings or facts."
At the Pasteur Institute at Garches,
such films of his as Cb'lmpignons Pre-
dateurs, which deals with a curious
fungus that preys on worms, and
Substitution de Noyaux d'Amibes,
which depicts the technique of the
removal of the nucleus of an amoeba
and its replacement by another
nucleus, have been basic contributions
to knowledge. His note on this last
film begins :"For studying the slow
movements of an amoeba, time-lapse
and cine-micrography have been par-
ticularly useful and have revealed
things which would not have been
apparent by direct observations."The
cine-camera can, in fact, be attached
to microscopes, telescopes, stereoscopes,
and all kinds of optical instruments
which normally produce a picture for
the human eye to see and to measure,
and so a recording instrument of
the finest accuracy can be produced.
In the medical field, living move-
ments of lungs and limbs can be
viewed repeatedly without danger
of an overdose of X-rays harming
the individual. It has been said
that with the introduction of film the
science of medicine has progressed so
far that"the same patient can be
used over and over again."
On the technical side, infra-red can
be used to take photographs in appar-
ent darkness. It was used to make a
film for scientists anxious to study the
contraction and dilation of the pupil
of an eye when a bright source of
light was switched on and off close to
it. Ultra-violet illumination has been
used, for example, to study the surface
of red-hot steel bars. During the
rolling process foreign bodies may
enter the bars, but it is difficult to see
what is happening because of the
glare from the red-hot metal. Using
a filter over the camera lens and illu-
minating the bar by either blue or
ultramarine violet light, it is possible
to photograph the bar as if it were
quite cold.
Science is popularized on the screen
through the documentary, the teaching
film, and the feature film.
The documentary school founded by
John Grierson has from the outset
tried to maintain links between the
specialist and the technician and the
general public. The documentary is
distinguished from the teaching, or
instructional, film in that its job is
"the creative interpretation of reality",
and when it deals with science it is
concerned with the relations between
science and society.
John Maddison, president of the
International Scientific Film As-
sociation, describes in"Experiment
in the Film", edited by Roger Manvell,
published by Grey Walls Press, London,
1949, two good examples of the
documentary's power to interpret
science. The first is Elton and Bell's
Transfer of Power, in which within
the space of twenty minutes the story
of the evolution of a technical device
is not only told with lucidity and
coherence but is related to the social
pattern. In Blood Transf11sion, Rotha
and Neurath drive home the point,
with an ingenious bringing together
of actuality, models, and animated
drawings, that scientific achievement
is a cooperative international business.
MADDISON refers to"the work ofBritish documentary technicians
in using films as a mass edu-
cational technique under Government
and other sponsorships"and to its
offshoots in Canada and elsewhere.
"Its importance it twofold. It has
illumined the social function of
science in countless ways. In Enough
to Eat, Housing Problems and Smoke
Menace, it has afforded a pulpit to
such progressive interpreters of
science as Huxley, Haldane and Boyd
Orr. During the last war, new labo-
ratory findings and techniques for
dealing with such problems as potato
blight and scabies were made widely
known to an extent impossible without
the use of the film. More recently,
Personnel Selection and Children
Learning by Experience have shown
how the camera can expound at-
tempts to apply objectivity and good
sense to the more delicate problems of
human behaviour."
He adds :"Not less important than
the new techniques of production ex-
plored has been the vast non-theatrical
experiment in distributing films to
audiences outside the commercial
movie houses. Fresh images of scien-
tific achievement have been carried
into schoolroom, workshop, byre and
forest clearing and the thousand and
one places where men meet together."
THE teaching film is known to bei a s imulating influence for both
pupils and teacher. A study
made in the USA concluded that
"when properly produced and wisely
used, the motion picture possesses dis-
tinct pedagogical values over and
above traditional teaching methods on
which the same amounts of time and
energy are expended,"It has been
found that children studying by means
of films have learned more than their
colleagues who have not used this aid.
Among the best of the British instruc-
tional aims-and pioneer efforts
when they began in 1921-is the po-
pular science Secrets of Nature se-
ries, begun by the late Percy Smith.
They were often produced in two ver-
sions-one for schools, and one with
a"popular"commentary for the ci-
nemas.
The feature film is essentially
a form of entertainment. There-
fore, little has been done consciously
to depict science as an everyday
vital force, but the effects of
such films as Pasteur and Madame
Curie have been very great. In this
context, the development of the science
action film is a factor of some import-
ance. These films are very popular
and some, such as Destination Moon,
have not been offensive in their
scientific content. The Russians have
in recent years used the feature film as
a serious medium with which to tell
the personal dramatic story of great
scientific personalities, such as Zhn-
kovsky, the pioneer of Russian avia-
tion, and Michurin the botanist.
Special mention must be made of
the great contribution of the Frencr
and the world-wide recognition of the
work of Jean Painlevé. Maddison des-
cribes how he has attempted"to
create a new sort of scientific film
biography for the ordinary cine-
magoer. He and Georges Rouquier
have made an absorbing study out
of the biological work of Louis
Pasteur in a film entitled The
Scientific Achievements of Pasteur.
Using an unknown unprofessional
actor, a Paris workman with a
strong resemblance to the great sa-
vant, Rouquier has made the scenes
in which Pasteur fought against the
prejudices of contemporary scientists.
come to life again on the screen. But
the main excitement of the film lies
In the way which Painlevé, through
innumerable hours spent with camera
and microscope in the cine-laboratory,
has retold the long tale of Pasteur's
triumph over microbes.
In most western European countries
there are scientific film associations
doing important work in developing
the use and understanding of the
scientific aim. and in 1947 there was
formed an International Scientific
Film Association. They are workirg
for an end of great significance to
society : to build up through the film
a living unity between the scientist,
the artist, and the man-in-the-street.
The photographs on these two
pages are published by kind
permission of M. Jean Pain-
levee, director of the Institute
of Scientific CinematlOgraphy
in Paris. These illustrations
are all extracts from M. Pain-
levee's film.
Battle to the death. A dytiscid gets Its victim. This underwater insect has no mouth ; instead
two sharp hooks, leading directly to the stomach, Inject digestive juices into the dytiscid's food and
then suck them into the stomach.
