THE power-or at least the
potential-of a film to com-
municate information, to convey
ideas and impressions at between
peoples, has long been generally recog-
nized. The most obvious example is
that knowledge of and beliefs (right
or wrong) about the American"way
of life"in most parts of the civilized
world are in the main based on con-
tact, over the years, with the ubiqui-
tous Hollywood film.
Yet remarkably little has been done
outside the educational documentary
and the frankly documentary films, to
make constructive use of this effective
agency for better international under-
standing. In the Western world, of
course, there is always the fear that
anything which might conceivably be
branded as propaganda in the realm
of entertainment will be suspect and
that this reaction will militate against
the commercial success at which all
entertainment films are aimed.
It is worth noticing that this does
not apply in the other half of the
world ; the London"Times"recently
reported from Singapore an intensive
campaign in South East Asia to secure
the widest distribution of Russian and
Chinese films, which are always Com-
munist in content, and uncompro-
mising in their determination to put
ideological inspiration before mere
entertainment. But there have been
from time to time in the West exam-
ples of the fact that a well-docu-
mented fiction film can do a great
deal more than tell a time-passing,
boy-meets-girl story which presents
in the last analysis, nothing more
than a belief that total, absolute and
constant bliss is within the reach of
all.
Mostly the examples have been un-
Page 7-UNESCO COURIER
THERE ARE OSCARS, CUPS, AND PLAQUES GALORE, BUT HERE IS
A FILM AWARE
WITH A REAL PURPOSE
by Stephen WATTS
Author of a syndicated film column appearing in Canada, Latin America, Italy,
Portugal, Japan. London film correspondent,'New York Times'.
consciously brought into being ; at
least they have sprung from no more
than a desire to face up to life as it
surrounds the creators of the film. An
"Open City"or"Paisa"conveyed
vividly what life in war-time Italy was
like, but that was mainly because the
producers, short of equipment, studios
and money, but abounding in ideas,
found their subjects in life, treated
them with telling directness and sim-
plicity, and photographed them in
natural, real settings. Whatever
"message"they carried was integral
and unselfconscious.
Recently a Swiss-sponsored, multi-
lingual film about the Four Power
regime in Vienna,"Four in a Jeep",
has been earning the kind of praise
which suggests again what can be
done along those lines. True, at the
Cannes film festival the, Russians pro-
tested, presumably finding the leading
Russian character portrayed as insuf-
ficiently heroic, but the film was
highly praised, as it was again on its
London presentation and at the Berlin
film festival. There, although the
winner of the German language Silver
Laurel award, to go forward for the
Golden Laurel final at Venice in Sep-
tember, was a locally-produced pic-
ture,"Herrl1che Zeiten","Four in a
Jeep"was specially commended and
will in fact be a candidate for the
Golden Laurel in its own multi-lingual
category.
This film serves as an admirable
example of what the Golden Laurel
award is all about ; some of the
reviews of it, using phrases such as"a
plea for greater understanding be-
tween human beings", are in close
parallel to the declared purpose of the
award, defined by its donor, Mr David
O. Seiznick, as"to pay tribute to those
motion pictures, produced by Euro-
peans in Europe which have made the
greatest contribution to mutual under-
standing and goodwill between the
peoples of the free and democratic
world".
Last year at Venice the Golden Lau-
rel award (then being contested for
the first time) went to the Italian
film"Donne Senza Nome".
Awards in the film business are
legion."Oscars", cups, medals, scrolls
and plaques, even (in Britain) Henry
Moore statuettes are presented for the
best this and the most outstanding
that. For the winners, they make
prestige and useful advertising mate-
rial ; too often they also blatantly glo-
rify the donor.
But the Golden Laurel award has
the virtues, firstly of being concerned
with more long-term, humane values
than are usually considered in the
cinema, and also of being free from
the taint that the donor's motives are
disingenuous and commercially rooted.
Selznick is an American film mag-
nate, but he has so defined the quali-
fications for entry that no American
film can compete, far less win ; indeed
the winner, by reason of the kudos
gained, is in a better position to com-
pete for a place on the world's screens
against the product of Hollywood and
even Selznick himself. The final jury
in New York, which passes judgment
on the"heat"winners from the six
language-groups, includes such public
figures as Dr. Ralph Bunche, of UN
and Nobel Peace Prize fame, Mr Her-
bert Bayard Swope, Mr Edward Mur-
row, Mr John Gunther and Dr. D'Har-
noncourt of the New York Museum of
Modern Art.
This year thirty-two films from
seven countries have been entered.
Apart from"Four in a Jeep"and
"Herrliche Zeiten", are the"local"
winners from the United Kingdom
("Trio"), France ("Justice est faite"),
Italy ("in Cammino della Speranza",
or"The Road to Hope"), and Scandi-
navia ("Medan Staden Sever").
"Trio"made from three Somerset
Maugham stories, has some charac-
teristically shrewd and salted observa-
tion of the British character. The
French and Italian pictures are graver
subjects-one deals with the task of a
jury of ordinary, people faced with a
"mercy killing"trial, the other with
poor emigrants from Sicily who trek
towards the French border in the hope
of finding work.
Whoever may win, the contest can
hardly fail to stimulate European film
production and to direct producers'
minds to an aspect of their work, and
its impact on other people which they
often seem dangerously to ignore.
One American commentator on the
Golden Laurel scheme has written"I
wish Europe would clinch matters by
establishing its own award for the
American film which provides the
soundest information on life in the
United States". That is an extension
of Mr Selznick's idea which is worthy
of consideration in the appropriate
quarters this side of the Atlantic.
There cannot be too many film-
makers aiming their work at the
target of greater mutual understand-
ing.
NACHTWACHE. (Germany) Silver Laurel Award, 1950.
DONNE SENZA NOME. (Italy) The plight of stateless women in a D. P. camp. Golden
Laurel Award, 1950.
The British Film Academy awards an annoa) prize for the best feature film illustrating one or more of the basic
principles of tbe United Nations Charter. Called The United Nations Award, the prize was created in 194&
by the British Fifm Academy in response to a request by the Film Oivis. on of the U. N. The Academy Councj !
reserve the right to withhold the United Nations Award jf none of the films, in their opinions, obtains sufficient
Yotes. to justify its presentation. This was the case in 1948 when no award was presented. The first film to
w. n the prize. presented in 1949, was the Swiss-American M.G.M. production The Search which tells the
moving story of a little refugee boy-one of the thousands of O, P. children separa1ed from their parents during
and after the last World War. Last year. the award went to the M. 6. M. American production Intruder in the
Durst. a furl-length feature film based on WiHiam Fauikner's novel attacking discrimination against Negroes
in the United States (above). Henry Moore, the distinguished British sculptor designed a statuette for the
award. A replica of this In bronze is formally presented to the director of she winning film who receives it
on behalf of the production studio. The bronze Is kept by the studio until passed to the next AC2demy winne1
ACK ON RACISM WINS BRITISH FILM ACADEMY
: AWARD FOR 1950
