THERE WAS launched recently in
Paris a French Association of
Science writers-the fifth such
national group of special writers in this
field. The oldest is the National Asso-
ciation of Science Writers in the L'. S. A. ;
the second is the British ; and then
follow the Danish and Austrian.
In welcoming the French Association
to Unesco House, where it held its first
public meeting, L'neseo's Director-
General, M. Torres Bodet, reminded the
writers that the scientist, whatever his
discipline, is today at the heart of all
progress. There is hardly a field of
human activity unaffected by scientific
advance. During the last few decades,
the consequences of this scientific mo-
vement have not only remodelled our
whole lives, but have also obliged us
to restate and to reconsider all our
problems. Religion, morals, our con-
ceptions of the world have been largely
reshaped.
Scientific knowledge, continued
M. Torres Bodet, has therefore a key
part to play in the formation of modern
man and in the most urgent problem of
our day : the reconciliation of men and
the protection of peace. Science.
through the riches it creates, can con-
tribute in a fundamental manner to
satisfy the basic needs of mankind and,
in so doing, it works for peace. Further,
the universality of the scientific mind,
the generality of its methods, and the
unbiassed enthusiasm that research
work engenders, all these help to build
a common bridge between men.
Eyes For The People
S ctevce writers therefore have a keyask to perform in society. It is not
an easy one, for there is much ill-
will, mistrust and fear of science. to
overcome. This fear Is a symptom of
the malaise of our age. The reason
for it. is obvious. People no longer be-
lieve in the inevitability of progress
through scientific achievement.
The science writer has the difficult
The French Association of Science Writers holds its first public meeting at Unesco House. This
photo shows (from left to right) : M. Bnand. of the French Ministry of Information ; M, F. Le Lionnais,
president of the Association ; M. Torres Bodet, Unesco's Director-General ; M. P. O. Lapse, French
Minister of Education and M. Louis de Broglie. of the Académle des Sciences and the Académle
Francaise.
lask of pointing out that science is not
an end in itself, but a means to an end.
It is a search for truth. The Ilnal de-
cision about what is to be done with the
practical application of scientific
research rests with society. Therefore,
a democratic society requires an in-
formed public : not the least part of
which information must
be an adequate know-
ledge of progress and
acilievement in the field
of the Sciences. The
limitations as well as
the possibilities of
science must be under-
stood. In all countries, whatever their
state of economic development, the
importance of the role of science is
recognized. The Technical Assistance
programme would be meaningless
\without this.
The science writer is the link
between the scientists and the people.
This is no mere mechanical role : he
has a living function 10 perform. He
makes clear to the people the signify-
cance of the seemingly esoteric work
in the laboratory : he penetrates into
the secrets of the test-tube, he examines
the radio-active wonders of the atomic
By
Maurice
GOLDSMITH
pile, and he watches the surgeon with
pioneer hands at, his pre-frontal leuco-
tomy. Science writers are eyes for the
people.
In 1934, at the Pittsburg meeting
of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, Professor
Einstein was to give
his first lecture in Eng-
lish discussing his
mathematical proof
that mass and energy
are equivalent and
interchangeable. Mr.
Herbert B. Nichols,
natural sciences editor of the Christian
Science Monitor, tells how the newly-
formed National Association of Science
writers tackled the problem of inter-
preting this important communication
to the public : Professor Einstein's
single paragraph abstract was abso-
lutely hopeless so far as gettin g
any quotable quotes was concerned.
His address was scheduled for
a most inopportune time fOl'the
majority of OUI'deadlines, He
was held incommunicado by well-
meaning friends. He could not see re-
porters. So toe drafted a request that
he meet lcith us all at a time convenient
to him, but in advance of his scheduled
lecture.
Professor Einstein agreed : That day
we all had good, front-page stories in
which we were able to interpret for the
public what Einstein's theories actually
meant, why the theory of relativity is
important to almost every branch of
science, and a/orecast on then possibility
of some day harnessing energy within
the nuclei or atoms as a useful source
of power.
Stimulation For
Scientists
No science can flourish as an iso-late : and the science writer helps
to make apparent to the scientists
some of the problems that need expert
investigation. He is an aid to the vision
of the scientist. I rather think,
comments Mr. Nichols, that our active-
ties in playing up certain stories like
Urey's work with heavy water, Jleitner's
discovery of the meaning of fissionable
uranium, Anderson and the cyclotron,
Van de Oraa"and the electrostatic ge-
nerator, early work with projected X-
rays, and many others, actually
stimulated other scientists reading our
accounts to further thought and action,
and actually hastened both scienttfic
progress and personal recognition for
the pioneer scientists themselves.
This is certainty truce of the writings
of British science writers like J. G.
Crowther and Ritchie Calder, who have
pinpointed current research and Its
social implications so ably that new
lines of development have been opened
up.
UNESCO wishes to help the forma-
tion of associations of science writers
throughout the world. When there are
sufficient groups, the plan is to consider
the establishment of an international
federation of associations of science
writers.
· I 1
