Amateur Theatre Today
Promise For Tomorrow
By Leon CHANCEREL
Director and Founder of the Dramatic Centre of Paris
FEWER young people are going to
the theatre today to see either
conventional, experimental or
avant-garde plays. This is a
fact-at least in Europe. Does it mean
that present-day youth has lost in-
terest in the drama ? In my opinion,
no, for never have they shown more
curiosity or more enthusiasm for dra-
matic art. But nowadays young people
want the theatre fu offer more and
mean more to them. Their demands
therefore are more exacting, and little
by little they are forming their own
opinions and judgments-in short, re-
discovering the theatre for themselves.
They are adopting new doctrines, new
ethical and aesthetic standards inspir-
ed by the ideas and examples of such
men as Constantin Stanislavski, Appia,
Fuchs, Gordon Craig, Granville Barkerur or Jacques Copeau
Perhaps the clearest,
most significant evidence of
this curiosity and enthu-
siasm by young people is to
De found in the non-profes-
sional theatre-in schools
and universities, youth as-
sociations, industrial or
agricultural centres, wor-
kers groups or in the Army
and Navy.
It is in these amateur
groups, drawn together by
the same artistic and hu-
man motives that I see the
promise of a rebirth of the
true spirit of the theatre.
It is here that we canñiC',.. n'l7o", tho,.. oallu"nnn-"''""''"'''''"...... &. V."''''''........,.,.........., Y""'
ular"theatre-in-the-making, free of
commercialism, which Jacques Copeau
has so ably defined in his latest work,
Le Théâtre populaire.
The"Mother-Cell"of Drama
THAT, we may ask, do these enthu-siastic young people hope to get
from the theatre ? Their studies,
their trades and professions allow
them very little leisure time, yet they
come together, form little troupes and
produce their plays even under the
most trying material circumstances.
Why do they forego their free time
at the end of a full day's work, and
without thought of financial profit, ac-
cept the rigours of the stage-with its
demands on nerve and muscle control,
diction development, and the concen-
tration and effort needed to translate
the words of a tragedy or comedy into
the appropriate scenic gesture ?
Why ? Because, deep down within
themselves, they feel a certain yearn-
ing, revolt, agitation, which they wish
to express in the form of characters.
And through their self-expression they
attempt to present a true personifica-
tion of their feelings to those about
them-not to mere spectators but to
companions (and companions who
lack their gift or talent for the stage).
Some begin at the beginning by
forming a Chores. For they see in the
contemporary tragic or comic Chores,
which is an adaptation not an aping
of the Greeks, the embryo or.. mother-
cell"of all dramatic expression reduc-
ed to its basic essence and purpose.
True, the results are often unskilful,
but who could fail to perceive, beneath
these unpolished and sometimes fal-
tering efforts, the hope and faith of
our generation in the ideals of beauty,
justice and the sublime ?
Amazing Mediaeval Revivals
LAST spring, in Paris, I personallywitnessed a moving example of
this kind during the final stages
01 a competltlve examma-
tion for young theatre com-
panies (J e u n e s Compa-
gnies>, organized by the
French Government at the
Theatre de l'Atelier. About
a dozen boys and girls, all
members of the Association
of Youth Hostels, were
present. Their"team"had
worked together for several
years inspired by the prin-
ciples and techniques of
the Copeau school. As I
heard them speak their
lines, sing and act out the
hopes of the community
which they felt they re-
presented, I asked myself :
"How can these young
people be helped to find equilibrium,
contentment and. peace of mind ? How
can we use our more mature experience
to assist them without distorting or
falsifying the fresh originality of their
youth ? How to help them"find them-
selves"and better themselves ?"
I recall another case, this time in
a school in Paris-the Lycêe Louis Ie
Grand-formerly the College de Cler-
mont where Moliere once studied the
classics, learned to appreciate Plautus
and Terence and was taught music
and dancing. There I watched ad-
vanced students bring to life forgot-
ten works by Schiller and Marlowe and
attempt a performance of Britannicus.
Their productions were staged with
such Intelligence and warmth and even
technical competence, that they would
have won the praise of professional ac-
tors had any been present to see this
unpretentious student performance.
And to whom do we owe the amaz-
ing classical and mediaeval revivals of
the Oresteia, The Miracle of Théophi-
Ius, The Passion of Greban, and the
troubadour romance of Aucassin and
Nicolette ? To the students of the Sor-
bonne.
Workers of the French National
THESE FOUR MASKS and expressive hands aptly symbolize the spirit 01 the theatre and convey
the sincerity of these young players presenting Arthur Rimbaud's A Season in Help, at a
Cone ours des Jeunes Compagnies (Young Peoples'Theatre Competition) in Paris.
Railways have set up a theatre in one
of the railway stations in Paris, and
the critics have been unanimous in
praising the productions of these ama-
teurs as among the most remarkable of
the Parisian theatre season.
A New American Theatre
\y7HAT I have said about the en-thusiasm for the stage by no -
professionals in France, is equal-
ly true of other countries. Armand
Salacrou, for example, recently declar-
ed that in his opinion a new Ameri-
can theatre would one day emerge
from the college campus and its dra-
matic organizations.
In England, where even the Old Vie
has a school open to future profession-
al and non-professional actors, ama-
teur theatre groups are very active.
Their importance has been recognized
by the British Drama League which
encourages amateurs and professionals
alike to meet in the interest of the
theatre instead of regarding each other
with suspicion as so often happens
elsewhere.
Not long ago, in Italy, I saw the
great effort being made by university
and amateur troupes in Rome, Padua,
Florence and Todi ; and one gets the
same impression in Brazil, Switzerland,
Belgium and Luxembourg. In fact, all
over the world, interest in dramatic
art is awakening and young people are
organizing new theatre groups.
How then can we help these young
people ? The answer, I think, is clear.
If we really want to work and prepare
for the theatre of tomorrow, we must
not only look to the polished produc-
tions of the recognized leaders of the
stage today ; we must also turn our
gaze beyond-and search out the small,
non-professional troupes. For here
unpublicized talent and creative ability
still lie hidden away and need the un-
derstanding, encouragement and sup-
port that official and private educa-
tional organizations can provide to sti-
mulate their growth and fullest deve-
lopment.
NON-PROFESSIONAL THEATRE in the USA is one of most active in the world today.
Above, a scene from Gcethe's Faust, staged by students of the University of California at
Los Angeles who produce 10 major plays and hundreds of one-act plays each year.

young theatre people. Recently,
for example, young student-pro-
ducers from Belgium, Austria and
Italy were able to study theatre
techniques in England, while
their English counterparts were
visiting Denmark, France, or the
United States.
Under the Institute's sDonsor-
