FOUR SUPREME
HUMAN FREEDOMS
By
Sir Robert Watson Watt, F. R. S.
THE Universal Declaration of
Human Rights necessarily cov-
JL ers a range of rights nd free-
doms so vast, so very universal.
that if they are not to merge into an
impressive but remote-seeming nebula.
each must be picked out for selective
examination by someone specially
concerned. Everyone is interested in
and affected by every Article of the
Declaration. But each of us can find
at least one Article bearing with
peculiar directness on his own fears,
hopes and faiths.
I trust that I shall not be calling
down on my head the opprobrious
epithet"intellectual"if I declare that
for me the majority of the Articles of
the Universal Declaration primarily
delineate a solid foundation of bodily
and material securities on which must
rest the supreme freedoms of Articles
18, 19, 26 and 27.
The foundation is indispensable, for
even the most freely soaring mind,
spirit or soul must, within the mea-
sure of those Articles, be ground-
based. But if the material securities
are to be truly secure, if they are to
become universal-they are still
lamentably circumscribed even in the
liberal parts of our broadly liberal
world of today-they will do so only
by the exercise of the intellectual
rights.
It is no empty paradox to say that
though the growth of the intellectual
freedoms cannot be assure save on a
minimal foundation of material seca-
rities, yet these material securities are
continuously dependent on the full
enjoyment of the intellectual free-
doms It is not merely that man
cannot live by bread alone ; it is that
the bread itself is menaced by res-
traint on the freedoms of the mind.
In the interests of that de-nebuli-
sation which I think important to
effective application of the Declara-
tion, I go so far as to select even
from within those Articles which I
regard as the keystones of its arch.
Article 18 declares that"Everyone has
the right to freedom of tho''e ; ht-
to change his belief-to manifest his
belief in teaching, practice-."Arti-
cle 19 declares that"Everyone has the
right to freedom of opinion and ex-
pression-to hold opinions without
interference-to seek, receive and
impart information and ideas through
any media and regardless of fron-
tiers."
Right to
Be'Wrong'
THE rights thus claimed include
that highest of human rights,
the right to be"wrong", to
adhere to those heresies through
which minorities, often oppressed, ini-
tially almost always minorities of one,
have changed the face of the world,
physical and spiritual. They include
the right to exercise the ill-appreciated
courage of the"turncoat", which is
only another name for a convert, and
the right to preach"false"and.. sUb-
versive"doctrines. There are sadly
few communities sufficiently adult
fully to cede these rights within their
own frontiers-regardless of the
frontiers of others.
This is the unfamiliar and never
wholly welcome face of the medal. The
other face is familiar, welcome, but it
too is more especially welcome in its
application to the other side of the
frontier. It is the transcendently
important one of unrestricted access
to basic knowledge and ideas, access
to every channel of ephemeral publi-
cation, to books, to meetings, confe-
rences and debates, to cinema films, to
radio broadcasting, all"regardless of
frontiers".
To the scientific worker this used to
be almost a platitude. He never
doubted that science could only
advance healthily as a wholly interna-
tional enterprise. He never, save as a
minor and gratifying diversion, cata-
logued the nationalities of those who
contributed to the ever-growing stock
of sure scientific knowledge and to
the fertilising accessions of hypothe-
sis, reasoned speculation, and critical
appreciation.
He was humanly happy when some-
one in another country provided evid-
ence in support of his hypothesis ;
he was inspired to higher flights by
evidence which failed to fit. The
greatest blow that has been struck
against the growth of science is the
restriction, whether on political, mili-
tary or economic grounds, which has
in recent years been imposed on the
international interchange of basic
scientific thought.
A Radical
Antidote
ARTICLE 26 declares that"Every-
one has the right to education-
directed to the fill development
of the human personality and to the
strengthening of respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms-to
promote understanding, tolerance and
friendship".
"Article 27-freely to participate
in the cultural life of the community,
to enjoy the arts and to share in
scientific advancement and its bene-
fits."
Article 26 is, in fact, the radical
antidote to this disease of restrictive
practices in international science. A
liberal education, in the true sense of
encouraging and feeding a wide, well-
balanced appreciation of the greatest
triumphs of the human spirit in every
field of endeavour, is the only real
cure for the disease of intellectual
isolationism, with its inevitable sequel
of intellectual sterility. It is not a
lightning cure, but it is worth persist-
ing with the treatment for a couple
of centuries or so-then we shall
really see worthwhile results.
Meanwhile Article 27 prescribes a
sustaining diet which will help the
patient to live a reasonably full and
useful life. And these four articles
together provide a goal for intellectual
and spiritual advances that would on
the one hand be a superb harvest
from the earthy fields which are safe-
gilarded by the other articles, and on
the other world enrich these same
fields to a still higher level of human
satisfaction and legitimate human
pride.
Formerly, the scientific worker never doubted that sciences could only advance healthily as a wholly
International enterprise. In recent years, however, science has suffered through the restriction, on
various grounds, of the international exchange of basic scientific thought.
