To Harness Its Resources
INDIA SETS UP FIRST ASIAN T. V. A.
by Tibor Mende, Author of "L'Inde devant l'orage"
One of the many dams under construction in India today-part of the vast schemes
undertaken by the Government to harness natural resources in order to raise
India out of poverty. and provide her people with a higher standard of living.
Work proceeds on Damodar power project. Sand is received through a rope-way
from the Damodar river-bed and blown into mine-shafts and tunnels in sand-stowing
collier, Above. Schemes like D. V. C. will alleviate India's serious food shortage.
THE Damodar is a wandering and capricious river in the North East
of India. It rises in the hills of Chota Nagpur, assumes the dignity
of a great river before it reaches Bengal and then joins the Hooghly
not far below Calcutta. Though modest in size it is a giant in destruction.
Like most of India's rivers it is given to extremes. With the rains it
overflows its banks, destroys crops and dwellings, carries away men and
cattle, disrupts communications and gravely damages the economy of
the entire region. In the dry season, it dwindles to almost a trickle and
slowly winds its way across a desolate country of arid fields.
But the valley of the Damodar,
cutting across Bihar and Bengal, is
India's richest mineral basin and its
soil is potentially fertile. In this area
millions of idle men wait to be usefully
employed. If only the"River of
Sorrows"-as the Damodar is called
in West Bengal-could be made to
serve them... it might drive turbines
and generate electricity ; it could be
channelled to irrigate land and carry
barges on canals. It might help to
exploit the region's resources, to work
factories, to modernize agriculture and
to change the Valley of Destruction
into one of hope and progress.
This is precisely what India's
planners want the Damodar to do. To
tame the river they have borrowed
their methods from the United States
Tennessee Valley Authority. India's
answer to the Damodar's extravagance
is a smaller T. V. A. which will put the
river to work. The idea of the
Damodar Valley Corporation (D. V. C.)
goes back to the 1943 floods. The
disastrous inundation of that year
caused enormous damage and called
for urgent action. It led to the
planning of India's first multi-purpose
river-scheme.
7 Million People to Benefit
THE D. V. C. was first conceived asa 10-year project calling for the
building of eight dams with
hydro-electric stations at each, a
200, 000 kilowatt steam-power station,
an irrigation barrage with 1, 553 miles
of distribution canals and a 90 mile-
long navigation canal. The cost of
this project-about 115 million dollars
- was found to be beyond the means
of the young Republic and conse-
quently revised. According to the new
schedule, the first phase of the scheme
will be realized within five years and
the remainder in slower successive
stages. This first phase will include
only four of the originally planned
eight dams together with the barrage
and irrigation systems. Thanks to a
World Bank loan of $18, 500, 000 pro-
vided in April 1950, work on the D. V. C.
project is progressing at an accelerated
rate.
Already, Bihar's countryside is
changed by the walls and chimneys
which are rising, by the workers'huts
and the army of men employed on the
large-scale enterprise. When comple-
ted the D. V. C. scheme will provide
irrigation for 750, 000 acres and will
generate about 350, 000 kilowatts of
electricity. Besides its basic objects
the project has several other attractive
features. It will provide a navigation
canal which will connect the famous
Raniganj coalfields with the port of
Calcutta and thus relieve congestion
in India's overburdened raiJways. As
a by-product D. V. C. will provide faci-
lities to combat effectively malaria, a
disease that claims millions of victims
in India each year. The benefits of
D. V. C. will directly affect the lives of
five million people in the valley and
another two million town-dwellers. It
had been calculated that the direct
benefits of the scheme, translated into
terms of current prices, would add
Water rushing down these pipes from the catchment area of a dam at the
top of the slope rotates the turbines at one of the newly-built power stations.
about $50 millions to India's yearly
national income. The indirect bene-
fits, human and material, though not
easy to calculate, would probably be
even bigger.
First of a Whole Series
SOME of the component parts ofthe D. V. C. are alr ady taking
shape. Considerable progress has
been made in setting up a power-
plant of 150, 000 kilowatts at Bokaro.
The Konar dam will be finished in
1952 and the operations on the Tilaiya
dam are also in progress and may be
completed by the middle of 1951. Pre-
liminary work on two more of the
projected eight dams-at Maithon
and Pench-Hill - is
When the monsoon fails, starvation
starts. That has been the sad history
of India for centuries. In present-day
India about 242 million acres of land
are under cultivation. Of these not
more than 20 per cent-about 47 mil-
lion acres-are being irrigated. Yet
waterways form India's basic wealth
and the promise of her future well-
being. They offer an answer to her
three chief problems : food, health and
rising population.
At present less than six per cent of
India's available water wealth is being
utilized ; the rest is running to waste.
Thus, the amount of electricity
consumed in India annually is just
about equal to that generated in the
United States in a week for less than
half as many people. But even this
low Indian consumption accounts for
only four big cities while some 90 per
cent of the population uses almost
nothing.
A Synonym of Hope
CHEAP power, therefore, is India'sprimary n ed to rais  herself out
of poverty and to enable her to
harness her natural resources. Whether
for domestic purposes or the manu-
facturing of fertilizers, to improve
agriculture or to conserve the
country's meagre coal resources, cheap
power is of supreme importance.
Indirectly, India's river projects
provide a great unifyhg factor, a new
common denominater to cement
together people divided by time-worn
sectional loyalties.
The élan of a joint enterprise as
well as the benefits of those schemes
will be felt across provincial and lan-
guage boundaries. Against the bleak
background of the burnt, bare hills
and the desolate fields, slowly and
painfully emerges the new hope of
. cle3n and healthy villages, of well-
irrigated fields and neatly terraced
hillsides.
With the help of the D. V. C. and
other river projects, India is moving
out of her proverbial immobility. The
enthusiasm that inspires her plans
springs from the claim of one-sixth
of mankind to obtain its overdue
share of human progress.
MAY 1951
India's industrial expansion has just begun. This tinplate mill and other industrial projects will need
new electric power plants which schemes like the Damodar Valley Corporation will help to provide.
also going forward.
The Damodar Valley
Corporation however,
is only the first in a
series of impressive
and significant vent-
ures of a similar na-
ture now being carried
out in India. The
sacred rivers of India
are gradually being
harnessed to serve
man and to bring new
hope to a people per-
manently on the
margins or famine.
For nothing has
hampered independent
India's progress more
than her lack of food.
To end her dependence
on costly food imports,
India's agriculture has
to be modernized as
quickly as possible.
This means irrigation
and fertilization. It
means building canals
and providing electric
energy : in other
words tapping India's
water supply.
With few exceptions
the country receives
its annual rainfall-
an average of 45
inches-in the
three summer months.
