Commissions Meeting ProposesUnesco C mmissio s Meeting Proposes
Regional Planning of Technical Aid
A I'LAX to put the United Nations
programme of technical assist-
ance to work on the problems of
an entire region rather than those
of individual countries has resulted
from the first regional conference of
Unesco National Commissions in the
Western Hemisphere, which ended its
thirteen-day meeting at Havana on De-
cember 20.
Conference recommendations for the
drawing up of technical assistance re-
quests on the basis of the needs of a
continent were in the general spirit of
solidarity and co-operation in the
Western Hemisphere which marked the
entire conference, attended by delegates
from sixteen countries.
The keynote of the conference was
sounded on the opening day, Decembcl
8. by M. Jaimes Torres Bodet, Unesco'-
Director-General, who told delegates :
.. The most important of the circum-
stances favourable to the holding of t1li. 
conference, in my eyes, is the fact that
the American peoples make up a demo-
cratic community... are all united ill
their belief in individual liberty and the
dignity o {the human person."
Technical Aid Measures
In the field of technical assistance, theconference recommended hat :
1. A scientific bibliographlcal centre now
being organized by Unesco in Mexico
be extended to other Latin-American
countries in the form of branch offices.
2, Unesco and other United Nations special-
Ized agencies begin a study of the
problems of Latin America's indigenous
peoples, with emphasis on their educa-
tion.
3. Unesco should organize a Seminar to
show Latin American countries how to
determine the type of specialized person-
nel they may need for their economic
development.
U. N. OFFICIAL WINS NOBEL PEACE
PRIZE : On December 10, Dr. Ralph
Bunche, Director of the United Nations
Department of Trusteeship and infor-
mation from Non-self-governing Territo-
ries, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize
at a ceremony in Oslo. This photo,
taken prior to the ceremony, shows
Dr. Bunch meeting Mr. Martin Traumel,
the veteran Norwegian Socialist leader,
at a lunch arranged by the Norwegian
Nobel Institute.
4, A seminar should be organized to study
the results of Unesco's surveys In Latin
America on teohnlcal needs In the field
of information (press, film and radio)
with the aim of drawing up a regional
programme to meet these needs.
The Conference's work covered vir-
tually all phases of Unesco's aim and
the role played by National Commis-
sions in translating them into national
and local action.
Delegates applauded Unesco's pro-
posal to set up a world network of
regional fundamental education centres
as part of a global campaign against
illiteracy and low standards of living
and agreed to facilitate this programme
"through all means necessary",
They pledged full support to the or-
ganization's international fellowship
programme and offered the services of
national commissions in the orientation
and guidance of holders of Unesco fel-
lowships.
The conference also urged that the
work of the Western Hemisphere's Na-
tional Commissions be brought down
to the community level-especially in
large."decentralized"countl'ies. It re-
commended a broader base for national
commissions through co-operation of
- women's groups, representatives of go-
vernments. youth movements and simi-
lar organization. The creation of full-
time staffs to handle administrative ope-
rations of the commissions was also
urged.
Human Rights Ceremony
The conference also discassed theUnesco coupon scheme, problems
of libraries in Latin America. the
translation of Latin-American classics.
and the teaching of the aims and prin-
ciples of the United Nations.
On December 8, M. Torres Bodet and
Senor Albert Llera Camargo of the Or-
ganisation of American States (OAS)
signed an agreement formalizing the
exist. ing co-operation between UNESCO
and OAS. The two organizations have
held joint educational seminars at Cara-
cas, Rio de Janeiro and Montevideo and
have co-operated in the establishment of
a fundamental education centre in
Mexico to train teachers for all of Latin
America.
The third dav of the conference.
December 10, was marked uy impres-
sive ceremonies commemorating the
adoption two years before of the United
Nations Cniversal Declaration of Human
Rights.
During the Havana conference, dele-
gates also had the opportunity to in-
spect Unesco's travelling science mus-
eum which was brought to Havana
following visits to Ecuador and Peru
where it was. visited by nearly 130, 000
persons.
Countries who sent delegates to the
conference were : Bolivia, Brazil, Co-
lombia, Costa Rica. the Dominican Re-
public, Ecuador, EI Salvador, France,
Guatemala. Haiti, Honduras, Mexico,
Panama, the United States, Uruguay
and Venezuela. Three countries. Chile,
Cuba and Nicaragua, and various non-
governmental organizations also sent
observers.
"HUMAN RIGHTS"DAY IN HAVANA : Delegates to the Regional Conference of Unesco
National Commissions in the Western Hemisphere took part in a ceremony marking the second
anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in Havana's Parliament
Building, on December 10. They were addressed by M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Unesco's Director-
General, who during his visit to Havana to attend the Conference received the degree of doctor
"honoris causa"at the University of Havana. This photo shows : (front row, from left to right)
Senor Manual Gual Vidal, Mexico's Minister of Education ; M. Torres Bodet ; Senor Ernesto Dihigo,
Cuba's Minister of Foreign Affairs ; Dr. Cosme de la Torriente, Chairman of the Regional Confe-
rence and Dr. Octavio Mendez Pereira, Director of Unesco's Regional Office in Havana.
BREAKING DOWN BARRIERS TO THE FREE FLOW OF KNOWLEDGE : NATIONS
SIGN THE UNESCO-SPONSORED AGREEMENT ON THE IMPORTATION OF
EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL MATERIALS. In a ceremony
at the United Nations Interim Headquarters presided over by Secretary-General Trygve
Lie, representatives of 17 nations signed the Unesco-sponsored international agreement
which will allow materials to move across frontiers free of duty. Since'hen, one more
country has signed and, more signatures are expected shortly. This photo : show Sir Gland-
win Jebb, of the United Kingdom, signing the agreement.
