TH E ARTS ARE NOT
JUST A PLEASANT
PASTIME
by Dr. Edwin ZIEGFELD,
Head, Department of Fine and Industrial Arts,
Teachers'College, Columbia University
ONE of the most significant discoveries of recenttimes is that all people are creative, that there
exist within each of us the potentialities for
artistic expression. The many illustrations on these
pages are eloquent testimony of the presence of that
trait among young people, for the examples are
not by specially gifted youngsters training to be
artists, but by children in the normal process of
growing up. These activities with art media pro-
vide them with essential means for developing into
emotionally-mature men and women who are
needed to cope with the problems of our twentieth-
century world.
Although the potentialities for creativity have
undoubtedly always existed in peoples, this had
never before been a pressing concern of education,
nor was there any particular necessity for it. Our
contemporary world, however, by its nature and
present condition, has made the development of
creative individuals essential and urgent. For,
increasingly, we live in a world in which it is dif-
ficult to maintain our individuality and stability.
Of the many factors that might be cited which
are complicating our existence, two appear most
important. First is the acceleration of mechani-
zation and technology. In industrialized centres
the labours of man to support himself have been
robbed of much or most of their dignity. Pride in
producing a product hardly exists since the part of
any one person is so insignificant. As a consumer
as well, he purchases and uses mass-produced com-
modities which may be exactly the same in Calcutta
or Chicago, in Anchorage or Capetown. A person
thus tends to lose his individuality and become a
cog in a machine and an anonymous consumer.
The parallel emphases on materialism which are
by-products of technology tend also to devalue the
emotional and the personal. The machine, imper-
sonal and insensitive, dominates our thinking and
our actions.
The second major factor is the present state of
world tension. Everywhere there are feverish pre-
parations against a war we hope will not be fought
and a large part of our money and energies are
diverted into channels for enormous destruction.
Never before have the demoralizing effects of uncer-
tainty and the disínteratlve effects of tension been
so widely prevalent.
These conditions and forces are a part of our
times and no one escapes them. Children, with
their particular sensitivity, are deeply affected, even
through they may not understand or even know of
the issues that form them.
It is being discovered all over the world that
children are responding to creative opportunities in
the arts with an almost fierce intensity. This is
true, not only of children but Qf adults as well. In
a world which devalues the individual they are
engaging in activities which develop the indivi-
dual : in a world which abounds in forces of disin-
tegration, they are demanding those activities which
make them whole.
Individuality and integration are two of the basic
characteristics of creative activity. Through it an
individual clarifies his world and his relation to it.
His experiences are deepened, intensi8ed, unified,
and most important, their meanings are made uni-
quely his own. Through dealing with things of
the senses, he himself becomes sensitive and emo-
tionally mature with an appreciation of human
values and feelings. The arts in life, then, are no
longer merely pleasant and superficial pastimes but
activities which are essential in our present world if
we are to maintain our dignity and integrity, our
wholeness and stability.
