Three major United Nations tasks
in the economic and social fields
THE activities of the United Nations in the economic and social field, and thoseof the twelve specialized agencies of which Unesco is one, are reviewed by the
Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) each summer. This Council is em-
powered not only to direct the future work of its own commissions, but also to make
recommendations to the specialized agencies. By such a survey of the full range of
work undertaken by organizations located in different world capitals, ECOSOC stimu-
lates collaboration in the many cases where joint action is needed, and makes it
possible to lay down certain priority tasks to which the efforts of all the organiza-
tions should be aimed.
At the session of the Council which ended last month in Geneva, particular
emphasis was laid by all the members on major tasks which should figure prominently
in the programmes of the various organizations during the next few years. Three
of these merit particular attention here.
o AIDING UNDER-DEVELOPED REGIONS
THE social and economic developmentof under-developed areas is perhaps
the most important single aim ever
tackled through international action. The
United Nations and most of its specialized
agencies have joined in this great effort
which received powerful encouragement
when, in 1949, the Economic and Social
Council launched the U. N. Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance for
the Economic Development of Under-
Developed Countries. This programme is
in many ways unique : it is a fully
co-operative undertaking in which all
the organizations play a part through
special budgets. A large number of
governments-some of them not
members of the United Nations-have
contributed a total of over $20, 000, 000.
While the programme is only meant to
contribute the technical aid of experts, it
has already shown its capacity to"prime
the pump"of economic development and
to set in motion activities far exceeding in
scope what could be financed out of the
relatively small sum just mentioned.
Unesco's main contribution has been in
the educational field, since no community
can hope to improve its economic standards
lastingly unless there is some real
understanding by its members of the
purpose of the effort required. Greatest
emphasis has been placed on fundamental
and adult education, that is to say, the
emergency type of elementary education
which governments are introducing in
areas where neither the children nor
their parents have had the benefit of an
organized school system. In 1947 Unesco
organized the first international experi-
ment in fundamental education in a
distressed valley in Haiti. Unesco's
conception of fundamental education,
which was first hammered out there, is
not confined to the rudiments of schooling,
but also includes education in such
matters as modern agriculture, public
health, village industries and crafts.
The Haiti experiment has been followed
by many others. Unesco either sends
experts to advise on the launching
of fundamental education projects or
conducts the projects wholly or partly
itself. This year Unesco has launched a
world campaign against ignorance and its
evils which will attack this problem at its
base-the lack of Fundamental
Education specialists. The programme is
based on the idea of"training by chain
reaction"which foresees a growing army
of 5, 000 teachers of teachers within
12 years through a network of regional
training centres spread around the globe.
The need for scientific advice has also
emerged sharply, and Unesco is now
providing technical help in the applied
sciences and is also devoting attention to
the important psychological problems
which may arise when a primitive
community is abruptly brought face to
face with problems of modern indus-
trialization.
MAKING HUMAN RIGHTS A REALITY
THE gradual realization in practice ofthe fundamental human rights
inscribed in the Universal De-
claration of 1948 is another major theme.
Unesco has its own contributions to make
in the fields of education, science and
culture. It has launched, with the support
of some fifty nations, a world campaign
for free and compulsory primary schooling
wherever it is not yet fully in operation,
thus aiding in the fulfilment of the right
to education which appears in Article 26
of the Universal Declaration. In many
different ways it, its promoting the
enjoyment of the right freely to par-
ticipate in the cultural life of the
community, and to share in scientific
advancement and its benefits (Article 27).
It is also in a variety of ways, and
particularly by proposing means to
overcome the existing barriers to the free
movement of information across frontiers,
endeavouring to give greater reality to
every man's right to be fully informed
about events all over the world.
The Economic and Social Council not
only reviews the progress achieved by the
specialized agencies in such matters as
health, food, labour and education, but is
also framing a Human Rights Covenant,
which will ultimately be laid before the
world's parliaments, and which will give
legal effect to the principles laid down in
the Universal Declaration.
&commat; STRENGTHEN) NG THE BULWARKS OF PEACE
THE third field of major internationaleffort which should be mentioned
here is the continuing effort to
assure and strengthen peace throughout
the world. It is true that the problems
here are in large part political and, as
such, outside the purview of ECOSOC.
The Twenty Years'Programme for Peace
launched a year ago by Mr. Trygve Lie,
Secretary-General of the United Nations,
is not, however, entirely concerned with
political and military issues. It also
speaks of the minimum conditions of
economic and social well-being without
which peace must remain insecure.
Unesco is working on several aspects of
this paramount problem of strengthening
the bulwarks of peace. It has studied
and reported on methods and techniques
by which the doctrines of international
understanding and of the brotherhood of
man may become real in the minds of all ;
it is investigating particular situations
which may arise in areas in process of
economic change, where dangerous states
of tension are latent in different sections
of the community ; it is seeking to bring
about a wider understanding of and
support for United Nations action to
enforce collective security, notably among
the young ; and through the mass media
it has. sought to publish, broadcast and
screen information designed to awaken
peoples'interest in the lives and achieve-
ments of their fellow men. This group
of activities received special attention at
Unesco's own General Conference this
year, and the Organization's support for
the United Nations was specifically and
enthusiastically pledged by some sixty
delegations without dissent.
These annual proceedings of the Eco-
nomic and Social Council are therefore
much more than formal and constitu-
tional. They provide a unique opportunity
of integrating the efforts of twelve or
more international organizations, and of
inspiring them anew with faith in the
basic purposes for which they were
created. Specialised agencies like Unesco
are of course autonomous, and are only
bound by the decisions of their own
annual conferences. Perhaps the value
of the Economic and Social Council's
survey lies precisely in its largely informal
character. The members of the Council,
the directors-general of the various
organizations, the officials and specialists
who attend, can all speak freely and com-
ment on each other's work.
There may be some disagreement on
points of political doctrine ; there are
constant problems of administration and
of financing, to be tackled and overcome.
But it cannot be doubted that the Eco-
nomic and Social Council provides Unesco
and its sister agencies with an invaluable
occasion to view their own work in true
perspective and to link it with the other
work of the United Nations.
The first of a series of buildings to house the permanent
headquarters of the United Nations has been completed and
is already in use. This 39-storey Secretariat skyscraper can
accommodate 4, 000 people. When fully completed, the head-
quarters site will serve the General Assembly, ECOSOC
and other UN bodies in New York City.
