Tarascan boy in island village of Janitzio near Patzcuaro studies poster
announcing inauguration of fundamental education training centre. Poster,
produced by silk-scree process, is the work of members of the newly-
established centre.
FIRST H. Q. IN THE FIGHT
AGAINST IGNORANCE
- by Daniel Behrman
ON the occasion of the inauguration last month of
Unesco's first fundamental education training
centre at Patzcuaro, the COURTIER sent
Daniel Behrman to Mexico to report on this event.
On the following pages Mr. Behrman describes the
Patzcuaro Centre, its work and the communities which
are serving as the local base for its operations.
"Tata"Vasco de Quiroga
DON VASCO DE QUIROGA died
400 years ago, but he is still
the leading citizen of Patz-
cuaro, a quiet little town on the
shores of a fairy-tale mountain lake
some 250 miles west of Mexico City.
He was very much present on
May 9, 1951, when, in the presence
of President Miguel Aleman of
Mexico, nearly 4, 000 people crowded
into Patzcuaro's main square to
watch M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Direct-
or-General of Unesco, inaugurate the
first international training centre
and research laboratory for raising
standards of living through education.
As the ceremony ended, a tall Tarascan Indian stepped up to
a microphone on the improvized grandstand. Turning to the
Mexican President and M. Torres Bodet, he said, in Tarascan,
that he and his people were very pleased to see the centre
open."Tata Vasco would have approved,"he added.
In Tarascan,'''tata''means"our beloved father" ; it is a
title with which only a few people have been honoured.
Don Vasco earned it in the 16th century when he was sent
to Patzcuaro by the Spanish Government to investigate reports
that landholders were enslaving the Tarascans.
By 1537, when he became the first bishop of what is now
the Mexican State of Michoacan, he had persuaded the Tarascans
to leave their mountain hiding-places. He founded schools
and taught the Tarascans to help themselves by organizing local
industries. Market day in Patzcuaro is still Friday, the day
Don Vasco chose. He died in 1565 at the age of 95 while
visiting a Tarascan village. But, in the 20th century, if you
explain the meaning of"Fundamental Education"to a Tarascan
in Patzcuaro, he immediately thinks of Don Vasco.
For'''Fundamental Education"is simply education in the
fundamentals of daily life. It is a highly-specialized field.
Teachers not only have to be familiar with methods of purifying
water or of crop rotation, but they must have the ability and
the understanding to explain them in the simplest terms.
70, 000, 000 PUPILS
1T\ URINC a visit last month to villages on the shores of LakePatzcuaro I s w farmers who, only recently, had abandoned
the wooden plough. I saw men 60 years old in island
villages who could not read or write. Up in the mountains
surrounding the lake-the lake itself is 6, 300 feet above sea
level-I saw Tarascan girls drawing water from an uncovered
spring, with pigs wallowing a few feet away.
These conditions are gradually being eliminated in the
Patzcuaro region through an efficient, and now deeply-rooted,
rural education system set up by the Mexican Government.
But-and this is the reason why an international centre is now
operating at Patzcuaro-most of the world's population live
under similar conditions.
The centre has been established through the close co-operationof Unesco, the Urganization of American States
(OAS), the Mexican Gcvernment and three other
specialized agencies of the United Nations-the
Food and Agriculture Organization, the Interna.
tional Labour  : rgadzatiol and the World Health
The problem of finding appropriate headquarters for the Fundamental Education
Regional Centre for Latin America was solved early this year when the former
President of Mexico, General Lazaro Cardenas, generously donated his mansion,
"lea Erendira", named after the daughter of an ancient Tarascan chief. Here,
General Cardenas (left foreground) and other dignitaries cross the p_ark to mount
1'1 1'1'1 1.'1
1'1. 1. 1 1
the steps leading to the new centre.'1. 1 1

A colourful pageant of sombreros, peasant dresses, baskets
of flowers marks opening of Patzcuaro centre. Above,
Tarascan Indians entertain guests with traditional songs.
This fisherman's net-shop is his family's bedroom,
living-room, dining-room and kitchen all rolled into one.
Eighteen Tarascan communities near Patzcuaro, like the lakeshore village of Cucuchuchu
(above) make up the"laboratory"area-about 80 square miles-of the Unesco centre.
Music comes easily to
music. A 24-pece on
In the Patzcuaro region a husband often considers that his wife should always have work
to do. Patzcuaro recreation specialists feel that recreation programmes should begin
in the peoples'homes with the wife taking full part in the family's leisure occupations.
This Tarascan ! nd !.
into the main squar
the first training eer
This boy's father never went to school but he hopes his
son will have the chance to learn to read and write.
Lake Patzcuaro, 6, 500 feet high and 250 miles west of Mexico City is the heart of the region
where the world's first international centre for training fundamental educational experts
was inaugurated last month. Here, Tarascan fishermen return home jwith their pictu-
resque ncutterny-
handed for though
observe the dos,

Indian woman and her son were among the 4, 000 spectators who crowded
luare of Patzcuaro Village in Mexico on May 9 to watch the inauguration of
centre set up by Unesco as part of its world-wide battle against ignorance.
rfly"nets after spending all night on the lake. They often return empty-
; ough they depend entirely on the lake's fish supply for a living, they do not
dosed fish-breeding season. They thus destroy their own livelihood.
OBJECTIVE N 1
80 sq. mixes-10/000 Tarascans
around a mountain lake
(CONTINUED FROM PAGE 7)
Organization. Unesco has allotted $115, 000 for
its first year of operation and the OAS $40, 000.
Buildings and land are provided by Mexico.
The centre has two objectives : to train teachers
of fundamental education for Latin America and,
secondly, to find out what are the best teaching
aids available. In Latin America--------
alone, there are 70, 000, 000 people
who cannot read or write-and
illiteracy is nearly always found
along with bad health, inadequate
housing and out-dated, inefficient
working and farming methods.
The term.'teachers of fundamen-
tal education"does not ne-
cessarily imply school-teachers
alone. Unesco, at Patzcuaro, has
the assignment of training special-
ists from other UN agencies in
the methods of bringing home
their knowledge in fields such as
health, agriculture and rural indus-
tries, to the. people who need it.
Experts from WHO, FAO and ILO
are among the centre's faculty
members.
The centre now has 52 students
from Bolivia, Costa Rica, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Honduras, Peru,
Guatemala, Haiti and Mexico. Its
faculty has an equally international
flavour with members from Co-
lombia, Denmark, Mexico, Puerto
Rico and the United States.
FOUR POINT PROGRAMME
EIGHTEE :-i Tarascan villageswithin e y distance of
Patzcuaro makeup its"laboratory".
These communities live on islands,
in mountain valleys, or on the plain
separating the lake from the
mountains. In a ! I, the"labora-
tory' covers about 80 square miles,
with a population of 10, 000.
Faculty members consider these
Tarascan people one of the centre's
most valuable assets. They are
industrious and intelligent, with a
long tradition of local handicrafts
- some of which, unfortunately,
are dying out.
The centre's curriculum in this
region was summed up briefly by
Lucas Ortiz, a stocky, powerfully-
built man of 47 who directed
Mexico's rural education pro-
gramme before becoming director
of the Patzcuaro centre. He
believes in making people work by
example. Six days a week-
sometime seven-he is at work
in the centre's headquarters at
Erendira, the graceful villa given
by General Lazaro Cardenas,
former President of Mexico.
"At Patzcuaro", Senor Ortiz
explained,"we intend to show
students how to stimulate the
improvement of life in rural areas
through what I like to call the
four cardinal points of fundamental
education. These are :
"First, man must protect his
health ;
"Secondly, he must take advan-
tage of local natural resources ;
"Thirdly, he must dignify his
home life-materially and spiri-
tually ;
"Fourthly, he has the right to
enjoy leisure, and he must be given
the opportunity to do so."
I looked up from my notebook
and asked :"But what about
teaching him to read and write ?"
Senor Ortiz smiled."We're
often asked that. It is no use
teaching a man literacy unless you
convince him it will help solve
the problems of his daily life. We
teach literacy when we teach health
or home economics or agriculture.
but never as a separate, isolated
subject".
CLOSED TO MOSQUITOES
THE CENTRE'S
LEADERS
graphic laboratory and the garage into a compact,
two-storey print shop.
The order of priority did not displease
Dr. Anzola Gomez, who was working the same
hours himself putting the centre's curriculum
into final shape. A key man in his own country's
educational system-he directedE">".....,"-.Colombia's literacy campaign in
1941 and 1942-he is firmly
convinced the centre has an im-
portant job to do.
"The only way to raise living
standards in regions like Patzcuaro
is through close co-ordination
between teachers and technicians",
he said.
"That may not be clear, so let
me give you an example from my
own experience-a bad example
at that.
"About 15 years ago, I was
director of education in a
Colombian province with 150 rural
schools. We were suddenly faced
with an outbreak of tropical
anaemia and I had to act quickly.
The province's doctors distributed
medicine wholesale, and we began
a big campaign to build sanitary
facilities. We put a cement latrine
in every school, and the sickness
disappeared. But the following
year, tropical anæmia broke out
all over again.
"It didn't take us long to find
out why. Every latrine was locked.
Someone had tacked up signs :
'Keep this door closed to prevent
mosquitoes from entering.'So, no
one ever opened the door.
"That taught me that education
has to accompany even the
simplest technical improvements",
Dr. Anzola Gomez concluded.
LIVING WITH THE PEOPLE
IN their training, the centre's52 students will work in t n
teams with each member special.
lizing in one of the following
subjects : health, home economics,
rural economy, recreational pro-
gramme or what the centre calls
social education-that is, educa-
tion to give villagers a sense of
community responsibility.
At present, the students are ready
to undertake an intensive survey
of each of the 18 villages in the
area. It will be a house-to-house,
family-by-family affair. When the
results of this survey are brought
back to the centre, the students
themselves will lay out fundamental
education programmes for each
village, with the guidance of
faculty members.
These programmes, Dr. Anzola
Gomez stressed, will vary from
village to village. On the islands,
for example, where villagers live
by fishing, the main problem is
that the fish supply of Lake
Patzcuaro diminishes every year.
In the mountains, there is an
urgent forest conservation problem
and, on the plains, agricultural
methods need improvement.
These programmes are no paper
theories. Once they have been
decided, student teams will go out
and put them into practice, living
in each community for a fortnight
at a time. They will work closely
with Mexican teachers."We are
certain to make errors, but we have
to try", commented Dr. Anzola
Gomez."The only way of not
making mistakes is not to attempt
anything".
That also sums up the approach
adopted by Dr. Enrique Laguerre
toward solving the second main
problem facing Patzcuaro's students
and faculty. Dr. Laguerre, whose
home is in San Juan, Puerto Rico,
is responsible for producing
teaching aids for experimental use
in the Patzcuaro region.
Since nearly all Latin-American
countries speak Spanish, and many
of them have the problem of a
bi-Iingual population, he feels that
methods and materials proved in
his Tarascan"laboratory"would
models to teachers throughout much
THE man in charge of training1. teachers along these lines
is a slim, soft-spoken Colombian,
Dr. Gabriel Anzola Gomez. Like
other members of the faculty,
Dr. Anzola Gomez was living in
makeshift quarters while awaitingthe conversion of an old hotel's tourist cabins into
family bungalows-a task still not completed.
Previously, 150 carpenters, bricklayers,
plumbers and electricians had given priority to
school facilities. Working 12-hour days, they
transformed Genera ! Cardenas* villa into an
administrative building. The dining room of
Erendira (the villa is named after the daughter
of an ancient Tarascan chief) became a library.
The billiard room was converted into a photo-&commat;sily to the Tarascans. Many who cannot read their own names can read
pece orchestra in a tiny village of 1, 000 is not at all unusual in this region.
be valuable as l
of the Western Hemisphere.
Dr. Laguerre brought to Patzcuaro long
experience in too use of the written and spoken
word. A Professor of Spanish literature at the
University of Puerto Rico, he also has written
and produced radio programmes
for a"school of the air"in San
Juan. He has written four novels,
three of them awarded prizes by

M. Jaime Torres Bodet (left) is welcomed atthe Patzcuaro Centre inauguration
ceremony by an Indian woman who presents him with a miniature Tarascan
guitar, the traditional instrument of the people. On his left, President Aieman.
students at the Centre are teachers who have come to Patzcuaro from all parts
of the American continent to be trained as specialists in fundamental educa-
tion. Here are some at work in the Centre's library.
"La Erendira", the Unesco Centre's main villa, has been partially transformed
to meet staff needs. Above, storey is added to garage to house printing shop
for producing local texts and other teaching materials.
OBJECTIVE ? 2 : SPREADING THE BENEFITS
OF PATZCUARO TO ALL THE WORLD
(CONTINUED FROM PAGE 9)
Dr. Laguerre, who is 44, speaks slowly and weighs
his words. He plans to weigh carefully every word
he and his staff use in the textbooks, radio pro-
grammes and films they produce at Patzcuaro.
As far as textbooks for newly-literate adult pupils
are concerned, Dr. Laguerre believes they must meet
two standards ; they have to be adapted to local
ways of life and they must use the simplest possible
language.
His first step in textbook production might be
called an inventory of the region's word resources.
Though nearly all the Tarascans speak Spanish, they
have their own version of the language. If you tell
a fisherman on Lake Patzcuaro, in good Spanish,
that he is using a malla, he will not understand.
He calls his net a cheremicua.
Dr. Laguerre has already enlisted the aid of local
newspapers and school-teachers in his survey. He
also counts on the centre's students as world
"detectives", because they come from other areas
and thus are the first to spot local variations in the
Patzcuaro region's Spanish.
Aiding Dr. Laguerre in textbook production work
are two pressmen and two artists, all hired locally.
Artists, he believes, should come from the region
Two village girls show keen interest in a drawing
which Justino Melgar Aliaga, Peruvian member
of the Patzcuaro centre, is explaining to them
during an out-door Jesson.
where the textbooks are to be used, or else they
must spend too much time learning about the region.
"If we use a house or a fishing boat to illustrate a
textbook,"he explained,"it has to be a house or a
boat our readers recognize or else they are
meaningless. We've no place for abstract concep-
tions".
REALISTIC BOOKS AND FILMS
As the centre's publisher, Dr. Laguerre has acompact Multilith press and a set of Varitype
machines. The Varityper is basically a typewriter
with a mechanism permitting it to print what
publishers call"justified lines"-that is, columns
with even margins on both sides as in an ordinary
newspaper. Dr. Laguerre chose these machines
because they offer a wide selection of type faces, and
because their letters can be photographed and
enlarged to any desired size at low cost.
With Dr. Laguerre are two experienced American
librarians, Marie Rapp of Detroit, Mich., and Rose-
mond Cook-of Brockport, N. Y. His film section
is headed by Hagen Hasselbalch, a Danish writer,
director and cameraman (documentary film production
by one man is not unusual). Both Mr. Hasselbalch
and Dr. Laguerre believe educational films in regions
such as the Tarascan villages surrounding Patzcuaro
require a technique quite different from that used
for audiences in New York, London or Paris. Dr.
Laguerre told a story to illustrate his point :"A few years ago, an animated cartoon on the
dangers of the mosquito was shown to an audience
in Africa and, at one point, the mosquito was
enlarged until it filled half the screen. This put the
spectators in a hilarious mood. They went home
and slept soundly because they knew they didn't have
mosquitoes that big around their houses."
The film strip (a modern offspring of the old-
fashioned magic lantern) has many points in its
favour for educational work, and the centre will use
it. It can be shown with a simple projector operating
on a gas lantern, so lack of electricity is no barrier
to its use. Images can be held on the screen for
as long as necessary to permit full explanation, and
it is simple to flash back a few pictures and explain
a difficult point all over again.
Dr. Laguerre and his staff are equally interested
in reaching people through their ears as well as
their eyes. The centre has begun broadcasting over
Station XELQ in Morelia, a small town 35 miles from
Patzcuaro.
A preliminary trip through the region showed
that each village has at least six or seven radio sets,
which are often centres of community life. Dr. La-
guerre has enlisted the aid of village school-teachers
to make a more complete census and to check on
listener reaction to the Centre's programmes.
Radio has helped to make known the Patzcuaro
Centre and its objectives to the entire region. On
May 7, two days before the official inauguration,
students representing eight countries talked about
themselves, their homes and their work over XELQ.
Music on this programme included a suite based on
South American Indian music played by a talented
Bolivian pianist, and the rendering of Creole folk-
songs by a young Haitian student.
During the year, each nation's students at the
centre will be called upon to produce educational
programmes over XELQ, which has allotted the Patz-
cuaro centre one half-hour of broadcast time a week
and more if it needs it.
"DON'T SHOOT THE TEACHER"
LIKE Dr. Laguerre and Dr. Anzola Gomez, who aretwo programme irectors under S nor Ortiz,
other members of the faculty give the same impres-
sion of patience and competence.
Miguel Leal and Isidro Castillo Perez, the two
"fundamental education specialists", learned their
trades from the bottom up, both beginning as rural
school teachers. Senor Leal held a top post in

One of the Patzcuaro Centre's specialists, Luis Felipe Obregon (complete with
stick and abundant good humour) is always welcome at neighbouring village
of Zurumutaro. Recreation is an important part of fundamental education.
Mexico's agricultural educatiun department before
coming to Patzcuaro. Senor Castillo is the founder
of Mexico's first rural teachers'training school and
a veteran of the days when fanatics roamed Micro.
acan with rifles looking for school-teachers as a target.
"I never went armed myself", he recalled,"I was
afraid I might have to use the gun if I carried one".
Senor Castillo emphasized that, though a teacher,
he doesn't have much use for lectures and large
classrooms."I believe in learning by doing", he
said.'''If this centre at Patzcuaro had been a formal
school, I wouldn't have come".
Another veteran Mexican educator is Luis Felipe
Obregon, in charge of training teachers to organize
recreation activities in villages. A distinguished-
looking man of 47, he is willing to shed his dignity
at a blast of a whistle and referee a basketball game
or start playing ball with Tarascan youngsters. He
believes recreation teachers are key men in this
specialized education because of two factors :
. They fill a definite need in villages where
the only pastimes may be card-playing, alcoholism or
idleness.
. They act as salesmen-propagandists, if you will-
for the other teachers who often must follow them.
"There is nothing which wins the confidence of a
village like playing with children in the street", he
commented. Besides that, Senor Obregon enjoys it.
He has already sketched out a preliminary
recreation programme in the Patzcuaro region
following trips to the local villages. These are some
of its points :
Revival of local dances for which the Tarascans
are famous.
Encouraging village composers and musicians who
need help in technique : Many Tarascans who cannot
write their own names can read music and, on a
Sunday morning, every other man you meet on a
country road carries a musical instrument-from a
bass fiddle to a clarinet. It is not unusual to find a
24-piece orchestra in a village of 1, 000-but tech-
niques need polishing.
Organizing sports in the region : Mexico, in
general, is very basketball-minded and Senor Obre-
gon intends to encourage volleyball and football too.
His plans include the establishing of a basketball
league in the villages near the centre. No
medals or cups for the winners, however-they will
get agricultural implements and home equipment
instead.
Enabling women to take part in the family's
leisure occupations : In too many homes surrounding
Patzcuaro, a husband often thinks there is something
wrong if his wife has nothing to do. The answer
is to make sure recreation programmes begin at
home, even if it means merely convincing the
husband his wife should sing when he plays his
guitar.
Theatres-in-the-round on an outdoor stap : e : This
is both recreation and education, for a play an teach
the advantages of, say,
literacy much more
vividly than a textbook,
In theatres-in-the-round,
the audience sits in a
circle with the stage in
the middle-a form,
incidentally, employed
successfully by a recent
play in New York.
The enthusiasm and
the utter disregard of
fixed working hour
shown by Senor Obregon
and other faculty mem-
bers is matched by the
centre's students. They
are a serious, mature
group-their average
age is around 30-and
nearly all of them have
worked as school tea-
chers or directors of
adult education before
coming to Patzcuaro for
what in reality is and.
v a n c e d post-graduate
study.
Here is what some of
them plan to do after
_ _. _ _
finishing their year of study at the centre :
Hector A. Burbano of Ecuador, a 37-year-old teacher
whose build gives him away as a former football
player, is specializing in rural economy because be
believes education must operate in this field in order
to raise living standards in his own country. Senor
Burbano and the four other members of Ecuador's
team have signed contracts with their government
to work as an educational team in Indian regions in
Ecuador after completing their course.
Nora Soto Rodriguez is studying at Patzcuaro to
take over a school now being constructed at Coron-
ado, San José (Costa Rica). The Costa Rican
government plans to open five new rural schools,
and members of this country's team at Patzcuaro
will help staff them when they return.
Justino Melgar Aliaga, a 33-year-old high school pro-
fessor from Peru, has the assignment, with other
members of his nation's team, of setting up a centre
similar to Patzcuaro on a national basis upon corm.
pleting his course.
PROBLEMS OF PATZCUARO
SENOR Melgar Aliaga and Senor Burbano bothfound striking similarities between the Tarascans
and the Indian peoples of their own countries. Thus
the problems faced by the Tarascans are not peculiar
to any one region.
Vicente Campos for example, might be a fisherman
on any mountain lake. He happens to live on the
island of Janitzio, in Lake Patzcuaro. Paradoxically
enough, one of the main needs of his family and that
of Janitzio's 1, 500 other inhabitants is good water.
They now haul their water up from the lake in
buckets yoked across their shoulders, and not all of
them boil it-with the result that waterborne disease
crops up sporadically on the island.
Then, too, Vicente Campos has no easy time making
ends meet. He depends entirely on the lake's supply
of whitefish for a living-but the supply shrinks
every year. Now he works every night from 8 p. m.
to 5 a. m. tugging a net 100 feet long with a dugout
canoe. When he makes a catch, he sells it for 35 cen-
tavos a Ib. (about $. 03)-but there are nights when
he paddles back empty handed. He spends his days
Patzcuaro centre students have to step warily as they traverse Janitzio village
so as not to get entangled in the fishing nets spread across the street. First-
hand study is part of students'curricu ! um.
repairing his net, a normal routine except when a net
has to be replaced. Then he and the rest of the
family work for months making a new one-while
the fish go uncaught.
Julian Talavera has nine acres of good land outside
of the lake-shore village of Zurumutaro, but there is
not much water for the land or his home. And
Julian Talavera is willing'to listen to advice on
how he could get more than three-quarters of a gallon
of milk a day from his cows.
Up in Casas Blancas, a mountain village 7, 400 feet
high and 10 miles from Patzcuaro by road, Ma-
corio Soto has an entirely different complaint. He
happens to be the village's second law enforcement
officer with the assignment of patrolling forests to see
that conservation laws are observed.
One of these laws forbids anyone in the region from
cutting down a live tree (wasteful stripping of trees
is believed to be one reason why, in Casas Blancas,
you may find wells 100 feet deep and bone-dry).
However nothing can turn a live tree into a dead
one faster than a forest fire-and"accidental"
fires happen frequently. That is, the villagers always
tell Senor Soto that the fire was accidental as they set
out to chop down the newly·killed trees.
These are only three of the 10, 000 villagers whose
problems in daily living have become those of
Unesco's international centre at Patzcuaro. Can you
educate mountaineers to realize that cutting trees
wastefully means cutting their own life lines ? What
is wrong with Julian Talavera's cows ? Is it the feed,
or does the region need new stock ? And what is the
best way out of Vicente Campos'difnculties ? Is it
stocking the lake with fish, teaching him to observe
a closed season while fish are breeding, or must be
learn a new way of making his living ?
These questions cannot be answered quickly. Maxi.
can education leaders have spent years working on
them. Patzcuaro, first of a world chain of Unesco
centres to extend fundamental education by providing
a greatly increased number of specialized teachers
using the lutest techniques, will help Mexico-and
other countries-in this huge task. For over half
the world has a vital interest in the answers.
(PHOTOS BY HAGEN HASSELBALCH
AND PEDRO PINA SORIA.)
A student from the centre explains to villagers at
Casas Blancas the advantages of the steel plough
and describes modern methods of agriculture.
Pruning the branches of a young tree helps it'
to grow better, as a student demonstrates to two
farmers in a village near the Patzcuaro centre.
A crude fireplace with no chimney, corn still
ground between stones. Improved methods could
ease this woman's life, as two students explain.
JUNE 95i
