KOREA-TO REPEL AGGRESSION AND RESTORE PEACE the United Nations goes into action. In response to the
Security Council call for help against the North Korean invaders, sixteen member nations sent land, sea and air forces
as their contribution to the world's first armed collective security action.
THE date was October 24,
1949. High above the
rows of seats in San-
tiago de Chile's large
stadium the flags of many coun-
tries floated in the wind. A blue
one, with a white laurel wreath
surrounding the five continents,
dominated all the others. It
was somewhat difficult to
concentrate on this flag repre-
senting the United Nations
because there were 40, 000
people in the Chilean stadium
and they were applauding a
group of dancers and singers
from all Latin America who
had come to celebrate a single
day dedicated to a united
world.
A united world ? Peace ?
Were these idle, utopian
dreams ? I asked myself two
years ago as I sat in the San-
tiago stadium. It was not eay
to say emphatically"no"even
then. Today the dangers are
even greater and the challenge
more urgent. The crisis of our
time is such that almost all of
us live with fear in our hearts.
On October 24, 19M, I re-
member, the U. N. flag had re-
called to my mind the birth-
place of the United Nations
in San Francisco in 1945. The
name"San Francisco"had
conjured up the figure of
St. Francis of Assisi, who ac-
cording to legend, considered
all animal-even the wolves
- his"brothers" ; who helped
all creatures in need and, by his
example of kindness and humil-
itv, imparted his faith in a
better world to all who appro-
ached him.
There was something of the
Franciscan spirit in the Charter
established by the United Na-
tions in San Francisco. Un-
fortunately, St. Francis did not
succeed in changing either the
world or the spirit of man. In
fact, far from considering all
solves his brothers, man has
come to think of his brothers as
wolves. And kindness bv itself,
or the will to let justice be
done, has not as yet proved
enough to permit good to
triumph over evil.
So mankind was obliged to
find some kind of machinery
capable of checking the inter-
national tensions that even-
tually lead to wars, and aggres-
sion itself. In the same way
as national laws punish offen-
ders to maintain a moral equi-
librium within society, so the
United Nations Charter esta-
hlished its own measures to
Counter the international ag-
gresor or offender. The need
to do this gave rise to the prin-
ciple of collective security. It
remained to be seen, however,
whether the United Nations
Charter could be effectively
Applied in an emergency or if
it would prove to be nothing
more than mere words and
empty rhetoric.
In 1950, the moment to put
the principle to the test came in
Korea. At this juncture the
verv existence and future of the
United Nations was at stake.
In 1935, the invasion of Abys-
sinia and the inability of the
League of Nations to deal with
this act of aggression, ultima-
tely led to the collapse of collec-
tive security as a preventive
weapon and ended in collapse
of the League itself with the
outbreak of World War II.
We all know that when the
human bodv is attacked bv cer-
tain infectious germs, an army
of other organisms which we
may call"health"germs go into
action to ward off the attack
and on many occasions save the
life of the patient. Similarly,
the attack on the United Nations
and the principles of its Char-
ter-which represents the
vast majority of the peoples of
the world-led to immediate
counter-action proving that in
the case of the U. N' ; collective
security was not an idle phrase
but a moral obligation on the
part ot its members to act. It
showed that respect for law-
one of the foundations of inter-
national order-was a realitv
and that nations were prepared
to oppose efforts to change that
order by violence.
But the United Nations looks
beyond armed conflicts. It is
esientially concerned with the
construction of the conditions
of world peace. The human
body contains not only defen-
sive micro-organisms ; it has
essential functional organs.
The United Nations too has its
functional organs (the specializ-
ed agencies) and a neuro-motor
co-ordinating system in the
Economic and Social Council
(ECOSOC). For just existing
is not enough.
We mut live with dignity
and raise the living conditions
of men, both individually and
collectively. For this purpose,
other specialized agencies of the
UN were created. Each of
them has a part to play in
laying a firm foundation for
international peace.
This year, for United Nations
Day, October 24, 1951, the theme
chosen to mark the sixth anni-
versary of the world organiza-
tion-"To Combine Our Ef-
forts"-has been taken from
the Preamble to the UN Char-
ter, in which"We, the Peoples
of the United Nations"have
promised"to combine our
efforts"to accomplish the aims
set forth in that document.
This means not only stopping
wars, but working together, as
peoples and as nations, to re-
move the causes of war-nar-
row-minded nationalism, reli-
gious, social and political into-
lerance, hunger and poverty,
disease and ignorance.
"Let us measure the causes of
our present disputes against the rea-
sons we have to unite in the face of
problems so vast", 1\1. Torres Bodet
has declared."Tile future dictates
our present dutv. International co-
operation in all fields is not a gene-
rous and debatable aspiration. It is
an urgent necessity for every single
country. The United Nations sum-
mon all men to this task, which is
not directed against anyone, but
serves the interests of all peoples
and respects the liberty of all."
Let us indeed Combine Our
EfTorts.
José de BENITO.

Our Efforts...
October 24... On this date six years ago the Char-
ter of the United Nations came into force. The
anniversary is observed by Member Nations
throughout the world. On this day we reaffirm the
aims of the organization, we recall its achieve-
ments and we pledge"... to combine our efforts..."
to realize its purposes.
Collective Armed Action Against Aggression
Continued Efforts for Peaceful Settlement
Wherever Possible
International Action for E. conomic and Social
Progress
Aid to Peoples on the Road to Independence.
These were the main avenues along which the
United Nations advanced in the sixth year of its
existence. Throughout the world, in every field
of human activity, the U. N. and its Specialized
Agencies initiated actions towards the achieve-
ment of the goals of the Charter. The focal points
were KOREA, the first example in history of the
use of collective force to restore peace, and TECH-
N) CAL ASStSTANCE for under-developed areas,
a positive programme to make the world a
better place to live in.
REHABILITATION OF KOREA IS ONE OF UN'S BIGGEST JOBS. Only broad international
action can bring relief to the hungry and homeless people. Member nations have already
made contributions. For instance, Thailand and the Philippines have sent rice ; Israel sulfa
drugs. Altogether, over 8200, 000, 000 has been pledged for relief and rehabilitation. Shown
here is rice distribution in Seoul.
FOR PROSPERITY AND DEVELOPMENT : TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
To stimulate economic and social advance, the UN provides technical know-
ledge and expert advice to under-developed countries. Example : the Greek
scheme for the utilization of idle manpower, introduced by a UN adviser. The
results : 5, 272 kilometres of roads built or improved, 50, 000 acres of land
reclaimed by 150, 000 volunteers.
HELP ON THE ROAD TO INDEPENDENCE : LIBYA. The United Nations has
resolved the future of the former Italian colonies. One of them, Libya, is to
become under U. N. guidance an independent and sovereign state by 1952.
Here the Libyan King-Designate arrives in Tripoli, where the National Assem-
bly met to proclaim a provisional government and to draft a constitution.
FOR THE WORLD'S CHILDREN : UNICEF. Shoes for Greece's children, just
one example of the world-wade operations of the United Nations International
Children's Emergency Fund. A school-luncheon, a pair of shoes or an anti-
T. B. vaccine, provided by UNICEF, have made the U. N. a living reality to mil-
lions of youngsters throughout the world.
