Literacy must be followed up. The Delhi Library being set up by Unesco and
the Government of India is aimed primarily to meet the needs of persons
just learning to read, who without practice might slide back into illiteracy.
IN INDIA-A NEW LIBRARY
FOR NEW READERS
APUBLIC library of a new kind-especially designed to meet the
needs of readers using books for
the first time in their adult lives
- is to be opened early this year in
the city of Delhi, India. The institu-
tion is the result of an agreement
between the Government of India and
Unesco, providing for a pilot project
to show how public library services can
effectively support literacy and adult-
education campaigns.
The library is to be housed in a
crowded part of the city, in a building
with ample room for book services and
educational meetings, and a spacious
court for outside reading during the
summer. The services will stress the
needs of adults just learning to read,
taking over where the current literacy
campaigns of the Indian Government
leave oft. Adult readers, newly-liter-
ate, will be helped to improve their
efforts in self-education.
HODELFORTHE FUTURE
D URINO the first year, the librarywill assembly a collection of
about 10, 000 books, plus periodi-
cals, pamphlets, maps and pictures.
Most of the material will be in Hindi
and Urdu but some books in English,
particularly reference books, will be
provided. There also will be services
for children and young people.
Books are to be lent free for home
use, and advisers will help the bor-
rowers, particularly those who have
just learned to read, to plan appro-
priate courses of reading. Reading
interest is to be stimulated through
film showings, discussions, publication
of reading lists, gramophone record
concerts, exhibitions and story-hours
for children.
Unesco's interest in the library
extends far beyond Delhi, for the pro-
ject is intended not only as an end in
itself but as a demonstration of what
can be done. When the project proves
its usefulness, mother cities in India and
in other parts M Asia will be encou-
raged to use it as a model.
The Delhi library programme will
be integrated with the work of local
organizations in the fields of funda-
mental and adult education, especially
with that of the Delhi Education
Board and Jamia Millia, a Muslim
voluntary organization. The former
now operates seven adult education
centres and sixteen literacy centres,
and plans to add nineteen more
centres to its present network. Jamia
Millia operates five centres in Delhi.
One of the critical problems in
developing the project will be the
provision of publications. Many books
in Hindi-one estimate is 2, 000-which
are suitable for the general reader
with some formal education, have
been published in the last five years.
But there is a great shortage of easy-
to-read books for adults and appro-
priate publications for children. Jamia
Millia has published 250 sixteen-page
pamphlets for newly-literate adults,
and has prepared 200 additional manu-
scripts in the local languages. But the
stock of all but fifty of the published
manuscripts was destroyed by a fire,
and publishers are unwilling to reprint
the old pamphlets or publish the new
ones at a price the average man can
afford. An effort will be made to solve
this problem, and ways of stimulating
the production of easy-to-read adult
books and publications for young peo-
ple in Hindi and Urdu will be studied
by the librarians of the new instit-
ution.
By the terms of the agreement
between Unesco and the Govern-
ment of India, Unesco is contributing
a fellowship for study abroad to the
Indian librarian who will be per-
manent director of the pilot project.
Unesco will also pay the salary of a
temporary foreign director to carry out
the organizational activity, and will
provide technical advice and funds for
publicity. In addition, Unesco will
purchase an audio-visual library van
for the project and pay the salary of
the permanent director during 1951.
A second fellowship may also be con-
tributed for a children's librarian, and
it is proposed to ask future Unesco
General Conferences to continue the
financial assistance.
PIONEER VENTURE
THE Government of India is contri-JL buting 150, 000 Rupees ($31, 175i
and use of the building provided
by the municipality of the city of
Delhi for the establishment and ope-
ration of the projet. The agreement
also provides for a further annual
grant of 25, 000 Rupees ($5, 196) contri-
buted by the city of Delhi.
Staff members of the library, who
are granted fellowships, will prepare
themselves for their work by studying
public library methods in other coun-
tries, and on their return will work
with the temporary foreign director in
assembling the book collection and
organizing the services of the project.
While these services will emphasize
primarily the needs of persons just
learning to read, who without practice
might slide back into illiteracy, they
will also take care of more advanced
readers. The pilot project, in addition
to being a pioneer venture in a special
field, will be developed to fit local
educational needs of all kinds.
