THE NEWS REEL CAMERA :
THOUGH its potentialities have beenonly partly re liz d, the n w
film is a universal and powerful
means of mass communication. Pic-
tures can be understood by anyone,
whether literate or illiterate, and make
him an eye-witness, as it were, of the
events they portray. In most countries,
the weekly newsreel has become a
feature of contemporary life, like the
illustrated news magazine.
A report just published by Unes-
co (1) shows that each person in the
world attends the cinema, on an ave-
rage, five times a year and that most
of the world's 100, 000 cinemas regularly
include news films in programmes.
These films are classified as regular
newsreels, film magazines dealing
with current events or special topics,
and general information or publicity
documentaries.
Despite their world-wide range,
newsreels have changed little in form
during the past 30 years. In company
with other films, however, they are now
challenged by a powerful new medium
- television. In countries where
television has been developed, televised
news has scored outstanding success
and promises to become the major
means of visual communication.
The story of the newsreel's develop-
ment, as told in the Unesco report, is
fascinating. The world's first films,
dating from the early 1890's, were a
(1). vewsreels Across tile World (La
Pre sse Filmée dans Ie J/onde) : by
Peter Raech/in, Swiss film expert, and
3/aMrice. Muller-Strauss, French film
historian. Unesco Publication 8. 8. $2. 00 ;
1016 ; 500 Fr. fcs. 7'/if present edition,
available at all Unesco sales agents, is
in French. An Engl1sh edition is being
prepared.
form of newsreel and their producers
developed the basic techniques of the
modern film industry, such as the use
of artificial light, camera tricks and
techniques and the reconstruction of
dramatic incidents.
From Nickelodeons
to Cinemas
IN those days the cameramanenjoyed less freedom of access
than he does today and newsreel
makers often had recourse to
"reconstructing"topical events. One
of them, an American named Amet,
staged a reproduction-in his bath-
of the destruction of the Spanish fleet
during the Spanish-American war of
1898. The film had an international
success. Amet later created a sensa-
tion by reconstructing realistic battle
scenes from the Boer War on waste
ground in Brooklyn.
The demand for newsfilms greatly
increased when permanent cinemas re-
placed nickelodeons and travelling
shows around 1907. World War I
gave the newsreel its great chance to
assert itself and gain access to scenes
of world events.
New films are today produced by
three groups-private companies,
joint undertakings with State partici-
pation or subsidy, and State-owned
units. Of the 47 countries covered by
the report, 40 together have a total of
160 producing units. Most of these,
however, produce only"national"
news films which circulate mainly in
the country of origin.
In newsreel production and distri-
bution, a comparatively small number
of big film companies in the United
AROUND THE WORLD
IN 15 MINUTES
by Philip SOLJAK
States, United Kingdom, France and
the Soviet Union have built up inter-
national networks. These companies,
whether private or State controlled,
enjoy a predominance in film reporting,
rather like that of the great news
agencies. This primacy is often
attained by the exchange of news to-
pics and camera services, by the control
of cinema circuits and by"block
booking"of feature films with news-
reels. A number of countries make
national newsreels. But since a news-
reel, to pay its way, must usually be
shown in at least 1, 000 cinemas, it is
difficult for small countries to maint-
ain their own newsfilm.
Largely as a result of these economic
factors, most newsreels tend more and
more to follow a uniform standard
pattern. Emphasis is mainly on the
"entertainment value"of items select-
ed, which normally consist of sport,
general news, fashion and miscellan-
eous material. The exchange of items
among a few big producers-a useful
technical expedient-moreover means
that the same topics tend to be repeat-
ed in newsreels shown over most of the
world.
The Great Challenge
of Television
IN order to utilize fully this impor-tant visual medium, wider inter-
national exchanges of news items
would be required, as well as the
extension to more countries and pro-
ducers of opportunities to obtain
film material from any area.
Today, as television spreads around
the world, newsreels are having to
adapt themselves to the challenge of
a new medium which brings scenes
from near and far directly into peo-
ple's homes. Recent developments
in the United States and United King-
dom suggest that fully-rounded
"film digests", of the documentary or
film magazine type, will be increas-
ingly seen both on television and
cinema screens.
Films are Part of our
Daily lives
EXCHANGES OAF televised news itemsbetween the United States,
United Kingdom and France
are already under way. Such
exchanges, while helping peoples in
different countries to know and un-
derstand each other better, raise an
important technical problem. The
countries where television is most rapid-
ly developing are those which pro-
duce new films that are shown through-
out the world. Any rivalry arising
between television and newsreels in
these few countries will, therefore,
largely determine the character, qua-
lity and presentation of visual news in
other, smaller countries which do not
themselves posses either of these two
media.
Films have become part of our daily
lives. Newsreels can perform a va-
luable service by highlighting import-
ant events and trends and by showing
the ordinary man how his counterpart
in other lands is living and meeting
common problems. The parallel deve-
lopment of news films and television
provides communication experts with a
doubly powerful instrument which must
be used with a full sense of social
responsibility toward all men, regard-
less of frontiers.

THE CAMERA RECORDS CATASTROPHE
A helicopter crashes on a Welsh hillside (Pathe News) A ship torpedoed at sea during the last war (USIS)
THE CAMERA PRESENTS PEOPLE IN THE NEWS
PresidentSoekarno announces Indonesia's independence (UN) Arturo Toscanini poised fora concertopening (March of Time)
THE CAMERA RECORDS POST-WAR RECONSTRUCTION
French speed work on Alpine hydro-electric plant (ECA) Refrigerators will condense steam to drive turbines (ECA)
THE CAMERA RECORDS WORK OF U. N.
UNICEF provides milk four a little boy in Europe Another boy discards his old shoes for new ones
THE NEWSREEL CAMERA RECORDS SPORTS : a split-second shot of an exciting mishap at a motor-race
EARLY NEWSREELS
1900 : Visit to the Paris Exhibition
1901 : Queen Victoria's funeral
1
2
I,
1909 : First air crossing of English Channel by Louis
1910 : The Seine floods Paris
Archives Cinémathèque, Française)
4
