Bringing New Life To Sick Regions
LAST month, the Courier announced the approval by Unesco's Executive Board ofa $20, 000, 000 plan for the creation over a period of 2 years, of a world network
of Fundamental Education training centres as bases for a world-wide drive against
illiteracy and low living standards. Because the term"fundamental education"has
enormous implications for the future of the world, we present on this page an article on
the needs, purposes and methods of fundamental education, by Conrad J. Opper, former
Director of Education in Mauritius and now Director of Unesco's Fundamental Education
Pilot Project in the Marbial Valley, Haiti.
The story of the Haiti Pilot Project, where such methods have been tested
under the severest conditions, is told in an article and photographs on pages 6
and 7 of this issue.
Fundamental education, w h i c h
H means a mass attack on poverty,
disease and ignorance is one of
the most empirical of activities.
Like the making of tribal lays, there
are nine and ! sixty ways and every
single one of them is right-or can
be. And as the United Nations pro-
gramme of Technical Assistance for
Under-Developed Areas gets into its
stride we shall hear more about plans
for what is variously called mass, basic,
social or fundamental education.
It is a melancholy thought that three-
fourths of the world's people are under-
housed, under-clothed, under-fed and
illiterate. Or, as Lord Boyd Orr has
said, a state of partial famine is affect-
ing nearly half the population of the
world. The problem confronts us in its
massive simplicity. No sociological
survey is necessary to perceive naked
bodies bloated by intestinal worms,
crippled by yaws, or stunted by malnu-
trition.
If we take a plane ticket to almost
any country lying within the tropical
belt (and to a great many others
besides), and then get off the boule-
vards into the countryside, we shall
soon come face to face with the world's
under-privileged areas. Within the
next year or so we are likely to see a
big expansion of efforts first to expose
the problems rio be faced and then to
work out plans for bringing new life
into these sick regions.
Areas are under-developed because
they present problems which have so
far'defied solution with the locally
available resources. While there may
be a great number of different
approaches, there are definitely no
short-cuts. The effects of diseases
which have stricken a region for
generations, habits of sloth springing
from physical debility, superstftion
penetrating to the very roots of society,
cannot be cleared away in a month or
a year, no matter how determined and
vigorous the attack.
Partners With The People
F UXDAME :-1TAL education must aim atchanging lives from within. It us
not impose on a community large
social and economic development
schemes but lead the people patiently
and unobtrusively to work for their
own improvement, using as far as pos-
sible their own social institutions and
their own leadership.
For people fighting a losing battle
against ignorance, disease and poverty,
there is no dramatic action that can
turn defeat into victory at a single
blow. Resource surveys, mobile film
units, bull-dozers and teams of im-
ported technicians-all the para-
phenalia of large-scale development
schemes-have their place, but if the
people themselves are not active part-
ners, everything will wither away as
soon as the alien resources are with-
drawn.
while there is no magic formula and
no stereotyped plan for the establish-
ment of a fundamental education
scheme, a knowledge of the people
themselves is essential 10 success, It
is not enough to have lived amongst
them, to like them, to speak their lan-
guage ; this may ensure sympathy, but
not necessarily understanding.
It is therefore usual to start with a
survey by a trained anthropologist.
This provides the educators with an
intimate knowledge of the indigenous
culture and of any special local pro-
blems. It permits comparisons between
conditions before the educational pro-
gramme and those that might come into
existence several years later.
The anthropologist's special com-
petence is derived from the fact that
he is trained to look at a total culture
from the point of view of the inter-
relations of its various aspects and that
he thinks not in terms of a single cul-
ture but of the different patterns of
social life that exist throughout the
world. He looks for the sources of
social behaviour and ways of thought,
he tracks down forces that make for
cohesion or disintegration. His ex-
perience enables him to indicate the
strength and weaknesses of a given
situation and what elements in the
existing social organization can be made
use of.
Fundamental education must move
forward in the stream of the people's
culture. The anthropologist shows
where this current flows strongest.
The Team Approach
W ORKIXG with existing socialand administrative organizations
means very different things in
different areas. In many parts of
Africa where a tribal organization still
exists, fundamental education may aim
at reinforcing the leadership of pro-
gressive chiefs and at trying to
penetrate the whole structure of local
authority and the culture in which It
is rooted.
In this case, the fundamental educ-
ation campaign may find a coherent if
rigid framework in which to work. but
at the same time pawerful forces of
conservatism and prejudice to over-
come.
Elsewhere there may be no such
tribal authorities but, in their place, a
system of representative government
and a developing sense of social ser-
vice and community organization which
reveals itself in cooperatives. Women's
Institutes, 4h Clubs (Head, Heart, Hand,
Health) and the like. Here the ground
is already prepared for the fundamen-
tal education project.
Other sets of circumstances are found
in the mission fields, the industrial area,
the plantation, each iwith its separate
organization. Other problems exist in
areas where tribal authority has
weakened or broken down and no-
thing with roots in the people's own
culture has grown up in its place.
The usual and most successful
approach to fundamental education is
through the team. Sometimes the
leader chooses his own team, sometimes
its members are appointed by the
various agencies collaborating in the
Project. These may be missionary
societies pooling their resources in a
common effort or Government depart-
ments, each providing a technician as
a member of a Community Develop-
ment team, or as in the case of the
Unesoo Pilot Project In Haiti, Special-
ised Agencies of the United Nations
working with the local government.
The leader would probably hope to
be able to assemble a team consist-
in of an educationist, an agrono-
mist, a doctor, a woman social
worker, and an expert in small indus-
tries. These would be his mainstays,
each responsible for a wide fleld of
human activities, pushing out his enter-
prises in every possible direction, im-
pinging on but not overlapping the work
FIGHTING ILLITERACY
IN N) ND) A.-"Literacy awa-
kens the mind and provides
incentive for further effort".
Above, young volunteers
teach men and women attend-
ing a social education class
at a village in the Central
Provinces.
FUNDAMENTAL EDUC-
ATION BY RADIO.-The
Lusaka Radio Station broad-
casts, $ :-ClYs, talks and feature
.. ; ; r."grammes on hygiene, hus-
bandry, soil conservation and
sanitation to native popul-
ations in Northern and Southern Rhodesia and Nyasaland. Many thous-
ands of people already listen to these programmes thanks to a cheap and
robust battery radio receiver, produced specially to meet their needs.
of fellow-workers. The M'home plan
wound gradually take shape in the field.
Literacy-The Basic Need
A literacy programme must be thefoundation of the team's"oper-
ations. Literacy awakens the
mind, provides incentive for further
effort and ma'kes it possible to impart
knowledge about the team's objectives.
The adult class also becomes the forum
for discussion, an important develop-
ment in ensuring that plans are pre-
pared not for the people but with the
people. The literate has to be kept
fed with reading matter or his new
skills are soon forgotten and the pro-
vision of simple booklets, a monthly
journal and occasional leaflets on spe-
cial subjects, is one of the team's most
important tasks.
Since illiterates must be taught through
the medium of their mother tongue, the
production of reading material mav
well involve orthographieai experiment
and research into local folklore and
legend. The members of the team will
provide much of the raw material for
book production and a competent local
translator will be essential. From the
primary schools will spring youth or-
ganizatIOns, from the adult or literacy
schools will germinate cooperatives and
perhaps some cultural or recreational
cubs.
The agronomist
must take care of the
soil, what grows on
it and the domestic
animals it supports.
lie must make plans
for soil conservation,
reforestation, irrig-
ation, the improve-
ment of farming me-
Iliods and animal
husbandry. He works
bY demonstration ra-
lIìer than by homih'.
Peasants are the
same the world over,
cautious, wedded to
custorn and suspi-
cious of innovation ;
but a healthy crop
"DO YOU WANT
TO HELP ME ?"
says the Brazilian
worker shown learn-
ing to read from a
literacy primer on
this poster issued
by the Ministry of
Education. Such
posters have a dou-
ble aim-to enlist
aid for Brazil's na-
>tion-wide literacy
campaign and to en-
courage illiterates to
take advantage of it.
growing on a terraced hillside or a two
and a half ounce egg speak louder than
words.
The doctor's most important task is
health education, a programme of vil-
lage sanitation with attention to such
public health undertakings as cleaner
markets, improved water supplies and
anti-mosquito campaigns. The'pro-
vision of medical attention at the Pro-
ject's dispensary should not be a first
call on his time.
Yet at the beginning he may find the
treatment of disease too exigent to
leave him much time for preventive
work. This is a phase that passes and
one which has a high propaganda value
for the project as a whole. Modern
treatments of some tropical diseases are
quite dramatic in their effects and this
medical magic provides a favourable
background for the team's other activ-
ities.
Mending Is Tougher
WORK amongst women is highly im-portant as it reaches out to the
whole family although often
much neglected owing to the special
difficulties it presents. A nurse with
training in public health and domestic
science is a godsend. An entry to the
peasant home is made most easily
through the kitchen. Sewing classes
and talks on baby care at the dispen-
sary get at the younger women and
influence the newer families.
Under-employment is a serious pro-
blem in rural areas in the tropics.
Often the cultivator is obliged by cli-
matic reasons to remain idle for more
than one-third of the total wor'king days
of the year. With so much time going
to waste there is much scope for se-
condary occupations. The team must
seek ways of using local materials in
cottage industries to bring some relief
to the universal poverty of these areas.
There is certainly no blue-print for
fundamental education. Everything
will depend on the team resources
available, the human resources of the
people and the hay in which these two
forces are brought together. Patience,
sincerity, a strong sense of missionary
spirit and an occasional lucky break
can work miracles in places where
nothing short of miracles will do.
The world will also have to be a little
patient. Many world problems call for
drastic and urgent solutions and there
is sometimes suspicion of enterprises
that seem to lack this sense of urgency.
woe are often reminded that the im-
perial age of too little and late has pas-
sed. But fundamental education is not
just bull-dozers, penicillin and cinema'
vans ; it is bringing new life to a people.
And in these sombre days, mending a
life is a far tougher job than ending it.
Permission for the reproduction of
this article must be obtained from
the editor of the Courier.
hy ( ;. J. OPPER
