BETTER WORKING CONDITIONS
FOR LABOUR
by David A. MORSE
Director-General, International Labour Organization.
T HE General Assembly will be called upon during
the present session to take further decision--
(-ol1cerning the proposed Covenant on Human
Rights and its implementation. The Internatiolla I
Labour Organization win continue to give it"filII 1'0-
uperalion in the consideration of those rights which
constitute its special responsibility.
Four years ago the General Assembly asked us t
proceed with the adoption of an InlernationaI Lalnmr
Convention on the protection of trade union rights, am !
two years ago the Economic and Social COllnei ! askp"
us to establish a fact-fending and conciliation commission
which conld conduct an impartial examination no
allegations concerning the infringement of trade union
rights. The Convention was adopted by the tenter-
naLlonal auour omerence m ty : rrs ana o m nwv rn trrn nr m· m nwrrn-
ments whic ! i have ratified it, but widespr'ead further ratincatinn is still neces-
sary to make the Convention an effective safeguard for the protection of trade
union rights throughout the world. I therefore appeal to the Government-
which have not yet ratified this Convention to give it urgenl consideration.
The fact-finding and conciliation commission has been established hut it can
function onto with the consent of the Governments concerned. Hitherto no
Government has given its formal consent 10 t'efer to the commission questions
concerning it. The governing body is taking action to expedite the preliminary
examination of allegations so that the reference of appropriate cases to the
commission may he facilitated, but the responsibility for our success or failure
in this task, which live have undertaken on your beha) f. rests squlrely upon the
Governments concerned. I make an earnest. appeal to Governments to accept
the principle of impartial and disinterested investigation of allegations as the
only alternative to continuing international tension. The International Labour
Organization witi provide facilities for the impartial examination of the facts in
an atmosphere free from political prejudice or propaganda.
In the same spirit the ILO has approached the problem of forced labour.
Tile Secretary-General and I have appointed a committee to survey the use of
forced labour as a means of political coercion and as an important element in
national economies. We have been particularly concerned to ensure that it is
a body enjoying the independence necessary for completely impartial and
objective examination of the nvhote question.
The International Labour Organization, in its search for social justice and its
efforts in laying a basis for world peace, is engaged in a variety of basic pro-
grammes ranging from improving the lot of indigenous workers to improving
methods and techniques of production. It Js carrying on widespread technical
assistance activities both as part of ils normal work as well as through tlie
Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance. It has established field office
and miss : ons in several countries, while technical experts are working under its
auspices in a great number of countries, dealing with a variety of questions.
It is because of the political urgency of the matter that we have given special
emphasis in our recent work to the problem of migration from Europe. Our
chief concern is to see that the problem is solved before it becomes a major
element in international tension. Recently, \ve put forward an international
plan for migration at a conference in Naples. The nations represented felt
unable to consider the plan on its merits but we succeeded in focussing attention
on the gravity of the problem and in drawing out the views of the various
governments concerned with the migration of Europe's surplus millions. \\e
still urge that the problem must be solved and solved without undue delay.
The regional activities of the International Labour Organization have been
further intensified, especially in Asia and in Latin America. \\e are taking
steps to extend activities in the Middle East.
In conclusion, I would like to echo the plea in the Secretary-General's report
on his Twenty-Year Programme for universalit y in the membership of the
United Nations and the Specialized Agencies. The International Labour Orga-
nization remains universal in its interests and outlook. It is not, and will never
be allowed to become an instrument of the policy of any State or group of
States. It welcomes to membership all States which are willing to accept the
obligations of its Constitution, and co-operates with all regional organizations
which are prepared to act with it. To make it possible for all human beings,
irrespective of race, creed or sex to pursue their material well-being and their
spiritual development in conditions of freedom and dignity, of economic security
and equal opportunity-that is our objective, and we look forward 10 the day
when we can be proud to have achieved the active and'whole-hearted (4)-
operation in pursuit of this objective of evpl'Y : \ff'mher of fll,. {"nill'cJ :'\a I ion,. :.
alone with progress
sense. Let me put tI
crete terms. Suppo
able to report tomon
pox had been brougl
for the first time a
population of, say, 3
or that certain count
of anti-malaria cam]
creased their total ml
equivalent of the w
persons per year. VI
the progress and hoa
fine it if the 3. 000, (
freed from smallpox v
living in a state of se
ignorance ? And whc
the extra labour
through these count)
themselves of malari
It could, of course
in more unemploym
greater misery than
sufficient capital
assured, unless these
certain of markets for
their labour, unless
on greater education
opportunities for U
their children, then t
of their achievement
health, any real ga
qreater physical, me)
well-being, will dim yin
of disappearing aliog
We of the World,
zation will never
stressing at every 0
our work, and health
ral, cannot be carried
in a social, economi,
vacuum. When we
we point to the clo
between health and
are merely emphasizu
the sensitive plant c
cannot qrow in a be
and social soil.
I am quite certain
in the other Specia
will agree when I sire
all possible coJordil
efforts on both the inl
the inter-government
mark the various proji
cialized agencies on
they appear in far tc
as isolated tiny pir
separate, their impac
would'probably nev
much. But if we such4
those pin-points toget
combine health with Sl
and political projects
association, and if w
lonq-term view reachil
or twenty years, but
qenerations into the f
may expect great
values to result from
In this connection Is
words about the UN
gramme of Technical
Economic Develops4
because this programr
a concerted, combinec
economic problems 01
underdeveloped areCll
considered as one
vitally significant of
ponent parts of the
are building towards
new world of peace,
plenty for which all
I sincerely hope that
armament expenditu
from the internationa
still holds the world i
not interfere with tb
gramme for economic
- a programme whi
sally applied and not I
the capacity of count
it, can become the
tool of our policy for
The question of uni'
me to the final point
like to make here witli
future of our joint end
not too much to say,
the most serious ha
WHO durinq the past 
the lack of participatio !
of countries in its wor
achieve our aims unl
countries which have
active support to WH
and unless those will
after playing an impc
establishing the orgaJ
seen fit to discontint
cipation in it. The ob
World Health Organize
all political and id
ferences. It is therefo
that any nation could
stand apart from the
mankind to bring abou
and, through it, greateJ
earth.
All of us who work i
ed Agencies have a 
in peace-a vested
we share with you an
peoples of the world 
hind our common effo
iident that your work
will advance still furtt
creation of conditions c
understanding which
make it possible for
economic and social f.
peace, security and pi
understanding of the intimate rela-
tionship that exists between health
and peace. There is in this philo-
sophy an explicit recognition of the
fact that efforts to raise standards of
physical, mental and social well-
being are at the same time steps
which lead toward the achievment
of collective security and enduring
peace.
The WHO Constitution, which has
now been accepted by 79 States,
proclaims that the health of all
peoples is fundamental to the attain-
ment of peace and security."It
further declares that"the enjoyment
of the highest attainable standard
of health is one of the fundamental
rights of every human being with-
out distinction of race, religion, po-
litical belief, economic or social
condition and that these principles"are basic to the happiness, har-
monious relations and security of all
peoples.
The organization which was built
on these fundamental concepts is
today only a little over three years
old. Despite serious limitations
WHO is already carrying out an im-
pressive number of important inter-
national projects. If we consider
them together for a few minute, I
am sure that the same questions will
occur to all of us : What are the
lessons which our common action
against disease and for better health
has taught us so far ? And, above all,
what has WHO been able to con-
tribute to the cause of peace ?
The first lesson which we in WHO
have learned is. I believe, that true
co-operation between individuals
and nations sincerely devoted to
the common cause can never faiL
There are already many cases in the
records of our young organization
which go to prove this. For exam-
ple, there is the astonishing progress
made by a number of countries in
South-East Asia and in the Americas
as well as in other parts of the world
against one of the worst age-old
scourges of makind : malaria.
In many places this progress has
been buttressed through help given
by WHO and UNICEF in the form of
international demonstration teams.
In some countries, after barely two
years of such demonstration work,
projects affecting the health and
well-being of hundreds of thousands
of people have already been taken
THE very
phi I 0-
sophy
which in
1945 gave birth
to the idea of a
world-wide
health organiza-
tion and which
led to the esta-
blishment in
1948 of WHO as
one of the Spe-
cialized Agen-
cies of the Unit-
ed Nations em-
bodies a clear
