UNESCO COURIER-Page 12 JANUARY 1952
France's newspaper publishers
talk about their difficulties
"VERY citizen may speak, write andpublish freely"
France wrote this revolutionary
idea into her Declaracion of the Rights of Man
in 1789. But, in the France of 1952, the right
to read what is published threatens to become
a luxury reserved to those citizens who can
afford to pay for it.
This is the opinion of French newspaper
, editors and publishers interviewed by this
reporter on the effect of the world newsprint
shortage on a free press.
The shortage has resulted in a rise in the
price, and a drastic cut in the size, of
newspapers. It has led to a reduction in
French daily newspaper circulation from
18, 000, 000 before World War II to 12. 000, 000
today, according to Robert Salmon, presi-
dent of the Société Professionnelle du Papier
de Presse (a newspapers publishers'organi-
zation responsible for distributing newsprint
to French newspapers).
"And, if we have to keep raising our prices,"
declared M. Salmon, who is also Chairman
of the Board of Directors of France-Soir, the
newspaper with largest circulation in France
today,"the French press will be lucky to sell
200, 000 copies daily."
Today, a Frenchman pays 30 times more
for his newspaper than he did before the war,
but his income has only gone up 20 times.
The villain in the piece, men like M. Salmon
will tell you, is newsprint, which now costs 45
times as much as in 1939.
French newspapers, he said, have estimated
their needs for 1952 at 350, 000 tons-but only
320, 000 tons are in sight."On the face of it,
this does not look like a shortage of much more
than 10 per cent,"he said,"but the situation is
much more serious than that."
French publishers, in 1952, can count on
only 250, 000 tons ; of ordinary newsprint stock,
known to the trade as AFNOR I-I. Although
the cheapest paper available, it nevertheless
costs 83, 000 francs (about $240 or L85) a
metric ton, as compared to the equivalent of
45, 000 francs a ton in the United States and
65, 000 francs in Great Britain.
In addition, said M. Salmon, French pub-
lishers can expect to get 40, 000 tons of higher
quality paper (one of the grades now offered
newspaper publishers is so expensive that it
was abandoned several years ago by a leading
French picture magazine). This will cost an
average of 105, 000 francs a ton.
Finally, as a partial remedy for the deficit
remaining, France hopes to be able to import
30, 000 additional tons from abroad at 110, 000
francs a ton (at this price, a kilogram of
newsprint is worth almost ten kilograms of
potatoes).
Under this programme, said M. Salmon,
French publishers believe they can maintain
their present stocks of 10, 000 tons-enough
for about ten days of publication. In normal
times, they had a 30 days'reserve of newsprint
on hand.
If these conditions prevail, he predicted that
the French publisher will soon pay about
95, 000 francs a ton for his newsprint. Thi. s
promises to have severe repercussions on the
budgets of newspapers which. he said, suffered
by Daniel BE. HRMAN
circulation losses as high as eight per cent
several months ago when they raised news-
stand prices from 12 to 15 francs on the basis
of paper at about 85, 000 franco per ton.
Henri Massot, editor of Paris-Presse, the
city's second largest afternoon newspaper, and
president of the Syndicate of the Parisian
Press, also commented on the effects the
newsprint shortage is having on the Paris
press.
Before the war, he explained, many Paris
newspapers used to publish 12 and 14 pages
daily, and two-thirds of their readers were in
the French provinces. There was enough
space available to give national and interna-
tional news and, at the same time, to reserve
a page for news of local interest in each
region. This is now impossible. With eight-
and ten-page papers there is no room for
regional news, and international news is often
reduced. Today, only 25 per cent of the
readers of Parisian dailies are in the pro-
vinces. Last August, to build up newsprint
stocks, the largest papers in France voluntarily
put out several six-page editions.
These changes have not been without effect
on the journalistic profession. Paris-Presse,
M. Massot said, was forced to make a ten per
cent cut in its staff recently and, in general,
the journalistic profession has one of the
highest unemployment rates of any in France
- where overall unemployment is extremely
low.
Maurice Bernard, assistant secretary-gene-
ral of the Federation du Livre, the French
printers'trade union, said that his organi-
zation has been forced to regulate admissions
to printers'trade schools.
Until now, the union has been able to find
new jobs for men thrown out of work when a
newspaper ceased publication. But M. Ber-
nard, speaking for his group, expressed alarm
at the disastrous consequences of present
newsprint prices.
"Newsprint prices are now so high that
many newspapers can no longer operate
without losing money,"he said,"and it's not
easy to convince a publisher to pay the current
wages if he is losing money himself."
What is the result of this situation on the
newspaper itself, whose duty in an democracy
is to keep the public well-informed ?
"In the first place our articles are too short
and we can't present all sides of a question,"
said Claude Bellanger, editor of the Parisien
Libéré and secretary-general of the Interna-
tional Federation of Newspaper Proprietors
and Editors.
"French papers are sometimes criticized
abroad because they do not always give com-
plete coverage on a story. I use four press
agencies.-Associated Press, United Press.
Reuter, and the Agence Franee-Presse-in
addition to my own correspondents, but I just
don't have room to run all details on a single
event.
"We have correspondents, for example, in
New York and Buenos Aires, but I haven't been
able to run any of their despatches for the last
two weeks. Our man in London has instruc-
tions to give us as little as possible. We have
a readership which demands a certain amount
of local news. good sports coverage and a novel
in serial form. If I cut these out, I'd lose read-
ers. As a journalist, I would like to devote
more space to foreign affairs and to problems
of world interest, but as a publisher, I cannot
- not with an eight-page paper."
M. Bellanger pulled a closely-written sheet
of paper from his desk. It was a table showing
how much advertising lineage a paper is requir-
ed to publish before the Société Professionnelle
du Papier de Presse (S. P. P. P.) will allocate sup-
plementary newsprint to allow a paper to in-
crease in size from six to eight pages or to ten
pages.
"Unfortunately, not every publisher can
count on getting this additional allocation,
which means that he must pay more than the
S. P. P. P. price for his additional newsprint,"he
said."That's one reason why the price of
newsprint is 40 per cent of a newspaper's costs
in France today, as compared to 25 per cent
before the war."
And this is how the newsprint problem is
seen by Jean Baylet, Editor of La Dépêche du
Midi, published at Toulouse, in Southwest
France, and one of France's leading provincial
newspapers."You must realize that you can't
have a free press unless it pays it way,"said
M. Baylet, who is also a Deputy in the French
National Assembly, and a member of the
Assembly's press committee.
"As things stand today, daily newspapers in
France are assured of a vital minimum of
newsprint for six pages by the Société Pro-
fes. sionnelle. Now, if you want to run more,
you have to buy it at a higher cost,"he said.
He pointed to a bill for newsprint at 105, 000
francs a ton, explaining that it was"superior
quality"-that is, he had been charged on the
basis off'''superior quality."
M. Baylet also explained that he and his edi-
tors have to find room for the general cover-
age given by Paris newspapers and at the
same time supply the local news their readers
demand. As a result the Dépêche du Midi puts
out as many as fifty editions a day, in some
cases using an edition for one district of a
French county.
"We would like to have enough pages to
cover local news of an entire county in one
edition, but we now have to split it up because
we don't have the paper,"he explained. His
newspaper has also been forced to reduce cer-
tain feature columns, such as those on literary
and cultural subjects, children's stories,, fash-
ions and agricultural problems.
"If the cost of newsprint keeps going up."he
said,"small papers will disappear in France
and the French press will be reduced to four
or five newspapers in Paris and four or five
more in the provinces."
As an important French publisher recently
put it :"We in the newspaper profession in
France are continually being told that well-
informed citizens are the best guarantee of a
free world. But how do you expect us to in-
form them it they cannot afford to buy a
newspaper ?"
'I CANNOT
AFFORD TO
BUY BOOKS
ANY MORE'
THE impact of price increaseson the cost of paper already
felt by the reading public in
practically all countries is likely
te become much more severe
according-to two leading book
publishers : Allen Lane, managing
director of Penguin Books, Great
Britain, and René Vaubourdolle,
director of the textbook depart-
ment (AWM clrlssiq/ll's) of tile
Librairie, Hachette, France.
Both publishers, in an interview-
with the ["II ('SCO Couricr, \\'arned
that more extensive book price
increases will occur when present
stocks have heen sold and new
hooks are printed on paper bought
since the cost began to mount
sone eighteen months ago.
Mr. Lane, who prints 10, Ooh, No
Penguin Books a year, reported
that his paper costs have risen
from f : 40 a ton at the beginning
of J () : JO to f : ! 10 a ton in June 1951.
These costs, nonnahy amounting
tn only about 2.') per cent of the
price of a book, now represent
: ; 0 per cent. Formerly sold ail
prices varying from Is 6d to Fis.
Penguin books are now to be
raised to a minimum of 2s.
The rise in publishing costs
also has serious repercussions
on authors, Ir. Lane explained.
"publishers must look for book.,
that are certain to selt,"he said,
"and that means diftìcult times
for new creative writers."
This picture of paper prices
gradually driving book out of
reach of readers is also reflected
in France. In Paris. M. Yauhour-
dolle of Hachette explained that.
while paper prices had increased.
the public's buying power had
decreased.
Todav in M'ance, text hooks are
available-hut often at prices
which I. Yaubourdnlte termed
"prohibitive."He chose some
examples from the Hachette
catalogue. One French grammar
had gone up from 180 to 260
francs. Another had risen from
300 to 440 franc". A history book
was up from 65 to 120 francs.
On his desk he had a weighty
Latin-French dictionary. It was
marked 2, 500 francs."There are
three kilograms of paper alone in
this hook,"he said,"If I had to
reprint it today, I could not sell it
for less than 3, 500 francs."
The increase in the cost of text-
books has. been a hard blow
to French municipalities which
furnish free books to children in
primary schools. Municipalities
establish their school budgets at
the beginning of a year, explained
M. VaubourdoHe. In January 1951,
the price of ordinary newsprint-
tlle paper used for elementary
school texts-was 50. 400 francs
a ton. BvJu) v of 195), it had
gone up to nearly 80, 000, but the
budgets were the same.
"the result is that. in some
schools, hooks have been bought
on the ha ; : ; i ; : ; of one for two
children. and teachers ; most dic-
tate texts to the resit of the class,"
he said.
Adually, the rise has been even
more severe. With newspapers
clamouring for newsprint, HacheUe
Itas not heen ahle to find enough
for it, ; elemental'Y sellOol book, ;,
and has been forced to use higher
quality paper, at prices going ns
ing-has 110, 000 francs a ton.
The final result is the sam as
elsewhere. From March 1950 to
March 1951, paper costs were 28
per cent of Haciiette's expenses.
"Today,"said M. Vaubourdoiie,
"they probably represent <12 per
cent, for exactly the same books,"
"['\'e made an estimate of the
prices paid by a fattier who buys
new book, for a 14-yeaI'-0Id child
in the third class'in secondarv
school,"he commented."In 19 ; Ù
it woutdiiave been 8, 000 francs as
compared to 6, 000' francs the year
before.".
The effect of new hook prices
on the buying habits of the French
reading pubtic was shown during
a recent conversation which
: \1. Vauboul'dotle had with a friend
\\'who i, one of the chief school
inspector in France. asked if he
had bought a certain new book the
education of1ìcial rl'plied."Oh
no :. I'm not rich ennuglt to buy
new i) ooks anv more."
