COURIER DECEMBER 1952. Page 5
All types of ocean-going vessels ranging from whalers to weatherships and
from merchant ships to cable ships (above) have been adopted by schoolchildren
in five European countries. As soon as"their"ship docks at her home port
the children are eager to go aboard to meet their sailor friends. (Photo COI).
MY SCHOOL HAS'ADOPTED'A SHIP
ARRIVING at a port of call oneday, Captain Kelly, master of
the merchant ship irish Cedar
found a letter addressed in a child-
ish hand waiting for him. He open-
ed it and read :
"Dear Captain Telly,
"My name is Patrick Smite, 1 am
eleven years old and I am a boarder
at Avoca School. There are 254 boys
in the school, of whom 14 are board-
ers.
"Please could you send me some
information about your ship ? I know
that it weighs 8, 000 tons and I have
read your messages. I have also
seen its photo and I like it very
much. You see I am very interested
in ships, the things they carry and
what ports they are calling at.
When you come back to Dublin 1
should like to come on board.
"1 also hope that you will be glad
to receive this and many other
letters."
The letter came as no surprise to
Captain Kelly, for he knew that
Patrick Smith and the other boys of
Avoca School at Blackrock, County
Dublin, had just"adopted"his ship.
Like thousands of other children in
Western Europe and Scandinavia,
these Irish boys go to one of the
schools associated with a Ship
Adoption Society, through which
boys and girls are in constant touch
with the captains and crews of
hundreds of ships sailing in all parts
of the world.
These Societies have already been
formed in five countries : Denmark,
Great Britain, Holland, Ireland and
Norway. The oldest and largest is
the British Ship Adoption Society,
founded in 1936 after a successful
experiment in 1934, when a London
ship-owning company allowed four
of its ships to be"adopted"by four
London schools.
In Britain today there are some
1, 000 ships and over 800 schools
associated with the movement, and
official recognition of the educa-
tional value of the scheme is evident
in the number of educationalists
and ministry representatives serving
on the committee of management.
In Norway, a similar orgazination
was set up shortly before the war
through the efforts of teachers'
associations and shipping com-
panies. Its work, interrupted by the
war, was resumed after Norway's
liberation, and 1946 saw the forma-
tion of Norsk Skipsadopsjon (Norwe-
gian Ship Adoption Society) to
which 370 schools are now affiliated.
The Dutch Ship Adoption Society,
Nevas, which was also founded in
1946, today has 200"adopted"ships.
Letters from children to their adopted ships are delivered in the Port of London
This London river postman is a member of a family which, for 150 years, has been
delivering all mail to crews of ships lying in the Pool of London. (Photo COI).
The president of the Netherlands Ship Adoption Society explains to a class
the history and voyages of the mail steamer"Merweda"-which the bcys and
girls have adopted-and presents them with a coloured painting of"their"ship.
The most recently formed, that of
Ireland, began operating in 1948.
Liaison between ships and shore
is maintained chiefly by correspond-
ence. A steady exchange of letters
between pupils and crews forms the
basis of a friendly and useful liaison
which adds life and zest to class-
room lessons.
Descriptions of journeys, cargoes,
ports of call and weather conditions
during the trips open up new hori-
zons for the children. True stories
and adventures lived and recounted
by their friends transform.'just
another geography lesson"into a
wonderful journey into reality.
"We sighted the Azores one even-
ing just before nightfall,"wrote
Captain A. R. Spearman, master of
the British motor tanker Nicania.
"Their rugged peaks were silhouett-
ed in the red rays of the setting
sun. When they were first dis-
covered back in the 14th century
by the Genoese, they were uninha-
bited. They now belong to Portugal
and the people are mostly Portu-
guese.
"The islands have a mild climate
with a high and steady rainfall.
The soil is very fertile and three or
four crops a year can be produced.
Maize and beans are the principal
crops, others are wheat, millet and
barley. Sugar and beet are also
grown, and fruit grows abundantly
.-there are sweet potatoes, pine-
apples, grapes, bananas and abricots.
Tea, coffee, tobacco and flax are
also cultivated, and there are sugar
and tobacco factories."
From such first-hand descriptions
as this, the chapter on the Azores
in the geography textbooks takes on
a new interest. During the voyage
which took him to the Bahamas, to
Florida, New Orleans and Curaçao,
through the Panama Canal and
across the Pacific, Captain Spear-
man sent accounts of what he saw
- vivid pictures and instructive and
picturesque details which all helped
to enrich classroom lessons.
The children bombard their sea-
faring friends with innumerable
questions : How long did the voyage
last ? Where do you go to refuel
and how much did it cost ? The
replies are detailed and instructive.
They teach the schoolchildren how
sailors live and work at sea, the
kinds of products.
imported and (Continued on
exportedbydiffer-next page)

Page 6. DECEMBER 1952 UNESCO
LESSONS BECOME A VOYAGE TO REALITY
Not all the stories ti1e children hear from their sailor correspondents have happy ending's. Sometimes they read of storms,
typhoons, of ships being disabled or even wrecked. But such accounts only tend to bring them closer to the seamen
(Continued from ent countries,
previous page) and the customsand habits of
peoples in foreign lands.
Here, for example, is an extract
from a letter sent by a member of
the crew of the Lutterkerk to the
boys and girls of a Dutch school :
"This time we have been making
a trip to the Persian Gulf. One of
our stops was Ashar which lies in
Irak near Shatt-el-Arab, a river
which flows from the Euphrates into
the Tigris. I want to tell you
something about Ashar which was,
according to legend, the birthplace
of Sinbad the Sailor.
"From the harbour we had a clear
view of the city, which is surrounded
by date trees. They grow along the
river for several miles, and their
fruit is the outstanding export. The,
first thing that strikes you about the
city is the cupola of the mosque.
Two stern looking Arabs are sitting
at the entrance. According to
religion custom, I must take off my
shoes before entering, and I am sure
to have a hole in my sock. The
building is made of sandstone and
the cupola is decorated with mosaics
- thousands of tiny multicoloured
stones.
"'Outside the mosque is a busy
street, where mules pull heavy carts
filled with vegetables and dates.
The women in the street are heavily
veiled and dressed in black-a
practical garb offering protection
from the millions of flies which exist
here even in winter."
The value of this exchange of
letters extends far beyond the
geography class. Details of shipping
transactions are used in economics
courses. Descriptions of feeding
arrangements on board are useful
for domestic science classes ; copies
of the engineer's logs can be used in
the mathematics period ; an article
on Palestine will illustrate a Bible
lesson ; a letter on the growth of a
port of a coastal town may provide
historical information.
Sometimes they provide material
for a lesson on international co-
operation. For instance, one captain
whose tanker visited Rotterdam
wrote :
.'woe spent about four days at the
loading berth, and during this
time I was able to go down to the
Hague and have a look over the
International Court of Justice build-
ing-the Dutch call it the Peace
Palace. It really is a very lovély
building. Every country that is
represented has contributed some-
thing. England's gift was the lovely
stained glass windows, Italy contri-
Schoolchildren in the Norwegian valley of Gudbrandsdalen received a letter
containing a series of questions from the crew of the"Herva"which they have
adopted. In their reply, the children illustrated their answers to this friendly
general knowledge test with simple drawings and decorations (shown above).
buted marble from which they made
the floor-a marvellous bit of work,
as it is composed of thousands of
inch-square blocks set into the most
intricate design. A Dutch painter
did the murals. Japan presented a
set of beautiful tapestries, made as
only the Japanese can make them ;
Burma contributed teak and maho-
gany, and so it goes on. An
Englishman was responsible for the
lay-out of the gardens which
surround the palace."
If the maximum benefits are to
be drawn from the ship adoption
scheme, teachers must play an
important role. They must link
facts recounted in the letters with
classroom lessons, encourage chil-
dren to use their initiative, and
organize all sorts of activities to help
bring children in touch with the life
of their adopted ship.
Photographs of the ship are
pinned on classroom walls together
with copies of telegrams giving her
position, notes on the types of
weather experienced, details of the
cargos carried, and so on. The
children follow the ship's progress
on a map of their own making,
marking each stage of the voyage
with small nags.
The headmaster of one Irish
school is even arranging for a film-
strip to be made of a typical voyage
of one of the ships. This will be
distributed to schools for use during
geography lessons. Many Irish
schools have already seen the
excellent aims which an Irish
shipping organization has made of
its growth and activities. Nearly
all exhibit in their libraries or
reading rooms, books, magazines or
collections of photographs and post-
cards which are souvenirs of a call"their"ship made in Sweden, Fin-
land, Canada, the United States or
Cuba.
The Irish Ship Adoption Society
has close contacts with its British
counterpart, and from France it has
received posters and pictorial and
informative material sent to Ireland
by two shipping companies.
In Norway, schools have received
collections of many strange objects
brought back from voyages by their
friends. These objects include
turtles from Africa, native spears and
musical instruments from Madagas-
car, and shells and dried plants
coming from many latitudes.
The interest and activities stimu-
lated in the schools by the exchange
of letters is unending. Some chil-
dren make models of ships, or of
farms, factories and plants described
by their sailor correspondents. Girls
are given an incentive to improve
their needlework, for they send gifts
to the crews at Christmas.
But the ship adoption system is
not a one-sided affair. Through
letters from the children, officers
and crews are kept in a special way
in close contact with life at home,
the sort of news they receive giving
them the impression of being closer
in touch with daily life in their
country. Parcels, books and papers
they receive help to break the
monotony of a long voyage. Some
schools edit"newspapers"illustrated
with amusing sketches, which they
send to their sailor friends.
The success of the system is
shown by the long list of schools
waiting for a ship which they can
adopt. War losses, the slowness of
building today, and the normal
depreciation and loss in shipping all
make it impossible to provide a
sufficient number of ships.
But the Ship Adoption Societies
are finding other ways of main-
taining the children's interest. Pub-
lications such as Our Merchant
Ships, Skolen og Skuta (Schools and
Ships) and t'Kraaiennest (The
Crow's Nest) which are put out
respectively by the British, Nor-
wegian and Dutch Societies, re-
produce the letters of children and
sailors, and keep the schools
informed about the activities of the
movement. Booklets on great ports
of the world are to be published by
the British Ship Adoption Society
which has already produced a book
entitled Seajarers, Ships and
Cargoes.
The adoptions are also proving an
effective aid to international under-
standing. When the Norwegian
merchant ship Vistajjord called at
Takoradi on the Gold Goast, it was
visited by a group of English chil-
dren. The captain explained that
his ship had been adopted by the
children of the Alvdal Stor School at
Osterdalen, Norway, and suggested
that the English boys and girls
should write to them.
About a week later the children at
Osterdalen received a letter from
Takoradi accompanied by a col-
lection of drawings and embroi-
deries. The English children wrote :
"Dear girls and boys,
"It is a great pleasure to send you
a collection of some of our work.
Our friend, Captain Kristiansen, has
told us about you and how you work
in your school high up in the
mountains. I expect you have to
wear sweaters and furs to keep
warm, while we try to keep cool by
wearing cotton clothes. Our school
is held on a verandah of a long, low
wooden building. We have sixteen
pupils, six of whom are in the
nursery department. Our ages range
from five to fourteen. Serious work
in the heat is difficult, but we do our
best, as most of us are going home
to the United Kingdom in the near
future.
"will you write to us and tell us
about your school ? Perhaps one day
we shall have the pleasure of
meeting you. On another page of
our book you will find the names and
United Kingdom address of the girls
and boys who would like to start a
pen-friendship. We should, how-
ever, be delighted to receive a letter
from you, here in Takoradi. May
we wish you, your parents and
teachers every happiness !'
The spirit which inspires the Ship
Adoption Societies and useful pur-
pose served by the movement are
well summed up in the words of one
of the organizers of the Irish Ship
Adoption Society :
"While we wish to remain inde-
pendent, we do not want to isolate
ourselves from the peoples of the
world with whom we wish to co-
operate in the building of a happier
and more prosperous world. The
interest which hundreds of boys and
girls in some of our leading second-
ary schools have for three years
been showing in the ship adoption
scheme is also a small contribution
of the Irish people towards the
building here of a greater under-
standing of other peoples and their
problems."
There is no reason why every
country should not have its Ship
Adoption Society. Educational au-
thorities and ship-owners through-
out the world can co-operate in
this truly modern venture to promote
education in the widest sense of the
word.
