COURIER NOVEMBER 1952. Page 13
THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION AND
THE AVERAGE MAN
Have you heard about the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights ?
Are there any rights which, in your
opinion, everyone should have, no matter
what his race, religion or country ?
Should education be made available to
everyone ?
Do you think the State should szWsidize
or maintain theatres arad museums ?
ONE Sunday morning this year, inter-
viewers went into the homes of
some 500 people in Cambridge
(England) and asked these questions and
some 20 similar ones. At about the same
time, in Upsala (Sweden) and Grenoble
(France), other interviewers were carrying
out the same sort of inquiry.
Putting these questions to representative
sections of chosen communities in three
countries was the first step in a Unesco-
sponsored survey, whose object was to
find out what people know about the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
what they think about its principles,
whether they believe these can be applied
in everyday life and, finally, whether the
methods used to make known the Decla-
ration are effective.
Polls of this type, often associated with
the name Gallup, have now become well-
known. More than one government has
used this barometer of public opinion to
measure its popularity and to estimate
likely reactions to measures it proposes to
take. Unesco decided to employ the
method so as to clarify one of its
important tasks-that of making the
Declaration widely known and understood.
The countries in which the polls were
carried out are in a part of the world
where traditions and cultures are espe-
cially favourable to a knowledge and
practice of these rights. In turn, each
of the towns selected can be said to
represent a typical cross-section of its own
country. Furthermore all the towns have
several common characteristics. They are
of average size, have some industry and
trade, attract tourists and possess univer-
sities which enjoy international reputations
and are attended by many foreign
students.
After the first poll was taken, a Human
Rights publicity campaign was launched.
This laid special emphasis on those rights
which are most closely linked with
Unesco's activities : freedom of opinion
and of expression and the rights to educa-
tion and culture The campaign lasted
several weeks and used a variety of media :
press, films, radio, posters, public
meetings, lessons in the schools and
lectures. Then, to measure the effects of
the campaign, a second poll, again
covering 500 people, was taken.
From an interrogation of 500 people
in their homes, it is possible to get a
good idea of the opinions of an entire
town, providing a representative group
has been chosen. This requires a selec-
tion from the points of view of age, sex,
marital status, profession and living
standards which will present a cross-
section of the community.
The professional public survey experts
who conducted the poll, assisted by teams
of volunteers, went straight to the point
of the enquiry, without mentioning
Unesco, the sponsoring body. A frank
conversation lasting for about half-an-hour
was generally sufficient to cover all the
items in the questionnaire which formed
the basis for the interview.
by Maxime C/ouzet
Opinions were obtained from a variety
of sources, which included housewives,
university professors, industrialists, civil
servants, workers and shopkeepers.
During both polls, a total of 3, 000
interviews took place in the three
countries. From the information thus
obtained it is possible, without going into
the details of the experts'analysis, to
draw several significant conclusions.
Generally speaking, the opinions
showed a lively and varied awareness, and
gave a clear indication of the relative
importance that is attached by different
people to one or other of the rights and
freedoms.
One of the first questions asked was
"When you hear the expression'Human
Rights', are there any rights you think of
first ?" Answers received during the first
poll are given below by percentages in
table A. (Certain people gave more than
one reply.)
Was it indifference that caused a large
number of people to give no answer to
this questions-43 per cent in Cambridge
and 40 per cent in Upsala ? Apparently
not, judging by later questions. Many
people may have been nonplussed by the
rather abstract phrasing of this question
at the start of an unexpected interro-
gation. The much lower percentage in
Grenoble, 14, was probably due to the fact
, could provide the means to ensure this
Opinion was 70 per cent affirmative in
Cambridge, 97 per cent in Upsala and
91 per cent in Grenoble that compulsory
elementary edncation should be introduced
among all peoples and races. To the
questions :"Do you think the authorities
should or should not subsidize certain
theatres, set up and maintain museums
and public libraries, look after historic
buildings and monuments and provide
recreation for workers ?" the affirmative
reply varied between 70 and 90 per cent,
and never dropped below 60 per cent.
As this showed, public interest is far
from being confined to the traditional
freedoms. It is greatly stimulated by the
economic and social rights which include
the right to education, to share in the
cultural life of the community, the right
to work, to social security and to a proper
standard of living.
The significant replies produced by the
poll would therefore seem to justify the
realistic attitude of the authors of the
Universal Declaration for their decision
to give a place in the document to these
"new"rights, and thus meet the aspi-
rations of modern man.
Another noteworthy result was the reac-
tion to the question :"'Are you mainly
satisfied or dissatisfied with the progress
made by the United Nations in the
that people. an this city are more familiar
with the conception of Human Rights and
with the expression itself, for it was here
that the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of
Man and of the Citizen had its origin.
The positive replies were on the whole
centralized on the three rights and free-
doms quoted in the first Table, which were
regarded as fundamental. These three
rights were also prominent in the replies
to the following question :"Is there any
right or freedom so indispensable that not
even Parliament should have the power
to abolish it ?"
When questions were put on precise
aspects of Human Rights, the picture
changed considerably. In both Grenoble
and Cambridge, 95 per cent of the people
thought that all clever children should
be able to get higher education, even if
their parents could not afford to pay.
Similarly, 90 per cent in Cambridge and
92 per cent in Grenoble thought the State
world ?" In Cambridge, 45 per cent were
satisfied and 32 per cent were not. The
percentages-in Upsala and Grenoble were
29 and 16, and 49 and 29 respectively.
Some of the results obtained through
the survey were deceptive ones. Probably
the most striking are indicated in Table
B above, which represent public reaction
to three principles.
These three questions were put in
quick succession so that the answers
came spontaneously, without people realiz-
ing the conclusions that could be drawn
by taking their replies literally. If they
are willing to admit theoretically the
equality of all men they are less ready
to accept all its practical consequences
when these come up against certain
fundamental attitudes or deeply ingrained
prejudices.
And while 77 per cent of those
questioned in Cambridge, 94 per cent of
those in Upsala and 74 per cent of those
in Grenoble recognized the same rights
for coloured people as they do for white,
there is a minority who, while conceding
the equality of rights, nevertheless retains
its prejudice concerning the racial super-
iority of the white peoples.
From the answers to three other
questions it would also appear that many
people are quick to demand freedom of
expression for themselves, but are not
always willing to concede it to others.
The interviewers began by asking :"Is
there any kind of opinions or prejudice
which makes you really furious, angry
or depressed ?" Then they asked :"What
steps do you think should be taken against
people who openly speak in favour of
opinions which you regard as really
inhuman ?"
There were 23 per cent in Cambridge,
37 per cent in Upsala and five per cent in
Grenoble who wanted to take measures
to render such people harmless, while,
the rest suggested either counter-pro-
paganda or doing nothing at all. But the
number of prohibitionists rose steeply
when the case of these undesirable
opinions being spread by the printed word
and through organized groups was put to
them.
As the report on the Cambridge survey
declares :"There is, therefore, a sizeable
minority of the public who would support
vigorous action against unpalatable views,
and tolerance does not have much
practical meaning for them."
The same questions as those already
described were put less than two months
later, under the same conditions, to see
what changes of opinions had resulted
through the publicity campaign. In some
ways, definite progress had been made.
The number of people who knew of the
existence of the Universal Declaration-
already fairly large at the first poll-
went up 11 per cent in Cambridge, five
per cent in Upsala and 15 per cent in
Grenoble. The proportion of favourable
replies on, for instance, the efforts made
for peace by the United Nations had
increased.
Another noticeable aspect, was the
change of opinion which brought people
ever from opposition to indecision after
some reflection on their previous ideas.
The view that there is too much
free, room found fewer supporters at the
second poll. And if the campaign did not
produce a marked effect on the most
firmly-held prejudices, it was encouraging
to see that the greatest influence was
made on young people aged between
16 and 24.
All in all, the results obtained were
satisfactory, bearing in mind the short
duration of the information campaign
and the limited resources possessed by the
United Nations Associations, which carried
them out.
Results from polls such as this give
practical guidance for the future to
organizations and individuals who, in the
fields of information and education, are
leading the fight to make the principles
of Human Rights a reality throughout the
world..
. :..
The survey described above was carried
out for Unesco by the British Institute of
Public Opinion, the Swedish Gallup
Institute, and the French Institute of
Public Opinion. The last.-named is to
undertake a collation of the results
obtained in the three countries.
GRENOBLE
".......
While the Unesco Human Rights survey was taking place
in Grenoble (Prance), posters reminded the inhabitants
of the basic principles proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of 1948.
CAMBRIDGE The people of Cambridge (England) were ready to co-
operate wh n interviewers questioned them on their
knowledge and opinions on Human Rights. Interviews lasted about half-an-hour
