Page 10. NOVEMBER 1952
THE RIGHT TO UNDERSTAND
ONE human instinct that sets man apart
from most beasts is curiosity. And the
one inborn trait of mankind, shared by
all peoples at all times, is intelligence.
The use of his intelligence to satisfy his
curiosity has brought man understanding of
the world he lives in. In such measure as
he understands nature, he has created civiliza-
tion and enriched his life.
Indeed, those human cultures that have
most encouraged unlimited curiosity and
have best organized their intelligence for
exercizing it are the ones that have profited
most in wealth and health, in power and
leisure and, as a result during the past
century, in economic and political advantage
over other cultures. It has been the reward
of understanding the material world.
But the right to understanding is not a
special privilege. In a de-
mocratic world it must be as
universal as is the instinct of
curiosity. It is covered by Article
27 of the Declaration of Human
Rights in the words :"Everyone
has the right freely to parti-
cipate in the cultural life of the
community, to enjoy the arts
and to share in scientific
achievement and its benefits."
To participate fully in modern
life and to share in its achieve-
ments is impossible without
understanding the physical
world, the nature of life and
the behaviour of people. And
the key to understanding is as
universal among men as hunger
itself : it is the hunger of the
mind, curiosity.
Every infant satisfies this
instinct by the use of all his
senses. He sees and observes,
he listens, he touches and feels,
he tastes and tries to eal
whatever is within his reach.
Later he explores the room and
the house, reaching for every-
thing, tearing and pounding to
find out what things are made
of.
When he learns to speak he
asks questions endlessly. It is a
wonderful world, so full of
mysteries, yet satisfying if he
feeds his mind as well as his
body. He has all the joy of an
explorer. He is a born scientist
and uses the direct method of
research.
It does not always last. Some
children, with minds not so
hungry, are easily satisfied.,... I,., I.
They lose interest in what is over the hill or
across the seas, what makes plants grow and
machines work, or why people act as they do.
But'most children lose their curiosity more
gradually by a kind of second-hand satisfac-
tion when they begin to learn from books or
from their teachers. Then the answers
come easily and it is not hard to believe what
one reads or is told.
This is the only practical way to learn the
accumulated wisdom of the ages. It would
be impossible to rediscover everything for
one's self. In fact, human progress depends
entirely on the fact that each generation can
learn from the one before and go on from
there.
Yet it is dangerous too, because there re-
mains so much that no one knows, and
because much of our supposed knowledge is
not true. Once evervone knew that the earth
was flat and that man cannot fly. Both
were wrong, of course. And so too, much
that is taught today is almost certainly
untrue.
That is the danger of having one's innate
curiosity satisfied by the authority of others.
It is the danger of accepting half-knowledge
and tradition and prejudice instead of proof.
It is the danger of accepting knowledge
instead of understanding.
The only protection against this danger is
to keep alive the instinct of curiosity, which
by Dr Gerald Wendt
will for ever ask :"How do you know ?-
What is the proof ?-Can we make a test
that will show whether you are right or
wrong ?" From such questions modern
science has learned the truth. They were
asked by Copernicus and Newton, Columbus
and Pasteur, Lavoisier and Einstein. Like all
great scientists, they were men of undying
curiosity and so created our modern age.
They lived in a culture where curiosity was
encouraged. On the other hand, the cultures
that depended on memorizing from books and
lectures, that depended wholly on believing
what the, wise men said, that discouraged
curiosity and experimenting, are the cultures
in which science has been foreign and
development in modern terms has been slow.
The right to participate in modern culture
and to share in the achievements of modern
The key to understanding is as universal among men as hunger itself ; it is hunger
of the mind-curiosity. Humanity can solve its problems if curiosity is not hampered.
it every year with the assurance that they
will be repaid many times over by the new
understanding of nature that the researches
will bring and the new power and wealth
that will result.
But, quite naturally, great researches and
discoveries also bring great new problems.
They are not always in the physical world.
Indeed, more and more they raise problems in
human life and in social institutions.
The development of atomic energy is il
striking example. The conquest of disease
has increased the number of persons living
on the earth and has brought, or will yet
bring, enormous problems in how to provide
them all with food. Quick transportation and
instant communication have made the world
so small that we are all neighbours and what
happens across the seas concerns us all.
Starvation, disease and ignor-
ance in any part of the world
are a challenge to every nation,
no matter how prosperous.
Three specialized agencies of
the United Nations-FAO,
WHO and Unesco-have been
created to deal with them.
They all face problems that go
far beyond physical knowledge.
Yet they are confident that
research can find the answers.
Those who know science only
as a source of material wealth
and physical power often fear it
because of the human and
social problems that it creates.
But all who have lived with
science and worked in it know
that the secret of its succes is
the research method, that cheer-
ful and confident attitude
towards all problems, the ability
to fiind the facts and face them
too, the habit of doubting and
questioning and testing all
human knowledge, no matter
how ancient and how well-
established.
Those who have worked in
research are not dismayed by
the new social problems. They
expect them, indeed they wel-
come them and are sure they too
can be evolved.
It is true, however, that this is
much easier to do in the phy-
sical and natural sciences than
it is in human affairs. New
knowledge about the stars and
the rocks is easy to accept. But
in human and social affairs,
where there have been no Scion-
tific answers, men have long
had their opinions which by now are firmly
established,'whether right or wrong. It
takes courage to question them and even
more to accept new understanding.
For instance, it has been said that the
human being is born aggressive, that
hostility is innate, and that even war is
natural. But modern research has proved
that children are naturallv friendly and so-
cial, and that aggressive behaviour is acquir-
ed or learned during the frustrations of a bad
environment.
It is human to be peaceful, not hostile.
This is a little hard for most people to believe,
because they have already learned the oppo-
site, and must first unlearn the untruth.
So also rye !"search has shown that all human
races are alike in inborn traits and abilities.
Humanity will solve the intimate questions
of human life and the vital problems of
getting along together in groups and in
nations, if the instinct of curiosity is not
hampered and if every resource of intelli-
gence is applied with the same skill and
strategy that have enabled science to under-
stand the physical world.
In the small crowded world of today, ana
with vast powers for both good and evil in
our hands, it is essential that we learn to
understand all men and all nations. The
right to understand is one of the basic Human
Rights.
science is the right to understanding, and this
is based on the right to unlimited curiosity.
It is the natural birthright of every child,
everywhere on earth. It is a right that wise
parents, teachers and governments will
maintain and encourage.
If there is no limit to curiosity, is there then
no end to questions and problems ? Since
the universe is infinite there can be no end.
Beyond every mountain there is another to
be explored. When the whole earth has been
mapped we have neighbouring planets to
explore.
Every research question answered brings
more questions to answer. Beyond the solar
system are the stars, beyond them the ga-
laxies, beyond them whole universes of
unknown stars. Within each object are the
molecules, then, farther in, the atoms, and
within them electrons and protons. Either
outward or inward investigation finds new
facts but also new mysteries. There is no
end.
All this is readily admitted with respect to
the physical and material world. The me-
thod of exploration has been refined to a very
successful strategy and technique of research,
often called the"scientific method"because it
has been successful in providing the sure
knowledge that is called science.
It has been so fabulouslv successful that
thousands of millions of dollars are spent on
J'
UNESCC
