COURIER DECEMBER 1952. Page 13
LIBERIA HAS APPOINTED THE FIRST
U. N. TRAVELLING TEACHER
I never thought I would come across ayoung white girl walking all alone
along a jungle path in Liberia. It
surprised me all the more in this coun-
try-the only independent Negro state
in Africa-where only Negroes can
become naturalized citizens, and where
until seven years ago, only a handful of
foreigners even lived in the capital,
Monrovia.
It was not until 1945 that a forward-
looking president opened the frontiers of
Liberia to whites. Even today the white
population is made up of only a few
hundred foreigners, most of them em-
ployees on an American rubber planta-
tion, businessmen, officials working on a
contract basis, or diplomats. There are
also a number of missionaries.
I suppose you would call the young
American girl I found walking in the
jungle a missionary too. But she is
probably the only one of her kind in the
world. Her"mission"is the United
Nations, and the words that she spreads
from village to village are those of inter-
national co-operation. Her name is
Miss Dora Lee Allen and she is the
world's first"Travelling Teacher for
the United Nations".
The strangest thing about this un-
by André BLANGHET
usual"missionary"is that she is not
officially connected with the United Na-
tions at all. The idea originally came
from the President of Liberia, Mr. Wil-
liam S. Tubman who conceived the tra-
velling teacher scheme as a gesture of
gratitude towards international organi-
zations such as Unesco, the World Health
Organization, the International Labour
Organization and the Food and Agricul-
ture Organization, whose technical
assistance experts are helping to mo-
dernize the country.
Miss Allen thus is an official of the
Liberian Government, and all facilities
and transport for her work are provided
by the authorities. Every day she goes
off to tell the schoolchildren in the dif-
ferent primary schools about the United
Nations, the things it stands for and the
work it is doing.
Primary schools in Liberia are far
from rich. Few of them, even in Mon-
rovia, have enough desks or tables.
Almost always the children have to sit
crammed together on tiny benches. And
since none of the schools is provided
with electricity, Miss Allen is unable, for
the moment at least, to illustrate her les-
sons with films which the U. N. Informa-
tion Centre could provide free of charge.
There are many things in the coun-
tryside of Liberia which remind one of
the American South. Between 1821 and
1860, about 10, 000 American Negroes
landed on the West Coast of Africa and
set up the first independent Negro
Republic on the African continent. They
brought with them an architectural style
which was far removed from the tradi-
tional mud hut one usually associates
with Africa. They constructed their
homes in the Southern Colonial style-
tall wooden houses with corrugated iron
roofs and a verandah built on all sides.
The old Baptist church in Johnson-
ville, with its bell tower housed in a
separate wooden structure, also makes
one think of the South. For want of
other accommodation, this rusty iron
church, with its dilapidated floor-boards
and-more important-its benches, is
used as a school for 150 pupils.
Soon after Miss Allen arrived, the
school was brightened up by a small
multi-coloured tree with 60 branches and
leaves, symbolizing the United Nations,
which was placed next to the artificial
flowers on the altar. From the car that
had brought her from Monrovia, through
a geometrically laid-out plantation of
rubber, trees, there came a series of post-
ers, pictures, diagrams and other panels
which make up Miss Allen's travelling
teaching equipment.
To the boys and girls in this school,
who have never seen a train or a paved
road, but who are all eager for learning,
Miss Allen has been bringing a new kind
of picture of the outside world with her
exhibits and her lessons.
Wherever she arrives, classes are inter-
rupted so that everyone can welcome
her. The teachers
- most of whom (Con tin u e d
lack even simple on next page.)
Liberia has been undergoing large-scale technological and social changes in
recent years. These have created increasing demands for skilled workers and
an alert, literate population, which Unesco technical assistance missions are
helping to develop. Above, Liberians study leaflet on what is being achieved.
The University of Monrovia is now developing its faculty of science. With Unesco
aid, classes have been equipped with microscopes and other laboratory equip-
ment and a team of science teachers has been sent to Liberia. Here, a New
Zealand biology teacher, Mr A. J. D. Barker, instructs a class at the University.
Education games are encouraged by the Liberian
Government as a"painless"way of learning. This
is a letter card game. Liberians are told"Poverty
and disease cannot be fought without literacy. It is
a patriotic duty of every citizen to spread education."
Unesco technical aid experts from seven countries
meet weekly at the Ministry of Education in Monrovia
with government and university officials. These
meetiflgs are considered so important that Liberia's
Vice-President (back to camera) attends regularly.
Liberia has undertaken a fundamental education
experiment in the region of Dimeh, 20 miles from
the capital. Above, Unesco technical assistance
scientist, Mr W. S. Rankin, registers people for
a routine health visit at a rustic jungle dispensary.

Page 14. DECEMBER 1952 UNESCO
SHE TEACHES IN
15-SCHOOL) mE ! EE ! N
(Continued from maps for their
previous page.) geography classes- look on with
pleasure as she sets the bright panels
with the U. N. symbol against the
wall (or against a tree, when the lesson
is held out-of-doors). To see if the
children have learned the previous
lesson, the travelling teacher asks them
a few questions, such as"What is the
meaning of the word'international' ?"
Then she goes on to talk about the
United Nations and why and how it was
set up. Slowly and simply she outlines
her theme.
"Now, let's take a few notes,"she
says, and rows of heads bend over twice
as many knees which must serve tem-
porarily as desks.,
The lesson over, there will be seven
days to think over what Miss Allen has
been explaining-and to do some"home-
work". Before going on to the next
village, Miss Allen leaves a set of ques-
tions for the children to answer in writ-
ing, or gives a subject for an essay on
international co-operation. On her
next visit, she corrects their"home-
work". Miss Allen's lessons require a
good deal of work on the part of her
pupils. They are not mere"pep talks",
to be listened to half-heartedly. The
results she has achieved thus far prove
that the U. N. is becoming an understood
reality in this tiny country.
Every week, Miss Allen brings her
panels to the older children in 15 dif-
Liberia's war against ignorance : To
dramatize the opening of the campaign
against illiteracy an aeroplane drops
) eaf) ets proclaiming a out-and-out war
on"enemy number one to progress."
ferent schools. Her largest classes are
in Monrovia itself, in an extremely over-
crowded school. An hour after leaving
the capital, she may be giving a lesson in
an open-air class under a mango tree, in
a village on the edge of the Liberian
forest.,
To reach the village, she has had to
drive through a maze of forest tracks,
almost indistinguishable one from an-
other. These tracks often give out some
distance from the village. Followed by
her chauffeur, who, carrying her posters
and display board, looks rather like a
sandwich-men she then sets off on foot.
As she passes, people wave a friendly
greeting or invite her into their homes to
share their simple meal.,
Sometimes the villages are even more
isolated, so like other missionaries she
adopts a local form of transport, in this
case the jinalzcme, an uncomfortable sort
of hammock slung on the shoulders of
two or four bearers.
What Miss Allen is trying to do may
not seem very far-reaching compared
with similar efforts in other countries.
But it should not be forgotten that Libe-
ria is a small and still a very poor
nation. Yet in this country which is
struggling to transform its economy and
raise its standard of living, the aware-
ness of the role of the United Nations is
great, What, for example, could be more
symbolic of its belief in the world com-
munity and its ideals than its choice of
having its children taught about the
United Nations-by a foreigner.
