WITH TH
HEALTH
river dispensaries are native perahu
(pronounced"pra-ow") powered by out-
board motors.
These 16 river dispensaries are now in
operation. They patrol fixed stretches of
the rivers at regular intervals-days,
weeks, or months-so that their
"consulting hours"and moorings become
familiar.
With a crew of three-hospital
assistant, attendant and boatman, all
Borneans-they chug their way through
the jungle swamps and up the rivers.
They have to be at their points on the
appointed days, because people come long
distances, often carrying the sick. The
sound of the outboard motor is a modern
tom-tom summoning the people from afar.
Treatments are simple : cough mixtures,
cod liver oil, stomach medicines, salves
and ointments and arsenical injections
(for yaws).
The hospital assistant does the diagnosis
and administers the
drugs, but if he
finds a condition
which requires doc-
tor's attention or
_11...--------L-
hospital treatment, the dispensary be-
comes a river ambulance to get the
patient to the nearest hospital.
The life of these Men Against Disease
is a trying and dangerous one. The
boats are cramped, and drugs and
equipment have priority over comfort.
The heat and humidity, the equatorial
sun and the steam-bath of the jungle is
my idea of hell.
And I suppose one gets used to the
sickly stenches of the tropical fishing
villages, redolent of drying and rotting
fish, and the reeking slime of the river
banks.
The dispenser does most of his
treatment on the river's edge, but often
he is summoned to the huts of the
bedridden-huts perched on stilts above
the swamp.
The dispensaries have been an unques-
tioned success. The number of people
treated the first year-36, 000-rose to
165, 000 the second. The river boat
method will be used in the B. C. G.
(inoculation against tuberculosis) cam-
paign, which the Colonial Medical
Service is about to start with the help
of WHO and UNICEF. It is being
adopted in Indonesian Borneo, to the
south, in the anti-yaws campaign also
sponsored by WHO and UNICEF.
Another pioneer enterprise, run by the

COURIER MAY) 9S2. Page 7
Government with U. N. help, is the Mother
and Child Health programme. The
supplies come-from UNICEF and the
experts from WHO.
Plymouth-born Olive Warren had had
many tough assignments in her time-
with UNRRA in Italy and with IRO in
the refugee camps-but probably none
as difficult as wrestling with religious
resistances and superstition and the
primitive child-bearing practices in equa-
torial Borneo.
She and a Swiss expert in children's
diseases, Miss Hulda Wenger, started out
to train Bornean girls as hospital nurses.
UNICEF helped by providing modern
equipment for the maternity and chil-
dren's wards and dried milk.
But Miss Warren's assignment also
included arranging for trained midwives
to go into the mothers'own homes. This
was difficult, particularly among the
coastal Mohammedan Malays. They are
supposed to be nursed only by their own
"wise women,"who are paid the
traditional fee-a chicken, two sarongs
and some needles. Their practices are
crude and unhygienic.
Slowly. : lips is changing. Malay women
a ;  : coming in increasing numbers to the
ante-natal clinics and often will agree to
go into hospital to have their baby, or
accept the modern trained bedans or
midwives. But usually at the last moment
they jib, through the nagging of their
elders.
The Chinese women have no such
misgivings and Dyak women are often
prepared to make long journeys by jungle
trail and canoe to hospital. Usually this
is when they themselves realize that
things are going wrong, and whatever is
wrong is worsened by the hazards of the
journey.
The only effective answer will be the
native-born midwives.
With one of the new bedans and Miss
Warren, I went on a midwifery call. The
bedan set off on her bicycle with her
black bag, a comprehensive rncksack of
equipment designed and supplied by
UNICEF. She pedalled her tortuous way
to the stilt-house. Miss Warren and I
followed in a jeep, which we had to
abandon at somme distance and pick our
way on foot.
The house was spotless-a tribute to the
ante-natal instruction the mother had
received. The baby was born on the
bamboo floor, covered with washed gunny
bags and Chinese paper. Faces peered
through the wicker walls.
When the baby had lustily introduced
himself, he was put to bed on seven
vividly-coloured folded sarongs on the
floor. These are ritualistic. Each day
one sarong is removed until on the eighth
the infant is lying on the cane mat beside
the mother.
Its daytime cradle is a sarong folded in
a triangle, knotted at the apex and
swinging from the rafter by a rope.
Cradled in this, the baby is safe from
marauding pests.
These bedans are hardy and courageous
young girls, who with flash lamps and
hurricane lamps bring babies into the
world to the sound of bullfrogs in the
swamp, the clucking of lizards and the
screech of night prowlers. All that WHO
or UNICEF or a government can do is to
start them off. The rest is with them
- the breaking down of superstition, the
emancipation of mothers from primitive
methods which amount to a death cult,
and the persuasion and training of other
Bornean girths.
Example is the great teacher. When
the"good spirits"of modern science can
overcome the dread of"bad spirits"which
dominate the Borneans, medicine will
prevail.
It has done so in the case of leprosy
here in Sarawak. The leper in Borneo
- as everywhere-is the tragic outcast. At
the first sign of the sinister red patch, the
longhouses and villages expel the victim.
Only a few years ago, he would go never
to return. Today, lepers are going back
cured to their families.
Between Kuching, the capital of Sara-
wak, and the jungle, there is a big sign
"Rajah Sir Charles Brooke Leper
Settlement."That is about all you can
see from the road. There is no fencing,
but among the trees, alongside a pleasant
river, is a series of"villages"which,
with an administrative building, a hos-
pital block (not very big, because few
are bed cases) and two wooden dormitory
bnts, comprise the settlement.
From its beginnings in 1929, when
leprosy was still a permanent disease, this
enlightened community set out to make
the leper. feel"normal."They follow
their own trades, have their own clubs
and lead their own lives. They can marry
and have children, but the baby will be
removed from the mother at birth, before
she can infect it.
Here what even we in the West call
"miracle drugs"have worked miracles.
By using basic sulphone injections once
a week, leprosy can now be cleared up.
It cannot repair crippled limbs but it
checks the disease, heals the scars and
removes infection. As a precaution,
patients must be medically supervised for
three years and continue their treatment.
Men Against Disease are only a hand-
ful in Sarawak-just nine doctors for an
area as big as England and Wales. Local
students are coming on, and some have
been sent abroad to be trained ; but the
shortage of personnel is appalling. Yet
this little group, confronting the jungle
and its primitive superstitions, are beating
out a trail along which the people
themselves will find their own way.
(This article and the three on pages 8
to 11 by Ritchie alder are copyright and
cannot 6e reproduced.)
