Page 6, OCTOBER 1952
AFGHANISTAN
CHOOSES TO
PROSPER
THE modern world encounters aworld of 2, 000 years ago on the
Lataband Pass which leads to
Kabul, the capital city of Afghani-
stan, a country now undergoing
great changes. Thé road climbs up
the sides of the mountains, with
precipitous drops, hazardous bends
and a surface which is little better
than a dirt track. The tribes move
in familles-men, women and
children with aIl their goods and
chattels, their tents, their rugs, their
pots and pans and jars ; tethered
poultry balanced on the backs of
asses ; and children strapped ta the
humps of camels.
Into this ancient world the 20th
century has charged with clamorous
horns. Lorries driven by frontier
tribesmen, who have become the
freight carriers, dispute the right
of way with the camel trains and the
burdened asses.
Beyond this pass and the grey,
barren déserts and mountains lies
Kabul, where at night the two
mountains which divide the city are
picked out in a festoon of electric
lights, proclaiming to the pastoral
peoples around that the Technical
Age has corne to Afghanistan.
But only just. For this is a
country the natural resources of
which are virtually undeveloped.
Here more than 90 per cent of the
population is agricultural and of
that, most are pastoral nomads.
The methods of agriculture are pri-
mitive, and there are few skilled
industrial workers except those in
two recent cotton factories.
The few roads which exist tear to
pieces the modern vehicles which
use them. There are no railways,
and traffic between north and south
Is practically impossible because of
the great barrier of the Hindu Kush.
Coal, which is accessible by simple
mining, is scarcely worked, and the
mountainsldes are continually strip-
ped of any vegetation usable as fuel.
Thus, Afghanistan, which even
superficial surveys have shown to be
potentially wealthy, is unques-
tionably an under-developed coun-
try, and to remedy this state of
affairs the Royal Afghan Govern-
ment requested the United Nations
for help even before the Expanded
Programme was begun.
The original United Nations Mis-
sion sent to the country agreed with
the Government on a programme of
technical assistance, whose main
emphasis was placed on projects by
which changes within the compet-
enCe of the people themselves could
produce benefits, pending the more
ambitious development programmes
requiring large-scale foreign help.
For example, the agriculture of
Afghanistan could be revolutionized
by modern methods. In a country
which has a low rainfall, this would
involve big irrigation schemes and
the discovery and development of
underground water supplies ; that
will corne. But a minor revolution
could be produced immediately by
the introduction, not of advanced
farming technology, but of the
simplest improved devices-like the
hoe or the scythe.
One of the first things which FAO
did under its expanded technical
assistance programme in Afghani-
stan was to introduce a demonstra-
tion team for hand-tools. Afghani-
stan is mainly mountainous, the
land is steep and the holdings
small, so that mechanized farming,
even if it were not too costly for the
farmers, could have only limited
value. The only tool which the
Afghans had for mowing was a pri-
mitive sickle with the blade set at
right angles to the handle, which
has to be used while the farmer is
sitting on the ground and grasping
the corn or grass in his left hand.
A Swiss FAO farm implement
expert, accompanied by two assist-
ants experienced in the scything of
high pastures, gave a series of de-
monstrations in harvest areas of
scythes, hoes, forks and hay rakes,
previously unknown in Afghanistan.
A jeep and the tools were provided
"If you choose to die", an old Afghan saying went,"go to Kundus."Today,
with thé région c ! eared of malaria and agriculture and industries developing,
the saying is justifìably changed to"If you choose to prosper, go to Kundus".
will be trained for a year in Switzer-
land in the use of hand-tools on
mountain farms. By extending this
work during 1952, it is estimated that
the productivity per man can be
increased by as much as five times.
Because of its widespread pos-
sibilities, this programme, which
appeals to the local farmer and
employs the local blacksmith, can
(U. N. photos by Eric Schwob.)
Afghanistan is a remarkable example of how a country is using expert help from
abroad to further its development. ln one season WHO technicians dusted
entire population of Kabul with DDT and prevented annual typhus epidemic.
by the Austrian Government as a
contribution to FAO's work.
The team was able to prove to the
Afghan peasants that a man could
mow many times as fast with the
scythe as with the local sickle.
About 500 scythes have already been
distributed, some of them to the
students of the school of agriculture,
who, after being trained in their
use, have taken them to their own
villages in remote parts of the
country. A fellowship has been
awarded to an Afghan student who
Impressive results have been achleved ln tlght against dreaded rinderpest cattle
disease. Last year, 1, 000, 000 cattle were protected by officia) inoculation and
isolation schemes that were widely supported by the cattlemen themselves.
be of far greater service to Afghan
agriculture than any immédiate
attempt to introduce modern ma-
chinery. Even if lt were though
advisable to introduce tractors and
the like, it would mean not only con-
verting the peasant farmer to un-
familiar machines and training me-
chanics, but also meeting the costly
use of petrol, which has still to be
imported at prohibitive expense.
Another example of how simple
changes can produce immeasurable
benefit is the case of Karakul. Ka-
rakul, the fur of the lamb, is Af-
ghanistan's most important source
of foreign exchange, and gives em-
ployment to over 1, 000, 000 people.
Before 1934 the sheep population
was in a flourishing condition. In
that year, when the karakul mono-
poly was started, only 1, 100, 000 pelts
were exported from the country.
In 1945 this had risen to 3, 200, 000,
but in the following year it had
dropped to 1, 700, 000. This drop was
brought about by bad weather, poor
food and sheep disease.
If, therefore, the technical assist-
ance which FAO is rendering under
its karakul improvement programme
succeeds, it will be providing an
increase in reserve which could be
put to improving the agricultural
conditions of Afghanistan, and also
to helping build up its industrializa-
tion.
The story of karakul, moreover,
provides an interesting example of
how inter-active technical assistance
can be, and how even a malaria
control scheme affects a country's
dollar-earning capacity.
There is an old Afghan saying,
"If you choose to die, go to Kundus."
Kundus is the centre of a large and
fertile area between the Hindu Kush
and the Oxus River. Eight hundred
years ago Genghis Khan destroyed
the canal civilization which had cul-
tivated this area. When the irriga-
tion system collapsed, the malaria
mosquitoes took possession. Since
that time repeated efforts to recover
this area failed because the people
were either killed off by malaria or
Sed.
In 1950, a WHO team set up it
headquarters at Kundus, and within
two years had effectively cleared the
region of malaria. This enabled the
expansion of a large cotton growing
belt and the recruitment of workers
for a cotton mill. While FAO is
helping to improve the yield and
quality of the cotton produced, the
new industry is producing the cotton
seed cake which can supply thp
winter feed of the karakul and help
reduce the death rate. This, with
the other help which the interna-
tional experts are able to give on
sheep diseases and the like, will help
to reduce the death-rate of sheep,
which is as high as 40 per cent in a
season.
With malaria effectively control-
led, the Northern Provinces can now
be opened up, not only for agricul-
tural purposes, but for industrial
development.. In this area lies a
potential oilfield. One of the first
requests agreed between the Govern-
ment and the United Nations was
for an oil geologist. This year, plan"
for the exploitation of the oil re-
sources of this region are going
forward. The old saying has now
been modified :"If you choose to
prosper, go to Kundus."
The malaria control scheme had
other secondary effects. In the off-
season for malaria, the WHO team
moved into the cities of Kabul and
Kandahar, dusted the entire popu-
lation with DDT, stopped the tribes-
men as they came into the town and
dusted them too, and thus prevent-
ed a typhus epidemic which had
recurred annually in Afghanistan.
The success of malaria-control and
typhus-control made a great impres-
sion on the people of Afghanistan,
and led to embarrassing demands
for immediate spraying of the whole
country.
Though agriculture is the central
problem, the services which are
being made available under the
technical assistance programme for
Afghanistan include experts in eco-
nomic planning, public administra-
tion, statistics and industrial en-
gineering ; oil drilling, telephone and
telegraph, underground water, cot-
tage industries, productivity and
labour legislation, and cotton cul-
ture ; civil aviation, oil technology,
health education in aIl its fields,
epidemiology, social medicine, ge-
neral and technical éducation and
teacher training.
This expanding programme is
closely correlated with the U. S.
bilateral programme, which, among
other things, includes help in
opening up the country's mineraI
resources.
Afghanistan is a remarkable
example of how a country is avail-
ing itself of expert help from aIl
corners of the world. The public
health engineer is from Haiti, the
woman expert on children's diseases
from Finland, the doctor in charge
of the malaria control is an Indian,
and the mission has included Bri-
tish, American, Dutch, Scandinavian,
French, Belgian and Austrian parti-
cipants.
UNESCC
