路 路 ' 路 路
The range of waves known as the electro-magnetic spectrum is like a long
piano keyboard. The string struck by each white key vibrates at half the rate of
the string eight notes higher, so that for each octave frequencydoubles and wave
length is halved. About 50 octaves represent the electro-magnetic spectrum.
SCIENCE has this in common with art, music
and poetry-any true and significant advance
requires creative imagination of a high order.
To be sure, the imagination of the scientific
theorist must be tempered by the picture of the
universe as available to the eyes of man, for not
all worlds are scientifically possible. But without
imagination and inventive genius science, like
any other aesthetic enterprise, withers and
becomes sterile.
There is perhap. s no better example of the
triumph of scientific imagination than our
modern conception of the nature of matter and
of energy. For a long time it had been known
that ordinary gross matter consists of individual
particles, or atoms (see"Atoms in Action"in last
February's issue of the Courier). More recently,
the Quantum Theory brought the suggestion
that light and other forms of radiant energy
exhibit particle-like attributes, despite the clas-
sical idea of light as a wave motion ("What is
the Quantum Theory ?"in the Courier for
November, 1950).
The concept of light behaving like a volley of
bullets was spectacularly shown by the experi-
ments of the American physicist Arthur Compton
in 1923. In his researches, he allowed X-rays
to strike a block of carbon, and the rays scattered
from the carbon were compared with the direct
radiation. Compton found that the X-rays,
which had rebounded from carbon, had slightly
longer wavelength than before-a fact unpre-
dieted and unexplained by the otherwise well-
founded wave theory of radiation.
And here is the point where creative imagina-
tion enters the scene-a type of co-operative
and consecutive creativity which is probably
more characteristic of the field of science than
of any other human endeavour. Trying Einstein's
idea of"light-bullets"of quanta, Compton (and
at about the same time Debye in Germany) had
the idea of treating the scattering process as a
situation transpiring on a billiard table rather
than on a pond. Considering the incoming
X-ray to be a particle rather than a wave, and
computing what would happen to it when it
struck and rebounded from an electron in a car-
bon atom, they found that the quantum would
lose just enough energy in the collision process
to account for its observed increase in wave-
length. At the same time, experimenters were
able actually to observe the recoil of the electron
that was struck by the X-ray bullet, completing
a convincing picture of the reality of"particles
of radiation.'
Physical science was accordingly in the uncom-
fortable position of having to consider light as
sometimes behaving like waves, sometimes like
particles. In its ordinary traffic with gross
matter-in passing obstacles and filtering
through apertures, in rebounding from mirrors
and penetrating transparent materials-light
would be correctly and adequately described as
a wave motion ; but in its more delicate mani-
festations, such as the Compton effect and the
photo-electric effect, only the particle concept
appeared to be adequate. Perversely, the fact is
that the plot was further complicated by the
appearance of a similar dualism in the case of
matter !
The French physicist Louis de Broglie grappled
with the idea presented by the double nature of
radiant energy ; and while he could see no imme-
diate resolution of the difficulty, he was led to
think of the possibility that the other great entity
in the universe-matter-might be beset by
the same dilemma. Accordingly, he made the bold
suggestion that matter might possess undulatory
characteristics in addition to its accepted and
evident particle-like nature. Both matter and
radiation are carriers of energy, and"it would
seem,"he said,"that the basic idea of the quan-
tum theory is the impossibility of imagining an
isolated quantity of energy without associating
with it a certain frequency."Material particles
ought, therefore, to be accompanied by waves of
some kind, and these waves should be detectable
experimentally. Within a year of Compton's dis-
covery, de Broglie had sketched a rather complete
and far-reaching analogy between light waves
(Continued on next page.)
COURIER APRIL 1952. Page 5

Page 6. APRIL 1952 UNESCO
WAVES IN SPACE
(Continued and"matter waves."
from pre- The notion is revo-
vious page) lutionar indeed forever since the dis-
covery of the electron and of
X-rays, physicists took great paint
to distinguish carefully between
what were identified essentially as
particles of matter and other see-
mingly distinct things that were
verified to have the properties of
waves. Now they were being pre-
sented with the need for admitting
that matter, as well as radiation,
has both attributes.
Proof of the existence of matter
waves was not long in coming.
Experimenters found that electrons
rebound from crystals only in cer-
tain definite directions, in much
the same way as light waves do.
Further, the observed lengths of
the waves associated with electrons
came out in perfect accord with
the values calculated from the for-
mula developed by de Broglie.
Other experimental proofs showed
that particles of matter bear the
unmistakable stamp of waves.
But it is evident that they
cannot be the same as light waves,
for groups of"matter waves"may
travel with any speed-the speed
of the particle with which they are
linked-while light waves travel
with a fixed speed in a given
substance. This question and
many others were answered
through a significant extension of
de Broglie's ideas, carried out
mainly by the Austrian theorist
Erwin Schrodinger and others like
Born and Heisenberg in Germany
and Bohr in Denmark. The re-
sulting body of theory, called wave
mechanics, has a highly mathema-
tical framework but it provides us
with a powerful tool for solving
problems involving matter and
radiation which the earlier deve-
lopments in quantum theory were
unable to attack at all. The waves
are interpreted as something that
guides particles in their courses.
Science at present is reconciled
to accepting the apparent dual
nature of both matter and radia-
tion, and to dealing with radiation
that sometimes behaves like par-
ticles and with bits of matter that,
on occasion, behave like waves.
The new theories provide us with
a formalism that correctly repre-
sents the details of atomic pheno-
mena. They demand in return
only that we give up the somewhat
naive hope of being able to visual-
ize what goes on in the atomic
world in terms of our ordinary
large-scale experience.
--.-
If you are interested in reading further
about the Wave Theory of Matter. write
to the Division for the Popularization of
Science, Unesco, 19, Avenue Kleber, Pa-
ris 16e, France, for a free bibliography
on this subject.
