Page I 0. MAY I 952
This thrifty, ingenious Javanese peasant''plants"fish
fry with the rice, and later"harvests"them with the grain.
They hail Singing Supraptor as an old friend and provide the musical accompaniment with strange in-
struments, including bass-effects obtained by"booping"into hollow bamboo tubes of various sizes.
A simple theme which will sing in the rice-peasant's head
long after Supraptor goes on his way to teach others.
MEN
AGAINST
HUNGER
RITCHIE CALDER-CONT'D,
THE SINGING SUPRAPTOR
AND THE SONG OF PLENTY
SURAKARTA, CENTRAL JAVA.
THIS is the story of Singing Supraptor.I have to call him that, to distil.
guish him from Social Supraptor
and all the other Supraptors who have not
got first names either. Nor surnames,
because Supraptor is not a family name
but a nom de plume.
Anyway,"Singing Supraptor"suits him
very well, because his method of teaching
farmers how to improve their methods
and their crops is to sing his instructions,
and to send them away chanting choruses
about the virtues of green manure.
This is Fundamental Education in its
simplest and most colourful form, as
simple as nursery rhymes, as practical as
a farming manual (which they could not
read) and as quaint as the troubadour.
Singing Supraptor is a graduate in agri-
cultural science, but he is a man of the
people who can shed his expertise as he
can shed his jacket and puddle in the wet
paddy fields with the peasants he is trying
to help.
"You must see and hear Supraptor,"
Dr. Van der Ploeg, the FAO adviser to the
Indonesian Government insisted in the
capital, Djakarta."He is the regional offs.
cer of the Agricultural Extension Service,
but his methods are remarkable."
"Unorthodox ?" I queried.
"On the contrary-traditional,"said
Dr. Van der Ploeg.
What Supraptor has done is to return
to the elementals, as anyone concerned
with the soil should do. He uses five
tunes which (I am told) are the basis of
all Javanese music, age-old and known to
every Javanese. To these he sets words.
Some of the verses are just music hall,
getting the laughs from the audience,
like :
"The farmer of Indonesia
Is a simple-hearted chap
Who always does what the govern-
[ment tells him to do..."
(Loud guffaws and catcalls.)
Others are instructions :
"If we want the best from our soil
And a proper reward for our toil
Our rice must be planted in rows
With manure to make sure that it
[grows
We must pick the best seeds
And hoe out the weeds
- But that every good farmer
[knows."
And so he goes on, through tune after
tune, improvising and word-nirting with
his particular local audience, but always
coming back to the lesson and explaining
in recurring verses how they should
select the seed not from the barn but
from the ripening ears, and what sort
of leguminous plant they should use as
green manure.
On another occasion it may be on irri-
gation, and when and how it is best to
prepare the channels. And so on-a
simple theme which will sing in the rice-
peasant's head long after Singing Suprap-
tor has gone.
We went on his rounds with him, in the
mountains around Surakarta, visiting the
new farmers'clubs and rural extension
centres, of which there are ten in his
district. Heart-warming places they are
- bright and lively with posters, primi-
tive in terms of the subtle sophistries of
western visual aids, but"packing a
punch, because they are the sort of
things which an illiterate peasant might
himself draw in trying to express himself.
These clubs are substantial buildings,
some of them provided with American
aid, but very much the farmers'own in
initiation and continuing support. They
come there in their spare time for good
fellowship, tea-drinking and rice-eating,
and once a week they have instruction.
They hail Supraptor as an old friend.
They provide the musical accompaniment
with strange instruments, including bass-
effects from"booping"into hollow bam-
boo tubes of various sizes.
I have never seen a"class"enjoy itself
more than that collection of tea-swilling,
chorus-singing, cigar-smoking peasants in
their turbans and sarongs. And I have
never seen more attentive pupils than
those who surrounded the irrigation
expert, as he demonstrated how, by co-
operatively planning their terrace lay-outs,
each could help all.
He used a sand. table on which was
modelled the contours of their own fami-
liar countryside, and on which they could
recognize their own rice plots. He show-
ed how, by banking and grading and
proper run. off, they could husband the
water and the soil, and prevent erosion
and the heartbreak of collapsing terraces.
What he was doing was no more than
"adding-up"the centuries. of experience
which have produced those monuments
of careful farming, the Javanese rice ter
races. I say"monuments"advisedly,
because I went to Borobadour, one of the
world's wonders, in this same region.
This is a Hindu temple (a reminder of
the time when the Hindu empire reached
down through the archipelago to Bali),
where hundreds of Gautama images look
out from their niches and stupas on the
ledges of a great ornate pyramid. But
those terraces of inanimate stone did not
impress me half as much as the living
Borobadours-the terraces of growing
rice which climb the mountains. Every
foot-and sometimes the ledges are not
more than a foot wide-of soil that
can be cultivated is made to yield rice,
with ingenious water management to flood
each terrace for the wet-paddy.
Often they yield more than rice, be-
cause these thrifty, ingenious Javanese
peasants"plant"fish with the rice and
"harvest"them with the grain. As they
flood the terraces, they introduce the
fingerling, or fry. When they drain the
water off some three months later, the
fish which have been"grazing"among
the rice are about the size of a large
sardine, or pilchard-which is the size
the Javanese like. This is a vital source
of protein for peasants on a rice diet,
and Supraptor and the other Government
officials are encouraging the peasants to
increase their fish yields. They supply
hundreds of thousands of fish fry.
Here in the Surakarta regency, we have
seen something of the leaven which has
come into the social and economic life of a
hard-working peasant population, with
political freedom (which they value fer-
vently), with the health campaign (which
has lessened the crippling burden of.
disease), with the anti. illiteracy campaign,
and with a sense of urgency to improve
their low standard of life.
With Social Supraptor, I went round
social centres, clinics, adult education
schools and rehabilitation centres. The
anti-illiteracy urge-from the people
themselves-is intense. Young and old
sit together on the benches in the school-
rooms. The teachers (in a country deplor-
ably short of them) are everyone who
knows and can communicate, such as civil
servants, doctors, nurses, postal workers,
all in their time off.
Perhaps it can be summed up in the
example of a rehabilitation centre for war
wounded, of which Social Supraptor is
properly proud. There we saw limbless
men, and women, making their own arti-
ficial limbs-not peg-legs but mobile,
aluminium arms and legs carefully copied,
with newly-acquired skills, from proto-
types obtained from abroad. And they
were learning their alphabet as they
worked.
There is something inspiring in a people
who sing their own practical salvation and
in cripples who mend their bodies and
minds at the same time.
