UNESCO COURIER-Page 6 MARCH 1952
UNESCO CAN HELP TO CHECK MILITARISM)
SAYS GERMAN FEDERAL PRESIDENT
DR. THEODOR HEUSS
welcomes entry into
United Nations Agency
-UNESCO'S decision to admitGermany as one of its
Member States proves its
concern for universality. This, I
believe, is bound to benefit Unesco
both materially and spiritually.
There is one thing, however, I
should like to stress in order to
destroy certain stupid rumours one
hears sometimes. That thing is
that Unesco in no way seeks to cover
all minds with a uniform coat of
paint or to make all peoples dance
to the same tune. Unesco's job is
rather to open men's eyes so that
they greet one another with
understanding and friendliness, and
not as strangers. He who travels
from one end of the world to the
other only to make up his mind
that everything is better in his own
country might just as well have
saved himself the time and trouble
of his journey. But he who finds
everything better outside his own
country is probably nothing more
than an ignorant philistine. Some
kind of enlightened curiosity toward
humanity as a whole is necessary
if we are to conquer sentiments of
superiority towards the ways of life
and ideas of other peoples.
The word"'tolerance"often
appears in works published by
Unesco. This is a splendid word,
but only if it implies a definite
respect for other people's ways-not
just a passive and indulgent
acceptance.
It is only in this light that the
abstract phrases of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights take
on colour and life. Religious and
philosophic traditions no less than
social and political experience which
are part of the spiritual history of
mankind find in the Declaration
their common denominator. But if
the Declaration of Human Rights is
to be more than just the reflection
of a fleeting moment in history, men
must see in it standards and
obligations for all mankind. It is
not new ideologies which are needed
but new conditions.
The way history is presented is
closely bound up with politics.
Discussion on this subject at the
national level is free and should
remain so. We who have known
National-Socialism realize only too
well to what extent official
censorship can mutilate the. past.
All Germans, not only historians,
should feel free to have differing
opinions on Frederick the Great
and Bismarck, just as Frenchmen
should on Napoleon Bonaparte and
Napoleon III.
In this respect, I should like to
mention an event which I consider
In the Chamber of Parliament at Bonn, several weeks ago, an impressive cere-mony marked the entry of the German Federal Republic into Unesco. On this
occasion the Director-General of Unesco journeyed to the German capital
as guest of the Federal Republic and conferred with leading officials, including
President Theodor Heuss and Chancellor Konrad Adenauer. During his stay
in Germany, M. Torres Bodet attended the inaugural meeting the National Com-
mission, presided over by Professor Walter Erbe, and met the head of the
International Institute of Social Sciences which was recently created in Germany
under Unesco auspices. Before returning to Paris, the Director-General stopped
at two of the most renowned cultural centres in Germany : Beethoven's house in
Bonn, and Goethe's house in Frankfort. On this page, we publish some of the
salient passages from the addresses delivered at the Chamber of Parliament by
Dr. Heuss and M. Torres Bodet.
particularly significant, and in
accord with Unesco's ideals. French
and German history teachers
recently met in Mainz to discuss
the events of the last forty or fifty
years, and the tensions, the
problems and the differences which
arose during this period.
By earnestly seeking to determine
the true facts, they were able to
reach joint conclusions concerning
the presentation or such themes
as Poincare, the Anschluss and
others in history classes. Teachers
of history in both countries have
been invited to profit from these
findings and to avoid the traditional
clichés which have been common
in the past. This event shows how
distortions can be eliminated from
accounts of history when these.
distortions are caused by old
propaganda and misconceptions
inspired by events which are
depasse.
During the war, certain ideals
and values which could be applied
later were not completely aban-
doned. Nations, it is true, were at
that time devoting all their efforts
to mutual annihilation. But the
peoples-or, at least, the best
citizens among them-had not
completely forgotten that we live
side by side with one another, and
through one another. To ask if it
would be possible one day to live
for one another inevitably meant
being regarded as a sentimentalist,
a Utopian, or even as a traitor.
If it is true that, historically
speaking, the word is mightier than
the sword, then the purposes and
mission of Unesco can only be to
restore the things of the spirit to
their rightful role and effectiveness.
Unesco must help to checkmate the
pretensions of power politics,
militarism and economic material-
ism to decide history's course.
But is it not illusory to speak such
words at a time when the pooling
of European coal production, and
the possibilities of a new type of
army seem to be the only questions
that count ? I am quite aware that
this is only a gross simplification of
the fundamental problem of our
time, but I present this question in
as hard and cold a way as possible
purposely. For even when it appeals
to rational arguments, romantic
sentimentalism has less effect today
than ever before and has even less
effect on the Germans than on
other peoples.
The answer to this question
depends on our abilities, on our
willingness to recognize the presence
of the spiritual and the effectiveness
of moral and religious factors which
are the corner stone and very
foundation of the historical
background of individual peoples
and of all humanity.
M. TORRES BODET :
'No true culture is
enemy of others'
WHEN it became a Member Stateof Unesco, the German Fe-
deral Republic acquired ipso
facto privileges which are also
duties. It undertook to contribute
to the common welfare of humanity
according to its capacities and in its
own special way.
The talents of your people, the
contribution which your culture can
make-and for centuries you have
shown how valuable these can be
- would once more be devoted to
serving of our fellow-men.
For every nation, entry into
Unesco means a stock-taking of its
own wealth, and a scrutiny, as it
were, of its own conscience. It
means asking what it can draw
from the resources of its own genius
for the benefit of its own and other
nations.
It also means resolving to fight
against the fatal temptation, some-
times insidious, sometimes insolent,
to treat others with contempt, or
to make others the means of
attaining a perhaps intoxicating
greatness, but one which is founded
on the humiliation of others, and
therefore contemptible.
No true culture is the enemy of
other cultures. The greater a
culture knows itself to be, the more
it feels called upon to give life to
others by its own contributions,
while at the same time esteeming
itself all the more capable of assi-
milating what other cultures offer.
A great culture is. neither jealous
nor timid. It fears neither to give
nor to receive. It is never afraid
that a foreign culture will eclipse it,
nor imagines that it can be corrupted
by another. It is not exclusive, it
is generous.
History teaches us eloquently
enough that all great cultures are
born at the cross-roads where
civilizations meet, amid material
and spiritual borrowings, exchanges,
and ferment, where the traffic in
things and ideas is at its height.
That is why Unesco fights for the
welfare of all cultures simulta-
neously, encouraging them to get
to know one another, to make
contacts, and to compete freely with
one another. We are convinced
that thereby every one of them will
be enriched and fructified.
A culture is not imposed by force
of arms, nor by the power of money.
It is imposed by its own merits, in
the forefront of which is the kind
of sympathy it shows towards
others, and that others can only
return, for sympathy creates sym-
pathy no less certainly than
contempt engenders distrust.
The National Commissions of
Unesco have therefore, as their first
duty within the territory of each
Member State, to promote and
encourage all measures likely to
persuade every citizen to look
beyond his own frontiers with
confidence and goodwill.
World opinion, however ill-
informed, inconsistent, or fickle it
may be, is nevertheless a factor
which every Government must take
into account, since it demonstrates
more clearly every day how inter-
dependent the different peoples of
the world really are. There are
very few decisions taken by any
State which are not likely, sooner
or later, to have repercussions at the
other end of the globe.
Twenty years ago, I visited Beet-
hoven's birthplace. The extreme
simplicity of this house accorded
well, no doubt, with the memory of
one who had been born, on a day
in December, into a poor home.
And no visitor can forget the long
tragedy of the life which began
within those walls. And yet, I had
not been prepared for the pathetic
humility of that room.
This memory recurred to me for
many years, when I thought of
Germany, and has become a kind of
symbol. After a terrible war, the
German fatherland, torn and
bleeding, looked the embodiment of
wretchedness and isolation.
All its wounds are not yet healed.
It still endures divisions and
countless frustrations. But no
nation in the world is prevented by
its difficulties from stretching out
with all its strength towards that
unique source of hope and peace
which is international collaboration
and the mutual trust of men in the
quest for freedom and justice
