>URIERNESCC
A new generation hears about its rights-and duties. The teacher has not only a good opportunity, but also a great responsibility for helping the child towards a
knowledge of Human Rights, and an understanding of what they mean in the practical term of daily life. But such instruction is still lackina in man v !' : hnnl..
HUMAN RIGHTS IN THE CLASSROOM
I THE children in the elementary class were
having their daily period of news report-. ing. One of the girls read ut a news aper
item which said that the president of their
country was planning to make a visit abroad.
"Yes !", commented one of the children,"he
always goes on trips and spends a lot of govern-
ment money."
"If you were president,"said the teacher,
"would you spend the government's money in
this way ?"
From this moment on it was a verbal free-for-
all, with every child offering his or her opinion.
Finally, the teacher interrupted.
"I am not sure whether the president is right
or not,"she said,"but I am sure that ours is a
great form of government. And do you know
why ? What we are doing and saying here could
never happen in some other countries. If it
were, We might all go to gaol."
As all the children looked incredulous, the
teacher continued :"You see, in some countries
it is a crime to talk against the government or
persons in authority. In a democratic one like
ours, you are free to criticize. You will not go
to gaol for it.
"This freedom is one of the Human Rights.
You are free to receive or give ideas in any way.
This Human Right is called freedom of speech.
Do you have this freedom ?"
"Yes !" chorused the children.
"Then,"asked the teacher,"can you give me
an example ?"
"Well,"said one child,"in one of the daily
papers, there is a column entitled.'We, The
People'. My father said that you can write to
that column and complain about anything."
Another said,.'In a radio programme, I heard
the announcer criticize the mayor of the city."
"Do you like our form of government ?" asked
the teacher.
The unanimous reply put the finishing touch to
this lesson.
What went on in this particular classroom was
just one example of the many methods teachers
employ to bring home to their classes the
meaning of Human Rights. For it is first of all
in school that a systematic approach can be made
to teaching about Human Rights.
From the time a ; child begins his education
until he finishes it as an adolescent or a young
adult, it is the teacher who has a good oppor-
tunity and great responsibility for helping
him towards a knowledge of Human Rights, and
an understanding of what they mean in the
practical terms of daily life.
Of course, the work of spreading knowledge of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
throughout the world cannot be left to schools
alone. All men and women should know and
understand it in order to exercise their rights and
to assume the responsibilities which they imply.
Since 1948, when the Declaration was adopted,
the United Nations has made every effort to
disseminate this knowledge as widely as possible.
But if teaching about rights began with young
people, the results would be far more effective and
lasting, and it is in this connection that education
has a vital role to play. It can give to the indi-
vidual not only the knowledge, but also the atti-
tudes and social values which are indispensable
to an understanding of, and respect for, Human
Rights. But, unfortunately, school programmes
in many places have not yet been altered to make
room for Human Rights teaching.
It is obvious that the development of teaching
about Human Rights is greatly aided in countries
where tolerance and mutual respect between
different nationalities and beliefs is stressed. It
has also been helped in some countries by the
inclusion in civic or history textbooks of facts
about the main international organizations that
have been set up since the war.
Teachers'organizations have stressed the need
for the existence and activities of such organi-
zations to be made more widely known in
schools. They have suggested that one reason
for lack of knowledge is that organizations are
more often than not referred to by their initials
only-which convey nothing to children-and to
the fact that, with some exceptions, children have
no contact with them. Most of them also agree
that the text of the Universal Declaration is
above the heads of children in their charge.
The subject of Human Rights is complex and
controversial. Teaching about them is an inno-
vation for many systems of education. Thus,
before such teaching can be carried out effectively
on a world scale, there are many problems to be
solved.
It was to help in the solution of these problems
that Unesco recently organized a Seminar on
Education for Living in a World Community, with
special reference to the principles of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, at Woudschoten,
Zeist, in Holland.
One of the fundamental objectives of Unesco's
programme is to make Human Rights principles
more widely known and observed. Since the
proclamation of the Universal Declaration,
Unesco has undertaken many activities aimed at
the dissemination and implementation of its
principles, and it is even true to say that all
Unesco's work serves this purpose directly or
indirectly.
Among the most effective of Unesco's educa-
tional methods are international seminars-
meetings attended by specialists and teachers
selected by the governments of Member States.
Those participating make a practical study of
given problems, pool their experience and
compare their ideas, seek the most effective
methods, and prepare materials appropriate for
the techniques thus evolved.
The seminar at Woudschoten was not the first
organized by Unesco for the study of education
for living in a world community. The 63 edu-
cators who met in Holland under the leadership
of Dr. C. E. Beeby, Director of Education for New
Zealand, benefitted by the experience gained at
earlier seminars organized in France, Czecho-
slovakia, England, the United States of America,
Canada and Belgium since 1947.
No general doctrine relative to teaching about
Human Rights has come out of these meetings,
but they have produced a number of principles
and techniques which can help to form the basis
for such a doctrine.
Here are some of the conclusions reached by
the teachers and educators meeting at Woud-
schoten :
To the question : Is it possible effectively to
educate children under 12 in the spirit and prin-
ciples of the Universal Declaration ?, the answer
of the seminar group concerned was"Yes-
providing that a number of special factors are
borne in mind."
During this first stage of schooling, the child
is still too immature for abstract thought, and for
this reason no direct or systematic teaching about
the text of the Universal Declaration should be
attempted.UoVVç, u.. J.. 1JVt ; u..
Certain activities, however, can
be used to develop attitudes and
habits consonant with the prin-
ciples of Human Rights. On the
Continued
on next
page.
NOVEMBER 1952. Page II

Page 12. NOVEMBER 1952 UNESCO
TEACHING ABOUT HUMAN RIGHTS
(Continued from previous page)
basis of these, an intellectual understanding of
the Universal Declaration can be established later
in the educational process.
For instance, certain free activities can be
introduced into the school programmes which
will enable the teacher to discover the child's
individual personality. He can be given certain
responsible jobs, such as helping to keep the lib-
rary neat, and even join in social services which
extend beyond the school itself, including assist-
anCe to old people and invalids, and to needy
schools. Debating clubs and teamwork projects
can also be organized.
Members of the seminar group dealing with
the education of ahildren aged from 12 to 15 years
emphasized that the text of the Universal De-
claration is, because of its legal and abstract
character, still beyond the intellectual grasp of
children of these ages. They felt that what was
needed was a version reducing the Declaration to
its essentials, and revolving around four main
concepts : freedom, equality and justice, fra-
ternity and solidarity, and duty to the community.
These ideas, which are familiar to children, pro-
vide a firm basis for teaching about Human
Rights.
It is the teacher's task to prepare the child to
exercise, demand and deserve Human Rights. To
exercise Human Rights is, first, to understand
their meaning, and second, to apply the principles
of Human Rights to daily living. To demand
them is to work with faith and courage for the
realization of the ideals of the Universal Decla-
ration in national and international life. To
deserve Human Rights is to carry out the duties----'I----------'_. !'. LJ---'l....' ! _"L..-----and responsibilities which corres-
pond with them.
For the achievement of these
purposes, the teacher must arouse
in his pupils an active sympathy
for the principles of Human
Rights. This does not mean that
children should be subjected to a
campaign of blind propaganda ; on
the contrary, the true situation of
Human Rights in the world today
must be made clear to them.
For example, the great difference
between a statement of principles,
such as the Universal Declaration,
and a binding treaty, such as the
projected U. N. Covenant on
. Human Rights should be explained,
and pupils must be made conscious
of the fact that rights can be lost
unless they are defended whenever
and wherever necessary. The
teacher should show that it has
always been necessary to defend
Human Rights.
Most courses of study in the tra-
ditional school curriculum provide
-----. L..-' :"" :'-- --... 11____1__' : --. L'L.-
opportunities for developing the concept of
Human Rights in the minds of the pupils. For
example, in geography, lessons about the living
conditions of people in under-developed countries
give the teacher a chance to stress the needs and
rights of those handicapped by want, ignorance
or disease.
In history, the story of slavery will naturally
direct the attention of the class to the principle
that no person should be held in servitude. In
literature, the lives and works of writers who
have fought for Human Rights offer rich
resources.
When it came to considering how Human
Rights can contribute to better international
understanding, the group started off by reviewing
some of the objectives of education for living in a
world community. To be a good citizen of a
nation where Human Rights are respected was
to be a citizen of the world community, they
declared.
The schools must contribute to the develop-
ment of free, independent personalities (which
were nevertheless capable of self-discipline for
the good of the community). Teachers must
train future citizens who would defend and work
for Human Rights in international as well as
national life.
The third seminar group, which was concerned
with education for young people aged between
15 and 18, began its work by considering the
environment in which youth lives in different
parts of the world. Folk and social traditions,
family customs, religion, philosophy and the
political and economic organization of life in
various countries were studied, each member
contributing information about his own nation.
One of the educational methods most appro-
priate to children in their teens, they declar-
ed, is group discussion. It is largely by this that
the pupils begin to formulate and to make precise
the nature of the problems which face them, to
sift and evaluate their experiences, and to think
creatively. In group discussion they acquire
habits of mutual respect, tolerance, intellectual
integrity and co-operation.
Members of the Unesco Seminar on Education for Living in a World Community
were received by Queen Juliana of the Netherlands at her Soestdijk residence.
Photo shows Queen Juliana (centre) with, on her right, M. Jaime Torres Bodet,
Unesco's Director-General, and, on her left, Dr Beeby, who headed the seminar.
Even very young children can be shown their rights
and responsibilities. At the school where this
photo was taken, the children have already begun
to develop the fundamental civic qualities-respect
for the rights of others, a sense of solidarity, disci-
pline and responsibility, as well as a sinking of
individual interests for the sake of the general good.
Another most instructive and convincing
method is experimentation. One conclusive
example of this was provided by a social studies
class (ages about 16-17) which was engaged in a
study of democracy and dictatorship. A number
of students expressed dissatisfaction with
democracy because of its alleged inefficiency.
Dictatorship was more efficient, they said, in
getting things done. They suggested that more
dictation by the teacher and less student parti-
cipation might be desirable in their own class.
The teacher proposed that the class be operated
as a dictatorship for two weeks. At the end of
this time, the students were to choose which
method they preferred for the rest of the year.
The students accepted the proposal eagerly,
and the teacher did his part in thorough-going
fashion. He strictly proscribed all class activities.
He acted as sole judge of all debatable ques-
tions. He even appointed two students to serve
as.'secret police"and to report to him daily on
the private actions of their classmates. Each
class period opened with the teacher's reading of
these reports.
Most of the students were ready to end the
experiment at the end of the first week, but the
"teacher-dictator"was unyielding. At the end
of two weeks, the class voted unanimously to
return to its accustomed democratic procedures.
But not all aspects of Human Rights teaching
can or should be based on group activity. The
pupil is not only a member of a community, but
also an individual in his own right, and he must
be given the opportunity to develop his own
personality fully and freely. For example, in the
cultivation of taste in art, music and poetry, the
pupil should be allowed to pursue his own
interests and to express himself creatively
without being subject to group pressures or
evaluations. There are times, too, when the ado-
lescent needs to work alone at a given problem.
But there are many activities which may pro-
vide experience of co-operation with others, such
as debates, panel discussions, the commemoration
Through group discussions children acquire habits
of mutual respect, tolerance, and co-operation-all
valuable assets to aid their understanding and
daily observation of the principles of Human Rights.
Many activities which involve
co-operation between home,
school and community can be
organized. In some schools, youth
councils have been formed to de-
termine the extent to which
Human Rights are enjoyed by all
who live in the community.
The role of the teacher In these
experiences is highly important.
He can join with the group in
planning and executing activities,
and should demonstrate through
his own personality and behaviour
the meaning of respect for Human
Rights.
Also it was felt pupils in the
15-18 age group could study the
text of the Declaration with profit.
They should be made thoroughly
familiar with its special, political,
and philosophical implication.
Whether this study should form
part of the civics, his. tory or social
sciences course was a matter for
those responsible for planning
curricula.
.. .. L- <In--------L1-. __-------.....But in the 15 to 18 age group there are many
who are not continuing with their schooling for
economic or other reasons. However, they too
need to be given opportunities to learn about the
Universal Declaration. The way to solve this
problem was to rely on youth organizations and
other voluntary agencies. Where such agencies
do not exist, the educational authorities should
assume responsibiilty.
A survey carried out in 13 countries by an
international federation of teachers'associations
. showed that, generally speaking, both the autho-
rities and the teachers are sympathetic towards
teaching about Human Rights. But in some
places there is still much to be done to remove an
all-too-frequent apathy or passive tolerance.
Teachers in one country reported :"We receive
neither encouragement nor discouragement from
the authorities or the children's families. What
We do meet is passive resistance, reinforced by a
superficial scepticism. Those who express it
point to existing situations in the world which
counter the Declaration's egalitarian theories".
Those in another country declared :"Teachers
here just cannot forget that many of their pupils
lead lives of terrible hardship, and that it is
difficult to teach respect for Human Rights to
children whose most elementary rights are not
respected."
Practical solutions have been suggested by
the Secretary-General of an international fede-
ration of teachers'associations, who declared :
"We have to win the support of the teachers,
first by giving them information, and then by
giving them help. Most teachers regard the task
as impossible, do not know where to begin, and
give up the attempt. They need to be provided
not only with literature on the subject, but also
with teaching aids suitable for young children.
"The task will take some time, and should be
undertaken jointly by the teachers'associations
and the teachers'training colleges. The respon-
sible authorities should be persuaded to give
encouragement, assistance, and, if necessary,
official instruction."
of special days, the publication of school news-
papers and magazines, the organization of model
assemblies, amateur dramatics, experimental
work in the natural sciences, club activities, sports
and student exchanges. ....... e...
