Page 6. NOVEMBER 1952
UNESCO
THE FREEDOM OF THE ARTIST AND
HIS DUTY TO MANKIND
ARTISTS always dislike a lack of precision. The artist
has to take hold of an idea and translate it into some-
thing concrete-a picture, a statue, a symphony or a
poem.
Those who met in Venice at the end of September for the
International Conference of Artists (organized under Unesco
auspices) displayed this characteristic of their calling when
they discussed the problems of freedom for a whole week,
without for a moment dwelling on theoretical considerations
regarding the concepts of freedom or rights.
There were nearly 300 of them from 44 countries. The
questions they asked and to which they sought to give
unanimous answers were :
What are the requirements for free creative work ?
What conditions make it possible, and what is the price
that may possibly have to be paid for them ?
How can the real message of a work of art be brought
home to men and women ?
How can the integrity of a work be defended against the
enemies of art, who are usually the enemies of freedom
as well ?
How, finally, can artists p) ay a usefu) part in Unesco's
work to secure these ends ?
These are practical questions, questions whose solution
involves technical considerations and sometimes economics.
The painter knows that he may work as he pleases-provided
he has enough to live on. But he wishes his painting to
live for others and, if possible, for all the world. So do the
sculptors and the architects.
All three dream of working together and welding their
various arts into that unity which gave the world the Greek
temple, the mediaeval church and the Renaissance palace.
After long years apart, they desire not merely association
but union, and recognize that union is impossible without State
support, public understanding and the international patronage
of cultural organizations.
At Venice, they studied ways in which such help might be
provided, and laid the foundations for their own collabora-
tion.
Once their personal independence is safeguarded, nothing
counts for so much with the dramatist and the writer as the
freedom of the theatre and the freedom of the printed word.
The problems which then arise seem rather far removed
from the literary sphere, since they relate to subsidies, mono-
polies, the quota system, taxes, charges, and all the intricacies
of copyright.
Writers are generally held to be individualists, but the ideas
expressed by those at this conference gave no evidence of
selfish interests. They were more concerned with the position
of literature and the drama than with the personal status of
the novelist, poet or dramatist ; they were trying to discover
the best ways of maintaining and increasing the influence of
their art in contemporary society.
The composers were working along the same lines. The
only effective method of establishing music as a force (in a
world which seldom recognizes a masterpiece until it is at
least a century old), seemed to them to be education. They
are anxious to introduce musical education at least for children
and young peoples, if not for the public in general.
by Georges Fradier
For the circulation and wider performance of their works,
for the protection of their personal interests, composers rely
on such organizations as the International Music Council and
Unesco ; long-term collaboration is the only real means of
dealing adequately with such problems.
vastly, there were representatives of the film industry in
Venice, glad, as they said, of this"official recognition of the
film as a form of art."They also wasted no time over
definitions or artistic criteria.
If films or to take their place as a genuine form of art,
the film industry, even more than architecture and the drama,
stands in need of sound finance and, of course, sound policy.
The discussions among its representatives at the conference
dealt mainly with the questions of assistance from the public
authorities, the reduction of taxes and duties, and State
subsidies.
But what of independence ? If all artists in their separate
spheres look to the public authorities for tax exemptions, help
and subsidies, what becomes of the independence which they
are usually so swift to defend ?
Not for one moment during the conference did they seek
to conceal this apparent contradiction. In their view, a
world without art is unthinkable, so that it seems perfectly
natural to them that the public authorities should give help
to art, to which they themselves have devoted their fives.
If it is suggested that the authorities in question might regard
such help as a pretext for control or direction, the artist will
ask :"own what, grounds ? I am not asking for charity ; I
claim your help in the name of freedom itself."
The Venice conference therefore called on all States to
"deist from imposing censorship in any form upon the products
of the mind, to refrain from restricting freedom or compro-
mising the position of the creative artist, and to recognize no
obstacles to the free movement of works of art."
There was no talk of rights for artists as the privilege of
a chosen few. On the contrary, it was the Declaration of
Human Rights which seemed to be naturally and necessarily
invoked. Roberto Rossellini sought to relate the aspirations
and claims of the film industry to the principle of the
right to participate in cultural life.
At the end of its last meeting, the Conference adopted
enthusiastically a resolution, submitted on behalf of the Italian
and French delegations by Guido Piovene and Jules Remains,
which declared :"Respect for the dignity of the individual
is the prerequisite for any form of creative activity... These
fundamental requirements are of universe) application and are
part of the body of Human Rights, which it is the duty of
artists to help in safeguarding..."
It was clearly in order to provide that help that the Venice
Conference sought ways in which artists could be associated
with Unesco's work. The eagerness of artists to work with
this Organization was fu)) y demonstrated-first of all, by the
number of people of outstanding prestige who had accepted
Unesco's invitation. More clearly every day, however, the
conference showed its confidence in Unesco and in the Organi-
zation's influence and impartiality.
A whole series of resolutions dealing with sociological, legal
and educational problems, and with the life of the arts, are
addressed directly to Unesco, soliciting the Organization's
services and offering to share its responsibilities. One of the
most important decisions from this point of view was that to
establish an International Association for the Plastic Arts,
which is to form another link in the chain of international co-
operating bodies, and which Unesco is to sponsor and organize
in the first stage of its devetopment*.
In short, the Conference showed clearly the readiness of
artists to collaborate with an Organization, one of whose main
aims is to uphold the right of every man and woman to a
share in cultural life.
This right is commonly regarded as a remote ideal. But
it is obvious that such an ideal can have no more fervent
champions than those who are not merely the representa-
times, but the artisans of culture, and in whose hands its deve-
lopment lies.
Referring to what he calls"combination workshops", Le
Corbusier spoke of the need for combining"all the arts which
express man's emotions-music, drama, the ballet, literature
and... the fi) m-at) the embodiments of a poetry which is
indeed the very essence of man's reason for lying."
The rights of the artist are thus seen to be not merely one
facet of Human Rights, but their very symbol, if not, indeed,
the fundamental condition for all other rights.
In the words of Thornton Wilder, the Venice conference
re-affirmed"two principles which the world is in constant
danger of forgetting : that the artist, through his creation,
has been at all times a force that draws men together, and
reminds them that the things which men have in common
are greater than the things that separate them, and that the
work of the artist is the clearest example of the operation
of freedom in the human spirit."
Thus the conference came back, as it closed, to the ques-
tion of freedom, after long and detailed discussions of the
practical conditions for the freedoms of every day.
At the inaugural session in the Doges'Palace, Unesco's
Director-General had also spoken of this problem and had
drawn attention to the heavy obligations which must always
go with freedom."There are two ways in which the artist can
be stove", said M. Torres Bodet,"the first is if he is obliged
to bow to orders outside his art ; the second is to imagine that
he is free in proportion as he rejects the rules which are the
strength of all art..."
Thornton Wilder, in his closing remarks, echoed these
words :"Freedom presents itself to an artist, not as a void,
but as a severe summons. Of all men, artists and men of
religion have the clearest vision of what freedom is ; and we
live in fear lest we abuse it."
* The original members of this Association are all
the painters. sculptors and engravers who were pre-
sent at the Venice conference. From among them, an
Executive Council was elected with the following offi-
cers,'president, Gino Severini (Italy), vice-president,
Anàré Lhote (France), secretary-srenera, Berto Lar-
dera (Italy). Its members are,'Henry Billings (U. S. A.),
Marko Celelxm<Yvic (Yugoslavia), Douglas Dundas
(Austria), Charles Leplae (Belgium), Yoshinobu Ma-
suda (Japan), otto Skold (Sweden), Coert Steynberg
<Union of South Africa), Graham Sutherland (United
Kingdom).
HENRY
MOORE,
sculptor
GIUSEPPE
'NGARETT).
poet
ARTHUR
ONEGGER,
composer
TAHA
iUSSEIN,
writer
--
Nothing is more significant of the
fragmentary character of our civiliza-
tion than the separation of the arts.
And, if a unity could be achieved
- say in the building of a new town-
and planners, architects, sculptors,
painters and all other types of artists
could work together from the begin-
ning, that unity would be artificial,
because it was imposed on a group. of
individuals, and not spontaneously
generated by a way of life.
Poetry, like art, cannot be JUdged
by criteria of practical usefulness ; but
its freedom conditions all freedom.
To imagine it could be divorced from
art would be an absurd denial of the
autonomy of the human being, a denial
of the age-old aspirations of mankind,
- a denial of man, for it would
amount to denying his claim to im-
mortality. For the arts are the sole
expression of the breath of humanity,
'rom which stems a duty of the State.
The number of concerts given
increases day by day, but the number
of works performed diminishes year by
year. This applies equally to the
innumerable recitals given by pianists,
who confine themselves strictly to the
three accepted composers. The public
should be led to take the same interest
in new aspects of music as in litera-
ture, drama, films and painting. And
music should be defended against the
exploitation of virtuosity in every form.
The writer's duty, though not easy to
fulfil, is perfectly simple to state :
to preserve his integrity. To do this,
he must be honest with himself and
with others. He must unhesitatingly
reject any interference with his
literary and artistic ideals. He must
ignore threats and promises like.
In these circumstances he should
soon come ta realize that he must
be at the service of truth, and o'
truth atone.
The theatre's spiritual aid is
9reot) y needed by a suffering
humanity. That is why the
theatre must receive gov-
___L___L'n.. L__.. _L-__ : ___1efnmento) ossistonce, preferabty through regional
rather than federal agencies. And it must be free
of political control. The theatre as a form of art
sheds a light that governments should keep burning
so that, at every pause of his journey, man might
look at himself, and by what he sees, be encouraged
to continue to his destiny.
The painter with a genuine
love of his art is a king in his
own right-however diminutive
his kingdom, however small his
stature. This is true royalty, and cannot be wrested
from you (the artist). You need never abdicate the
throne that you won without yiotence, and you will
leave a happier memory than many a crowned
monarch, for people will understand your work and
they will feel its message-perhaps until the end
of all time.
It is technically feasible to
provide ideol, well-sited housing
for whole populations within 0
relatiyely short period. Nothing,............... I. 1
however, is being done. Why ? Briefly, because the
pace of social readjustment in the modern world is
still teisurety. It has never speeded up to the
quicker beat of the process of swift transition
initiated by the Industrial Revolution, when the
traditional craft techniques of manufacture yielded
to the industrial technique of mass production.
MARC CONNOLLY.
dramatist
GEORGES ROUAULT,
painter
LUCIO COSTA.
architect
