JULY 1952. Page 13
There is a striking contrast between public library readers in England and India. In the average
English public library (above) women predominate and wives tend to borrow books for their husbands.
In India, women are comparatively rare visitors. In English libraries (below) the proportion of children
is very high, declining sharply as children leave school. The age group between 15 and 25 is least
represented. In Delhi, teenagers are a library's most devoted users. (CO ! Photos. British Crown copyright.)
One of Unesco's aims is to encourage the development of public library services for ail people
whether they live in cities or rural districts. Delhi's Public Library project will shortly include a
mobile rural service, It will be similar to the bookmobile (below) in British Columbia, Canada.
ONE WOMAN
STARTED IT ALL
Two years ago the Greek island
of Aegina had no public library.
Today it has. This is largely due
to the initiative of one woman.
by Beatrix COLLlNGHAA1
FIVE minutes'walk up the village street from Aeginaharbour, on a corner to the left, the visitor may
notice an interesting-looking old house standing
back from the road. In the garden of the house, which
was once the home of John Capodistrias, the first Presi-
dent of modern Greece, there stands a new building, small
and plain, of island stone. It is the first modern public
lending library in Greece. And the emphasis is on the
words modern and leading.
Most towns in Greece have a public library. Occa-
sionally, as at Salonica, Patras, Corfu and Chios, they
have very fine ones, but they are only public in the sense
that they are property of the municipality. The main
concern of the librarian is generally to conserve his books,
rather than to facilitate their use. Readers may not
borrow, nor are they free to browse amongst the shelves.
It was, I believe, Chios which took the initiative in open-
ing a small lending section-but the arrangement is
regarded as a conce. ssion, whereas at Aegina the outlook is
quite different. You can see that at a glance.
Its bright room-tastefully decorated with pictures
and the odd vase of flowers, with shelves arranged accord-
ing to the international Dewey system and well sign-
posted-is a revolution in Greek library practice.
Entering behind a village boy with the usual close-
cropped hair, I was greatly moved at seeing him go
through the routine of returning his book, taking his
ticket, choosing one or two volumes, and sitting down to
sample a little of each before making up his mind which
to take home. A simple act, but, to my eye, historic.
It all began two years ago. The initiative came from an
official of the Ministry of Education, Mrs. Peppa Xeflouda,
who, since long before the war, had followed with lively
interest the development of the public library movement
throughout the world.
In 1948, she had an opportunity to see for herself. As
a guest of the British Council, she took a course of study
at the University of London School of Librarianship and,
subsequently, with a Unesco Fellowship, visited libraries
of many kinds in Britain, France and Scandinavia.
Rural library methods seemed best suited to her country,
and on her return home she sought an opportunity to
experiment. The chief obstacle was lack of money, but,
even so, much might be done with the existing libraries,
given the will.
By 1949, the outlook was encouraging. A General
Council of Libraries was formed with the object of pro-
moting the study of modern methods of librarianship, and
shortly afterwards an Act of Parliament authorized the
Minister of Education to allocate money for libraries.
The amount was small, but the principle was established.
About the same time, a hundred or so librarians from
all over Greece attended a fortnight's course at the United
States Information Service Library. There were useful
discussions, and various plans were formulated, but months
went by and nothing actually happened. Mrs. Xeflouda,
however, was not discouraged : she determined to produce
a working example of a modern library. And her thoughts
turned to her own island home of Aegina.
The mayor, schoolteachers, tradesmen, all kinds of
people came forward with offers of help when she made
her plan known. The Ministry of Education also gave its
blessing, and provided money for roof, windows and doors
to be added to a half-completed building left with un-
conscious forethought by the Germans.
Old book-cases were found in the town hall and re-
modelled like last year's hat. The carpenter who did this
also constructed a professional-looking periodicals rack,
and an issue counter with the right kind of drawers and
fittings. The necessary wood was given by the mayor,
Mr. Hadzis, and Mrs. Xeflouda presented the catalogue
cabinet.
All was ready now for the books. In the circumstances,
these had to be donations, and they came from far and
wide. Many were the gift of interested people in Aegina
and Athens, including publishers and writers, but in
addition there arrived sizeable contributions from overseas
through Unesco, notably from the New York Public
Library, the CARE Children's Book Fund, the Lord Mayor
of London and the British and Foreign Bible Society.
Especially useful was the gift of $50 worth of Unesco
Book Coupons, which sufficed to purchase a complete set
of Greek classical text. s and a variety of reference books.
Months. of preparatory work had to be done before the
public could be admitted. Mrs. Xeflouda and the present
(unpaid) librarian, Miss Georgia Elia, dealt with these
preliminaries at weekends, with enthusiastic help from a
band of capable boys and girls who labelled and numbered
the books, and even scrubbed the floor in readiness for
the opening ceremony which took place last October.
Now the public library is a feature of everyday life in
Aegina, and its future is assured because the Ministry of
Education and the General Council of libraries are making
a n ()'u ! i ! r p-ontribution towards its runnins exnenses.
Nor is this the whole story. Access to books quickens
curiosity, and so the suggestion was made quite spon-
taneously that classes should be held in the library. The
majority of people wanted first of all to learn some
English, so a teacher was found to come and give lessons
every Sunday morning. Other classes are being planned.
Thus Aegina is demonstrating how a public library can
be not only a store-house of knowledge and ideas, but also
a power station generating new intellectual activity in
the community it serves.
(This article is reproduced from the Athens News.)
bURIER
