. 2, 000 YEARS
OF MEXICAN ART v
by Jean Cassou
Curator, Musée National d'Art Moderne, Paris
JUNE) 952. Page 3
An exhibition on Mexican art, 01 exceptionally wide scope opened last month at the Paris Museum 01 Modern Art.Its aim is not merely to oller connoisseurs a chance to admire Mexican pointings, statues or rare art objects.
It is lar more than that, lor it reveals a great civilization which is really understood only by a relative minority
01 travellers and specialists. What the exhibition oilers us is an opportunity to comprehend the people of Mexico, not
Irom the outside in the political or ethnological sense but deeply and fNoloundly by tracing their spiritual and aesthetic
development. On this occasion, too, the Mexican Government has placed at the disposal 01 European radio stations
collections 01 recordings 01 its authentic folk music and its modern symphonic music. This great cultural event, then,
goes far beyond the scope 01 the ordinary art exhibition. The COURIER is devoting these page ! to the Mexican
exhibition 01 are not merely because 01 the value al the great works shown, but even more important, because 01 the
unusual opportunity it oilers lor a better and richer understanding between peoples. The article by M. Jean Cassou,
published bellow, is prevented in this same spirit-not as an account 01 she exhibition itself but as an attempt to
explain the fundamental continuity of Mexican culture expressed through the ants.
WHAT an awesome, startling experience
it must be to discover a new world
of undreamed-of expanse and with
an even more undreamed-of past. Can we
who have never had this experience, ever
hope to imagine the profound agitation
and emotion that must have gripped the
Spanish Conquistadores when they beheld for
the first time the vast new continent of
America and became aware of the long, long
ages of its history ? They had the revelation
of a whole universe in time and space ; a uni-
verse hermetically sealed, totally strange and
with an utterly distinct unity of its own
which was to persist down to our own
time. Everv element from the outside was
to be assimilated and absorbed so that this
unity remained unshakeably whole. Today,
there exists a phenomenon we can call Mexi-
can, a world that is purely Mexican. The
exhibition of Mexican art which opened
last month at the Musée National d'Art Mo-
derne in Paris, following an agreement be-
tween the Mexican and French Governments,
bears witness to this enduring phenomenon
which is Mexico and to its fundamental
continuity.
When the Conquistadores, or Teules
(Lords) as they were called, set foot in the
new wor) d, there was revealed to them a huge
Many centuries separate the pre-Columbian terracotta figurine of an old'Hunchback' (upper right) from the'Head of a Woman' (lower left) by the contemporary Mexican artist, Julio Castellanos, who is relatively
little known outside his country. The two works, seen together, convey something of the essential contin-
uity of Mexican art through the ages.
continent stretching out to the other Sea
beyond, and an uninterrupted span of em-
pires and monuments with their epic sequen-
ces of gods, laws and customs. The new-
comers, however, had their epic dreams, too,
and incredible good fortune was to make
these come true. That which they had so
passionately dreamed in their hours of idle-
ness, when the minds of all of them were
filled with the fabulous fancies of their early
childhood, they now were actually living.
They were living a romance of chivalry, each
of them Amadis of Gaul himself, the knight-
errant mounted on his charger, each of them
a Knight of the wheel or a Knight of the
Cross.
For with them, Iwhen they landed, they
brought the material and spiritual things of
the world they knew, their myths and estab-
lished beliefs, their arms, their animals and
their technical skills. They appeared at a
time when their world had reached new
heights of power and entered a new era of
global politics and aspirations. Indeed, a
brilliant panoply of strength and a solidly
organized machine supported the dreams
which dazzled their imagination.
And so, the Conquistadores pitted their
myths and their fantasies against the fables
of the unknown world, and from the vast,
confused battle which ensued, new dreams
were to emerge, new ideas and new forms no
less remarkable than the old.
One thing, however, was always to
remain, potent and indestructible as ever-
the original spark of Indian genius. In fact,
before the coming of Cortes, the native genius
of Mexico had expressed itself with such
powerful intensity and vigour that it is not
surprising that its burning, all-consuming
force has persisted down through the ages.
Scholars who work constantly with the
comparative method, as well as the man-in-
the-street who automatically draws parallels
with the things familiar to him, may find
similarities between certain forms of art of
the pre-Columbian period and those of
ancient Egypt, the old Mediterranean civili-
zations or the Far East.
And yet, when we consider the treasures
unearthed in the temples of Chichen-Itza or
Monte-AIban, we cannot evade the thought
that here is something underived, inalienably
original and whole ; here, indeed, is an art.
form of astounding beauty, which if it must
(Continued on next pore.)

and style alike a power that expresses the concentration
or a tight closed core, a power primarily hermetic,
coiled like that of the symbolic serpent whose
expansion can only be slow and terrible.
The Indian genius, with its patient im-
passive features, its opaqueness, its iron,
and its aggressiveness, which might be
ncalled a combination of mineral
matter and wild beast, was to find a
note of harmony in certain rhythms
of the Spanish spirit. Above wall,
the distinct fascination death had
for both, the sarcastic reflections
each made on death, were to
come together here. Two peso-
ples were to intermingle, both off-
noble stock, both endowed witch.
the highest genius, both accus-
tomed-and this is truly excep-
tional in the history of human
philosophy-to regarding death
as a sport. This single encounter
was to make possible a new
Mexico, rich in new and amazing
spiritual possibilities.
The humanism of the Iberian
peninsula, which extends over a.
considerable part of the globe, is the
result of such encounters. Varied fac-
tors, each carried to the maximum degree
of intensity, have contributed to its para-
mount originality. The aspects it assumed in
Mexico are no less striking, particularly in the case
of Colonial Baroaue art. This style, already sufficiently
In these mural paintings, the people have found their
own style, true to those they have used fer centuriesand expressing what they want to say with
perfect artistic dignity. They tell of their
past, of all their struggles and adventures
and vicissitudes, of their sufferings, their
work and their wars, of all their hopes
and their passions.
All this is of especial interest to us
today since modern art is in search
of new applications to architecture
and monuments and hence as a
service to the community. During
the past 50 years new ideas have
been developed in the plastic arts
and these, as more and more
persons everywhere are urging
- need to be applied and
adapted to mural painting. The
example set by Mexican fresco
painter, therefore, deserves
our serious consideration. The
success of this medium is
undoubtedlv due to two vital
factors : first, Mexican art for the
E past 2000 years, has been profoundly
and essentially of the people ; second,
Mexico has had a remarkable history
as a nation which has given its art many
inspiring themes. Of course, every people
has its history and expresses itself through
its art. But all art, however evolved and scholarly
it may seem to us, has a basic element which
"f (m" òiT'p. Uv from the People.
Page 4. JUNE t952 UNESCO
A SYNTHESIS OF TWO GREAT CIVILIZATIONS
(Continued from previous page.)
be placed alongside the highest art forms of other great civilizations
of the past, it is only because, like them, it is matchless and reaches
the sublime.
If, then, we are truly to understand the phenomenon of Mexico,
it is above all towards its originality and vigour that woe must look.
Mexico and Peru were parts of the continent occupied by the
Indians where the White man found a great civilization. In
Mexico, the Indian civilization had attained a remarkable degree
of advancement ; in fact, it was so advanced that it had reached the
ledge of arrested growth and was beginning to decline and disin-
tegrate. Despite the desperate stand af Cuauhtemoc, the last of the
Aztec emperors, and the heroic battles which for a short time drove
the conquerors out of the city of Mexico, there was a sad fatalism
in the way the Aztec Empire accepted its fall and saw its fate as the
fulfilment of ancient prophecies. This was aided by the rebellion
of the Indian tribes subdued by the Aztecs and the help many of
them gave to the invaders to hasten the collapse.
But perhaps this fatalism and melancholy are parts of the very
genius of Mexico, and a permanent element which humanizes its
frightful-cruelty. The love of flowers and of other short-lived
things which the song-poems of King Netzahualcoyotl evoke so
movingly ; the meditative spirit : a minute and infinite patience-
all of these are traits of the Mexican soul. In their buildings and
sculpture one feels the weight of a massive, melancholy despon-
dency. The implacable geometrical forms, the square-cut jaws,
the uncompromising decorative motifs, the whole Cyclopean weight
of Mexican monuments speaks. of a gravity of mind inclined
towards macabre, unfathomed mysteries. There is in this spirit
intoxicating and intoxicated, was carried by Mexico's tropical pas-
sion to an unparalleled degree of richness and exuberance. For the
miracles introduced by the Whites were permeated by the terrifying
prestige of the old gods which had not been forgotten. This survives
even up to today. In the same way, the keen subtle spirit of the
Indian survives in Mexican speech with its soft sibilant inflexions
and its rhetoric even more ingenious and persuasive than Castilian
Spanish.
just as the Mexican genius surpassed Baroque in the field of art,
so it surpassed Conceptism (1) in poetry. Sor Juana Ines de la
Cruz, author of the First Dream-the admirable lyric description of
an adventure into the mind-was undoubtedly the greatest of
Gongora's successors and his equal as a poet and thinker.
The countries of Spanish America, which were all former pro-
vinces of Spain, have still retained a provincial air that is at once
touching, old-fashioned and quaintly picturesque. Yet beneath
these 18th and 19th century provincial ways the keen observer can
distinguish the differences between Chile and Argentina or Bolivia.
As for Mexico, its mark of individuality is easily recognized. And
perhaps it is not one of the lesser thrills of the Paris exhibition on
Mexican art that visitors will be able to discover for themselves
the charm of some of the religious pictures or portraits of the
Colonial period which reveal certain ingenuous qualities, it is true.
but which nevertheless are so very delicate and elegant and almost
clever. In fact, as far as the people of Mexico are concerned, we
can always believe and appreciate their ingenuousness. For their
native, unadulterated qualities are their guides in art, and popular
inspiration, for them, is always right. Technique and skill are only
derivatives of such native sources and have neither been learned nor
acquired from outside.
If we wish reallv to understand Mexican civilization, be it under
the domination of the Aztec Emperors or that of the Castilian Vice-
roys, or since Mexico became a sovereign state and nation, we must
This basic element i's clearly seen in a painter like Rufino
Tamayo whose name is always linked with those of the three
famous fresco painters of Mexico. Although he has done less mural
work than they, he is nonetheless one of the foremost representa-
tives of contemporary Mexican expression. The is something
poetically savage, mysterious and totally strange in all his works.
One fundamental thing stands out above everything else in
Mexican art. I have said this before and repeat it because one is
constantly brought back to it : the high degree of popular inspiration
which is so particularly rich and dynamic in Mexico's art. Add
to this the passionate temperament of the Mexicans, reflected in the
dramatic history which they have lived and forged by themselves.
As a people, the Mexicans are intensely individual. Their indivi-
duality has persisted through the strangest vicissitudes and even
because of them. We can see it, unchanged, in the civilizations
which preceded the White man and in those where he was present.
We can see it alike in the ancient gods and in the Christian images,
in the frescoes which express the collective spirit and in the easel
paintings that voice a personal sensibility. We can see it in the
masterpieces of art and in the cheap products of traditional crafts.
The singularity does not change. It is not contaminated ; nor is it
weakened or diminished. It persists like an undying flame, a force
of gravity, an everbeating heart.
(1) Concept ism was an offshoot, of Gongorism, a Spanish litf'rary style
of the 16the centUl1//. ch ich hwi a strung influence on Mexican literature ofthe lith centunj. It was to literature what Baroque was to archi ecture,
marked by complicates, allstruse images. SOl'lnès JUaJw de la Cruz, a
Mexican nun, is considacd the greatest literanj figure of Spanish-Arnerican
colonial times, Her work is extrem,. {'ly subtle arid abstract in thought
thouljh not in language.
All photos on Mexican art in this issue were chosen with the kind
collaboration of Dr. Fernando Gamboa, of the Instituto Nacional de Bellas
Artes, Mexico, organizing director of the Paris exhibition. Photo, above,
is a huge Mayan disc showing a pelota (ball) player. Around edge is a
calendar in hieroglyphics.
always turn to the people, that is turn back to the original native
population which must always serve as our background. Wherever
influences have combined and intermingled in Mexican history, we
can always find the spontaneous initiative of the people colouring
and guiding them. That is why the works of modern Mexican art
which are most likely to please us are those we call"primitive"
or"naïve". But all modern Mexican art is naive and primitive.
This is, in fact, the highest compliment we can pay it. It appears
to ups : something like an explosion of the primitive, naive spirit and
of the crude essence of the people. So it expressed itself in the
Revolution of 1910, the second emancipation of the Mexican people
after their first struggle for Independance. From then on, the
Mexican genius in art developed freely and completely on its own.
Once freed of their fetters and complexities, all the elements of
this art, which'had been confirmed in the course of Mexico's long
history, asserted themselves as one single hermetic force of expres-
sion. These elements should be recognized and accepted as they
are, without our expecting them to conform to our own familiar
standards since modern Mexican art can be judged only against
Mexican art as a whole. The one element in it we should look for
is the inherent strength which derives from the Indian civilizations
such as the Zapotec and the Mayan and we should desist from
comparing its innovations and styles with modern European art.
Mexican art is the expression of its people ; it describes, defines
and portrays them in a natural easy manner since it is essentially
popular. The large frescoes of José Clemente Orozco, Diego Rivera
and Alfaro Siqueiros are not works produced for an aristocratic
court or on official commission even though they were completed
with the help of government funds. They are products of the people
focussed on themselves and fixing their actions in image.

ECO COURIER JUNE 1952. Page 5
'SMHDNG MASK'Pre-Columbian Totonac Indian mask
discovered in the Vera Cruz area of the Gulf of Mexico.
'EYES W) TH TEARS'Pre-Co) umbian Huastec Indian
head discovered in the Vera Cruz area of the Gulf of Mexico.
COATLICUE is the greatest monumental work of sculpture of Aztec art. It is the goddess of the
earth, representing the abstract ideas of death (destruction) and life (generation). The head is
formed by the jaws of two serpents ; the feet by the claws of a bird ; the torso by skulls and severed
hands and hearts. It is considered one of the most extraordinary works of mythical-magic surrealism.
TARASCAN ART. Unlike the art of the great Aztec, Mayan, Zapotec and Toltec civilizations which are essentially religious, the pre-Columbian art of the
Tarascan Indians of west Mexico (now the State of Michoacan, site of Unesco's fundamental education centre) is entirely non-religious. Their ceramics show
ordinary men and women, dancers, warriors (photo, left), nursing mothers, kneeling women (photo, right), scenes of love, fruits, animals, and plants. It is a
delightful, imaginative art, filled with gaiety and the joy of true artistic creation. (photos Gise/. Fr. und-Molnum)

Page 6. JUNE 95X
UNESCO
'BONAMPAK'-THE PAINTED WALL
Mural paintings have played an important part in the artistic expression of Mexico since pre-Columbian times.
Only four years ago, new Mayan ruins were discovered in the jungles of the State of Chiapas. The Indians called
these'Bonampak'or the'painted wa) !' because the walls of the temples were covered with frescoes. A
fragment of one of these is shown below. Above, part of huge contemporary mural, telling history of Mexico,
painted by Diego Rivera in the Palacio Nacional, Mexico City.
BAROQUE AND
FOLK ART
The Baroque style which reached a peak of
development in the 18th century was carried to
the New World from Spain where its fanciful and
profusely ornamented interpretation by the archi-
tect José de Churriguera had given rise to the
name I Churriguresque"It quickly became an
idiom of wide currency in Mexico and all Spanish
America. In Mexico, a particular richness resulted
(sometimes referred to as'uttra-baroque') from
the fusion of churriguresque with the native
Indian taste for exuberance of heavy detail. This
is seen, for example, in the statues, ornaments
and jewelry of the ancient Mayas and Aztecs.
Today, Colonial Baroque art can be found almost
everywhere in Mexico. One of the masterpieces
of this style is the Sanctuary of Ocotlan in the
State of Tlaxcala (top photo). The church of
Saint Mary Tonantzintla (detail in centre photo)
in the State of Puebla, is another. Even in Mexi-
co's contemporary folk art, which is so rich,
varied and imaginative, the mark of Baroque is
still frequently evident (bottom photo of present
day terracotta folk representation of'Adam and
Eve'shows this influence).

COURIER JUNE 9S2. Page 7


