MARCH 1952 Page I I-UNESCO COURIER
BETWEEN the time the Institute for
the Young Blind of Paris originally
published louis Braille's system of
simple raised dots in 1829, and the re-
quest made to Unesco in 1949 to help
rationalize the Babel in Braille usage in
many parts of the world, 120 years have
elapsed.
The first 50 years witnessed a stubborn,
last-ditch battle by conservative groups to
maintain the old forms of embossing.
Then came 70 years during which the ori-
ginal Braille method had to compete
with modified and reconstructed forms of
itself.
Almost from the start, enthusiasts of
the Braille idea in many. countries began
juggling the dots around in different com-
binations. Soon the same patterns of six
dots came to be used to express different
letters not only in different languages but
even in the same language.For over 70 years, on both sides of the
Atlantic, a virtual civil war was fought
between the numerous adaptations of
Braille, with the blind themselves some-
times forgotten in the din.
In Great Britain, for example, the Bible
had already been printd in no fewer than
five systems by 1868. In the same year,
Dr. Thomas R. Armitage, together with a
group of other blind men, founded the
British and Foreign Blind Association
(now the National Institute for the Blind)
which was to play an important role in
printing and disseminating Braille books
and furthering the cause of Braille
throughout the world. After a study of
the various British types, the group
decided in favour of the original Braille.
In the United States, three arrangements
came into use. One group adopted French
Braille, as Britain had done. Another
modified many of the signs on the prin-
ciple of the fewest dots to the most fre-
quently recurring letters. A third group
turned the axis of the Braille rectangle
from the vertical to the horizontal.
All three systems had their virtues, but
they created a situation similar to that
which would exist if one third of sighted
Americans today spelt Washiltgton in the
ordinary English way ; another third spelt
it Pxftwqsaq ; and the remainder like this :
- : :...,.,'",,' IS- : :"
In 1918, after a committee had worked
for 15 years, unity was restored with the
decision to return to the original French
Braille. Only in 1932 did an agreement
between the United Kingdom and the
United States fix"Standard English
Braille"as the contracted or abbreviated
form for everyday use throughout the
English-speaking world.
Similar divergent systems introdueed in
German, modern Greek and Hebrew
Brailles also yielded in due time to a
return to the original French.
But there are many scores of major lan-
guages and dialects in the world. Varia-
tions existed in Braille used in Spain and
Portugal and the different Latin American
countries. Because of the added factor of
varied scripts and the absence of any
recognized symbols for letter-sounds not
used in the Latin alphabet, Asian and
African language Braille systems have been
even more erratic in those parts of the
world.
Throughout the later 1940s, movements
towards the establishment of single Braille
systems gained momentum. Governments
began to consider linking the education
of the blind with their wider educational
programmes and discovered for themselves
the chaotic state of Braille adaptations.
These were the circumstances which in
April 1949 led Dr. Humayun Kabir, Joint
Secretary for Education of the Govern-
ment of India, to write to the Director-
General of Unesco to ask whether it would
be possible for Unesco to take up the
question of a single universal script for
the blind.
The Government of India was already
working hard to bring about some form
of unified Braille script for the many
different languages used by its vast pops.
lation.
"In India,"Dr. Kabir wrote,"with its
ten or eleven major languages, the pro-
blem of different Braille scripts has been
one of the main obstacles to the provision
of larger facilities for the education of
the blind... The fact that scripts differ
from country to country has prevented the
production of literature in Braille on a
sufficiently large scale and thus added to
the cost of an already expensive process."
Soon after receiving Dr. Kabir's letter,
Unesco's Executive Board accepted the
task, recognizing that this was a world
problem which came within the scope of
Unesco.
But such a world problem called for
the help of the best specialists. Unesco
made a survey, and chose Sir Clutha
Mackenzie as its consultant to"study the
world Braille situation as it stands, and to
advise Unesco on Braille systems."Sir
Clutha, a New Zealander who lost his sight
in the Gallipoli campaign in 1915, had
become one of the most eminent experts
in Braille.
At Unesco's General Conference in 1949,
the Director-General was instructed"to
organize an international conference with
a view to agreeing on certain international
principles which would allow the greatest
degree of uniformity in Braille and would
improve its rationalization and develop its
extension."
Leading experts from a number of
countries, including eminent blind leaders
and teachers of the blind, met in Paris in
December 1949 as an advisory committee.
Among those present were Professor Pierre
Henri of France, Mr. John Jarvis of the
United Kingdom, Professor Suniti Kumar
Chatterji of India, Captain Shahri
Bekhradnia of Persia, Professor Nikola
Bassili of Egypt, and Miss Marjorie
Hooper of the United States.
The discussion led to unanimous
agreement on a fundamental objective : a
single Braille system should be worked
out, in which each sign would be used
for the same or nearly the same sound 8S
in the original Braille, and would
represent the same letter or fulfil the
same or a similar function.
This paved the way for the Interna-
tional Braille Conference in March 1950.
It was one of the ; :, :,-. t representative
gatherings of specialists in problems of
writing for the blind ever brought
together in a single place and for a
common purpose.
The 21 delegates, 11 of them blind,
represented the sightless in India, Pakis-
tan, Egypt, Malaya, Argentina, Ceylon, the
United Kingdom, Hashemite Jordan,
France, Greece, the United States, China,
Brazil and Japan. The famous blind-
mute American woman, Helen Keller,
attended one of the sessions, and spoke
of the work of the meeting as a historic
milestone in the history of the blind.
She was riot exaggerating. For the
result of the meeting was to bring blind
readers of all languages closer than seeing
readers to a single script for the whole
world. The delegates decided that it
was both desirable and practicable to
create a broadly uniform Braille system
for all languages and scripts. This would
be known as World Braille.
In it, a single symbol would be pro-
vided for each visual letter. The sound
value of the symbol would be identical
with that of the visual letter of the alpha-
bet of the particular language. Thus,
World Braille would be a complete
tactile representation of visual scripts.
This would mean a close degree of Uni-
formity in each language group, and a the
maximum degree of consistency among
the various Braille systems.
The Conference succeeded in taking a
number of practical and concrete steps
toward creating World Braille. One was
agreement that Braille should read
always from left to right. Represen-
tatives of the Perso·Arabic languages
spoken in Hashemite Jordan, Egypt, Per-
sia, Pakistan, Iraq and Malaya decided to
suggest to all countries in their linguistic
group that the method of reading from
right to left be abandoned. A spokesman
for modern Hebrew concurred in the
recommendation.
Another achievement was an agreement
on uniform Chinese Braille based on
Mandarin, but keeping a degree of sound
relationship with the traditional Braille,
Still other agreements were to recommend
that mathematical and chemical symbols
be represented more uniformly throughout
the world ; that uniformity be restored
and maintained in punctuation signs ; and
that the degree of uniformity be extended
in musical notation.
Many formidable obstacles arising from
Braille codes built on traditional practices
in visual scripts tied to historical, reli-
gious and sentimental backgrounds were
overcome. Spokesmen for various groups
of Braille readers expressed, in the name
of uniformity, a willingness to sacrifice
that which had already been learned and
to begin all over again.
Although a truly phonetic World
Braille was not yet deemed practicable
for general purposes, the Conference
suggested the creation of a panel of
experts to suggest ways of extending the
use of existing phonetic notations. An-
other panel would work out an interna-
tional classification of sounds of letters
and tone marks.
Unesco's General Conference at Flo-
rence in 1950 took further practical steps
toward Braille rationalization. It decided
to compile a World Braille chart ; to
foster the publication of a reference book
on uniformity ; and to help establish a
World Braille Council.
Bit by bit, th. rough hard and consistent
efforts of experts under Unesco's auspices,
the obstacles were gradually removed. A
study of the linking of Braille symbols
with those of the International Phonetic
Association was made. A meeting was
held in London of a committee of experts
on the uniform adaptation of Braille to
African tribal languages.
In February 1951 a regional conference
took place in Beirut, Lebanon, devoted to
the problems of Braille uniformity in the
languages of the Middle East, India and
South-East Asia. In November last, a
second regional meeting was held, in
Montevideo, on reducing the differences
among the various Braille methods in use
in the Spanish and Portuguese languages.
Thus, most of the ground work was done.
Finally, Unesco convened a meeting last
December in Paris of representatives of
the various linguistic areas, and of the
different Braille committees and pub-
lishers, to form a consultative committee
for the creation of the World Braille
Council, to be set up this year. It
will be a world agency, centralizing and
helping through expert advice in the
work of rationalizing all varieties of
Braille into a single universal script for
che blind.
