JANUARY'952 Page 13-UNESCO COURIER
POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
TO WORLD
NEWSPRINT
FAMINE
by Bernard MINNS
THE world paper shortage
first began to occupy the
attention of Unesco soon
after the organization was
set up six years ago. For it was
plain even then that the post-war
political and social changes would
create a wider demand for reading
matter in large areas of the world.
When, in 1947, Unesco asked a
commission of experts to investi-
gate the shortage, they reported :
"There is not enough newsprint
available to enable the Press
adequately to do their essential job
of informing the people of the
news and opinions that are vitally
important at this critical juncture
of the world's history."
This report underlined the cur-
rent needs of a paper-hungry
world. National independence re-
cently won by a number of coun-
tries in Asia has increased this
need, for it has already provided
new opportunities for millions of
illiterate people. With the re-
surgence of nationalism and the
steady growth of industry, the
mental horizon of the under-pri-
vileged in most parts of the globe
is today widening, thus increasing
the demand for enlightenment.
This thirst for knowledge will
certainly grow as national literacy
campaigns now being organized by
many governments get under way.
It is already invading Africa, the
Middle East, and Latin America,
as well as pushing forward in Asia.
And it will inevitably go on for
decades, since the task involves
bringing knowledge to one half of
humanity that today still remains
unlettered.
Unhappily, these additional de-
mands from under-developed
countries for more newsprint and
other printing paper coincide with
urgent needs for extra paper in
all the more developed ones. These
overwhelming claims have created
a production crisis, for present
output cannot meet the world's
current requirements, let alone the
long-term literacy needs of the
under-developed countries.
Indeed, it has been estimated
that if the number of people able
to read goes up by only five per
cent, it will be impossible to
provide them with the books,
newspapers and other publications
they will need.
The basic problem or paper was
well summed up by M. Torres
Bodet, Director-General of Unesco,
to a Montreal conference convened
by the United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization in 1949.
He asked the Preparatory Confer-
ence on World Pulp Problems to
remember that"even if present
manufacturing capacity were fully
utilized, and the most up-to-date
methods applied, it could not fill
immediate needs, still less the
needs of the world tomorrow.
"It is essential,"he stressed,
"notwithstanding the difficulties,
to equip new factories and to
encourage research into the pos-
sibility of utilizing other raw
materials ; to reserve the most
suitable species-fir, balsam, poplar
and spruce-for the manufacture
of newsprint and printing paper,
using other timbers wherever pos-
sible, for purposes of building,
heating, manufacture of pit-props
and Kraft."
Study and research into forestry
resources, conservation and deve-
lopment is now being conducted by
the Food and Agriculture Organi-
zation, so that it can indicate to
the Social and Economic Council
the technical measures necessary to
increase production, including the
use of substitute raw materials.
Current and future demands for
paper call for short-term and
long-term programmes, if the
world's cultural needs are to be
met. As a beginning, the Eco-
nomic and Social Council-the
United Nations'co-ordinating body
- has appealed to major consumer
countries to limit consumption, so
that more newsprint can be made
available to the paper-hungry areas
of the world. America today con-
sumes over 60 per cent of world
output, arid if a small fraction of
this were diverted to needy coun-
tries, it could ease the paper crisis
in most non-dollar lands.
Owing to a shortage of dollars,
certain paper-producing countries
cannot import sufficient raw ma-
terials to keep their mills on full
production. According to the
Newsprint Association of Canada,
they could, if they had the cur-
rency, increase production by
60, 000 metrics tons, or nearly twice
the present output of Great Britain.
It has also been suggested that
all Canada's mills should work a
seven-day week. Canada is al-
ready responsible for 46 per cent of
the world's newsprint output ; with
Sunday work it could increase pro-
duction by one-fifth.
In a number of countries, var-
ious substitutes like eucalyptus
wood, esparto grass, bamboo and
papyrus are being used for manu-
facturing different kinds of print-
ing papers, Kraft and cellulose. In
Italy, there are plans for building
a factory producing 15, 000 tons of
paper a year from chestnut and
poplar wood, straw, ht ! mp fibre,
rushes and reeds. By using these
for making other printing papers,
similar quantities of wood-pulp are
released for newsprint.
These are some of the short-
term measures that can be taken
to alleviate the growing crisis.
But even if they were all carried
out, it would still not solve the
basic problem-insufficient raw
materials to supply the world's
steadily increasing needs.
As far as long-term measures are
concerned, the chief need is to push
on with intensive research to find
substitute raw materials that
could be mixed with small quan-
tities of the usual ones for making
newsprint and printing paper.
Such experiments are under way
in many parts of the world.
In the United States at Sav-
annah, Georgia, and at Lufkin
Texas, two factories are working
for American, African, Indian,
Finnish, Mexican and New Zealand
manufacturers. Raw materials
being studied include palmetto,
sugar cane, fibre, straw, bamboo,
African bango and cotton stalks.
Great Britain has carried out
research on the use of elephant
grass which is common in East
Africa.
Promising developments are
going on in Australia. Wholly
dependent on imported newsprint
until a few years ago, this country
is today turning out 30, 000 tons of
newsprint made from hardwood,
and is expected to treble her output
by next year. In India and
China, rice straws are used for
making rice paper upon which it
is possible to print newspapers.
But of all the substitute raw
materials being examined, it seems
that bagasse is the most promis-
ing. It is the fibrous residue of
the sugar cane after the sugar has
been extracted, and is inexpensive.
From the Brazilian sugar industry
alone, bagasse could produce
1, 500, 000 tons of paper.
In the Philippines, one factory
daily produces ten tons of extra fine
paper made out of bagasse which
compares favourably with the
imported paper. A similar mill is
being constructed in India.
Unesco has reported that in
America, a complete edition of the
Daily Transcript of Holyoke (Mas-
sachusetts), has been printed on
bagasse paper. The American
paper industry is showing consider-
able interest in this material, and
leading U. S. experts are now
carrying out research in Hawaii
into its possibilities.
From these experiments all over
the world, raw material substitutes
will be found sooner or later that
may finally solve the problem of
supplying sufficient newsprint and
printed paper to every corner of
the globe.
RECENT FAO ACTION
IN order to decrease and gradually overcome the present world deficit
of newsprint and printing paper, the Food and Agriculture Organiza-
tion, meeting last month in Rome, adopted the following recommen-
dations :
(1) that FAO, in consultation with the International Materials Con-
ference and other interested inter-governmental agencies, survey the
possibilities for increasing the production and transportation facilities for
pulpwood.
(2) that member governments
(a) take action aimed at increasing pulpwood supplies including
adjustments in forest policy such as planting quick-growing pulpable
species and developing and using suitable supplementary or substitute
raw materials.
(b) consider the advisability of establishing or encouraging new pulp
and paper manufacturing plants in areas where permanent supplies of
raw materials (including processing materials) in adequate quantities
are assured.
(3) that member governments avail themselves of facilities provided
by addressing formal requests to FAO for :
(a) exploratory missions to assist in selecting possible sites for new
pulp and paper mills, taking into account local technical and economic
conditions.
(b) advisory missions to help in drawing up detailed plans for such
mills, with due consideration to the conservaton of forest resources and
the estabiishment of the necessary transport facilities.
The Conference invited the Director-General of FAO to facilitate the
rapid conclusion of technical assistance agreements in this connection,
and to report periodically to ECOSOC on the progress achieved.
