THE REQUI REMENTS
FOR ETERNAL LIFE
f MMORTAHTY of the spirit has been
the hope or the faith of mankind
since the beginning of time. But
an everlasting life for the physical
body of flesh and blood has always
seemed hopeless. Recent biological
research, however, has advanced
toward that goal. Whole organs of
animals are being kept alive in glass
tubes for long period of time and in
Chicago, U. S. A., Dr. Ralph W. Gerard
has been studying the living spinal
cord of a laboratory rat, kept in a
glass vessel like a goldfish. Gradually
the conditions for the continued
maintenance of life are becoming
known.
To keep an organ alive indefinitely,
long after its removal from the body
of the animal, requires full and
precise knowledge of what that organ
needs for its nutrition. It must be
supplied with energy in the form of
sugars, with oxygen to permit it to
use or"burn"the sugar, and with
a complex mixture of other sub-
stances that are needed for the life
process. The nutrient solution in
which it is immersed must in effect
do all that the blood does in the
animal.
It is just as important also to
remove the products of life, the waste
materials which are formed in the
process of living. If these are stead-
ily removed and uniform correct
nutrition is supplied, the organ can
remain as healthy and active as it
was in the animal. In fact, it can
live longer than the animal could
because in an animal the composition
of the blood changes with age. It
deteriorates and finally fails to
maintain the health of one or more
organs so that death results. But in
the laboratory it is possible to
maintain perfect and changeless con-
ditions and thus to prolong life in-
definitely. This has been done for
individual muscles and organs but it
is still impossible to do it for whole
live animals. True immortality is
still far oft.,
Dr. Gerard's results have not yet
been fully public. shed but his purpose
in studying the Hfeof thespinat
cord are important. He could vary
the amount of oxygen supplied, for
instance, and Ihus have direct
In this tissue we begin a regular column
on Our World of Science by Dr. Gerald
Wendt, formerly professor of chemistry
at the University of Chicago and Dean of
chemistry and physics at the Pennsyl-
vania State College in the United States.
I n recent years he has devoted himself
to public education in science, first as
director of science and education at the
World's Fair in New York in 1939, then
as science editor of Time and Life
and finally as editorial director of
Science Illustrated. His published books
include Science for the World of
Tomorrow, The Atom Age Opens, and
Atomic Energy and the Hydrogen Bomb.
His first article for the COURIER
appeared in the February 1952 issue ; it
was entitled"The Miracle on 57th
Street". Dr. Wendt is the newly
appointed head of the DiYÎsion of
Teaching and Dissemination of Science in
Unesco's Natural Sciences Deportment.
evidence on what happens to the
nervous system if oxygen is insuffi-
cient. Such a direct study of the
role of oxygen in the life of the
nerves and of the brain should be of
enormous value to aviators who fly
high in the sky where the air is thin
and oxygen is deficient. Direct study
of the action of alcohol and of drugs
on the nervous system has also be-
come possible.
The method of keeping organs
alive is now called perfusion and is
being used in many laboratories of
physiology. At the Worcester (USA)
Foundation for Experimental Biology
the adrenal glands of calves have
been kept alive for long periods and
have been \used to manufacture cor-
tisone, the new drug that gives almost
complete relief from the crippling
effect of arthritis. A battery of living
animal glands, under perfusion, would
be a new type of biochemical factory.
In the case of muscle, very long
extension of life is possible.
Dr. Alexis Carrel, the distinguished
French surgeon, who spent all his
active life in researches at the
Roekefeller Institute for Medical
Research in New York and won the
Nobel Prize in Medicine, kept a piece
of heart muscle from a chicken
embryo alive for 23 years. He re-
ported in his famous book Man the
UnknO'wn, that"Colonies" (of muscle
cells), obtained from a heart frag-
ment, removed in January 1912 from
a chick embryo, are growing as
actively today as 23 years ago. In
fact, they are immortal.
It is true that a life of 23 years is
not immortality. But it is a long life
for a piece of chicken. Dr. Carrel
was quite confident that if the condi-
tions under which the muscle re-
mained alive were kept absolutely
changeless, then the muscle would.
remain alive and would continue to
grow for ever.
It was surprising enough when
Alexis Carrel kept a few muscle cells
alive, but these recent researches in-
dicate that much more lies ahead.
The ancient.'secret of life"is not as
mysterious at it was. Life goes on
if its environment is favorable, for
cells, for muscles and for organs. In
the living animal the blood and other
body liquids provide such an environ-
ment until the chemistry of the body
fails with age. But if ageing can be
prevented in the laboratory there is
hope that the process of ageing in
the body can also be explored, under-
stood and prevented. Eventually,
though not in this century, if all the
parts of the body stay young, the
entire body stays young too and
immortality is at least conceivable.
It is a word used by Alexis Carrel
fi fI een years ago.
