Out world
of
Scienèe
COAXING RAN OUT OF
THE CLOUDS
By Dr. Gerald WENDT
To cox from a cloud the rain that greens the fields
and gives man food was in earlier days a task
for holy men, because the clouds were beyond
man's reach and could only be touched by divine aid.
But the aeroplane has now scaled the clouds and
rainmaking has become a science. The tiny droplets
of water that compose the white mist of cloud can be
made to grow into large drops that are too heavy to
drift in the sky and must fall to earth.
Cold does it. Pellets of"'dry ice", which is the
solid, frozen form of carbon dioxide and has a temple.
rature of 110°F. below zero, are scattered (or"seeded")
on a cloud from a plane flying above it. They cool
the air in the cloud, condense the moisture, and the
high mist turns to rain.
Another method is now being studied which requires
a machine on the ground, preferably on a hill, to make
a smoke of microscopic crystals of silver iodide. These
float into the moist air and also induce the drops to
form.
These methods are often successful and many mil-
lions of dollars are spent each year in efforts to make
rain by them. Even when rain is not wanted they are
sometimes used to empty a towering thundercloud
before it can become violent and drop its water as'a
destructive downpour or as hard hailstones. In both
ways crops have been saved.
But this is not an adequate answer to the problem
of getting rain where and when it is needed. It can
only be used when the right kind of cloud formation is
drifting by. But no man can make a cloud, nor can he
push or pull a cloud to the place where he wants rain
to fall.
A desert is arid primarily because clouds do not get
there. Instead, the air is dry and the sun burns hot
and steadily. If man would bring rain to such an
area, he must learn to bring clouds, and therefore to
control the circulation of the atmosphere. This is at
present an impossible task.
Two great forces are involved which are literally
astronomic. One is the power of the sun to evaporate
water, which is immense in the tropics where the rays
of the sun come down vertically, less in the slanting
rays of the temperate zones, slight in the arctic zones
where the sun shines weakly and nearly sideways from
the horizon.
Nearly all clouds contain water that came from the
ocean and most of it from the warm seas. The energy
required to vaporize the ocean water and lift it into
the sky is enormous.
It takes only about a tenth of an inch of rain
falling over 100 acres to produce 1, 000 tons of water.
To vaporize that much water with coal would require
more heat than is obtainable from 100 tons of this
fuel. A good rain one inch deep would need more
than is obtainable form 6, 400 tons of coal for each
square mile.
This energy is obviously beyond man's capacity, at
least until he learns to utilize atomic energy instead
of coal. Yet the sun lifts millions of times that
amount of water into the air from the sea every day.
Only the sun can do it.
Once the water is evaporated it is spread over the
earth by the circulation of the atmosphere, which is to
say, by winds. The first part of the motion is easy
enough to understand, for the moist air of the tropics
rises as it heats in the sunshine because warm air is
lighter than cold.
But it cannot go upwards for ever. Like a vast
fountain, it spills to the north and to the south, pushed
onward by more hot air rising behind it. Thus it
flows into the temperate zones, carrying its moisture
with it, both to the north and to the South.
Now the second great astronomical force shapes the
course of the moving air. The two great currents,
northward and southward, do not continue straight
north or south. The rotation of the earth sends them
both eastward. This is because the motion of the earth
at the equator is faster than either to the north
or to the south, so that at the north and south poles
the rotation involves no motion at all.
At the equator the earth turns on its axis once a day
- 25, 000 miles in 24 hours. The tropic air rotates
with that same speed. But as it moves away from the
equator the earth beneath it moves more slowly in
miles per hour. Retaining its momenta, the air seems
to move faster and thus blows eastward. The prevailing
winds, both in the north temperate zone and in the
south temperate zone, are western. Away from the tropic
areas most weather comes from the west for this reason.
But in the tropics, air must flow toward the equator
to replace the rising column. These are the trade
winds, and since they flow southward they are rotating
more slowly than is the earth at the equator. So they
drift westward as they go south. Thus the tropical
trade winds blow from the north-east.
There are many local modifications of these general
winds because of ocean currents, large bodies of warm
water such as the Gulf of Mexico and the Indian Ocean,
and mountain ranges. It is these that contribute
variety both to the climate and to the day-by-day
weather. It is the winds as modified by these factors
that determine where the clouds go.
But to condense the clouds into rain requires one
effect : cooling. Water vapour can remain in warm
air indefinitely, but when the temperature goes down,
the air can no longer keep the water in vapour form.
It condenses, first into tiny drops and then these
grow into larger drops. A very common cause of
cooling is the rise of a stream of air over a range of
mountains. As the altitude increases, the air cools and
if there is enough moisture in the air it falls as rain
on the near side of the mountains.
In the temperate regions, where the prevailing wind
is from the west, it is usually the western side of a
mountain range that is wet and rainy. On the other
side, the air has been drained of its water, and many
arid zones thus lie just east of the hills. On the other
hand, in the tropic zones where the trade winds carry
the moisture, the wet areas are to the east and north-
east of mountains and the dry zones lie beyond. Cooling
is also accomplished by cold winds from the arctic
regions that often flow under the warm moist air and
lift it upwards to bring rains and storm.
These forces-the heat of the sun, the rotation of
the earth, the cooling of vast masses of atmosphere-
are beyond man's control. One possible way to distri-
bute rainfall more evenly would be to level down the
mountains, but even this is beyond man's feeble powers.
In time the mountains will be washed away by the
rain itself. It has happened many times in the history
of the earth. But it takes millions of years and in that
time new mountain ranges will be raised elsewhere.
So the problems of getting water to the extremely
arid deserts are not likely to be solved by rainmaking.
If man wishes to bring water to them it must come
from the ground or direct from the sea, not from the
sky. There is hope, however, of increasing rainfall
in the arid and semi-arid areas fringing the world's
deserts.
