"I M  G I. N Et you're in a
car hurrying
along the
magnificent road
which rolls north-
westwardly from
Mexico City over
mountain ranges,
through pine forests
which remind you
of Switzertand,
one-street villages of
mudbrick houses with
wide shadowed eaves,
dusty streets where
pigs and fowl wander.... 0
donkeys amble along under enormous loads
"Men in wide-brimmed straw hats are squatting in
doorways, women in colourful scarves are chatting in
groups, and over all 011 intense magical light-pours out of
a hot blue sky.
"We have three companions, all Latin American, two
men and a girl. The girl, called Conchita, s ! im, dark-
haired and vivacious, is from Ecuador. One man, Jose, is
a Mexican, a health expert. The other, Alfredo, an agri-
cultural student, comes from Guatemo) a.
"They are all young and high-spirited, and as we drive
along they occasionally break into song-for preference,
one caNed'La Pacanda,'which is named after an island
in Lake P6tzcuaro."
In these words, Leonard Cottrell, a B. B. C. features pro-
ducer who was invited by Unesco to visit its Fundamental
Education Centre in Pdtzcuoro, describes his arrival at
this small Mexican town.
Conchita, José and Alfredo are students at this inter-
national centre, which also has people from Peru, Uruguay,
EI Satvador, Haiti-in fact, from no fewer than 16 Latin
American countries. They have all come to PátzcuarcÍ to
study Fundamental Education methods, so that when they
return to their own countries they can train other special-
ists in this work.
The first people Cottrell saw in Pátzcuaro were three
boys, in black jackets with silver braid, who came over
to their car and, accompanied by a guitar, song"Flor de
orquida,"0 love song whose title means'''little orchid
flower."
"they made the guitars themselves,"Alfredo explained.
"The Taroscans are wonderful instrument makers, and in
fact, an amazing people."
Cottrell's reaction to this remark rather surprised his
companions. *'As they seem happy enough, why have you
people got to spoil it all by educating them ?", he asked.
"We're not educating them in the sense that you mean
- academically,"Alfredo said."The only way to under-
stand is for you to come out to the villages with us."
Leonard Cottrell had heard about Fundamental Educa-
tion, the main aim of which is to help people to under-
stand the problems that affect them directly and then
give them the means of solving these problems through
their own efforts.
It is an emergency method brought out by Unesco to
give the millions of people who live in under--developed
parts of the world the minimum of instruction which they
need to improve their living conditions, their health, and
their social and economic life.alfred, Conchita and José had explained that the
students at the Centre used the Torascans as 'subjects"
in their experiments. The Torascans, who formed the
majority of the population of the region, were beset by a
number of related problems-malnutrition, poor soil,
disease and illiteracy. The Centre's activities fit into a
Mexican Government campaign to raise living standards
around Lake Pdtzcuaro.
The director of the Centre, in explaining to Cottrell that
the training given at the Centre (which is called CREFAL
- initials for Centro Regional de Educacián Fundamental
para America Latin) stressed the fact that it was useless
teaching people to read and write unless they had the
incentive to learn and use this knowledge.
That was why the students-like Conchita, José and
Alfredo-in addition to following the theoretical and
practical courses given by the specialists at the Centre,
also went out into the Tarascan villages to teach not only
the ABC and writing, but also things that affected every-
day life-which are all the more urgent for men whose
living conditions must be improved.
It was in Nocutzapo, one of the many fishing villages on
the side of Lake Patzcuoro, that Cottrell had his next
lesson in Fundamental Education. His three companions
brought him to the end of a narrow alley, where two
young girls were pulling up earthenware jars filled with
water, while nearby some villagers were building a stone
tank. José explained :
"You know, it's so difficult to explain to these people
the relationship between disease and the causes of
disease. In your own country, any child knows that
diseases are spread by germs. That's not because you're
more intelligent than these people-don't run away with
that idea. You're taught it at school. You read books
and see films.
* Several passages and quotations in this particle
have been taken from the introduction to Human
Rights across the ages by Professor Boris Mirkine-
Guetzevitch, Dean of the Faculty of Law and Poli-
tical Science at the French University in New York,
and Professor at the Institute of Higher Interna-
tional Studies at the University of Paris. His
work forms part of a colleetion of studies by
eminent writers, which is to be published by
Unesco next year. This collection will be an
anthology of the important basic documents on
Human Rights.
The making of sombreros has been a leading
industry on the island of Jaracuaro for centuries.
A student vaccinates a villager's pig against
cholera, and sets a widely-followed example.
Oil stoves, one possible solution to the fuel problem in this wood-starved region, are demonstrated by
an Ecuador student. Fundamental Education must make a practical approach to everyday difficulties.
-.
UNESCO

; col COURIER NOVEMBER 1952. page 5
MEANS THE RIGHT TO BETTER LIVING
Under a blazing sun on the shores of Lake Patzcuaro, the villagers load up stones destined for a new road which they themselves have decided to build.
"But how can you expect someone who is illiterate, who
has never been outside his village, to realize that the
thing which kills his wife or child is the water he drinks ?
"That's why we've convinced the people of Nocutzapo
that, if they have pure water, they're not likely to get
typhoid or dysentery. So they've given their time and
their labour to build the cistern. They're going to buy an
electric pump-with their own money, mind you-to
bring the water into the cistern. Then we'll install a
filter, and for the first time Nocutzapo will have a pure
water supply."
Then it was Alfredo's turn to give Cottrell a lesson
- this time on the agricultural side of the students'task.
As they went to a village up in the hills, Alfredo
explained :
"You see, the emphasis in this work is always on
self-help. If you try to impose new techniques on these
people, you get nowhere. They simply watch you and
then forget all about it. But if you give them a personal
incentive to learn the techniques for themselves, then your
lessons are more likely to stick.
"It's like the story of the pigs. I went to a place called
San Gregorio, where nearly all the pigs were dying of
cholera. Well, the answer was simple : inocu) ation. But
we were a bit too'hasty.
"Without first of all explaining what we wanted to do,
we just arrived with our serum and hypodermics and set
to work. When we arrived at the village, we went
straight to the house of the village leader, whom we'd met
before, and as he wasn't in sight, we didn't wait, but
set to work on one of his sows.
"Suddenly he appeared.'What's happening ?' he said.
'What's that you've got in your hand ?'
.,'It's only a hypodermic syringe,') answered.
'There's no harm in it.'
"'Let me look !'
"'tt's quite harmless. You see this bottle ? Inside
it there's a medicine. You know when you wife was ill
the doctor gave her medicine out of a bottle'.
"'Yes, but that medicine was red. This has no
colour.'
"'But that doesn't matter. This instrument is made ta
give medicine to your sow. Only, instead of making her
drink it, we inject it into her blood, like this : And I
started to demonstrate.
"'Stop,'he shouted.
..'I tell you it's good medicine : I answered.'Your
pigs are all dying of cholera. This will save them.'
"'Stop,) te)) you,'he repeated. And villagers who
had come on the scene started shouting'Get out !',
'They're foreigners'''Throw them out !'"
"Finally, the village leader said :'You are strangers
here. We don't know you, and we don't like you. We
don't need foreigners to show us our business. Now, get
out !'"..
And Alfredo learned his lesson. It was no good
trying to move too quickly. First you had to gain the
confidence of the people and get to know and like them,
and then you reach the stage when they trust you, which
they will after a time.
In this case, one of the CREFAL professors, who knew
the village leader, later went to have a chat with him.
Then the leader invited Alfredo and his party bock, and
they could not have been more friendly. The party injected
the pigs, and showed the farmers how to use the
instrument. And nowadays they buy their own anti-
cholera serum, and do the injections themselves-with
excellent results. At present they lose perhaps one pig
out of ten, compared with nine out of ten before.
Many other aspects of Fundamental Education were
shown to Cottrell : how the peasants were taught to graft
on trees, to work their fields better, to make straw hats ;
how to teach housewives to produce more nourishing and
healthy meals, as well as showing them how to sew.
"And,"Conchita told hi-n,"t don't hear the phrase'This
is my fate, this is how I was born, and this is how I
shot ! die'any more."
During his final talk with the director of the Centre,
Leonard Cottrell heard a band playing"Pátzcuaro", an
old song in which the Tarascans praise Don Vasco, a priest
who helped them centuries ago. Now a new verse praises
CREFAL and Unesco.
.'y ou could hardly have a better indication of the
success of our scheme than this,"the director pointed
out to Cottrell.."After all, the best judges of the success
of Fundamental Education are the people themselves. The
verse you have just heard goes like this :'At Patzcuaro,
we even have CREFAL, the home of Unesco, which is of
great importance to our country !'".
The first class at the Unesco Centre at Pátzcuaro will
graduate in a few weeks. It was inaugurated in May 1951
with an enrolment of 52 students from nine Latin-Ame-
rican countries. This year, the number of students
attending the courses will be doubled.
Pátzcuaro is only the first of a network of Fundamental
Education centres which Unesco, with the aid of the other
Specialized Agencies of the United Nations, proposes to
set up in the areas which need them most : Africa, Asia,
Latin America, the Middle East. The next one will be at
Sirs-el-Layan, in Egypt. In the same way as the Mexican
Government has furnished the installations and ground
for the Pátzcuoro Centre, as well as given financial aid,
so the Egyptian Government will provide similar facilities
otSirs-et-Layan.
The completion of Unesco's Fundamental Education plan
will take several years. This is inevitable in view of the
enormous task that has to be faced. Such a task seems
even more urgent at a time when the anniversary of the
adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is
being celebrated.
In this connection, the words used last year by
M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Director-General of Unesco, are
still applicable today. In a foreword too booklet
describing Unesco's projected network of Fundamental
Education Centres he wrote :
"If we want to live in a united world, we cannot allow
this most. unjust of 011 frontiers to go on existing-the
frontier that divides those who can read from those who
cannot. We have terrible memories of the concentration
camps, but we some-
times forget that,
without prisons or
barbed wire, more
than 1, 200, 000, 000
men and women live
in the imptacobte,
invisible. inner dun-
geon of ignorance.
We propagate the
text of the Univer-
sal Declaration of
Human Rights, but
how can we pre-
sume to call it
'universal'when we
know that not one
man in two can
so much as read
it !"
