A world-wide task for Unesco
HELPING NATIONS TO PROVIDE
EDUCATION FOR ALL
ONE half of mankind is still illite-rats. About the same proport on
of children of school age are
without schooling. Opportunities for
secondary and vocational education
are still limited in most countries.
These are the hard facts of the
world's educational situation. To claim
that they are at the root of all the
world's ills would be an exaggeration.
But what is true is that ignorance re-
sults in poverty, and poverty goes
hand-in-hand with disease.
To attack the inter-linked problems
of ignorance, poverty and sickness by
helping the people of underdeveloped
countries to improve their standards
of living is a task which Unesco has
undertaken in its pioneering work to
develop and extend Fundamental Edu-
cation for illiterate adults and children.
But the continuous tide of children
who grow up to be illiterate adults,
thus creating the need for Fundament-
al Education, can only be checked by
the provision of a regular school edu-
cation for all children in all countries.
It is this gross inequality in educa-
tional provisions throughout the
world which inspired Article 26 of the
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights."Everyone has the right to
education. Education shall be free, at
least in the elementary stages. Ele-
mentary education shall be compul-
sory".
One of Unesco's first acts in its pro-
gramme to promote free and compul-
sory education was to assist the Inter-
national Bureau of Education to carry
out an inquiry into this question in all
parts of the world. At the same time,
it made several national studies of its
own on compulsory education.
Three of these studies dealt with
countries where compulsory education
has been applied for some time : Eng-
land, France and Australia. The
other three had to do with countries
in various stages of applying compul-
sory education : Ecuador, Iraq and
Thailand. In addition, general studies
were written on the problem of rais-
ing the school leaving age, and on
child labour in relation to compulsory
education.
The immediately useful purpose of
these studies and reports was to assist
the International Conference on Public
Education, which chose free and com-
pulsory education as its main topic of
discussion when it met in Geneva last
year. Recommendations made by this
conference emphasized the importance
of long-term State planning of
compulsory education schemes.
The Conference also recommended
that the possibilities of obtaining in-
ternational aid be explored. To help
improve the attendance of poor
children called for such social welfare
measures as school meals, the pro-
vision of clothing and family allow-
ances.
It is not difficult to reach general
agreement on the advisability of tak-
ing such measures as these. And, in
fact, those States who are in the
advance guard of compulsory edu-
cation need little or no help and
advice in this fields.
But this is not the case of the"'less
advanced countries, which are still in
the majority, and which have not
yet established effective compulsory
education systems. These States,
while anxious to do so, are unable to
apply such measures in the immediate
future, because of lack of technical
knowledge or because of social or poli-
tical obstacles, but above all because
of the lack of financial and economic
resources.
They therefore tend to think of
compulsory education as a vague aim
to be realized in the very distant
future, and often take a kind of fatal-
istic view of the problem.
One of Unescos roles is to convince
these States that, if the full application
of free and compulsory education looks
distant, it can be brought nearer by
a more active policy of extending pri-
mary education and by better manage-
ment of resources, and that compul-
sory education schemes are best
formulated with other schemes for the
eccnomic development of the country.
It can offer technical assistance for
the planning and execution of such
schemes and, in some respects, its
campaign must take the form of a
crusade is which Member States and
educators are roused to a sense of
urgency, as well as to a realization of
the feasibility of compulsory education.
No such crusade, however, can be
effective unless it is based on a sound*
foundation of existing facts, and
unless steps are taken to ensure ade-
quate planning in this field. To ensure
this, Unesco makes use of four me-
thods : the preparation of studies and
publications about problems of free and
compulsory education, the holding of
regional conferences, the sending out
of missions or individual experts, and
the granting of fellowships and of
scholarships.
For example, Unesco has been pre-
paring for the Conference on Compul-
sory Education in South-East Asia and
the Pacific, which will be held in
Bombay next month. Thirteen Mem-
ber States have been invited to it-
Afghanistan, Australia, Cambodia, Cey-
lon, India, Indonesia, Laos, New Zea-
land, Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand,
Union of Burma and Vietnam. One
non-Member State, Nepal, has been
asked to send an observer. Member
States responsible for the administra-
tion of territories in this region who
have also been invited are France, the
Netherlands, the United Kingdom and
the United States.
One of the main questions to be
examined at this Conference will be
the preparation of compulsory educ-
ation curricula.
It has been shown that"academic"
curricula in primary schools have an
adverse effect on school attendance in
many countries. Parents, especially
poor parents in outlying districts, who
are in need of the labour of their
children, tend to think of most of
school instruction as a luxury, having
little to do with their everyday pro-
blems. They therefore withdraw their
children from school or do not send
them at all.
The technical and material needs of
countries in South-East Asia and the
Pacific will be examined as will the
questions of the status and training
of teachers. Countries will be asked :
"What programmes do you have, and
how can Unesco help you to achieve
them ?"Emphasis will be laid on the
need for the drawing up of schemes
of compulsory education even though
they may not be fully effective for
some time.
By such activities as these, Unesco
is giving international educational
assistance to those countries that re-
quest it in order to turn the principle
of education for all into a reality.
UNESCO
