COURIER AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952. Page 3
A novel movement for the collective viewing of television programmes is bringing
entertainment and education to young people and old in an increasing number of
small villagers in France. When the notice"Television programme this afternoon"-
- is posted outside the local school (above), children can hardly wait to get into the
classroom to see the"show"which gives lessons a new interest. In the evening,
villagers (below) gather in the school house to watch and discuss programmes.
by Henry R. CASSIRER
IN the village of Nogentel, 60 miles east of Paris, television was
known two years ago as one of those miracles of modern science,
like atomic energy or air conditioning, which belong to a world
far removed from the traditional life of the peasants.
Today, however, the village gathers several times a seek to
'watch television programmes in its little one-room school house, and
is proud of having started a movement for collective viewing-a
movement which may hold great significance for many countries.
Television today is developing rapidly in the United States and
Great Britain, and also in many countries of Latin America and on
the European continent. Even in Asia and Africa steps are being
taken to establish television broadcasting. But because sets are
expensive in most of these countries, there is the danger that this
great new medium for education and information may become
nothing but a source of entertainment for those who can afford to buy
luxury items.
That is why Unesco is particularly interested in the movement
for collective viewing in French villages, which is sho'wing a way to
bring television to poorer people and enabling them to use it primarily
for education. This movement is a French contribution to the use of
television for education which ranks with efforts of a different kind
being made in the United Kingdom and the U. S. A.
Here is what happened in Nogentel, Gland, Chaudun and 40 other
villages of 200 or 300 inhabitants where most people make their living
as land labourers, small farmers and wine growers.
The idea of using television sets for entertainment and education
in these villages originated among a group who had tried. to organize
film clubs but who had run up against many obstacles. These were
due to the high cost of projectors and film rentals, the problem of
moving the few projectors available from village to village and the
difficulty of finding skilled projectionists without whose services the
projectors frequently broke down.
Those film clubs, and now the television clubs, are guided mainly
by the primary school masters. In France, adult education rests
predominantly in the hands of these teachers, who are well organized
throughout the country and spend a good deal of their after-school
time in bringing cultural activities into the lives of villages and
townspeople alike.
The plan which these teachers developed together with a group
of television enthusiasts works as follows : by agreement with
various television set manufacturers, a set is placed for a limited
period in the school house, and the villagers are invited to view
programmes in the evenings. At first they can see them free, later
a small entrance fee is charged.
After a few weeks the teacher asks the villagers whether they
want to buy the set. So far, in all except one village, the answer has
been affirmative, and many villagers have even volunteered to
advance the necessary funds (in France these amount to about
180, 000frs. or $300 for complete installation of a set with a screen
measuring 12 square feet.
A local committee is formed which organizes the purchase,
determines the entrance fee (the money that has been advanced is
paid back out of this) and chooses the programmes, as the set is
turned on only a few nights a week.
Soon the villagers get into the habit of gathering in the school
house for entertainment, and also for education and informal
discussion. Quite naturally a closer link develops between the
schoolmaster and his community,'while the adults take a greater
interest in the life of the school.
One of the essential conditions of this plan is that the set is made
available during day-time for reception of educational programmes
in the cla room, and that it will become school property once it has
been fully paid out of the admission fees. It is therefore of immediate
advantage to the school, and becomes eventually a valuable source of
additional income which can be used for school purposes, such as
trips and special equipment for sports and theatre activities.
Even though French programmes are at present only of limited
educational value, it is undeniable that the television set is already
enriching the life of the community. The programmes which are
being received with the greatest interest by adults and children alike
are those which tell them"hdw things work". An inside view of a
newspaper plant, films showing life abroad, personal accounts by
explorers and scientists, unusual sports events all find an eager
audience among the peasants who rarely emerge from the isolation
of their normal life.
At the same time, the viewing groups are constructive critics for
the improvement of broadcasts. They strongly objected to the
broadcast of gangster films, with the result that these were finally
omitted from French programmes. The organizers realize that
their movement can be really beneficial only if they are supported by
special educational programmes which can be prepared from
information distributed in advance and exploited more fully through
discussions following the broadcast. Educators and French televi-
sion are therefore planning to co-operate in the creation of such
programmes.
The peasants and schoolmasters of the French départments of
Aisne and Marne have only made a beginning. They have organized
themselves into the National Federation of Educational and Cultural
Television in oi'der to give organized support to this movement, which
is spreading \vherever television can be received.
The entire project is now being officially sponsored by the Ligue
Française de 1'Enseignement (the French League for Education).
Their efforts may eventually help many other countries to find a
way to give television its place as a vital force for the improvement of
education, the dissemination of knowledge and the enjoyment of an
expanding life of culture.
THE TELEVISION
SET BECOMES A
FRENCH VrLLAGE
MEETING PLACE
