Page 14. JULY 1952
UNESCO'S'FREE TRADE IN KNOWLEDGE
PACT COMES INTO FORCE
A few years ago, a well-known
scientist received a letter in-viting him to attend an im-
portant conference in a foreign
country. He accepted the invitation
and a few days later packed his
suitcase and boarded a train for
his destination.
While he was noting down some
of the things he hoped to reveal to
his colleagues, his train pulled to a
halt at the frontier.
There, he became so terribly em-
broiled in customs formalities over
an educational film he had brought
along that he left it in disgust at the
frontier post !
On May 21 of this year, ten coun-
tries agreed that this sort of thing
will no longer happen at their front-
iers. On that day, Mr. Trygve Lie,
Secretary-General of the United Na-
tions, declared :"I hereby proclaim
the entry into force of the Unesco
Agreement on the Importation of
Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Materials."
He was presiding at a ceremony
at UN headquarters in New York to
mark the first day of operation of
the Unesco treaty which abolishes
import duties on books and period-
icals, works of art, educational
films, scientific equipment, articles
for the blind, and many other ma-
terials which are vitally important
for the educational and scientific
progress of nations.
So far, the treaty affects
165, 000, 000 people in 11 countries.
It went into force on May 21 when
Sweden became the 10th nation to
ratify the agreement. An addi-
tional 19 countries have signed too,
and many of their ratifications are
expected in the months ahead (1).
The Times of London has describ-
ed the new treaty-which is the
first to come into operation under
Unesco's auspices-as"an admir-
able step backwards into a more
sensible world."It is a"step
backwards"in the sense that cus-
toms barriers to knowledge are a
20th century innovation. A hun-
dred years ago, it was quite easy to
get books from abroad or send them
to other countries. Transport by
sailing ships was slower than today
but free trade was the general rule.
Customs officials nearly every-
where paid no attention to book
parcels, and educational materials
moved around the world un-
hampered by duties, taxes and other
obstacles. Some governments even
made special arrangements to make
sure that trade in these materials
would not be obstructed. In 1860,
for example, the United Kingdom
and France signed a treaty provid-
ing for free untaxed trade in books.
Then came the First World War.
Governments adopted tariffs and
licensing systems to limit trade to
"essential"goods and most educa-
tional articles suffered. The eco-
nomic depression of the 1930's
brought many new restrictions in
the form of import quotas and cur-
rency and export regulations. With
the Second World War and the
big disruption of shipping, com-
merce and industry, came the final
blow to the free trade system.
Educational materials, w h i c h
were needed more than ever before,
suffered more than most com-
modities. Books, paintings, music,
science equipment were caught up
in the web of restrictions along with
other products. Today, trade res-
trictions to knowledge exist every-
where.
These were summarized last year
by Unesco in a closely set volume of
167 pages entitled Trade Barriers to
Knowledge (2). It shows that more
than 50 countries impose duties and
an assortment of other taxes on the
by Philip L. SOLJAK
(1) In addition to Sweden the ten ori- 
ginal adherents are: Cambodia, Ceylon, 
Egypt, Israel, Laos, Monaco, Pakistan, 
Thailand and Yugoslavia, Vietnam be- 
came eleventh participant 
The 19 countries which have signed 
but not yet ratified : Afghanistan, Bel- 
wen, Iivia, China, Colombia, Domi- 
nican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, 
France, Greece, Gua’ emala, Ilaiti, Iran, 
Lur+mbourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, 
Philippoines, Switzerland and the United 
Kingdom. 
(2) On sale 
Agents at $1; 6s; 
equivalent. 
through Unesco Sales 
300 French francs or 
equivalent.
importation of books. By some
strange logic, certain countries tax
imported film by the foot, others tax
sculpture or paintings or maps by
the pound-like refrigerated beef.
Science equipment is taxed as high
as 40 per cent of its value.
Trade Barriers to Knowledge re-
veals many strange practices. Thus,
for example, the customs laws of
Czechoslovakia provide that wood or
metal statues can enter duty-free
provided they are"not less than life
size", while stone statues are not
subject to duty if they weigh more
than 11 lbs. In the United States,
printed music, maps and charts
can enter duty-free if they are more
than 20 years old. In Iceland, ordi-
nary gramophone records pay an 11
per cent import tax, but those used
for foreign language study pay 14
per cent-three per cent higher !
Recently, a university professor
wrote a letter to Unesco explaining
that because of the new, heavy im-
port duties charged by his country,
an essential textbook had become so
expensive that his students could
not afford to buy it any more. Exhi-
import licences and foreign ex-
change for books and publications
required by libraries. They also
agree to speed up and simplify
clearance through customs of all
materials of an educational, scienti-
fic and cultural character.
Unesco is publishing a simply-
worded manual to show how the
treaty operates, which will be dis-
tributed in participating countries.
The treaty works quite easily. For
individuals, no special formalities
are needed. A book-seller imports
books in the same way as he did be-
fore but he no longer pays duties
and some of the other taxes pre-
viously charged. To be classified as
"recognized", institutions have to
obtain approval from their govern-
ments.
Here are some specific examples of
what the Unesco treaty means for
the student, teacher, artist, scientist
and the average person generally in
the eleven countries which have
ratified it.
The agreement prevents future
duties from being levied on books,
The Unesco Free Trade Agreement entered into force on May 21 when Mr. Sven
Grafstrom (left), Permanent Representative of Sweden to the U. N., deposited
his country's instrument ot ratification. At right is Mr. Trygve Lie, Secretary-
General of the United Nations, who presided at ratification ceremony,
and with them is Mr. S. Arnaldo, Director of Unesco's New York office.
bitions and collections for schools
languish in customs warehouses
while their sponsors try to raise the
heavy bond required by the autho-
rities. In another letter to Unesco, a
museum director wrote telling how
he had planned to send a collection
of paintings abroad for a special ex-
hibition. Because of the heavy bond
asked by the importing country, the
exhibition never got past the foreign
frontier.
The treaty abolishes import duties
on the following five categories of
materials :
1) PUBLICATIONS : books, newspapers,
magazines, music (printed and
manuscript), maps, charts.
2) WORKS OF ART : paintings, sculp-
ture, antiques, scientific collec-
tions or specimens used by zoolo-
gists, anatomists, botanists, mi-
neralogists, paleontologists, ar-
chaelogists and anthropologists.
3) VISUAL AND AUDITORY MATERIALS :
educational films, filmstrips,
newsreels, sound recordings, mi-
crofilms, slides (if imported by
schools, universities, libraries,
broadcasting organizations and
other recognized institutions).
4) SCIENTIFIC EQUIPMENT : all cate-
gories (if imported by laboratories
and other recognized institu-
tions and unavailable domestic-
ally.)
5) ARTICLES FOR THE BLIND : all cate-
gories.
Governments which have ratified
the treaty also undertake to grant
magazines and newspapers in most
countries where they already enter
duty-free. But in Sweden and
Yugoslavia books will now be cheap-
er. A duty amounting to $0. 19 a kilo
(2. 2 ibs.) on illustrated books and
children's picture books will end in
Sweden. Yugoslavia will abolish im-
port duties ranging from $0. 26 to
$0. 33 a kilo on books in the Yugoslav
languages as well as on magazines
and manuscripts.
Swedish school teachers now save
$0. 29 a kilo formerly imposed on cer-
tain imported maps and charts.
The saving on these articles to
Yugoslav educators runs from $0. 09
to $0. 18 a kilogram.
When a 300-metre (980-foot) edu-
cational or scientific film enters Pa-
kistan, Thailand or Yugoslavia, it
is no longer subjected to duties
amounting to $19. 60, $1. 57 and
$1. 12 respectively in these countries.
The saving on the same length of
newsreel is $24. 00 in Ceylon, $19. 60
in Pakistan and $28. 56 in Israel.
Research workers and science
teachers in Pakistan, where science
is mobilized in a vast national deve-
lopment plan, are spared a 30 per
cent customs levy on imported
equipment. Swedish scientists will
save 15 per cent as a result of the
treaty. These duties often ran into
hundreds of dollars for a single
instrument.
Many other groups will benefit.
Art importers will no longer pay a
35 per cent duty on sculpture in Is-
rael, 30 pe'cent in Pakistan or 45
per cent III Ceylon. Life, too, will
become simpler for Swedish customs
officials who have have had to com-
pute the duty on paintings based on
the width of the frame and picture
combined with the total weight.
Gramophone record users will no
longer pay 20 per cent duty in Thai-
land, 45 per cent in Ceylon and 50
per cent in Pakistan. In Ceylon, a
27 per cent duty on radio sets for
the blind is abolished.
The Unesco treaty thus constitutes
a kind of indirect subsidy to educa-
tion, the arts and the sciences. It
means that governments have agreed
to forego revenues which they have
derived in the past from the pockets
of lovers of art, readers of books, or
from the limited budgets of educa-
tional institutions importing essen-
tial equipment from abroad.
Most of the revenue derived by
governments from such duties is
relatively small anyway. As the
Manchester Guardian has said,
"No country would suffer economic
disaster if most of these regulations
were swept away."In reality, no
governments ever wanted to cripple
education with its customs laws.
They were prepared to drop their
. carriers, but some kind of interna-
tional machinery was needed to pro-
vide them with a way of doing so.
This Unesco has done.
As early as 1946, it assumed the
leadership of a campaign to abolish
trade barriers to knowledge. Unes-
co's General Conference agreed that
an international treaty, to be adopt-
ed by as many nations as possible,
was the best answer. In 1949, Unes-
co sought the advice of the Contract-
ing Parties to the General Agree-
ment on Tariffs and Trade which
met at Annecy, France. Thirty-four
countries, including 26 Unesco mem-
bers, took part in this trade confer-
ence which set up a special com-
mittee to draft the treaty. The men
on this committee succeeded for the
first time in establishing a common
international standard.
The Unesco treaty was opened for
signature in Noverilber 1950. Since
then, in addition to the eleven coun-
tries which have now ratified, 19 na-
tions have signed the agreement.
Most of them are now seeking rati-
fication by their parliaments.
The pact has received widespread
support from the world press, from
official agencies and voluntary
groups. The Manchester Guardian
declared that"there is no reason for
criss-crossing the world with bar-
riers against the spread of know-
ledge,"and urged governments to
ratify. The UN Economic and Social
Council, the Brussels Treaty Powers
and the Council of Europe have
stressed its importance.
At Uppsala, Sweden, a conference
of European newspaper editors call-
ed on"liberal-minded people in all
countries"to support the treaty.
And the New York Times wrote :"In
a world in which freedom of infor-
mation has become constantly more
restricted, the United Nations pact
is a welcome and encouraging move
which the United States ought to
support."
Some 20 international non-govern-
mental organizations have also en-
dorsed it. The International Fede-
ration of Newspaper Editors and
Publishers and the International
Exchange Committee (a free trade
body) have urged their national as-
sociations to support ratification. So
also have the League of Red Cross
Societies and the International
Council of Women.
When the treaty came into force
on May 21, Unesco's Director-Gen-
eral made the following statement :
"On behalf of Unesco I congratu-
late the first adherents to this inter-
national instrument of cultural ex-
change, and sincerely trust that they
will soon be jDined by others. The
readiness of Governments to ratify
and implement the agreement will
give the world fresh proof of their
refusal to turn geographical front-
iers into intellectual barriers. It
will show that they are determined
to promote that intellectual and mo-
ral solidarity of mankind which
strengthens peace through the com-
munion of minds."
UNES

qOURIER JULY 1952. Page 15
The photos on this page show some of the articles which will now enter
duty-free in the countries which have ratified Unesco's free trade treaty :
architectural and industrial plans, materials for the blind, geographical
maps, educational films, scientific equipment, printed music, works of art,
