Page 14. JUNE t952
HOPES AND BITTERNESS
OF THE ARAB REFUGEES
IT is three years since I first saw Mr. Fattah
Nounih in an Arab refugee camp not far
from Jericho. lie is still at his refugee
school in El Karameh but in these three
years great changes have taken place there.
When I saw Mr. Nounih for the first time in
his black coat and striped trousers he looked
as impressive as any schoolmaster could hope
to be. But somehow his rather solemn beha-
viour and appearence did not fit in with his
surroundings, and least of all with what he
proudly called"my school."
His school was the burning sand of the
Jordan valley on which hundreds of Arab
refugee children were sitting in groups of
between 4U and 30, some chanting verses from
the Koran, some counting, others listening,
and a few even tracing English irregular verbs
in the sand. There were no books and not
even a blackboard ; there was just sand and
the deafening noise of children reciting in
chorus at the tops of their voices.
Despite the noise, the heat and the absence
of even the most elementary items of school
equipment, Mr. Fattah Nounih escorted me as
proudly as any headmaster might have done,
from class to class, and finally to his office-
Hn old army tent-where I explained that I
had been sent by Unesco to find out what it
could do to help him and other refugee teachers.
We made lists : so many blackboards, so
many pencils, notebooks, textbooks, maps, and
then, after reflecting a moment, this desert
schoolmaster suddenly added :"And I should
like a schoolbell, please."I thought at first
he was joking-a schoolbell in the wilderness.
Today, three years later, he receives visitors
in a neat little office in which chairs have
replaced the boxes on which we once sat. His
600 students still recite from the Koran, but the
older ones learn history, geography and En-
by Willem V AN VUT
glish. Each of the 20 groups has its own class-
room built of white-washed mud bricks, com-
plete with blackboards, chalk, pencils and
plenty of other equipment. And the head-
master now has his bell to summon the chil-
dren to classes.
But all these changes have not been brought
about simply by financial help from Unesco.
The school walls were built by the headmaster,
his pupils and some of their elder brothers.
The chairs and benches were made in an
apprentice workshop attached to the school, as
also were 81 pairs of shoes which Mr. Nounih
keeps in reserve.
The schoolbell was a gift from the Unesco
Youth Club in Amsterdam, Holland. A ship-
ment of notebooks came from Norway, black-
boards arrived from South Africa. The Calder
High School for Girls in Liverpool, Engtand,
made a collection and sent a cheque for
t 12. 0. 10. From Antwerp, Belgium, three
16 m. m. film projectors were shipped to the
Middle East.
With such gifts, an endless list of indiv-
iduals, clubs, schools and organizations in all
parts of the world have taken voluntary
action to help Mr. Fattah Nounih and his
800 colleagues to keep open the schools for
Arab refugee children in the Middle East.
The combined efforts of the U. N. Relief and
Works Agency (UNRWA) and some of the
Specialized Agencies (Unicef, WHO, Unesco)
have served a great humanitarian purpose.
Nearly 1, 000, 000 refugees who possess no
means of existence whatever, were kept from
starvation, protected against diseases and
provided with the equipment to continue the
education of their children. The Palestinian
refugees are grateful for these efforts. But
what is their actual position ? Mr. John B.
Blandford, Dil'eetOl of UNRWA, described it
earlier this year to the United Nations Assem-
bly in Paris :
"Today, almost a million refugees look back
upon more than three years of homelessness.
Approximately one-half of them are children
of 15 years and less ; there are more than
thirty thousand births a year. One-third of
the refugees live in organized camps or tents,
mud huts and barracks. The remainder are
scattered through villages and towns in temp-
orary rooms, old public buildings and caves.
Eight hundred and seventy-five thousand live
on rations which provide a daily average of
1600 calories per person. For clothing they are
principally dependent on the generosity of
private agencies. A small number of the
wage learners find employment, but in so doing
are often competitive with natives of the
country in which they work. Declining per-
sonal resources of the refugees has caused a
steady drift from private rooms to public tents
and huts. The problem daily grows in size
and intensity.
There can be no stability or security in this
mass dislocation and temporary way of life. A
recent storm of nine days duration destroyed
six thousand tents, ravaged 3, 000 mud huts and
momentarily unsheltered almost one hundred
thousand refugees. More tragic is the steady
weakening of the defences of family and reli-
gious life-the steady deterioration of morale."
To provide a solution for this great humani-
larian problem and enable the refugees"to
move out of a valley of despair and up a road
of hope", as Dr. Blandford put it, the Director-
General of UNRWA proposed, and the UN
General Assembly approved a $ 250, 000, 000
programme to help refugees obtain adequate
housing and employment ; permit them to move
from camps to suburban housing projects and
rural villagps ; and help them to become not
Through the combined efforts of the U. N. Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) and some of the U. N. Speciaiized Agencies, nearly 1, 000, 000 homeless
refugees, with no means of existence whatever, have been kept from starvation, protected against disease and helped to continue the education of their children.
UNESCC

JUNE 1952. page 15
THREE YEARS OF
HOMELESSNESS
only self-supporting but ultimately economic
assets of the Near East countries.Meanwhile, the refugees'general attitude is
one of both bitterness and gratitude. Bitterness,
because of the continued existence of drab
camp life and the desire of many to return
to their former homes. Gratitude, because they
are aware of the goodwill of people from all
over the world.
Unesco was among the first to invite the
whole world to help to keep the Arab refugee
schools in action. Declaring that.'these chil-
dren cannot be brought up on bread alone",
Unesco appealed for money to buy books,
classroom supplies and teaching materials. As
fast as grants and gifts allowed, Unesco opened
more schools in the Middle East Camps. When,
in 1950, the United Nations decided to convert
its emergency aid unit into the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency the entire basis
of the education provided for the children
changed from a primarily social measure to
prevent the delinquency which follows idle-
ness, poverty and cramped living conditions.
It became an education aimed at preparing the
children for the task of earning a living and
contributing to the material and spiritual well-
being of the country in which they were to live.
The number of schools has steadily grown.
Today, Unesco and UNRWA are operating
119 schools such as the one at El Karameh, for
nearly 51, 000 boys and girls, scattered all over
the Middle East, in the Lebanon, Syria, Jordan,
and the Gaza area as compared with the
64 schools which provided elementary education
for about 33, 000 children in 1949.
Last year, a new vista opened up for a few
thousand of the young refugees. In some of
the schools vocational training classes were
opened up on a small scale, to supplement
ordinary classroom education with basic
training for a livelihood.
In these makeshift shops, girls learn dress-
making, knitting, embroidery, and home eco-
nomics. Education for girls is in itself a new
development, for before they became refugees, a
good many Arab girls never went to school. In
their home villages mothers would teach their
daughters everything that was thought proper
for a girl to know : housekeeping, needlework,
the care of babies. In the refugee camps,
however, home life lost much of its traditional
form. More and more girls are now being
allowed to attend school along with their bro-
thers. Although boys outnumber girls three
to one in the schools, still, for the first time,
thousands of young Arab women are growing
up with a knowledge of reading, writing,
arithmetic, geography, history and other school
subjects.
Vocational training for boys includes tin-
smithing, carpentry, shoe-making, black-
smithing and book-binding-all specialized
skills calling for special implements. The
things they make are immediately useful. At
the school of EI Karameh, run by Mr. Fattah
Nounih, for example, fifty boys are learning
how to make shoes. They are not elegant by
Western standards, the soles being made from
old tyres, and the uppers from disused canvas,
but the product is serviceable and saleable to
low income groups in Jordan.
Close to the EI Karameh refugee camp some
250 boys of the school are learning how to till
the land, how to plant and tend crops and
vegetables. Their production is used for the
supplementary feeding programme which
gives the schoolchildren part of their daily hot
meal. A less immediate but important result
is that these boys are getting agricultural
training through the United Nations which they
would formerly have obtained on the land
owned by their fathers or their father's em-
ployers. They are now being taught about soil
erosion, tree planting and irrigation in prepar-
ation for the time when they will be earning
a living as farmers, fruit growers and market-
gardeners.
These are some of the positive results that
have been achieved. But there are many pro-
blems to be solved, many needs to be satisfied.
More teachers are required, but teachers must
be paid. School equipment is lacking, but this
must come from abroad. Shortage of tools is
preventing the opening of more vocational
training centres.
Individual needs are modest, but multiplied
by the total number of refugee children, the
overall demands are tremendous. As a result,
the educational efforts of the United Nations
to tackle the problem of re-integrating youth
have so far been restricted by lack of funds
to a comparatively small number of benefi-diaries.
Even the maintenance of existing facilities,
difficult enough in itself, is not going to meet
the problem. There are still some 130, 000 refu-
gee children in the 6 to 14 age group eager
to go to school. Thousands of teen-agers are
still getting no training. Forty thousand adults
have learned to read-but now find themselves
in the ronic circumstances of having nothing
to read. Babies are still being born in their
hundreds to swell the refugee problem.
The progressive social planning that has
been initiated in the schools for Middle East
refugee children must be continued and
developed. The children must be taught and
trained to become productive citizens and not
left, illiterate and ignorant, to add to the
troubles of the Middle East.
: COURIER
Some facets of Arab refugee life are expressed in these few photos. For the aged who have exchanged a settled
family existence for a temporary way of living in tents, mud houses or huts, life has indeed become bitter. For the
young, sports and studies... and youth itself... help keep alive the spirit of hope. For the few wage earners who,
like this former forester now working in a re-afforestation nursery, have found employment, life has begun again.
