MARCH 1952 Page I 3-UNESCO COURIER
OF all the works of art in the
Temple of Koryuji at Kyoto,
Japan, perhaps the most
graceful and subtle is the
statue of Miroku-Bosatsu (shown
here). Made of carved wood and
covered with gold lacquer, the figure
(also known as Maitreya Bodhisattva
in Sanskrit) dates back to the Hakuho
Period of the 7th century and
represents the deity worshipped by
"Buddhists as the future Messiah who
will descend from heaven to earth to
save mankind. Until recently this
was the only treasure of the Koryuji
Temple ever made public. The
photographs which follow on the next
pages are the first ever taken, and
they have never before been published.
 
M
Unknown treasure
of Japanese art

UNESCO COURIER-Page 14 MARCH 1952
Prince Shotoku Taishi, in whose honour the Koryuji Temple was founded the year after his death,
622 A. D., inspired a series of giant coloured drawings on silk portraying his life. Each panel is 16 ft.
by 9 ft. Above, portion of one of drawings executed during the Murumachi Period (15-16th century).
Only ten sets of
these photos are
..
In existence
JAPAN is a treasure house of Oriental art-but
much of it has remained unseen and unknown.
Priceless glories in the past were so jealously
guarded in certain temples and monasteries
that most people were never even allowed to look at
them ; and, until recently, making copies or keeping
records of these treasures was generally forbidden.
As a result, when earthquakes, fire, war or other
disaster destroyed such temples, not only was re-
construction virtually impossible, but the lack of
details left a gap in history, religion and art that can
never be filled. And there have been many big
disasters to artistic masterpieces-for instance, the loss
by fire in 1948 of the magnificent main hall of the
Koryuji pagoda, one of the country's finest.
Fortunately, the contents of Koryuji had been well
documented, so that what the flames devoured was not
really lost for ever. But such is not always the case.
Some 25 miles away, in Kyoto, art lovers were not
only horrified about the Koryuji fire ; they were
alarmed, too. For Kyoto is proud of its treasures.
Capital of Japan from 794 to 1869, it is noted for
its magnificent temples, shrines and monuments, and
for numerous craftsmen who faithfully keep up the
fine traditions of Japanese art. But nothing in Kyoto
is more famed throughout Japan than Koryuji, one of
the world's oldest wooden temples.
Originally erected in honour of Prince Shotoku (572-
621 A. D.), the temple was rebuilt in 1165, and partial
repairs were made in 1558-59. Its outstanding feature
is a subtle, refined and graceful statue of the future
Buddist Messiah, Miroku-Bosatsu, believed to have
been sculptured by the prince himself.
The prince too has his statues in the temple, and
it is still the custom for Japan's newly-crowned
emperors to send their coronation robes to Koryuji to
dress one of these royal memorials.
Yet, even at Koryuji, virtually no records were kept
to indicate to posterity what it was and all that it
contained. If disaster overcame Koryuji, it would be
lost in every sense of the word.
The Kyoto Unesco Co-operative Association there-
fore arranged to produce a photographic record of
Koryuji in 1950. In all, 184 photographs were
commissioned of its treasures.
Only ten sets were made, however. One each went
to the Emperor of Japan, the Supreme Allied Com-
mander in Japan, the Louvre Museum in Paris,
the British Museum in London, the Library of Congress
in Washington, the Boston Museum of Fine Art, the
Tokyo National Museum, the Kyoto Museum and the
Kyoto Unesco Association. The tenth was sent to
Unesco headquarters in Paris ; and the photographs on
these pages, selected from the Unesco set, are published
here for the first time. RICHARD O'FARRELL,
One of Koryuji's wood statues of Umoregi-Jizo-Bosatsu,
the patron god of children, is only the height of a
child : 3 ft. 3 ins. A work from the ninth century.
Carved and coloured wooden figure of
Hata-no-Kawakatsu, the god who founded
the famed Temple of Koryuji in 622 A. D.
Upper part of the image of Makira, one of the Twelve
Deities, and an attendant to the Messiah of the future,
Miroku-Bosatsu. This statue was carved in the year 1064.

MARCH) 952 Page 15-UNESCO COURIER
SYMBOL OAF WISDOM
Hands of Amida-Nyorai, one of the outstanding figures in the long history of Buddhism, show the influence
of Indian art on Japan. Position of hands symbolizes the teaching of wisdom through inner purity, which
leads to tranquillity. Made of carved wood covered with gold lacquer, the statue dates from the ninth century.
Detail of upper body of Miroku-Bosatsu, which reveals the
exquisite beauty of the hand and the purity of expression
of the face. The head used to be crowned with a diadem.
Twelfth century image of a god. carved in
wood. The existence of this figure only
became generally known eleven years ago.
Head of a goddess. This masterpiece in carved
natural wood, dating from the later Heian period (12th
century), was only discovered on December 28, 1941.

UNESCO COURIER-Page 16 MARCH 1952
MPv
MM
One of the richest yet least known storehouses of Japanese art is the wooden Temple of
Koryuji situated on the western outskirts of Kyoto. Here are preserved the treasures produced
by brilliant Japanese sculptors and artists between the 7th and 15th centuries. The history
of Japanese sculpture may be said to date from the introduction of Buddhism from Korea
in 552 A. D. less than a century before the construction of the Koryuji Temple. It is surprising
that so many of the sculptures of Japan still exist since they were often carved in wood and
: 1ave been housed in wooden buildings exposed to recurrent conflagrations. Their preserva-
tion has been mainly due to the important part that works of art have played in religion and to
the reverent care accorded to them. In spite of this a large number were destroyed by fire and
earthquakes. By 1897 systematic State protection was undertaken and thousands of works of
art were classed as"national treasures."Later, photographic records were made of them.
No photographs of the art treasures in the Temple of Koryuji were taken, however, until 1950
and these masterpieces have therefore remained practically unknown outside Japan up to
today. On pages 13, 14 and 15 we present for the first time a few examples which illustrate
the striking grace and beauty preserved at Koryuji. Above, a rear view of the statue of Miroku-
Bosatsu, the Buddhist Messiah of the future, formerly the principal figure in the main hall
of thrs'much-revered Temp) e. A different statue of the same deity is published on page 13.