Lampang, Thailand.
DIGNITY made way for Impudence. Boon
Tam, the giant tusker, stood aside and let
Too Too, the tawny terrier take the lead.
And for the very good reason that the
elephant feared the King Cobra, and TooToo, our
snake-dog, did not. He went jauntily into the
bamboo undergrowth. Chan, the forester,
released the safety-catch of his colt revolver.
Boon Tam, forced by the goad of his mahout,
warily pushed his, and our way through the
jungle.
One would have thought that TooToo took a
delight in teasing his mountainous friend. He
would scurry on ahead and stop dead. So would
Boon Tam. He would sniff at a dangling vine.
The elephant would give it a wide berth. The
terrier would get excited over the spoor of a wild
pig and go haring off leaving the elephant
"unprotected".
Once he himself was taken aback. Across our
path wriggled something black and apparently
furry. TooToo sniffed and sprang back
dismayed. The reptile was a giant earthworm
about ten inches long, very much alive but being
carried shoulder high by a swarm of ants, like
the Lilliputians manhandling Gulliver. The
captive would wriggle desperately and the
swarm of ants would sway but hang on.
Meanwhile, I had troubles of my own. I don't
ask anyone to believe it-but I had absentmind-
edly trekked into the jungle in my house-
slippers and in the squelch I could feel things
real and imaginary slithering in and out. I was
more worried about hookworm and leeches than
about King Cobras. So we went deeper and
deeper into the jungle of the teak forest-
TooToo, Boon Tam, Chan, the officer of the Royal
Thai Forests, the teak-fellers with their saws
and axes, and the jungle farmers and their
women folk with their curved, razor-edged kris.
And Nai Khan Chaiyen-"Little Mister Pitcher-
Who-Never-Gets-Excited"an appropriate name
for a jungle twelve-year-old, who fetches and
carries water. Jungle clearing is thirsty work,
and running errands to a jungle waterhole needs
a bit of nerve.
The jungle excursion may seem remote from
our mission, but, believe me, Chan Watanasuva-
kul, Bachelor of Science (Forestry) and his
fellow-conservators are as much"Men Against
Disease"as Dr. X and Professor Y.
The reason why the UN Food and Agricul-
tural Organization raJ1lIæ forestry and forest
management high in its technical aid programme
in South East Asia, is not just the commercial
value of timber or indeed, helping to house the
world's people, but because the food of Thailand
may depend on what happens to the forests.
"Some undeveloped countries are actually poor
but potentially rich while Thailand is actually
rich but potentially poor", said an FAO nutrition
expert."It has a rich and fertile soil. It has,
second only to rice, the wealthy export of teak.
But its population is beginning to rise steeply.
In another generation it may be short of'food
instead of exporting it."
They will have to increase, not lose, productive
acres. Crops depend on the control of the foods,
Here as elsewhere in South East Asia most of
the population is to be found on the banks of the
rivers and the alluvial plains. But the rivers
which supply the irrigation for the rice fields
also drown crops, the stocks and the people,
leading to hunger and to disease.
And soil conservationists look at Thailand's
rivers after a tropical downpour with the
concern of doctors confronted by a haemorrhage.
The rivers rise several feet an hour and swirl
past, the colour of liquid teak, heavy with eroded
soil scoured off hills where forests once checked
the run-on'.
The get-rich-quick teak cutting of the past has
already diminished the average size of teak trees
to about half. Peasant methods of cultivating
the jungle by clearing the trees and setting fire
to what remains so as to get the ash, and than
moving on somewhere else, have exposed soil to
the sun and to the hose-pipe violence of tropical
storms.
Now most of the forests are Royal preserves.
Concessions are lapsing and leases reverting to
the Crown and cutting is under supervision.
Not that cutting is a bad thing. Indeed selective
cutting can improve the forest. Nor is jungle
farming a bad thing-provided that it is done
the right way.
Thailand is fully alive to this and has called
in intennational forestry experts through FAO to
add experience elsewhere in the world to the

IoIESC (OURIER JUNE 1952. Page I 3
. C U T TIN G THE I E A K T R E E'S'T H R 0 AT'
local experience of their own trained foresters.
These foresters also can have the opportunity
through FAO fellowships to go and study prac-
tices elsewhere.
FAO has brought in four experts, to advise
on Forest Management, Reafforestation, Mecha-
nisation and Sawmilling. And we went into the
jungle to find out what is meant by"Forest
Management".
Deep in the forest where the sunshine filtered
green through a screen of foliage, Chan chose
his tree.
The lumbermen with slashing axes, cut a
"girdle"-a deep gash round the trt1nk about
2 feet from the ground. He cut through the
combium through which passes the food vessels
from the roots and the leaves. In fact, it was a
case of cutting the teak-tree's"Throat". But it
will take two years to die-off and dry-off so that
when it is felled the log will be light enough to
float for anything from two to six years down-
river to Bangkok.
Beyond this he sanctioned a clearing with no
teak or other valuable wood, but other timber for
the peasants to fell and the Government to sell,
and with a bamboo undergrowth to fire to provide
the ash.
The men got to work with their axes and in a
matter of minutes trees were crashing. The
women with their knives cleared the wndergrowth
and lopped branches. With all their energy and
speed it would take them weeiks to clear the two
acres.
Then with long spiked sticks they would make
holes for the rice-seed and would plant their
cotton, their water-melons, their peppers and
their vegetables. And o. n the same ground they
would plant teak trees under the supervision of
the foresters.
This is the hard way to win rice, because the
ground they clear is theirs only for a year. By
then the teak would have asserted itself and
become a plantation and they would have to
repeat the process.
But"shifting cultivation"of this kind has beg. n
their traditional way. The difference now is
that it is a healthy instead of a destructive
process, supplying them with their vital rice,
cotton which they make into their clothes and
with a varied vegetable diet. But instead of the
scorched earth policy of abandoning the land
when its rice-fertility is exhausted and leaving
it to the off-scourings of the rains, they leave a
plantation of 800 teak saplings an acre, which
will be thinned to 80.
Ln ten years time, these trees will be useable
as timber and in a hundred and seventy nine years
it will be as valuable as the one we saw felled in
a nearby logging operation.
This veteran had been girdled and forest-
seasoned for two years when Chan ordered it to
come down. With axes and saws, (with"Little
Mister Pitcher-Who-Never-Gets-Excited"pulling
like a grown-up) they brought down the giant in
half a. n hour. They then sawed off the upper
reaches leaving a log three cubic metres in
size.
Its value on the jungle site is about 2400 ticals,
or 120 dollars, or 1 : 45. When it floats into
Bangkok, in three years'time, it will be worth
twice as much and when it reaches the cabinet-
makers in Europe or America it will be worth
at least four times as much.
That is why it pays teak-robbers to steal the
logs out of the river on their long journey, take
it to saw-pits in the juggle and slice it, by hand,
into planks for smuggling to markets.
With a deft axe, the huge log was shaped, given
a sharp nose like the bow of a ship and notched
for the fixing of chains. Boon Tam then rolled
it into position with his tusks and prepared for
the long haul.
When he strained on the chain it would not
budge. He bellowed with fury as TooToo barked
and the lumberman shouted and the mahout
goaded him. Then with his hind foot, he pushed
it clear of the root obstruction and went crashing
through the jungle-a living bulldozer.
At one point he struck a rock. He cried with
exasperation and tears ran down his cheeks.
Then, his brain-which is an intelligent (mite-
came to the rescue of his muscles. He turned
and tusked it past the obstacle. Then, he had to
drag it through a mat-hut jungle village. It
looked as though at any moment he would sweep
away the frail huts but always he edged and
twisted it past, like a boatman steering between. n
rocks.
As Chan said, you can mechanize the sawmills,
install stacking machines and road-haulage
trucks, but in the jungle itself, the elephant is
the only practical machine.
With foresight and fair-warning, with their
own able foresters and the added experience
which FAO can bring from other parts of the
world, the Thais can repair past havoc and avoid
the disasters which ruthless forest destruction
has caused to agriculture elsewhere in the world.
And so, strange as it may seem, the teak
forests of Thailand can help to feed the future
millions and preserve the health of the people.
Boum Tam, the giant tusker, is still the only pra'ctica) machine for these teak foresters in the jungles of Thailand. After the tree has been brought
crashing down and the upper branches sawn off, an elephant rolls the log into position and then hauls it away through the jungle undergrowth
