OURIER NOVEMBER 1952. Page t5
THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION
ONE of man's most cherished rights is to be able to hold opinionsand to express them. Yet this right which, in the words of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, includes
"freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive
and impart information and ideas through any media and
regardless of frontiers"is far from generally enjoyed in the world
today.
In the present state of international affairs, political differences
are raising serious barriers to the realization of this right. There
are, however, broad areas of human need and activity outside the
directly political sphere in which much can be done to lessen
impediments to freedom of information.
It is here that Unesco has been active in trying to remove the
obstacles which hinder the passage across frontiers of books,
newspapers, press despatches and, in general, knowledge and ideas.
One of Unesco's major initiatives was the Agreement on the
Importation of Educational, Scientific and Cultural Materials which
recently came into force.
Another was the Universal Copyright Convention, signed by
the representatives of 35 nations in Geneva last September. This
agreement supplements international copyTig-ht law, broadening
and strengthening the scope of existing bilateral and multilateral
instruments already in effect.'
Unesco has also been striving to relieve the crisis arising from
the shortage and maldistribution of newsprint and of paper for
books and publications. One of its proposals, calling for the
lowering of postal rates on newspapers and publications, was
adopted by the Universal Postal Convention last May.
In another field, Unesco has been working to promote the free
movement of persons engaged in educational, scientific and cultural
activities. It has called on governments to assist this movement
by reducing transport costs, passport and frontier formalities and
has urged the granting of fellowships and travel grants, particularly
for students, teachers and scientists.
To illustrate some of the obstacles which are still raised against
the right to information we present on this page two pictographs.
The first shows the unequal distribution throughout the world of
radio sets, cinema seats and daily newspapers ; the other indicates
the customs duties which hinder the free flow of information
across frontiers.
Press, Film, Radio
Pictograph shows the number of copies of daily newspapers, the
number of radio sets and the number of cinema seats that are
available to every 100 people in the different parts of the world.
Customs duties
Black bands symbolize frontiers. The
smaller the openings in them, the more
difficult it is (because of duties) to pass
books, radio set and newsreels into the
44 countries represented in the pictograph.
The figure immediately underneath the
openings indicates the number of coun-
tries in each group. The word"free"ap-
pears over countries which allow in books
or newsreels without demanding duty.
