'JUNE 1952. Pare'I
BUDDHIST PRIESTS'AN MODERN SCIENCE
WORK A'MIRACLE'IN THE HUMMING SWAMP
CHIENGMAI Northern Thailand.
THE malaria team sprayed with DDT the priceless
mosaics on the walls of the temple of Phra Norn
Nong Pung which means-"The Reclining Buddha
of the Humming Swamp."
Priests in their saffron coloured togas, their heads and
eyebrows close-shaven, stood by in silent approval.
Above them glowed the golden smile of the recumbent
Buddha, 65 feet long and sheathed from
head to foot in gold-leaf, an image so big
that they had had to build the temple round
it.
Today the Humming Swamp does not
hum so such..
When'we went out with Dr. Bhatia, the
Indian entomologist from the World Health
Organization and his team of mosquito
hunters we dipped in vain into the water-
grasses of the irrigation streams. In a day's
search it was impossible to find a single
anopheles minimus, the midget mosquito
which has kept Northern Thailand malaria-
ridden for generations. And we could have
searched in vain through the whole of Se-
rapei, the district which, three years ago WHO, in
conjunction with the Thai Government and UNICEF,
chose as a demonstration area for malaria-control.
Notice that it was malaria control, an attempt to reduce
malaria to proportions in which it was no longer a public
health problem and a crippling disease for a whole popu-
lation. The project was not so ambitious as to expect
eradication. But today there are no new cases of mala-
ria and no malaria-bearing mosquitoes in Serapei.
At the temple of the Reclining Buddha we set up a
clinic on the steps of the pagoda. This was nothing
unusual. It had been held regularly there throughout
the whole project. In the verandas, or cloisters of the
temple were the desks and blackboards, the lay-teachers
and the chanting children of the village school-another
feature of Thai Buddhism which gives honseroom to
compulsory civil education.
When Dr. Udom, the Thai doctor, had borrowed an
altar table as his clinic couch, the bell was rung and the
children came tumbling in a hilarious romp up the
temple steps, lined up, put their little straw hats at their
feet and waited their turn.
Dr. Udom pressed their little stomachs to find the tell-
tale swelling of the spleen which, in malaria sufferers,
bulges with the overwork which the disease imposes on
it.
Always it was the same : children who three years ago
would have been pot-bellied with malaria were found
An inspiring saga is unfolding in South-East Asia-the story of man'sstruggle against poverty, disease and ignorance, a hard but slowly
advancing struggle in which the United Nations and its specialized
agencies are joining with governments and the people. Recently a joint
UN and specialized agencies mission led by Ritchie Calder completed
a 25, 000 mile expedition to record in words and pictures something of this
struggle. Last month the COURIER began publication of Ritchie Calder's
report on Sarawak and Indonesia. This month we follow him into Thailand
where the people are improving their health and living standards with the
help and technical advice offered by of the international organizations.
normal and to Dr. Udom's questions they replied : No,
they had no fever. Nor their brothers, nor their sisters,
nor their parents. The shaking disease had left their
homes.
Looking on were the hoy-priests, no higger than the
primary schoolchildren, their shaven eyebrows giving
them a look of continuous surprise.
And surprised they might be, because here was a
modern miracle-a miracle for which the Buddhist
priests can rightly claim a large share of the credit.
The Miracle of the Humming Swamp is a lesson for
the whole world. Modern science has played its indis-
pensible part, but equally indispensible was the co-
operation of the Buddhist priests who, throughout the
whole area, instructed the faithful to work with the WHO
international experts, with the Government authorities
and with the diligent Thai doctors.
So far on this expedition, we have seen how primitive
fears and superstition as in the jungles of Borneo have
to be overcome before modern life-saving practice can
play their part. We have seen too how the tenets of
advanced religions can deny women safe childbirth.
But here in Northern Thailand, Buddhism was the
doctors'closest ally.
I have a great respect for Dr. G. Sambasivan, the
Indian maloriologist who headed the WHO mission, both
as a medical expert and as a diplomat, handling with
real understanding the local susceptibilities. But I also
n. _ ___ ___-__ 1__ L_ I`L_·_t ALL_. _Lnave a great respect lur we,"-, UU : I ftUlJUL Ul
the North, Chawkun Tepmunee, who receiv-
ed me in the great Temple of the Golden
Buddha.
When I thanked him for the example he
had given by instructing the priesthood to
co-operate with WHO which supplied the
experts and UNICEF which supplied the
DDT and the equipment, he demurred.
Why, he said, should he or the priests be
thanked for obeying the injunctions of
the Lord Buddha and working for the
living wellbeing of the people. Science
and religion were as one when they strove
for the good life.
This was reiterated by the Governor of
Chiengmai who, like his predecessor who launched the
project three years ago, has been the friend and active
helper of the international team. He was proud that in
his province there bad been this project which had
benefitted his people and which in a few years would
mean that all Thailand would be delivered from malaria,
but which had also brought doctors from other countries
for training. These doctors (with WHO fellowships)
would apply in their own countries lessons learned at
Chiengmai.
These lessons are illuminating.
In other parts of the world there have been spectacular
victories over malaria. Even before DDT, malaria could
be checked by laboriously seeking out the breeding places
of the mosquitoes and either draining the swamp areas
or treating them with oil.
Then there was the heart-warming examples of malaria
control in Greece, and of Sardinia and Cyprus where
both islands were enti-
rely freed from malaria (Continued on pane 12.)
.-
1 1 1
THROUGH
SOUTH EAST ASIA
(2)
· 1
by Ritchie Calder
u. N. Photographs by Eric Schwab
Summoned by the temple bell, the
village children line up for a
periodic medical examination.
. 1'1 1 1
1  1 1'1 1
URIER


Page 12. JUNE 1952 UNESdc
A CASE OFC
While a shaven-headed priest) looks on, a member of a WHO anti-malaria team sprays DDT on pri-
celess mosaics of the temple of Phra Norn Nong Pung-"Reclining Buddha of the Humming Swamp."
! N THRE E YEARS THE'SHAKING DISEASE'
HAS VANISHED
(Continued from poge II.) by the destruction of
the mosquitoes through
spraying their breeding places with DDT.
But land-locked countries have not the advantages of
islands and require a different strategy. In Sardinia and
Cyprus it meant a frontal attack and mopping-up opera-
tions. In Thailand, it meant a pincer movement, cutting
off the mosquitoes when they were on the offensive.
When Dr. Sambasivan arrived in the spring of 1949,
he had to ! plan a campaign which would be economical
in DDT and in manpower, because it had to be scaled to
the resources which Thailand could afford in extending
the lessons of the project to the whole country-nnan-
cial, but also medical resources. Thailand is short of
doctors.
First it was necessary to choose a workable area. He
selected Chiengmai in Northern Thailand, in the hills
behind which lies Burma. This was an endemic malaria
area. That is, malaria was constantly present in 60 to 70
per cent of the population, not flaring up into sudden
and deadly epidemics, but robbing the people of health
and fitness and liable, like a sleeping volcano of disease,
to erupt.
Second, they had to find the mosquito responsible for
malaria in this part of the world. There were 30 types
of mosquito in the area, any one of which might be the
villain.
They were lucky. The very first day, Dr. M. D. Bhatia,
who had joined the mission from the Malarial Institute
of India, and his assistants, found the spores of human
malaria in the salivary gland of the 13th mosquito they
examined-the anophiles minimus.
Third, they had to study its habits. They found that,
unlike certain other mosquitoes which favour stagnant
water, it bred only in running, fresh water. This was
lucky because the experts could define its area of opera-
tions. It belonged chiefly to irrigation channels fast fed
from the hills and could not survive in the sluggish
canals of the lowlands.
Fourth, they had to find its bases for attack on humans.
They systematically examined the peasant huts-built on
stilts, with plaited mat walls and thatched with attap, a
broad, brown leaf, tobacco like. After studying the
habits of 15, 000 specimens, they satisfied themselves that
it rarely rested higher than 8 feet from the floor-an
economy when it came to spraying-that it lurked in
the walls and in hanging clothes, and that it was mainly
active between 9 in the evening and 4 in the morning.
They decided to attack its.'airstrips"-the walls and
hangings of the houses. The homes of 40, 000 people
were involved but, with the help of the priests and the
village headmen they set about it systematically. All
over the area one sees huts with letters and numbers and
dates painted on them'''A/16 DDT 21/4/50,"meaning
the village, the number of the house and the date of the
first spraying. So thoroughly was this done that the
DDT sign is now the postal address of the householders.
At the end of the first year, the Thai members of the
team led by Dr. Udom and Dr. Vimol were entirely
capable of handling the scheme and the international
members retreated to the role of advisers. This tactful
move strengthened rather than lessened their authority.
All this time UNICEF had been providing the DDT
sprayers and vehicles for the pilot project, matched in
cost by the Government's provision of staff.
They extended the Serapei project to five times as
many people, 200, 000, and at the same time trained and
advised the personnel which the Thai Government instal-
led and financed in the adjoining area of Hangdong.
This scheme was also so successful that it was extended
five times.
Yet another scheme was started in Central Thailand,
covering a population of 50, 000. In this case half the
cost of the, materials was born by WHO directly.
The pilot projects also provided training facilities for
the American and Thai staffs who were to work the ECA
schemes in conjunction with the Thai Government. This
provision of direct American aid has taken the place of
the WHO/UNICEF contributions and, following through
the plans prepared by the WHO experts, aims to clear
Thailand of malaria within 3 years. Thus the protection
already given to 600, 000 people will be extended to
another 4 million.
By killing the mosquito with the lingering poison of
DDT, the Chiengmai methods broke the cycle of malaria.
And they killed off the species. In a search of 5, 000
man-hours not an"a-minimus"has been found. The
disease faded out. And for a cost of 14 cents a head,
compared with 6 dollars a head in Sardinia.
This parable of health began with The Kathin and it
ended with The Kathin.
The Kathin is the festival which goes on for weeks in
celebration of the end of the Buddhist Lent and the
beginning of the Buddhist Spring. With the last of the
monsoon, the thousands of young Thais who have entered
the monasteries for a term of spiritual service-and
practically every Thai does-emerge and exchange their
humble yellow robes for civilian garb. The permanent
priests receive from the faithful their new robes. And
everyone makes merry.
It was at the Kathin that the Chief Abbot had first
enjoined the people to co-operate with WHO and when
we reminded the Governor of Chiengmai, Udom Bunya-
prasop, of this he immediately said we must join in the
Kathin. He ordered a procession complete with the
Corps of Court Dancers and the Busabok, the triumphal
car which the people drag with ropes through the streets.
The beautiful dancers of the Court, with their vivid
robes and flowered head-dresses and their goldern finger-
nails, six inches long, danced barefoot in the streets.
Every turn of the foot, every gyration of the body,
every movement of the hand is the exquisite dumb-
alphabet of age-old legend.
And the procession moved through Chiengmai to Wat
Suan Dawk the principle temple.
Only once a year does the Golden Buddha, the most
precious image in all North Thailand, emerge from the
dim recesses of his temple. For this occasion, the Chief
Abbot gave a special dispensation with priestly rites, the
golden image was carried down the temple steps and
enthroned on the lawn before the pagoda. People
prostrated themselves before it. The Dancers danced
before it.
Tradition and modern science met in common
thanksgiving.
