COURIER NOVEMBER 1952. Page 7
WOMEN'S
ACCESS TO
EDUCATION
by Jacques Guérif
THE proclamation that"everyone has the
t right to education"qualified by the
words"without distinction of sex..."
made by the United Nations General
Assembly when it adopted the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights in 1948, marked
a world-wide condemnation of prejudices that
have existed throughout history against giving
women equal educational opportunities with
men.
Until recent times, all countries applied quite
different systems of education for men and for
women. It required all of Plato's audacity for
him to give women in his Republic an identical
role with men, and to institute the idea of
co-education.
Manuscripts and chronicles of the Middle
Ages and of the Renaissance, it is true, speak
of the considerable role played by capable,
courageous and enlightened women in political
life and in art and literature, but these
remarkable women did not stop most men
expressing the view, as did Moliere's Chrysale,
that"It is not right, and for many reasons, that
a women should study and know so many
things."
Even philosophers and educators took a
long time to abandon the accepted ideas of
their times. François Fenelon, author of a
Treatise on the Education of Girls, a work
considered very advanced in his day, declared :
"Keep young women within bounds. Teach
them that their sex should regard science with
a modesty almost as delicate as that which
inspires a horror of vice."And even Jean-
Jacques Rousseau declared that"the virtue of
women is conditioned by their ignorance-and
docility."
It was not until the French Revolution that a
radical change of attitude was observed. At
that time Condorcet wrote :"Women are, like
men, reasonable beings, capable of making an
intelligent contribution to the betterment of
society and mankind.
"So far from hindering them in their role as
wife and mother, a good intellectual training
will make them more able in this respect-more
capable of maintaining in their husbands, and
fostering among their children, a love of truth
and devotion to the public weal."These views,
at that time purely abstract and doctrinal, were
a forecast of future evolution.
A century later, with the progress of
democratic ideas and also as a consequence of
great economic changes, this evolution began to
take shape. Feminist activities were organized.
Between 1875 and 1880, the fight to extend
educational opportunities to women started to
show results in the United States, England,
Germany and France, with the setting up of
schools which were soon to receive official
approval.
Primary and secondary education was opened
to women in countries with more liberal ideas
(but with modifications and limitations of
curricula which often kept their education quite
different from that given to boys). It was not
long, however, before women, who had until
now been refused admission to universities,
won their right to higher education.
The two world wars and their concomitant
loss of human life, plus the economic and social
upheavals that have come about since the
beginning of the 20th century have helped to
accentuate this evolution. Women showed
themselves to be perfectly capable of replacing
men in many types of industrial work.
New conditions of life led to greater numbers
of women than ever seeking paid jobs, either
in factories or in shops, or in the liberal and
administrative professions. Long and complete
studies and professional training became indis-
'Oensable to them in their new positions.
This is the state of affairs in the more
progressive countries. But how about the less
developed ones, which are now striving to make
up for lost time ? There it is generally realized
that, without the support of women, there can
be no victory in the fight which these various
countries are conducting against poverty and
ignorance.
But here the problem is a double one, for
the education of young women must go hand-
in-hand with the task of giving adults an
elementary knowledge of hygiene, child-care,
domestic economy, rural and industrial work.
New conditions of life have led more and more women to enter professions and take on jobs tradition-
ally reserved for men. But women are still frequently handicapped in their careers by discrimination.
Events which have changed the face of the
world have also brought womén face-to-face
with situations which are entirely new to them
and to which they must now adapt themselves.
This adaptation, in other words, has become a
matter of practical necessity which has left
questions of principles behind it.
It is not enough to recognize the need for
women's right to education ; it is also necessary
to. decide what measures must be taken to
ensure their access to it. The difficulties of a
pedagogical order which today prevent compul-
sory schooling from becoming universal-
insufficient schools and shortage of teachers-
are often serious, but are not factors which
seem to affect girls any more than they do boys,
except where the shortage of girls'schools is
more pronounced than those for boys in places
where the separation of the sexes is rigorously
applied, even in elementary schooling.
The basic reasons for the inequality of the
sexes in the matter of schooling, and the early
termination of study by girls, are due partly to
the financial position of parents, and partly to
the customs of countries and to popular opinion
which may be more or less favourable to the
emancipation of women and their participation
in certain fields of activity which have for long
been regarded as the exclusive province of men.
The reasons, then, are economic and social-
two factors which work together and which
cannot easily be dissociated.
Obviously, going to a professional or other
training college often entails heavy expense for
the maintenance of the student, perhaps in a
city a long way from his parents'home. When
the parents have not enough money to enable
all their children to do this, the girls find
themselves at a disadvantage with the boys,
who usually get priority.
Even when this choice has not to be made,
girls still tend to prefer a training that is
shorter and less costly, such as for a commercial
career. Also the parents are sometimes more
willing to make sacrifices to ensure their sons'
education because the possibilities open to
women are more limited than those for men,
despite the fact that the knowledge required
and certificates bestowed on both are exactly
the same.
Again, women often abandon their careers
after marriage, and therefore people usually
think it is not worthwhile to give them a long
and costly professional training which they
will not use to earn a living.
An important indication of the willingness of
governments to give practical effect to the
principle of equal educational opportunities for
women as proclaimed in the Universal Decla-
ration was given by the recent International
Conference on Public Education, held in
Geneva. Here 102 educators representing
51 countries chose this subject as their main
discussion theme. Emphasizing that the solu-
tions envisaged must be adapted to local
conditions in each country, they suggested some
steps that could be taken to overcome existing
prejudices and obstacles.
They declared that, in the drawing up of
plans for making education free and obligatory,
the provision of facilities for girls must be
treated with exactly the same priority as those
for boys. The same needs must be kept
in mind when it is intended to build or open
new schools and to employ more teachers.
Even taking into account the special course
which prepares girls for their role in the family
and in the community, length of compulsory
education should be the same for both sexes.
Similar qualifications should mean similar
degrees and positions. Young women should
have the same advantages as young men in the
way of scholarships and allowances, so that
they, too, can complete their studies without
facing extra difficulties on the secondary,
professional, technical and higher educational
levels.
In spite of the problems that arise in
connection with the free access of women to
all levels of instruction, as well as giving them
full civic and social responsibilities, there is no
basic difference between the aims of education
for women and of education for men. Each
must become capable of thinking for himself
or herself, of understanding the modern world
'as well as his or her own heritage of culture,
and of taking part actively in the life of his
or her country while remembering the role it
must play in the family of nations.
