Page t2. OCTOBER 1952
THE AWAKENtNG
VALLEY
(Photo Copyright Herbert Kirchhoff.) *
BOLIVIA LAYS FOUNDATIONS
FOR ECONOMIC BETTERMENT
THE type of association being worked out
between Bolivia and the United Nations
programme of technical assistance has a
special significance. Apart from the direct
economic benefits it should bring to Bolivia,
this association also constitutes a test of the
ability of technical àssistance to help reinforce
administrative and planning services which the
governement considers essential for the success
of its economic development scheme.
Realizing the need for a firm administrative
basis on which to develop more rapidly the
considerable natural resources which can help
the Bolivian people to achieve a higher
standard of living, the goverment requested the
United Nations for comprehensive assistance
both in establishing this structure and in
improving the country's internai economy.
Located not far below the equator, the diver-
sity of Bolivia's climate and vegetation
makes it possible to cultivate almost every
variety of plant or animal product. There are
few material human needs which could not be
satisfied from its rich soils, its rich mineraIs
and its rich water sources. Yet the conditions
of life for the majority of the Bolivian people,
heirs of the Inca and the Spanish civilizations
and inhabiting a country rich, in modern terms,
beyond the dreams of the Conquistadores, are
difficult in the extreme.
initeracy, disease and infant mortality rates
give cause for concern. The maintenance of
roads and railways has become a serious pro-
blem. Agriculture needs developing so that
foodstufis and plant materials can be produced.
in Bolivia insteaß of being imported as they
are today. vide surveys of oil and hydro-
electric power resources must be made so that
these can be properly developed.
For centuries silver from the mountain of
Potosi was one of the most important exports
of the Americas, but as the self-evident source
of wealth, the spectacular deposits of tin have
now replaced silver. IL is also known that
Bolivia possesses reserves of zinc, lead, anti-
mony, tungsten, copper, iron, oil and natural
gas. Gas and oil, with the enormous possibi-
lities of hydro-etectric power, could provide ail
the energy needed to promote Bolivian industry
for générations ahead.
But the tremendous task of developing these
natural resources and realizing improvements
in hea) th, éducation and food supplies calls for
more extensive administrative machinery than
that at present disposed of by Bolivia. This
was recognized by the Bolivians themselves
when they invited the United Nations to share
in a experiment which Mr. Trygve Lie has
described"as an innovation which would be
watched throughout the world by governments
in other countries with similar conditions.
A comprehensive 17 member Technical Assis-
tance Mission organized by the United Nations
under its regular programme in co-operation
with ILO, FAO and Unesco visited Bolivia in
1950 and surveyed the country's needs and
resources. The report of this mission contained
a number of spécifie proposais for economic and
social development in Bolivia, but as a founda-
tion for these projects, it made a suggestion
which the Bolivian Government endorsed, that
the United Nations should assist Bolivia in
obtaining the services of a number of experienc-
ed administrative officiais, drawn from a variety
of countries, whom the Government would
appoint to key positions as integral members of
the Bolivian Civil Service.
In agreement with the Government, and with
the help of FAO and ILO, the United Nations is
recruiting ten officiais for a period of three to
five years and is providing Bolivia with an
annual $ 200, 000 toward their empioyment.
These international recruited officiais are not
UN officiais but are being employed by the
Government and are directly responsible to it.
Eight of them are being assigned to the Central
Bank, the Ministries of Agriculture, Public
Works, Finance, Labour and of Mines, Petro)-
eum and Economy. Two are concerned with
public administration and social security. The
UN is also supplying Bolivia with the services
of 13 technical experts for periods of 6 or 12
months.
Here is an example of a country which is pre-
pared to plan its economic development, in a1l
its phases, with the help of international advice.
The success of this experiment will depend on
the ability of the country to train its own na-
tional experts to carry on without outside
help, and to do so as soon as possible.
