LEONARDO DA VINCI
the universal genius
15 April 1452 - 2 may 1519
by Jose de Benito
"HEBE is a miraculous story, all of
which is not only true, but can be
proved,"Paul Valéry once wrote of
the life of Leonardo da Vinci.
"Were it fictitious, it would form a chapter in
the mythology of the human mind and Leonardo
would be one of the heroes or demi-gods in the
history of the intellect. Yet all the proofs of
his stupendous life are there for those who
demand them and his great achievements may
be seen bv all who have eyes to see."This
explains why, in the words of his faithful Melzi,
at his death"all grieved at the loss of such a
man, whose like nature will never repeat."
In the year 1452, "Ser Antonio"noted in his
diary : "A grandson was born to me-the son
of Ser Piero, my
son-on April 15,
a Saturday, at three
o'clock in the morn-
ing."Ser Antonio,
a landowner living
in the Florentine
village of Vinci, was
a man of few
occupations. In a
declaration made in
1457, he stated that
he lived in his
house and did no-
thing. Presumably
he was 3sufficiently
fancies which never
left him, from the
language spoken by
the stains made on
old walls by mould
and peeling stucco,
and from the mes-
sage of the bells as
they pealed from
bey fry to belfry,
that he derived his
theory that"how-
ever ugly and even
absurd a thing may
seem, yet it may
enable the mind to
FEW of Leonardo do Vinci's original paintings havecome down to us today. In fact fewer than 20 are
known to cxist in the world. These are centred in
the large cities of Europe. Leonardo's drawings - though
far more numerous-are only in a limited number of
collections (Windsor Castle in England has the widest
selection).To help commemorate the 500th anniversary
of the birth of Leonardo on April 15, 1452, Unesco has
prepared a series of 45 travelling exhibitions each contain-
my 150 facsimile reproductions of the great master's
drawings. The exhibitions are being sent to the member
countries of Unesco for circulation in art galleries,
museums, workers'and youth centres, universities and
other educational institutions in city and country areas.
The drawings published here are from these exhibitions.
occupied tending his vines and his land and
watching hie five-year-old grandson running
about the house and fields. Little Leonardo
observed with rapture the falcons in flight,
the painstaking industry of the ants, and
the clouds overhead. He used every scrap of
paper that came his way to render the graceful
lines of the cypresses, the gnarled shapes of the
olive and fig-trees, the houses in the surround-
ing countryside and the outlines of the animals
that grazed on the hills.
The discoveries that Leonardo made in those
first five years of true liberty, in close com-
munion with nature, looking, assimilating and
understanding, left a profound mark upon his
mind. His earliest recollections were suffused
with light, with fantasy and with a prescience
of his future destiny. Leonardo himself tells
us of it in his Notebooks and in his Treatise on
Fainting.
One day, as he lay in his bed watching the
wind driving the clouds helter-skelter over the
top of Mount Albano, a falcon-the lesser eagle
of those valleys-alighted beside him, and after
a moment's contemplation, brushed Leonardo's
parted lips with its tail and throat-feathers, so
that-as though anointed by an eagle-his
destiny was marked by the cares of the bird
which lords it over the skies of Leonardo's native
Tuscany.
Another time, he found a grotto and, torn
between fear of the darkness and his curiosity
to discover its twilit mysteries, he crept in, and
perhaps even then glimpsed the harmony with
which he was later to endow his"Vir-
gin of the Rocks." And it was from his childish
fashion inventions of every sort."From this
idea, too he derived his use of lines, half imagi-
nary, half real, to depict battles, landscapes or
figures in motion, or to catch in the vibration of
tongues of bronze the sound of words and
phrases.
The song of the streams, of the birds and of
the wind in the olive-trees and vineyards around
Vinci led him to the study of music. His urge
to learn the why and the wherefore of things
was transformed into a love of drawing and
mechanics. His thirst for precision led him to
mathematics-to calculus and geometry. His
passion for knowledge and reading drove him to
learn Latin as the only vehicle whereby he could
read the volumes piled thigh in the library of the
parish priest at Vinci-his first teacher in the
humanities. And his repeated contemplation of
the stars in the Tuscan
sky roused him to study (Continued on page. 8.)
It was neither " La Gioconda " nor
"The Last Slipper"which brought
Leonardo the greatest fame in the
Italy of his day, but"The Battle of
Anghiari,"for which he made these
two studies of the heads of fighting
warriors. Leonardo undertook this
fresco, of which practically nothing
has been preserved, to decorate the
new council hall in the Palace of
Ihe Signory in Florence. He con-
ceived it as one of the"glorious
works by. which future generations
shaH know me"as indeed its size
indicated : 160 feet long by 32 feet
high. In fact the only part actually
done was the central group which
measured 23 feet by 10 feet. The
master then decided to use heat in
order to make secure the colours
and specially prepared ground on
\which they had been painted. When
heat was applied, however, the
colours in the upper part. ran or
scaled from the tall and ruined the
painting so that Leonard had to
abandon his task. The unfinished
and decayed painting was covered
over with new frescoes by Va sari
some 50 years later. Toe original
cartoon which served as a mode)
(0 the students of his generation
mysteriously disappeared. Today
the only existing memorials of the
great work are a number of original
pen studies (the originals of the-
reproduced here) several copies hy
contemporaries of Leonardo and co-
pies of copies, including one by Ru-
bens, now in the Louvre (Paris).
The Battle of
An ghiari
A lost work of art

: C COURIER APRIL 1952. Page 7
Leonardo hated to destroy any piece of paper on which he had
drawn with pen or crayon. His skelches, thus preserved,
reveal a mastery of form and movement, as well as his
universal genius. His personality flowed over and invaded
every field of human knowledge of his time, marking an
advance in every direction. Drawing in upper left corner
is one of the early studies of the "Last Supper. " In the lower
left corner. Leonardo da Vinci depiets bis conception of war.

A few years later, by an extraordinary stroke of luck
was discovered by Cardinal Fesch in a shoemaker's sl
The aged man with deep-set eyes was one of the few
ST. JEROME. Vatican Gallery. The story of the discovery of this unfinished painting on wood is amazing.
In 1820, Cardinal Fesch, Napoleon's uncle, spied a small cabinet amidst the bric-a-brac of a Rome curio shop.
The door held the St. Jerome panel from which a rectangular part containing the head had been cut out.
Leonardo was the first artist to rt :. : ugIìIZ" lil"pIa)
been able to do before, he also found the way to \
movement, rhythm of line and quality of texture
(Continued from page 6.)..
astronomy. He saw
with. hi, s eyes and his
will was strong, but ignorance interposed itself
like the bars of a cage between his thirst for
learning and universal-or as he termed it,
"solar"-freedom of knowledge. Leonardo
thereupon devoted all his energies to overcoming
the obstacle presented by those iron bars, in
order that, like the falcon that had anointed him,
he might fly free through space.
With that varied but incomplete stock of
knowledge, Leonardo left his village of Vinci
and came to the city of Florence, in those years
of the Qllalll'occnlo (1400-1500) the very heart of
the Renaissance. It was a great adventure to
arrive at the Tuscan capital where in the period
following the splendours of Dante and Boccaccio
Were gathered together the masterpieces of Giotto
in the church of Santa Croce, of Masaccio in the
church of Santa Maria del Carmine, and of
Mantegna and Piero della Francesca. The
patronage, first of Cosimo, and then of Lorenzo
di Medici, peopled the city of the rich silk and
wool merchants with the most illustrious names
in the arts, the culture and the science of the age.
The burghers of Florence had understood that,
if they were to reap the fruits of their wealth,
they must enjoy freedom. Without it their
possessions might, from one day to the next,
pass into the hands of the tyrant of the hour ; for
then as today, the one path to liberty lay through
culture. That is why thev called in Greek
masters to teach them, and why, not content
with that, they sent their young men of
outstanding promise and industry to study the
\vorks of antiquity in Greece. This policy paid
a rich dividend, and the Academy of Plato,
founded by Cosimo di Medici, was inspired by
the learning of men (like Pao ! o L'cceHo and
A perfect balance between the
Marsilio Ficino)'whom Lorenzo the Magnificent
collected around him.
For a youngster of sixteen, with Leonardo's
spiritual and mental make-up, Florence was the
ordeal of fire. Donatello had just died, and
Verrocchio, Ghiberti, Ghirlandaio, Alberti,
Perugino, Botticelli, Andrea del Sarto-all of
them magicians in the use of brush and chisel,
in gold and silver work, metal-casting and
building-were not legendary figures, but
beings of flesh and blood talking together and
discussing solutions to the problems they
encountered daily in their work.
Scarcely had Leonardo arrived in Florence,
when his father, the notary Ser Piero, thinking
to have his illegitimate son taught a trade, took
some of the boy's drawings to show to
Verrocchio. Verrocchio at once perceived the
young draughtsman's extraordinary gifts and
took him into his studio without further ado.
Thus Ser Piero was-fortunately-able to
forget his"youthful escapade,"and in the genius
who created the"Colleone"and the"David,"
Leonardo found a father, friend and guide, so
that in four years he passed from the status of
apprentice to that of master painter (1468-14i2).
His companions in the studio were Sandro
Botticelli, Lorenzo di Credi and Pietro Perugino.
Verrocchio, Leonardo and Credi first collaborated
publicly on the"Baptism of Christ."\Vhen the
public came to examine the picture, they realized
that another great artist was now making his
contribution to the greater glory of Florence.
Team-work was the rule in the"workshops"of
the Renaissance painters. The master would
plan, direct, paint in parts, compose, add the
finishing touches and sign the work."The
Annunciation,"preserved in the Uffizi Gallery,
is another collective product of Verrochio's
studio. The Angel in it is by Leonardo, and for
many years it was claimed that here the disciple
had excelled his master, though today that claim
is no longer upheld.
It seems that Leonardo continued to work with
Verrocchio until towards 1480, when the master
moved to Venice to start on the"Colleone"
monument for the Republic ; and not long
afterwards, BotticeIli and Perugino also left
Florence on an invitation from Pope Sixtus IV
to work in the Vatican chapel. In the twelve
years between 14di8 and 1480, Leonardo possessed
by his thirst for knowledge, not only worked at
his drawing, painting, sculpture and metal-
casting, but besides that, he visited the houses of
Leon Battista Alberti and Paolo Uccello, true
masters of æsthetics ; he read books on geo-
metry, hydraulics, mathematics and optics ; he
seized every opportunity to make the acquain-
tance of Yisiting masters, and counted among
his friends the physicist Toscanelli, the astro-
nomer Marmocchi, the cartographer Amerigo
Vespucci and the mathematician Benedetto
Aritmetico. He attended the Academy debates,
composed music and wrote words for songs,
made musical instruments, and untiringly took
notes and made sketches of everything he sa\v,
He loved nature in all its forms and longed to

e of luck, the missing rectangle with St. Jerome's head
aker's shop, where it was being used as part of a chair.
the few themes that obsessed Leonardo in his works.
the play of light and shade. As no draughtsman had
vay to unite subtlty of expressive definition with vital
xture as exemplified in the delicate draperies above.
capacity to see and to understand
plumb its secrets."Great love,"he said,
"springs from profound knowledge of the object
loved."His first-hand study of nature enabled
him to pursue this enormous diversity of inter-
ests'without thereby weakening his own per-
sonality. He filled notebook upon notebook :
"I tell painters that in art, no one should copy
the manner of another, else will he produce but
a nephew to nature, and not a son."
At the age of thirty, gifted'with everything
needed to fulfil his universal mission, and
engaged at the time on the"Adoration of the
Magi"-a picture which, although unfinished,
represents a revolution in æsthetic, perspective,
conception and composition-Leonardo betook
himself to Milan, bearing a silver lyre shaped
like a horse's head, which Lorenzo the Magni-
ficent was sending as a gift to Ludovico Sforza.
Conscious of his skill and firmlv assured of his
ideas, he sent to the Regent of Milan the famous
letter in'which he explained all that he could do
for the Dukedom-build canals, manufacture
new arms, perform feats of engineering and
architecture-concluding with the statement
that, in painting and sculpture, he could do"any
task as well as another man."
During this second period, at Milan, Leonardo
gave forth the fruits of his maturity."Mortal
beauty passes, but beauty in a work of art does
noL"Thus he produced"The virgin of the
Rocks,"confirming his theory of chiaroscuro :
the"Last Supper,"in which he achieved incred-
ible light effects, realizing his own ambition :
The drawings of Leonardo are among the greatest treasures ever given to the world by the human spirit.
This study of the angel for"The Virgin of the Rocks"forms part of the Turin Library collection. The com-
pleted painting is the Louvre, Paris ; a fine, slightly differing version is now in the National Gallery, London
thinner. l'nlik.'Plato, he dit not merely
reproduce the doctrine uf Socrates. The hands,
eyes and intellect whicti co-operated to produce
imperishable well'k were his own. Over Goethe,
the romantic ! who said :"I love those who want
the impossible,"Leonardo, executant and realist,
had the advantage when he said :"I do not want
the impossible."Yet at the same time he
enlarged the scope of human endeavour to an
unbelievable extent. All three developed their
own theory of colour. All three-as Gælhe
expressed it in naming one of his works-were
poetry and truth. The genius of all three was
universal. But of the three, Leonardo alone
displayed that unique phenomenon-a perfect
balance between capacity to see and capacity to
understand. We do not know whether his eyes
were his intellect, or whether his intellect lay in
his eyes, but we do know'that both gave to his
hands the means to do what he did. He has
been called an"intellectual artisan,"but he was
more-much more. If ever in human history
there was a prototype, on which future men
could be modelled in the mass, then Leonardo
would be the prototype uf"Man the Intellectual."
A few days before he died at Amboise on
. May 2, 1519, where his last patron, Francis I, had
provided him with lodging, Leonardo knowing
that he was near his end, uttered three words :
"I shall survive,"by which he meant his
influence would live on. An actin'illlnlOda1ìty
enjuyed only by a precursor-bul in n his case
fully conscious. The forerunner of Baton,
Newton, Watt and of so many later men of
science had discharged his debt to humanity,
and in dying poured out his education, science
and culture from the full cup of his life and
work. to enrich a world, like himself seeking
.'avidly after truth.
"May it please God, the Illuminator of all things,
so to enlighten me that I treat light'worthily."
Soon after finishing the"Last Supper" (1499),
he started on his travels through Italy : Venice,
Florence again, Pavia, Rome and back to Milan.
By now the perfection of his work was familiar
to all.
Leonardo was pouring out sketches and studies
for his"Saint John,"the"Virgin and Saint
Anne,""Leda,""Elizabeth d'Este"and the
"Gioconda,"in all of which the painter'was
seeking not only to create a work of art, but also
to apply his doctrine of universalism. Behveen
times he was writing the Treatise on Paining,
the Treatise on Painting and Music, the Treatise
on Water, the Treatise on the Flight of Birds : the
Codice Atlantico and the Anatomical Notebooks.
Leonardo's personality flowed over, invading
every field of the human knowledge of his time.
marking an advance in every direction. Two
hundred years were to elapse before anatomy
achieved the precision of his drawing of the
human body, and four hundred before a flying
machine, with wings constructed on the lines of
one of Leonardo's sketches, rose from the earth,
supporting itself on air, and covered over a
hundred yards in miraculous flight.
How shall woe explain the Leonardo phono-
menon ? In the historv of Western civilization.
Plato, Leonardo and Goethe perhaps represent
the three highest peaks ever sealed by the mind
of man. Leonardo had the adnmtagE'oYer the
first that he was more a man of action than a

Page 10. APRIL 1952
Some of Leonardo's
aphorisms-
* You can have neither a greater nor a less dominion
than over yourself.
* Experience, the interpreter between formative nature
and the human race, teaches how that nature acts among
mortals ; and being constrained by necessity cannot act
otherwise than as reason, which is its helm, requires
her to act.
* In rivers, the water that you touch is the last of what
has passed and the first of that which comes : so with
time present.
* Shun those studies in which the work that results dies
with the worker.
* Nothing can be either loved or hated unless it is first
known.
* You do ill if you praise but worse if you censure
what you do not rightly understand.
* Iron rust from disuse ; stagnant water loses its purity
and, in cold, water becomes frozen ; even so does inaction
sap the vigour of the mind.
* Where the descent is easier, there the ascent is moredifficult.
* Every part is disposed to unite with the whole, so
that it may thereby escape from its own incompleteness.
* A drop is that which does not detach itself from the
rest of the water unless the power of its weight is more
than its adhesion to the water with which it is joined.
* The earth is moved from its position by the weight
of a tiny bird resting upon it. The surface of the sphere
of water is moved by a tiny drop of water falling upon it.
* Two weaknesses leaning together create a strength.
Therefore the half of the world leaning against the other
half becomes firm.
* A thing that moves acquires as much space as it loses.
* Science is the captain, practice the soldiers.
"* Whoever in discussion adduces authority uses not hismtellect but rather memory.
* The idea or the faculty of imagination is both rudder
and bridle to the senses.
* This benign nature so provides that over all the world
you find something to imitate.
* A good painter has two objects to represent : man,
and the intention of his soul. The first is easy, the
second difficult.
* Call not that riches which may be lost ; virtue is our
true wealth and the true reward of its possessor. It
cannot be lost ; it will not abandon us unless life itself
first leaves us. As for property and material wealth,
these you should hold in fear ; full often they leave their
possessor in ignominy, mocked at for having lost pos-
session of them.
* Of streams of water equal in length, breadth and
declivity, the swiftest will be the one of greatest depth.
* The goldfinch will carry spurge to its little ones
imprisoned in a cage : death rather than loss of liberty.
* Feathers shalt raise men towards heaven even as they
do birds-that is, by letters written with their quills.
* The age as it flies glides secretly and deceives one
and another ; nothing is more fleeting than the years,
but he who sows virtue reaps honour.
* While I thought that I was learning how to live, I
have been learning how to die.
- and three of his fables
The cedar, arrogant by reason of its beauty, despising
the plants which were round about it, caused them all
to be removed from its presence, and then the wind, not
meeting with any obstacle, tore it up by the roots and
threw it on to the ground.
Once upon a time the razor, emerging from the handle
which served it as a sheath, and placing itself in the sun,
saw the sun reflected on its surface, at which thing it took
great pride, and turning it over in its thoughts it began
to say to itself :"Am I to go back any more to that shop
from which I have just now come away ? No, surely ! It
cannot be the pleasure of the gods that such radiant
beauty should stoop to such vile uses ! What madness
would that be which should induce me to scrape the
lathered chins of rustic peasants and to do such menial
service ? Is this body made for such actions as these ?
Certainly not ! I will go and hide myself in some retired
spot, and there pass my life in tranquil ease."
And so having hidden itself away for some months,
returning one day to the light and coming out of its
sheath it perceived that it had acquired the appearance
of a rusty saw, and that its surface no longer reflected
the sun's radiance. In vain with useless repentance it
bemoaned its irreparable hurt, saying to itself :"Ah, how
much better it would have been to have let the barber
use that lost edge of mine that had so rare a keenness !
Where is now the glittering surface ? In truth the foul
insidious rust has consumed it away."
The same thing happens with minds which in lieu of
exercise give themselves up to sloth ; for these like the
razor lose their keen edge, and the rust of ignorance
destroys their form.
The flint on being struck by the steel marvelled greatly
and said in a stern voice :"What arrogance prompts you
to annoy me ? Trouble me not, for you have chosen me
by mistake. I have never done harm to anyone."To
which the steel made answer :"If you will be patient you
will see what a marvellous result will issae forth from
you."
At these words the flint was pacified and patiently
endured its martyrdom, and it saw itself give birth to
the marvellous element of fire which by its potency
became a factor in innumerable things.
This is said for those who are dismayed at the outset
of their studies, and then set out to gain the mastery
over themselves and in patience to apply themselves
continuously to those studies, from which one sees result
things marvellous to relate.
On tyre ceilings of the great Sala dell'Asse in Milan, Leonardo painted a series of striking deco-
rations of abstract puzzle-patterns intermingling with designs of living boughs and leavens.
Two studies which show Leonardo's prodigious skit) in delineating the movements of horses
and their rides. Thl'nohility of horsl's and their hl'aut y of outline d ('eply imp",'ssed him.
UNESCO'E

APRIL 1952. Page I I
Authorities today consider that most of Leonardo's grotesques were just people, as Vasari, one of his earlier biographers, has declared. Above, some
the product of his (at times fantastic) imagination and not studies of real striking example's of his distortions of certain aspects or the human face.
Leonardo the architect left numerous plans for huildings and other works,
like this sketch of a church, square in plan, with a central done and bell
towers. He studied profoundly the works of Alberti and Bramante.
He even planned an aeroplane - over 400 years before the world took flying
for granted. Leonardo, who was left-handed, wrote from right to left. His
words can be deciphered by placing them upside down against a mirror.
