COURIER JULY 1952. Page 5
A CITY
RISES ON
DESERT
SANDS :
"IT
A report
by Ritchie CALDER
U. N. photographs by Eric Schwab
At Kotri, the massive ramparts of the barrage
being built across the Indus River are rising
out of the drab, tawny desert of the Sind.
Water from the completed barrage will fertilize
a vast desert area and make practicable the
construction of a model city for 100, 000 people.
FAR out in the desert is the Lower SindBarrage, which is being built across the wide,
sluggish Indus.
Standing on top of the massive masonry of one
of the spans, we looked out on a depressing land-
scape. Stretching to the horizon was the drab,
tawny desert, dead flat except for a few low, table-
topped hills, and with practically no vegetation
apart from clumps of camel-thorn and a few stunted
trees. The Indus itself Was at low water, just
branching streams crawling round massive sand-
banks.
It took a lot of imagination to see this as a land
of flourishing farms and well-cropped fields. We
just had to take the word of the experts that one
day it would be so. After all, most of what is now
West Pakistan, including the Punjab, the Land of
the Five Rivers, was once desert just like this.
The rivers flowed through the Thirstland, with-
out slaking its thirst. Then in the past century,
great irrigation schemes farther up the Indus-
like the Sukkur Barrage, the world's biggest-
watered the desert and it blossomed.
That is what can happen to the Lower Sind desert
when this barrage at Kotri is completed. It is a
government enterprise using direct labour. It has
the services of British engineers, but they are
employed directly by Pakistan.
The Pakistani engineers are very proud of the
fact that, breaking with a tradition which used
abundant cheap manual labour, they have brought
in the latest modern equipment for barrage
construction. They took a pride in showing us, for
example, the giant shovel (its arm towers 200 feet
above the bed of the river), which scoops up tons
of earth at a bite-and which walks.
It is like a fantastic Disney cartoon. When it
moves, two enormous flippers lift the giant engine,
drop it belly-fist on the ground, lift it again and
keep moving forward, With a curious hopping
motion.
They showed us the crushers which break up the
sandstone rocks for mixing with cement in the
pumpcrete machine. This electrically-driven appa-
ratus forces the liquid concrete through pipes, like
squeezing tooth-paste out of a tube, and a couple
of men can direct the nozzle of this hose into the
masonry casings of the barrage.
But modern engineering has not abolished the
picturesque. Trains of donkeys with panniers pick
their way through the modern machines into the
more inaccessible parts of the operation.
The barrage will consist of 445 spans, compared
with the 665 spans of the Sukkur. Each span is
60 feet. It is being built in sections. A great earth-
work encloses each section, diverting the river and
forming an enormous caisson within which the
building goes on.
As each span is completed, a similar earthwork
protects the work on the next span. The first bund
is then broken and the river takes that channel.
(Continued on next page.)
1 1 ·
THROUGH
SO U T H-E AS T A S I A
(3)

Page 6. JULY 1952 UNESCO COI
AT WORK IN
THE DESERT
(Continued from previous page)
When is it completed, the barrage,
which is not a storage dam but a
gigantic weir, will divert the water
into irrigation canals on either side
of the Indus, and will generate elec-
tricity.
As a contribution to the develop-
ment which will follow the bringing
in of water to the desert of the Sind,
FAO has provided experts to help
with the careful soil-analysis and
soil-mapping. They will advise on
drainage and on underground water
This area has not only the dis-
advantage of being dry, but the soil
is salted. With enough water and
proper draining, it should be pos-
sible to leach or scour out the salt.
I went into one desert section of
10, 000 acres which will be watered
from the barrage, and which has
been mapped out and the soil
classified with the help of FAO.
Some of it was covered by a crust
of salt. The soil looked pretty un-
healthy to me, but Mr Le Vee, the
U. S. soil conservationist of FAO
assured me it was not.
To prove it, he took me down to
a pit dug in the desert, and showed
me a cross section of the soil. These
pits are desert"classrooms"for Pa-
kistan agriculturalists to learn how
to sample soil. In the middle of the
desolation was a market garden,
where a Sind farmer had used well
water to wash out the salt, and was
growing vegetables which would be
a gardener's pride.
But agriculture is only one aspect
of what will be possible in this area.
Between Kotri and Hyderabad (not
to be confused with the state and
city of that name in Central India)
they are planning a city of 100, 000
people. I suggested it ought to be
called"Unobad", because from the
outset it will be planned and deve-
loped with the help of Technical
Assistance experts.
Originally the scheme was to
provide homes for thousands of
Moslem refugees from India, most
of whom were craftsmen, traders
and artisans. But the Pakistan
Government decided instead to
make it a model city, which would
have a cross section of all classes,
professions, industries and interests.
They asked U. N. Technical As-
sistance to provide a social and a
town planner, who will both be
British.
In addition, the International
Labour Office is providing experts
who will help in the setting-up of
industries, organising labour ex-
changes, industrial relations and
co-operatives, and on technical
training.
The World Health Organization
and Unicef are to help on the
medical side, and Unesco has been
brought in on the educational.
FAO will play its part in seeing that
this new city has a proper relation-
ship with the agricultural develop-
ment of the area.
The city will be the embodiment
AN EXAMPLE OF) NTERNAT) ONAL) SM
Under a six-year, 8800, 000, 000 development programme and with the help of United
Nations Technical Assistance experts, the seventy-six million people of Pakistan
are progressively working their way towards ever-improving standards of living.
of Pakistan's belief in U. N. Tech-
nical Assistance. The U. N. technical
mission here is the biggest in the
world. It covers practically the
whole range of the country's in-
terests, from economic planning to
cottage industries.
Mr. Tom Hibben, * leader of the
mission, is economic adviser and
works with the Department of Eco-
nomic Planning, so that the pro-
gramme is related not only to the
vast possibilities, but to the imme-
diate needs and present capacities
of the country.
For instance, when one is told
that Unesco has supplied experts in
geodesy, terrestial magnetism, seis-
mology and atmospheric physics, it
may sound academic ; but geodesy
and terrestial magnetism are meant
for the training of Pakistanis to dis-
cover their still unknown natural
resources.
Baluchistan is in the earth-
quake belt, so they want to know
about seismology. West Pakistan is
an arid zone and depends for its
water on rivers which have their
sources outside the country. So
atmospheric physics means the study
of the possibilities of cloud precipi-
tation, oar'''artificial raindrop" (see
article on page 10),
Karachi has a very fine new broad-
casting studio and a new radio
transmitter, and it asked Unesco for
(and got) an expert in school broad-
casting.
Pakistan needs internal air com-
munications (and"internal"means
linking up West Pakistan with East
Pakistan, 1, 000 miles away in Ben-
gal). So the International Civil
Aviation Organisation has put in
teams of experts to train the Paki-
* Mr. Hibben has since died.-Editor.
stanis in airport traffic control, radio
and radar systems and other as-
pects of air communications.
The World Health Organization
and Unicef are giving substantial
assistance on the medical side, parti-
cularly in the development of
mother-and-child health.
ILO is already in the field advis-
ing on the setting up of labour
exchanges and vocational training.
Pakistan needs a lot of trained
technicians quickly and wants to be
able to move workers to new centres
of development. That is only a be-
ginning. This year there will be
30 ILO experts in Pakistan.
FAO is not only helping with the
opening up of new lands, but with
animal disease and (most interest-
ing) deep sea fishing.
In East Pakistan, communication
is by water. Over 1, 000, 000, 000 tons
of goods a year are carried through
the Ganges Delta by boats of one
type or another. There are over
30, 000, 000 boats, and the government
has asked for technical advice on
the mechanization of craft for East
Pakistan.
They have also got international
experts to help with the develop-
ment of telephone exchanges. Com-
munications are poor, but they
are taking modern short cuts. They
are bringing in experts on ultra
high frequencies. A chain of U. H. F.
radio stations will be strung across
the country, providing radio tele-
phone links.
Another encouraging sign of
co-operation is the tying in of U. N.
experts with schemes. going forward
under the Colombo Plan.
Pakistan, after partition, found
itself desperately short of trained
experts. It fortunately has the help
of the United Nations in making
good that shortage.
Pakistani engineers constructing the barrage at Kotri have brought in the latest equipment for the job : giant mechanized
shovels, rock crushers and"pumpcrete"machines which mix the cement and force it into the masonry casings of the barrage.
