Page 18. AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952
'DEAR STRANGER../
by Jacques GUÉRIF
err 0 a boy 12 years old whocan speak English, Paris,
France."
A letter bearing this address
was recently posted in Kansas
(U. S. A.). In Paris a postal, clerk
glanced at the address, smiled, and
forwarded it immediately to the
French division of the International
Federation of Organizations for
Scholastic Correspondence. He had
handled many such letters-and so
have the postal clerks of most other
countries, for they are written every
day by the school boys and girls of
all five continents to unknown boys
and girls whose languages and coun-
tries they wish to know.
The thirst for knowledge which
these youngsters show is at times
insatiable. Consider this"testimo-
nial"from a young girl :
"Thanks to you, I have found an
American pen-friend. She has sent
me the addresses of others, so now
I keep up a correspondence with
nearly every one of the States ! In
addition, through you, I got to know
an Argentinian, and there is a good
chance that I may one day visit her
country. But my biggest wish is to
learn languages and my latest is
Swedish ; so I am now going to ask
you for a Swedish correspondent. I
hope you can manage this. With the
help of your service, I can perfect
my foreign languages, and I also
have friends pretty well everywhere.
I think International Scholastic
Correspondence is the best example
of world understanding that the
youngsters of today can have, living
as we do in an atmosphere of per-
petual discord."
Teachers are convinced that the
pen-friend scheme has very real edu-
cational value. It awakens a deep
interest in language study. It leads
the young writers to better under-
standing of how other people live.
The exchange of ideas and impres-
sions quickly leads to mutual esteem
and often to personal friendships.
Letters are supplemented'by an
exchange of view cards, magazines,
and other informative matter, and
even by presents and souvenirs. The
friends, especially the girls, join in
each other's personal joys and sor-
rows. Exchange visits are arranged.
In fact there are many examples
that go to prove the solidity of the
links which International Scholastic
Correspondence has helped to forge.
It has even been the first step
towards a number of marriages.
Started almost simultaneously in
North America and France, the
movement has continued to grow
ever since the end of the first World
War, and a system of co-ordination
- now provided by over 30 national
offices-rapidly became indispens-
able to make sure that letters
actually found appropriate reci-
pients, and also to ensure that the
correspondence had an instructional
and generally beneficial background.
This co-ordination, which, since 1929,
had been aided by the Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation of the
League of Nations, was extended in
1946 to exchanges of, and trips by,
students. The permanent committee
of International Scholastic Corres-
pondence was transformed into the
International Federation of Organi-
zations for Scholastic Correspon-
dence and Travel, with the aim of
uniting all efforts in this direction
on an international basis-and
especially in relation to Unesco.
Thanks to these organizations,
hundreds of thousands of young
people from 45 countries now ex-
change letters regularly. Many
among them apply direct to the
national offices to find a correspon-
dent, but most of the exchanges are
made through teachers and head-
masters. They send requests to their
own national offices, who get in
touch with similar organizations
abroad and make the arrangements.
Educators insist that correspond-
ence must be personal, individual
and voluntary. The teacher should
avoid even the appearance of
meddling ; but he can suggest,
propose, or guide, and he can often
integrate the correspondence into his
lessons. It is easy enough, and well
received by the children, if he knows
how to make the right approach-
for instance, by putting up a map
of the foreign country with which
most of his pupils communicate. It
must, of course, be on a sufficiently
large scale to indicate the towns
where the correspondents live, and
the places where events reported in
the newspapers or in the letters have
occurred. He may also hold tempor-
ary and frequently-changed wall
exhibitions, each dealing with an
aspect of life abroad.
The letters thus are used to give
children an idea of the different
countries which speak the language
they are learning. When English is
taught, for instance, to French, Ita-
lian or Belgian youngsters, their
correspondents in various parts of
Great Britain, the Dominions and
North America often give the
teacher ideas for study themes such
as the wool trade in the Common-
wealth ; British cathedrals ; the part
sport plays in English life ; various
types of buildings in the United
States ; plant life of Australia and
New Zealand.
Inevitably, the natural curiosities
of one land will be compared to those
of another : the Italian, French and
Canadian lakes and the Norwegian
fjords ; prairies and steppes ; the
Alps and the Rocky Mountains ; the
Thames and the Orinoco Rivers ;
agriculture and stock breeding ;
industries (especially in professional
and technical schools) ; types of
houses, schools, monuments ; cos-
tumes and typical meals in differ-
ent countries ; sport ; the theatre.
Correspondence in just one language
can lead to an infinite enlargement
of horizons.
The documentation received also
leads to the production of albums of
pictures from illustrated magazines,
or of postage stamps-and even
of collections of insects and plants.
Small libraries of foreign books have
been set up following exchanges
between correspondents. And to
these visual aids to learning without
apparent effort can be added aural
aids-the singing of songs in for-
eign languages, readings of parti-
cularly interesting letters, and the
recitation of poems suggested by the
foreign writers.
In addition to exhibitions and
collections organized in collaboration
with the geography teacher, drawing
teachers find foreign themes which
can be used. Problems of foreign
money and measurements lose their
boredom in the mathematics class,
and become an important prepara-
tion for travel. The study of litera-
ture in all its forms also benefits
from these exchanges of letters.
Pupils see, for instance, how classical
or modern plays are presented else-
where. (A number of Continental
schools recently illustrated the study
of Hamlet by photographs of the
actors and decor in a London
theatre.) It is not only a knowledge
of foreign works which increases
from hearing about the most read
authors in other lands ; to inform
their pen-friends reciprocally, the
children feel obliged to get better
acquainted with the literary life of
their own country.
Through their faraway friends
thousands of youngsters have learn-
ed to appreciate better the human
community to which they belong.
More and more of the teachers and
parents who. use children take part in
these exchanges are enthusiastic
promoters of the scheme, seeing in
its further development an import-
ant contribution to genuine in-
ternational understanding.
(Continued from to improve and sim-
previous page) plify inernational post-al relations.
Progress was delayed by the American
: : : ivil War and the Franco-Prussian War. During
1870-1871, besieged Parisians organized a
pigeon and balloon post to Tours. This was
the first regular airmail. Three hundred and
sixty pigeons carried micro-photographed
dispatches. During the same period balloon
postmen made 63 ascents, transporting over
3, 000, 000 letters and 91 passagers, despite
attacks by high-firing German guns.
Meanwhile Dr. Heinrich von Stephan, Ger-
man postmaster-general, was preparing a plan
for an international postal union. In 1874,
Switzerland convened at Berne a congress at
which all the European countries, the United
States and Egypt were represented. The
result was the International Postal Conven-
tion, which, for the first time, brought order
and uniformity to this international service.
This treaty, which came into force in 1875,
provided for uniformity in treatment of cor-
respondence, simplification of accounts and
reduction of rates within limits. Rates were
to be based on weight rather than distance.
The agency thus founded was named the
Universal Postal Union in 1878 and by 1900
included almost every country in the world.
Nations large and small continued to contri-
bute to the advancement of the service.
New Zealand, for instance, produced the
automatic stamp-selling machine in 1908, and
in 1920 won international recognition for the
letter-franking machine.
Air mail, established in Britain, France and
the United States in 1919, covered four
continents within a decade. The UPU in 1927
adopted a code of international air mail
regulations, which have been expanded as
required.
The basic principle of the UPU is that, for
postal purposes, all Member States form a
single territory. Each member undertakes
to transmit mails entrusted to it by the best
means of communication it uses for its own
mails. Thus each country today enjoys full
use of the railway, shipping, and air mail ser-
vices of the whole world.
Organization of the UPU is simple but effec-
tive. Most questions are settled by the coun-
tries directly concerned, but for matters
concerning all members an international
bureau is maintained at Berne. This bureau
collects and publishes informations, issues lists
of air and steamer services, and acts as re-
quired as an office for settling international
accounts. These are based on a return,
taken every three years, of one month's
correspondence.
The Universal Postal Convention is revised
every five years by the UPU Congress, to
which all members send delegates. The UPU
Congress which was held this year in
Brussels and which ended on July 12, took
decisions which will lead to a wider appli-
cation of lower international postal rates for
newspapers, magazines, books, maps and
printed music. These concessions, based on
recommendations by Unesco or inspired by its
aims for the free flow of information, will :
1. Allow alp newspapers, books and maga-
zines sent abroad to enjoy a 50 per cent
reduction in rates, regardless of sender.
2. Ensure that rates for publications sent
abroad will parallel the favourable rates
for publications posted within a country.
3 Allow literature for the blind to be mailed
free of charge.
4. Broaden an existing scheme permitting
payment in national currency, at local post
offices, for subscriptions to foreign
newspapers and magazines, and their
dispatch at low rates. This service will
be greatly simplified, so that many more
countries may be able to participate.
In addition to the Congress there is a
19-nation executive committee which meets
annually. Under the revised convention of
1948, the UPU became a Specialized Agency
of the United Nations.
Today the Union's members handle over
60, 000, 000, 000 letters annually. Their air-
liners speed across the skies with tons of
mail. This is a far cry from the turbaned
horsemen of ancient Persia, the cross-Channel
cutters of Queen Elizabeth's time, or the
reckless riders of the Pony Express. Yet all
who have served the post have been inspired
by the same objective-to transmit news and
informations to the furthest corners of the
earth.
UNESCO
