Page 10. FEBRUARY 1953
THE WORLD IS FILLED WITH MUSIC
BUT OUR CHILDREN ARE DENIED IT
though displayed in neon
lights two feet high. For
music has many facets,
and one of them reveals
it as a language which
is not easily learned.
What sort of class will
teach it to these millions
of boys and girls, to this
majority of the \vorld's
young people ? The one
which offers a sol-fa
exercise twice a month ?
Or the three rehearsals
w h i c h proclaim the
approach of the school's
prize distribution day ?
( ; ome now, the ques-
tion is really simple
enough to leave no plaue
for hypocrisy. Either one
believes in music, or one
doesn't. If it is regarded
as an"accomplishment",
the realm of a handful of
queer experts, yet suit-
able on occasion to dis-
tract ordinary people ; as
a stimulation to danc-
ing or an inspiration to
dreaming, for example,
or, most appropriate of
all, to provide a back-
ground to cocktail parties
and family meals, then,
in this case, all is well.
There is no problem to
discuss. Sol-fa exercises
twice a month are quite
adequate.
If-and what a con-
trast-one recognizes the
truth of the Orpheus le-
gend, then music can be
seen as the pre-emin-
ently civilizing art, and
by Andréa SALIERI
greatness and this power, a revolution is called
for. In teaching programmes and educational
systems music should have a leading place. It
should be introduced to children and adoles-
cents as something equally respectable and
useful as algebra, spelling and Latin grammar
are considered to be. If the word"useful"
tends to shock, then let us simply repeat the
witticism of Santayana who said that music
was as useless as life itself, but that no one
should renounce either one or the other.
In any case, let people make up their minds,
and not speak of education in music in Utopian
terms, as if they !"were dreamers or prophets.
For it is not a question of creating something
in the absolute. There is little to invent. The
teaching of music and even education through
music are not such recent discoveries or such
rare innovations as to call for the services of
pioneers or apostles.
It would not serve much purpose to recall
here the studies of a young Greek in the time
of Pericles, but we can say that in our own
"time education would hardly be conceivable in
.'more than one country in the East if it'were
not based on music. In Thailand, for example,
the natural environment of childhood is created
out of singing and dancing. The child's first
steps and words are linked with a folklore of
an exceptional richness and beauty. Later, in
the primary school, the universal medium for
learning is choral music. The family commun-
ity is its own orchestra, sometimes its own
theatre. Secondary studies on Western lines
undoubtedly tend tao remove the child little by
little from this magical realm. But he is to be
envied his happy, early days amid the subtle
moods of the sacred and secular songs and the
wonderful sounds of the Thai flutes, gongs,
drums and violins. When the first ten years of
life have been spent thus in cultivating a nobil-
ity of gesture and an accuracy of intonation, it
must be easy to refrain from vulgarity.
When I write. of such things I cannot help
recalling with regret a certain school, a very
modern one, which kept faithfully to the spirit
of official curricula and was situated in a
country whose artistic achievements are widely
praised. This school granted its pupils the right
to 23 minutes of music each week-a right
which the pupils themselves renounced'when
they reached the age of 15. No one
could really blame them, for these 23 minutes
seemed to be taken up'with the explanation of
a few absurd rules,'or the playing of several
records accompanied by a ritual admonition of
"Keep quiet ! Listen to this ; it is a fine piece
of music."Children who learned to play the
piano or violin elsewhere were even excused
from these"music lessons".
Yet, in the same city another school of similar
category, though much less official in charac-
ter, followed a secular tradition which excited
IT is an invaluable help for music teachers
and musicians seeking the best music
education methods in one country to be
able to compare their experiments with
those being tried elsewhere. They are, there-
fore, always anxious to exchange their ideas,
to harmonize their activities and generally to
develop a collaboration which they hope will
help to give the teaching of their chosen art its
full effectiveness.
There is little doubt that considerable pro-
gress will be made in extending and improving
music education through the work of the inter-
national conference on the place and the role
of music in the education of young people and
adults, which is to be held in Brussels next
June, as well as through the contacts it makes
possible.
However, the major problem which will
dominate the Brussels'meetings is not one that
can be resolved by the efforts of musicians,
teachers and musicologists alone. The real
problem to be solved is how to give music its
rightful place in the education of young people- the place it would certainly have if musicians
were given the final say in the matter.
But it is obvious that protagonists of the arts
are not at present in charge of education and oj
teaching programmes. It is known to every-
one that in both primary and secondary schools.
music is generally given the same place as
domestic economy and physical training, or by
preference comes after physical training. It is
added to the"also ran"subjects in the curri-
culum, it fills in the gaps in the week's pro-
gramme, if any exist. And as it does not reai ! y
form part of the normal studies imposed on the
children and demanded by the parents, no one
is required to take it seriously.
There is, of course, no lack of outstanding
exceptions which could be cited and I am
happy to have personal knowledge of several.
but exceptions have never disproved the most
minor of rules, and it must be admitted thai
music is offered to the majority of the school-
children of today as something they can well
do without-something childish or painfully
dull. In other words, music is denied them.
Yes ! in spite of records, concerts, the rad in
and the cinema, music is denied them. At
home and outside they hear more music that
Mozart ever did. All their lives they will Iw
surrounded by great waves of it, but they will
be like deaf people, or foreigners to whom. 
poem remains for ever incomprehensible even
To young people who have the irreplaceable experience of singing or playing together, music becomes an
everyday fact, something familiar and loved. Choirs, youth musical associations and orchestras already
exist in many schools and cities, but most children still lack the opportunity to share in such activities.
its study must be regarded as something
more than a question of ear and memory.
Also, the supreme role it plays in the develop-
ment of mind and character becomes clear-
just as clear today as in past centuries.
For he who accepts music in this role, be-
lieves, as did the ancient Chinese, that"by
music one becomes a man". He agrees with
Plato who called it.'this art which, regulating
the voice, reaches right to the soul and inspires
in it a taste for virtue."Or, like the theologians
of the Middle Ages, he sees it as a force for
"giving rhythm to the spirit". Finally, he does
not hesitate to repeat the words of Goethe :"He
'who does not like music does not deserve to be
called a man, hue'who likes it is already half it
man and he who plays it is a complete man."
From here it is a short step to speak of a
revolution, for if, indeed, music possesses this
In many countries of the East, music, like poetry, forms the basis of the tradi-
tional education. The family often constitutes an entire orchestra composed
of flutes, gongs, drums and stringed instruments. The Indian youth
shown here is playing a Surbahar, a sort of guitar with a deep, soft sound.
UNESC

FEBRUARY'953. Page) t
Music is not simply an"accomplishment". Its study is not just a question of ear and memory, but plays a supreme role in developing the mind and character.
both admiration and suspicion-it had an
excellent choir of which almost all the pupils
were members. The significance of the *words
"almost all"lies in the fact that there was no
obligation to join the choir and the frequent
rehearsals provided no excuse for neglecting
other studies. Here music existed as an every-
day fact, something familiar and loved. Right
from the start these youngsters had the irre-
placeable experience of singing together, joy-
fully and attentively under a discipline they
freely accepted. They acquired the basic
notions of music with little effort and by the
end of their studies they had a real command
of an extensive repertoire'which ranged from
Gregorian chants to the oratorios of Perosi, from
Palestrina to Ravel, from Handel to Verdi and
from Monteverdi to Malipiero. And I should
add that these"pueri-cantores"were just as
successful as other children when it came to
literary and scientific examinations.
One'wonders how such inequality can be
tolerated. For, in fact, are not the pupils in the
first of these two schools-typical of so many
more-victims of an injustice ? They are ex-
pected to become cultivated, but are only
shown the adventure of life in terms of books
and monuments. And then people are sur-
prised that these examples, however fine or
moving they may be, always strike the children
as unspeaking, empty and bookish. The
children lack, and will probably always lack,
an understanding of those form sounds through
which so many poems, peoples, dreams and as-
pirations would come to life and appear beforE
them. It is as if they'were being deprived of
one of their most precious senses.
And yet, all that is needed to right this wrong
is for the many existing examples of a proper
musical education to be increased, and for those
advantages from which a few children already
benefit to be extended to all. Everyone has
heard about the activities of school orchestras
and the remarkable successes they have
achieved in several countries. The interna-
tional work of the amateur musical associations
and the Musical Youth organizations whose
activities continue to develop are also well-
known. Then there are the school and church
choirs, natural'centres of musical culture,
where the intelligence and tastes of children
and young people are developed and moulded,
so that although they do not necessarily develop
into professional exponents, they do, in fact,
eventually become musicians and not merely
musical enthusiasts.
Choirs, associations and youth orchestras
already exist and work actively-usually with-
out much money or support-in this or that
city and school. But why not in every school
and in every city ? Why should the majority of
children be kept outside these activities ?
This again is not a problem for specialists
alone. No solutions will be forthcoming as
long as public opinion fails to recognize the
dignity of art, the special value of music in
education and the urgent need to give everyone
the same opportunities in this field, as in all
Others.
'QUIET ! LISTEN TO THE MUSIC ;
tT'S BEAUTIFUL'
The day such simple truths are admitted, it
will no longer be very difficult to bring about a
genuine introduction of music-teaching into
school programmes, to find the means to pay
for it, to provide proper training facilities for
teachers, and to encourage them to show appli-
cation and initiative in their task.
The gospel of free and compulsory educa-
tion appeared absurd when it was preached a
century ago. One day it will seem ridiculous
to have ever refused children their right to
music. Already in such countries as Wales
and Yugoslavia, where traditional art has been
preserved as a living reality, such a denial is
regarded as a crime. Then there are many
peoples, such as those in the non-industrialized
countries of Africa and Oceania, for whom no
such problem exists. And in certain other
countries, the revolution, which 1 referred to
earlier, has started and is going well.
One of the best examples of the progress that
has been made is the case of the United States.
Thirty years ago this country could not yet
point to any outstanding achievements on be-
half of music in its schools and colleges. There
is no doubt, of course, that things had improved
somewhat since the time when Chaliapin, the
great Russian bass declared :"'I pity Americans
because they have no light, no song in their
lives."But even so, music remained a pleas-
ure enjoyed hy a fortunate few. The possibil-
ity of all children and young people being able
. to share in it seemed at that time a far-fetched
idea. Yet today, 80 per cent of the 25, 000
secondary schools in the country have a band,
orchestra or choir-in many cases, all three-
and the same is true for the colleges. Altogether,
it is safe to say that most young Americans bet-
ween the ages of 10 and 20 now learn to
appreciate music and that more than three mil-
lion of them also.'make music".
The high musical calibre of these youngsters
was vouched for by Leopold Stokowski
when, from school orchestras all over the
country, he selected the members of his All-
American Youth Orchestra in 1940. Some 10, 000
young musicians from all States had auditions,
and from this number 560 were chosen as out-
standing. Mr. Stokowski listened to them all
and was amazed by the technical proficiency
and musical insight of these young performers,
many of whom, he said, were of professional
stature.
When one learns such facts it comes less as
a surprise to find Beethoven's'"Missa Solemnis"
in the repertoire of a choir whose members are
science, literature and agronomy students, or
to hear that a difficult composition by Arnold
Schoenberg was given its world premiere per-
formance in Albuquerque, New Mexico, by an
amateur orchestra largely made up of univer-
sity and secondary school students playing
under the direction of Kurt Frederick.
These rapid and impressive results are due
to the energy and enthusiasm of a handful of
people who, after forming associations to bring
together musicians and teachers, finally found-
ed an organization now known as the Music
Educators National Conference. Their uisest
decision was to go all out to arouse the interest
of the pubiic and, in particular, of the school-
going population. To do so, they appealed at
onE a d the same time to the curiosity, pride
and.'esprIt-de-corps"of the youngsters, and
even to their taste for dressing up. As a result
education in music was in many cases insti-
tuted at the demand of the students themselves.
It may be said that to ensure music its proper
place in school programmes it is first of all
necessary to provide for the musical education
of parents, so that they in turn demand it for
their children. But the change will come more
rapidly if all the musicians, music critics and
teachers and, in general, the music lovers in
every country band together to help break this
form of vicious circle once and for all.
IRIER
