COURIER NOVEMBER 1953. Page 3
THE CHILD IN SCHOOL
AND HUMAN RIGHTS
HISTORY is in part the record of men's struggle to
win recognition of many of those human rights
which are enumerated in the Universal Declaration
adopted by the United Nations in 1948.
At first glance, the Declaration might seem to be the
culmination of the hopes and efforts of all who have
fought the cause of human freedom in one form or
another ; and it is true that all their struggles have
contributed to the creation of the conditions in which
the drafting and acceptance of the Declaration became
possible. But it would be a serious mistake to see in
each instance a conscious movement in favour of the
universal enfranchisement of man, or to represent the
history of human rights as one of steady and unbroken
progress towards that end.
Although, throughout history, people have struggled to
defend or establish certain rights, this does not mean
that they were freely claimed for all men nor that those
who enjoyed them felt themselves under any obligation
to give their leadership or encouragement to other less
fortunate groups. On the contrary, we find that in the
past these rights were often regarded as the privilege
of certain limited sections of the community.
For example, the democracy of Athens observed equa-
lity before the law, equal participation in drama and
games, freedom of speech and many other rights for those
who were citizens, but these privileges were denied to
the greater part of the population. Moreover, Athenian
democracy was to a great extent treated by the Athenians
as something peculiar to themselves, which marked them
off from Sparta, for instance, and above all from the
"Barbarians".
Thus, while the democracy of Athens in the fifth cen-
tury B. C. was perhaps one of the most complete the
world has known, it was also one of the most limited in
scale, for the number of people in Athens with full
privileges of citizenship at this period was probably no
greater than 40, 000 (women, children under 18, resident
foreigners, and slaves did not count as citizens in the
political sense).
In the English Magna Charta of 1215, which is com-
monly regarded as one of the milestones in the struggle
for human rights, we read :"No freeman shall be taken
or imprisoned or dissiezed or outlawed or exiled or in
any way destroyed, nor will we go upon him nor will
we send upon him, except by legal judgment of his
peers or by the law of the land."
IN A. D. 1215 this was a far-reaching restraint on arbi-trary government. Neverthless, we may note with
interest today that the"law of the land"meant feudal
law and that the"freemen"were the English feudal
barons ! who were forcing King John to sign their Charter.
They little thought that before long new classes of men
would be claiming their rights as free men, or that one
day women also would be claiming them as the equals
of men.
So we find that the advancement of many human rights
During the past century, however, the world has grown
suddenly smaller than could have been foreseen two
generations ago. The development of new means of
communication, the spread of industrialization and the
wider flow and accessibility of ideas and information are
among the factors which Ihave made us interdependent
today.
It is not only that no one can ignore the problems of
, others, but also that the very problems which confront
us, and our needs and aspirations, have assumed a close
. similarity. It would seem that this, and our growing
realization that universal peace can be established only
if it is based upon social justice, have made it possible
for our generation to propose a universal declaration of
. human rights.
We know how varied were the ideas and conflicts and
how uneven the progress which led to the making of a
Universal Declaration. Even in modern times, this
progress has been neither smooth nor sure. We need not
go far back in memory to see how close we are still to
the abyss, how easily all gains may be lost if we do not
devote all our energies to the preservation of our rights.
This is one reason why the Universal Declaration pays
particular attention to education, for advances in the
cause of freedom and of social rights as well as their
defence depend very largely on education, just as the
dissemination of the Declaration itself is in a great
measure the teacher's task. It is at school that the hindi.
vidual learns, or fails to learn, to think honestly and with
purpose, to test out the standards of the community in
which he lives, to accept responsibility for his actions, to
assume duties.
Another reason for the Declaration's emphasis on
education, is that education itself is all too likely to
has often taken a strangely
ironic form. Groups within
a society or nation strug-
gled for the recognition of
rights which they conside-
red their own particular
privileges, only to find,
after victory, that they had
prepared the ground for
new groups to demand in
turn these very rights from
them, and ultimately for the
proclamation of these rights
as being common to all
men.
subjects. Foreign language
students have translated
the various Articles and
compared their translations
vsith the official text (obtain-
able from the U. N. Public
Information Department on
request). Civics classes
have made detailed compa-
risons between their nation-
al constitutions and the
Declaration.
The science teacher too
can incorporate human
rights in his teaching. He
be subjected to attack in these times, and the educational
freedoms are particularly vulnerable. Moreover, the De-
claration is concerned with education because the teacher
is also a citizen, and, like other citizens, has rights and
responsibilities which need to be affirmed.
It should also be remembered that the Declaration pro-
claims standards to be achieved, and that they will be
achieved only if education, along with the other organs
of society, accepts and performs its tasks in the common
sense. In the classroom and outside there are many
aspects of school life which coincide with articles in the
Declaration, and this is another demonstration of the fact
that the Declaration is not remote and artificial, but isa reflection, albeit an ideal reflection, of the world in
which we live.
It has often been asked whether every teacher can teach
about human rights or if it is a subject only for the
specialist, the history teacher for instance. The answer is
that human rights concerns all teachers whatever their
subject, and every teacher can contribute even if his share
amounts to little more than ensuring mutual respect in
the classroom. Human rights is as much a matter of
encouraging certain attitudes and habits of behaviour as 1--Ou-&1-... A. 1
Eventually, however, the Declaration is also used so that
the pupils can check the attitudes they expressed with
the international standard. Teachers have found this
approach from the human problem to the appropriate
Article quite effective.
Other teachers, using a different technique, have taken
up some of the broad issues embodied in the Declaration
(such as the principle that the will of the people should
be the basis of government). They introduce each dis-
cussion by recounting an episode from past or present
times which illustrates the topic in a dramatic way. One
episode shows where a particular right has been notably
absent, another how people have struggled to achieve it,
or how it has been gained. Groups of children have even
dramatized one or several of the events.
This method has been found to be a more exciting
introduction to human rights for children than a direct
study of the Articles. Biographies of great figures in the
history of human rights have also been used in much
the same way.
Teaching human rights in special subject courses offers
many rich and varied possibilities without the teacher
neglecting the fixed curriculum. Literature classes have
thus been assigned themes from the Declaration as essay
can explore the scientific bases of the Declaration with
his students. Many questions suggest themselves. Why
may the family be said to be the natural unit of society ?
What justification is there for the anti-racial and ønti.
discriminatory clauses of the Declaration ? (Here, the
special Aug-Sept 1953 issue of the Courier and the series
of Unesco pamphlets on race may prove useful.)
The history class offers the most obvious possibilities
for teaching about human rights. It has therefore been
suggested that a term's or a year's work be based on
human rights in history classes. First, because it is im-
possible fully to appreciate the meaning and importance
of the Declaration without a study of its larger historical
context. Second, because a study of history which does
not give proper emphasis to the human struggles it em-
bodies has not exploited all its possibilities.
At a particular project, history classes could assemblejTi. a set of episodes in world  national history to illus-
trate the story of human rights. After a discussion of one
of the rights under consideration, the class could be divi-
ded into teams of about four pupils each for independent
research. Each episode could then be presented to the
entire class by each team, and the episodes finally com-
piled under a single cover for use by other students.
More advanced pupils could examine the history of
particular rights. It would be an interesting project for
example to study the changing concepts of"the will of
the people" (Article 21) at different times and places.
How have different peoples at different times made their
wishes felt ? What government techniques have been
created (to enable their will to express itself ?
of learning the Articles
themselves.
Thus, general teaching
about human rights ha-
been approached through
discussions of current
events. These have raised
many issues such as free-
dom of movement, the pro.
blem of nationality, equa-
lity of races and sexe,
without the children realiz-
ing that they were in fact
discussing the content of
the Universal Declaration.....,.....-
studies showing the scope
and character of such edu-
cational programmes was
submitted to Unesco in
1952 by four international
organizations of teachers :
the international Federa-
tion of Secondary Teachers,
the International Federa-
tion of Teachers Associa-
tions, the New Education
Fellowship, and the World
Organization of the Teach-
ing Professions.
These reports, based on
As an alternative approach a class could be asked to
concentrate on the history of human rights in its own
country. But this approach will have value only if the
work is conducted in a critical and dispassionate spirit.
For few countries can lay claim to an unblemished hist.
rical record in human rights ; and no country can claim
that it altogether fulfils the precepts of the Declaration.
The object of teaching about human rights is not to
deal only with the Articles as such, but also to introduce
the principles of the Declaration in such a fashion as to
encourage a constant concern for human rights. Such
an attitude is likely to develop only from discussion
conducted with all the honesty and mutual criticism and
guidance that it requires.
The teacher should do everthing he can to get the
children to investigate their own doubts and queries,
deflecting questions addressed to him back into the class
for further consideration. It is the children themselves
who must learn to pass judgment on events at first hand,
for the Declaration is intended as a standard for everyone
to apply.
Today, teaching about human rights is being carried
on in the schools of many different countries. A group of
extensive s urveys, show that human rights is being
taught not only in the classroom but outside as well,
through extra-curricular activities which link the school
with the neighbourhood and bring children into personal
contact with some of the important community problems.
More important still, many teachers feel, is the extent
to which the spirit and the atmosphere of the school itself
gives children an opportunity to grasp the implications of
the Declaration and carry them out in terms of their own
lives. For it is the life of the school ! Which prohahly
counts for ! most in forming the character which the child
takes with him into society. It is reflected in the whole
nature and tone of the relationships between the children,
and between the headmaster and the staff and the chil-
dren. It is reflected in the extent to which the school
fosters friendliness and cooperation, whether it tends to
perpetuate or correct undesirable social divisions in its
environment, and whether discipline is arbitrary and
over-severe or understandable to the children.
HERE is an interesting outline of how one school inGreat Britain sought to li k up human rights with
the life of the children in school :
Article 3 (security of person) : physical safety rules, fire
drills, etc.
Article 5 (no cruel punishment) : protection from
"bullying".
Articles 7, 8, 9 (justice) : minimum of rules ; no favour-
itism ; appeals against injustice.
Articles 2, 15 (equality of races, right to nationality) :
pupils of various nationalities treated alike ; hospitality
and good manners with foreign visitors ; opportunity for
foreign travel ; friendly relations between staff and boys ;
friendly relations with other schools ; pen pals overseas.
Article 18 (religious liberty) : the"conscience clause"
- the right to withdraw from religious instruction and
act of worship (Jews, Moslems, Roman Catholics, and
sceptics may withdraw at parents'request).
Articles 18, 19 (freedom of expression) : Freedom of
class and discussion groups to speak freely without
censorship, and to write freely in essays and magazines ;
training in public expression.
Articles 20, 21 (freedom of association, freedom to
participate in government) : school clubs and societies ;
prefect system ; election of club and sports leaders.
Articles 22, 25 (social security) ; tutorial system ; grants
to boys of 15+ ; free milk (to all), free meals (to needy) ;
free travel to school (over three miles) ; scholarships and
higher education grants.
Article 24 (rest and leisure) : holidays, breaks, etc.
Article 23 (free choice of employment) : school careers
bureau ; free choice of special studies.
Article 26 (right to education) : no fees or charges for
schooling or participation in any school activity.
Article 27 (cultural participation) : cultural visits
(concerts, theatre, ballet) ; out-of-school cultural activities ;
school assembly ; School Eisteddfod.
It may be said, therefore, that the real measure of the
success of education on human rights is the extent to
which children develop qualities of mind and behaviour
that reflect the principles of the Declaration. These
qualities can be developed by teaching in the classroom,
and by activities outside the class. But above all they
come from the school's purpose, spirit and philosophy.
The 01101'1'arlie/e is based 011 eha/'le/'s (/'om"7'h (' ['lIil'I'I'sal
Dee/omlioll of HOII/OII lIi ! Jhls-"'Coide for Teacllel'S"jllst
pl/blished by C'lIeseo. See bib/io ! Jl'apIIY p. 1 ß.
