Page 4. NOVEMBER 1953 UNESCO.
This ship's manifest Nststhestaves carried hke so muchhvestock. Notethat
the slave trader is designated as the"proprietor"of these human beings.
THEY CHALLENGED
SLAVERY TO FREE
THE march to the African coast was a terrible experience, often lasting three months or
more. The slaves were usually roped or chained together by their necks, their hands
bound behind their backs ; sometimes they were gagged by having a piece of wood like
a snaffle tied into their mouths. If suspected of trying to escape they were shackled
with beams of wood, some of which were as thick as a man's thigh, and six feet long with a
fork at one end in which the neck was. secured by an iron pin. If a halt was called for trading
the gang was «'rdcd together w t'n (hasilly bl/Ill stockade.
IN the history of slavery and its abolition wehave an example of real progress made by
humanity relatively quickly, thanks principally
to the efforts of a few courageous minds, and
despite the opposition of powerful vested interests.
At the beginning of the nineteenth century
slavery was still a basic institution in a number
of great and otherwise highly developed countries.
In 1835 it flourished in the colonies of all the
great European countries, and in North and South
America. Immense economic interests and a
"They are rounded
up on a beach and
then baptised with
holy water from a
sprinkler. This is
monstrous, for after
having been made
Christians they are
then treated like ani-
mals, embarked on
an old tub of a ship
and then fastened up
in the hold like so
many pigs".-Father
Thomas Mercado :
"Suma de Tratos y
Contratos", 1562.
complete social sys-
tem were based on it.
The supporters of abo-
lition were treated as
dangerous Utopians,
when they were not
prosecuted and punish-
ed as criminals.
Yet within half a
century slavery was
everywhere abolished.
It was founded on
ancient traditions. The
earliest laws of Baby-
lonia recognized that
one man might own
another man, as he
owns an ox or a goat,
and do to him very
much the same as he
does to his ox or goat.
Egypt, Greece, Rome
and practically all the
countries of the ancient Orient practised slavery.
Among the Greeks, Aristotle, one of the greatest
minds of the ancient world, said,'''The lower sort
of mankind are by nature slaves, and it is better
for them, as for all inferiors, that they should
be under the rule of a master."
In early times, men often sold themselves or
members of their family to pay a debt. In Greece
and Rome a debtor could be enslaved by his
creditor, though this was soon forbidden. Slavery
nourished ! in the ancient world principally
because people of one country regarded foreigners
as their inferiors ; (our word barbarian comes
from the Greek barbaros which meant"foreign").
A conquering nation took not only the land and
herds won in war but the inhabitants as well.
Julius Caesar once sold 60, 000 captives.
In most of the ancient communities, gangs of
slaves played the part of machinery in modern
society with men for parts. They erected the
gigantic monuments of the Pharaohs, built the
aqueducts of Rome, were the chained oarsmen of
the galleys of old, and worked under frightful
conditions in Greek and Roman mines and
plantations.
Not all slaves, however, hved lives of horror. In
Athens their conditions were remarkably good ;
they dressed like the other residents and could
aspire to purchase their freedom. The great
French Orientalist, René Grousset has even
remarked that"the slave found himself treated
with more consideration in Athens than was the
free man in most other countries".
In Rome slave labour was used to an extent
never seen before. The hundreds of thousands of
slaves taken in her endless series of wars made
slavery the very foundation of the state. Slaves
were the physicians, teachers, house servants,
farm hands, actors, acrobats-and Gladiators.
Though never given the free movement in Rome
which they enjoyed in Athens, the Roman slaves
could still save money and in the end purchase
their freedom.
From the earliest times there was always protest
among the Greeks and Romans against slavery.
For whatever their conditions, slaves could neither
possess goods nor take part in public life. Their
children belonged to the master who could sell
them at will. The master's good or bad will alone
determined whether a slave was treated kindly
or cruelly. And the master had the right of life
and death over his slave.
In the time of Pericles (5th century B. C.)
Sophocles and Euripedes reminded Athenians
that a slave was a man :"Though the body be
enslaved, the soul is free", said Sophocles. But
few persons advocated slavery's abolition because
they did not see how society could do without it.
Many slave uprisings occurred in the history of
Rome, the most formidable being that headed by
Spartacus in 73 B. C. Escaping from the school
of Gladiators at Capua, he fled to Mount Vesuvius
where he collected an army of 60, 000 runaway
slaves like himself. For two years he fought
army after army sent'against him from Rome.
But the insurrection was finally crushed,
Spartacus was slain and 6, 000 of his followers
were crucified along the Appian Way leading to
Rome.
The messages of the early Christian churches
were so permeated by the principle of equality of
souls that the application of this principle to
slaves occupied an important position in those
messages. Slaves flocked to the new doctrine.
It is noteworthy that during this same period
when the early Christians were concerned with
alleviating the condition of slaves, the Chinese
emperor Kuang-Wu, in the year 35, enacted laws
to protect their fives and safeguard them against
mutilation.
In the scale of Chinese virtues, to give a slave
a violent scolding counted as one fault ; not to
care for him in sickness or to overburden him with
work as 10 faults ; to prevent him from marrying
as 100 faults ; and to refuse to allow him to buy
his freedom as 500 faults.
Although slavery was actively practised for
generations in Islamic countries and isolated
traces of it are still to be found, Mohammet
declared :"He who frees a slave redeems his
entire body from the fire of hell."
In India, owing to the strict social cleavage of
caste, slavery was relatively little practised. In
Japan it was apparently unknown.
Slavery gradually disappeared from Europe
after the 4th century. In its place appeared the
serfdom of feudalism, where the worker was no
more the"chattel"of his master but had to render
his lord a fixed portion of his services. He was
"bound to the soil"and when the land was sold
he and his family went with it. If he fled he
could be brought back unless he hid"for a year
and a day"in some free city. He could not give
his daughter in marriage without permission.
Serfdom ceased in England after the great Peasant
Revolt of 1381 ; in France on the eve of the French
FOUR WHO FOUGHT TO END THE
TRAFFIC IN HUMAN BEINGS
In all countries courageous and humane men and women have fought for the abolition of slavery. The
names of some of them, such as Abraham Lincoln, are known in all parts of the world ; others, though
honoured in their own countries, are less well-known abroad. Here are four of these fighters against
slavery : 1. The Abb6 Gregoire (1750-1831), on whose initiative slavery was tirst abolished In t-rance In 1/ ! : I4 DY a aecree or me NaTional \"onvemlOn. I flUUY"flUl
carried out it was confirmed by later laws. (2) William Wilberforce (1759-1833) who in England was one of the leaders of the campaign against slavery. (3) William
Groen (1801-1876) who led a similar campaign in Holland. (4) Joaquim Nabuco (1849-1910) "the great and illustrious leader of the abolition movement"in Brazil.

'COUfUER NOVEMBER 1953. Page 5
Revolution ; and in Russia in 1861 when Czar Alex-
ander II liberated 40, 000, 000 serfs.
Slavery revived in the 15th century when Euro-
peans first came into contact with the African
Negroes. The Portuguese introduced the slave
trade in 1444, although their Prince, Henry the
Navigator, who was in advance of his time, quickly
forbade it. Soon after the New World was disco-
vered, the slave ships of Spain, Portugal, England
and other European countries, with their"cargoes
of despair"were a regular sight on the ocean rou-
tes between Africa and the Americas. It is esti-
In 1776 the motion was made in the English
House of Commons that"the slave trade was
contrary to the laws of God and the rights of
men". This motion did not pass but the end was
near. To Denmark belongs the honour of being
the first Western nation to abolish the slave trade
in 1792.
The name of a great Englishman, William Wil-
berforce, stands out in the struggle against slave-
ry. After many efforts, he achieved his object in
1807, when England abolished the trading in sla-
ves throughout the Empire. The example was fol-
AFTER CENTURIES OF
BUFFERING, THERE CAME
THE DAY OF FREEDOM
For centuries they were deprived of all rights. They were put
up for sale in the markets and sold to the highest bidder. They
then became the property of a man who held over them the power
of life and death. Then one day they were set free. Their outburst
of joy and thanksgiving was something the world had rarely seen.
mated that between the 16th and 19th centuries,
thirty-two million Negroes were thus shipped to
the New World.
For one Negro who arrived alive, four died,
either in the manhunts on African soil or during
the crossing. The conditions under which they
travelled, crowded together for weeks on board
ship, beggar description. When the slave-trade
was prohibited their lot grew worse aboard smug-
glers'ships, for they were often thrown into the
sea on the approach of a policing frigate.
As the true nature of this revolting traffic in
human beings came to the knowledge of Euro-
peans it outraged men's sense of justice and free-
dom. One of the great forerunners of abolition
was William Penn, an English Quaker, who after
founding the colony of religious tolerance and
freedom of con. science in Pennsylvania, returned
to England where in 1697 he strongly advocated
the abolition of slavery. He was still too much in
advance of his time but in the following century-
"the century of enlightenment"-many voices
were raised on behalf of abolition.
Thomas Jefferson favoured it and if one more
vote had been obtained when the U. S. Constitu-
tion was drawn up in 1787, slavery would have
been abolished then and there.
Generally speaking, the abolition of slavery in
the modern world was achieved in two stages.
First by forbidding the. slave-trade, and then by
the elimination of slavery itself.
lowed by the United States in 1808 (though slave
smuggling continued until abolition in 1865) by
Holland in 1814, and France in 1815.
It was well enough to stop the traffic in slaves
but slavery itself-"the shame of humanity"-still
continued. In England, Wilberforce spent the lar-
ger part of his life denouncing it over the country
and introducing measures for its abolition. A
number of smaller nations in Europe had already
abolished slavery, and all the abolitionists in Eng-
land redoubled their efforts. Finally in 1838,
three years after Wilberforce's death, complete
emancipation was achieved.
The enthusiasm of humanity associated with
the revolutionary movement, spurred many
Frenchmen in the struggle for abolition. A
"society des Amis des Noirs"was formed in Paris
in 1788. And it was in France, by a decree
passed during the Revolution by the National
Convention in 1794, that slavery was first abo-
lished by a great nation. This measure was
introduced by a deputy, the Abbé Gregoire, who
at the same time had civil and political rights
restored to the Jews. The decree, however, was
not fully carried out. In 1801, Bonaparte re-
established slavery officially in the colonies.
Public opinion, moved by the work of Victor
Schoelcher and others, finally secured complete
abolition in March 1848.
The most stubborn resistance was put up in
North and South America, in the regions where
slavery constituted an essential basis of economic
wealth.
Negroes continued to arrive from Africa,
brought in by well-organized slave-traders, des-
pite the fact that slave trading was forbidden.
It is estimated that at about 1820, 20, 000 Negroes
were arriving annually. Between 1840 and 1860,
New York was the most active port of commission
in the world for this trade ; Bc. ston and Portland
came next. At about 1856, forty slave-ships left
annually from North American ports, and this
"black market"brought in 17 million dollars
profit.
A little more than a hundred years ago, in 1852,
appeared the famous Uncle Tom's Cabin by
Harriet Beecher-Stowe. Translated into many
languages, it rendered signal service to the cause
of abolition. (See Courier, February 1952). It was
only after a long, costly and bloody Civil War
and the ratification of the Thirteenth Amend-
ment to the U. S. Constitution in December 1865,
that the seal was set on the total and definitive
abolition of slavery.
In most Latin American countries, emancipation
came fairly early, the first nation effectively to
liberat the slaves being Equador in 1851. One
country, Brazil, remained the last great strong-
hold of slavery in the New World.
Slavery came to Brazil some 30 years after its
discovery in 1500. It continued uninterrupted
for nearly 300 years assuming its largest propor-
tions in the 18th and 19th centuries. How many
Africans were brought in will perhaps never be
known, but the number undoubtedly ran into
millions.
Many of the Negroes brought to Brazil were
superior in cultural equipment to their masters.
Large numbers were literate and some are said
to have written Arabic fluently. * It is not sur-
prising therefore that the history of Brazilian
slavery records numerous examples of Negroes in
revolt. Fugitive slaves occasionally banded
together in considerable numbers for mutual pro-
tection into quilombos, settlements established
in the jungle.
Perhaps the greatest quilombo was the famous
"Negroes of the Palmares"in Northeast Brazil in
the 17th century. The fugitives, numbering in
the thousands, set up a series of heavily fortified
villages scattered over some 240 miles. They
became so strong and difficult to dislodge that
numerous expeditions sent out by the Dutch and
later the Portuguese were unable for 70 years to
destroy them completely. The quilombo, some-
times called a'"Negro Republic", was finally sub-
dued in 1697 and its leader, a Negro named Zumbi,
slain.
The first recorded protest against slavery in
Brazil was that of the Jesuit Manoel de Nobrega
who wrote to his superiors in Lisbon decrying the
importation of Africans. In 1758 Manoel da
Rocha published a book in Lisbon advocating
abolition of the slave trade. He called for the
freeing of slaves after a certain number of years
of service and the emancipation of their children
at birth.
Sixty-five years later, in 1823, Jose Bonifacio
unsuccessfully proposed in Parliament a measure
to end the importation of slaves. This was
achieved in 1831. Public opinion demanded that
owners set at liberty any slave requesting his
freedom and offering the price of his purchase.
In 1871 the so-called"Law of Rio Branco"freed
children of slaves born after the adoption of the
law.
By 1880 a widespread emancipation movement
was under way."No more slaves ! No more
masters ! Liberty to all hands, liberty to all
heads !" cried Ruy Barbosa the great statesman
and orator, echoing the words of a colonial
author, Gonzaga.
Brazil was no longer a pro-slavery nation ; it
was a country fighting for abolition. In the fore-
front of the battle was Joaquim Nabuco,"the
great and illustrious leader of the abolition mo-
vement."In one of his first parliamentary
speeches he roared :"I see Liberal Deputies, but I
see no liberal ideas."In a Rio de Janeiro news-
paper he wrote :"Slavery is a word which may
have lost all its force for certain consciences, but
like a red-hot iron it marks a sign of degradation
on the foreheads of others."
On the eve of nation-wide abolition, slaves were
being freed by the thousands across the length
and breadth of the country.
In 1888, the Imperial Government at Rio,
through a decree signed by Princess Isabel, abo-
lished slavery entirely, freeing the last 600, 000
Negroes in bondage throughout the country.
The extinction of the institution of slavery in
Brazil thus came about gradually by means of a
progressively increasing and finally irresistible
popular movement.
Thus, the history of slavery and its abolition
in a relatively short space of time shows that an
idea which is apparently Utopian but basically
true can be finally translated into fact when
men who are at once courageous and discerning
will take a hand in public affairs. It is on this
that the authors of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights based their reasoned hopes.
