Page 12. MARCH 1953 UNESCCOUÐ
tivities. Something like forty institutions, most
of which have been offering radio training and
instruction for years, have incorporated the new
art into the existing radio curriculum.
But still more significant for the development
of educational television is the number of students--.,.....
and faculty members already
contributing frequently to tele-
vision programmes over commer-
cial stations, either as individuals
or in co-operative undertakings
between stations and the college
or university for the presentation
of programmes designed and
executed by the college.
In Philadelphia a group of 20
colleges has combined to present,
between them, a regular series of
adults education programmes.
Similar programmes originated
by some 40 or so other institutions
are being transmitted by com-
mercial stations. In only two
cases are such programmes pre-
pared for classroom use-the vast
majority designed and executed
zion the campus"are for adult
consumption.
The range of subjects treated
is about as extensive as the
departments of instruction at the
universities. Of the six com-
monest subjects, science in all its
aspects leads. The others most
frequently offered are psychology,
art and literature, history, forums,
drama.
In general, then, universities
and colleges are at present
making use of television to bring
education"into the living room"
of millions of viewers, not into
their own classrooms. Television
applied to classroom instruction is
most often used in courses for
students majoring in radio or
television, or both.
What are the"target ob-
jectives"of these institutions of
higher education in planning
programmes which they know
will reach millions of people ?
At a number of colleges and
universities, the primary objective
appears to be that of public
relations-to create goodwill for
the institution concerned and to
bring to the general public fuller
knowledge of the opportunity of
"'on the campus"education.
Thus, at the University of Akron,
film tours of the campus have
been televised, and a course on
rubber chemistry. has highlighted
a specialized activity of the
university.
The commonest type of pro-
gramme, however, reflects an
attitude typical of many univer-
sities and colleges in the U. S.,
particularly the so-called"land
grant"colleges. These institutions
owe their existence to an 1862
Act of Congress which granted
public land to each State to found
a college of, agriculture and
technology. Some of these ins-
titutions were incorporated in.....  ;....  ;......,...". C"'+..............- ;........-... ; + ;.............. +\..existing State universities ; others remained
separate.
Founded and developed in a tradition of service
to the community, these institutions exemplify
the great concern throughout American education
that it be related to life and that the resources
of scholarship be harnessed to the needs of the
community. This is why so many courses are
offered which reflect the needs and activities of
the community surrounding the college or
university.
In this particular field, the work of Iowa State
College stands out not only because of the
advanced stage it has reached, but also because
of the college's unique position as the first and, as
yet, the only college or university owning and
operating its own television station.
The State college exists to serve the people of
the State. The aim of its station has been to
extend and facilitate such service among the
600, 000 or so people in its area-the richest and
heaviest populated part of Iowa.
Programmes put out reflect the general
characteristics, in terms of service rendered, of a
State Agricultural College, as the following
examples show :"Down to Earth" (information of
interest to the home gardener) ;"Books on Trial"
(discussions of books, classics and modern) ;
COLLEGE COURSES BY TV
Television has solved a major problem for the instructor in medical schools. It enables
him to show effective close-up views of demonstrations of delicate techniques to as
many as 40 or 50 students at a time, instead of to only small groups as in the past.
The first subject to be chosen was school
district reorganization i. e. how to achieve a more
rational distribution of the State's schools. This
is a problem of local importance but of national
scope. The town selected for the discussion was
Cambridge, Iowa, which had a problem of
declining high school enrolment, and school costs
per pupil well above the average. After some
discussion the townsfolk agreed to participate,
and chose 12 of their number to represent them.
The telecast had two skilfully blended com-
ponents-spontaneous, unrehearsed discussion
and films of the community to dramatize and
underline the problem. Since the first programme
some of the techniques have been modified in the
light of experience.
But the basic principle on which"'The Whole
Town's Talking"was conceived, real people
discussing their own real problems, has remained
unchanged. And what stands out above all is
the sincerity of the programmes. John Dyer, the
rural mailman, alone of all the people in Cam-
bridge spoke up for a type of school reorganization
which might mean better education for the
children at the cost of losing the high school to
another town. John Dyer is a man of over 60.
He does not like to speak in public. But when he
stood up and pointed his finger at the eleven
slightly over 100, 000 individuals
have, during the course of presen-
tation, viewed one or more tele-
casts.
A second series of courses on
"Child Psychology"and.'Physical
Geography"and subsequently on
"General Economics"and"Ap-
preciation of Music"were pre-
sented. The music courses were
given on television in the morning
and the music referred to played
on the radio station the same
afternoon.
Because these were morning
programmes, nearly 90 % of the
viewers were women. Some 64 %
of the registrants completed
the course and took final ex-
aminations. Their work amazed
instructors, one of whom said :
"Even though the age range was
from 19 to over 50, and although
some had not been in school for
over 30 years, the papers were
stimulating, thoughtful and often
refreshing."
A survey also revealed that
56 % of the students came from
outside the county in which the
university is situated. There
were bedridden students to whom
examiners were sent, and also
patients in a war veteran's
hospital. Then there were groups
of women who met to view the
lecture and then discuss it.
When a book was mentioned
during the course, libraries re-
ported a rush to borrow works of
that type. In other words, it
was shown that courses reached
a vast segment of the people
*'thirsting for additional know-
ledge".
Many other types of collegeand university television pro-
grammes can be cited, for most
institutions now active in tele-
vision are producing two or
more programmes a week..'Sem-
inar", presented by Columbia
- University and the American
Broadcasting Company, has made
it possible for viewers throughout
the United States to sit in on an
actual college seminar in Ame-
rican Civilization. One of the
oldest and most popular pro-
grammes bringing science to the
television screen is"The Johns
Hopkins Science Review", which
is just celebrating its fifth anni-
versary. This covers in an easy-
to-understand way the whole
alphabet of science from aero-
nautics to zoology, reviewing
each week, all kinds of devel-
opments.
There remains, of course, the
potentialities of television when
used for classroom teaching and-- _. Z !. L_-_'l-' : -demonstration. In many areas 01 teacnmg,
effective exploitation will depend on imaginative
script writing and direction. But where visual
demonstration is the very essence of the com-
munication, the television camera takes over, as
it were, as instructor in its own right.
It is in medical instruction that use of the
camera is, perhaps, most vividly and dramatically
illustrated. Television is able to provide close-up
views of the demonstration of delicate techniques,
previously available only to small student groups
at a time."Closed circuit"colour television is
already being used for this purpose in several
universities. Similarly, students at Cornell Uni-
versity are getting basic physics training from
television screens. They no longer wait in turn
to use microscopes, for a special midget television
camera is trained into one microscope magnifying
the image on the screen.
In these and many other ways both in and out
of their own classrooms, U. S. colleges and uni-
versities have been answering the challenge of
television, discovering and tabulating its assets,
proving by careful experiment some of the major
opportunities it presents to. education and, above
all, bearing in mind the needs of the many
different audiences that can be reached by
educational television.
"Your Health" (presentation of public health
problems) ;"Farm Facts" (demonstrations of
approved farming procedures) ;"Background
Europe" (Hiscory lectures produced with co-
operation of history and government department).
One of the most striking and successful of the
programmes has been an experiment in mass
education through TV entitled :"The Whole
Town's Talking."
It is, in effect, an effort to facilitate the goal
once bespoken by Thomas Jefferson :"I know no
safe depository of the ultimate powers of society
but the people themselves ; and if we think them
not enlightened enough to exercise their control
with a wholesome direction, the remedy is not to
take it from them, but to inform their discretion
through education."
To this end the State College of Iowa station
has literally gone to the people. For a series of
half-hour weekly discussions the station has sent
its mobile van, its camera and its crew to a series
of communities throughout the State. The basic
idea has been to bring together representatives of
an Iowa community to discuss a serious local.
problem, to look at the alternatives, to weigh the
costs, and to decide what action to take.
other people of Cambridge and said :"What do
you value, your children or your business ?", that
was a moment of courage and conviction not
easily forgotten.
It is difficult to measure scientifically the effects
and action of such a programme, but an adult
education worker had this to say :"It has certain-
ly stimulated thinking in a number of commu-
nities... It has developed a better understanding
of the complex problems involved in the school
district organization of Iowa and in the nation...
in general talks on this problem I have not, in
five years, been able to reach as many people as
you did in two hours..."
The experience of Western Reserve University,
Cleveland,, is indicative of the enthusiastic
response universities have had to their offers
of"college courses by television". In August 1951,
the university announced that it would offer
courses in introductory psychology and com-
parative literature. By the close of registration
109 students had paid full tuition and were
enrolled for credit and 674 had bought the
syllabus in order to follow the course.
Many other people, too, followed these formal
courses. Indeed the university estimates that
ODAY over 65
institutions of
higher learning
in the United
States are
participating in
television acti-
vities of one
kind or another.
Broadly speak-
ing, colleges and
universities have
been relating
their work to
television in two
ways : student
training in tele-
vision and ac-
tual television
programme ac-........ -4-..., +. ;....."'".......-..........
