CEYLON'S'DRY ZONE
PROSPERITY TO AN
mrwniles out of Colombo,
the counh'yside of Ceylon
undergoes a sudden change.
The palm trees of luxul'iant
plantations thin out, passing cars
kick up little clouds of. dust and
villages grow rarer. Though the
road remains excellent, the jungle
slips up on its borders.
The reason for the sudden change
is that you have passed into the
"dry zone"of Ceylon, so called
because its rainfall is concentrated
in three months. This dry zone
covers three-cjuarters or the island,
but supports only 3, 000, 000 of Cey-
lon's population of 7, 500, 000 which
is growing at the rate of 100, 000
new mouths to feed each year.
Until 20 years ago, much of the
"dry zone"was a waste of malarial
jungle, although, more than 1, 000
years ago, it was here that the
kings of ancient Lanka tamed the
swollen rivers of the rainy season
and put them to work irrigating
paddy fields. But invaders from
the north wrecked the "tanks"
(artificial lakes) which were the
heart of the irrigation system, and
the jungle moved in.
In 10 : \. Ceylon began an irriga-
tion and settlement programme to
put this dry zone back to work
producing rice-Ceylon's staple
food, \vhich she must now import.
In the area of Polonnuruwa alone
(ancient capital of Ceylon and now
a ruined city), 5, 000 families from
all parts of the island have been
settled on new land reclaimed
from the jungle. Ancient tanks
have been restnred and their water
by Daniel
channelled into the green paddy
fields of the colonists.
In order to raise living standards
in this region, whose population
includes 35, 000 colonists, 10, 000
"squatters"who have moved in on
new land, and 1U, 000 villagers
whose ancestors refused to sur-
render to the jungle, Ceylon and
L'nesco have set up a Fundamental
Education centre at the crossroads
village of Minneriya.
Head of the centre is Dr. Duane
Spencer Hatch, an American edu-
cator'who has spent most of his
life doing exactly this sort of
work, beginning in India in 1922,
and whose energy wears out men
half his age, although he will
admit to being"around sixty".
The centre itself kvas opened in
temporary offices while its build-
ings were made ready on the site
of an old Royal Air Force aero-
drome at Minneriya.
The programme of the centre
has two main objectives : to provide
the people of the region'with
opportunities to learn what they
must know to lead better lives, and
to train teachers who can carry on
its work throughout the island.
The foundation of this programme,
Dr. Hatch believes, must rest upon
the people themselves, who live in
17 cotonies and 39 villages dotted
over the 90 square miles which
form the centre's field of activity.
Two of the villages are inhabited
by \'eddahs, the aboriginal peoples
Only two years ago the reservoir below-now forming a vast lake-was covered
by jungle undergrowth. The transformation was effected by the restoration
ofasystemofirrigation tanks, (actually lakes), built in the 12th century A. D. under
the reign of King Larakramabahu the Great, whose statue (above, right) stands
over the ruined royal city of Polonnuruwa. This king built himself a seven-
storyed palace of which only the ruins (above, left) are left standing today.

COURIER JANUARY 1953. Page II
PIONEERS RESTORE
ANCIENT KINGDOM
, BEHRMAN
of Ceylon. Ceylon's two main
linguistic groups are reps'resented
by 2U villages speaking Sinhalese
and 11 speaking Tamil. Many of
the villages lie along jungle trails
accessible only by jeep and, during
the wet season, rising waters
convert some into islands inhabit-
ed mainly by wild animals.
Schools are going up in these
villages, and often the school is the
site of one of the adult education
centre which the Ceylon Unesco
team has opened in the area.
The 17 irrigation colonies are
the homes of the dry zone pioneers ;
in a way, they have many of the
characteristics of boom towns.
Villages like IIingmakgoda have
busy main street lined by shops
selling everything from sarongs to
cameras. At night, a cinema with
its own generator sends a green
glow of neon over the land'wrested
from the jungle.
Although life may be easier in
the colonies nowadays, the land is
not as generous. In the begin-
ning, colonists working newly-
clenred paddy fields could count
on, 40-bushel-per acre rice crops
twice a year, but now yields may
drop as low as 1U bushels per acre.
The CN team earrying out the
programmes of the centre under
Do. Hatch is as international as its
parent organization. Srinavasa
Hao of India is its deputy director ;
Lemon J. Bickham, an American
sent to Ceylon by WHO, is in
charge of health education, and
fore Hakansson of Sweden, an ILU
expert, is responsible for vocation-
al training. The FAO is also
participating by sending an agri-
cultural extension worker to join
its staff.
The most important part of the
centre's work is bringing these
skills to the places where they are
needed. Every other night on a
regular schedule, the centre's staff
loads a motion picture projector,
a filmstrip viewer, an epidiascope
(this device projects picture direct-
ly from a book onto a screen) and
a portable electric generator into
a jeep, and takes them to its adult
education centres.
We accompanied Mr. Rao and
My. Bickham on one of these,
trips, which took us to Sungawila,
a village of 2UO Tamil-speaking
Moslems two hours fw'ay over
jungle trails. As we arrived in
the village, dusk was tailing and
men were lighting fires at the edge
of stockades to draw insects away
from their cattle.
They set up shop at the village
school, a modern cement structure
open on all sides. A string of
coloured lights had been hung
across the school compound and
children were assembling outside,
taking front row seats on the
ground before the screen. A
loudspeaker, hooked up to the
generator, was blaring Tamil mu-
sic to a fascinated audience.
The village headman, U. L. Mo-
hamed Sheriff, was anxious for
the team to set. up an adult educa-
tion centre in the village.
"Every child in this village goes
to school and it's a good school,"
he said,.'but there are some of the
grown-ups \who never had the
chance and they want to learn to
read. You can become an import-
ant man in the village if you know
how to read. You can deal with
shopkeepers and you might even
become a vel t'ÎdanÎ." (The zcl
vidal1i is responsible for allocating
irrigation water to farmers, and is
one of the most respec1cd members
ot the community.)
The music'stopped, the coloured
Until a few months ago the only book in the village of IlIukwewa was a collection of Buddhist fables, the property of one of
the elders. Today the community has other and more modern books which its people tearnto readataduiteducation classes.
Thirty-five thousand colonists coming from at parts of Ceylon have joined the 10, 000 villagers in the region covered by the
Minneriya Centre. One of the Centre's first goals is to help train more skilled craftsmen like Janis Appuhamy, a carpenter,
(left) for they are needed to build homes in the fast developing region. The staff at Minneriya, whose area includes
17 colonizes and 39 villages, maintains close and friendly contact with their inhabitants. Mrs. Hatch (right) wife of the
Centre's head, finds that a demonstration of tatting (form of knotted handwork) helps to overcome the children's shyness.
light flicked off and the show
began with two entertainment
shots. Then three health films,
with Tamil sound-tracks, were
shown, covering malaria, disease-
carrying insects and vaccination
against smallpox. After the show
ended a question and answer ses-
sion got under way.'
The village shopkeeper, T. S. M.
Sheriff, had a ready answer to a
question on how to get rid of ma-
laria.
"Bring out the pump, put oil on
the \vater in the swamps, clean up
your home and you won't have
malaria."
The village listened and nodded
in unison.
A young man stood up and
asked..'Does it do any good to
be vaccinated ? That boy we saw,
he didn't want to be vaccinated."
The headman rose majestically
and answered slowly :"The man
who refuses to be vaccinated is
afraid. I know now that'when
1 am vaccinated, I am protected
against disease. The man who is
not vaccinated is a coward."
The questions and answers
continued to fly, but Mr. Bickham
and Mr. Rao decided to put an end
to the session..'They've grasped
the point very well,"Mr. Bickham
to ! d us,"We don't want to try to
cram in too much at once-we'll
be back again."
The loudspeaker played the Cey-
lon national anthem, and then the
village went to bed. So did the
Unesco team, on small beds in the
open schoolhouse, after a supper
of sandwiches washed down with
coconut milk.
It was a quiet, cool night with
no uninvited visitors. The next
morning, the team broke camp and
began its trip back home. The
school teacher had no use for the
two rifles he kept loaded beside his
own cot.
Thisisagtimpse of \vhat, in
three years, is to become a"rural
univel'sitv"at Minneriya. One
training seminar has already
been conducted at the centre and
these courses are to be ù regular
part of its programme. Progress
is slow and that is the way it
should be, for quick, spectacular
achievements are not what edu-
cators are seeking. This Ipro-
gramme is aimed at all sides of
peoples'lives-spiritua), mental,
physical, social and economic-
and all sides must move ahead at
the same pace.
As Dr. Hatch put it,"there is no
point starting a three-year pro-
gramme in health a ! one and team-
ing. at the end of three years. that
people are too hungry to be
healthy."
