iSCO C COURIER AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1953. Page II
Cut off from the rest of the world and untouched by cutside influence for untold centuries, the aborigines of. Australia are on  of the few peoples in the wor) d whose tife is still fairly close to the s one age. Their
way of life has evolved considerably during the past century and a half of contact with Western civilization,
but vestiges of their primitive customs still exist. In their natural tribal state they possess no knowledge of metals
or agriculture. They have 0 highly developed social organization however. As in all newsy-settled countries, the
indigenous inhabitants. suffered at first from their contact with the white race. It has been estimated that atthe time of the first white settlement in 1788 there were about 300, 000 aborigines in Australia. Contact with the the
white settlers was more than they could survive and the numbers dwindled as hunting grounds were reduced
with the spread of settlements. It is estimated that there are still 60, 000 full-bloods aborigines and 25, 000 half-
castes on the mainland. They are mostly nomads found in tribes scattered over the Northern Territory, the
north of Western Australia and northern Queenstand. Many roam vast reservations. They are there encouraged to
live their traditional communal tife. Others, no longer tribal, live in supervised camps. Others again live in
normal contact with the white man and are usually in employment, particularly 9S stockmen on cattle stations. The
most complete record yet made of the life of the aborigines is now being presented in the United States under
the auspices of Unesco and the U. S. and Australian Nowional Commissions for Unesco. The exhibition opened
in Buffato in June and wit ! tour the country for nearly two years. One of the most remarkable aspects of the abori-
gine of Australia is his art-a truly primitive art that is still a living art. Like the cave men of Europe, the abori-
gines who lived thousands of years ago were artists. Through the centuries which have passed since they worked with
feathers and bark brushes and tapped away patiently with stone toots, or cut outline figures in the rock, there have
always been artists among the tribes. Unesco is now eompteting p ! ans for the publication later this year or next year
of a portfolio on Australian aboriginal art. It will include 32 large reproductions in colour of the cave paintings in
Arnhem Land-in the for north.) In word and picture the COURIER presents on these pages same aspects of the
tife-fascinating both from human and scientific points of view-of the aborigines of Australia.
by Professor A. P. fLKIN
Professor of Anthropology hi the University of Sydney, Australia
B USInIE='I are those peoples of primitive culture, who
neither garden nor pasture flocks and herds. They
depend for their living s lely on hunting, fishing
(where possible) and food gathering. Such was the
life of the Palaeolithic peoples of pre-history ; such, too,
has been recently, and still is, the life of some groups as,
for example, the Bushmen of the Kalahari Desert, South
Africa, some American Indian tribes, a fe\v groups in
Malaysia and New Guinea, and especially the Australian
Aborigines.
These last are the most interesting and indeed startling,
for here was a food-gathering people of the simplest
material culture who until 1788 had been occupying a
whole continent, undisturbed for many centuries. Indeed,
fifty years ago numbers of tribes were still living in
ignorance of the existence of other races, and it is
only during the past twenty years that all have
come into contact with white peoples. Thousands
of Aborigines, however, cannot speak English, and
still depend to a large extent on food gathering
for a livelihood. I shall take the Australian Aborigines
as my example of the part played by Bushmen in modern
civilization, for I have worked amongst and for them for
a quartet of a century.
The Aborigines had developed a very effective social and'
economic adaptation to their environment. They were
divided into tribal or smaller groups, each with its re-
cognized food-gathering territory. This varied in size, as
did the density of the population, according to the food
providing character of the region. The poorer the country
and the more arid the conditions, the larger the area re-
quired for food gathering and hunting, and the smaller and
more scattered were the groups. In good food country,
smaller areas sufficed, and groups were not isolated but
often hunted and camped together, though in group order.
wherever it was, the members of a tribal group knew
all about their own country and everything in it, where and
when food and other desired articles could and should be
found, and the signs pointing to these facts. Thus, the
appearance of flowers on certain trees was correlated with
the ripeness of yams in sandy ground, and with other
phenomena.
All in all, a large body of'natural'knowledge was
passed from generation to generation.
This was not only a feat of memory, but (C 0 n t ; n u e d
witnessed 10 « piwcrs of obsen'ation and 01 on next page.)

COMPLETELY ISOLATED
FOR MANY CENTURIES...
Very early in human history-perhaps more than 60, 000 years ago-a small band of
venturesome people from south-eastern Asia arrived in Australia. Evidence indi-
cates that they were the first to people the land of the kangaroo probably settling
in Arnhem Land in the north. Even today the life of most of their descendants has
changed very little and as a race they show archaic features which have remained
unmodified down to the presents, In their natural tribal state. they possess no
applying the results of observation. When we add to this
the skill required to get some of the desired objects, or to
make such articles as spears, spearthrowers, boomerangs,
canoes and nets, we realize that the Aborigines
had and have the intellectual ability and the
potential technical skill to adapt themselves to
new situations.
There is one provision, however. No people
can readapt itself to a new way of life overnight,
nor indeed in one generation. Consequently, as
European settlement at harbours and in good
farming and grazing land was always fast and
total, the food gathering Aborigines were de-
prived of their way of life, became hangers-
on or were involved in uneven clashes. As a
result they declined rapidly, and almost the only
Aborigines to remain in the regions of success-
ful European exploitation of the land are those
of mixed blood.
In the less favourable areas, however, white
settlement was slow and sparse. The natives
were not dispossessed, though there were clashes
between them and the"invader". But the sett-
lers needed the labour of the Aborigines, and
the latter had time to realize that by working for the lormcr
they could obtain some of the white man's goods. So a
working adaptation was reached.
As a result, the Aborigines have made a positive contri-
bution to the pastoral development of Australia in the
great inland cattle and sheep areas. As stockmen, drovers,
fencers, shearers, windmill attendants, and
general handymen, they have, for a hundred
years, done most of the pastoral work in the
"outback"and"inland". Their women, too,
have done the domestic work, either substituting
for white women or making life under hard
conditions more endurable and pleasant for the
settlers'* wives. The fact is that the pastoral
industry in both the arid and the tropical regions
could not have been developed without the
Aborigines. Further, with the spread of educa-
tion and literacy amongst them, and the
establishment of better conditions of employ-
ment and reward, their contribution towards
Australia's economic life will increase.
With very few exceptions, they have not shown
an aptitude for, or interest in, farming, but the
north-coastal Aborigines have proved themselves
good and reliable boat crews. On small govern-
ment and private trading vessels their work has
been mostly menial, but on mission boats
they have filled, and-fill, all positions, except that of
master, a post filled by a \vhite man, or, often, a man of
part-Aboriginal descent. Frequently, however, the Abori-
gine is really in charge, for he
weather, and will get into the t
In the past, they were emp
industry. Today, only the Te
engaged in this work, and th
controlled by the Queensland A
Finally, a few full-bloods a
caste Aborigines have made g (
own businesses, such as sa'w-r
and fishing. Hundreds of IT
factories in the big cities. A fey
and nurses. As opportunities
higher education are opening 1
will play a bigger part in thesE
In two World Wars, men
served in the ranks and also
sport, especially in boxing and
and cricket, they have proved
The foregoing shows that the
ed, and will continue to contr
towards Australian life and th :
of the average intelligent perso
achievement : conditioned by
they are achieving a place ir
economy.
Some are doing more ; they
doing so outside of the econe
... THEY ARE ADOPTING
A NEW WAY OF LIFE
Regarded in old Colonial days as being of the lowest intelligence the aborigine
remained a despised people until a better understanding of their ways spread among
white people. In recent years sincere efforts have been made to save the most
interesting of all primitive races of man from the fate of the Tasmanians who became
extinct in 1876 with the death of a romantic figure, the"Princess Truganini". The
Australian Federal Government has launched an ambitious programme to assimilate
0 tJ

knowledge of metals or agriculture, but they have a highly developed social orga-
nization. Organized in tribal groups, they possess a vast amount of"natural"know-
ledge about the country where they live, and this is passed from generation to
generation. Professor A. P. Elkin, author of the article below, has brought back
from Arnhem Land the first wire recordings, films and photographs ever made of
secret aborigine ceremonials there. Photo, left, shows public ceremonial dance,
or corroboree, staged in honour of Prof. Elkin's arrival. Photo, right-also brought
back by Prof. Elkin-shows another dance, the Warrangan corroboree, asso-
ciated with the flying fox (bat) mythology. The dance is performed to the rhythm
of clapping boomerangs. (University of Sydney photos.) Centre photo shows
W. J. Harney, one of the great specialists on the Bushmen of Arnhem land, enjoying
a meal offlying fox with his aboriginal friends at Oenpelli. (Australian official Photo.)
he knows the \vaters and the
s boat safely to its port.
nployed in the pearl-shelling
Torres Straits Islanders are
that on a co-operative basis,
I AdministratIOn.
; and many half and lighter
good in trades, some in their
v-milling, small boat-building
mixed-bloods, too, work in
few are successful as teachers
is for technical training and
g up for the Aborigines, they
sse and like spheres.
n of half and lighter castes
so in labour gangs, while in
nd to a less extent in football
; d their prowess.
lhe Aborigines have contribut-
itribute, m no small measure
that they are playing the part
'son. That, however, is a real
y a food-gathering economy,
in a pastoral and industrial
ley are making a name, and
momic and sporting spheres.
In particular, Albert Namatjira and a dozen other members
of the Aranda tribe of Central Australia stand forth as
water-colour artists, whose works are sought far beyond
the borders of Australia. ; There was no
indigenous art'worthy of the name in that part
of the continent, until Namatjira fortnnateiy
saw a white artist at work. The artist, realizing
Namatjira's interest, encouraged and helped
him. His work gave the idea to other Aborigines.
These new artists vary in their styles, some ex-
pressing more Aboriginal background and
feeling than others. Their exihibitions in the
capital cities are always successful.
Some good singers have appeared, too, the
best known being Harold Blair, who has been
in America. A few have stood out as Christian
religious leaders amongst their own people.
especially the Rev. James Noble and Pastor
Doug. Nicholls.
But much more will be achieved along cultur-
al lines. For some years now, there has been a
vogue to use Aboriginal themes in Australian
poetry, Ahoriginal art motifs (especially from
Arnhem Land, North Australia) in designs
for fabrics, murals and panellings, Aboriginal musical
themes in our musical compositions, and Aboriginal myths
and legends in interpretative dancing. It remains, now,
for the Aborigines themselves to express their art, music
and dancing in ways and places which will bring their
own interpretation of life into Australia's cultural heritage.
i ney are excellent dancers anu acLora, anu
have shown that they can perform well in
movie-film jwork. But it will be much more
significant if they develop and perform their
own traditional ballets for public showing. So,
too, they could contribute to our common stock
of music, through recordings, such as those 1
have obtained in Arnhem Land, which fascinate'
all those who hear them.
In addition, their Songmen will interpret the
experience of their people in. ballads and
"spirituals"which will make a definite impact
on our culture. The Arnhemlanders, too, are
poets of no mean order ; they carve and mould
figures, and they paint on bark and on cave-
walls designs both naturalistic and symbolic.
expressing their mythology and their desires.
These paintings in ochres reveal skill, aesthetic
sense, and feeling, and should provide the
basis for a fresh and positive achievement in
the Australian world of art.
To sum up : the"Bushmen"of Australia have achieved
much for and in modern civilization. They will achieve
much more-if they are guided aright.
the aboriginal nomad population into the general stream of Australian life, Reserves
have been established where thousands of aborigines make their homes and primary
schools have been opened. It is estimated that there are still 60, 000 full-blood
aborigines and 25, 000 half-castes on the Australian mainland. Without their help it
would not have been possible to develop the country's pastoral industries. Aborigi-
nes have contributed and will continue to contribute in no small measure towards
Australian Hfe. Photos show, from left to right : 1) Children of the Arunta tribe
leaving camp for school. 2) The Bungalow, a reserve for aborigines working
near the town of Alice Springs, Central Australia. 3) A mobile unit dentist of the
Northern Territories Medical Service attending to an aborigine's troublesome
tooth on Melville Island. 4) Aborigine cattlemen highly prized for their excellent
horsemanship and skill as drovers on the great cattle stations of Australia's far north.
I) 9
