"On the road to Louviers"by Reine, one of Pierre Duquet's pupils, aged 11, France.
THE CHILD WHO
DOES NOT DRAW
IS AN ANOMALY
by Pierre Duquet
Teacher at Creuse, Somme (France).
Prix Monnier for art teaching in schools 1950
"Shepherd"by a Nigeria. child.
' ! n the green field"by Jacky, another of Pierre Duquet's pupils, aged 9, France.
THE urge to artistic expression isan imperative need in every
child. None can escape it.
Although for those children who are
constrained and bullied, who lack
the freedom and the material means
to give full rein to the urge, this
need may perhaps not be so strong,
the scribbles and furtive drawings
that they make on the walls and in
the margins of their exercise books
bear ample witness that it exists
and persists.
A child who does not draw is an
anomaly. Particularly so in the
years between 6 and 10, which is
outstandingly the golden age of
creative expression.
Up to the age of six, the thought
and behaviour of the child have been
predominantly egocentric. From
that age onwards, his mentality be-
comes less centred on himself and
turns towards social behaviour
which is gradually submitted to the
discipline of reality and reason.
The small child does not at first
have any idea that his scribbles
should represent real objects. He
draws lines and scribbles, just as
formerly he used to gesticulate and
babble incessantly. Then one day,
he finds a resemblance between the
scribble he has just made and some
object in real life, and he gives it
the name of the object.
One of his first achievements is
generally a symbol for a man, which
will be subjected to all kinds of
transformations and endowed with
different attributes, while remaining
over a long period basically un-
changed, although actually evolving
all the time.
Design grows larger
AT this age from 4 to 5, spon-taneous expression is as
much subject to the changing
moods of the child as is a game he
plays. He endows his creations
with intentions that he has been
unable to carry out. He tells a story
about what he could not express in
the drawing. The action becomes
more important than the person.
He does not always indicate where
this is taking place. Only what is
essential for the action is formu-
lated. A figure may have only one
arm, the one being used.
Generally, he begins in one corner
of the paper and works outwards,
beginning calmly then becoming
more and more active, the elements
of the design growing larger and
being drawn more quickly. And
then, when he has covered it all,
when the temptation of that empty
surface has been satisfied, or some-
times quite suddenly when interest
is exhausted, he will stop.
By the time he is six years old, the
child has acquired, or soon will,
control over the movements of his
hand so that he can make his pencil
or paint-brush define or diversify
the shapes and areas he wants.
This is the stage of outlines, specific
tasks, definition of objects drawn on
a two-dimensional surface where
the ideas of space and volume are
apprehended but not expressed. He
becomes aware of his sheet of paper
as a limited area with its demands,
its shape and its potentialities.
At first he places the various ele-
ments haphazardly on the paper but
soon he fills it up, in a kind of
enumeration, without any apparent
connexion other than the impulse
of the moment. Then the base line
representing the ground begins to
appear, and a rudimentary form of
codification is imposed. Organiza-
tion of the design comes in and
people, trees, houses stand up from
this base line, while sun, clouds and
birds are moved up to the top of the
paper, the place where the sky is.
'No man's) and*
LATER on, after a period in whicha kind of"no man's land"
exists between sky and earth,
devoid of colour, they are united
and the paper is thus divided into
two zones. The area of the page
has been conquered. The child
clings tenaciously to this schema
which he has imposed upon himself ;
his creative expression becomes
organized and controlled. He begins
to relate areas full of detail with
empty spaces and these begin to
take on a significance of their own,
so that the total effect tends to
achieve a plastic harmony.
I should like to emphasize how
extraordinarily plastic the schema
of the child becomes at this age.
(Continued on next. page)
OCTOBER 1953. Page 5OURIER

Page 6. OCTOBER 1953 UNESCQCOUR
'Our teacher"by Irene, aged 6, Great Britain.
6 TO 10, THE GOLDEN AGE
OF CREATIVE EXPRESSION
(Continued from previous page)
The drawing of animals from the
side with their four legs, of human
figures full-face, and of things from
their most significant aspect, all
contribute to the grouping and
composition.
If the child is encouraged to vary
the format of his work, he very
quickly acquires through free art
the faculty of thinking plastically.
It is at this stage that the child
acquires his first notions of social
awareness which coincide with his
entry into the small community that
is the school class.
The school class is a collection of
children who are equals, but a
grown-up, the teacher, directs it.
What is he to be, enemy or friend ?
At this point the serious problem
arises as to the attitude of the edu-
cator towards creative expression.
Will he know when to stand back
in order that it may continue to live,
or will he kill it by interfering ?
The first condition of success is to
gain the child's confidence. When
he first enters the classroom the
child makes contact with an en-
tirely unfamiliar environment ; and
for the first few days, while he is
adapting himself, what occupation
can he be given to prevent him from
feeling lost ?
Let him have a pencil. He will
begin to draw and his first free
drawing, having been sympatheti-
cally regarded by the teacher, will
be the determining factor of the
child's adaptation.
At home perhaps his scribbles
were not very kindly received. Here,
at school, they appear to be impor-
tant. He finds that the teacher is a
friend he can trust ; this very fact
inspires the child with self-confi-
dence.
Free drawing forms the first
bridge across the gulf between pupil
and teacher, child and grown-up.
It is the first manifestation of a
language, of a means of expression
with which the child is most at
ease ; it will facilitate the first ex-
change and help the child's first
steps in learning.
Let everything be done through
art for art. Each new piece of
knowledge should be fixed in his
memory through pictorial represen-
tation not by a sample drawing by
the teacher, but by one thought out
and expressed by the child himself.
Once confidence has been estab-
lished, is it enough to encourage
this natural bent which is ready to
flourish, and to go on with the
game ? Is the teacher, who has
provided the conditions favouring
creative expression-equipment, a
varied supply of good quality mate-
rials and freedom of action for the
child-now to remain an amused
spectator during these sessions of
free expression ?
Is it not the teacher's role to
awaken the child's inner sensibilities,
to be his counsellor and friend ; and
in the first place to be a technical
adviser ?
The child has to become familiar
with the materials, the tools. He
must learn to handle pencil, paint-
brush, chisel, to know their poten-
tialities and the most practical way
of using them. There is a right way
to dip a brush in colour, to paint so
as to avoid blobs of water or patches
of dry paint, to use a chisel without
hurting oneself. Colour must be of
the right consistency to spread cor-
rectly when applied ; the master
must teach innumerable small tech-
nical details in order to save time...
and materials.
He will teach the use of tools, but
not the work. Can a child's drawing
or painting be called his"work" ?
Work implies intention, effort, will-
power, conscious responsibility and
many other qualities which it would
be premature to demand from a
child at this impulsive and unstable
age, but which will be expected of
him later.
Creative expression provides a field
in which the child develops his un-
conscious artistic qualities but where
"Learning to read"by Alfonso, aged 12, Mexico.
he can also learn to develop his
character. He can be taught to
persevere in his efforts, not to be
easily satisfied with them, to set
himself high standards, to be honest
with himself, and this is where the
educator is needed.
Should a competitive spirit be en-
couraged in children ? I think there
should be neither competition nor
marks. Each child should learn
from his own experience and follow
the laws of his own development.
Should copying be forbidden ? It
would be useless to forbid it, since
at this age the child is, consciously
or unconsciously, an imitator, but
his own creative expression is en-
riched by his borrowings for he assi-
milates them and makes them his
own.
What, then, should be the teach-
er's attitude during a session of
free creative expression ? He should
stimulate his pupils, but never
prompt them. He should stir their
imagination and strengthen their
emotional life by a procedure com-
parable to the method of Socrates.
He should ask questions which bring
to light new ideas or new details. If
the child has decided to draw his
home, he can be asked whether he
is going to show us his mother and
father, the dog, the pigeons on the
roof, his baby sister asleep in her
cot, and so on.
In this way his imagination will
be aroused and he will gradually
cover his paper with the objects
that he knows from his daily life or
that he has just discovered ; his
vision will be enriched and he will
be able to put more of himself into
his drawing.
Without in any way defending the
distortions and clumsiness found
in child art, it is important to
remember that there is more to
them than that. They are the fruits
of both will and instinct, of both the
conscious and subconscious mind.
It is by preserving the child's first
fresh original vision that the way
can be paved for successful personal
research in the future. Sympathy
for his first efforts will give a child
encouragement to discover his abi-
lities and remain true to his own
character.
What in fact do these first efforts
of his represent ? The character of
his drawings remains the same as
in the preceding period-in other
words, drawing for him is a game,
into which he throws himself on
the whim of the moment, covering
sheets of paper with confused, inco-
herent scribblings, repeating the
same shapes over and over again,
or juxtaposing objects at random ;
but the difference is that he now
begins to aim at something more
coherent and significant.
This is the age of avid enthu-
siasms and thrilling discoveries. He
begins to draw everything he sees.
And the shapes he uses begin to
vary, come to life and take on
human semblance.
He begins also to be accurate and
takes pains to be legible and wants
to be understood. Imagery will be
born, with the help of finer instru-
ments and materials that are more
appropriate and flexible, and so lead
on to stricter perfection.
Differences begin to appear in the
symbol for a human being which
the child draws, differences of sex
and age. Heads are covered with
manes of hair ; humanity is divided
into those wearing skirts and those
wearing trousers. Everything he
draws now has a kind of life of its
own.
Very soon the child throws all
restraint to the winds and oversteps
the bounds of prosaic reality to
revel in the crazy realm of won-
derland, of the strange and the
funny and the marvellous. His men
have two heads ; his horses lay
eggs. It is as though he felt the
need to try out his new weapons,
and test his own strength. And his
strength lies precisely in his blissful
unawareness of rules.
He now knows of course, that the
objects he is drawing belong to the
supernatural and he himself laughs
at what he is doing, whereas, at an
earlier stage he found no cause for
amusement in the distortions he
inflicted on his figures in an effort
to copy from real life.
Inconsistencies of scale, with
abnormal enlargement of certain
parts ; transparent drawings show-
ing the insides as well as the
exterior and, above all, neglect of
perspective are not, strictly speak-
ing, errors. In fact, they can only
be called errors with reference to
photography, but who would accept
that as a standard ?
"Group"by Andre, aged 5, France."Self-portrait"by Diane, aged 7, Canada

OCTOBER 1953. Page 7
"The singing sailor"by 10-year-old boy, Denmark. "The s ! edge" by 12-year-oid boy, Germany.
The child's first attempts to rep-
rESent what he sees usually begin
at about the age of eight or nine,
a transition period, during which he
draws partly from memory and
partly from imagination and obser-
vation. Gradually, he begins to
aim at accuracy and a life-like re-
semblance ; he becomes the slave of
his eye.
While he still clings to his old
pimitive drawings, he now feels the
need to base them on reality, and he
therefore turns to the external
world for first-hand information.
Provided his desire for self-expres-
sion has never been repressed, he
will now do this entirely sponta-
neously. It is possible though that
school lessons and the development
of his reasoning and critical faculties
may have killed his spontaneity.
cretism and universalism. The man-
ual and visual skill he has acquired
incline him to repetition, to super-
fluities, to effect for effect's sake,
with the result that his creative
expression becomes stagnant or
even recedes. This is the mo-
ment when he needs a motive for
self-expression. He takes a liking
for illustrating stories, anecdotes,
his own experiences, any set subject
needing an external compulsion to
unleash his creative mechanism.
The golden age of plastic expres-
sion is over ; it has been replaced
by what may be called the academic
approach. If left to himself at this
transition stage, he may well lose
his first flush of confidence. Up
to this point he was only dimly
aware of his own awkwardness, but
now the veil has fallen from his eyes
ART MUST BE PRACTISED
TO BE. APPRECIATED
It is a mistake to deline a world 01 art and set it apart from line. For that reason
it is a mistake to teach the appreciation 01 art, lor the implied attitude is too detached.
Art must be practised to be appreciated, and it mu ; f be taught in intimate
apprenticeship. The teacher must be an artist no less active than the pupil. For art
cannot be learned by precept, by arry verbal instruction. it is, properly speaking, a
contagion, and passes ! Me rire rrom spirit to spirit. But always as a meaninglul
symbol, and as a unifying symbol. We do not insist on education through art for
the sake of art, but for the sake of life itself. - Sir HERBERT READ.
Hitherto, there has been a fertile
dualism between play and reality.
Now it seems as though reality will
win the day. Play has lost its
enchantment and the child begins
to worry about visual realism.
His creative expression is affected
by this change and the ideas and
information he is acquiring invade
his drawings. The objects conform
to a single scale of values. Details
that formerly were enlarged as the
fancy took him, haphazard and with
gusto, poetically scattered over the
paper, are integrated in the whole,
making it accurate but more
commonplace. The child's poetic
vision of his world gives way to a
rational vision.
At this stage he takes a new step
forward in mental development. His
critical sense is born and an analy-
tical spirit gradually replaces syn-
and looking at his drawings impar-
tially, he realizes that he is helpless
to represent what he sees. The little
world of his imagination is crumb-
ling about him.
It is very necessary to guard
against the child becoming discour-
aged by helping him to get away
from those ready-made formulae
which he repeats now without
much conviction. His logical facul-
ties must be appealed to and the
subject must be discussed with him,
by questioning him about the diffi-
culties that hinder him. It is im-
portant, above all, that the child
shall not be inhibited because his
drawing is incorrect and does not
agree with objective reality.
Ready-made solutions, on the
pretext of helping him and saving
his time, must be avoided at all
costs. He does not need to be given
ideas. The value of self-expression
is not proportionate to knowledge
and dexterity. There is a problem
to solve, and the child must be made
aware of it and know that he has
to solve it for himself.
The teacher must therefore inter-
vene, but he will have to exercise
consummate tact and skill to avoid
pushing the child into the facile
course of purely realistic photogra-
phic representation, devoid of all
emotional significance.
It is vital not to destroy what has
already been built up. It is at this
period, in fact, at the age between
6 and 10, that the child's individual
instinctive bent, an integral part of
his emotional make-up, and one
which is to determine all aspects
of his future life, practical, emo-
tional and intellectual, first comes
to light, and begins to develop
towards self-realization.
In order to achieve this aim, Pes-
talozzi once said, the teacher's
approach, more especially when
dealing with the subject of creative
expression, must be that of a gar-
dener rather than a potter. Expres-
sion is essential for the fulfilment
of the ego ; but there can be no
fulfilment under constraint, or by
copying a compulsory model.
The child can of course learn to
imitate, but imitation can never
teach him self-expression. Instead,
he learns to give the appearance of
self-expression, and-which is
dangerous-to cheat, and play
with something that has no sub-
stance, escaping from his ego, de-
personalizing himself. When this
happens, his sole desire will be to
lose himself in the crowd, which
will think and act for him.
Effective knowledge is measured
not by the bulk of information
acquired, but by the use made of
it, and the results obtained. The
first effective act is that of the
small child who succeeds in ex-
pressing himself in some concrete
material, and experiences the satis-
faction of doing so. Apart from
the accruing benefits of knowledge
and skill, the experience of creative
expression contributes to develop, on
both the conscious and the sub-
conscious plane, the qualities of
initiative, will-power and a desire
for self-fulfilment, which will come
to fruition in the grown man.
"Self-portrait"by Daniel, aged 9, Peru.
"Self-portrait"by Outi, aged 7, Finland.
"Setf-portrait"by Lehene, aged 6, China. 'Head''by Shyam, aged 9, Indian, Theatre Set :"The City"by Monika, aged 12, of Linz, Austria.
COURIER
