JANUARY 1953. Page 3
After four years of creative leadership
JAIME TORRES BODET LEAVES UNESCO
n w R. JAIME TORRES BODET, Director-Gene-ral of Unesco since 1948, has resigned his
post. He announced his. decision to leave on
November 22, 1952, during the seventh session of
the General Conference of Unesco which was
meeting in Paris. His resignation went into effect
on December 1, and Dr. John W. Taylor, Deputy-
Director, was appointed Acting Director-General
until the naming of a new Unesco head, probably
in April or May.
Mr. Torres Bodet's resignation, which followed
the General Conference discussion on the pro-
visional budget ceiling for 1953-54, was accepted
by the delegates of Unesco's Member States with
expressions of profound regret. Unanimously, the
Conference adopted a resolution paying tribute to
the departing Director-General"for four years of
creative leadership of Unesco".
Mr. Torres Bodet, the resolution declared,"has
rendered in every way the most admirable services,
to develop with his tireless devotion and energy
and with all his great talent, education, science
and culture among all the Member States of
Unesco.
"Thanks to his great leadership, our Orga-
nization has developed in a few years as. a bastion
of peace and a modern symbol of international
co-operation, and of the advance of all races
towards a future of agreement and happiness."
"It was with profound regret that the Con-
ference learned of the irrevocable decision of the
Director-General, Mr. Jaime Torres Bodet, to
submit his resignation ; and the Conference
wishes to pay a deep and genuine tribute to him
for four years of creative leadership of Unesco."
During his"four years of creative leadership"
Mr. Torres Bodet saw Unesco grow from an orga-
nization of 46 Member States in 1948 to 68 in 1952.
He saw its action and influence extend across
frontiers to increasing numbers of men and
women in the various fields of human thought :
in the arts, in education, in the sciences.
He saw the Unesco ideals and the Unesco
principles assume deeper significance for the
ordinary man in the street and among young
people in different parts of the world.
Under his leadership, he saw Unesco embark
on one of its boldest and most far-reaching
enterprises : a programme to help half the
population of the globe who are the victims of
ignorance and illiteracy to achieve a higher
standard of living by providing them with at least
a minimum of general, technical and civic
education now known as fundamental education.
The opening, at Patzcuaro (Mexico) in 1951, of
the first of a world-wide network of Fundamental
Education laboratories and training centres,
marked one of the significant milestones in this
programme.
During the past four years, Mr. Torres Bodet
saw Unesco assume leadership in a world
campaign for free and compulsory primary
education ; in a scientific campaign against racial
prejudice ; in a campaign which helped in
alleviating the world's newsprint crisis ; in a
campaign for greater educational opportunities
for workers through increased fellowships and
study tours and the formation of an International
Centre of Workers'Education in France.
He saw Unesco assume leadership in the difficult
task of unifying the conflicting Braille systems of
writing for the 7, 000, 000 blind people of the world,
which ultimately led to the creation last year of
the first World Braille Council.
As Director-General, he guided the day-to-day
efforts which culminated in the drafting of the
first Universal Copyright Convention, now signed
by 35 countries ; in the establishment of the first
European Council for a nuclear research centre to
serve the cause of peace ; and in the drafting of
an agreement abolishing many impart duties an
educational, scientific and cultural materials.
This agreement, which eliminates some of the
serious obstacles to the movement of ideas
between countries, has now entered into force in
13 countries.
Today, the effect of Unesco's practical efforts is
felt in almost every Member State of the Orga-
nization, whether it be in the training of
industrial workers in Guatemala or the im-
pravement of harbour installations in India ; the
modernizing of a school system in Thailand or the
training of badly-needed science teachers in
Liberia ; the showing of a travelling exhibition of
art reproductions in Peru or an exhibition an the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights in
France ; the development of library services in
Turkey or aid in desert research work in Israel
and Pakistan ; the purchase of $75, 000 worth of
Unesco Gift Coupons by 500, 000 school children
and other groups in seven countries, or the issuing
of $2, 500, 000 worth of Unesco Book Coupons in 30
countries.
*
These are but a very few of the achievements of
Unesco during the four years of Mr. Torres Bodet's
leadership. They were made possible by the
devotion, the deep inspiration and great
dynamism of Unesco's Director-General, by the
faith and sincerity of Unesco's Member States, and
the combined efforts of hundreds of thousands of
men and women throughout the world who
believe that the progress of mankind and the
cause of peace and understanding between peoples
can effectively be fostered through education,
science and culture.
Thus, this moment in the history of Unesco
when Mr. Torres Bodet resigned is marked by
sadness and regret, but also by hope and regard
toward the future. This is the deep significance
of the homage paid to the departing Director-
General by the delegates at the General Con-
ference last November, when they spoke in the
. name of the different cultural, linguistic and
geographical regions of the world which make up
Unesco.
"Unesco is the conscience of the people",
M. Paul Montel of France said, quoting the words
of the French Minister of Education."For four
years, Mr. Torres Bodet has embodied the
conscience of Unesco."
In  the final words of the resolution unani-
mously adopted by the delegates representing the
Member States of Unesco, the General Conference
wished to express its deep conviction"that the
devoted and indispensable services which Mr. Tor-
res Bodet has rendered to peace, security and
social progress will be an inspiration to all those
in the Organization and within Member States
who will endeavour to continue the splendid work
on behalf of international understanding and
solidarity which he has so ably and self-
sacrificingly carried out."
It is this same regard for the future and the
continued success of Unesco that Mr. Torres Bodet
himself expressed in his final words to the
General Conference :
"May Unesco one day develop its programme as
we who had the privilege of being present at its
birth in London, in 1945, dreamed that it might.
And notwithstanding all obstacles, may peace
assure for the world, through education, science
and culture, a destiny worthy of mankind."
Before his election as Director-General,
Mr. Torres Bodet was well known in his native
country of Mexico, in Latin America generally,
and in many other countries, as a man of broad
and comprehensive culture. Before he was 23,
he had published five volumes of verse and had
won himself a secure place as a poet of
importance.
While still in his twenties, he occupied the Chair
of French Literature at the University of Mexico.
During this period, his literary work had become
still more widely known and when, in 1929, he
entered the Foreign Service of his country as
Secretary to the Mexican Legation in Madrid, he
was already regarded as one of the foremost
literary figures of the New World. His literary
and diplomatic careers advanced harmoniously,
winning for him the respect of critics and of
diplomats in many countries.
A new phase began with his appointment as
Minister of Education in 1943. While serving in
this capacity, he began a campaign for mass
literacy which led to the establishment of more
than 60, 000 collective teaching centres in
Mexico, staffed largely by volunteers-pro-
fessional teachers, industrialists, farmers, land-
owners and even new literates.
By this means and by ambitious programmes
for school building and teacher training, he helped
launch his country on a crusade for basic
education, under the slogan"Each one teach
one."In the course of two years, more than
1, 200, 000 Mexicans were taught to read and write.
While still Minister of Education, Mr. Torres
Bodet led his country's delegation to a meeting
of the Unesco Preparatory Commission in London,
in November 1945, and was one of the signatories
of the Constitution of Unesco.
On his appointment the following year as
Foreign Minister of Mexico, he won distinctions
from his country and from various international
organizations. Finally, in 1948, he was chosen as
Director-General of Unesco, to succeed Dr. Julian
Huxley, Unesco's first Director-General.
