Page t2. JANUARY 1953 UNESCO
THE TEACHER WHO
TAMED THE'FRUIT
BIRDS'OF LIM. A
by Rona ! d FENTON
IF you should find yourself in thet magnificent capital city of Peru
and heard some one mention the
Fruit Birds of Lima, your curiosity
would probably be aroused. But it
would be useless to ask the way to
the nearest zoo if you wanted to see
them. The chances are that you
would be told, with a knowing smile,
to visit the home of a teacher named
Bernardino Gines.
The fact is that, up to several
years ago, there were no Fruit Birds
in Lima, or anywhere else in Peru
for that matter, and so no-one could
have told you what pajaros fruteros
were anyway.
It all started when the large
wholesale food market was built just
outside Lima. Like so'many other
cities of Latin America, Lima has
been growing rapidly in population
since the last World War, and the
new market was designed to central-
ize the sale and distribution of the
huge quantities of foodstuffs needed
by the capital.
Around this new market a floating
population soon congregated, made
up chiefly of peasants who had ori-
ginally come to Lima only to sell
their farm produce, but who had
decided to stay on because of the
apparent attractions of city life.
Most of these peasants, however,
quickly learned that city life was
not so glamorous after all.
Ill-prepared to compete with the
city dwellers, they were rarely able
to find permanent jobs or establish
settled homes. Almost all their time
was spent in a desperate attempt to
eke out even a miserable existence.
So they allowed their children to
run wild or abandoned them com-
pletely. And as a result, the Fruit
Birds were"born".
Left to themselves and forced to
find their food and shelter where
they could, groups of boys banded
together into gangs to carry out
large-scale raids on lorries and other
vehicles transporting food from the
provinces in the early hours of the
morning. They concentrated their
attention on loads of fruit, (although
every kind of food vehicle was sub-
ject to their attacks) so that the
people of Lima referred to them as
the Fruit Birds. They constituted a
serious social and police. problem as
well as a costly menace.
When groups of Fruit Birds were
caught by the police, they were
taken into court and the most
serious offenders confined to a refor-
matory. But the pillaging and
early-hour attacks continued. New
gangs continued to spring up to
replace those boys sentenced by the
courts, and new Fruit Birds were
readily found among the numerous
vagabond children nicknamed Palo-'mills (night butterflies).
To one young teacher, Bernardino
Gines, the reformatory was not the
answer. What these delinquent boys
needed more than anything else, he
felt, was understanding and help
rather than punishment and con-
finement.
Bernardino Ginés knew that most
of the Fruit Birds were the sons of
country peasants. Since he himself
had been born in a small farming
community in the interior-a village
called Muquiyauyu, about 60 miles
east of Lima-he was sure that he
could win their confidence and
goodwill by mingling and associating
with them directly.
So he began to spend much of his
time in and around the food market.
Slowly and patiently he gained the
friendship of the Fruit Birds, and
was finally"'accepted"by them.
Then, after living among them for
a whole year and getting to under-
stand them thoroughly, he broke
through their veneer of callousness
and cynicism to convince them that
there were better things in life than
stealing and pilfering, and that as
their friend he was ready to help
them.
Senor Ginés was acquainted with
the results obtained at the children's
reformatory run by the Ministry of
Justice. These had clearly shown
the difficulty of rehabilitating
youths once they had reached the
age of 18. Ginés thought that an
effort to readapt younger children
between the ages of seven and 15
might give more promising results.
His own first-hand experiences
with the Fruit Birds had given him
a thorough knowledge of their pro-
blems and an understanding of the
psychology of their behaviour and
attitudes. These were due to the
mental and physical effects of priva-
tion, and the deep shock at finding
themselves without protection and
forced to struggle on their own
to keep alive. Without this
background of knowledge, it would
have been useless to attempt to
readapt the boys to a normal way of
life.
So Senor Gines was armed with
appropriate rehabilitation methods,
and plenty of potential pupils, but
he had nowhere to work. After
much effort on his part, he was
finally granted a piece of land in
Magdalena del Mar, and immediately
he began his attempt to change a
group of problem children into
healthy, happy youngsters.
Ginés and his pupil friends still
had no school, so they just went
ahead and built one themselves !
They dug the foundations, learned
to lay bricks, became skilled car-
penters and did a score of different
jobs before the building was complet-
ed. This work proved to be a useful
introduction to the new life that
Ginés was planning for the boys.
All this time they were being shown
that they belonged somewhere and
were developing a group spirit and
group action that were now applied
to something worthwhile.
Anyone seeing the completed in-
stitution at Magdelena del Mar, a
suburb of Lima, for the first time
finds it hard to believe that this
spacious building is the handiwork
of the boys for whom it is today a
school and a home. As they worked,
The"Fruit Birds"of Lima and Senor Bernardino Gines, the teacher (wearing
white cap) start consttuction of their new school building in a suburb of the city.
new friends gave them effective aid.
One organization, SECPANE (Pe-
ruvian-American Co-operative Ser-
vice for Education), paid the cost of
installing a water supply system and
the director of SECPANE, Mr. Sulli-
van, became one of the most regular
and devoted helpers of the school.
Finally the school received officials
recognition and was named Escuela
Especial de Readaptacion (Special
School for Rehabilitation)-but not
for long. Senor Ginés rightly pro-
tested that in the minds of the boys
this name would tend to set them
apart from other youngsters, and
that it would create an inferiority
complex. So the name was changed
to El Hogar del Nino (The Child's
Home) which exactly expresses the
purpose and the atmosphere of the
scliool.
Open to children and youths
between six and 16, El Hogar del
Nino gives them a complete element-
ary education and also offers basic
technical training, so that on leaving
they are equipped with a trade that
will enable them to earn a living.
Today the problem children who
once hung around the market of
Lima, and the palomillas whose
homes were in the streets, have
found a new way of life and new
homes in an attractive building sur-
rounded by flower and vegetable
gardens and rows of fruit trees.
To re-educate boys in whom vi-
cious habits and practices have
already become ingrained often
raises special problems. But with a
proper psychological approach and
an infinite faith in the receptive
qualities of young minds and
personalities, Senor Ginés has so far
overcome such obstacles.
There is no rigid system of control
and discipline in his school. Order is
maintained by the students them-
selves. Through a free and demo-
cratic system of elections, which
helps to develop a sense of freedom
as well as of responsibility, the boys
choose their own leaders.
One of the basic principles they
learn is that the rights of every
individual are conditioned by res-
pect for the rights of others, and in
this way they soon realize that co-
operation, not individual selfishness,
brings the best results.
Children remain at the school
just because they wish to do so.
Taking into account the background
and origins of most of them, the
remarkable thing is that so few have
ever run away The reason is that
most of Senor Ginés pupils have now
learned the real meaning of free-
dom.
It is hard to believe that this beautiful school-home, now surrounded by flowers
and fruit trees, was built by a teacher assisted by one-time delinquent boys.
Inside the school there are no servants. In turn, students take charge of tile
various chores in the house. Meals are prepared and served by student teams.
