Page 14. AUGUST-SEPTEMBER) 953
THE REMARKABLE'X-RAY ART
OF THE MEN OF ARNHEM LAND
MAN SPEARING A KANGAROO. This bark painting is a remarkable example of the curious X-ray art-
in-which the Australian aboriginal painters depict not only the exterior outlines but also the internal organs of
their subjects. This painting by an artist ot the Kakatu tribe was collected by Sir Baldwin Spencer in 1913 at
Oenpelli, Arnhem Land. It is now in the National Museum of Victoria, Melbourne. (Australian Official Photo.)
t FTER eight months in the field, a joint
Australian-American expedition return-
ed from Arnhem Land, northern Aus-
tralia, in November 1948 with 25 tons
of specimens which included 400 sheets of
aboriginal bark drawings and photographs and
tracings of cave paintings.
The expedition found that some of these bark
paintings closely resembled the work of pre-
historic man in the caves of eastern Spain and
of the Bushman of South Africa. The scientists
brought back some particularly interesting
tracing of a hitherto little kno\vn form called
The only musical instrument devised by the Austral
"Mimi"paintings. These, the bark drawings
and their associated legends have intrigued
anthropologists. Why is the same form of pri-
mitive art found in such widely separated places
in t. he world ? Why does the Australian aborigine
have a legend of the journey tlf the dead that
is so like the story of Charon ferrying spirits
across the Styx ? These are questions which
the Arnhem Land expedition may help to solve.
The expedition was financed by the National
Geographic Society of America, the Smith-
sonian Institution and the Australian Depart-
ment of Information. It \vas the largest
by Charles P. MOUNTFORD
scientific survey yet made in Australia, and had
1C members-11 Australians, 5 Americans.
Apart from the examples of primitive art, they
brought back specimens of 15. 000 fish, 13, 500
plants, 800 birds, 600 animal skins, and much
archaeological material.
There were four naturalists ; a unit of three
scientists investigating the health and nutrition
of the aborigines ; an archaeologist determining
their historical background and an ethnologist
examining their customs. I led the party,
directed a series of documentary films on
natural history and aboriginal life, and collect-
ed examples of primitive art, recording, lheÌI'
associated legends.
We established camps in three widely
different environments-at Groote Eylandt, a
somewhat arid island in the Gulf of Carpen-
taria about 40 miles from the Arnhem Land
coast ; at Yirkalla, a coastal region bounded by
eucalyptus forests in north-Eastern Arnhem
Land, and at Oenpelli, about 150 miles east of
Darwin.
The cave paintings and bark drawings on the
north coast of Australia, and particularly ill
Arnhem Land, represent the highest develop-
ment of Australian primitive art. They are
much more advanced both in technique and
design than the crude rock engravings around
Sydney and in South Australia, or the primitive
symbolism of the desert aborigines.
Collecting specimens was much easier in
Arnhem Land than in other parts of Australia
because the aborigines had for centuries
painted pictures on the inside of their bark
huts during the rainy seasons. All we had to
do was to give the men sheets of bark about
the size of those with which their huts were
built and ask them to paint the same pictures.
All the art of Arnhem Land is closely linked
with the beliefs and philosophies of the people.
Whether the subject is a living creature, an
inanimate object, or a heavenly body, there is
almost always a legend that explains the origin
of the subject and the country to which it
belongs. I was, however, surprised to find that
the aborigines at Groote Eylandt, YirkalIa and
Oenpelli had each developed a distinctive art
form.
At Groote Eylandt, drawings consisted of
single pictures, predominantly of sea creatures.
At Yirkalla, many design elements were
skilfully woven together in decorative panels.
The drawings at Oenpelli showed not only the
external, but also the internal details of the
creatures they depicted.
Groote Eylandt drawings, although simple in
design, were skilfully and carefully executed.
For colours, the artists used red, fellow, black
and white pigments ground to a paste on a Oat
stone, and for brushes a narrow piece of
chewed bark or a small feather. It takes a
good deal of skill to draw Hne lines on the
rough bark with these primitive feather brushes.
Most bark drawings were done in a day but
some took longer.
It must be more than 40 years since Malay
fishermen last visited the northern coast of
Australia in their sailing proas, yet the aborigi-
nes have retained an accurate knowledge of the
appearance of these boats. Bark paintings
showed their general shape and accurate details
of the tripod mast, steering paddles, and even
the number and disposition of the ropes in the
rigging.
ian aborigine is the didjeridoo, a hollowed pole seldom less than 6 ft, long which produces a deep, organlike
note. Right, children practise their music.) In bark painting, left, one man plays the didjeridoo while his companion is clapping bamboo sticks to provide a rhythm.

UR
The bark drawings and cave paintings on the north coast of Australia, particularly Arnhem Land, represent the highest development of Australian aboriginal art.
The painting here depicts a turtle hunt. Three aboriginals in a-bark canoe have speared a sea-going hurtle. The man in the bow is holding the line to the hurtle.
Decorative group of"mimi"women, A group of aborigine women dancing.
Frieze of women with hands linked : from a cave in western Arnhem Land.
I painting of Aunenau, which
is a bony, fleshless spirit
covered with bristly hair. It
is a spirit which wanders
by night in search of dead
men whose flesh it eats.
Oenpelli, our last camp, was the centre of acurious but attractive form of art known for
want of a better name, as X-ray art. In this,
the artists have not only painted the external
 features of the creatures, but also the bones and
! internal organs such as the heart, stomach, liverand intestines.
Although we collected many X-ray drawings
on sheets of bark at Oenpelli, the best examples
were painted in the caves in the rugged plateau.
The walls and ceilings in some of the larger
caves were covered with a profusion of paint-
ings of birds, fish and animals but, strangely.
none of human beings.
Deep in the labyrinth of gorges, I found the
Mimi art, an entirely different form that de-
picted almost without exception thin-bodied
human beings in strong action, running, jump-
ing or fighting. The figures were crude in
design and painted entirely in deep red.
These paintings, the aborigines say, are not
the work of their ancestors. They have been
done by a fairy-like people called the Mimi,
who live under the tumbled boulders. No one
has ever seen the Mimi, because, having parti-
clIlarly keen sight and hearing, they can detect
the approach of human beings from great
distances. When they do, they run quickly to
the rocky plateau, and blow on the face of the
boulders. The rock opens like a door to admit
the Mimis to their underground home, then
closes behind them, keeping out all intruders.
The Mimis lead somewhat the same life a ?
the present day aborigines. They have wives
and children. The men hunt animals and the
women collect yams and lily roots. In the
evening the Mimis eat the food they have
gathered. My informants had to admit,
Jiowever, that they had never seen the smoke
from the Mimi's camp fires, although they often
heard them shuffling among the rocks at night.
The aborigines pointed to the attenuated
figures of the paintings to pr. ove that the Mimis
are tall and thin-so thin, indeed, that they
can only hunt in still weather. Otherwise the
wind would break their slender bodies.
Obviously the story of the Mimi ws in vented
to explain a form of art that the aborigines
could not account for in any other way. They
distinguish sharply between a painting done by
the Mimis and that done by their own relative,
Bunbalama, the mythical
woman, responsible for
creating rain. Rectangle of
dots on body represents
clouds she has made ; the
vertical bands indicate rain.
If the painting is red, and of a human being,
it is the work of a Mimi. If it is painted ill
any other colour, it is the work of an aborigine.
There is, however, such a wide difference
between the simple though lively art of the
Mimis and the colour and skilful technique or
the modern X-ray art that no one could faii
to distinguish between them.
The resemblance between the Mimi paintings
at Oenpelli and the paintings done by prehistoric
man in eastern Spain and the Bushman of
South Africa is remarkable. The figures are so
alike that, when placed side by side, one can
scarcely'detect any difference in style even
though thousands of miles separate them and
many centuries in time.
We do not know who painted the tall, thin-
bodied running people. Probably they belong-
ed to an earlier civilization though not nec-
essarily to another race. There is abundant
evidence in the ancient rock engravings of
South and Central Australia, and the small
delicately-flaked stone implements and curious
cylindro-conical stones found along the River
Darling that a different civilization once flour-
ished in Australia.
