COURIER AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1953, Page 5
THE ORIGINS OF RACES,
STILL STEEPED IN MYSTERY
by W. W. HO WELLS
Professor of Anthropology,
University of Wisconsin
A GREAT deal has been learned about the
past of man since Darwin made the
docirine of evolution irresistible (if not
at once respectable), and Huxley so
forcefully pointed out its meaning to ourselves
by showing our intimate relationship with the :
great anthropoid apes. It is the most recent
discoveries of the South African man-apes by
Dart, Broom and Robinson, which have given
us the clearest light on our adual human
origins, and in fact have made these origins
seem more log'ical, so to speak, than ever.
Matters had been different before. It had not
been easy to fit the known facts together. It was
clear how close men and apes were, these largu
tailless animals being quite distinct from mon-
keys, and sharing even such things as patterns
of the teeth. But while our torso was like their's.
our pelvis, legs and feet were different, being
meant for true upright walking, not for bough-
clasping ; and our canine teeth were short and
small.
One after another fossils were found in Eur-
ope, Africa and Asia, some of them of small.
early apes something like the living gibbon,
and others larger and later, claarly akin
to the orang, chimpanzee and gorilla. If
these were our own ancestors, they were
certainly ape-tike. This left us the rather
uncomfortable theory that man was a late
comer, an ape who had for some reason come
out of the trees to a permanent ground life,
undergoing rapid changes in feet and canine
teeth as a response to this drastic shift (and
later developing a large brain).
The explanation bristled with difficulties :
Why had the shift occurred? ? How could the
fool have reformed its toes and made an arch !
Why were there not clearer signs of once-hugs
canine teeth ? Yet the most likely parents
known from fossils (Dryopithecus and his
relatives) were certainly apes much like the
ones we know today, and so this explanation
held, faute de mieux.
Then, mostly'within the last six years, a
group of closely related fossil animals of great
importance came to light in South Africa, in
limestone deposits which had once been caves.
The oldest finds, of teeth and of skull fragments.
simply showed certain human traits. But
excitement mounted as later and better
specimens revealed that, though large of jaw,
they had the relatively small cHnines and front
teeth of true men, so different from a gorilla's ;
and that their small-brained heads nevertheless
had the human type of a number of minor
details of construction, and not the type found
in apes.
Finally, several hip bones capped the climax
by making it clear that these man-apes were
true upright ground-walkers like ourselves.
That is to say, they can only be considered as
very primitive and small-brained men, be-
longing to our side of the family, not the
gorilla's. This in turn shows that our side--
the ground-walking side-probably had a long-
and honourable history of its own, separate
from the tree-loving apes we know, and that
we no longer have to suppose, as once we did,
that these tree apes wee the only kind of
ancestor possible to us.
Oldest 'human' fossil
These riches in fossils are all from SouthAfrica, but it now seems, from some other
rare finds, as though the same general
kind of animal also lived in East Africa, in
China, and in Java-in many parts of the Old
World - during the late Tertiary and early Ice
Age, at the same time that later kinds of men
were appearing, and probably also earlier.
More such fossils will surely be found in other
places. In the meanwhile, we have learned a
great deal about the details of these ancient
forms, and have done away with much of the
mystery of our own beginnings.
So much for the origins of man. The origins
of races, unfortunately, although far later, are
steeped as much in mystery as ever. We know
very well that there were different kinds of
early men during the time of the Ice Age. The
ancient, thick-skulled Java Man is famous, and
so is his slightly more advanced cousin, the
Pekin Man. The Heidelberg jaw, in Europe.
may be the oldest"human"fossil of all (after
the man-apes). Alas, that so little can be told
from a jaw.
Later, more advanced kinds of men are
known from Africa-the Rhodesian Man--
and from Europe, which was part of the pro-
vince of the Neanderthaters, who furnish us
with a special mystery in their peculiar bowed
and thick boned Hmbs-aU the other fossil
men had skeletons tike our own. Then in the
latest part of the lee Age the board was swept
clean of all such types, and was suddenly
occupied by modern man alone.
This was the time of the cave men (the Cro
Magnons and others), who painted, in due
course, the masterpieces in the caves of Lascaux
and Altamira. These are our ancestors, our
own kind, with a high skull and a delicate face
of a kind not seen in the other fossil men.
These ancestors appeared not only in Europe,
but apparently also as the parents of other races
in other places : in China (as a sort of parental
American Indian), and perhaps even in Aus-
tralia.
Well and good ; but here is a mystery.
Where did these related kinds of"modern"
men come from ? Why did they appear so late,
and apparently suddenly ? Who are their an-
cestors ? And what made them into races ?
Tliis matter is one of the great problems of
anthropology, and it contains in itself a key to
our understanding of race.
The late Dr. Franz Weidenreich, renowned
anatomist and palaeontologist, thought the
answers were alreadv in the museums : that
the older and different types of men known
from the Ice Age, each in its own part of the
word, had gone forward in evolution until each
had achieved the status of modern man,
"Homo sapiens"proper, though each in a
different racial form.
He found certain likenesses in each case, he
thought, as for example between the Pekin men
and the modern Mongoloid peoples. But his
theory involves a biological improbability. The
earlier men were of rather distinct types, and
the races of modern man are all one type,
certainly very similar in their skulls and
skeletons to one another.
His theory would therefore suppose that evo-
lulion had taken diverse types and made them
all-not just two or a few - into a single type.
Evolution has done this to no other animal form,
and there are serious reasons as to why
it is not likely to happen. This idea of
Weidenreich's would see modern races as much
more separate in their origins than the more
generally held belief, that they arose as lesser
variations on a single theme.
Though we need-not accept Weidenreich's
view, we do not know what is the right
one. We know far too little about the
biological nature of racial differences : the
meaning of skin colours and hair forms, and
so on. It is no simple matter of becoming
black under the sun of Africa, though such
forces have probably partaken in the results.
But this is not all we do not know. We lack
the skeletal evidence to show how old modern
man is, or where he might have developed.
The past is almost a blank
The important Fontéchevade skull, found by. MIle Henri-Martin, at least tells us that our
kind of man (or something very like it)
existed in France in the Third Interglacial
period, and so was as old as the Neanderthal
men. But this is little to go on. From the
advent of the Cro Magnons, we know that
Europe was continuously peopled with"White"
men, wherever they may have come from. But
elsewhere our knowledge is almost all gaps.
We are relatively certain that the American
Indians wandered over from Asia, a good deal
later, in much their present form. But the past
of the Mongoloids, and above all the Negroes, is
practically a blank. We can only look at their
distributions and make guesses.
One is strongly inclined to feel that the
common parent stock of races is fairly, but not
very, old : and that its most ancient division was
into a dark-skinned tropical branch on one
hand, and on the other a medium-skinned
northern branch not unlike American Indians.
Also that in turn, one stem of this second
branch went to America, another became
lighter in colour and straighter of face and
headed for Europe, and a third became
drastically modified in facial form as a pro-
tection against the savage Siberian cold, and
produced the slit-eyed, flesh-padded face of the
lungoloid peoples of the north.
But please be sure that these are stimates.
Some day we shall have enough ancient
skeletons to tell us more. Probablv the blood
types of living people will help, though they
often provide as much confusion as light. And
archaeology, tracing the steps of different
tribes through their ancient dwellings, may at
least show us what is likely to have happened,
and what is not.
