Page 12. OCTOBER 1953 UNESCO
ART FOR THE ENJOYMENT OF IT
ALL of us are in some degree artists and to some
extent educated through art. The measure of our
achievement will depend, moreover, upon where we
live, what we do and the kind of people we are.
Wherever we are and whatever our condition, we have
in common our humanity and our potentialities for
creative expression, whether we paint a fine picture
or make a first sketch.
Yet there are degrees and kinds of creative expression
so that, as in other human activities, we make a
convenient distinction between the specialist and the
amateur. My present concern is not with the professional
training of the specialists, but with the art education
of the adult in general, with those referred to in the
Declaration of Human Rights as having the right to
enjoy the arts. Of the millions who make up the
world's population, relatively few in fact are enabled
to assert this right.
Art still tends to be readily available only to
comparatively few, although, from the historical point of
view, presumably more people today have opportunities
for appreciating art than ever before. But apart from
those who lack opportunities, there are those who do
not avail themselves of the facilities which exist.
Enjoy is a word that, at first glance, evokes the idea
of easy pleasure. Admittedly, many things can be enjoyed
intuitively with apparent ease, for example, pleasurable
effects to be found in nature such as a brilliant sunset.
But enjoyment in art is something which has to be
acquired through experience and that means some form
of education.
Possibly much of the inability of the average adult
to enjoy art is the result of faulty education rather
than an innate defect. We are by nature endowed with
the faculties for creative expression, but all too often
we have been either ill-educated, so that other faculties
were developed at the expense of the creative ones,
or we have been deprived of the facilities, materials and
opportunities for their full expansion.
In these respects, there is evidence enough to show
that, fortunately, many thousands of children now being
educated will not be able to make such complaints when
they reach adult life. But there is also, less happily,
plentiful evidence that enlightened approaches to
education through the arts are by no means universally
accepted and encouraged by educational authorities, even
for children, and are far from being sponsored in the
education of adults.
Of the various agencies which engage in adult art
education, there are in the first place such obvious and
major ones as press, theatre, music, film, radio and
television organizations which exercise an enormous
influence, not always necessarily consciously directed
to educational ends and, indeed, more often than not,
activated by commercial rather than cultural motives.
Now that by means of television, the visual image can
be taken to the spectator wherever he may be, this
influence may become immeasnreable for good or ill, by
reason of its indiscriminate diffusion.
Adult art education strictly addressed to individuals
rather than to mass audiences is often sponsored by
universities, colleges, evening institutes, art museums,
libraries and art schools.
There is a general tendency in the provision of these
art courses for the academic institutions to sponsor studies
in appreciation, and for the practical art schools to
arrange activities in techniques ; but progressive
by Trevor Thomas
institutions, such as some art museums, often arrange
for both types of course. Indicative of the nature of
the two approaches are such titles in the syllabuses
as, on the one hand,"The Lives of the Great Artists"
and, on the other,'''Practical Leathercraft for Beginners".
In principle the idea of such courses is excellent ; in
practice they may suffer from unfortunate defects, in
part due to a prevailing idea that the arts are not
serious subjects but marginal frills in the curriculum,
but also arising from the attitudes and qualifications of
the teachers and the attitudes and aptitudes of the
students.
Tutors in the academic types of course may find it
difficult, after a number of years of ringing the changes
on the few topics within their competence, to keep their
lectures fresh and alive. Practical instructors usually
have to teach regular students in the daytime and so
arrive too fatigued by evening to give their amateur
pupils the lively attention they need. The people who
attend these courses consequently often begin in genuine
desire and enthusiam, continue year after year out of
force of habit and end in disillusioned despair.
"Portrait"by Betty, aged 15, U. S. A.
Of recent years many employers have arranged for
the part-time education of their employees and many
professional and trade organizations undertake similar
responsibilities for their members. Such typical
groupings as trade unions, nationalized enterprises, cho.
operative societies, agricultural federations and so on,
frequently sponsor art education programmes which
include lectures and recitals, exhibitions and excursions
as well as classes in practical instruction.
Here again, the quality of these ventures depends on
whether or not trained leaders are employed. Firms and
organizations which could not conduct their normal
business with the aid of amateurs mav nevertheless find
these sufficiently suitable for directing the cultural
welfare of their employees.
Probably the best of all agencies for adult art education
are those which are created by people for themselves
in response to their own needs, such as clubs and
community groups. These are of various kinds, often
primarily social in nature, and the arts may form but
one aspect of numerous activities, as for example, very
frequently in the programmes of youth clubs.
The leaders have to cover a wide range of interests
and may not be specialists in any particular field of
art. The urgent need of such groups is for good
instructional books and leaflets, and in some countries
these are produced by headquarters organizers in
consultation with experts. These are better than nothing,
but there are many educational dangers inherent in the
"how-to-do-it"type of booklet. Nothing can replace
good personal teaching and direct participation.
Just as there are vital and moribund kinds of practical
art so also there are moribund and vital ways of
appreciation, and the last of these, creatively arranged,
can be one of the best ways of conducting adult art
education.
I am thinking, in particular, of some personal expe-
riences which were richly rewarding, with various adult
groups during a time of war, when many people had
erroneously foretold the temporary demise of the arts.
In the event, although great masterpieces'''went under-
ground", the spirit of desire for art burned more
clearly and widely than in times of peace.
Thus, I was called upon by military authorities-and
this was in itself indicative of the prevailing attitudes
towards the arts-to conduct brief courses in art
appreciation for members of the armed military forces.
Shock tactics were necessary, since in the short time
available the only hope of making the slightest inroad
on the defenses of these men and women who Were
bored and cynical about service life, was 10 organize
cultural commando raids. Talk was of little use. They
came expecting to have an easy, idle time.
Actually, they were obliged to participate actively
all of the time in sheer art appreciation experiences,
for example, choosing from a miscellaneous collection
one or two pictures which they liked and then selecting
colour schemes, wall-papers, fabrics, pottery, glass and
furniture that would go with them in an imaginary
room. Or, again, watching three or so artists, with
distinctive styles, painting simultaneously from the same
group of objects, seeing how their vision varied and
evolved, and being able to talk with them about what
they were doing and why.
At other times they were shown different techniques,
seeing for themselves how an etching process may lead
to effects quite different from those achieved with oils
or water-colours. Some notions of the interrelations in
the arts were expounded by having them choose a small
collection of pictures and then select a programme of
records which would be in harmony with them. A
similar idea lay behind those occasions when they were
asked to mime scenes, in a kind of charade, which
derived their chief motive or character from a given
painting.
Even if all this sounds like elaborate parlour games,
"The Vil ! age.. by Ofelia, aged 14, Mexico

COURIER OCTOBER 1953. Page 13
'Rainstorm"by a 15-year-old boy, Germany
"King in the mirror"by a 12-year-old child, Israel
this was one of the times when the ends justified the
means. The fact that these courses were not conducted
on a high level of aesthetic and philosophical discussion,
but involved the participants in experiences which they
could carry through at an ordinary level of activity
without any special technical or intellectual knowledge,
was the reason why a door was opened for them on a
world of the senses of which they might otherwise have
remained ignorant all their lives.
Something of the same kind was true of a civilian art
club, in which the pace was more leisurely than with
the army courses and the activities were more spontane-
ously evolved by the members themselves.
Although there were various kinds of practising artists
in the group, most of the people came because"they
knew nothing about art"but wanted to, and did not
quite know how to go about it. They arranged many
of the types of event, such as lectures, debates, exhibitions
and forum discussions, which are usually organized by
groups of this kind. They also did more imaginative things.
Sometimes each of the members brought two objects
from their homes, one that they thought was aesthetically
good and one they regarded as artistically bad. These
they showed and gave a brief statement on the reasons
for their choices. In this way they were obliged not
only to clarify their own ideas and express them
succinctly, but to do ; 0 publicly.
Another time, in a variation on the conventional
formula of the debate, the theme was presented in
dramatic form, in period costume. Victorian taste was
put on trial. Counsel for prosecution and defence
produced, in court, documentation, material and evidence
and witnesses, the last including some distinguished
foreigners, notably from France and the Orient. Victoria
and Albert were sub-poenaed to appear in person. After
due trial before the learned judge of aesthetic law, the
accused was found guilty, with a recommendation to
mercy.
To the solemn pundits of aesthetics and pedagogy it
may seem that this is perilously near to being a frivolous
approach to the serious business of adult education.
But adults learn, as do children, much better and more
readily through creative play than by pedantic
application.
Though the spirit of such clubs can be gay and
sociable, the underlying purpose is a serious one, to
arouse people from an aesthetic lethargy and cultural
unawareness, to help them not only to look but to see,
not merely to listen but to hear.
Creative expression and appreciation are necessary for
"The Twe ! ve"by an 11-year-old chill, Germany
everyone as forms of healthy personal experience.
Whether it be world-famed men or the butcher, baker
and candlestickmaker, Winston Churchill or the Douanier
Rousseau, they meet on common ground in finding
through the positive channels of aesthetic creation,
release from high-powered decisions and routine
existence.
The true arguments then in favour of more adult art
education are those which lay emphasis on the health
in art, on the value of creating in all kinds of communi-
ties, groups of people who are aware of the virtue in art.
They should act as the reconcilers and vivifiers in the
community. Though their art resources may be initially
limited they can help to increase them. Many places
are completely lacking in public collections of original
works of art.
In those countries where the standards of education
are low, where new programmes of basic education are
being promoted, sometimes with potential dangers to
traditional forms of arts and crafts, there is a sheer
necessity to encourage the people themselves to retain
and develop their natural, intuitive modes of artistic
expression. The right to enjoy the arts is an abstraction
unless people themselves can claim it and give it a
tangible reality.
"Portrait"by a 15-year-old Austrian girl.
