JANUARY 1953. Page 7
M'Boumba is a village in Senegal, French West Africa. Its 1, 800 people have no school nor medical service.
For five months of the year, M'Boumba is cut off from the outside world by the flooding Senegal River. The French
authorities have chosen this placeto conduct a three-month fundamental education experiment. Results will guide
education campaigns in other villages. Above, African women fetching water. Left, general view of M'Boumba.
E I L LA EA SENEGALESE VILLAGE
REFUSES TO GO TO SLEEP
WHEN we arrived at M'Boumba it was
already dark, so we expected to see
W nothing of the life of this Senegal vil-
lage until the following morning. But
it was not long before we heard some rhythmic,
mechanical noises and saw an electric light come
on at a street corner-probably the only one
shining in the darkness of the brush country
within a radius of 50 miles or more.
Then we heard the unmistakable sounds of a
village coming to life, and we wondered whether
we were going to be treated to some sort of
group spectacle or entertainment-whether we
should soon be hearing the beating of tom-toms
by André BLANCHET
and the chanting of ritual music in the night.
If so, this was hardly what the organizers of
our trip had led us to expect. We had come to
M'Boumba to see the work of an educational
mission led by M. André Terrisse, head of the
Education Service, Dakar, French West Africa.
It came as a surprise then to learn that the
noises we had heard in the night were the prepa-
rations for a class which the village was due to
attend.
It had not taken M. Terrisse long to realize
that day classes brought poor results. The heat
and lack of shade (for there was no school
building) discouraged both teachers and pupils.
Also, the able-bodied men were busy in the
fields or tending their nocks, so that only the
old men, the women and the children attended
the classes.
Moreover, in a Moslem social environment
(hierarchic, and divided strictly by a caste sys-
tem), it is easier to bring together at night in a
single group the chiefs, the workers and the ser-
vants. The members of the supe-C t. d. h. I.. h on mue on
nor caste hesitate less to mix with
the others, the wives of the chiefs new page
(1) French education team arrives at M'Boumba. (2) Head of Education Service, Dakar, French West Africa, M. André Terrisse, discusses project Wltn village
chief and notables. (3) Classes are undertaken with help of African teacher. (4 and 6) After having seen a film on African art, one villager was inspired to try
his hand, carving his first animals on the walls of his house. (5) French team set up dispensary in native hut, where it has an average of 300 patients a morning.

THE PEOPLE OF MBOUM)
can attend without being seen,
Continued from and the timid, who by day
prevIous page would hesitate to answer ques-
tions, find courage in the darkness.
And, what is probably more important, teaching
aided by the film screen and loudspeaker com-
mands attention ; eyes and ears strain to see and
hear, and there are no distractions to take them
from the subject.
So the members of the mission, now living in
clay huts 400 miles from their homes, changed
their working hours. The discovery that the
night time was the best period for teaching was
exactly the sort of knowledge the mission was sup-
posed to obtain through practical experience.
Theirs was a pilot mission for testing practical
methods and techniques, a preliminary to funda-
mental education campaigns on a large scale.
These were eventually to be undertaken in the
eight territories of French West Africa as a
"federal experiment."
By definition, fundamental education is design-
ed to help the least-favoured rural populations.
The best field for experiment would have been a
village which had never had contact with the
outside world. M'Boumba almost met this quali-
fication, for, situated on a road which leads
nowhere, and isolated by heavy rains from July to
January, it has seen few Europeans since its
almany or supreme chief, the sovereign of Fouta-
Toro, negotiated with General Faidherbe nearly a
century ago.
.,..,'. .
. ! te zone* viHage
ON a scholastic and medical map of Senegal, itis shown as a"white zone,"meaning it is
not served by any school, and is much too
isolated to benefit from the services of the nearest
dispensary.
The truth is that M'Boumba itself is partly
responsible for this situation as, on two occasions,
in 1897 and 1924, when schools were established,
they were boycotted by the people. The town
has no public scribe, no trader, not even a market.
The 1, 800 inhabitants are virtually self-sufficient ;
they cultivate their millet, and raise cattle, their
artizans spin cotton, and women make pottery by
hand.
One mystery is where the women get the neck-
laces of flat keys which they wear. To be on the
safe side, M. Terrisse's helpers took care to hide
their own motor car keys
It took a jeep and a lorry to bring the mission
and its equipment to the town. In addition to
teaching, film, sanitation and farm materials, the
five members of the party had to transport sup-
plies for their two-month stay : camp beds, tables,
chairs, stove, dishes, pots, and the indispensable
refrigerator, none of which could have been ob-
tained in M'Boumba. Fortu.
nately, the largest house in the
village was available for them.
The three Africans who
came with M. Terrisse as
members of the mission all
spoke the local Toucouleur
dialect. The teacher, Ibrahim
Ba Ibrahama, was himself a
Toucoul. The farm monitor
knew the dialect well. The
African doctor, Amadou Gueye,
was helped in his task by his
prestige as a hadji (a title given
to Mohammedan pilgrims who
have been to Mecca).
I wondered what would be
the role of these three special-
ists in the kind of night ses-
sion which we were about to
attend. To give medical care
would surely be difficult in
darkness, I thought, and writ-
ing, as far as I knew, had
seldom been taught by a film.
It was later when I saw the
doctor's clinic, besieged by a
crowd of natives, in daylight,
that the marvellous possibili-
ties of the epidiascope, and the
value of film strips, were
brought home to me.
I soon learned that the
prospect of seeing a pro-
remarks to the needs of the audience, the speed
of the changing images is partly balanced.
Voice from the past
By the end of the evening, each of the threeAfrican officials had talked himself hoars .
They spoke with typical African eloquence,
never hesitating, never pausing, and keeping up
with the rhythm of the film. But all three, the
doctor, the teacher and the farm monitor, spoke
so easily and convincingly that a political orator
would have envied their skill.
The only respite any of them got from their
duties at the microphone was during the playing
of musical records, which greatly appealed to the
villagers. Indeed, the records seemed magical to
the people of M'Boumba, for they heard and re-
cognized the voice of a famous singer from a
neighbourhood village, who died several years ago.
As they listened to the song, the tears coursed
down their cheeks.
How much of what the audience see and hear
remains in their minds and affects the life of the
community ? The head of the mission at
M'Boumba believes that audio-visual methods
alone are not adequate for the effective teaching
of reading. They make it possible to teach the
Using the cinema screen and the microphone, a French
screen help to take some of the strangeness out of this
gramme of film strips attracts the village people
like a tom-tom call. At the first show they
had been alarmed by the mechanical sounds made
by the projector, but this had long since been
forgotten.
The programme was varied. M. Maillet, the
team's technician, used the screen to'''converse''
with the audience. A lesson in spoken and writ-
ten French included local place names and simple
words. The first person to read and pronounce
them was applauded and received a small gift.
An envelope addressed to someone in the village
was flashed on the screen, and ther were shouts
of pleasure when the addressee recognized his
name and came to claim the letter.
In chorus, the villagers called out words from
the pages of a spelling book. The best writing
exercises submitted by pupils were shown. Draw-
ings and sketches explained new words, spoken
aloud by the teacher over the loudspeaker, and
then repeated in chorus by all the spectators.
When the doctor wished to explain what a mi-
crobe was, and why mosquitoes are harmful, he
used the epidiascope to show microscopic slides
while he repeated again and again in Toucouleur
the significance of what was being shown.
The possibilities of this apparatus, which unfor-
tunately is large and costly, are manifold. Opa-
que images, flat objects, drawings, photographic
plates, film strips, can all be projected and any
illustrated magazine, even a technical one, can fill
the screen with attractive pictures.
That evening, for example, coloured photo-
graphs of cotton fields and markets and samples
of cloth gave visual substance to an educational
talk. For a public which finds it hard to follow
the fast pace of a film, it is a great advantage to
be able to maintain such images in view long
enough to have their meaning understood.
A good film strip, with commentary in the lan-
guage of the region, always gives better practical
results than a film. In M'Boumba, at any rate,
even the most amusing and instructive animated
cartoons have been failures with the public.
M. Terrisse pointed out that the natives, whose
interest and response is aroused primarily
by concrete facts and objects, and to whose
eyes the projected images are'''new'', remain
quite unmoved by"this super. abstraction of the
modern world".
Even the most didactic documentary films
always hold the natives'attention and can appa-
rently be shown again and again without loss of
interest. Such documentaries as those on cattle
feeding and on pottery-making, for example,
aroused so much excitement that I thought they
were being seen for the first time. Yet they were
already well known to the spectators.
Repetition, it would seem, is welcomed by the
natives, and provided that a commentator explains
the film in the local dialect and adjusts his

'SPA JOIN IN A NEW EXPERIMENT IN EDUCATION
alphabet, a few common words, and names of
persons and places. Yet even knowing how to
read and write his name does affect a person's
personality and attitude.
"What is important,"says M. Terrisse,.'is that
the adult, in becoming aware of the usefulness of
reading in terms of practical existence, will now
favour the education of the children."
In this respect, the activities of the mission have
been effective. Not only did a few children,
brought together for a few hours a day, learn
within three weeks to read simple texts and write
short letters, but the whole village decided to
build a school and went to work on it at once.
In comparison with the unfortunate experiences
of 1897 and 1924, this is significant progress.
The Senegal Government responded by pro-
mising the construction of a permanent building
and the provision of a teacher. Meantime, a
former official, now in retirement at M'Boumba,
will act as monitor.
Moreover, the inhabitants of the village have
subscribed 180, 000 francs, and promised to furnish
labour, sand and gravel'for the building of a
dispensary. A male nurse, trained by Dr. Gueye,
: will meantime give first aid to the sick, and help
women in childbirth.
These are not the only promising changes in
the village. Others, however, will not become
obvious until the trees planted during the last
two months have grown to full size. Some will
provide fruit, or wood for carpentry, others will
be merely ornamental.
Much depends on whether the natives continue
to water the plants. Most Africans, of all races,
have still to learn that trees need careful tending.
Another type of improvement, already notice-
able, is in the comfort and sanitary arrange-
ments in the houses. Refuse, for example, is now
being burned.
Films stimulate arts
IT ESSONS in personal cleanliness and in methodsof improving agriculture were the counter-
parts to those given at night. It was
however, the effect of film strips on African arts.
and of films on the making of pottery, that
aroused the artistic feelings of some of the
villagers.
In a village where previously not the slightest
trace of decoration existed, potters, carpenters and
blacksmiths have suddenly found their vocations
and set to work making objects that are not only
useful but also attractive. I remember, in par-
ticular, a surrealist spoon that was given, to
M. Terrisse. And the children are making extra-
ordinary stylized and geometric drawings, which
strikingly recall some of the paintings done by
the bushmen.
The members of the mission tried to liberate
the women from their dawn-to-dusk drudgery of
pounding millet to make the family meal. When
the mission suggested that the village buy a millet
crusher, the response at first was enthusiastic,
But the strict feudal system soon became an
obstacle. There were such strong 9bjections to
using the same apparatus for the chiefs and the
inferior castes that the project had to be dropped.
Thus M'Boumba will continue to resound all
day with the heavy rhythm of the pestles, as the
women, using the traditional graceful movement,
make two pestles dance together in the same
mortar.
It is probable that teams like M. Terrisse's
will be formed to work all over French West
Africa. Thus M'Boumba will not be the only
village to benefit from the demonstrations, the
conversations under the stars, and the 120 films
shown during 60 nights when no one in the village
slept.
A technique has been found which can help
other disinherited villages of Senegal, and directly
or indirectly influence the evolution of 16, 000, 000
human beings.
education mission at M'Boumba"converses"with its audience. During the reading lessons, familiar names-those of local places or people-which are flashed on the
new skill the villagers are learning. Commentaries in the local dialect which accompany films and filmstrips often bring an appreciative smile from the audience.
