FEBRUARY 1953. Page 3
A few miles from the capital of the Saar, in the heart of one of the few tracts of
woodland left in the country, is the University of Saarbrucken.) Its 1, 300 students
hail from 25 countries. Of the total, 980 are from the Saar, 136 from German
and 60 from France. There are also many from countries outside Europe.
THE UNIVERSITY OF SAARBRUCKEN
A BRIDGE LINKING TOO GREAT EUROPEAN CULTURES
KARL (from Saarlouis) andJohann (from Mainz), Fran-
çoise (from Nancy) and Giu-
seppe (from Turin), Peter, Katia,
Fernandez, Ahmed-there is little
formality about introductions in the
dining-hall of the"Mensa"of the
University of Saarbrucken. I find
myself returning a hundred young
smiles, shaking hands all round, and
trying to summon up from a halting
memory a few friendly words in
about half-a-dozen different langua-
ges. Through the open window, the
eye goes out to the near-by forest of
stately firs and silver birches sur-
rounding and hemming in the Uni-
versity on every side. It is difficult
to believe that we are in the Saar,
the little country with an area of
only some 965 square miles (and over
900, 000 inhabitants), wedged in
between France and Germany, and
probably possessing more mines and
blast-furnaces than any area of
similar extent anywhere else in the
world.
In Saarbrücken itself, the sky is
sometimes darkened, even at mid-
day, by the thick dust and smoke in
the air. But the University, about
three and a half miles from the
capital of the Saar, in the heart of
one of the few tracts of woodland
still left in the country, is far enough
removed from that modern forge of
Vulcan. It has been set up in a
disused Wehrmacht barracks, an
enormous, and most uninviting,
quadrilateral of low grey buildings.
Such a metamorphosis is an en-
couraging omen. The University of
Saarbrücken in fact stands for one
of the most inspiring attempts being
made to unify the peoples through
culture in this troubled modern
world, all the more striking on this
eastern frontier of France where
international antagonisms have in
the past bred discord and division.
Its history, its short history to date
- for it has been in existence barely
five years-symbolizes the slow and
painful awakening of the European
spirit among the ruins of the second
world war.
On a wet September morning in
1944, when the first French and
American troops fought their way
into Saarbrucken. to the crack of
bullets, the sight that met their eyes
was one of still greater desolation
than that which the allied forces
by Michel SALMON
encountered at the same time in the
Ruhr. More than 6, 000 of the 9, 800
houses and other buildings which
had made up the town of Saar-
brücken were wholly or partially
destroyed. Acres of rubble were all
that was left of 65 % of the coun-
try's dwelling houses, 60 % of its
factories, 50 % of its public build-
ings, including churches and schools.
In all the chaos which prevailed
in the first few years of the occu-
pation of Germany, the position of
students in the Saar was particu-
larly difficult. No opportunities were
as yet open to them in the French
Universities, while the over-crowded
German universities could only
accept them in small numbers and
were, in any case, rather far away.
Those nearest-the Universities of
Heidelberg, Mainz, Frankfurt and
Bonn-to which students from the
Saar were in the habit of going, are
respectively some 95, 108, 135 and
162 miles from Saarbrucken by rail.
The extent of the disaster which
had overtaken the Saar, and the
: ; special situation in which the coun-
try was placed at a very early date.
developed a special attitude of mind
among the people of the Saar, and
especially among young University
students. The European University
of Saarbrucken was thus born of a
combination of local needs and more
general cultural considerations. Its
object was to become a'peaceful
meeting-place, a bridge linking two
great civilizations and cultures. It
was necessary to train engineers for
the mining and metallurgical indus-
tries, doctors specializing in indus-
trial diseases, lawyers and so forth,
with the least possible delay, but
these new leaders for the Saar were
to be brought up in a new spirit of
international understanding and co-
operation, in the interests of Eurcpe
as a whole.
The Faculty of Medicine was the
first to be established, at Homburg.
a small industrial town on the Ger-
man frontier, about 18 miles to the
east of Saarbrucken. Homburg is a
dull, grey town, whose only merit is
that it contains the best of the local
breweries and the model hospital to
which the medical Faculty is now
attached.
As early as 1846, Saar and French
doctors and a former Professor of
the University of Budapest began
giving lectures and clinical demons-
trations to about fifty students.
March 1947 saw the formal opening
of an"Institute of Higher Studies"
which, during the Winter Term of
the same year, was converted into a
fully-fledged University. Three of
the Faculties (Arts, Law and Science)
moved to Saarbrucken in 1948, and
new Departments were later set up
- the Institute of Metallurgical
Research, at which certificated met-
allurgical engineers are trained in
co-operation with the Faculty of
Science, the Institute of Interpreters
and the Institute of European Stu-
dies.
The legal authority for the estab-
lishment of the University is
Continued on next page
In front of the University buildings (they were once army barracks), Professor
Angelloz, Rector of Saarbrucken University, chats with some of his students.(\I1agnum photo)
O : COURIER

Page 4. FEBRUARY 1953
A lecturer at Saarbrucken. Languages mainly used are German and French, but English, Spanish and Italian are being
introduced. The faculty is almost as multi-national in composition as the student body : 250 professors, 10 nationalities.
A MULTILINGUAL UNIVERSITY
contained in Article 33 of the Saar
Constitution, which makes mention
of a University, and in the Franco-
Saar Cultural Convention, which
lays down that the two Governments
shall both contribute to the cost of
running the University. A decree
of the Saar Government, dated
3 April 1950, states the position of
the University more exactly. It is a
State institution with complete inde-
pendence in financial matters. Its
governing body is a Board of Mana-
gement consisting of representatives
of the authorities directly interested
in the development of the Univer-
sity ; the other administrative autho-
rities are the Rector, the Vice-Rec-
tor, the Secretariat and an academic
council consisting of all the Deans
and Vice-Deans of the Faculties.
As a European University (which
it is stated to be in Articles 3 and 4
of its Charter), in fact as an inter-
national university, Saarbriicken is
able to call upon the services of pro-
fessors and lecturers from different
countries and is open to students of
any nationality. The Planckstrasse
in Saarbriicken, where most of the
teaching staff of the University are
living in pre-fabricated houses
which have literally sprung up from
the ground in a few months, is a
very Babel where Oxford and Hei-
delberg, the Sorbonne and Sankt
Gallen (Switzerland), Cambridge
(United Kingdom) and Cambridge
(United States) meet and mingle.
I myself met, one after the other,
a German zoologist who had been
one of the lights of the University of
Shanghai, a Swi. ss psychologist car-
rying on the tradition of Claparede,
a librarian from Berlin and a Bel-
gian physicist. The 250 or so profes-
sors, assistants and lecturers of the
University of Saarbrücken are of
10 different nationalities. The 1, 300
students, for their part, include
nationals of 25 different countries-
980 being from the Saar, 136 from
Germany and 60 from France ; but
there are also American, Turkish,
Iranian, Israeli, Chinese and Viet-
Namese students, to mention only
those from outside Europe. The lan-
guages mainly used in teaching at
Saarbrucken are German and
French, which are treated on a
strictly equal footing.
From the practical point of view,
this system gives rise to some little
difficulty, with regard both to actual
teaching and to examinations. The
University has had to work out an
ingenious compromise between the
rigid syllabuses to which French
teachers are accustomed, leading
ultimately to the"agrégation", a
highly competitive examination, and
the much more flexible German sys-
tem with its various grades of
"Hauptamtlich"and"Nedenamtlich-
professor","Docent"and assistant.
In the same way, the Saar Univer-
sity examinations combine the
French"licence"with the'''Stadtexa-
men",'''Doktorat''and"Habilita-
tion"of the universities on the other
side of the Rhine.
Plans are already being made,
however, for the use of further lan-
guages in teaching. With the ap-
pointment of Professor Startup and
Professor Jeeves, English has been
officially introduced, closely followed
by Spanish and Italian. The Uni-
versity is, of course, not yet entirely
"run in". Nothing is as yet immu-
table in the form of its organization.
It is no easy matter to establish a
satisfactory system of bilingual or
trilingual teaching, not to mention
the other difficulties encountered.
But the foreign specialists who were
recently asked to serve on the Board
of Examiners at the public defence
of scientific theses were able to see
for themselves that there is nothing
impossible in such an undertaking.
The Saar students replied unhesita-
tingly to all their questions in
French, German or English, accord-
ing to the nationality of the person
addressing them.
A pale, wintry sun was playing
upon the few remaining leaves,
flashing on the windows of a build-
ing, and making the guard-tower
- a menacing snow-covered cone-
look harmless as a country steeple.
I walked across the campus of the
University with Professor Angelloz,
that eminent German scholar who
bears the proud title of"`Rector
Magnificus Universitatis Saravensis".
The University's domain is expanding
in every direction and pushing out
into the forest. Bulldozers are
cutting swathes through the trees,
excavators are breaking up the
frozen earth and hollowing out vast
craters in the soil.
"When we have completed our
five-year plan", the Rector mur-
mured confidentially to me,"we
shall be able to have a big sports-
ground here"-pointing out a part
of the forest as yet untouched-
"our Faculty of Science and our
Faculty of Arts, which are at present
too restricted for space, will be
extended in that direction ; the Uni-
versity hostels will be built over
there, and so on".
The foundations of the splendid
central library are already being
laid ; I was much impressed by the
model of it I saw in the Rector's
office-a great oblong reading-room
flanked by a tower ten storeys high,
with passenger and goods lifts, in
which the 100, 000 volumes at present
kept in different places about the
University, with new additions, will
be collected together and indexed.
We visited the group of University
hostels, where some 300 men and
women students are comfortably
housed for a monthly charge of
800 francs (1), the cheerful and
spotlessly clean"Mensa", or Univer-
sity restaurant, where students can
have the three main meals of the
day at a cost of 195 francs, the labo-
ratories and the lecture-theatres.
One of the buildings we visited was
taken over in a state of complete
dilapidation in 1946. It had origi-
nally housed the tanks of the Wehr-
macht unit and was deliberately set
on fire before the unit left. It now
contains the most up-to-date and
possibly the best-equipped physics
laboratory to be found in any Euro-
pean university.
Perhaps the most significant mo-
ment of my short stay in the Saar
was my visit to the geology labora-
tory. I was given a most warm and
friendly welcome by a young assis-
tant belonging to the country, who
led me to a great block of coal
covered by what looked like an
enormous dish-cover in one corner
of the room. Above it was a map of
the Saar coalfield, a great brown
streak of discoloration running from
north east to south west across the
greater part of the country."Our
daily bread", my guide called it, in
tones of the most serious signifi-
cance.
Thus, even in this forest vastness,
this haven where, thank heavens,
the horizon is still free from the
chimneys of collieries and blast fur-
naces, the Coal-God is yet present-
and omniI-otent. Even the Univer-
sity is inevitably subject to the laws
of geography."It must be our aim",
I was told,"to train the very best
mining and metallurgical engineers
here. We are particularly well placed
in Europe for such a purpose ; we
have centuries of experience behind
us which can be of use to students
all over the world. So far as Europe
is concerned, our University might
become, for the mining industry and
its ancillaries, what Princeton is for
mathematics, and Johns Hopkins for
medicine in the United States of
America. Students would come to us
not only because, under its Charter,
our University is international but,
even more, because they could be
sure of receiving here technical ins-
truction of truly international
worth."
The pursuit of such an aim by the
University of Saarbrucken seems to
us to be a most interesting develop-
ment. Thus, the multilingual Uni-
versity of Europe would then be able
not only to train officials to staff
any pan-European organization
which may be set up-the only pro-
bable career open, for the time being,
to students from countries other
than the Saar, taking the extremely
interesting courses at the Institute
of European Studies, for instance-
but also technicians, who would be
inspired by a desire and determina-
tion to found the future of Europe
on a recognition of the interdepen-
dence of our cultures and the need
for them to live side by side in peace.
(t) We may mention, in this connel'ion,
that the Europrnn University of the Soar is
highly democratic ; the feps are low, stlldcl1feare drawn from a.//sections of the country's
population. Twenty-sel'en l>er cent of shestudents come from worldng-class families
and nearby 20 per cent from the familil's of
clerks, small craftsmen, etc"in the imrer-
income groups.
Not far from a typical Saar landscape-factory chimneys and blast furnaces-
foundations are being ! aid for an ultra modern University library, a scale model
of which is shown on right. In this new building, the 100, 000 volumes at present
kept in different places about the University will be collected and indexed.
UNESCO :
