COURIER APRIL 1953. Page 7
REGIONAL EDUCATION C E N T R EF 0 R THE ARAB 5. T ATE 5 :
S) RS EL-LAYAN
IN a small village in the Nile Valley, the olderfolks were noticing with sadness that too
many young people left the land to seek a
better, more promising life in the big cities. The
older people were sad but they didn't know what
to do about it.
Then, one day, a government worker paid a
visit to the village. He told the people about a
government plan for building what he called a
"ural Social Centre"in their community. The
programme, he said, could help them to improve
their health, harvest better crops and earn more
money, and learn to read and write.
The villagers were willing to do their part, and
so the government sent two young social workers
to help them get started. One, a young man, was
a farming expert. The other was a young woman
nurse. With their assistance, the new social
centre was constructed. And it was a fine one.
It included a clinic, a maternity ward, a library.
There was also a recreation room, public baths
and laundries. The centre had classrooms, and
rooms for demonstrating better farming methods,
model beehives and so on.
When all was ready, the villagers set up five
committees.
A health committee was made responsible for
getting the village clean water, and for general
sanitation and hygiene. It worked with the
government nurse to make the new centre's clinic
a success.
A second committee tackled problems of
education and recreation. As its first task, it
established a school for the village children.
Then it organized evening classes for the adults.
It supplied the centre's library with books,
purchased a radio, and was soon bringing films to
the centre.
A changed village
A THIRD group worked with the young agri-cultural expert and with the village co-
operative society. Their goal was to raise
the economic level of the community. Using the
centre's classrooms, they demonstrated new far-
ming techniques. They bought and distributed
better seeds and improved breeding stock. They
also encouraged the peasants-or fellahin, as they
are called in Egypt-to make profitable use of
their spare time. They taught them how to raise
bees, for example, and silk-worms-how to im-
prove their spinning and weaving.
Two other committees rounded out the new
organization. One was a conciliation committee
to settle local disputes. The other was re-
sponsible for charity, and for helping widows,
orphans, the sick and the aged.
The results of this new programme of funda-
mental education came quickly enough. Young-
sters who had previously basked listlessly in the
sun, with flies on their faces and sores on their
eyes, were now more vigorous. The death-rate
among children dropped by almost two-thirds.
Families began to double their incomes. The
new school was filled in the day time by the
children, and at night by the adults. Before long,
the library became a favourite recreation spot
The case of this village centre is not an isolated
one. Since 1946, the Fellahin Department of the
Egyptian Ministry of Social Affairs ha. s helped to
establish 135 such centres.
Today, one of these villages has suddenly taken
on special international importance. It is Sirs
el-Layan, located about 50 miles north of Cairo,
which has been chosen as the headquarters for
Unesco's second regional fundamental education
centre to serve the Arab world in raising standards
of living through education. The first, serving
Latin America, has been in operation at
Patzcuaro, Mexico, since May 1951, and is now
accommodating more than 100 students from 16
countries.
Sirs el-Layan is situated between two branches
of the Nile, the Damietta and the Rosetta, in the
centre of the Menouf district, one of Egypt's most
fertile regions, with about 300, 000 inhabitants.
Within this district there are now 18 social
centres, 18 new type rural schools and six health
units. Sirs el-Layan itself is about 3 miles from
the town of Menouf, the administrative centre of
the district. In 1946 it was selected as the site of
a community development project of the Egyptian
Government. The plan was to develop Sirs el-
Layan as a model experimental area in which a
combined attack on ignorance, poverty and
disease was to be conducted by the Ministries of
Education, Social Affairs, Health and Agriculture,
with the Ministry of Trade and Industries co-
operating in the development of local industries.
Now it will serve as a model experimental and
training centre for all the countries of the Arab
world.
The Unesco centre was officially opened on
20 January 1953 by the Egyptian Premier, General
Mohamed Neguib and Dr. John W. Taylor, acting
Director-General of Unesco, at a ceremony
attended by Egyptian officials, representatives of
the Arab states and Specialized Agencies of the
U. N.
Fifty trainees from six Arab States (Egypt,
Hashemite Jordan, Iraq, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia,
Syria ; in addition, a number of Palestinian Arabs
have also been admitted) now make up the
centre's first class, but enrolment is expected
. to rise to 150 by September when new dormitory
facilities are to be completed, and to 200 by 1954.
These"students"are not undergraduates. They
were chosen because of their knowledge of the
rural problems of their country, their long
experience in rural education generally, and
their specialist knowledge in at least one field
of fundamental education. They include school
directors, village welfare workers, nurses, literacy
teachers, agriculturists and economists.
At Sirs el-Layan they will be trained to become
the leaders and.'the teachers of teachers"in
fundamental education work in their own
countries. Operating as teams in the various
villages which constitute the Menouf district, they
will be trained in the down-to-earth, practical
techniques of raising social and economic
conditions through education.
Specially-adapted textbooks, posters, films and
General Mohamed
Neguib, Prime Mi-
nister of Egypt, at
the inauguration of
the regional educa-
tion centre at Sirs
e !-Layan, the sec-
ond in a world
chain of training
institutions plan-
ned by Unesco to
help in raising liv-
ing standards by
combatting ignor-
ance, disease, pov-
erty and illiteracy.
(Unesco photo)
filmstrips for adult use are sorely needed
throughout the Arab world ; most existing edu-
cational materials in Arabic have been made
primarily for children. The centre and its
international team of students will develop model
materials designed particularly for adults and
specially adapted to meet the needs and resource
of local communities.
Although each student will specialize in a single
branch of fundamental education such as health,
hygiene, literacy or agriculture, each will be
trained to be something of an'''all-rounder''in
the team and to see fundamental education work
nob as a series of isolated tasks but as an
interdependent whole, each part of which is
equally essential for raising living standards.
Teams of leaders-
ON completing their training, the students
will return to their own countries as teams,
prepared to help in carrying out the edu-
cation programmes which the Arab r'. untries are
now launching on an increasing scale. Some of
these activities are already associated with
Unesco's normal programme, some have been
undertaken through U. N. technical assistance,
others have been started independently by
! national or international organizations. The
Unesco centre will co-operate with all, exchang-
ing information, carrying out research and
Bending expert help where it is needed.
The Sirs el-Layan Fundamental Education
Centre has been recognized as an institution of
decisive significance to the educational and social
welfare programmes of the Arab States.
The leaders in fundamental education trained
at the Unesco centre will help to provide these
masses with the health education they need to
combat endemic diseases and improve sanitation
and hygiene. They will be available to teach
better farming methods, soil conservation and
home economies ; to help foster the development
of rural crafts and small industries in order to
create new sources of income and livelihood for
village communities.
The establishment of the Unesco Fundamental
Education Centre has already created keen
interest everywhere in the region in fundamental
education as one practical answer to the cent-
uries-old problem of the Arab peoples. It has
also stimulated interest in the other aspects of
Unesco's work. Thus the centre is not only
helping to provide ways of improving living
conditions in the Arab world but is also helping
to foster international co-operation between the
peoples of a vital area of our modern world.
In order tllat ow'readers may better understand tile
importance and tile need for the Sirs el-Layan Fund {l-
mental Hducation Centre serving tile peoples of tile Arab
u'Mld, we present on tile following pages a report on
tile gl"eat social upheaval tlla. t is non : tak, ing place in
the countries of tile lIli/Hle East, and a p1cture of live
in tile villages of tllis regi<in where fundamental edu-
cation IVaI'} ; is particularly needed. Tllis study is taken
frail the"Report on the World Social Situation"prepar-
ed by tile Department of Social Affairs of tile United
'ations.
