T COURTIER AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1953. Page 9
a IT 0 worship, live and work together regardless
of race-these truly human relationships are the
only norma ones'
by W. A. WSSER'T HOOFT,
General Secretary, World Council of Churches.
ONE of the remarkable facts of the twentieth century has
been the coming together of the Protestant, Anglican
and Orthodox Churches in what we know as the"Ecu-
menical Movement". This movement took more definite
form in 1948 when at Amsterdam delegates from some 150
churches in more than 40 countries agreed to establish the
World Council of Churches.
The Ecumenical Movement has been concerned not only
with the life of the churches as such, but also with the
message that the church has for the world. Since the question
of race is one which is crucial for the church itself and which
is of utmost importance for the life of the world, it is natural
that this co-operative venture of the churches should be
concerned with it.
One of the forerunners of the World Council was the'''Life
and Work"movement. Its Conference, held in Oxford in
1937, issued a strong statement on the racial question which
had a profound effect on the thinking of various churches.
It first recognized that"`the Christian sees distinctions of race
as part of God's purpose to enrich mankind with a diversity of
gifts".
Knowing that many people in the world, however, were using
these distinctions of race as an excuse for the oppression of
one group by another, the Conference declared :"Against
racial pride or race antagonism the church must set its face
implacably as rebellion against God."Frankly admitting
that the churches themselves were often guilty of erecting
walls of separation in their own life the Conference further
stated :"specially in its (the church's) own life and worship
there can be no place for barriers because of race or colours.....
no place for exclusion or segregation because of race or
colour."The World Council of Churches which after 1948
incorporated the"Life and Work"Movement continued to
adhere to the convictions expressed by the Oxford Confe-
rence.
The Assembly at Amsterdam considered the question of race
in two particular respects. First, it pointed out that the
Church can hardly hope that society at large will listen to its
pronouncements while it is guilty of fostering racial separation
in its own life.
That the Church must become aware of its own failure in
this respect was made abundantly clear in the report of the
Assembly's section on The Church and the Disorder of Society
which was unanimously received by the Assembly itself and
commended to the Churches.
This Assembly report declared :"It is here (in the matter
of racial distinction) that the Church has failed most
lamentably, where it has reflected and then by its
example sanctified the racial prejudice that is rampant in
the world. And yet it is here that today its guidance con-
cerning what God wills for it is especially clear. It knows that
it must call society away from prejudice based upon race or
colour and from practices of discrimination and segregation
as denials of justice and human dignity, but it cannot say a
convincing word to society unless it takes steps to eliminate
these practices from the Christian community, because they
contradict all that it believes about God's love for all His
children."
The Amsterdam Assembly further acknowledged the Church's
responsibility to work for the universal recognition of human
rights. Its section on The Church and the International
Disorder said :"We are profoundly concerned by evidence
from many parts of the world of flagrant violations of human
rights. Both individuals and groups are subjected to persecu-
tion and discrimination on grounds of race, colour, religion,
culture or political conviction. Against such actions whether
of governments, officials, or the general public, the churches
must take a firm and vigorous stand, through international
institutions of legal order. They must work for an ever wider
and deeper understanding of what are the essential human
rights if men are to be free to do the will of God."
In the period following the Amsterdam Assembly the World
Council of Churches'teadership has been continually concerned
with the racial situation in the world and especially with the
developments in South Africa. The Central Committee of
the World Council, meeting in Toronto, Canada in 1950,
particularly concerned itself with this point. It recommended
that an inter-racial ecumenical delegation be sent to visit the
South African Churches. It became apparent, however, that
such a delegation would not be generally welcomed and the
Central Committee could not agree to send a delegation of
any other nature. The General Secretary, however, made a
visit to the Union of South Africa in 1952, visiting both
English-and Africaans-speaking churches as well as various
African Negro bodies.
All racial divisions overcome
HE report which the General Secretary made on his visit
to the meeting of the Central Committee in Lucknow,
India, in January 1953, prompted a series of resolutions
from that body which said in part :
"The Central Committee gives encouragement to all those
in South Africa and elsewhere who are labouring for a solution
of the racial problem in keeping with the Christian Gospel,
and calls upon all Christians to uphold them in thought,
prayer and acts of reconciliation.
"The Central Committee would use this opportunity to
express its strong conviction that the first and foremost
contribution which the Churches everywhere can and must
make to the solution of the race problem is to manifest in
their own life that in Christ all racial division is overcome and
that any policy of enforced segregation in any aspects of
church life is incompatible with the very nature of the Church
in Christ.
"The Central Committee holding strongly the convictions
expressed by the First Assembly (Amsterdam), affirms that
all political, social and economic discrimination based on the
grounds of race, wherever they may exist, are contrary to the
Will of God as expressed in the Christian Gospel. Recognizing
that existing racial discriminations are increasing tension and
bitterness in various parts of the world, the Committee calls
upon the member churches to engage in the Christian
ministry of reconciliation and to do all in their power to end
such discrimination wherever it exists."
In August 1954 the second Assembly of the World Council
of Churches will be held at Evanston, Illinois, U. S. A. After
considering its main theme :"Christ-The Hope of the
World,"the Assembly will turn to six specific areas in which
this hope is relevant. One of these will be the realm of
inter-group relations :"the Church Amid Racial and Ethnic
Tensions."It is hoped that the work of this Assembly section
will serve to give more specific content to the convictions
already expressed by the various World Council bodies on the
race problem.
On the national level, the Ecumenical Movement has taken
the form of National Councils of Churches, and these have
often spoken on the race problem as it particularly affects
their own countries. Two cases are specially noteworthy.
"The General Board of the National Council of the
Churches of Christ in the U. S. A. in June 1952, adopted an
Official Statement and Resolution entitled :"The Church and
Segregation."Since the U. S. A. is, one of those areas in the
world where racial barriers are most in evidence, it is signi-
ficant that this body, representing the vast majority of Pro-
testant and Orthodox Christians in that country should
"renounce and earnestly recommend to its member churches
that they renounce the pattern of segregation based on race,
colour or national origin. as unnecessary, undesirable and A
violation of the Gospel of love and human brotherhood."
Common loyalty brings community
Ion a further elaboration of that theme, in words that have
also been adopted as their own by several of the official
church bodies, the National Council promised to work for
"a non-segregated church and a non-segregated community."
In Great Britain the British Council of Churches has realized
its particular responsibility toward all races represented in
the British Commonwealth. Consequently this ecumenical
body included as its fifth point in a seven-point policy which
it adopted in April 1951 :"To oppose racial discrimination
wherever it is found, at home and overseas ; in particular to
support and apply the principle of partnership in all relation-
ships, official and personal, with other members of the multi-
racial Commonwealth to which we belong."
Further implementing this policy, the British Council of
Churches in April 1953, adopted a resolution with specific
reference to the proposed Central Africa Federation, which
without committing the Council for or against the scheme
urged that safeguards be included to secure equal educational
opportunity for all racial groups, the removal of racial restric-
tions for skilled employment and the professions and the reduc-
tion of all discriminatory practices.
The common voice of the Churches as expressed through
the ecumenical bodies is clear. Friends of the Church as
well as its critics may well ask, however, whether the practices
of the churches correspond to its pronouncements. The
answer, of course, is that in many areas they do not. Yet
these official statements have value in creating the"bad
conscience"in the Church which can lead and have actually
led to a change of attitude.
Lastly, the Ecumenical Movement is in itself an inter-racial
fellowship. In all large ecumenical meetings and in numerous
smaller groups, Christians have learned to worship, live and
work together regardless of race. Thus they have come to
learn that such truly human relationships are the only normal
ones. In a common loyalty to their common Lord, they have
discovered a true community transcending all human barriers.
