"Children Playing"by Mikio Wada, 2nd grade, primary school of Konan.
"Teacher"by Yukimo Yanai, 2nd grade, primary school of Nohara.
"Fish"by Isamu Terada, 3rd grade, primary school of Shimura.

COURIER OCTOBER 1953. Page
THE EAST MEETS THE WEST IN
JAPANESE ART EDUCATION
THERE are people, especially inthe Orient, who speak of"the
scientific West and the spirit-
ual East". This may be partially
true, for undoubtedly science is more
advanced in Western countries, but
it may be excessive to suggest that
Eastern cultural development is the
more spiritual.
In the field of the visual arts
modern forms of expression are not
necessarily superior to those of
former times. Quite po. ssibly the
scientific developments of Western
civilization have involved a comple-
mentary neglect and consequent
decline of artistic sensibility. In
that respect, Oriental forms of civili-
zation, which are not so highly
mechanized and scientific in charac-
ter, may have preserved certain
qualities which can be of value to
the West.
The essential quality in Oriental
art is a simplification and a sym-
bolization that, although often ap-
parently realistic in detail, actually
achieve a kind of abstraction, as in
the multiple stone figures on the
surfaces of buildings. This also
derives in part from the techniques
employed, which are based on tra-
ditional formulas, as in the detailed
carving of ivories or the skilful
working of small objects in various
kinds of metals and the complicated
processes involved in lacquering.
Most of the examples of work in
these materials which are familiar
to Western peoples are noteworthy
for their minute detail and realism.
But when you look closely it is ap-
parent that the underlying design is
far from verisimilitude and is a non-
realistic. often lifeless, abstraction.
Formal abstraction
A GAIN in painting, and in the artfor which Japan is renowned,
namely coloured woodcuts, the
manner of setting out the simple
washes and brush strokes, the inclu-
sion of written texts and the im-
portance given to the placing of the
signature as part of the spatial
design, all contribute to an effect
3f formal abstraction.
With the impact of Western civi-
lization during the nineteenth
century and up to the present time,
it was difficult for the arts in the
Orient to escape from the influence
of the so-called realism of Western
art. However, a tradition of
genuine realism has not been estab-
lished in Eastern countries, whereas,
in the Western countries even
the various forms of"modern"art
are, in fact, basically developments
arising out of what is fundamental-
ly a tradition of striving for realism.
Eastern countries found them-
selves in the inevitable situation
where modern Western civilization
was imported and imposed upon
them, and, it must be admitted, in
Japan this was openly sought and
desired in order that the country
might take its place in the assembly
of modern nations. But our tradi-
tional pattern of culture was still
essentially feudalistic in character.
Scientific and technical develop-
ments had to take place. In the
process Oriental civilizations have
been under great strain ; they have
been like persons with split person-
alities, no longer safe in the old and
not yet fully adapted to the new.
This is a situation of extraordinary
significance and implication for art
and art education. Technique and
style in the arts are rooted deep in
something that lies beyond the
merely visual. Hence those tra-
ditional styles and techniques in
Oriental art, which appeal so much
to Western connoisseurs, are in fact
echoes of the spirit of a former age
and have become mannerisms which
cannot be regarded as creatively
by Oasmu Muro
Council Member, National Art Education Association, Japan
relevant. so our present phase of
evolution.
The problem is how to adapt our
teaching to the new conditions while
still retaining those traditional ele-
ments which are true for us and
worthy of retention. Naturally,
many Western visitors to Japan
advise us to admire our own tradi-
tions whereas, in ordinary life, we
are busy swallowing Western fas-
hions and ways of living. It is
useless telling us to return, in the
arts, to those qualities which are
only stylistic, because we of the
younger generation in the East think
that the modern methods and
discoveries in art belong not exclu-
sively to the West but to the world.
Therefore, in our schools, the situa-
tion is undergoing changes.
There has been a fundamental
revolution in administrative, spirit-
ual and technical approaches to
education generally, especially under
the recent influence of the occupa-
tion authorities, so that the intro-
duction of primary, lower and upper
and esteemed as a means of free
self-expression. Interest has been
aroused in the general public
through many exhibitions of chil-
dren's pictures arranged by various
institutions and newspapers.
Secondly, more efforts are being
made to cultivate the pupil's capacity
for art appreciation, instead of the
traditional training in skill. For
this purpose reproductions of various
works of art of all countries have
been introduced.
Thirdly, the concept of visual art
as a branch of education has been
greatly enlarged from the limited
sphere of fine arts to include com-
mercial arts, industrial arts, and all
kinds of decorative arts, aiming at
the unification of art and life
through resolving the problems of
visual beauty in daily life.
Lastly, research on methods of
evaluation, especially objective and
scientific methods, has been started.
As in many other countries, the pro-
gressive teachers have had to face
many objections from the conserva-
some time, for the first requirement
is to build ordinary classrooms.
On the administrative side, the
Ministry of Education and the boards
of education in every prefecture and
the big cities, have their own ad-
visers or consultants for art teach-
ing, but small cities, towns and vil-
lages do not. A course of study for
art education, a kind of teacher's
manual, has been drafted by the
Ministry of Education. As teachers
who are really capable of carrying
out the new methods of art educa-
tion are still scarce some such guid-
ance is necessary ; but it is even
more desirable, as soon as possible,
to train good specialists in large
numbers. Training centres for art
teachers are rare. Consequently
the majority of special teachers now
working are professional painters,
and few opportunities for their re-
education can be envisaged under
present conditions.
There are numerous societies and
associations. Each prefecture has a
teachers'association for research in
art education. The national con-
vention meets once a year. There
are many other societies and re-
search institutes which hold training
.. Little Girls,"by Yukimo, Kubomachi Primary School.
secondary schools, and the democra-
tization of the theory and practice
of education, are epoch-making
events.
With regard to art education the
same dilemma arose as in relation
to adult artistic problems. The tra-
dition in the schools was based on
the earlier view, incidentally still
widely held, that art was only for the
talented few and that all art teach-
ing should be done by artists. Con-
sequently, the education authorities
had little interest in promoting art
education for everybody, and the
professional artists did not approach
teaching from the point of view of
understanding the child, but of
training further professionals in the
conventional styles.
Gradually, a more perceptive atti-
tude is gaining ground and methods
are being promoted in accord with
progressive approaches to the art
education of the child. The deve-
lopments in Japan can be summed
up as follows :
First of all, in the lower grades,
visual art education is understood
tive ones. Nevertheless, the new art
education is prevailing in spite of the
lack of materials and equipment and
the fact that specialist teachers have
been trained only as painters.
The Ministry of Education, and
private enterprises, are producing
various visual aids and films to pro-
vide for the appreciation of master-
pieces and the understanding of
some technical processes. Some
magazines for art education are
being published by institutions and
associations of art teachers and the
first issue of The Journal ot Japanese
Art Education, a publication of the
Unesco Art Education League in
Japan, appeared in September 1952.
One of the real difficulties we are
now facing is the very serious short-
age of classrooms, especially in pri-
mary and lower secondary schools,
due to wartime devastation and the
demands of the new educational
system. Hardly any schools, except
for those which escaped damages,
have special rooms for art teaching.
Moreover, we cannot expect adequate
special equipment in every school for
classes and organize workshops.
With and through the children we
are thus solving some of the pro-
blems which have arisen from the
confrontation of East and West. We
have profited from the experiences
of pioneer experimenters in art edu-
cation in other countries, we have
looked at the methods being em-
ployed in American and European
schools, but we do not intend blindly
and slavishly to copy in our art edu-
cation the content and techniques of
the work done elsewhere. Child art
everywhere in the world has certain
qualities in common and the
experience of creative art education
can everywhere be a liberating one.
But there is also a national flavour
and a quality in the art of children
in each country, and that is certainly
true of what is produced by Japanese
children. Those who took part in
the Bristol seminar thought that this
work, like that of the Egyptian chil-
dren, had something to offer to
children everywhere. Here, in my
view, is a clear way of using the arts
to increase mutual understanding.
