SCO COURIER JUNE 1953. Page 5
MORE BOOKS FOR AFRICANS
ik T EXT month at the University College in Ibaden, Nigeria,a group of educators and libran : wins from all parts of
Africa will meet to chart a course in an experiment to
satisfy African demand that literates get a better chance to
find the books they need. The seminar, organized under the
auspices of Unesco, will focus discussions on getting more
public library services to African rural areas on a regional
or national scale... It will treat such questions as the
expansion of mobile library units for the"hinterland", the
use of films and other audio-visual techniques in mass
education campaigns, and the steps to be taken for the
professional training of a greater number of librarians.
The problems in British West Africa, discussed in the article
below, are typical of those in many parts of Africa, where
library development has followed a historic pattern-reading
rooms begun by private or semi-official bodies expand into a
library system and then become an accepted responsibility of
government.
f iBRARY service began in the four West African capitalsin the early 1940's, under the direction of British
Council representatives. European librarians were
appointed for the Gold Coast and Nigeria, and Africans
were trained to help them or replace them.
In ten years the service in the Gold Coast has come of
age and is independent of the Counril, despite all the ini-
tial difficulties : for example, the acute shortage of books
in the early years.
Certain things became clear quickly in the Gold Coast.
For one thing, the main difficulty for a targe and under-
developed area is the selection of books. There are insuf-
ficient books of the right type published. Although the
borrowers are adult and often require books on advanced
subjects, these must be simply written to be readily
understood. There are few books written in the West
African vernaculars, so English-a foreign language to
the majority of the population-has to be learned before
books can be readily used.
Books go to the people
ONE other fact became clear from the very beginning.Most of the Africans using the library services con-
centrated on reading for examinations. There was
very little reading for pleasure, and yet the library was not
designed solely to provide textbooks. This is being offset
by the provision of books for children who are being taught
the delight and pleasure to be found in literature.
Then again, there is a question of helping people to pick
books to read. This is not so difficult when the people
come to the library itself. The staff is always on hand to
help and advise.
But in the ninety-three thousand square miles of the
Gold Coast, this is not always the answer. There are two
other methods of bringing book and reader together. One
is the book box system where a box of some fifty books
is made available to schools, ('colleges, community and
social centres, and hospitals. Each box has a shelf inside
and when stood on end it can be used as a small book
case. Today, some ten thousand volumes are on issue
through this service.
The third approach is that of bringing the library to the
people when they cannot come to the library.
The motorised librarian
A TRAVELLING library was designed and put on the road.It consisted of a truck which contained shelves on the
outside so that when the van was opened up twenty
or more people could stand around choosing books.
The van holds about one thousand volumes and the
interior is used for carrying fuel and camp equipment. As
an added protection against rain, a hood-cloth Was fixed to
let down over the lockers.
The van enables a selection of the library's stock to be
sent around the country, and as often as possible the
librarian travels with it. In this'way, he is able \to advise
readers on their choice of books. This system has the
added advantage that the personal contact between the
librarian and the reading public makes the borrowers more
ready to ask for help. Advice and help are also given in
connection'with the building up of book stocks in school
libraries, methods of dealing with bookworm and simple
library practice.
The library also offers service to school teachers. Books
on teaching methods and allied subjects are provided gra-
tis and post free to bona fide teachers. This service was
made available when the library of the Education Depart-
ment was taken over. As often as possible, personal
contact is made with the teachers, and whenever the library
van is on trek schools are invited.
Plans are under way for building regional libraries in
various parts of the Gold Coast. As each of these is open-
ed, a library van will be attached to it. thus decentralizing
the book box scheme and making visits to the surrounding
districts more frequent. The Regional Library will be
begun by a European, but it is hoped that at the end of a
year one of the African staff will be able to take over.
- The {irst duty o {11 public library i., to serre llie people ; the
second duty IW8/lot yet been discorered.
- Life bei/lq l'et' !/,, ! lort, allil tIle qllil't ! lUI/I''' o {it {I'1 (', 11'1'DIll/lit
to'waste/10/11'o {t ! lem ill I'ewlillg raluell'''''book" : all'l rallla ! J11' ! Jouk.'
should be ldtltin tlte read ! ur eray (1/11'.-Jultn/ill"kin,
Three young librarians from the Gold Coast proudly examine the librarian certificates which they
have just received. West Africans are being trained as librarians to help or replace Europeans.
New community centre at Accra, Gold Coast, offers recreation, mass education and library
facilities for young and old. Book boxes bring reading material to village centres.
Mass education movement is spreading rapidly through West Africa. This reading chart has
been placed in the village square for all to see. (Photos : Crown Copyright Reserved)
