The main Children's Library of Sao Paulo, the most modern
in Latin America, is housed in a magnificent structure of
20th century design 0 It is provided with an open-air
reading terrace, a cinema, a conference hall, reference and
lending sections, a dining room, and special departments
where children can paint, sculpt or model, listen to gramo-
phone records, dance and play games. It also has a coin
and stamp room, and a Braille section with some 400 books
for blind boys and girls. A Children's Theatre &commat; built
alongside the library and seating 700 persons was opened
last September. Children participate in many of the plays
and puppet shows produced. Five new branch libraries,
of a total of 20 planned, have recently been constructed
in various workers'sections of Sao Paulo. The Children's
Library Branch of the Santo Amaro district Ð was inau-
gurated on January 25, 1953. It offers all the facilities of
the main library except the separate Children's Theatre.
About 400 Braille
BIB
EVERY WE
bus, cro
though 1
Paul, B
Rua General Jar
workers'section
stop before an
circled by a beal
50 or so blind cl
and march off iI
Gurilandia"-Ki
Kiddies'Para
officially known
blind ; it is th
remarkable mov
Brazil, indeed, iI
Paulo Bibliotect
its bold concepti
library method1
opportunities fo
sighted as well.
Today, over :
children's libra
listen to folklore
ry, publish thei
produce their 0
specially built fl
Five branch 1
built in the past
in workers'din
libraries, equip
planned by city
have been or are
Sao Paulo, and
regions of the CI
The movemeJ
Lenira Fraccarl
Division of the
past 20 years of
of children's lib]
can obtain boo]
wonderland of f
to them and wl
and freely exprl
arts and crafts.
As one New
the Biblioteca I
main impression
their library mo
Not only have t
catalogue, but tl
boards, playing
story hours art...
well-known chi
selves take an a
own monthly li
sliows, literary
ments, and eXCl
other places of

400 Braille books to read-this one feels interesting. A typical Brazilian dance organized in one of the five Children's Branch Libraries set up in the City of Sao Paulo.
BLIOTECA INFANTIL :
A PARADISE FOR
SAO PAULO'S CHILDREN
by S. M. KOFFLER
VERY WEDNESDAY and Friday morning a special
bus, crowded with shouting children, rolls
through the heart of the skyscraper city of Sao
Paulo, Brazil, and heads for a little street-the
eneral Jardim-in one of the densely populated
rs'sections of town. At number 485 it pulls to a
efore an ultra ultra-modern two-storey building
by a beautifully laid out garden. From the bus,
, 0 blind children descend rapidly and impatiently
arch off into what has been called"0 Paraiso da
ndia"-Kiddies'Paradise.
lies'Paradise-or Biblioteca Infantil as it is
lly known-is no special institution just for the
it is the headquarters of one of the most
,-able movements in children's libraries created in
, indeed, in the whole of Latin America. The Sao
Biblioteca Infantil leads the way not only with
j conception of architecture but with its advanced
'methods and techniques, and the variety of
unities for development and expression it offers
i as well as blind children.
ay, over 35, 000 children registered in the main
; n's library can choose from 30, 000 books, or
to folklore or classical music, paint, learn puppet-
blish their own newspaper, go on excursions, or
; e their own plays in a huge children's theatre
lly built for them last year.
branch libraries, along similar lines, have been
1 the past two years in other parts of the city-all
rkers'districts-and a chain of 20 children's
es, equipped with open-air reading terraces, is
d by city authorities. Similar children's libraries
een or are being built in other parts of the State of
who, and the movement is now spreading to other
s of the country as well.
movement owes much of its success to Dona
Fraccaroli, Director of the Children's Library
m of the City of Sao Paulo, who has devoted the
) years of her life to the growth and development
dren's libraries, not only as a place where children
) tain books, but as a social centre, a delightful
rland of fun which young people can feel belongs
n and where they can learn the joys of reading
eely express their personality through the various
ld crafts.
me New Zealand librarian who recently visited
blioteca Infantíl on Rua Jardim remarked,"The
mpression I received was that the children regard
brary more as a home than an official institution.
ly have they free access to all shelves and to the
ruse, but they are also supplied with games (chess
, playing cards, etc.). Twice a week there are
tours at which not only the library staff but also
nown children's writers and the children them-
take an active part. The children also issue their
monthly library bulletin. There are weekly film
, literary ant musical entertain-
and excursions to factories and
laces of interest to children.
(Continued
onþage II.) Which book shall I take home ? The answer is not easy when the library has over 30, 000 volumes from which to choose.

"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs"played by youngsters at the
Children's Theatre annexed to the Sao Paulo Biblioteca Infantil.
The Story Hour comes twice a week. Well-known children's writers
as well as the library staff and the children take an active part.
Some remarkable results have been achieved by the children of Sao
Paulo in puppet making and in the production of puppet plays.
UNE : 

JUNE 1953. Page
MORE CHILDREN'S V1/RITERS,
BETTER CHILDREN'S BOOKS
(Continued from page 9.)
"There is a vertical file with
pictures concerning-history, geo-
graphy, art and science, and also
coin and stamp collections. Books
in Braille for blind children are
provided too. Among the young-
sters one sees all kinds of races
and nationalities, Negroes, Mu-
lattoes, Japanese, Italian, English,
American ; German, French, etc.
The librarv therefore has on its
shelves not only books in Por-
tuguese, but also in French, Ger-
man, English and Spanish."
Root of Brazil's evils
THE central branch of theBiblioteca Infantil first opened
its doors in 1936 with a small
reference and lending section in a
small building. This has now
been replaced by the modern
two-storey structure offering all
facilities and the Children's Thea-
tre alongside it now stands on the
site of the old children's library.
With each book borrowed, a small
card is added on which children
are asked to answer four questions,
describing what they read, how
they liked the book, which char-
acter they liked most, and why.
This, says Dona Lenira, not only
helps the library to determine the
most popular books in a given
period and to gauge differences in
children's reading taste, but also
to sharpen the youngster's'interest
in what they are reading.
In a country like Brazil, where
literacy is a serious problem which
the government has been fighting
to overcome for years, Dona Lenira
sees the children's library as one
of the best ways of ultimately
solving the problem by interesting
the very young in the pleasures as
well as the benefits that come from
reading and general cultural devel-
opment.
Her work has been inspired by
a statement made by Monteiro
Lobato, the greatest writer of
children's books in Brazil, who
once said :"The day when every
city in Brazil'has its children's
library, Brazil will be safe from
all evil. For all the evils of Brazil
have one single cause : ignorance ;
the ignorance of adults who were
never inspired with a love of
reading when they were children."
Ever since she heard Monteiro
Lobato utter this phrase, Lenira
Fraccaroli has repeated it again and
again in her speeches and writings
to win local'and government
support for the children's library
movement.
Yellow Woodpecker Farm
LIKE many Brazilians, DonaLenira sees in Monteiro Lo-
bato the"Himalaya"of her
country's children's literature. His
stories of Little Pug Nose, Viscount
of Corncob, Emilia, the talking rag
doll, and Mammy Nastacia on
"Yellow Woodpecker Farm"have
delighted millions of Brazilian
children for many years. His
works would probably delight
many more millions in other
countries if they were trans-
lated into other languages. Un-
fortunately his name is almost
completely unknown abroad.
Despite this, Dona Fraccaroli
believes that the day will come
when Monteiro Lobato's"Wood-
pecker Farm"characters will
be known and loved by children
in every corner of the globe ant
that"he will rank as one of the
greatest authors of children's books
in the world."
Although Brazil can today boast
a number of other first-rate writers
of children's books, the need for
more good books in this field is
still great. This was well brought
out at a. Unesco seminar on the
development of public libraries in
Latin America held in Sao Paulo
in t951.
A section of this seminar, headed
by Lenira Fraccaroli, was devoted
to children's libraries. Surveying
the book production picture in all
the Latin American Republics, it
revealed that little was being done
in most of them. Brazil, Argentina
and Mexico lead in the publication
of children's books but a much
greater effort is still needed in all
the countries. The seminar called
for the co-operation of writers,
publishers, librarians, teachers,
illustrators and book trade organi-
zations"to increase and improve
the production of books and maga-
zines for children and adolescents."
Since then, Lenira Fraccaroli and
many of her colleagues in Rio de
Janeiro, Bahia, Pernambuco and
other parts of Brazil, have been
campaigning on a four-point plat-
form for more children's writers,
more children's books, more chil-
dren's libraries and more training
courses for children's librarians.
Last July, under the auspices of
the young editorial staff of the
Biblioteca Infantil's newspaper,
"A Voz da Infancia" (Youth's
Voice), Dona Lenira organized a
Congress of Children's Writers at
which some 20 authors-some of
them outstanding in their field-as
well as 150 adolescents from differ-
ent regions of Brazil attended. They
discussed ways to provide better
books for children, how to
eliminate pulp publications and
increase the circulation of better
books and magazines, and asked
for increased government and
local support for the establishment
of children's libraries in all of the
cities of Brazil.
A children's library in every city
of Brazil, however is probably still
a long long way on. But the Sao
Paulo Biblioteca Infantil is pointing
the way. In Bahia to the north, a
children's library"Monteiro Loba-
to"resembling the main branch on
the Rua General Jardim, was re-
cently inaugurated after a Bahian
librarian had spent two months
studying the Sao Paulo installations
and techniques. Other children's
libraries along similar lines are
also planned for the city.
In Rio de Janeiro, where until
recently a single room for children
Finishing touch to a left-handed job. Complete freedom of expression is
allowed youngsters in the creative arts. Children are also offered regular courses
in the history of art accompanied by reproductions of the great masters.
was attached to the existing public
libraries, the Chamber of Deputies
is now considering a proj ect for the
creation of 10 children's libraries in
separate buildings. The coffee
city of Santos is completing two
ultra-modern structures equipped
with open-air reading terraces, arts
and crafts facilities, a cinema and
a children's theatre. In these and
other cities special courses to train
library staff have been organized
and library courses are now plan-
ned as a regular part of all normal
schools as a means of stimulating
the creation of children's libraries
throughout Brazil.
All in all, it looks as if the Biblio-
teca Infantil of Sao Paulo has
reaìlv started something. With its
accent on combined libraries and
play centres where children have
found delight and inspiration
through access both to books and
creative activities, with its five
branch libraries and two children's
theatres already in operation, with
its 20 new children's libraries now
planned or under construction, the
Biblioteca Infantil of Sao Paulo
stands as a brilliant and inspiring
example for the rest of Brazil and
for other countries elsewhere in the
world.
in July 1952, the Children's Library of Sao Paulo convened a Congress. of Brazilian children's writers. Here young-
sters take part in a lively discussion on the need for more children's libraries and more writers of children's books.
