DECEMBER 1953. Page 21
Christian Art
Near EasternMM CONTACTS BETWEEN CULTURES
"THE LAST SUPPER". This picture on a 12th century manuscript now in the British Museum, is taken from a series illustrating the life of Christ. The clumsy-
ness and naivety of the drawing mark it as the strangest of all the Syriac manuscripts which have come down to us. It recalls certain Egyptian friezes, but it
also has a modern quality which finds an echo in some present-day art trends. Especially striing are the faces with their wide-open eyes. (Photo British Museum.)
r the Middle Ages", said Victor Hugo,
"there were no profound, important
thoughts which were not inscribed in
stone."
In this phrase, the author of Notre-Dame ae
Paris not only gives us the reason for the multitude
of figures and scenes decorating the portals of our
cathedrals or enlivening the multi-coloured panes
of their stained-glass windows, but also reveals
the educational significance of the image up to
the time of the invention of printing.
In this sense, the"Middle Ages"covered a much
longer period than is generally understood by the
by Abbé Jules Leroy
term, going back to the first manifestations of the
"civilization"of those prehistoric men who
produced the cave paintings of Altamira or
Lascaux and lasting until the introduction of a
new means of expressing ideas.
Until that time, the art of writing was the
prerogative of the learned. It presupposed such
a standard of learning that those who were able
to write were necessarily the most influential
people in the State, and it is for that reason that
the oldest civilizations may truly be described as
civilizations of scribes and priests, both of whom
held the secret of the art of'writing. The
common people's only means of acquiring know-
ledge was to listen to instruction given by word
of mouth or to read the lessons in history and
ethics, set forth by the recognized custodians of
knowledge, in bas-reliefs and frescoes.
Paintings and sculpture simply embodied in a
visual form, suited to yet untutored minds, truths
now accessible to all, thanks to the increase in the
(Continued on next Page)
"THE CANONS OF EUSEBIUS"or"THE CONCORDANCE OF THE GOS-
PELS" (A. D. 1177). The marginal drawings inspired by mosaic flooring have a
Hellenistic style full of poetry. From this point of wiew, they differ greatly from the
eligious character of those usually found in liturgical books. (Photo L. Jalabert.)
"THE NATIVITY". This is one of the finest pictures from a manuscript on which the painter, in accordance with
Byzantine religious rules, has grouped all the events relating to the birth of Christ : the angel appearing to the shepherds,
the adoration of the Magi, the bathing of the new-born child. It is one of the most noteworthy examples of the meeting
of Byzantine art with pre-Mongol Arab art, traces of which are to be found in the faces. (Photo British Museum.)
"THE RAISING OF LAZARUS" (A. D. 1216 1220) : The theme is borrowed from
Byzantine iconography, but Eastern influence is seen in the faces and costumes.
The Realism contrasts strongly with the traditional style of Constantinople church
paintings with their cold, hieratic Byzantine figures. (Photo British Museum.)

Page 22. DECEMBER 1953
ARAB FLAVOUR ADDED TO
THE TRADITIONAL THEMES
OF EARLY RELIGIOUS ART
(Continued from previous page)
"CHRIST'S ENTRY INTO JERUSALEM". This Syriac manu-
script from the Vatican Library, dating from 1546, is a strongly
stylized copy of a 13th century miniature. (Ph. Vatican Library.)
number of printed books. They filled the place
in instruction that films and television are tending
to take at the present time, a process which may
one day end in their ousting the book and re-
placing the civilization of the printed word by
that of the visual image. A curious repetition of
history by which modern man is placed in the
same situation as his distant ancestors and is
better able to understand Victor Hugo's words of
genius than were the poet's contemporaries I
It was hundreds of years before man was able
to free himself to some extent from the
ascendancy of the image. Visual depiction was
found everywhere, and took a particularly brilliant
form in all the civilizations of the Near East or
the Mediterranean. All the successive empires in
Egypt, Mesopotamia, Greece or Rome, like all the
religions, made use of it.
When Christianity made its appearance in the
oikoumene, i. e. the civilized inhabited world as
distinct from the"barbarian"world, it took a
place in the system of instruction everywhere
prevailing and created a world of images drawn
from biblical history which, in its eyes, recounts
the whole story of the bringing of salvation to the
world, first by the Jewish people and later by
Jesus Christ. It covered the walls of its churches
with these images and scattered them through the
pages of its manuscripts, so that, as one of the
Fathers of the Greek Church was to say in the
fifth century,.'the dumb image spoke from the
wall"or from the margin of the book with as
much authority as the written word itself.
"MOSES CONFERS WITH PHARAOH", a Syriac manuscript, now in 1he Bibliotheque Nationale,
Paris, and one of the oldest of its kind, probably dating from the 6th century. This illustration is
taken from a Bible containing both the Old and New Testaments. This small work is classed today
liS one of the last relics of Hellenistic painting adapted by the Christians of Syria and Mesopotamia.(Photo : Bibliothèque Nationale.)
THE FOUR EVANGELISTS". A meeting of civilizations i  reflected in this manuscript fragment. The features recall those of certain
figures in friozos at Turfan. Central Asia, while the draping of the robes and s1yle of furniture are those found in the Arab miniature.
This manuscript probably dates from the 12th or l3th centuries. (Property of Mr. Kevorkian, New York ; photo by John D. Schiff.)
All the images here displayed to the reader are
drawn from this world of sacred representations.
They all come from the Christian societies of
Mesopotamia, where the Christian religion was
introduced at a very early date. The first centre
from which it spread was the little kingdom of
Edessa, the modern Urfa, which officially adopted
Christianity at the end of the second century.
From that ancient
stronghold of Semitic
culture, little affected
by the Hellenic civili-
zation from which it
was cut off by its lan-
guage, Syriac, akin to
Aramaic and Hebrew,
it spread throughout
all the countries water-
ed by the Tigris and
the Euphrates.
In the fifth century,
during the theological
disputes concerning the
nature of Christ, a
schism occurred bet-
ween the various chur-
ches whose only re-
maining sign of their
lost unity thereafter
was the language they
shared. While most of
the churches of Upper
Mesopotamia adopted
Jacobite monophysi-
tism (1), those in Persia
went over to Nesto-
rianism (2) (now re-
presented by about
100, 000 adherents in
North Persia and East
Turkey in the neigh-
bourhood between the
Lakes of Van and
Urumia).
In the Middle Ages,
this Nestorian Church
in Persia played a
brilliant part. Its
missionaries spread
Christian communities
throughout Central
Asia, China and even
Tibet, though these
communities were to
disappear in the Mon-
gol invasion of the
thirteenth century, so
that the European
missionaries who came out in the 17th and 18th
centuries found virgin soil awaiting them.
This spread of the Syriac-speaking Nestorian
Church in the Far East is extremely interesting,
because it shows us a meeting of civilizations
which has left its mark and explains the
existence in Far-Eastern thought of ideas recog-
nizably drawn from Persian Christianity. The
same lesson can be gleaned from the Syriac
manuscripts enriched with miniatures which, in
the absence of wall paintings now vanished, help
us to define, or at least sketch in (for these
manuscripts are rare, most of them having been
destroyed by wars or other calamities) the various
cultural movements which have taken place in
Mesopotamia. The history of these venerable
fragments is an epitome of the history of
Mesopotamia since the introduction of Chris-
tianity : each of the alien civilizations with which
this region has, willy-nilly, come into contact, has
left its mark upon it.
The interest that these miniatures from the
Syriac manuscripts have for us probably lies far
more in this than in their aesthetic quality, which
is governed by the laws of book illumination as
understood in the early Middle Ages and now,
after long neglect, coming back into favour with
some of our contemporary artists. The art of the
book is a two-dimensional art. There is a
disturbance of unity if three-dimensional figures
are incorporated in the text. This accounts for
the fact that the figures overlap instead of
receding in perspective, for slight differences in
their size and the absence of relief and shadow.
These laws, which were observed by all painters
up to the revival of painting, were applied by
these Mesopotamian artists in a highly individual
manner. In the oldest manuscripts, for instance
- those of the sixth century-they give life, by
their expressive gestures, to the cold, hieratic
Byzantine figures, while in the thirteenth century
they give an Arab flavour to the traditional
themes by introducing backgrounds, faces or dress
borrowed from their own people and environment,
or again themselves create images whose"primi-
tivism"is echoed in some of today's art.
For all three reasons, this religious imagery
deserves to be better known. It will thus regain
a part of its original function, which was to teach.
Only the sort of instruction it provides will have
changed. While in the past it was theological or
religious, today it is historical and cultural.
(I) The belief that the humun and divine natures in
Cllrist are united in one single nature, part human and hart
divine.
(2) The doctrine 01 Nestorious, patriarch 01 Constantin-
ople in the 5th century, who held that there were two
persons as well as two natnres in les2ts Christ-the divine
and the human.
UNEf
