I COURIER DECEMBER 1953. Page 5
UNLOCKING THE BASIC SECRETS OF NATURE
0 ALPHA, BETA, GAMMA-THE ABC OF NUCLEAR PHYSICS
THE greatest surprise experienced by thestudent of the universe is to find that it is
composed entirely of discrete particles. If
one could step quite outside it, the whole great
universe would look somewhat like a wisp of mist
or a puff of smoke, with stars and galaxies in
place of the droplets of water in the mist. The
stars too, like the sun and the earth, are compos-
ed of materials in the solid, liquid or gaseous state,
and these in turn are composed of very small
particles, known as molecules.
Solid rock and metal, the oceans, and the atmo-
sphere around us are not continuous, as they
seem to our eyes, but are made up of individual
molecules. In solids they are held in firm contact
to each other ; in liquids they are loosely held so
that they easily slide over each other, or flow ;
in gases they are quite separate, with empty space
between them. Temperature decreases their
attraction for each other so that heating ice first
melts it to liquid water, then boils it to steam,
with the molecules separating ever farther from
each other. This much has been known for
centuries and is new only to the beginner in the
science of physics.
The molecules are all alike
in each of the many thous-
ands of different substances
that compose the earth :
sugar and salt, sulphur and
iron, cellulose and protein,
limestone and sand. They
are ultimate in the sense
that they cannot be split
into smaller particles me-
chanically. But the chemist
can split them by putting dif-
ferent substances in contact
with each other in which case
reactions take place that
give rise to new materials.
Thus heating oil or cellulose
in air starts combustion, to
form water and carbon
dioxide. This, with other.
experiments, shows that
within the molecules of the
oil and the cellulose there
are both carbon and hydro-
gen, both of which combine
with the oxygen of the air to
give the oxides-for water
is merely the oxide of hydro-
gen.
- Such reactions, and myr-
iads more complicated, have
proved that molecules are
composed of still smaller
particles, the atoms of the
chemical elements. There are
92 different elements, thus
92 different types of atoms,. which in various combina-
tions form the endless variety
'of molecules and therefore
the whole range of different
materials that compose the
earth and the universe-
including the materials that
compose living things and
the bodies of animals and
men. As physics studies mo-
lecules and their motion, so
chemistry studies atoms and
their combinations with each
other to form molecules.
For a century after their
existence was accepted by
scientists, atoms were consi-
dered to be the ultimate
building stones of all matter.
No one suspected that theynaa an interior. That would have been almost
unthinkable in the philo. sophy of the nineteenth
century. But in the final years of that century
came the revelation. In 1896, Henri Becquerel
in Paris noticed, aimost by accident, that uranium
fogs a photographic plate in the dark, even when
the plate is tightly wrapped in black paper. This
led the Curies, Pierre and Marie, to the discovery
of a new element, radium, which did the same
thing but much more powerfully, and which not
only glowed in the dark but kept itself several
degrees warmer than its surroundings, automatic-
ally and constantly. It was the most sensational
discovery of modern times. It was not only the
first revelation of what we now call atomic
energy, but also the first suspicion that the atom
has an interior, waiting to be explored. It pointed
the way to the new world within the atom that
has brought surprise after surprise to twentieth
century science.
Within five years it was understood that the
atoms of radium are unstable. One after another
they explode and in exploding give off three dif-
ferent types of rays called alpha, beta and
gamma, the first three letters of the Greek alpha-
bet. They, in turn, cause the generation of both
light and heat. The radium atoms are all iden-
tical, yet every second a very small proportion of
them suddenly breaks up, sending out particles of
matter, the alpha-rays, that turned out to be
atoms of helium.
Radium also emits electrons as beta-rays and
atom vibrations as gamma-rays that are even
more. penetrating than X-rays.
Whatever the amount of radium in hand, it dis-
by Dr. Gerald Wendt,
Head, Division of Science Teaching, Unesco.
integrates at a steady rate, so steady that it would
form a perfect natural clock, for in every 1600
years half of the atoms disappear and half
remain. The production of rays is thus reduced
to one-half every 1600 years.
Later many other such radio-active elements
were discovered, each with a characteristic half-
life, some of which are measured in thousands
of millions of years, some in millionths of a
second, others in hours, days or a few short years.
No-one knows why some atoms of radium are
destined to explode today while others that are
identical so far as we know, will last for centuries.
It is a matter of chance, like winning a lottery.
It was the study of natural radio-activity that
paved the way to devising artificial radio-activity,
that is, methods of forcing atoms to disintegrate
and yield up their energy. It took almost fifty
years. In the course of those studies much was
learned about the ultimate particles that consti-
But the origin of the X-rays and how they are
formed in the electric discharge tube was not
'understood for many years. To explain them
required a knowledge of the nature of electricity
that did not exist at the beginning of the century.
Electricity had been used for a long time. Bat-
teries, motors, electric lights and even telephones
were in common use. How electricity acts was
well known ; what electricity is was a mystery.
It was Prof. R. A. Millikan at the University of
Chicago in the U. S. A. who gave the final answer
in 1909. Searching for the smallest quantity of
electricity that would still show electrical quali-
ties, he used not the usual electric current but
the static form, the charge on a small particle
of matter that causes it to attract or repel other
charged particles. In his final experiment he
used a microscopic droplet of oil which, by itself,
fell slowly downwards through the air of his
experimental vessel. Then he electrified it to the
least possible degree and held it suspended,
without falling, by an opposing electric force.
He found that there was a minimum charge
and, what is more, all larger charges on the oil-
drop were exact multiples of the minimum. It
The simplest method of accelerating electronic or nuclear particles is to allow them to stream through successive charged electro-
static plates each of which adds many hundreds of volts to the energy and the speed of the particle. The photograph shows the
interior of such a"linear accelerator art the Radiation Laboratory, University of California. The particles pass through tubes on left.
tute matter and the energy that Is associated
with those particles. The story ends today with
the giant cyclotrons that create such particles.
But to tell that story it is necessary here to start
afresh with several other aspects of the problem,
especially the nature of electricity and of light
vibrations, which weave into the story later.
In 1895, just one year before Becquerel in Paris
discovered radio-activity, Professor Roentgen at
Wiirzburg, Germany, discovered, quite by acci-
dent, that when a current of electricity is passed
through a tube that has been pumped out to a
high vacuum, one of the electric terminals gene-
rates invisible rays that go outward in straight
lines. Unlike light, these rays can penetrate not
only through black paper but through almost all
solid objects. Because of their unknown charac-
ter they were called X-rays.
Slowly it was proved that they were indeed
exactly the same type of etherwaves as light but
much shorter in wave-length. The waves of
visible light are about 0. 4 thousandths of a milli-
meter in length. X-rays are about 0. 1 millionths
of a millimeter. Still later it was found that the
gamma rays from radium are of the same type
but still shorter-only about 0. 01 millionths of
a millimeter. It is the shortness of the waves
that enables them to penetoo. te through solid
objects, much as small waves or ripples entering
a harbour pass between rows of stakes or piles
that stop the larger waves. Their use in medi-
cine is now well known and depends on their
going more easily through soft tissues than
through. solid bone, so that they show shadows of
bones and other solid objects in their path.
was a simple proof that electricity is not a"conti-
nuous fluid"but is itself composed of very small
pieces, all alike. They are now called electrons.
Just as matter is composed of atoms, so electricity
is composed of electrons.
That they are truly particles was proved by
measuring the force needed to deflect them from
their straight path when a stream of them passes
at high speed through a vacuum tube. The mass
proved uniform too and is equal to about half of
a thousandth of the mass of the lightest known
atom, that of hydrogen. It was the first particle
to be discovered that is smaller and lighter than
an atom. It is indeed incredibly small, for the
electric current that passes through a 100-watt
electric light bulb in a single second is composed
of 10 million million million electrons-ten
followed by 18 zeros !
Here was another revelation, ten years after
the discovery of radium, which opened another
window on the new world of extremely small
things. But the electron was at once accepted
everywhere as a perfect explanation of all elec-
trical phenomena. These tiny electrons are far
smaller than atoms and can pass readily among
and through them in a wire, for instance, and
thus form a current. A battery of any kind
merely pumps electrons into the battery pole that
is called negative, and a dynamo is a machine
to do the same.
The discovery of the electron also provided the
explanation for the origin of the mysterious,
penetrating X-rays. When a stream
of electrons, an electric current, (Cont'd on
passes through a wire, it gives next page)

Page 6. DECEMBER 1953 UNESCO ; OUR
FIRST STEPS IN OPENING UP THE ATOM
* ALPHA-RAY : One of the three types of
rays emitted by the radio-active elements. It
is the nucleus of a helium atom, composed of
two protons and two neutrons, with a net
positive charge of two.
* ATOM : The unit of chemical composi-
tion ; the smallest particle of a chemical
element capable of independent existence.
Atoms are chemically combined in various
arrangements to form the molecules of che-
mical compounds.
* BETA-RAY : Penetrating ray, composed
of electrons, ejected from radio-active atoms
at velocities sometimes almost equal to the
velocity of light.'
* CYCLOTRON : A device or machine in
which electrically charged nuclear particles,
such as protons, are forced to move in a
horizontal spiral path between the poles vf
a powerful electromagnet and to receive an
additional electrical impulse at each passage
around so that they gradually acquire high
speed and emerge as energetic nuclear pro-
jectiles.
* DEUTERON : A nuclear particle composed
of one proton and one neutron which forms
the nucleus of the atom of deuterium or
"heavy hydrogen".
. * ELECTRON : The fundamental particle of
electricity.
* ELECTRON-VOLT : The unit of energy in
the motions and transformations of electrons,
photons and nuclear particles. It is the
energy acquired, by an electron when it is
propelled by an applied voltage of one volt.
* GAMMA-HAYS : Extremely penetrating
rays from radio-active atoms, composed
essentially of vibratory waves like X-rays
but with waves less than 1/1000th of the
length of X-rays.
* HALF-LIFE : The period of time required
for any quantity of a radio-active element to
be reduced to half the original quantity by
the gradual disintegration of its atoms.
* ISOTOPES : DIfferent varieties of atoms
of a single chemical element ; they have the
same number of electrons at the surface,
therefore the same chemical properties, but
the composition of their nuclei is different
in the number of neutrons, so that different
isotopes of an element differ in the weight
of their atoms. Hydrogen and deuterium art
examples.
* MESON : A short-lived particle, either
positive or negative, and intermediate in mass
between an electron and a proton which was
discovered in cosmic rays and is now produc-
ed in the proton-synchrotron.
* MOLECULE : The smallest particle of any
substance or chemical compound that is
capable of independent existence. Molecules
are arranged side-by-side in crystals, near
each other at random in liquids, quite
separated from each other in gases.
* NUCLEUS : The dense core at the centre
of all atoms, with less than 1/10, OOOth the
diameter of the atom but containing all its
mass in the form of one or many protons
and neutrons closely packed together.
* NEUTR1NO : A hypothetical particle, not
yet actually observed, but believed to be form-
ed when a neutron disintegrates into a pro-
ton and an electron and also in certain
collisions of cosmic rays, to account for the
observed energy. They have no electric
charge and practically no mass.
* NEUTRON : One of the fundamental
components of all atomic nuclei (except that
of hydrogen). It has practically the same
weight as the proton but carries no electric
charge.
* PHOTON : The unit quantity of the energy
of light and similar wave-vibrations ; it has
some aspects of a particle of energy with
almost zero mass but can on collision with
an atom break up into a positive and a nega-
tive electron.
* POSITRON : Like the electron but is posi-
tively charged instead of negatively.
* PROTON : One of the basic components
of all atomic nuclei ; it carries a single posi-
tive charge. It is also the nucleus of the
hydrogen atom.
* PROTON-SYNCHROTRON : The most
powerful type of accelerator for nuclear pro-
jectiles which operates on the frequency-
modulation principle.
* RADIUM : One of the chemical elements,
discovered in 1898, with the unique property
of giving off alpha, beta and gamma-rays
from the nuclei of its atoms, and thus of
changing into a series of other elements and
eventually into lead.
* SYNCHROTRON : A machine suitable
for the acceleration of electrons to speeds
near that of light and to an energy level
which increases their mass (according to the
Einstein principle) so that the frequency of
the propelling electrical oscillation must be
modulated.
* V-PARTICLE' : The most recent of the
elementary particles discovered in cosmic rays,
produced in the high-energy accelerators.
Its exact nature is still unknown.
* X-RAYS : The rays, essentially wave-
vibrations, produced when electrons in a
vacuum tube are hurled under high voltage
against a metallic cathode. They are the
same type of wave-motion as ordinary light
but their waves are only 1/lCOOth the length
of visible light waves. They are invisible but
can penetrate through several centimeters (or
inches) of matter, depending on the voltage
with which they are produced.
(Continued from previous page)
up some of its energy to heat the wire. Electric
lights, heaters and pressing irons depend on this
fact. But when electrons pass through a glass
tube that has been partially evacuated, they col-
lide with the molecules in the remaining air to
make the gas glow. If the vacuum is very high
so that the electrons cross through the tube at
high speed, they collide with the solid wall oppo-
site. And when on that spot there is a metal
plate to form a target for the electrons to hit,
their high-speed collisions set up very rapid ether
vibrations-the X-rays-somewhat as hitting
an anvil with a hammer sets up sound waves. Now
the various new discoveries began to fit together
to give understanding.
Let us return now to the three types of rays
that are automatically generated by the atoms of
radium. The discovery and identification of the
electron at once explained the beta-rays and the
gamma-rays too. For it was soon found that the
beta-rays are nothing but electrons, streaming
naturally in all directions from every bit of
radium, while the gamma-rays, known to be like
X-rays, are produced partly as by-products when
the high-speed electrons in the beta rays bom-
bard the radium itself.
The atom of
heavy hydrogen
0. 02 per cent of
which is found
in all natural
hydrogen and
all natural wat-
er. Heavy hy-
drogen, or deu-
terium as it is
called, has a
neutron as well
as a proton
at its nucleus.
This explained part of the mystery of radium
but it also brought a new surprise. It meant that
there must be a store of electrons deep within
the atom of radium. Thus the atom cannot be a
hard, solid, ultimate particle but must be a com-
plicated structure composed partly of electrons
and with enough energy packed inside to propel
the electrons outwards in the form of beta-rays
almost at the velocity of light.
But it was the investigations of alpha-rays from
radium that finally revealed the structure of the
atom. The alpha-rays are not electrons nor are
they ether vibrations. They are composed of rela-
tively large particles. Measurement of the mass
of the particles by the same method that was
used with electrons-namely by measuring the
force necessary to bend them from their swift
straight path of flight-showed that they are
of atomic size, thousands of times heavier than
an electron.
They turned out to be, in fact, atoms of the gas
called helium. But not normal atoms, for each of
them had two charges of positive electricity. In
other words they lack two electrons-since an
electron is the unit charge of electricity and is
called'''negative''merely by an error of naming
in the early days when no-one knew what an
electric charge was. When the alpha particles
strike matter they quickly pick up two stray
electrons and become true atoms of helium.
Since the atom of radium must therefore
contain both electrons and helium atoms, and
ejects both of them at very high speed, the
radium atom began to appear complicated indeed.
The next step was the series of researches by Sir
Ernest Rutherford and his associates in England,
in which he allowed a very thin beam of alpha
particles from radium to strike a thin sheet of
gold. Some of them passed straight through the
solid metal ; many changed their line of flight
and were deflected from their original direction
by some form of elastic impact. A few of them
were reflected almost straight back to the direc-
tion from which they had come. When Ruther-
ford measured the number of helium atoms that
were reflected in various directions, he was forced
In the photograph on the left, alpha particles are
shown streaming through a cloud chamber. One
has hit a hydrogen nucleus, and since the alpha
particle has a mass four times as great, its path is
hardly affected at all. But the light hydrogen nucleus
is knocked out of the way towards the left. In the
right hand picture, an alpha particle collides with a
helium nucleus. These particles are identical in
mass, and it can be seen how they share the energy
of the impact and the fly off with equal deflections.
to the astonishing conclusion that most of the
helium atoms went through the metal sheet as
easily as if it were not there, but a very small
number hit a solid obstacle that repelled them.
The only explanation is that the sheet of solid
gold is not solid at all from the point of view of
a very small projectile like the alpha particle.
The gold atoms are nearly empty. Through this
emptiness of the gold atoms the alpha particles
penetrate quite easily. But there are some spots
in the gold atoms that are solid and impenetrable.
This conception of the atom of gold was new but
the facts could not be explained at all if the gold
sheet were made of solid atoms all in contact and
side by side. So what was it that the alpha parti-
cles hit ? Rutherford called it the nucleus, a very
small and very hard centre where all the matter
is concentrated and from which the alpha par-
ticles bounce. Unless the nucleus is hit, the alpha
particles easily go through the gold atoms.
The result is a wholly new picture of the atom.
At its centre is a small nucleus. At a considerable
The collision of
an electron
with a positron
neutralizes
their charges,
annihilates
their mass and
converts it into
a strong burst
of gamma rays.
distance from the nucleus are electrons distribut-
ed in orbits much like the planets around the
sun. In fact, the analogy of the solar system is
a good one, with the atom nucleus as the sun at
the centre, and electrons circulating far away.
But what is hard to realize is that the nucleus
is so very small. Its diameter is only 1/10, 000th
of the diameter of the atom. Thus the diameter
of the atom is 10, 000 times that of the nucleus.
If the nucleus were as large as a hazel-nut the
atom would measure 2/3 of a mile across. Yet
in that small central nucleus is all the'''matter''.
It is from the nucleus of the radium atom that
the alpha particles are ejected, and the beta rays
too. It was at once obvious that the nucleus is
not only very concentrated in matter but in
energy also. As so often happens in scientific
research, the exploration of the atom has only
deepened the mystery. Now the problem becomes
one of exploring the nucleus.
In considering the structure of the nucleus it
should be noted first that, electrically speaking,
it is"positively charged". This means, of course,
All the three isotopes of hydrogen have one proton and one electron. They differ only in the number of neutrons
in the nucleus. Protium (ordinary hydrogen) has none, deuterium (heavy hydrogen) has one, and tritium
(extra heavy hydrogen) has two. In these diagrams the orbit of the electron is much too close to the nucleus.
If it were drawn to scale and the nucleus were this big, the electron orbit would be at least 300 feet away.

DECEMBER 1953. Page 7
The use of radium in medical treatments, especially for cancer, is well established, but limited and expensive. The cyclotron has led to the manufacture of
artificially radio-active isotopes of a long list of chemical elements. The photograph shows a patient at the Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, N. Y. in the
United States, which has the first hospital ever to be devoted exclusively to the medical effects and uses of atomic rays. A Geiger counter, a ! med at X
marked on patient's throat, is used to measure quantity of radio-active iodine, remaining in thyroid gland after a patient has been given an"atomic cocktail"to drin k.
only that electrons are missing. But the whole
atom is neutral, electrically. Thus the positive
charge on the nucleus is matched by the negative
electrons forming the atom's exterior layers.
It was mentioned above that the alpha particle
is a helium atom with two positive charges. That
can now be better said. The alpha particle is
merely the nucleus of the helium atom, without
the two external electrons that characterize the
atom of helium. Thus the radium nucleus merely
ejects a helium nucleus in its automatic explosion.
It is therefore easy to suspect that the helium
nucleus is one of the inherent components of the
nuclei of other atoms. But this is not quite the
case. The helium nucleus is itself complex. Space
does not permit a detailed description of all the
researches which led to the present conception of
the atomic nucleus. But the conclusion is that
one of the basic components of all atomic nuclei
is the nucleus of hydrogen not of helium.
Hydrogen is the lightest and simplest of atoms,
with only one electron at its surface and one
positive charge on its nucleus. Its weight is also
a unit, for the weights of all larger atoms are
simple multiples of the weight of the hydrogen
atom. It is the hydrogen nucleus, smallest and
simplest of all, that is the chief building stone.
All the larger atomic nuclei are built, at least in
part, from this unit. For this reason it deserves a
special name : it is the proton.
But it is not the only building stone. One more
particle must be introduced before the list of
major nuclear components is complete. That is
the neutron. It was the last to be discovered
because, oddly enough, it is not electrically
charged and therefore is very hard to detect. It
is of the same weight as the proton but it is not
positively charged. It must therefore somehow
contain an electron within it to make it neutral.
That one electron makes the only difference bet-
ween a proton and a neutron.
The word"within"is important here. A posi-
tive proton can be balanced by a negative electron
circulating in an orbit around it, like a planet
around the sun. This is the hydrogen atom. But,
if, somehow, the electron enters into the proton,
as if the sun had swallowed its planet, the result
is a neutron. Conversely, knocking an electron
out of a neutron converts it into a proton. But
such interference with the structure of protons
and neutrons is not easy. They are practically
untouchable except by the powerful cyclotrons
that are described in another article of this series.
The discovery of the neutron by Prof. Chadwick
in England came late-not until 1934. It proved to
be the key to many puzzles. It explained at once
what the alpha particle is as well as heavy water,
and gave a clear understanding of isotopes, as
will be shown in the next paragraph. It also
made possible the transformation of one type of
atom into another and thus paved the way not
only for transmutation but for the actual creation
of new chemical elements.
Heavy water, much in the scientific news in
recent years, is easy to understand. Water is, of
course, the oxide of hydrogen and heavy water is
merely the oxide of heavy hydrogen. The hydro-
gen atom as has been said, is merely a proton
with an electron circulating in an orbit about it.
The weight of this atom is essentially that of one
proton. But Prof. Urey in the United States dis-
covered a form of hydrogen whose atom weighs
twice as much, yet in all other properties is iden-
tical with ordinary hydrogen. In fact, there is a
small proportion of this heavy hydrogen in all
natural hydrogen gas and in all natural water.
The explanation came with the neutron, for the
nucleus of this type of hydrogen is a particle
composed of one proton and one neutron, inti-
mately and firmly joined. It thus weighs twice
the normal weight, but has only one positive
charge own the nucleus and therefore only one
electron at the surface of the atom. It is called
deuterium and its nucleus is a deuteron.
The two different forms of hydrogen, chemi-
cally alike, yet different in their nuclear struc-
ture, are known as isotopes. As nuclear research
advanced in the past ten years it became possible
not only to discover many natural isotopes of the
chemical elements but to create many hundreds
more that do not exist in nature. In some of them
the various unions of protons and neutrons are
not entirely stable so that they gradually break
up with the emission of energy in rays in exactly
the same way that radium disintegrates naturally.
These artificial radio-active isotopes have becomes
extremely useful in medicine, agriculture and
industry and are the topic of a later article in
this series.
The alpha particle that is ejected in the auto-
matic explosion of the radium atom is also
explained by the neutron. The alpha particle has
two positive charges and when it adds two elec-
trons it forms an atom of helium. But the weight
of this atom, and therefore of its nucleus, is four
times the weight of a proton. The explanation is
obviously that the alpha particle is composed of
two protons and two neutrons. This gives it a
weight of four units and two positive charges.
With this explanation of the mysterious alpha
particle the list of well-known fundamental par-
ticles of matter is. complete. Within the atom but
at the surface are the electrons, responsible for
its chemical properties. Deep within the atom is
the nucleus, thousands of times smaller than the
atom itself but containing all its'''matter''. It is
composed of protons and neutrons and must
somehow contain electrons too. In various combi-
nations the protons, neutrons and electrons make
up the nuclei of all atoms. In the radio-active
atoms, such as radium, the nucleus is unstable
and occasionally ejects one or another of its cons-
tituents and thus changes into a different isotope
or, indeed, into a different chemical element. So
the new facts and conceptions begin to fit into a
single picture which was inconceivable fifty years
ago but which now reveals a holly new world
within the atom.
But great underlying problems remain. What
holds the nucleus together ? Is the proton really
the ultimate particle, or does it have an internal
structure too ? How does an electron get into it
to make a neutron ? Whence comes all the energy
that propels the rays at such high speeds ? All
such questions were insoluble with the older tools
of science. They have been successfully attacked
in recent years with the great cyclotrons that are
described in the third article of this series. But
that would not have been possible had not valu-
able hints come literally from the sky. Cosmic
rays brought the clues to these mysteries and
paved the way for the cyclotrons. The following
article therefore takes a look at these very high
speed particles that bombard the earth from outer
space and come from no-one knows where.
These diagrams, in a study of atomic extremes, show the structure of the lightest atom, hydrogen, contrasted
with the heaviest atom, uranium. Hydrogen has only one proton in the nucleus and one electron spinning in
an external orbit. Uranium has 92 protons and 146 neutrons crowded together in the nucleus, and 92 external
electrons vibrating in complex orbits. In both diagrams the nucleus is much magnified. Its diameter sis actually
only 1/10, OOOth of the atom's diameter and thus it would only be an invisible speck at the atomic centre.
OURIER
