Page 14. APRIL 1953 UNESCO COUR
THOUGH THEY TRAVEL FREQUENTLY, CHILDREN OF MINING ENGINEERS CAN KEEP UP WITH LESSONS THROUGH THE SCHOOL OF THE AIR. (Photos : COI and Australian Officia))
AUSTRALIA'S BUSH COUNTRY CHILDREN
'TALK BACK'TO THEIR TEACHER
By L. A. BINGHAM
ONE of the greatest problemsconfronting parents in the
lonely cattle land of the Aus-
tralian outback has always been the
question of how to educate their
children.
Of course the children themselves,
with pet horses, calves, and other
animal playmates, wouldn't think
that was anything to worry about.
It has always been the aim of the
Australian States to carry the bene-
fits of education into the more
remote and sparsely settled districts.
In that huge inland area-the Nor-
thern Territory alone has an area
nearly two and a half times the size
of France-the carrying out of such
a worthy aim is not an easy matter.
At first, itinerant teachers went to
the station homesteads and settler's
cottages to instruct the children on
the cattle holdings, or in the rail-
way camps along the single-track
straggling railway lines stretching
out into the inland. The tremendous
task these teachers undertook will
be readily understood when it is
remembered that in Queensland in
1927 nine itinerant teachers travelled
57, 727 miles to visit 1, 139 children
living in the inland sheep and cattle
country.
In the harsh lands of the Northern
Territory during that same year, one
teacher alone spent the whole year
travelling to and fro over enormous
distances to teach twelve children to
read and write. These wandering
teachers, their work well done, were
replaced by Government Correspon-
dence Schools set up to meet the
needs of children out of reach of the
ordinary means of education. These
followed naturally as a result of the
introduction by the Postal Depart-
ment of regular mail services, mostly
once a week, or once a fortnight in
the more isolated areas.
Strangely enough, the majority of
Australians, clustered as they are in
the over-crowded coastal cities,
know very little if anything about
these excellent primary Correspond-
ence Schools. To the outback
child, however, Miss Smith, or Miss
Jones, his teacher perhaps 2, 000 miles
away, whom he has never seen, is
someone to whom he can write short
letters about his pets and his life.
No child with schools close at
hand could possibly realize the
pleasure and excitement there is
among, the children on an inland
station on mail days. When the
mailman's lorry rattles to a stand-
still and the mailbag is thrown
down, there is a rush to see what
teacher has had to say.
Some places employ a governess to
supervise the correspondence work.
Where this is done the children go
to school on the side verandah or out
under the trees at the same hours
as school children in the cities. Des-
pite the fact that such positions are
of a high standing socially, and the
opportunities of marrying into well-
to-do grazing families are good,
governesses in inland Australia today
appear to be becoming fewer and
fewer. They were plentiful during
the depression years, but the return
to full employment has kept girls
closer to the bright lights of the
cities.
Teachers may well ask whether
the correspondence system is suc-
cessful, particularly where only the
parents are available to supervise
the children's work. It has, in fact,
more than lived up to the most
hopeful expectations of the State
educational authorities. Parents
themselves have been so pleased
with the results obtained that in
many instances when families have
moved into a district where attend-
ance at school has been possible,
they have asked for the correspon-
dence lessons to be retained.
The Correspondence Schools are
constantly being improved. Libra-
ries are now being established in
connection with some, the most
successful so far being that in South
Australia. This library is being
heavily drawn on by parents as well
as children. Because colour is now
recognised as having an important
appeal in education, the New South
Wales Correspondence School recent-
ly introduced a duplicating machine
which turns out lessons in colour.
Maps, charts, diagrams, pictures.,
and in particular lessons for the
infant classes, are reproduced in
colour on this machine.
Figures for the two largest Cor-
respondence Schools are interesting.
The Queensland School has over
8, 000 boys and girls enrolled from
north-west Queensland, the Northern
Territory, Central Australia, New
Guinea, and the New Hebrides. The
New South Wales School has 178
teachers for 6, 000 pupils. These Cor-
respondence Schools have served
their purpose well, and will continue
to do so as long as the population of
inland Australia remains small and
scattered.
A recent innovation, however,
gives promise of being a big improve-
ment on the correspondence sys-
tem. A short time ago the first
broadcast of what is known as"`The
School of the Air"was given from
Alice Springs in Central Australia.
Broadcasts to schools are not unu-
sual ; they are being successfully
used in many parts of the world.
With these, however, the children
only listen. The new Australian
school not only broadcasts to the
children, but the children may
answer back and ask questions over
the radio as welL This is unique
in the he. story of education.
Under this new method youngsters
can he taught as well as if they
were in the classroom with the
teacher. The scheme relies for its
success on the close co-operation of
the now world-famous Flying Doctor
Service. The Flying Doctor scheme
uses specially-invented pedal wire-
less sets with which people in isolat-
ed places may call up the nearest
Flying Doctor base at any hour.
These transceivers are radio sets
which transmit as well as receive.
The pedal wireless was so called
because the user pushed the pedals
beneath the set in the same manner
as those of a bicycle to generate
current for transmitting, while he
or she spoke the message into a
small mouthpiece. Today the pedals
are only used in emergencies, as
most of the transceivers are battery-
operated. This set is very simple to
operate, requiring no technical know-
ledge whatever. The Flying Doctor
can speak to the caller, and the
caller may in turn speak to the
doctor. Knowing this, three peo-
ple decided in 1945 that these pedal
wireless sets could be used to teach
children over the air. These people
were Miss Adelaide Meitke, South
Children whose parents live in the lonely cattle lands of the Australian"outback"would have to travel hundreds of miles to
attend the nearest school. Postal services and the radio are now used to bring education to the most isolated families.

COURIER APRIL 1953. Page
Radio has taken some isolation from the lives of people living in the lonely places of the world. In Australia, for example,
it has made possible a unique educational experiment. Three times a week a teacher in a Central Australian town gives
lessons by radio to some 300 isolated children. Each child has a transreceiver radio for question-and-answer sessions.
Australian Inspector of Schools, Mr.
Graham Pitts, director of the Flying
Doctor base at Alice Springs, and Mr.
Les Dodd, headmaster of the Alice
Springs School, and now Northern
Territory Director of Education.
At the Alice Springs Higher Pri-
mary School a studio with a full
transmission panel was established,
and a land-line constructed from
this studio to the Flying Doctor base,
Every Monday, Wednesday, and Fri-
day, the head teacher at Alice
Springs speaks to 300 children seated
round their pedal radios within a
radius of 400 miles. Not only chil-
dren, but parents and stockmen
crowd round to listen. After each
lesson children on stations a hun-
dred miles apart ask the head
teacher questions on the lesson, as
well as on other subjects.
The scheme is as yet only in itf
infancy, but it is already planned to
step up the lessons to five a week.
When it is realized that there are
now seven other Flying Doctor bases
similar to that at Alice Springs, the
expansion possibilities are obvious.
With the introduction of this
scheme the education of children
living in the outposts of the Empire
has moved forward yet another step.
By lessening the'problem for
parents, this unique.'School of the
Air"is making a big contribution
towards a better life for those who
work and live in the isolated areas
of outback Australia.
A diamond drill team investigates one of Australia's vast mineral deposits. Today, the children of these technicians are
no longer deprived of lessons because they are out of reach of normal means of education. They go to school'buy radio'.
