HUMAN
FALSE
Theories on human nature have been as
numerous as the proverbial leaves of
Vallombrosa, but it was not until the
beginning of the twentieth century that
human nature became a subject of serious
scientific study. This study has revealed a
multiplicity of facts which should serve as a
challenge to social thinkers and the leaders
of public opinion.
"human nature"can mean several different
but mutually reconcilable things at one and
the same time, so that until we have explored
these different meanings and reconciled them,
it will not be possible to make a brief, valid
and readily understandable statement as to
the nature of hun. an nature. However, it is
possible to say several significant things
about it at once.
First it should be said that no organism of
the species so prematurely named Homo So-
piens is born with human nature. What
human beings are born with is merely a com-
plex of potentialities. Being human is not a
status with which but to which one is
born. Being human must be learned. This
is an important distinction, for the age-old
belief in the innate character of human na-
ture has been responsible for much personal,
social, and political misunderstanding, and for
an untold amount of human suffering.
What are the specific qualities or character-
istics, and what is the peculLar nature, of
man that distinguish him from all other crea-
tures ? On the basis of his obvious physic-
o ! characteristics man is described as a mam-
mal of the order Primates, genus Homo, and
species sapiens. But what of his psychologic-
al classification ?
Human Premise--
While every creature that is classified
physically as man is thereby called
Homo sapiens, no such cre ture is
really human until it exhibits
the conduct characteristic of a human
being. If it is true that one has to learn
the kind of conduct that is uniquely human,
then any organism which fails to learn that
conduct cannot be human. In a sense this is
a sound argument, and a closer examination
of this argument will serve to throw much
needed light upon the meaning of human
nature.
The fact is that man is human by virtue
of both his physical and his mental traits.
In the course of his evolution the two appear
to have gone hand in hand. One can no
more deny the status of being human to a
newborn baby because it cannot talk, than
'because it cannot wa) k erect. The wonder-
ful thing about a baby is its promise, not its
performance-a promise to perform under
certain auspices. A juvenile ape can do a
great deal more than can a juvenile human,
but the promise of the child far exceeds that
of the brightest of apes.
Now, what is this promise ? The answer
is : a remarkable capacity for learning to use
complex symbols and symbol relationships, a
symbol being a meaning or value conferred
by those who use. it upon any thing. A sign,
on the other hand, belongs to the physical
world, it is a physical thing which indicates
some other thing or event. A symbol
belongs to the human world of meaning.
Now, it is generally agreed that newborn
babies are incapable of symbol usage ; it is an
af>ility which they have to learn ; if they are
not taught it they do not learn it.
We can thus say that human nature means
the uniquely human set of potentialities for
being human with which the organism Homo
sapiens is born. Potentialities must be
underscored, for what is generally erroneously
assumed is that human beings are born with
certain definite traits and characteristics
which only need time if they are to develop,
whereas the researches of the last 30 years
have increasingly shown that the traits and
characteristics of the organism will to a very
large extent be determined by the kind of
cultural stimulation which those potentialities
Man's second nature
What most persons have taken to be
human nature, is actually the
acquired b haviour of he person ;
this may and usually does become
a second nature, and this, too, could be cal-
led human nature, since it is a function of
man's nature in interaction with his environ-
ment, but it must not be confused with man's
inborn nature-and this is exactly where the
confusion is usually made. Hence, human
nature may express itself, or rather be made
to express itself, in many different forms.
But the differences in these forms are not,
UNESCO

COURIER FEBRUARY 1953. Page 15
NATURE CANNOT BE CHANGED'
SAYS U. S. ANTHROPOLOGIST
according to modern evidence, determined by
innate factors but by environmental ones.
Man is born not with the ability to speak
any language, but with a capacity or potent-
iality for speech, and this potentiality will
never develop in the absence of the proper
stimuli. These stimuli will usually assume a
form determined by a particular environment,
so that what the organism learns to speak
will be of purely social origin, just as the way
in which he learns to eat will be socially
determined. Now languages, knives and
forks, and fingers, are all instruments for
manipulating one's environment, but whereas
fingers are natural, languages and knives
and forks are artificial. Obviously it is no
part of the primary or innate nature of man
to create artifacts.
by At. F. ASHLE. Y MONTAGU
Professor of Anthropology at Rutgers University U. S. A.
On this page we offer our readers a condensed version of an article which
appeared in the winter 1952 issue of"Impact of Science on Society"the
quarterly review published by Unesco. Professor Ashley Montagu presents
the results of some recent scientific research into the character of human
nature, and offers some of his conclusions on this controversial question.
Acquired experience
Science knows of no natural drive in man
to make knives and forks or to speak
Italian ; Australian aborigines neither use
knives or forks nor do they speak Italian,
not because they couldn't do so, but because
human nature frequently differs owing to dif-
ferences in the history of cultural experience.
In short, human nature assumes secondary
forms according to the pattern of the sociali-
zation process in which it has undergone
development, and this pattern is determined
by the cultural history of the group.
In the tradition of Western civilization it is
the custom to reckon age as beginning from
birth ; other civilization, notably the Chin-
ese, reckon age as beginning from fertiliza-
tion or conception. Recent researches indi-
cate that this is scientifically a much sounder
events of greater moment, than all the three-
score and ten years that follow it."It has
taken science 150 years to come somewhere
near supporting Coleridge's guess.
It is now a demonstrable fact that there
is a very intimate connexion between the ner-
vous system of both mother and foetus acting
through the fluid medium of the blood (and
its oxygen and carbon-dioxide content).
There is good evidence that an emotionolly
disturbed pregnant woman may communicate
her emotional disturbance, at least in chem-
A baby Homo Sapiens : Was he born with human nature ?
they happen to be born into a cultural en-
vironment from which such instruments are
absent and where their own language alone
is spoken.
In short, how a person will behave, what he
will do, think, or say, what language he will
say it in, and what artifacts he will prize,
will be determined not by his innate nature
so much as by his acquired experience. And
this gives us the answer we have been seeking :
human nature consists of the unique potent-
ialities for complex symbol usage with which
the organism is born, potentialities which un-
dergo development within a cultural environ-
ment, the result being a human being, made
to measure, and tailored to the prevailing cul-
tural pattern in which he has been condition-
ed. The process of learning the traditional
cultural patterns is called socialization, and
is essentially cultural in character. We
may, then, call the cultural endowment of
human potentialities primary human nature,
and the socialized development of those
potentialities secondary human nature. Human
nature, therefore, consists of both primary and
secondary elements, the innate and the
acquired. Where most errors have been
committed in the past has been in the iden-
tication of the latter with the former.
While the primary human nature of all
men is fundamentally similar, the secondary
manner of reckoning age than our own. The
tendency to think of the child being born as
a sort of tabula rasa, without a previous his-
tory, and beginning life, as it were, for the
first time at birth, is wrong.
The teaching in our scientific institutions
hitherto has been that the foetus in utero is
so carefully protected, so thoroughly insulated
from virtually all stimulations originating in
the mother or the outside world, that it deve-
lops autochthonously according to its own inner
resources and the nutriment which it receives
through the placenta. It was and still is
being widely taught that since there is no ner-
vous connexion between mother and foetus,
the mother's nervous states could not possibly
influence the development of the foetus in any
way.
Life before birth
With such a viewpoint concerning
maternal-foetal relations it is not to
be wondered at that the prenatal pe-
riod was considered irrelevant for
the study of human nature. And yet nearly
a century and a half ago a poet and
thinker, Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772-
1834), wrote :"Yes ! the history of a man for
the nine months preceding his birth, would,
probably, be far more interesting, and contain
ical form, to her foetus. The Fels Insti-
tute workers at Antioch College, Yellow
Springs, Ohio, have found that emotional dis-
turbances in the pregnant mother produce a
marked increase in the activity of the foetus.
They have also found that fatigue in the
mother will produce hyperactivity in the foe-
tus ; and that under severe emotional stress,
especially during the later months of preg-
nancy, such mothers generally have babies
who become hyperactive, irritable, squirming,
feeding problems.
Such an infant, says Sontag :"is to all
intents and purposes a neurotic infant when
he is born-the result of an unsatisfactory
foetal environment. In this instance he has
not had to wait until childhood for a bad
home situation or other cause to make him
neurotic. It has been done for him before
he has even seen the light of day."
Not only this, there is evidence that the
mother's emotionat disturbances are reflected,
through disturbances in nutrition, in the
skeletal system of the foetus. It is, of course,
not being suggested that the mother's emo-
tional states as such are transmitted to the
foetus-this is almost certainly not the
case. What does apparently occur is that
the mother's emotional disturbance manifests
itself in impulses which proceed to the pituit-
ary gland. The latter then secretes various
hormones directly into the blood stream
which activates the glands of the rest of the
body, and since most, if not all, of these hor-
mones are of small enough molecular size, they
will pass directly through the placenta into
the foetus, and there act upon it.
It is now well established that the foetus is
capable of responding to tactile stimuli, to
vibrations, differences in pitch and tone, and
to sound, to taste, and to various gases. In
other words, it is clear that far from being
thoroughly insulated from the outside world,
the foetal organism is a great deal more
sensitive to it than we ever suspected.
Creature of habit
It is generally agreed that man is born freE
of those biological predeterminants of
behaviour which characterize othe  ani-
malts. man is born without instincts,
without those psychological dispositions which
cause other animals to respond in a particular
manner to a particular stimulus accompanied by
a particular emotion. The form of the oni-
mal's responses is predetermined, man has
to learn the forms which his responses assume.
While other animals are mostly creatures of
instinct, man is the creature of habit-the
habit which he acquires from his culture. But
these habits are organized by his culture
around a number of urges, drives or basic
needs as they have been variously called.
These terms are the merest labels for physio-
logical conditions, the exact nature of which
is far from being known.
There is fairly general agreement as to
the number and definition of basic needs. A
basic need may be defined as a requirement
of the organism which must be fulfilled if the
organism and the group are to survive. The
main basic needs are : oxygen-hunger, thirst,
food, activity, rest, sleep, bowel and bladder
elimination, sex, fear, and avoidance of pain.
Malinowski has defined the concept of basic
needs as"the environmental and biological
conditions which must be fulfilled for the sur-
vival of the individual and the group."
It is important to note that this definition
includes the group as well as the indi-
vidual, and this inclusion constitutes one
of the most significant departures from,
and improvement upon, the old concept of
"instinct". It constitutes an explicit recog-
nition of the fact that man, if not all other
animals, functions, if he functions at all, in
relation to a group ; and that, so far as human
beings are concerned, functioning, that is
behaving, apart from a group simply does not
occur. When human beings behave socially it
means that they have been socialized within a
human group-if they have not been socialized
within a human group, then they do not behave
like human beings (1). Indeed, the person
becomes related to himself to the extent to
which he becomes related to the group.
Traditional myth
One of the prevailing myths of our
Western tradition is the belief that
the baby is born inheriting some-
thing of the ancestry of its lowly
forbears, with respect not only to its
physical but also to its psychological traits.
The alleged"aggressiveness"of animal nature,
it has been held, is in part inherited by the
young Homo sapiens. Freudian and Jungian
psychology assumes the innate aggressiveness
of man, and civilization is regarded by both as
a more or less unsuccessful attempt to keep
this innate aggressiveness within hounds.
Freud's postulation of a"death instinct"IS
now generally discredited but his use of the
synonymous term,"the destructive instinct",
still plays a considerable role in psycho-anat-
ytically influenced writings. This alleged
"destructiveness"is identified with man's
alleged inherited aggressiveness, and so one
of the dominant views about human nature in
our own day has become associated with the
belief that man is inherently born aggressive.
For this viewpoint there is not a shred of
supporting evidence. On the contrary, all the
available evidence gathered by competent
investigators indicates that man is born
without any aggressiveness within him what-
soever.
(Continued on next page)
(1) There are no examples of completely
isoloted human children-in spite of mony
published occounts to the contrary-but there are
several recorded cases of children who hove been
almost completely isolated from human contact for
several years (these cases will be discussed in a
book now in preparation by the author) ; such
children fail almost completely to develop as
human beingsl and in many cases are even
psychically blind and deaf, unable to walk or run,
and unable to make more than the most
elementary sounds.

'YOU CANNOT CHANGE HUMAN NATURE'
FALSE ! SAYS MODERN ANTHROPOLOGIST
(Continued from previous Page)
Professor Abraham Maslow, in an important article, writes :"Those human impulses which
have seemed throughout our history to be deepest, to be most instinctive and unchangeable,
to be most widely spread throughout mankind, i. e., the impulse to hate, to be jealous, to be
hostile, to be greedy, to be egoistic and selfish, are now being discovered more and more
clearly to be acquired and not instinctive. They are almost certainly neurotic and sick
reactions to basic situations, more specifically to frustrations of our truly basis and
instinct-like needs and impulses."
Professor Gardner Murphy writes :"As we watch behaviour in early childhood, we no
longer assume that each individual will inevitably push himself ahead and crave every toy
or every attention he can get ; instead, we begin to ask if there is something in our society
that does not satisfy the child's needs and, therefore, makes it aggressive."
The fact seems to be that aggressiveness usually develops in the child as a result of
frustration, that is to say, the blocking of expected satisfaction. The infant expects to have
its needs satisfied ; if those needs are not satisfied it feels frustrated, and normally reacts
with aggressive behaviour. It is now coming to be understood that aggression is, in effect,
a technique or mode of compelling attention to, and satisfaction of, one's needs. (I believe
that the late Ian B. Suttie was the first to point this out in his important book, The Origins
01 Love and Hate, Kegan Paul, London, 1935.)
Such an interpretation of the meaning of aggressive behaviour in children puts a very
different complexion upon the manner of handling it than has been customary in the
past. Aggressive behaviour in all human being most frequently represents a response to
frustration. A response to the frustration of expected satisfaction.
As the result of the work of a large number of investigators it is now indisputably clear
that the satisfaction of the child's needs by the mother or some substitute for the mother
is necessary for the healthy physical and mental development of the person. Physical
satisfaction of the needs of the organism is not enough ; what is necessary in addition is the
warmth, the love of another being who is deeply interested in the welfare of the child.
It is becoming increasingly clear that the infant is born not only with the ne d to be
toved, but also with a need to love ; he is certainly not born with any need to be aggressive.
This view of human nature makes a very different picture from the troditional one
with its conception of man born with aggressiveness. It is that view which rendered rotion-
alizations about the"innate warlikeness"of man, and facile generalizations about man as
a"brute", the stock in trade of every former authority on human nature. But modern
research has shown that this view of human nature is erroneous. Man is not born evil or
aggressive-he is rendered so. This being the case, it is incumbent upon us to realize
that we can best change human nature for the better not by working on man's biological
inheritance but by working on his social inheritance ; by changing those conditions which
produce disharmony in the person and corresponding disharmony in his society. As Professor
Warder C. Allee has said :"Despite many known appearances to the contrary, human
altruistic drives are as firmly based on an animal ancestry as is man himself. Our tendencies
toward goodness, such as they are, are as innate as our tendencies toward intelligence ;
we could do well with more of both."
The school of evolutionary thought which preached the struggle for existence and the
survival of the fittest gave a one-sided view of nature as a competitive"red in tooth and
claw"process, and omitted almost entirely the factors of co-operation and mutual aid,
which play so great a role in the ecology, the balance, of nature. The resulting view of
nature was thus put badly out of focus, but upon it was erected a view of human nature
which was as readily accepted as was the evolutionary theory of nature modelled on a
laissezfaire industrial civilization.
Perhaps one of the most important of our conclusions is that never was there a
stereotype more unsound than that enshrined in the view ;"You can't change human
nature". On the contrary, we find that man is the most plastic, the most malleable, the
most educable, of all living crectures ; indeed, that educability is a species character of
Homo sapiens. Man is the learning animal, and he is capable of learning and changing
his views and his habits throughout his life.
Human nature, happily, is a great deal better in its promise than man has thus far
realized in his performance.'