FOREIGN TRAVEL : A MODERN OBSTACLE RACE
A few years ago, the late Mr. ErnestBevin, speaking as Great Britain's Mi-
nister of Foreign Affairs, said he
wished that he and other British people who
felt like going abroad could do so without
having to worry about anything else but the
purchase of a rail, air or steamer ticket.
These are the sentiments of people in every
country in the world today for whom the
simple act of crossing a frontier involves
the filling in of innumerable application forms
for passports, visas and currency allowances.
"Everyone has the right to freedom of
movement and residence within the borders of
each State."-'''Everyone has the right to
leave any country, including his own, and to
return to his country."
So states Article 13 of the Universal Decla-
ration of Human Rights. While this article is
readily acknowledged in theory, it is far from
being put into practice everywhere. And even
in areas where freedom of movement is
accorded there are inevitable obstacles in the
shape of forms and formalities.
It can certainly be said that in the twentieth
century, freedom of movement has suffered a
setback despite the tremendous improvement
and development of means of transport bet-
ween one part of the world and another.
This is obvious when we look back on the
historical sequence of events that has led to
this paradoxical situation.
Primitive communities generally regarded a
stranger as an enemy, or at least as a suspect.
However, as soon as men began to trade and
barter, the advantage of allowing travellers
freedom of movement was recognized.
Pioneer travellers
THROUGHOUT the Middle Ages, thegreat routes followed by the merchants
were channels of prosperity, carrying
fruitful knowledge from country to country,
from continent to continent. To take one
example, the travels of Marco Polo, the Vene-
tian, at the end of the thirteenth century had
an immense effect on life in the Western
world.
In the fifteenth and eighteenth centuries,
the Portuguese and Dutch, who were great
traders and navigators, stood in the forefront
as pioneers of international freedom of mo-
vement. Pilgrims, too, played a great part in
developing international relations. Jerusalem,
Senores and Mecca attracted the faithful by
hundreds of thousands, and on the roads
leading to them there were countless inns and
chapels, so many meeting-places where goods
and ideas were exchanged between travellers
from all lands.
In Europe, feudal particularism tended to
box communications, or at least to hamper
them, through tolls and other taxes. On the
other hand, the Crusades created many
contacts with the Near East, the Byzantine
Empire and the Moslem countries, most of
which possessed a high degree of civilization.
As trade increased, the exporting countries
were more ready to welcome strangers. In
the fourteenth century, Ghent, Brussels, Ant-
werp and Louvain were open to all.
The great discoveries in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries led to large-scale emi-
gration to the New World ; some emigrants
left Europe to escape religious or political
persecution. These constituted an é/ite, whose
love of freedom left its mark on the new
countries'institutions.
In the fields of culture, man's freedom of
movement produced especially beneficial
effects. When Irish monks journeyed to Italy,
when Albertus Magnus and Saint Thomas
Aquinas taught in Paris, Erasmus in Oxford
and Copernicus in Bologna, when students of
all countries flocked to the great universities
of Salamanca, Coimbra, Montpellier, Toulouse,
Cambridge and Heidelberg, it is hard to say
which derived the greater benefit from these
sojourns, the traveller or the place itself.
No passport needed
VARIOUS factors, of course, combined to
curtail freedom of movement : Travel
by road was anything but safe ; and the
pirates who infested the seas often made jour-
neying positively dangerous. Unquestion-
ably, however, the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries saw a great increase in travelling
facilities. Unpoliced areas grew smaller, and
the rapidity of transport increased by leaps
and bounds. The Atlantic, which in former
times had often taken several months to cross,
was usually crossed in under three weeks by
the large sailing vessels of 1850, and by the
steamships of 1900 in a week. Where a
coach had taken two weeks to cross a big
European country, the railway train took
twenty hours. Continents that had hitherto
been pronounced"impenetrable"were opened
to explorers, colonists, traders and promoters
of industry.
It would seem that the first fourteen years
of the twentieth century marked the apex of
man's freedom of movement on earth. Not
only were time, cost and insecurity then
reduced to a minimum, but the obstacles
placed in the way of travellers by States had
almost entirely vanished. In 1913 one could
travel without a passport in all Europe, with
the exception of Russia and Turkey. What is
more, currencies were easily exchanged, and
even tended to become standardized.
But after the 1914-1918 war, human
obstacles two freedom of movement increased ;
passports, formalities and restrictions reap-
peared. The New World was partially closed
to immigrants. After the 1939-1945 war diffi-
culties became general, and were added to by
financial regulations. Today, despite marked
improvements in aircraft and automobiles, the
de ! ightfu) freedom of movement of 1913 is no
more than a memory.
A brooding fear
Not only in entering various countries,
but in leaving them, the traveller comes
up against regulations that everyone
deems excessive, but that nevertheless exist.
In most cases they are direct or indirect evi-
dence of the fear that broods over men and
nations in regard to one another.
Freedom of movement is a perfect example
of a principle that men are at one in pro-
claiming but render invalid in practice. Only
international agreement based on firm, clear-
cut undertakings, will suffice to remove, for
the benefit of the majority, the present obsta-
cles which profit scarcely anyone. When Arti-
cle 13 of the Universal Declaration has
assumed the force of a general obligation, it
will allow hurnanity once more to resume pro-
gress in a form that is essential to its well-
being, and individuals will again enjoy the
exercise of a natural right : freedom of move.
ment and residence for each and for all.
