Page t4 : JULY 1953
GERMANY : LARGEST AND
MOST VARIED PRODUCER
OF BOOK TRANSLATIONS
by Georges FRADIER
THE translation of book titles intoa foreign language often seems to
obey certain mysterious laws of
fantasy. From a sales point of view
the title of a book is, of course, an all-
important affair and a lot of hard
thought goes into the choice of any
title.
But when a book is translated into
another language the original title,
even if it lends itself easily to trans-
lation into a fresh idiom, may not
necessarily have sufficient sales appeal.
Foreign publishers, therefore, often feel
themselves obliged to seek out a differ-
ent and more striking one. The result,
however, is sometimes quite startling.
One of Emmanuel Mounier's books,
for example, which was originally
entitled"La Petite Peur du XX'Siecle"
(Minor Fears of the 20th Century) has
now the English title"Be Not Afraid".
Louis Bromfield's"Wild is the River"
has become in German,"Traum in
Louisiana" (Louisiana Dream). In the
same country, a book whose original
cover page asked"After Hitler, Stalin ?",
now bears the title"Von Talleyrand bis
Molotov" (From Talleyrand to Molotov).
In Finland,"La Reine Margot" (Queen
Margot) by Alexandre Dumas became
"Herttuattaren Rakkaus" (The Love
Affairs of the Duchess). And then we
have the remarkable example of a
scientific work"Beyond the Atom"
which in the Netherlands gained a title
pregnant with promise :"Het Lied van
Gods Schepping" (The Song of Divine
Creation).
These are some of the intriguing facts
that can be gleaned from the latest
volume of"Index Translationum",
an International Bibliography of
Translations, which has just been
issued by Unesco (1). This publication
which has now become something of a
"bible"for library workers, publishers
and translators, was first brought out
as a quarterly bulletin by the Institute
of Intellectual Co-operation from 1932
to 1940, and after an interruption of
ten years was revived by Unesco.
- 17, 000 translations
SINCE the new series began in 1950,
Index Translaticnum has from
year to year tried to present as
complete a listing as possible of all
translations published. The latest vo-
lume, the fourth, lists more than 17, 000
works translated in 44 countries during
1951.
The Unesco volume shows that the
, Germans are the world's most prolific
translators, producing more than 1, 300
works each year. France, Italy, Japan
and the Scandinavian countries follow
with about 1, 000 foreign books trans-
lated. In 1951, Britain translated some
500 books and the United States 450.
Germany, the Unesco volume further
reveals, publishes translations of works
in practically all major languages.
Most other countries draw their
material from very few foreign-lan-
guages, usually no more than two or
three. Germany, too, seems to be the
only country which regularly translates
the Scandinavian output of novels,
plays and poetry.
A study of the Index Translationum
also shows the great differences that
exist in translation exchanges between
different countries. In 1951, the
Germans translated hundreds of British
books, yet in Great Britain only 12
German books were published. In
France translations were made of 134
American and 27 Italian books. Italy,
however, chose 128 French books for
translation but only 54 from America.
In most countries, as a general rule,
the best known or most widely trans-
lated works of literature are those of
Great Britain, the United States and
France. But a good third of the British
and American books that are translated
into all languages are detective stories,
crime novels or similar works.
The Unesco volume also seems to
point to the effect that political
differences are having on translations.
In 1951, only a few scientific works and
some half-a-dozen novels from the
United States were published in Russia.
(1, 1 J'l'ir' (' : $10 ; ; ; : ;/- : , nnn FI'l'l/f'iI F"lIIIC.'.
Conversely, only two Soviet works seem
to have been published in the United
States during that year, with the
notable exception of the Russian
classics and certain books written by
Russian emigrants.
A much greater gap still exists,
however, between the occidental
countries and those of the Orient,
between the West and the civilizations
of Islam, India, China and Japan. The
Index Translationum shows that Eu-
ropean language versions are rare
indeed of Asian literary works. Trans-
lations of Western books in the Oriental
countries are equally rare, with the
exception of Japan.
Madame Bovary in Tamil
THE Unesco bibliography shows, forexample, that the most recent
Indian translations of French
novels are"The Count of Monte Cristo",
in Telugu, and"Madame Bovary"in
Tamil. In Burma several European
scientific works were published, but only
one work of fiction-George Orwell's
"Animal Farm".
In Iraq, translations have now ap-
peared of"Robinson Crusoe"and of
Turgeniev's stories. In the Lebanon
only two contemporary novels from the
pens of Pearl Buck and Jean Paul
Sartre were published in 1951, although
several historical works were translated,
most of them relating to the Second
World War. In Egypt, translations
were made of works by Shakespeare,
Racine, Moliere, Oscar Wilde and Pierre
Loti.
Year in and year out there seems to
be little change in the names of the
writers who are most translated. At
the head of this list are the Great
Books, new translations of which are
constantly being published. The 1951
favourites were Aristotle and Plato,
Homer and Euripides ; Shakespeare,
Moliere, Dante and Cervantes ; Goethe,
Rousseau and Voìtaire ; Dickens, Balzac,
Maupassant, Stendhal, Tolstoy, Hugo
and Zola. And, as always, the world's
"best seller", The Bible. A century
from today, this list will probably still
hold good.
It will of course require expanding
with the names of authors of new
classics-our contemporary writers,
though perhaps not all those whose
works are most widely translated today
would lay claim to immortality.
Ever popular Pinocchio
ON this score, the Index provides
some interesting facts. In 1951 the
number of translations of works
by eight famous authors were as fol-
lows : Gide (5) ; Pearl Buck (4) ; Tho-
mas Mann (13) ; Steinbeck and Gorki
(8) ; Bertrand Ru. ssell (16) ; Stalin
(30) ; Winston Churchill (3),. During
the same period dozens of translations
were made of books by Agatha Christie,
Peter Cheyney and Leslie Charteris.
Preferences of a national or cultural
character seem unchanging. Apart
from works of literature, history and
geography books are generally the
most widely translated. The Germanic,
Scandinavian and Anglo-Saxon coun-
tries, as well as Italy, however, show a
marked taste for philosophical and
religious works. Scientific books are
most popular in Spain and in the
republics of Eastern Europe.
Fewer works of poetry, as might be
expected, are listed in the Index Trans-
lationum for 1951. Lsrael, Denmark
and Japan translated the largest
number of poets during this period.
Rilke, however, was extremely popular
and his works were published in many
countries and to a lesser degree those
of Lermontov, Heine, Maiakovski and
Baudelaire whose poems are now
available in Japanese and Hebrew.
Among children's books, which get a
fair showing, Pinocchio always takes
first place, followed each year in about
a dozen languages, by the Tales of
Perrault, of Grimm and of Andersen,
by the stories of Jules Verne, and by
"Alice in Wonderland"and"Treasure
Island".
UNESCO
During a three-day workshop course recently, Oju sCience ana i
vocational teachers of the City of Manila high schools learned
how to produce self-made science demonstration apparatus
under the guidance of a Unesco expert in science education.
Converting a light bulb into a laboratory flask is demonstrated
to Manila students by Viktor Holbro, Swiss teacher who has
just completed a Unesco technical assistance mission to
the Philippines to help educators modernize science classes.
An old paste pot or an ink bottle can double as a laboratory
burner with the help of shreds of cotton, a metal tube and some
ingenuity. This Philippine teacher was one of the students
who attended a training course conducted by Mr. Holbro.
Philippine school boys cut up old tin cans which will serve
as part of their home-made laboratory equipment for conducting
science experiments. Blueprints for making all types of labor-
atory equipment are sent to schools throughout the country.
