CHILDREN HELP CHILDREN
OF OTHER LANDS
EARLY last February, while the world spas stillreading about the progress of rescue and relief
work in the flooded areas of the Netherlands,
Unesco received a letter from the organizer of a
public affairs lecture course in Cannes, on the French
Riviera. To his query as to how his group might
help to restore educational facilities for the children
of Dutch flood victims, Unesco had a ready answer ;
"Unesco Gift Coupon Project No. 100".
When this spontaneous offer of help came from
Cannes, the emergency gift project No. 100 entitled
"Flooded Schools in the Netherlands", had already
been announced. The project was Unesco's response
to a letter from Mr. Bart Lunenberg, former head of
the Unesco Centrum in Amsterdam, who wrote :
"Though no-one can yet know the extent of the
damage suffered by schools, it is certain that
throughout the area school equipment will have to
be replaced. Laboratory materials will have been
ruined. All books, wall maps, film strips, projectors
etc., will have been destroyed."
Gift Coupon Project No. 100 was soon under way
with, as its first contribution, a cheque for 15, 000
French francs donated by the lecture audience at
Cannes. Fifteen 1, 000 franc Gift Coupons were sent
to these students who have since posted them to the
Netherlands, earmarked as help for the restoration
of the flood-damaged schools. Meanwhile, Unesco
has learned that people in many other countries are
helping the stricken Netherlands schools by sending
Gift Coupons.
When a flood or an earthquake brings devastation
to a country, people elsewhere are quick to
sympathize and to send assistance. The plight of
children in such disasters is particularly poignant
and in helping them, most well wishers generally do
so in terms of food, blankets, shelters and medical
supplies. However, after these first needs have been
met, young people are still without schools, and the
schools, even if standing, are without equipment.
In more fortunate countries it is the children who
have been quick to understand this problem when
they have asked Unesco :"Is there anything WE can
do ?" They have been told :"Send Gift Coupons to
replace schoolbooks and other equipment."
Though less dramatic because they are relatively
widespread and of long standing, the educational
needs of children throughout most of Africa, Asia
and Latin America, are just as acute as those of the
youthful flood victims in the Netherlands. But
where grown-ups are sometimes inclined to take for
granted the serious handicaps to education in these
vast areas, their children, on the contrary, have
shown a keen and sympathetic awareness of the
problems whether they concern the needs of a deaf
child in Ceylon, or a juvenile delinquent in Manila
or a village schoolboy in West Africa.
"Boys'Town"in HanHa
TODAY, more and more people are learning ofthe handicaps suffered by young people in
many underprivileged countries, through the
Gift Project Catalogue of Unesco's Gift Coupon Pro-
gramme. In the two years since this programme
began, youngsters in the United States, France and
the United Kingdom, have befriended less fortunate
children in over a score of countries throughout the
world by sending them Gift Coupons with which to
buy school equipment and supplies. This year, they
are being joined by young people in Canada, Ger-
many, Australia, Denmark, Sweden, Cuba and
Japan-all of which have recently decided to join
the Gift Coupon Programme as donor countries.
Gift Coupons have been used to help give
educational opportunities to delinquent children,
and those handicapped by physical disability, by
economic privation and by the effects of war. And
many of them have been sent by children to help
children. For example, there is the story of Boys'
Town, Manila.
On the outskirts of Manila is a pleasant little
surburban community with its own shopping centre,
school, park, playground, chapel, library and town
hall. The population numbers about 250 youngsters
from 7 to 17 years of age. This is.'Boys'Town", a
model centre for rehabilitating juvenile delinquents.
When the teen-age girls of the Ecole Technique
St. Honoré in Paris heard about Boys'Town, Manila,
(Unesco Gift Project No. 32) they began selling 1, 000
twenty-franc Unesco souvenir stamps. The money
they raised bought twenty 1, 000-franc Gift Coupons
which provided blackboards and textbooks for Boys'
Town. Meanwhile, boys and girls of San Diego High
School, California, U. S. A., were selling 480 twenty-
five cent souvenir stamps to raise money for twelve
S10 Gift Coupons so that the Manila boys could equip
their manual training shop with carpentry tools.
Other French and American groups are also
helping this project. Gift Coupons, however, have
done more than simply provide for some of the needs
of Boys'Town. They have also resulted in the
growth of international friendships between its
young citizens and boys and girls many miles away.
To assist physically handicapped children all over
the world is one of the problems being tackled by the
World Health Organization and the United Nations
International Children's Emergency Fund. But while
medical care is of vital importance to blind, deaf and
crippled children, educational needs must also be
satisfied. Unesco has found that healthy children
are quick to realize that in the life of a paralyzed
child, books, films and toys and handicraft materials
are needed along with medical equipment ; that
blind youngsters need Braille reading and writing
materials, relief maps and musical instruments, as
well as shelter and guidance.
For this reason a school for blind and deaf children
in Ceylon has been a favourite Gift Project among
schoolchildren. Among their unseen friends around
the world, the Ceylon youngsters include pupils of
the Camden Street School, Glasgow, Scotland ; the
little girls of a Brownie Scout troop in Pittsburgh,
U. S. A., and the youthful members of an apprentice
training centre in Metz, France. Moreover, sub-
stantial help through Gift Coupons has come to the
Ceylon School from C. O. R. S. O. (Council of Orga-
nizations for Relief Service Overseas, Inc.), New
Zealand's leading overseas relief organization.
Most Popular of all
M ENT ALLY handicapped boys and girls in theschool for feeble-minded children at Jabuka,
""*'Yugoslavia, have been befriended by children
in scores of schools, including high school pupils of
Kidderminster, England and those at the Lycée des
Jeunes Filles, in Moulins, France, whose Gift Coupons
were used to buy coloured slides for the Jabuka
children.
Probably the single most popular of all Unesco
Gift Projects was the'''Ecole de Richard Toll"in
Senegal, French West Africa. Schoolchildren all
over France eagerly adopted this project, and
completely fulfilled it within a few months. This
means that books, periodicals, notebooks, slates,
crayons, water colours, maps, duplicating machines
and a film projector bought with Gift Coupons paid
for out of the pockets of French schoolchildren, are
now on their way to this remote African village
school.
Another special case is that of the 200, 000 school-
age children in the Arab refugee camps of the Middle
East. These youngsters are literally wards of the
United Nations, and schooling for some 65, 000 of
them is provided by Unesco and the United Nations
Relief and Works Administration.
Perhaps it is this or perhaps it is because, unlike
most children mentioned in Unesco Gift Projects,
these are homeless children, that explains why Gift
Coupon Projects relating to Middle East schools have
met with such a universal response. In 1951, the
first year of the Gift Coupon Plan, they received
nearly a thousand dollars worth of Gift Coupons-
intended for maps, globes, books and other classroom
needs. In 1952, contributions from the United States,
the United Kingdom and from donor groups in
France, increased this help many times over.
Among the latest of Unesco's Gift Coupon Projects
are those designed to bring aid to the young people
of Israel. Since 1948, when the United Nations
recognized Israel as a sovereign State, a tidal wave
of immigration has doubled the country's population.
To shelter these newcomers until housing construc-
tion could catch up with immigration, temporary
camps were hastily erected. There are 100 or more
of these"Ma'abarot" (Immigrant transit camps) in
Israel today, home for fully a quarter of a million
people.
Immigrants find that there is work for all in Israel- though many must learn new skills. While their
elders work, children attend school in the camps.
But after school or work, there is simply nothing for
young people to do ; nowhere for them to go.'''Home''
is a dark or stuffy tent or hut.
Eventful Ma'abarots
TODAY, something is. happening. Already in halfof Israel's hundred Ma'abarot, young people
are organizing community centres, starting
social activity programmes to replace the monotony
of after-school and after-work with group recreation.
Already in fifty communities group leaders are being
chosen to start youth centre activities.
But from the start these young people are faced
with a crippling handicap-the complete lack of
equipment in the Ma'abarot. They cannot learn
handicrafts without tools and materials ; they cannot
read without books ; they cannot make music without
instruments.
So to help them along the road, to a new life in a
new land, Unesco has developed a series of gift
projects for selected Ma'abarot youth centres. One
of these is in the camp at Gilath, not far from
Beersheba, where several times a week some 500
youngsters will come from the scattered camps and
settlements in the Negev desert.
The children themselves will help to construct
their centre, levelling playgrounds and sports fields,
erecting huts, planting their own gardens and farm
plots, building their own handicraft and carpentry
workshops. The skills they will thus learn are
essential to their future careers as pioneers in
the long-range development of this arid, but
potentially fruitful corner of the earth.

COURIER MAY 1953. Page 13
Tent villages for Arab refugees in the Lebanon (above) and tin hut transit camps for Jewish immigrants in Israel (below).
Children in both areas are being helped through Unesco Gift Coupon projects to obtain badly needed school equipment
and materials for newly-established youth centres. (Top photo UNRWA ; Bottom photo copyright Robert Capa-MAGNUM).
