THE AUSTRALIAN
ECHIDNA AND THE
KOOKABURA BIRD
GO ON THE AIR
THANKS to an international ex-change of school broadcasts init-
iated by the Canadian Broad-
casting Corporation, the Toronto zoo
has now added a zoological wonder-
an Australian Echidna, one of the few
remaining links with prehistoric fife-
to its collection of animas.
The Echidna, better-known as a Spiny
Ant-Eater, was presented to the CBC
by the Australian government to
mark the beginning of a series of
exchange broadcasts. For the first
time, through a plan initiated by CBC,
Canadian school children are hearing a
series of six school broadcasts integrated
with their curriculum and prepared by
the Australian Broadcasting Commission.
likewise Australian children are receiv-
ing a series of six programmes prepared
by the CBC, about life in Canada.
The Echidna, which plays a starring
role in one of the Australian series of
programmes about birds and animals of
that country, arrived recently at Toronto
after crossing the Pacific by air and then
making another air trip across Canada
from Vancouver. It was then presented
to the City of Toronto at a ceremony
in the CBC studios formally marking the
Canada Australia exchange of school
broadcasts, which began with Australian
programmes for the benefit of Ontario
school-children.
Champion digger
RANKING as one of Australia'squeerest creatures, the Echidna
bears some resemblance to the
Canadian porcupine, and is about the
size of a hedgehog. Its back is covered
with long, sharp, yellowish-black spines,
like those of a porcupine, but any other
resemblance is purely accidental. It is,
however, a close relative of the famous
duck-billed platypus.
The Echidna is a mammal, growing
hair between its spines, and suckling its
young. But it also lays eggs, which
it keeps within a special pouch until
they hatch. The adult Echidna is about
12 inches long, and for its size, has few
rivals as a digger. Working in soft
ground, it can dig itself out of sight in
a few minutes, and an Echidna has
been known to dig itself through a con-
crete-floored enclosure, if a crevice in
which to start working exists.
The Toronto Zoo has a good collec-
tion of Australian animals and birds, but
no Echidna, so the new arrival from
Australia is a valuable addition. Echid-
nas normally feed on ants and small
insects which they pick up with a long,
sticky tongue. They also eat eggs and
milk, and for that reason are easy to
feed. Although Echidnas are always
trying to escape, they usually live a long
time in captivity.
Exchange broadcasts
DESIGNED to give children of eachcountry a better understanding of
life in the other, the school radio
exchange programmes between the CBC
and the Australian Broadcasting Com-
mission have been more than one year in
production. Six months were spent in a
study of the varying school curricula
in the Australian states and the Cana-
dian provinces, and another six months
in preparation and revision of, scripts and
production of the actual recordings.
The firSt series of six programmes
from Australia deal with animals and
birds-the Echidna, the Kangaroo, the
Koala, the Platypus, the Kookabura Bird
and the lyre Bird. The first six pro-
grammes sent to Australia by the CBC
deal with three Canadian animates-the
moose, bear and the beaver-and also
with different aspects of life in Can-
ada : a visit to a British Columbian
logging camp, a day in the life of a
northern fur trapper, and a trip down the
Great lakes in a freighter.
