Page 4. MARCH 1953 UNESCO CO
THE BRITISH APPROACH TO EDUC
T ELEnsIO has been called a windowopening on a world far beyond that of the
ordinary man's limited experience. In
November 1936, Great Britain became the first
country in the world to open this"window"to
the general public with the inauguration by the
BBC of regular television transmissions. It
was, in fact, Great Britain that led all other
countries in both the quality and extent of its
programmes until the suspension of all tele-
vision operations at the outbreak of World
War II in 1939. At that time, however, the
range of television transmissions was limited
to the London area and receivers numbered
only 20, 000 to 30, 000.
With the resumption of programmes after
the war and their extension to other parts of
the country, public interest developed rapidly.
Today the number of receivers is estimated at
well over 1, 700, 000 and most of the heavily
populated areas of the country are within the
service area of the BBC's five transmitters.
Television in Britain, like radio, is operated
by a non-profit, public service corporation, the
British Broadcasting Corporation. The BBC is
a monopoly but, contrary to widespread belief,
it is not Government controlled.
When one of the 1, 700. 000 or more owners of
television sets in Great Britain switches on his
receiver and relaxes in a comfortable chair in
his living room, he can be pretty sure that he
will see a wide variety of information and
entertainment programmes but there are, as
yet, no regular transmissions of formal educa-
tion programmes. The main categories of
the regular five hour daily output of the BBC
are news, broadcasts of actualities such as
sports events, drama, light entertainment, films,
talks, features and documentaries.
Though the main emphasis is on entertain-
ment, the BBC claims for its programmes
certain educational values of an informal kind.
Thus in drama many plays have been televised
in full, including Hamlet, King Lear, The Rivals
and St.. Joan, also plays by Yeats, Pirandello,
T. S. Eliot, Cocteau and O'Neill. Full length
opera and ballet, performed by leading
companies, are transmitted regularly. One
recent example was Fokine's"Le Carnaval"
given by the Sadlers Wells Theatre Ballet.
Talks, features and studio documentaries
cover a great variety of subjects. In one
programme,"Inventor's Club", inventors are
invited to bring their models for scrutiny by
experts. So far, more than 360 inventions,
chosen from between 5, 000 and 6, 000 submitted,
have been shown to viewers. Among a dozen
which were shown recently was a flagpole
device---off particular interest in Britain's
Coronation Year-and a novel pneumatic
trouser press. Requests from overseas for
details of the inventions are received in
increasing numbers. In this way a new outlet
has been provided for unrecognized, and often
unrewarded talent.
The possibilities of the visual arts as material
for television programmes have also been well
exploited. In a series called"The Eye of the
Artist", paintings and sculptures, as well as
other forms of art, are regularly shown. When
works taken from current exhibitions, such as
that of Dutch painters recently held at the
Royal Academy have been shown on the
screen, it has encouraged viewers to go and
look at the original more closely and with some
equipment of expert comment. Science, of
course, is a frequently recurring topic.
, ballet for beginners'
TilE particular attention paid by the BBC tochildren is obvious from the large place
allocated to programmes for young people in
the daily transmissions as well as from their
quality and content.
While presented in the form of entertain-
ment, much of this material is deliberately
educational as : well as informative. An
example is"Ballet for Beginners", a pro-
gramme in which a ballet is analyzed, and the
way it is composed and put together is shown
before it is performed. In one children's pro-
gramme,"Nature Detectives", young viewers
receive suggestions on how they can discover
for themselves the habits of wild birds and
animals and the wonders of plant life.
In presenting these programmes, however,
the BBC is fully alive to the dangers of
passivity. Dealing with this problem"The
BBC Quarter) y" stated,"participation, which
represents the creative aspect of imitation, has
been actively encouraged. Children have been
shown how to paint scenery and make
puppets ; a nursery opera was performed with
properties and puppets made entirely by young
viewers. Illustrated poems poured in after a
programme on the centenary of Wordsworth's
death in 1930. One series of programmes sent
children into the country, following maps and
instructions on the screen, to find Norman
arches, country craftsmen, bird songs, flints and
barge names and all the various sights and
sounds of the countryside".
The BBC writer added :"Anything which
makes a contribution to creative activity rather
than to passive and continuous viewing is
worth a lot of trouble and a calculated propor-
tion of the financial expenditure."
Another BBC official, discussing the term
"education"in relation to the content of
television programmes in Great Britain, wrote :
"Television broadcasting, like sound broad-
casting, is in this country required to be a
service of information, education and enter-
tainment. It is not easy to draw the dividing
line, but I should regard a programme like
'Ballet for Beginners', which is explanation and
appreciation added to performance, as being
education. If one of the objects of education
is to increase and intensify enjoyment, the
production of plays of artistic worth comes
within the term as does opera."
As already stated, BBC television pro-
grammes at present include no formal educa-
tion, though the Corporation is moving
cautiously in that direction. On possible
classroom uses of television, it says :"We are
at present holding to the doctrine that we in
broadcasting are seeking to complement rather
than displace the teacher, though we think it
possible that, at certain points, as, for example,
in the teaching of science, experience may
suggest more directly didactic broadcasting
than has been acceptable in sound and that this
will be a useful service to the secondary
modern schools."
Last May, the BBC began to explore its

COURIER
ATIONAL TV
future contribution to formal education when
it broadcast its first experimental television
programme for schools.'Twenty programmes
were televised'and sent out on a special
wavelength for six schools in the neighbourhood
of the London transmitter. About 1, 000
secondary school children saw the programmes
on receivers which radio manufacturers had
loaned free of charge.
The purpose of the experiment was primarily
to study programme technique, but the subjects
chosen-current affairs, the industrial scene,
geography, aesthetics, science-were held to
be those which would seem obvious for
inclusion in a school television service if it were
started. The production was a team effort in
which the staffs of the Television Service and
of the sound School Broadcasting Department
collaborated.
Pilot test
SINCE the conclusion of this experimentmemb rs of the School Broadcasti g
Council (an advisory body consisting of mem-
bers of the teaching profession) have studied
reports, by some of their members who acted
as observers in the schools concerned. They
have studied teacher and pupil attitudes to the
programmes, but so far no decision has been
taken regarding the continuation of such
experiments or their extension to other parts
of the country.
The first"pilot"test has helped the authorities
to study many educational and technical
questions such as the extent to which
programmes may be a cause of passivity on the
part of children or the size of screens needed
to make viewing easy for a class of 40 children.
Great Britain has also been studying the
economic implications of school television. At
present, well over 20, 000 schools use radio
programmes specially broadcast for schools.
Quite apart from the cost of producing regular
TV programmes, the total expense involved in
providing one or two sets in each school at a
cost of between S70 and E100 apiece would add
tremendously to the budgets of local education
authorities.
This was one of the points raised by some of
the people who protested at the time of the
tentative experiment, against the possible
introduction of television in British schools.
No less a person than the Archbishop of
Canterbury, formerly a distinguished school-
master himself, asked :"Are we justified in
promoting or even considering such a move
involving great expenditure at the present time,
or should it be postponed until there is money,
material and labour to play with"It was a
remarkable thing, he added, that"just at this
moment when, as a nation, we are in extreme
financial peril, it should be thought appropriate
to increase the, in many ways, unnecessary
amenities of ordinary living. Television is by
way of becoming one of such amenities".
'D Disastrous wedge'
THE Archbishop describes television toschools as"nothing less than a perfect
disaster. It drives another wedge between the
teacher and the pupil, and is bad for the
children, who ought to be looking to the
personal contribution of the teacher for their
own personal growth. It is a dangerous thing
when they think they can be educated by
mechanisms from outside."
In a reply to the Archbishop, Mr. J. L.
Longland, Chairman of the Television
Committee of the School Broadcasting Council,
stated the reasons which prompted educators
and the BBC to undertake the experiment :
"You can't argue good cases from bad teachers"
he wrote."Television could help to give a
lazy teacher an even lazier life, but so can
providing a textbook for every child, or devoting
an hour or two to silent reading. Television
will be worth having only if it does two things
simultaneously-if it adds to the armoury of
the good and average teacher, and if it opens
for the children new windows on the
surrounding world."
Whichever way the controversy over
classroom television is settled in Great Britain
it is obvious that the approach so far made to
the problem has been more cautious and
tentative than that adopted in the United States.
As a BBC official recently declared :"It may
seem very deliberate, but I think the
deliberation is wise ; at least it is what the
educational world seems to want. There is a
certain amount of indigestion already over the
visual aids, and both the School Broadcasting
Council and the BBC are determined not to
undertake direct television broadcasting to
schools until there is shown to be a place for
it."
MARCH 1953. Page 5
