K. BERTAZZINI
A scene in the TV studio of Radio Italiana in Turin. Small images seen on screens are picked up from studio cameras.
Image on far left is reproduced on centre screen, showing that this is being seen by public at the moment.
WHAT HAS TV TO SAY TO US ?
TELEVISION for the public is only
17 years old. In 1950 television
activities, other than of an expe-
rimental nature, had achieved impor-
tance for the general public only in
France, Great Britain, in the United
States and in the U. S. S. R. Today, hardly
three years later, it is a practical re-
ality in 24 countries.
No new medium of communication
has ever been greeted with such enthu-
siasm by SO many. Yet in one respect
the reception of television appears to be
different from that of previous media.
Experience with radio over 25 years
appears to have combined with aware-
ness of the fantastic potentialities of
television to provoke, from the outset,
some questions and even some alarm.
What, people ask, will this new instru-
ment do to us ? Are those who control
and direct it conscious of their respon-
sibilities ?
It is, perhaps, significant that it is
by educators that the voice of warning
and even of alarm has been chiefly rais-
ed."I don't want kids watching
things,"says one educator."I want
them doing things. They should be
solving problems, modelling in clay, mak-
ing things at a work bench, experi-
menting in chemistry, throwing a ball,
playing a trombone, skinning a squir-
rel. They should be learning skills,
skills, skills. Watching is one of the
best ways of learning, but not if you
just stay and watch. You should see the
pattern and then go out and do it."
These words, spoken at a national
education convention in the United Sta-
tes provoked quick and angry response
from the chief announcer of a television
station."Having spent some time in
the TV field, and also having in my
home a four-year-old daughter who is
vitally interested in television, I would
like to enlighten you about the so-call-
ed watching and not doing habits form-
ed by the children I have come in
contact with. They form the habit of
being moral citizens, believing that truth
and right will triumph over evil, false-
hood and wrong. They learn to grow
straight in body and mind, they learn
in many instances the meaning of the
golden rule ! I believe that people like
yourself who berate television, all the
time saying that it is not bad, then
attempting to prove that it is, are doing
a great deal of bad for the country, and
especially for the children. If enough
of the so-called intellectuals of the nation
pan, attack and criticize TV or attempt
to dabble in fields not their own, I be-
lieve that it will do immeasurable harm
to the television industry as a whole and
thereby rob the public and the chil-
dren of one form of educational enter-
tainment."
But the fears and anxieties of educa-
by Prof. Charles SlfPMANN
tors persist despite such angry denuncia-
tion. The former Chancellor of the
University of Chicago thus reads the
future."Under the impact of television
I can contemplate a time in America
when people can neither read nor write
and will be no better than the forms of
plant life."
Another educator thinks that televi-
sion may prove as"dangerous to culture
as the atom bomb is to civilization."
On the other hand, a senator of the U. S.
sees in television the possibilities of a
"great public forum and a real means
of furthering government of and by the
people."
Some parents share the anxieties of
some educators."It's not healthy,"one
says,"the way Johnny plays. All day
it's machine guns, murder, and gangs.
You can't tell me kids don't get those
UNESCO seeks to aid its member statesin developing television in the inte-
rests of education, science and
culture through the encouragement of
research, through clearing house services
gathering and furnishing information.
Last month, Unesco issued its first volume
on the subject, entitled :"Television and
Education in the United States."The
author is Professor Charles Siepmann, of
New-York University, who has devoted
much time to the effects of T. V. and its
use as a medium of education. The
new Unesco publication (priced at $ 1. 00 ;
6/- ; 300 frs) will be of special interest
to teachers, everyone concerned with the
use of audio-visual means for education,
individuals and institutions engaged in
adult education or school broadcasts, and
broadcasters engaged in or planning tele-
vision production. The material in this
issue ot the Courier is taken in major
part from Professor Siepmann's book,
supplemented by additional information
from Unesco's television service which is
shortly to publish a special report entitled.. Television, a Worfd Survey". The artie/e
on this page is reproduced from the intro-
duction 0/Professor Siepmann's book.
ideas from radio, TV and the movies."
For other parents television is a god-
send."TV keeps the children from
getting under foot.""TV keeps Billy
off the streets. It's a built-in baby sit-
ter."And so it goes. Opinion, con-
flicting and sometimes self-contradictory,
but opinion. Much of it, everywhere.
The concern, if not the alarm, of pa-
rents is justified by a fact of which few
of them, probably, are aware. For tele-
vision marks the high point of a curve
in the development of mass communic-
ation, which has proved as steady as it
it remarkable. Each new medium in-
vented has tended to embrace a younger
group of devotees. Newspapers, olde5t
of our four modern giants of mass com-
munication, are read mainly by adults.
Then came the cinema. The cinema, in
the United States at least, is predomi-
nantly an adolescent pastime. Radio,
next, absorbed the pre-adolescent child.
With the advent of television, mass
communication appears destined to ab-
sorb us from the cradle to the grave-
television is viewed with rapt attention
by infants.
Last century John Ruskin was asked
by a group of journalists to comment on
what at the time was a triumph of tech-
nology-the completion of a cable line
from England to India. Ruskin offered
no comment, but posed them the ques-
tion :"What have you to say to India ?"
What, we may likewise ask. will tele-
vision have to say to us ? Those in
charge of television in the U. S. in Bri-
tain and elsewhere, are conscious of the
portentous undertaking on which they
are embarked. Educators in the U. S.,
who were laggard and half-hearted in
availing themselves of radio's resour-
ces, have been quick to grasp the cultu-
ral significance of this newcomer on the
mass communication scene.
In the sense that all experience is edu-
cational all television programmes are
educational. But the educational inten-
tion of television varies, and will vary,
from country to country and in accord-
ance with the nature and purposes of
the organizations and institutions operat-
ing television stations and producing
television programmes.
Programmes range from education in
a very broad sense and with a heavy
sugar coating to'formal instruction un-
der classroom conditions.
There can be no question that, in the
matter of educational telecasting, there
are'those who ! have rushed in where an-
gels fear to tread. Television is not an
unmixed blessing. It is a two-edged
sword. Every technological advance
does not automatically spell progress.
Without the exercise of great intelli-
gence and true conscience, it may, in-
deed, prove a curse. Faith and enthu-
siasm have been the keynote of deve-
lopments in educational television thus
far. The condition of further effective
advances in this field is caution-great
deliberation, more careful and extensive
testing and, above all, concern with
standards.
Television is developing fast every-
where. Its expansion thus far is as no-
thing to its likely development over the
next 10 years. This images it the more
important to take stock of the present
situation and of the short past which is
already rich in evidence, in examples of
intelligent experiment, and in clues to
the future development of this latest of
the media of mass communication.
