CHEAPNESS AND SIMPLICITY MARK
NEW UNESCO PRINTING PROCESS
Students study most effective design for future poster at Fundamental Education Training Centre set up by Unesco
at Patzcuaro, Mexico. Artists must pay great attention to local customs and dress if lesson is to have its full effect.
Artist engraves poster design directly in a mixture of paraffin wax and beeswax spread on glass plate. He cuts right
down to glass (see diagrams on right) and can easily correct any mistakes by melting a candle over the wax plate.
After engraving, a mixture of glue and glycerine is poured over wax. Finished plate (here being removed) has a rubbery
texture. Poster can be printed from it by inking its surface, laying down a sheet of paper and smoothing it down by hand.
by Daniel BEHRMAN
A new printing process, so cheap and
so simple that any teacher, aided
by an artist, can use it has recently
been developed at Patzcuaro, Mexifu.
Designed primarily for the production of posters,
the process is now in operation at the inter-
national centre known as CREFAL (Centre
Regional de Educacion Fundamental de America
Latina), set up by Unesco, the Organization of
American States and the Mexican Government,
to raise living standards through education hy
training badly-needed teachers of fundamental
education for Latin America.
The process consists simply of engraving on
wax, and from this wax"'positive", casting a
printing plate made of a mixture of carpenter's
glue and glycerine-the same as used to manufac-
ture printers'rollers. The result is a"'negative"
plate resembling a huge, flexible stamp from
which a poster can be printed even without a
press.'
The new process was developed as part of the
Patzcuaro centre's assignment to find simple,
inexpensive ways of producing the highly-
specialized materials needed in this form of
education-which often requires a teacher to
spend more time outside of the classroom than
in it.
Since the centre's opening in May 1951, its
staff has counted heavily on posters to make its
objectives known to the 14, 000 inhabitants of the
20 Tarascan Indian villages in which teams are
working to improve health and economic
conditions. With half the population illiterate
and newspapers and radios a rarity, posters were
found to be one of the few ways of reaching the
villagers. The centre relied on art to tell the
villagers of the need to boil water or to vaccinate
cattle against anthrax. For mere slogans, no
matter how bright or powerful, were useless
when people could not read them.
At first the production of these posters
presented a serious problem. Ordinarily, poster
production of realistic drawings (abstract art was
avoided for these villages) requires expensive
plates and a heavy-duty press. The. engraving
process on linoleum, for example, is an exacting
one, for one tiny slip by the artist can ruin a
plate.
The centre first tried poster printing by the
photo offset process, which is usually considered
an effective, low-cost method of producing
posters. In Patzcuaro, however, it presented an
endless series of difficulties.
Variations in electric current from 60 to 120
volts made it impossible to obtain a steady press
speed. During the rainy season, damp paper
would not go through the press properly. And,
finally, the press required a trained operator-a
rarity in most of the rural regions where the
centre's students from 16 Latin American
countries knew they would work after graduation.
Then, the head of Patzcuaro's production unit,
Senor Julio Castro of Uruguay, and a 36-year-old
American, Mr. Jerome Oberwager, began to hunt
for a solution. After months of experimenting,
during which they tested various materials such
as modelling clay, melted brown sugar, plaster,
tar and sealing wax, they finally evolved the
process now used by the centre.
It begins with the pouring of a mixture of
more or less equal quantities of paraffin wax and
beeswax onto a pane of glass set into a table
boarded on four sides. The beeswax, which at
Patzcuaro comes from the centre's own hives
where students are now being taught beekeeping,
serves to raise the melting point of the mixture.
When no beeswax or paraffin is available, candles
such as those used in many churches, can be
used, provided they are made of beeswax and not
of animal fat or petroleum.
After the mixture has solidified, the artist is
ready to engrave his poster. Unlike other engrav-

Simple yet versatile method of printing produces lines
almost as fine as those of a steel or copper engraving.
This poster points out advantages of cooking meals
on a proper stove instead of over a smoky open fire.
The Spanish text of this poster could be translated as"You are never too old to learn". In Tarascan villages,
however, where the word"viejito" (little old man) is also the name of a traditional dance, the poster's double
meaning (you may dance, but you can also learn) is appreciated by the local people and has a greater effect.
ing processes, however, the artist first draws
his poster directly on the wax plate with Indian
ink or a pencil, or else he can spread a paper
drawing on the wax surface and trace the lines
and words lightly with a pencil or any sharp
instrument. No special tracing paper is needed
to do this ; any kind of paper will do. And by
using this method, even persons who are not
artists can achieve satisfactory results.
Once the drawing is completed, simple
engraving tools are used to carve out the wax.
Here again, the new process has an obvious
advantage : the artist is no longer forced to
"engrave in reverse"as in other methods. He
simply carves out the black lines and surfaces
which will appear in the finished poster. This
is the opposite of what is done in linoleum or
wood engraving, for example, where those parts
are cut out which will not appear in the final
poster.
When the engraving is completed, the wax
plate is placed in a wooden casting box and a
mixture of glue and glycerine is poured over it.
The finished plate has a rubbery texture, and a
poster can be printed from it merely by inking
its surface, laying down a sheet of paper and
smoothing it out by hand.
To speed up production, Mr. Oberwager and
his students have designed and built a wooden
printing press, which is so simple that any
carpenter can construct one. This hand press
accomplishes the inking and smoothing processes
in two simple strokes. (At the Patzcuaro centre,
the surface of the printing roller is made of the
stout cloth from which Tarascan Indian women
weave their skirts.)
A wide variety of posters have so far been
produced by this new glueplate process which
has reduced the cost per poster to less than two
cents. They have treated such subjects as
literacy, personal hygiene, cooking on a stove
instead of over a smoky open fire, and village
sanitation.
The process has shown many practical
advantages :
* It is cheap : the wax is melted down and used
over and over again and so are the printing
plates of glue and glycerine. In fact, provided
the glue and glycerine are kept clean, their
quality improves with use.
* There is no limit to the size of the poster that
can be produced ; a large poster merely means a
bigger pane of glass, more wax and more glue
and glycerine.
* It does not require an expensive press (the
wooden press at Patzcuaro was built with local
timber and materials bought in the markets).
* Artists can correct their mistakes while
engraving by melting a candle over the wax plate.
* It is versatile : it can produce lines almost as
fine as those of a steel or copper engraving as
well as huge block-letter signs.
* It makes printing possible on almost any kind
of material : cloth, wood, leather, glass, metal,
cement, plaster, and practically any kind of paper.
In fundamental education, local needs have to
be given full consideration. Only if the men,
women and children depicted. in posters wear
traditional costumes, and the objects drawn are
well-known to everybody, will the visual lesson
have its full effect on the population.
The Patzcuaro experiment has proved that any
forgotten detail, or any mistakes made by the
artists as far as the peasants'garb is concerned,
may reduce the importance, if not wholly destroy
the content and value of the lesson illustrated by
a poster.
The shape of a hat was enough to convince
Tarascans, for instance, that a certain poster did
not really show the way they should select their
seeds, but indicated the way this operation was
performed in a different region, with a different
climate altogether.
Therefore, the impact of such posters depends
more on their variety and specialized local
appeal than on a centralized, streamlined
production.
"Those who work daily on fundamental
education tasks"-says a booklet published by
Crefal under the title :"How To Print Posters"
-"must face continously new problems, which
require new solutions. To them we offer this
printing process. If they work on it with
patience and dedication, they will soon see their
efforts rewarded."
