COVER PAGE OF THE UNESCO PUBLICATION"TRANSMITTING WORLD NEWS"WHICH PRESENTS
WORLD NEWS IS E
WHEN Charles Havas founded
the world's first news agency
in Paris in 1835, Samuel F.
Morse, in New York, was developing
an instrument which two years later
was to be hailed as the first"elec-
tromagnetic recording telegraph".
Morse's invention involved use of the
"dot-dash"code which bears his
name.
The Havas agency collected and
translated extracts from the Euro-
pean newspapers it received by post
and distributed them to the Paris
press. By 1840, Havas had his own
correspondents in most European
capitals and had established a pi-
geon post to distribute news to pa-
pers in Brussels and London as well
as Paris. In the same year, Morse
opened a 40-mile telegraph line for
public business between Washington
and Baltimore.
The telegraph was soon to put the
pigeon post out of existence. At
the same time, it was enormously to
increase the scope of Havas itself
and make possible the rise of other
news agencies. But in America, as in
Europe, telegraph charges remain-
ed high. In 1848, six New York
newspapers founded the New York
Associated Press to share the ex-
pense of bringing news to their city.
They thus created a precedent in co-
operative news-gathering which was
greatly to influence development of
the world press.
The third of the world's news
agencies, Wolff's Bureau of Berlin,
was founded in 1849 following ex-
pansion of the Prussian State tele-
graph. The fourth, Reuters of Lon-
don, came into being two years later
as a result of the laying between
Dover and Calais of the first success-
ful submarine cable. Julius Reuter
had then, as throughout his career,
an instinct for"following the cable."
by Philip
It was by trusting his instinct that
he achieved world-wide success in
the news agency field.
Thus began a new era that was
eventually to put a girdle round the
earth in far less than the 40 minutes
required by Puck in Shakespeare's
Midsummer Night's Dream. With it
came a development of international
reporting by cable, telegraph, tele-
phone, radio and television which is
completely transforming man's un-
derstanding of the world around
him.
"The free flow of news is not
merely the concern of those profes-
sionally involved in its collection and
distribution, but of all men and all
nations", says Francis Williams in a
graphic study, Transmitting World
News, just published by Unesco.
Formerly editor of the London Daily
Herald and Governor of the British
Broadcasting Corporation during
1951-1952, Mr. Williams is a noted
authority on the world press.
In this study he surveys the deve-
lopment of world communications
and the press, illustrates which
areas of the world are well or insuf-
ficiently served by these media and
jshows how high costs and delays in
transmitting press reports hamper
the flow of news between nations.
Finally, he suggests means of over-
coming such obstacles to effective
enjoyment of freedom of informa-
tion.
Mr. William's book is the latest in
a series of studies produced by
Unesco in an effort to focus public
attention on obstacles to the"free
flow of ideas by word and image."
Transmitting World News is con-
cerned with the physical means of
UNESCO

communication."It is thus a note
on a theme as old as civilization",
the author declares."The struggle
to destroy the distances that keep
men apart goes back, in one form or
another, to the beginning of his-
tory."Modern communications
are"the direct successors of the sig-
nal fire on the hill, the drum in
the forest, the courier on the horse,
the messenger in the boat, the pi-
geon in the air, the dispatch sent by
coach or train ; of all those means,
indeed, by which communities have
sought, since society began, to satis-
fy the need to communicate rapidly
with each other."
Every day some 7, 500 newspapers
and 5, 000 radio transmitters bring
information to the world's peoples.
Ninety per cent of these journals
and 80 per cent of the transmitters
receive domestic news from over 70
national news agencies, most of
which also distribute international
news from one or more of the.
"world"news agencies.
The world agencies, which deal
largely with the transmission of news
across frontiers, are concentrated
in four national groups. They
are Reuters (British Common-
wealth)) ; Agence-France-Presse
(France) ; Tass (Soviet Union) ;
Associated Press, United Press and
International News Service (United
States).
These six agencies, Mr. Williams
points out, serve as many as 144
States and territories, which toge-
ther contain 98. 7 per cent of the
world's population. But they, like
the national news agencies and in-
dividual newspapers, are hindered in
their task of reporting news and
opinion by the lack of communica-
tion facilities, or because these faci-
lities are technically retarded, slow
and expensive.
Severely hampering the flow of
news are the high cost of transmitt-
ing press dispatches to and from
various parts of the world-notably
Latin America, the Middle East and
Asia-and the wide discrepancies in
rates charged for similar communic-
ations services. These charges
vary from country to country by
over 300 per cent.
Mr. Williams cites examples in all
continents to illustrate what he des-
cribes as the"chaotic nature of the
international press rate structure."
The ordinary press rate from Lon-
don to Moscow, for instance, is 4. 6
cents a word ; from Paris to Moscow
(approximately the same distance)
8. 8 cents. The charge from London
to Cairo is 4. 0 cents ; Paris-Cairo,
10. 0 cents. Turning from Europe to
North America, we find that the
rate from New York to Rio de Jan-
eiro is 8. 0 cents ; from Montreal to
Rio de Janeiro (approximately the
same distance), 12. 0 cents. Conver-
sely, while the charge from New
York to Sydney, Australia is 6. 5
cents, the Montreal-Sydney rate is
only 2. 0 cents.
Striking disparities are also reveal-
ed in two-way press traffic. It may
cost considerably more to send news
in one direction than in reverse.
The rate from London to New York,
for example, is 2. 0 cents ; from New
York to London, 5. 5 cents. The
charge from Rome to Bangkok is
21. 3 cents ; the return rate is 14. 3
cents.
Another related obstacle is the
frequent delays in the reception,
transmission and delivery of press
messages. These may greatly dimi-
nish or even destroy the value of
news reports. To ensure priority
of tt-patment, news agencies and
individual correspondents often
have no choice but to pay the ur-
gent press rate, which may be three
or four times the ordinary charge.
High press rates, Mr. Williams
declares, prevent newspapers and
news agencies from extending their
coverage to many parts of the world,
especially to less advanced areas
where fuller reporting is essential to
international understanding. At
the same time, smaller or less weal-
thy newspapers cannot afford to
subscribe to basic news services, let
alone maintain their own corres-
pondents abroad. The overall effect
is to limit the volume and variety of
world news, particularly information
which gives an interpretative back-
ground to current events.
As a long term solution, the author
urges establishment of a universal
low press rate. Citing the expe-
rience of certain communication
services, he suggests that a uniform
reduced rate might result in such an
increased volume of press traffic as
to be economically feasible.
Mr. Williams further proposes that
the International Telecommunica-
tion Union (I. T. U.) should establish
a consultative committee"to exa-
mine the whole question of telecom-
munication facilities in the light of
the international public interest."
This committee, jointly representing
the I. T. U. and the press, would seek
to :
1. reduce the present wide gap
between highest and lowest
rates and fix uniform charges
for two-way press traffic ;
2. obtain more uniform rental
for teleprinter networks ;
3. establish lower charges for
cable lines jointly rented by
two or more newspapers or
news agencies ;
4. assure a cheaper and more
extensive international tele-
photo service. The commit-
tee would report to the inter-
governmental conferences pe-
riodically convened by the
I. T. U. to revise the world's
telegraph, telephone and ra-
dio regulations.
- The author also draws attention
to shortages in information facilities,
pointing out that the continents
where illiteracy is high-Africa,
Asia and South America-are poor-
est in communication and press
services. As a corollary, he notes
that, of the 45 States which lack
AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1953. Page 21
national news agencies. 31 have an
illiteracy rate of over 40 per cent.
"In view of the urgent need to
make available to the peoples of
. underdeveloped areas a basic and
independent service of essential
world news", Mr. Williams state,"the major news agencies should
examine the possibility of supplying
newspapers in such areas with a
summarized non-profit news service
transmitted by radio". He asks
telecommunication administrations
to co-operate in this public service
by providing transmitters and by
permitting direct receipt of these
newscasts by the newspapers con-
cerned.
In a foreword to the book, Unesco
declares that"the present paucity of
information to and from large areas
of the world is difficult to accept
with complacency in an era in which
science has opened up boundless
possibilities for full and rapid com-
munications". The Organization
expresses the hope that the book
will help to secure adoption of re-
medial measures at the next Inter-
national Telegraph and Telephone
Conference, to be convened by the
I. T. U. in 1955.
At the last International Telegraph
and Telephone Conference in 1949,
Unesco submitted a number of pro-
posals to assure greater facilities for
the press. The Conference made
the following favourable decisions :
(1) a new and more comprehensive
definition of press dispatches was.
adopted ; (2) administrations were
urged to increase construction of
telephone circuits as a means of
facilitating transmission of dispat-
ches ; (3) a system was adopted for
the uniform reduction of press rates.
Unesco will continue its action on
behalf of the press at the 1955 Con-
ference.
Mr. Williams'book has mean-
while been brought to the attention
of the Economic and Social Council,
at its summer session in Geneva, by
Mr. Salvador P. Lopez, United Na-
tions Rapporteur on freedom of in-
formation. In a report on press
problems, he has urged the Council
to act on the issue of rates and
priorities as part of its effort to
promote freedom of information.
Transmitting World News contains
a series of pictographs illustrating
disparities in press rates, charthlg
the national news agencies and
giving locations of ocean cable and
radio services.
Transmitting World News (99 pa-
ges plus 5 pictographs) published by
Unesco, Paris. Price $ 1. 00 ; 6s. 300 fr.
During the early half of the 19th century the first news agencies such as Havas
and Reuters used pigeons to distribute news. By 1840 Havas had pigeon ser-
vices working between Brussels, London and Paris. Reuter's first news venture,
in 1850, included among other things, a pigeon post between Aachen and Brussels.
COURIER
I A STUDY OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND THE PRESS WRITTEN BY FRANCIS WILLIAM.
, tRVONE'S CONCERN
L. Soljok
