Page 4. JULY 1953
oASHOT ! N THE ARM
FOR HEALTH IMPROVEMENT
IN many cultures throughout the world manis continuous with his environment. He is not
healthy unless his environment is"healthy,"
or, conversely, the well-being of his environment
depends upon his acts. For example, a bereaved
Kgatla spouse of a fruitful union needs purifica-
tion before he can step on the earth because his
tread scorches the ground ; he injures the people,
the cattle, the crops, and causes a drought.
To break connection between the body and the
land that is continuous with it may be hazardous
or disastrous, irrespective of whether the people
are sedentary or not, whether they depend on
"the fruits of the earth"through agriculture.
This continuity is expressed in a wide range of
ways, from the Eskimo desire to die where he
was born to the belief of the cattle raising Nuer
that if a man permanently settles away from
tribal land he will get sick unless he takes some
earth with him to drink in water mixed with
gradually increasing amounts of new land. The
distance a man will travel for treatment may
depend on which is more hazardous, lack of treat-
ment or continuity with his land.
Again, the body is continuous with the other
bodies of the social unit, and in this lies the
strength and the weakness of the unit, inasmuch
as when one body suffers, it exposes the whole
unit to danger.
Western medicine has a name for this : it calls
it contagion and explains it scientifically. The
medicine of other groups recognizes a different
order of contagion or pollution, and acts accord-
ing to a different conception. So the Australian
Murngin will psychologically cut off any one of
their members who is known to have been magi-
cally attacked ; they stop treating him in terms
of his place in the balanced system of structured
roles ; the mother does not act as his mother,
the brother does not relate himself to the man
who is magically stricken as his brother. The
stricken one is"isolated,"and the social unit
thus protects itself against his contagion. Such
a conception of continuity of body with land
and society underlies the way in which medical
treatment and hygienic measures are accepted
and worked out.
The image of the body depends to some extent
on these concepts of continuity. In many socie-
ties it has no sharp boundaries. Different parts
of the body may be stressed in forming the link
of continuity. In Greek culture, for example,
lineal continuity with the descendant is envi-
sioned as a continuity of the internal organs, the
splanchna, and"compassion"in Greek is derived
from this word. A mother, ready to do anything
for her child, will say,"He is my splanchna."
The lateral relationship, however, is one of blood :
my sister is"my blood,"and blood brotherhood
is reported to have been created between friends,
at least until recently, in remote sections. The
organs of communication, the windows of the
soul, are the eyes among the Greeks, and also
among the Russians, as well as in Latin America.
In Mediterranean countries and the Middle East
evil flows through the eyes when an individual
admires and covets.
Certain parts of the body are often more highly
charged with emotion than others. We find
many regions, in the Middle East, the Far East,
and the Pacific Islands, where the head is extre-
mely important, often sacred. It may have to
be covered, or there may be regulations against
allowing anyone to step over it, or even over the
shadow of another's head.
It is not here our intention to list all the
differences in the emotional weighting of parts
of the body, but to point out that these exist and
should be taken in consideration in the appli-
cation of health measures. For example, if a
treatment is to be applied to feet and the head,
it might be expedient to introduce it through
tampering with the less valued area first. If
skin is to be grafted and it is unavoidable that
it be applied from the lesser to the higher area,
this differential in value should at least be
known to the worker. The advantages of cutting
off the hair should probably be weighed against
the disadvantages resulting from doing so.
In many societies the body is not considered
A patient in England submits calmly to special"wind tunnel"test for loss of salt from body by temperature
variations. In technologically advanced countries people are more accustomed'0 accept innovations in
medical science. In communities less accustomed to change, introducing a new attitude to disease or a
new medical practice can disrupt whole social order and produce deep psychological troubles (COI Photo).
to be complete at birth, Man has to add to it,
to increase it in maleness or femaleness or
potency or effectiveness, or sheer adequacy. In
Burma a girl traditionally could reach woman-
hood only when her ears were pierced. To be
truly male, a boy was tattooed between knees and
navel. The body of its own accord was not
completely potent ; many Burmese and people
from the hill tribes inserted coins and other
charms under the skin to enhance the person.
In Africa and Oceania the teeth had to be
filed or knocked out or broken or blackened,
before the body was complete. In many parts of
the world, the body had to be scarified and some
foreign substance rubbed in. This completion
was not, however, for the body itself alone, but
also symbolized the continuity with the social
unit.
The'a) arm c ! ock'
that buzzed
IN certain cultures clothing seems necessary tothe completion of the body. A Greek village
girl may never see her naked body, and may
never try to see her naked baby. She delights in
the clothed baby, and particularly in festive array
with embroideries and jewels. Petal skin or rosy
cheeks have no part in her lullabies or dirges ;
she sings of costly silks and jewels, and of the
festive trappings of the young brave.
In many parts of the world, clothing is not
"shelter"as it is classified by Western society, but
personal enhancement, even completion. For
thirty years missionaries among the Chagga tried
to introduce change in their clothing habits, so
as to combat the scourge of respiratory diseases,
without any success. The Chagga said that
these diseases came from evil spirits, and that
clothing had nothing to do with them, since its
function was that of adornment.
These are some of the concepts relating to the
body which are relevant to the introduction of
health measures, either in the field of medicine
or that of hygiene. Hygiene, in one definition,
tells people what they should do and tries to
prevent the spread of disease. Medical care has
as its purpose the relief of suffering and tells
people what they should not do.
The two fields, however, often overlap. It is
difficult, for example, to place the DDT
campaign in either category exclusively. Under-
taken under medical auspices, it has also
destroyed pests and vermin in the area of
Hygiene. In Iran, a farmer was heard to
complain that it had an adverse effect upon
farming ; the flies, mosquitoes and bedbugs which
had been counted upon to wake the farmers from
their afternoon siesta are now gone, and the
farmers do not wake up in time to put in suffi-
cient work before sunset.
Conceptions of what constitutes cleanliness,
uncleanliness, and dirt vary throughout the
world. In many societies death and. graves are
contaminating, making relatives or people who
handled the dead unclean until they can be
purified or until a certain period of time has
elapsed. It is not safe to assume that, because
a people are given to washing often, they can be
trusted to wash their hands before embarking on
an undertaking which may be highly vulnerable
to infection.
What the eye
doesn't see...
'wtrTHEN villagers in an Iranian village com-plained that their water tasted and smelled
foul, a filter was built for it under the
auspices of the Near East Foundation. The
farmers were told all about the dangerous micro-
organisms and urged to avoid them by drinking
only the filtered water. But they needed no
urging ; they drank of the pure water because it
was cool and clear, and tasted good, though not
because of the absence of micro-organisms. A
variation of this attitude, as Margaret Mead has
pointed out, is prevalent in the United States
where people avoid that which looks or smells or
tastes dirty as unhygienic, whereas actually the
dangerous germs have neither taste nor smell and
are not visible to the naked eye.
Patterned cleanliness, not because cleanliness as
such is important, but as part of a way of life, is
common in many cultures. A good housewife, as
among the Spanish Americans of New Mexico,
may be one who always keeps her house clean ;
the people may always wash themselves, morning
and evening. But among these people, this is
the way to act, part of the aesthetic picture ; it
has nothing to do with hygienic ends. The idea
that a person they love or familiar objects and
surroundings can contaminate them, is rejected
by this group.
In Colombia cleanliness was introduced in the
schools as an aesthetic measure. In Indonesia
and the Pacific Islands there is frequent bathing
by immersion throughout the day, apparently for
refreshment. In Indian villages there are often
tanks where the villagers can immerse themsel-
ves before a meal. The Burmese villager bathes
after the last meal for refreshment and as part
of the ritual of making himself festive for the
amusement of the evening. Burmese wash their
mouths after every meal, the Hos clean their
teeth with a twig every day after their first meal.
UNESCO I

. COURIER JULY 1953. Page 5
A new aspect of Technical Assistance is taking on supreme importance. It is the realization that new techniques must be introduced with proper regard for the
existing culture and with as little violence as possible to the folkways of the groups concerned. In public health it has been discovered repeatedly that innovations in
child and maternal care, hospitalization and the distribution of drug remedies for a disease may have serious effects neither intended nor expected. (COI photo).
Cleanliness, again, may be a ritual, as with
Mohammedans and Jews. Orthodox Jews must
wash out mouth and hands upon arising and
before eating and after elimination ; the hands
must be clean before they help to wash the
mouth. The water must be flowing or must be
poured.
From the viewpoint of other peoples, many
Western habits are dirty. The British, who
regarded the hill tribes of Burma as filthy for
taking almost no baths, were in turn considered
dirty by the Indonesians for bathing only once a
day. Our Western handkerchief used for pock-
eting mucous is found revolting by a number
of other societies.
There has been confusion among people of
Western culture as to the meaning of dirt and
cleanliness, and the extent to which they are
related to hygiene. And where new habits have
been pressed upon other cultures without plan,
they have often reflected this confusion. Cow-
dung, for example, is important in medication
in some groups such as the Kgatla, and in some
Indian villages where it is used in poulticing and
for the treatment of burns. There is no disgust
connected with it, and disgust expressed by a
foreigner may meet strong opposition. Cleanli-
ness in Western culture is often merely an
aesthetic quality, or is associated with virtue,
despite the use of hygiene as a sanction.
Hygienic measures have been directed toward
teaching people cleanly habits, better housing,
better ventilation, and the destruction of vermin :
but the most concentrated attack since the
beginning of this century has been against soil
pollution and water pollution. Where people
eliminated on the surface of the gtound, in no
specific area, and went about barefooted, they
exposed themselves daily to hookworm in many
areas where this is present. Rains washed para-
sites from the excreta into streams and exposed
people to dysentery and other intestinal disor-
ders. Flies settling on exposed excreta carried
disease from person to person. The paramount
need then was for the building of deep pit
latrines.-
The attempt to educate people to the need
for latrines and to persuade them to build
and use them was undertaken by the Rockefeller
Foundation for the Oceanic areas, by the Near
East Foundation for areas in Greece and the
Middle East, and by various governments and
colonial administrations. The need was wide-
spread and still is. In 1948, after fifteen years
of an intermittent campaign for the introduction
of latrines, 98 per cent of the Greek farmers were
reported to be without latrines. And this was in
a country where the only resistance came from
the people's contentment with the habitual and
from seeing no need for change.
It is no easy matter to introduce latrines in
the different regions of the world. Sometimes, as
in the Netherlands Indies. the very idea was so
curious that people could not believe that they
had understood correctly. Sometimes, as in
India, it was ridiculous. With all the space
universe-that is, for psycho-
somatic health.
Among some groups disease is a
Continued on
next page
around the village, why should the people trouble
themselves to bore holes for latrines ?
The attempt to introduce more hygienic hous-
ing has also met with various resistances. Often
people lived in crowded quarters because they
liked to live that way ; the hope that a better
income would mean better housing for the Mexi-
can villager, for example, or for the Spanish
Americans of New Mexico, was ill-founded. In
Uganda the resistance was based on the religion
of the people and was found to be almost insur-
mountable. Here in many areas the houses have
no windows and very low doorways, admitting
minimal quantities of light and fresh air, and
thus also allowing no opportunity for the working
of the evil eye, which is responsible for all illness,
poverty, and death.
The concepts of health and disease are part of
man's view of the universe and his place within
it. There are people who believe that the good
is normal and inherent, and only man's misdeed,
carelessness or sin allows evil to intrude. Among
some Indian tribes of the southwestern United
States evil, and specifically disease, can enter
when man has allowed his relations with the
universe to become disharmonious, or the loss of
harmony itself is a disease. So, among the Hopi
and the Papago, it is imperative to have good
thoughts, to avoid quarrels and aggressive acts,
for the maintenance of good relations with the

Page 6. JULY 1953
-
HEALTH MEANS DIFFERENT THINGS TO DIFFERENT PEOPLES
(Continued from previous page).
punishment for sin, mainly against society ; it was
therefore an important factor in the maintenance
of social order. Among the Saulteaux Indians,
and the Manus of the Admiralties, where con-
fession was necessary before cure could be
effected, disease actually brought to light and
clarified a number of hidden matters. The whole
process of getting ill and being cured was a
mainstay of society. To introduce a new concept
of disease, and penicillin instead of confession, to
people for whom illness has a significant place in
the universal order is often impossible, or
dangerous to psychosomatic health.
It is common to attribute disease to the
machinations of witchcraft, evilly disposed people
or spirits, the evil eye, or blackmailing deities
desiring to be bribed. Weak tsav potency among
the Tiv, a low kan among the Burmese, makes
the individual vulnerable to such attack. Fright
is a major causs of disease in Mitla, and its
effects may be manifested years later. Against
a background of such beliefs, workers found it
hard to introduce hygienic measures.
Attitudes toward treatment rest on the concep-
tion of health and disease. The Navaho may
take treatment to relieve his symptoms, but he
knows he will never b2 truly well until he reco-
vers his harmony with the universe. Where
health is defined as an existing average, not an
ideal to be achieved, much ill health will be
accepted before treatment is sought. Workers
among fellahin in the Middle East found
that trachoma and even partial blind-
ness, were part of the picture of health,
since these things had always been
present and anyway they were from God.
Reports from Latin Americans and
from the Spanish Americans in the
United States indicate that there, too,
the picture of health contains a"normal"
amount of disease. This is the con-
ception among the Tiv where tsav was
needed for super-normal health. It is
the attitude of rural Greeks, who learn
to put up with a certain amount of ill-
health as a matter of course. It is one
which has made the teaching of new
health measures very difficult, since the ;
people have first to be taught to re-
cognize ill-health as abnormal and un-
necessary.
The idea of infection itself frequently
does not have to be taught since it is
present in many cultures, but the agents
of infection, the routes, the kinds of
things which are communicable, are
usually completely different from those
which Western medicine accepts.
There are many kinds of measures
taken for the prevention of the spread of
an infection. To prevent the spread of
death, the home of the dead is often
burned or deserted, and his belongings
buried or destroyed. In many parts of
the world the near relatives of the dead
are isolated, and are not allowed to mix
with others until they have undergone
purification. From the viewpoint of
Western medical practice, these measu-
res often are actually good precautions
when the death was from an infectious
disease.
In many cultures where the individual
is continuous with, his unit, the isolation
of the ill is completely unacceptable.
Dr. Carl Binger reports that when he was
dealing with a typhus epidemic among
the Greeks of Macedonia at the end of
the first World War, the family would
hide its sick under piles of clothing or in
the cellar rather than show them to a
physician who might take them to a
hospital, though they know that to keep
the sick with them might mean death
for the family. This attitude is reported
4-..... h^,..,....,....""......... 4- i-  Mn'u' ̂ 1",,,"h... i-..."ni--i"""rr- +1-...... 1"10....to be present today also, obstructing t. he campaign
against tuberculosis. People do know the danger
to which they are exposed, but they feel that to
isolate the sick individual, or to take precautions
protecting the rest of the family would be to
reject a member of the family. In West Africa
"the whole family would rather contract disease
and die from it than part with the infected
member."
Spitting out the snake
WHEN a Burmese villager is ill, it is he whoimmediately sends for a physician, for
drugs, for treatment. When a Greek is
ill, he does not exhibit any need for care, does not
go to bed unless he is incapable of standing up,
thus exercising fortitude. When a Navaho is ill, it
is his relatives who decide what is to be done and
make the necessary arrangements. It is not much
use to try to persuade a sick Navaho to go to the
hospital, since it is his family who will actually
make the decision for him. It is cruel to tell a
Greek that he must stay in bed and do nothing
for himself ; it is much kinder to say this to his
wife or other relatives, so that the sick one
should not have to be put in the position of
asking for this pampering.
There are definite patterns of treatment in the
various cultures. Where disease is inflicted by
the intrusion of foreign matter, of spirit arrows
or snakes or fish, sucking is a common form of
treatment. In Papua, native doctors are found
sucking out the spirit of the hookworm and
spitting it out in the form of a miniature snake.
Where there is contact with Western medicine, it
is usual for the native medicine man to be called
first and for the Western practitioner to be
summoned only when all else fails.
Burmese take mainly solids as medicament,
and have solids introduced into the body. The
Navaho depend largely upon anointing, and use a
variety of greases. They use pitch as a sort of
poultice, and when a herbal concoction is used,
it is first rubbed ritually over the body and then
the remains are drunk.
The Western practice of going to bed when ill
is not present everywhere. In some societies,
such as the Zuni, one goes to bed when one is
ready to die. Sending such people to bed may
be very disturbing. The Navaho, used to moving
about freely, find it terribly confining to stay in
bed in the hospital. Where beds consist of mats
on a draughty floor, moreover, they may not be
an ideal place for the ill.
A difficulty encountered in treatment is that
diagnostic measures are often taken as the cure.
In Sikian, in Malaita, and the Cook Islands, it
was found that the use of the stethoscope and
tuberculin injections were considered corrective
measures ; the people could not understand why
they should submit to further treatment. And
in general, one application, whether diagnostic or
curative, was considered a cure, so that in the
tuberculin test, people could not be persuaded to
return for further injections or for inspection.
The Spanish Americans of New Mexico felt that
These New Guinea medical aides take proper precautions against
infection before performing a minor surgical operation, but in many
areas many psychological hurdles must be overcome if modern concepts
of disease, germs and microbes are to be understood and accepted.
(Australian Official Photo.)
an X-ray examination was a cure in itself, and
that there was no need to return to the phy-
sician.
Where illness and health are determined by
ancestors or deities, prevention often takes the
form of periodic rites. When Western practices
are introduced, it is found to be necessary to first
educate people in Western concepts of the
agency of disease. It is very difficult to explain
what we mean by germs and microbes. Dr. Hei-
ser found that people in the Philippines were
ready to attack germs with a bolo, since a germ
represented the enemy.
Workers in India found it effective to present
germs as poison ; this made sense and circum-
vented the neces. sity of determining whether the
germs had true life or not. Control through
elimination of insect carriers met with resistance
in Buddhist societies ; some groups, however, may
agree to destroy life if they are made to do so
by someone who will assume the responsibility.
In the destruction of plague-infested rats we
find that, though such people will be unwilling
to take life, they are ready to abandon a village
until all the rats have been forced to leave, or
they will lift the roofs off their houses so that
the light forces the rats to leave. Africans and
Greeks were delighted with the dramatic elimi-
nation of mosquitoes and vermin which accom-
panied the DDT campaign. Iranian farmers
worried because pests were Godsent, and God
might now send worse ones.
Inoculation and vaccination are sometimes
entirely acceptable. Some societies have the
pattern of introducing potency and resistance to
unless the patient makes some payment.
This conception is quite prevalent, and
may be important in ensuring the
patient's faith in the treatment given by
a Western physician. In Africa the
British administration, attempting to
persuade the people to seek treatment by
making it both valid and free, announced
that the people had already made
payment through their taxes.
People to whom it is important that
the body should be complete, perfect,
find surgery insupportable. The Spanish
Americans of New Mexico resist having
any cut made into the body, and prefer
to deal themselves with such ills as
appendicitis. An operation means that
the body is damaged forever ; they
compare it to a pottery vessel which,
however carefully mended after breaking,
will always present a damaged appear-
ance.
Amputation presents a somewhat dif-
ferent picture. It is not merely surgery ;
it changes the individual into a kind of
cripple, and in many societies the
crippled are despised, or at any rate, are.
a source of uneasiness. The Navaho feel
that the cripple is out of harmony with
the universe, and close contact with him
might bring disharmony into one's
own life. And infants who are born
deformed, among these people who have
a great love for children, are sometimes
abandoned to die, or taken to a hospital
and left there.
In Burma Dr. Seagrave found that the
Katchin were ready and even eager for
operation when they sure that this was
desirable. At one time a man offered a
great sword for the incision by way of
persuading the surgeon who was hes-
itating over the advisability of operating
on the abdomen, saying that he would
not hold the surgeon responsible if the
operation failed. The need for surgery,
however, was not usually recognized by
these people until it was too late. For a
year, everyone undergoing appendectomy
died, since the patients came only after
rupture ; yet they did not hesitate to
come, even though they knew that no
one had survived this operation. In
Africa also, Dr. Schweitzer found that
.. 1.,. T, .. o.. o., r1<&gt; fn., nnnr, f o"wrrn, " n, rnr, fhofthe people were ready to accept surgery, even that
involving amputation, and were impressed with
the dramatic cure erected. At one time a man
walked three hundred mile. s to be operated on.
The effects of change, and of regulations in-
tended to bring about change, have sometimes
been unforeseen. Pure water campaigns, direct-
ed at the elimination of enteric disorders, have
actually reduced malaria through removing the
source of the swamp, and have resulted in better
roads, as in a village in Egypt, or a village park,
as in a Macedonian village. A hut tax in Africa,
and the scarcity in timber resulting from indus-
trialization, have brought about overcrowding
and possibly an increase in ill-health. The in-
troduction of medicine has meant a loss of faith
in the known, and when new medicines proved
too expensive, people found themselves without
any medicine at all.
Industrialization and the migration of labour,
as well as the opening of roads and the esta-
blishment of improved transportation, have meant
that local diseases have been spread to areas
where there was no immunity.
Industry, which has been responsible for much
ill-health and disruption, has also been respon-
sible for many health programmes in colonial
areas, since people in ill-health or low health
make wasteful workers. And the economic moti-
vation for the introduction of health measures
has been reported from rural areas also, where
people have been persuaded to control food-
waters which formed breeding places for malarial
mosquitoes, only when they discovered that these
also damaged the crops. 
evil by the introduction of substances under the
skin. The practice of pricking the skin with a
needle is also often present. The Burmese did
not resist injections when these were first intro-
duced, for tattooing was prevalent here, as well
as the practice of introducing charms and medi-
cines under the skin. In Oceanic regions where
tattooing is prevalent, Dr. Lambert found that
people came to him demanding the"needle."
On the other hand, great resistance to inocula-
tion was encountered among tribes in northern
Burma. People deserted their villages in panic
when they heard that he was coming to
inoculate against a raging epidemic of plague.
'Use my sword, doctor'
THERE are certain requisites for the acceptablephysician. Moslem women-except where
change has been carefully induced-will not
allow themselves to be examined by a male phy-
sician. In West Africa, physicians younger than
the husband cannot look at or treat a wife, but
those older can do so without bringing harm.
In many cultures the physician's right to treat
must be validated, perhaps by supernatural
sanction, perhaps by payment. Among the Tiv,
a"physician"could not treat a patient effecti-
vely unless he had paid for the knowledge and
also for the right to give that particular treat-
ment. Often the treatment itself is ineffectiv8.,...,
