=COURIER DECEMBER 1953. Page 9
To learn more about the makeup and nature of the atom nuclei scientists bombard them with high energy particles. These are raised to phenomenal speeds in
accelerators such as the Cosmotron (above) at Brookhaven National Laboratory, United States of America, which is at present the largest machine of its kind
in the world. The huge'doughnut'-shaped magnet 75 feet in diameter guides the particles in a circular path while they are given a high speed by a succession
of electric boosts. In this Cosmotron, the particles circle the magnet 3, 000, 000 times and travel a total distance of some 138, 000 miles in less than a second.,
.,.--<.-". - :
0 GIANT MACHINES AND MAN-MADE RAYS
THE world within the atom, as revealed by thenatural rays from radium and by cosmic
rays and briefly sketched in the two
preceding articles, is almost incredible from the
ordinary human point of view. This is not merely
because it is so complex but also because the basic
particles seem to have no relation to either matter
or energy as we commonly know them. The
appeal to curiosity and the desire to explore
further is almost irresistible.
The nucleus of the atom contains all the
"matter", yet is so small that it occupies only a
thousandth of a millionth of a millionth of the
space within the atom. In that case its density
(that is, its weight per cubic inch) must be a
thousand times a million times a million times
that of ordinary materials. As a matter of fact,
researches with the cyclotron, such as will be
described below, now indicate that the nucleus
itself is not at all a solid mass but has a still
denser core at its centre. Whatever that core is
made of, it is so dense that a lump of it as large
as a drop of water would weigh two million tons.
But that is only half of the astonishing
situation. Energy is similarly concentrated.
Within that exceedingly minute volume of the
atomic nucleus there are forces that hold the mass
together. The earth itself is held together by
gravity but the force within the nucleus must be
so much larger than gravity that there is no word
to express it. The force of gravity would have to
be multiplied by a number that contains the figure
1 followed by 37 zeros :
10, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000.
Gravity holds the planets in their courses and
the stars in the sky-but has no place in the
nucleus.
The whole atom is itself held together by
This star-like picture is the self portrait of an exploding nucleus of an atom, and is one of the most
significant milestones along the road of nuclear research. This nuclear"event"was photographed when a
very high energy particle, accelerated in the giant Cosmotron (top of page) hit the nucleus of an atom of the
film emulsion and exploded it into 17 particles of different types which flew out to form tracks in a star-shaped
pattern. Until this man-made nuclear collision took place the type of nuclear event pictured here had occured
only in the action of cosmic rays which, as they bombard the earth's atmosphere, produce the highest energies
which atoms have been known to release. (Photographs : Brookhaven National Laboratory, NewYork.)
electrical forces, since the positive protons at the
centre attract and hold the negative electrons at
the surface. But within the nucleus are protons
and neutrons which cannot be held together
electrically because the electric force between
them would not attract but repel them from each
other.
So the binding force within the nucleus is of a
new and unknown form. It is complicated and
depends on the velocity of the nuclear particles
and even on their spinning motion or rotation.
On the other hand the force, whatever it is, does
not depend on the electrical charges, for neutrons
and protons seem to attract each other to precisely
the same degree that they attract their own kind
of particle. This is the present mystery of the
nucleus and therefore of the atom and thus of
matter and energy in general.
Certainly this is the basic mystery of the
universe and one with which science cannot be
content. But to solve it requires methods. and
instruments never before conceived. What is
needed is a sort of nuclear microscope which would
permit gazing at the crowded infinitesimal
intimacy of protons and neutrons as the
astronomer gazes through his colossal telescopes
at the infinity of space.
Atom-smashers in action
BUT light waves are millions of times longerthan the size of the nuclear particles. There
is no way to probe into the nucleus that does
not pry it open or take it apart. To do that
requires concentrations of energy just as high as
those in the nucleus, and even higher. The
successful method is one which fires electrons and
protons at the nucleus at velocities very close to
that of light and loaded with energy amounting
to thousands of millions of electrons-volts. n is
for this reason that the devices that serve as
atomic or nuclear microscopes are often called
"atom-smashers".
It is not difficult to give these tiny projectiles,
electrons and protons, energy by giving them
speed because their electric charge propels them
if they are exposed to a high voltage. This was
first done in the tubes for generating very
penetrating X-rays. The higher the voltage
across the terminals of the tube, the higher was
the speed of the electrons and the more
penetrating the X-rays produced.
This led to the design of X-ray tubes operating
(Continued on next page.)

Page I O. DECEMBER 1953 UNEscaoU
.,
THE
COSMOTRON
AND HOT
IT WORKS
Protons (A) from electrostatic generator (B) are Increasing the magnetic field causes the protons
"shot"into the metal vacuum tank of the Cosmotron to spiral around Cosmotron (dotted lines). They are
at an energy totalling 3. 6 million electron volts. now making a total of 350, 000 revolutions per second.
An amplifier (C) produces accelerating and deceler-
ating voltage causing about half of the protons to
speed up and other half to slow down. Protons
that are speeded up by accelerating voltage (D)
group together in a sausage shaped bundle and
continue to revolve at. higher and higher speeds.
Slowed down protons (E) strike inside walland are lost.
(Continued from previous page)
under a million volts. But in order to reach such
a voltage, it had to be applied step-wise. As the
electron passed down a long tube, it went through
a series of electrodes each of which added a few
thousand more volts to the pressure and therefore
to the speed of the electron.
But a million volts is not enough for penetrating
deep into the nucleus and it is not practical to
operate such a tube with more than a few million
volts. The next step taken was in effect to wind
the tube in the form of a spiral by means of a
magnetic field. There were, in fact, only two
electrodes, formed from a single hollow circular
box with a slit across the diameter. This gave
two electrodes, each shaped like a capital D, back
to back, with a narrow air space between them.
When the entire box of two D's was put between
the poles of a heavy magnet, then an electron
injected at the centre would normally travel in a
circular path, around and around.
But when voltage is applied to the D-shaped
box, the electron receives a kick each time it passes
through half the circle. When it thus goes faster,
it would travel in a larger circle because the
magnet is less able to turn its path. But it con-
tinues its flight, passing repeatedly through each
D, thus going ever faster and therefore describing
a larger and larger circle. In effect, its path
becomes a spiral. In the end, when it has
attained an energy of several million electron
volts, it reaches the outer edge and passes out
through a slit in the side wall at top energy.
Then it can be used to generate powerful X-rays
or for other experiments.
But the electron is a relatively light projectile.
When the heavier proton is similarly whirled to a
high velocity, its energy content should become
sufficient to counteract the binding forces in any
nucleus that it later hits. This was the principle
of the first cyclotron made by Dr. Ernest O.
Lawrence, of the University of California, who
received the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1940 for
this achievement. Many refinements have since
been added to the cyclotron and in its present
development it i. s called a proton-synchrotron.
The largest proton-synchrotron now in opera-
tion is-at the Brookhaven National Laboratory,
operated by the Associated Universities, Inc., under
contract with the United States Atomic Energy
Commission. From an auxiliary generator it in-
jects protons which carry 3. 6 million electron-
volts. These protons enter the great proton-syn-
chrotron in bursts at intervals of five seconds.
In less than a second they go around inside the
large circular magnet about 3 million times and
by then have reached an energy of 2, 300 million
electron-volts. The magnet has a diameter of
The proton bundle is now revolving around the
entire vacuum tank at a rate of 4 million times per
second (or 175, 000 miles per second, 90 per cent of
the speed of light). After about 3 million turns (in
0, 8 seconds)-the equivalent of four trips around the
earth-these protons have acquired the energy of
two thousand three hundred million electron-volts.
75 feet, so that 3 million circuits of the path
amount to a total distance of 130, 000 miles, which
is about four times the distance around the earth
and half the distance between the earth and the
moon. At that energy, they are ready for use.
A target piece, consisting of an extremely thin
sheet of metal, is interposed in the path. In
the violent collisions of these high energy protons
with the nuclei of the metal the atomic nucleus
is shattered. The resulting fragments emerge
from the cyclotron and can be photographed
in what is called a cloud chamber with results
such as are shown on the cover of this issue.
It looks like a picture of a catastrophe or like a
hurricane among the stars, but each white streak
is the path of one of the many types of rays or
of nuclear fragments. Each can be identified as
one of the constituents of the atomic nucleus. A
careful study of the photograph will show that
there are occasionally sharp breaks in the path
and some points where a path seems to cause
another explosion with two or three, or even four
particles darting out at various angles. This is
indeed another explosion, similar to those that
occur in the cosmic rays. In a sense, this photo-
graph shows a shower of artificial cosmic rays.
A'sixth sense'at work
THE photograph on page 9 shows a singlesuch collision, this time made by placing a
photographic plate directly in the path of
the rays. One of the high-energy particles from
the proton-synchrotron hit the nucleus of an
atom in the photographic emulsion in such a. way
that it exploded into no less than 17 separate
particles, which can be counted.
The careful study of photographs such as these
two gives the chief evidence of the existence of
such short-lived particles as the mesons and the
more recently discovered V-particles. Each track
must be analyzed for its degree of curvature, its
length and intensity, and its effectiveness in
producing branching rays. No human sense can
detect these particles. The combination of the
great proton-synchrotron and the photographic
plate is the"sixth-sense", or the nuclear micro-
scope, that reveals these deepest secrets of nature.
It is important, however, to note that the
shattering of nuclei is not the only effect of these
high-energy particles. In a large number of
cases the high-speed particle, whether it is an
electron, a proton, a deuteron or an alpha
particle, enters the nucleus which it hits and
remains combined with it and thus transforms
that nucleus to a new architecture which, in turn,
makes it an atom of a different element.
At this energy the protons hit a target (F) inserted
in their path. They collide with the target, and
nuclear fragments (such as neutrons) shoot out of
the magnet in a straight lihe. Detecting instruments
(G) such as a cloud chamber or geiger counter are
used by scientists to study result of collision of
these particles with various chemical elements.
In other cases the combination breaks down into
two smaller nuclei. Thus the high energy
particles of the cyclotron and the proton-synchro-
tron have been used to create not only new
isotopes of well known chemical elements but to
create elements that do not exist in nature. The
dream of the medieval alchemists, of making gold
from mercury and other common metals, has long
since come true, has indeed, been far surpassed.
A very common case of this kind is the creation
of isotopes of elements whose nuclei are only
partially stable and that gradually disintegrate
with the emission of rays like those from radium.
A long list of artificial radio-active elements has
thus become available. Some, like radio-active
cobalt, can be used as a source of rays in medical
uses, where radio-active cobalt has, in fact, now
largely replaced radium because it can be made
very cheaply. Indeed the uses of the radio-active
isotopes in medicine, agriculture and industry are
so varied and valuable that a separate article is
devoted to them later in this series.
The proton-synchrotron at Brookhaven has
been operating'only about a year and its results
have not yet been studied sufficiently for general
publication. It is expected, however, that with
further modifications, protons can with this
machine be given energies as high as 3, 000 million
electron-volts.
This energy, high as it is, is only at the very
threshold of the power needed for the study of
mesons, neutrinos, and the new V-particle, all of
whiah are still mysterious. In order to produce
an adequate stream of artificial mesons, a still
higher energy is needed. A proton-synchrotron
that can reach 6, 000 million electron-volts is at
the University of California. It is a colossus in
which the magnet weighs 10, 000 tons and the
power to energize the magnet is nearly 8. 000
horsepower (9, 000 kilowatts). The United States
Atomic Energy Commission has been asked to
build a still larger machine impart 15, 000 million
electron-volts to its proton projectiles.
But the most powerful of all is now being
planned for erection at Geneva for the European
Council for Nuclear Research. It is to provide
30, 000 million electron-volts. A new principle of
keeping the rays in the desired path will greatly
reduce the weight of iron needed in the magnet
so that this major item of cost will be much
reduced. As now planned the Geneva proton-
synchrotron will have a relatively thin or narrow
magnet but the diameter of the circle will be
about 1000 feet. No building would be big enough
to house it ; it will be buried in a large circular
underground trench. Details are discussed in the
next article of this series.
