PageS. MARCH) 95 UNESCO :
U. S. CHILDREN : TV'S MOST AVID FANS
All over the
United States
millions of chil-
dren, from in-
fants hardly able
to walk to teen-
agers, are sitting
with their eyes
glued to televi-
sion every day.
The impact this
is having on the
habits of chil-
dren has been
occupying
parents and tea-'T'T'tT"'^.,.. nn......... ^",, +chers ever since the TV set came out
of the barroom and entered the
American home.
Are most of the programmes bene-
ficial or injurious to children, many
ask ? How can you ensure that the
youngsters will not neglect their
homework ? That they will continue
to read books ? Does it help to bring
the family together ? Does watching
programmes discourage more creative
forms of recreation ? These and a
host of other questions have received
many conflicting answers which have
stirred the nation.
One thing, at any rate, is certain.
American children spend a good deal
of their time before the TV screens.
A study at Stamford, Connecticut,
first brought out that schoolchildren
are looking at programmes 27 hours
a week-almost as many hours as
they attend school. According to
another survey conducted in Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts, the average
child watches TV for some two and a
half hours on weekdays and for three
and a half hours on Sundays. These
figures apply, on the whole, to chil-
dren of all age groups and from all
income groups. But it has been found
that five-and six-year olds tend to
watch TV even more than older chil-
dren (perhaps because school work
fills less of their time).
The reason for TV's enormous
appeal to children is not far to seek.
As the American educator, Dr. Paul
Witty, of North-western University,
says,"TV offers exciting stories told
in short episodes or instalments
that keep up interest. The spoken
word is easy to understand... The
accessibility of TV (as of comics, radio
and the cinema) adds to their appeal.
Children can have TV merely by
turning a knob in the living room...
Even if a child is a good reader, many
homes and classrooms just don't have
enough interesting, attractive reading
material that can compete success-
fully. Too few children have good
books in their homes. Children also
have the fun of meeting old friends
over and over again. (They) enjoy
belonging to their hero's clubs,
offering special rings, code books and
badges. It makes them feel they
belong to something big and im-
portant. Through radio, TV, cinema
and comics, youngsters also believe
they are participating in something
grown-up and worth while."
Research indicates however (though
findings vary on this point) that
children do not spend more time with
other children of their own age once
they have television. The tendency,
instead, is for children who have TV
sets in their homes to become isolated.
Initially, at any rate, TV presents
parents with certain disciplinary
problems. Many, for instance, end it
difficult to get their children to leave
the set to come to meals, and the
eating habits of many children have
been affected since they must often
be served in front of the set.
Bedtime, also, is often a serious
problem. Most studies, in America
and Great Britain, indicate that
children in TV homes go to bed later
than those of the same age in non-
TV homes. Many teachers report
that small children are"sleepy heads"
in school, and a survey of elementary
schools in a New Jersey community
revealed that it is not unusual for
second and third grade pupils to talk
about 10. 30 p. m. programmes they had
viewed. The General Superintendent
of Schools of Chicago, Illinois, de-
clared that youngsters turn up in
classes with what he termed"TV
hangovers".
It has been claimed as a virtue for
TV that it tends to bring families
closer together. This is undoubtedly
true-in the sense that they spend
more time in each other's company.
There is, however, very little discus-
simon or other interaction among
family members when they watch
television together.
Adverse reading habits
T he powerful appeal of TV has hadimportant consequences in the
daily living habits of children. At-
tracted by the TV screen, youngsters
are listening to the radio less, going to
the cinema less, and reading less ;
exactly to what extent is not easy to
determine. But most studies in the
United States and Great Britain agree
that reading is seriously affected and
that radio listening is substantially
reduced.
Audience research carried out in
England reveals that the desertion of
radio is particularly marked among
the young, despite the fact that 90 per
cent of TV homes still have radios.
Thus, during the TV Children's Hour
of the B. B. G., viewing outnumbered
listening in the following proportions :
among 5-to 7-year olds by 18 to 1 ;
among 8-to 11-year olds, viewers
outnumbered listeners by 11 to 1 ; and
among 12-to 14-year olds by 4 to 1.
Afternoon cinema attendance, fur-
thermore, was found to be down by
about 40 per cent and evening
attendance by about one-third.
One American child put the matter
succinctly. When asked how often he
went to the cinema or listened to the
radio, he answered :"only when the
television isn't working."
But a report published in December
1952 by WOI-TV in Ames, Iowa (the
only all-educational station in the
U. S.), reveals.'no special evidence
that TV has reduced moving picture
attendance."
In December, 1951, station KING-
TV in Seattle, Washington, decided to
undertake a 13-week experimental
series of telecasts to increase chil-
dren's interest in books and stimulate
them to read more.
Shown on the screen was a group
of children, their backs to the
viewers, seated at the feet of a young
story-teller. In her hands was a
book from which she told the story.
The backdrop was a huge open book
with the inscription"Telaventure
Tales... Once Upon a Time". Across
its pages moved a non-realistic char-
acter, Penjamin Scribbler, who knew
all the books and all the authors.
In the first half of the programme,
an episode from a book was related
by the story-teller. A few live scenes
were enacted to vary the story
technique. The second half of the
programme involved a game in which
the TV audience participated. Scenes
from a number of books were pre-
sented, and the viewers were invited
to write in the name of the character
portrayed, the name of the book, its
author, and"`Why I like this book".
The immediate results were re-
markable. By the second programme,
the Seattle Public Library and all its
branches had reported that every book
by the author featured had been
borrowed. The programme's influen-
ce extended into the rural areas.
The county public library reported
that all the books by all the authors
mentioned on this programme dis-
appeared from the shelves of its
38 branches and two bookmobiles.
At a conference on"Reading in the
Family", held in New York last
December, Robert L. Shayon, TV
critic and author of"`Television and
our Children", ipointed out that
television can provide a bridge to
books if parents made the most of
the opportunities it presents. If a
youngster is fascinated by the
Westerns he sees, parents might get
a good Western story to read with
the child and compare the two, trying !
to build discrimination and taste. He f
also suggested using TV as a.'cross I
reference"to reading. If parents I
watch shows with their children, he it
said, they are very likely to find in
them occasions to refer to books or
characters that would help arose
the child's interest in books. (
TV and school grades
Much has been said to the effectthat poor homework, poor grades
and TV seem to go hand in hand. A ;
survey undertaken by the New York
Times in June 1951 found, however,
that"the overwhelming majority of
school officials from coast to coast
believe that the new medium is
benefitting youngsters in many dif-
ferent ways and is not having sig-
nificantly adverse effects."But the
same survey also reported that *'a
preponderance of educators were
critical of the cultural quality of
today's general run of commercial
television programmers".
The effect of TV on the child's study'
habits and class marks was recently
the subject of a special investigation
undertaken by Xavier University and
the Crosley Broadcasting Corporation
in Cincinnati, Ohio. About 1, 000
sixth and seventh grade pupils
participated in the study. Those not
having TV sets were matched with
pupils, of the same class and mental
age, who had sets. Four major
conclusions were drawn :
1. There was no significant differ-
ence in school results between"TV
children"and"non-TV children".
2. Learning at school was not much'
affected by the way parents controlled
their children's viewing.
3. The lower the child's intelligence,
the more likely he is to watch many
TV mystery-crime programmes. As
the report put it, poor TV habits, 
lower LQs., lower parental control,
and poorer school marks tend to be
found in the same child.
4. TV results in damage to physical
well-being and mental alertness when
used to excess.
Several other studies carried out in
the United States confirm that watch-
ing TV does not, as fa rule, seriously
affect school results. But despite
these findings, a great many teachers,
drawing on their own observations
and experience, persist in claiming
that it does.
Thus, when the teachers of Cleve-
land, Ohio, high schools complained
that the quality of home work was
seriously deteriorating, the principal
of one school made a survey of 274
students. He found that 112 or 41
per cent had TV sets. More than 89
of them watched television for over
an hour a day ; and of these, 86 said
they thought it handicapped them in
their school work."Maybe really
good students could s tan d the
diversion", the principal said. He
doubted, however, whether the poor
students could, pointing out that,
unlike radio, TV was a'''completed
attention"activity, and that while it
was possible for some students to do
their homework and listen to the
radio at the same time, it was
impossible to watch TV and study at
the same time.
Exploring the art world
Educators have suggested that TVappreciation courses be instituted
in the classroom to encourage children
to discuss the programmes they see.
In secondary schools special courses
in literature or cinema appreciation,
are already common, and it has been
proposed that TV might be included.
In addition, the oral language period
at any grade level is felt to be an
important place for discussing tele-
vision and helping children to develop
better viewing standards.
The principal of one New York
elementary school has already decided
to do this, and has suggested to his
teachers that they incorporate at
least one weekly. lesson on television
in their language, art or social studies
classes. A similar effort is planned
by the chairman of the English
Department of a New Jersey sec-
ondary school in order to relate
education more closely with living,
and to reduce as far as possible the
child's sense that"academic"subjects
are just and only that-academic.
It may be of interest, at this point,
to mention the TV effort originated

: OURIER MARCH 1953. Page 9
by Victor d'Amico, director of art
education of the Museum of Modern
Art in New York. The museum has
produced a series entitled :"Through
the Enchanted-Gate"which the pro-
gramme notes state,'''guides the
three-to ten-year-old through a
wonderful explanatory course in
esthetic self-expression. Accent is on
the child, but the parent is si-
multaneously coached into playing a
helpful part in the development of the
child's creative impulses. And the
proper attitude for parents and
teachers is suggested by a group of
professionals who work with children
on the programme."
There has been (and still is) much
debate in the U. S. about the psycho-
logical influence of TV on children.
Professor Charles Siepmann, in the
Unesco volume just published on
"Television and Education in the
United States", does not hesitate to
write :"It had better be said cate-
gorically that there is at present no
solid evidence on this point. For it
is virtually impossible to separate out
the influence of TV, whether on
children or adults, from the conco-
mitant influence of other mass media
and the complex of factors in the
general social environment.
"To say this, however, is not to
dismiss the subject as of no im-
portance. It is obviously of supreme
importance. It simply means that if
one is looking for proof on this matter
one will not find it. It is a matter of
judgment and opinion. And the
absence, whether now or in the
future, of scientific corroboration
provides no alibi for serious thought
and discussion of the problem or for
responsible action."
Psychiatrists and child experts are
generally of two opinions regarding
TV's effect on children. One group
feels that with proper control and
parent supervision television is not
harmful. The other sees TV as a real
threat to child development.
Dr. Frederic Wertham, psychiatrist
and author, is fairly representative of
the second point of view. He feels
that many people glibly discount the
influence on children of TV, comic
books and mass media in general.
"What children get out of comic
books", he writes,'''is that kindness,
sympathy and regard for human
suffering are all weaknesses ; that
cunning and shrewdness are the kind
of thing that counts ; and that women
are not to be respected as persons,
but are luxury prizes like automobiles,
distinguished chiefly by sexy attri-
butes rather than by any high ideal
of womanhood."
He sees similar evils in television.
Because of TV, he says, children
"confuse violence with strength, low
necklines with feminine ideal, sadism
with sex and criminals with police."
Crime and violence
C rime arid violence as major themeson TV programmes are in fact
the sharpest criticisms levelled against
the current output of television in
America. Some startling figures have,
indeed, been revealed on the subject.
"By and large", says the TV
correspondent of the New Yorker
magazine,'''television writers are
fascinated by death... Week after week,
programme after programme, death
in one form or another assumes a
major role... Over the past year, I
find that 16, 932 men, women, children
and animals have passed away on TV
programmes since November 1950,
most of them in a sudden and quite
violent manner."
Figures published in January 1953
and based on a comprehensive survey
made by the Parent-Teachers Asso-
ciation of Chicago, reveal even more
startling findings. The study was
based on reports by a group of mon-
itors who watched every children's
programme on every one of Chicago's
TV stations during the period
between last Christmas morning and
New Year's Eve. The monitors tab-
ulated 295 violent crimes portrayed
exclusively on children's shows. These
included 93 murders, 78 shootings, 9
kidnappings, 9 robberies, 44 gunfights,
2 knifings, 33 sluggings, 2 whiplash-
ings, 2 poisonings, and 2 bombings.
The number of shows for children
totalled 134 ; 48 were Western crime
films and 33 were old films of various-
types.
Somewhat similar results have been
found by the National Association for
Better Radio and Television in a
report published last July on the Los
Angeles, California, area. The study
showed that 56 per cent of the
broadcasts were considered"ob-
jectionable"or"most objectionable"
for children. It indicated that crime,
violence and mediocrity dominated
programmes and called for a revision
of children's shows.
However, psychiatrists of the oppos-
ing school of thought, like Dr. Lau-
retta Bender, head of the Child
Psychiatry Department of Bellevue
Hospital, New York, are convinced
that such programmes offer no threat
to the healthy development of
children. They feel that the violence
on TV merely provides a harmless
outlet for the natural and normal
aggressiveness of all children (1).
Another psychiatrist, Dr. Phillip Po-
latin, believes that cowboy films,
despite general parental disapproval,
are an"excellent outlet"for the
child's aggression, and he suggests
that critics.. who object to television's
"passive entertainment"watch a
group of boys popping cap pistols,
yelling at villains and encouraging
heroes as they sit before the TV set.
Thus the answers go, for and against
television. In reality, it is part of the
great debate which has raged for
years over the influence, of all the
mass media on young people and
adults as well. There have been the
dime novels, the cinema, the radii,
and the comics. The latest battle-
ground is now television. Practically
all critics and supporters will admit,
however, that the picture is actually
neither all black nor all white.
As the New York Times aptly put it
in an editorial,"It (is) abundantly
clear that television represents a new
problem for the world of education,
but the implications obviously extend
far beyond the classroom itself. Any
medium which can command such a
high proportion of a child's waking
hours no longer can be regarded
merely as a novel form of en-
tertainment. It is a social force
with enormous potentialities for good
or bad, and the course which television
follows in the future quite properly
should be the concern of the
community as a whole."
(IJ.-POT a report on"aY (JTes ; iveness" in child'Ten se. eartid"You Can't Chanue Human Natu'Tt-False !..
bV Ashlev Montag"in Feb. 1953 CtlIJrier).
