RACE RELATIONS
AND PUBLIC HOUSING
IN THE UNITED STATES
by Patricia Salter WEST
and Maria jAHODA
THE development of publicly subsidized
housing proj ects in the United States,
in which apartments are available
on equal terms to White and Negro
people, has provided numerous opportunities
for the study of attitudes-and changes in
attitudes-among these groups.
Even before the studies began, it was
noted that there had been a great demand
for this unsegregated housing by both
groups, showing at the outset that the various
motives which led people into public
housing were stronger than the prejudices
which would tend to repel them.
Observations of this unsegregated housing
were made by groups of sociologists and
psychologists who conducted community
surveys of people's actions and feelings as
tenants of these projects. One study,
supported by the Lavanburg Housing Foun-
dation of New York City and carried on by
sociologists of Columbia University's Bureau
of Applied Social Research, was of a project
in an eastern industrial city, pseudo-named
Hilltown, containing 400 Negro and
400 White families.
The other, conducted by the Research
Center for Human Relations of New York
University, studied two New York City and
two Newark, New Jersey, projects with
different proportions of Negroes and Whites
and different degrees of partial segrega-
tion.
First of all, these studies make us look
more closely at prejudices and ask where
they come from. If a white man tells us
he does not trust Negroes-assuming he is
generally a man of goodwill and good sense
- we will begin to wonder whom he has
been associating with ; but we would prob-
ably be wrong in assuming he had had
some unfortunate Negro acquaintances.
The chances would be greater that he had
never known any Negroes at all. The
tenants of United States public housing
prove this and support the feeling of a
psychologist who said that"Attitudes
toward Negroes are now chiefly determined,
not by contact with Negroes, but by contact
with prevalent attitudes toward Negroes".
True to the predictions of opponents of
non-segregated housing, many prospective
White tenants felt they were letting
themselves in for trouble, that there was apt
to be conflict between the members of the
two races. But some had these premonitory
fears more than others : and these were the
people who had never had any experience
with living in the same neighbourhood with
members of the other race before.
In Hilltown well over half (56 %) of these
"inexperienced Whites"expected real con-
flict between the two races in the projects,
while this open trouble was anticipated by
only 10% of the Whites who had had
Negroes as neighbours before.
It turned out that the latter, more expe-
rienced, Whites were also the more realistic,
for the five-year history of the project
boasted no serious racial incidents or
conflicts at all. In fact, by their own
testimony many of the trepidations were
wrong, for fully 80 % of all the Whites,
looking bask on their lives in the project,
summed up the Negroes and Whites
getting along together as"pretty well".
In these housing projects, situations exist
for Negroes and Whites to get first-hand
information about each other. But, the
sceptic will say, do people really take

gation : ï and9%.
How does this change of mind come about ?
It is in all likelihood pl'Oduced by a chain
of minor events, such as women gossipillg
over laundry tubs, children meeting in
halhYL1Ys and play-yards, men borrowing
tools. These experiences, common among
neighbours enrywhere, lead to close
acquaintance and sometimes friendship,
even when they occur between Negroes and
Whites.
For example, the N. Y. U. studies showed
that in the segregated projects only about
;  % of the White housewiHs knew any of
the Negro women on a"first-name basis".
In the fully unsegregatrd pl'Ojects half and
three quarters, respectinly, of the White
housf'\YlHS were thus familiar with Negro
housewives. In HiHtown, many more Ne-
gro-White friendships were c) aimed by the
people living in unsegregated areas of the
project : in fact, the c) oser were other-race
buildings, the more likely were tenants to
have other-race friends.
Close acquaintance and friendship leads
people (some, of course : not all) to get rid
of their stereotypes about the other race and
to judge each other more on the basis of fact
than hearsay. A caSe in point : Hilltown
Whites were asked to guess the average
educational leHI of the Negro tenants
(which happened to be about the same as
lhe Whites'.) True to the stereotype which
depicts Negroes as uneducated, most Whites
guessed that their Negro neighbours were
less educated than themselves. But, 48 %
of the Whites with Negro friends and
acquaintances in lIilltown guessed correctly,
while only : 10 % of those without Negro
friends or acquaintances in llilllown guessed
correctly.
Thus, we see a circular process at work :
in one direction a beneficent, in the other, a
vicious circle. Keep races apart in separated
projects or in separate areas within a project
and they will not learn facts about each
other through personal experience ; hence
they will have to judge each other by hear-
- say, which leads to unrealistic fears and
strengthens their desired to keep part. But.
bring races closer together and you stand a
good chance of fostering friendships, which
tend to destroy stereotypes and stereotyped
fears, and which in turn leads them to ap-
prove of mixed residence.
Of course, this is a simplified picture, and
risks exaggeration. These are just [t'/ldt, t/-
des and do not necessarily hold for all
people : for example, American Southerners
and perhaps people of different economic
classes might react differently. This, fu-
ture studies will have 10 find out.
adnwlnge of this opportunity, or do they
simply draw the ('[oak of prejudice tighter
about themselves so as to avoid the conta-
mination threatened by the new contacts ?
The answer is"it depends".
If a local authority decides to interpret
unsegregated housing as requiring the
completely random assignment of apart-
ments so that some negro and White
families live on the same hallway, share the
same stairs, courtyards, playgrounds, and
other facilities convenient to nextduur
neighbours, the desirable rapprochement
really occurs, not among all but among a
considerable number of tenants. If non-
segregated housing means separate Negro
and White buildings or, worse, separate
little racial ghettos within the project, it need
not have this effect at all.
Here is some of the material from the
communitv studies which demonstrates
this point.
Two of the projects in the N. Y. t. study
did provide real next-door-neighbour living
for Negroes and Whites. The other two
had separate buildings and racia ! neigh-
bourhoods within the projects. In the former
two 38 % and 40 % were still in favour of
racial segregation : but in the latter-with
the separate racial buildings and neigh-
bourhoods-many more were for segre-
