Page 14. MARCH 1953 UNESCoCOUR
THE SPLENDOUR OF TURKISH ART
EUROPEAN travellers returning
from Turkey in the 16th and
17t centuries had many tales
to tell of the marvels they had seen
at the court of the Sultan-carpets
of a quality unknown in Europe,
brilliantly executed designs in cera-
mics and tapestry and exquisitely
worked metal objects decorated with
ivory, silver, enamel and precious
stones.
In Paris recently, visitors to an
exhibition entitled :"The Splendour
of Turkish Art"have been able to
see some of the examples of an art
which so impressed the travellers of
bygone days and have also felt some
of the wonder these works inspired
in the past.
The masterpieces assembled in the
Musée des Arts Décoratifs testify to
the artistic greatness of the Otto-
by Georges FRADIER
man Empire when it was an already
remarkable and still developing
power. They also recall an event
which, when it happened just five
centuries ago, revealed to the West-
ern world the full measure of the
mighty force approaching it from
the East.
This year, as it happens, is the
fifth centenary of the capture of
Constantinople by Mohammed the
Conqueror-the event which re-
sounded throughout Europe.
Later the King of France was to
seek an alliance with this new force.
The reply sent to François I by Soli-
man I, whose signature may be seen
at the exhibition, has been pre-
served. It runs : ; sultan of sul-
tans, sovereign of sovereigns, the
shadow of God on earth... You, Fran-
coins, King of the country of France,
have sent a letter to my gate, the
haven of sovereigns... All that you
said was told to me from the foot of
my throne and was taken in by my
imperial wisdom... Be not discou-
raged..."A few months later, in
1532,"the shadow of God"was to
lead his armies to the very gates of
Vienna.
This page of history is also brought
to life at the exhibition through the
many masterpieces amassed by a
people long practised in the working
of metals : armour, silver-inlaid hel-
mets, swords with inscriptions in
gold, coats of mail, chamfrains,
Miniature by Abdulcelil Celebi, better known as Levni, painted in The Book of Rejoicing, an 18th century poem.
The manuscript contains 137 miniatures by Levni whose works are still as fresh as the day they were painted.
daggers and pistols adorned with
ivory, silver, enamel and precious
stones. And there, too, are the
luxurious tents in which the military
commanders held audience... and, of
course, the famous carpets.
These carpets have long been
world-renowned. For four hundred
years, in every city in Europe, they
have symbolized the wealth of Tur-
key. From Smyrna (Izmir) they
were shipped to Venice or Bruges,
and Flemish and Italian and other
European artists vied with each
other in reproducing their colouring
and designs. They succeeded so well
that their paintings often afford a
clue to the date of the carpets them-
selves, some of which-the Uchåk
carpets, for instance-are named
after Hans Holbein.
As early as the 13th century, the
workshops of Anatolia were turning
out masterpieces whose praises
Marco Polo sang after he returned
from his epic journey through Asia..
The imperial factories went on to
introduce one refinement after an-
other in the art of carpet-making.
In West and East alike, they exerted
a very real influence, just as did the
weavers and needlewomen of Brusa,
Konia and Scutari, through their
celebrated fabrics. Some of their
finest works which date from the
16th century have been piously pre-
served-among them the precious
caftans of past sultans, which the
Topkapu Sarayi Museum has loaned
to the Paris Exhibition, along with
many other treasures.
But achievements in the art of
working wool and silk must not blind
us to the brilliance of Turkish cera-
mics which are just as important.
The earthenware tiles, originally
designed for use on outside walls and
later for interior adornment of mos-
ques and palaces, are typical of Tur-
kish decorative art. And while it
was from the Moors that the Span-
iards learned the techniques of
ceramics, it was through the Turks
that faience, which perhaps had its
birthplace in Turkestan. was intro-
duced into Italy, and then spread to
the rest of Europe towards the end
of the 15th century.
In Turkish art, ceramics and tap-
estry share a common inspiration
and use the same colour and designs.
In fact the individuality of the best
Ottoman period lies precisely in or-
namentation. This flower-loving
people chose to make its mark in the
history of art by the unwearying
repetition, in various forms, of a
simple stylized theme-the four
flowers, hyacinth, carnation, tulip
and briar-rose.
The artists of Asia Minor, it is
true, always remained faithful to the
complex heritage they owed to their
Byzantine, Mongol, Tartar, Persian
or Arabic origin. But they made it
unmistakably their own, and the four
symbolic flowers, woven, carved or
painted, became their stamp, their
hallmark.
The miniatures, too, make play
with the carnation, with the well-
loved tulip, and with the hyacinth
and rose. More than 200 species of
the carnation were grown in Istanbul
in the 18th century ; the tulip wa. s
considered as a sacred newer, since
the Arabic letters used to write its
name in Turkish are also those which
spell the word God. Another motif
is the cypress, a privileged tree,
which symbolizes the soul rising to
heaven, in death or contemplation.
In point of fact, Turki. sh painters
were long subject to Chinese, Persian
and Italian influences, which they
had welcomed enthusiastically. Yet
they were hampered by extremely
rigid religious scruples in a society
which forbade the hanging of any
portraits on walls, and they had to
confine their essays in portraiture to
the pages of albums and the illus-
tration of poetic or official works.
These limitations did not prevent
the emergence of a most remarkable
school of miniaturists, which in the
15th century produced such master-
piece. s as the famous portrait of
Mohammed II breathing the perfume
of a rose. In the 18th century, this
school acknowledged as its master
the delightful painter Abdulcelil
Celebi, better known as Levni.
Levni'whom was also a poet, was born
at Edirne (Adrianople) and was sent
at an early age to the art school of
the Topkapu palace where nearly

ESCoCOURIER MARCH 1953. Page 15
HORSEMAN WITH BOW AND ARROW. XVTH CENTURY MINIATURE FOUND IN AN ALBUM CONTAINING EXAMPLES OF TURKEY'S REMARKABLE CALLIGRAPHIC ART.
Soliman the Magnificent, who was also known as
'the lawgiver' ; XVlth century miniature by Nigart.
Young Lady with veil. XVlllth century painting
by Levni, the leading miniaturist of that time.
Two examples of ancient Turkish calligraphy-a
distinctive field of the country's decorative art.
all his work was done and most of
his miniatures remained ; they are
still intact, as fresh as the day they
were painted.
Besides reflecting a subtle and res-
trained conception of art, an exqui-
site sense of colour, masterly
draughtsmanship and a deliberate
naivety, these minatures are also
nrst-rate documentary material :
they recall the delights of a legend-
ary, yet true-to-life, Istanbul, with
its officers, its dignitaries, its mus-
icians and dancers, and the splen-
dours of its court. Levni, who died
in 1732 lacked neither rivals nor suc-
cessors ; we can only regret that
their work was not as carefully pre-
served as his.
In Turkish decorative art, there is
one field that stands apart ; this is
calligraphy--a field in which the
masters need no distinctive stamp,
no sign by which they can be iden-
tified.
Every culture Moslem has
dreamed of copying the Koran in a
writing worthy of the divine words,
and the Turkish calligraphers pur-
sued this dream with passion, mind-
ful of the saying that"in the last
judgment the ink of writers will be
valued as highly as the martyrs'
blood."
The most careful study has been
devoted to calligraphy, on which
connoisseurs set fabulous prices, and,
until the 20th century, it was used
not only for the adornment of books
and mosques, but in furniture and
rooms of any household rich enough
to afford a beautiful plate inscribed
with a verse from the scriptures,
poetry, or some philosophical maxim.
Calligraphy is an abstract, non-
representational art, in which the
harmony of clear-cut lines and the
balance of the composition stand
supreme, and it plays somewhat the
same role as the symbolic paintings
of India or China, drawing men's
gaze and thoughts to meditation ; it
had a psychological and religious, as
much as an aesthetic significance.
But this note of austerity is sound-
ed in all the products of Turkish cul-
ture, at least in the best of them.
The finest carpets are those made for
prayer, the loveliest faience is that
intended for mosques ; and, among
similar oriental works, they are dis-
tinguished for their sobriety and
purity of line. We need only think of
the monuments in which they were
and still are housed. The architec-
ture of Anatolia, impressive and
rough-hewn, was that of a people
both religious and warlike, and later,
at Brusa and Istanbul, expanded to
opulence ; but its mosques and hospi-
tals were never gaudy or pretentious.
It is perhaps the strength of this
art and its seriousness that should
be emphasized. For, despite its fame,
Turkish art seems to have been long
misunderstood. Indeed, its fame act-
ed as a handicap by starting a vogue
of inferior European imitations. But
exhibitions such as the one now on
view in the Pavillon de Marsan
should prove once and for all the
authenticity and the quenchless vi-
tality of the art of this.'people
without idols."

THE art. of bookmaking reached itshighest degree of development in
Turkey during the 15th and
16th centuries. The refined handwrit-
ing called calligraphy and the illumina-
tion of manuscripts were for many
centuries regarded as essential in the
reproduction of religious and poetical
works. The two miniatures published
on this page were produced when Turk-
ish taste had come to lay as much
stress upon the pictorial appearance of
book pages as upon the texts which
they contained. Many of the books
composed consisted of collections of
illustrated pages with no conbected text
running through the volumes. Besides
their remarkable artistic qualities,
many of the miniatures produced at
that time are also first-rate documen-
tary material. Barbaros Hayrattin,
whose portrait we reproduce above, was
one of Turkey's most famous admirals
when his country became an import-
ant sea power in the 16th century.
"Barbarossa" (Red Beard) as he was
known to the people of Western Eur-
ope commanded the fleet which the
then ruler of Turkey, Soliman the Mag-
nificent sent to support François I,
King of France. In this portrait (the
work of Nigari), the Turkish admiral is
shown holding a carnation, one of the
four flowers (hyacinth, tulip, carnation
and briar-rose) which became hall-
marks of Turkish artistic design. Our
second illustration is the famous por-
trait of mohammed II breathing the
perfume of a rose. Mohammed the
Conqueror, as he was known, extended
Turkey's domains well into South-East
Europe and as far as the Crimea. He
is said to have been of a jocular disposi-
tion, to have afforded a generous pa-
tronage to learning and to have been
master of six languages. (See page 14,
"The Splendour of Turkish Art".)