"I N Utopia", writes Professor Charles Siep-mann,"every classroom in every school
would be equipped with a television receiver.
But Utopia is far off."It is, in fact, so far off that
educators are still eyeing the entire question of the
classroom use of TV with a good deal of mixed
feeling. On the one hand there is the conviction
that it will lead to a more effective means of
mass education ; on the other, there is scepticism
even as to its potentialities. The ultimate deci-
sion as to the place of classroom television in the
overall picture of educational telecasting will
depend to a great extent on the information which
is now being assembled and which will be gather-
ed in the next few years.
Classroom TV today is still in its infancy. It
is only in the past five years that pioneer groups
in the United States have ventured forth into this
unknown and unexplored territory. Only about
40 school systems, concentrated mostly in the
eastern part of the U. S. and in certain large city
areas of the Middle West and California, now use
television. Television sets in schools are still
scarce, except in a few areas, like Philadelphia,
Los Angeles and Minneapolis.
According to many persons, Philadelphia is the
outstanding example in the U. S. of experimenta-
tion in the use of school TV. It has come to be
regarded as'''a Mecca for those interested in the
future development of school television,"and has
attracted visitors from 40 States and at least
10 foreign countries.
Regular telecasts to primary and secondary
school classes first began on 7 March 1949, with
31 schools participating.'''Operation Classroom",
as it was called, followed two years of arduous
pioneering effort on the part of Philadelphia
school authorities and teachers, during which
many school programmes, not intended for class-
room use, were transmitted regularly during after-
school and evening hours. These were intended,
to show parents and the general public what goes
on in the public schools of Philadelphia ; to give
teachers and children an opportunity to view TV
with a more critical eye ; to increase confidence
in television as a classroom medium ; and through
trial and error, to train teachers in the highly
specialized skill of programme production.
Today, 13 programme series for classroom use,
graded for different age levels, are being broad-
cast weekly over three commercial stations which
donate the time and studio facilities. And some
40, 000 pupils now watch these telecasts during
school hours on 900 sets throughout the greater
Philadelphia area.
The purpose of these programmes is primarily
to provide the schools with material and person-
alities normally not available in classroom educa-
tion. They include for instance :"The World at
Your Door"which discusses problems of educa-
tion, government, industry and agriculture with
guests from other lands ;"Exploring the Fine
Arts", where children are shown exhibitions from
the Philadelphia Art Museum or dramatic scenes
from Macbeth presented by an English teacher ;
"Science is Fun", includes discussions and dem-
onstrations of interplanetary travel, observation
of phenomena under a microscope and sugges-
tions of science activities for summer days. Other
programmes include stories for young children
and discussions of children's books with guest au-
thors, music education, talks about teen age man-
ners and social problems, and a weekly quiz on
American events and history.
Students and teachers participate eagerly and
in fact practically constitute the entire show. At
the end of the second year of operation, 2, 500 pu-
pils had taken part in 210 live telecasts.
Philadelphia has explored various educational
implications of classroom TV. It quickly saw the
need for printed guidance so that teachers would
know what to do before the telecasts began and
have material for"follow-up"activities. The Sup-
erintendent of Schools admits that this material
is still inadequate and will need considerable am-
plification to be fully useful. In addition, a sum-
mer workshop has been held every year since the
beginning of the project to give teachers practi-
cal training in the various uses of school TV.
All in all, the Philadelphia schools'television
staff are encouraged by the results achieved so
far.'''Follow-up activities are almost amazing,"
they say."Teachers report that as a result of
'Science is Fun', children built small motors, col-
lected insects, built small radios...'Everyone's Ar.
Artist'led to a tremendous number of art projects
in the classrooms."
Teachers opinion surveys list a number of bene-
fits of classroom TV : it stimulates class activities ;
field trips are requested ; vocabularies are enlarg-
ed ; children seek supplementary reading ; they
are more aware of the importance of good diction ;
they retain the skills and processes they see with
amazing accuracy ; many of the teaching tech-
niques used on the screen are good training for
the class teacher himself.
It should be pointed out, however, that these
findings are expressions of opinion and not scien-
tifically verified conclusions.
Very little research of scientific testing has as
yet been undertaken in the U. S. (or in'other coun-
tries for that matter) to determine how effective
TV really is as a classroom tool. Practically no
tests have been made to find out how much chil-
dren actually understand and remember of what
they see on the screen.
One of the rare studies made thus far is an
experiment in teaching elementary school music
by TV. Eight music lessons were telecast in 1951,
with sixth grade classes in seven Washington, D. C.
schools taking part. Similar classes of children
who did not see the TV programmes were used as
a control group. Telecasts lasted a half-hour,
except for a 45-minute opening lesson.
The"public affairs"programme is one branch of educational television now being widely developed in the U. S.
which contributes to the cultural advance of the community. It ranges from news, discussion and religion
to documentaries and special events programmes. Using maps, photos and charts, the speaker (above) can
make his explanation clearer and more forceful than is possible in broadcasts over the radio.

ESCO OURIER MARCH 1953. Page II
iCHOOL TV
In these programmes, the
children were told about Beet-
hoven and other composers
whose works were then played ;
they saw unusual instruments.
heard them played and explain-
ed ; they were shown how easy
it is for any child to play simple
instruments like the melody
flute.
Although this study was ad-
mittedly limited, school author-
ities drew the following con-
elusions :
1-Parents and pupils were
enthusiastic about the teaching
of music by TV.
2. The experiment failed to
show any advantage in favour of
teaching music by TV. Test re-
sults showed that pupils did not
learn more about music as a re-
sult of classroom TV than if the
lessons had been taught without
television.
3. Answers given on the tests
revealed"the limitations of
learning by TV and suggest that
a transient TV show seen in a
classroom may prove of little
permanent value unless the tea-
cher does something in follow-
up teaching to sharpen up and
fix the facts, concepts or anti-
tudes." (Lack of preparatory
and follow-up materials is, at
the moment, one of the major
problems and one of the serious
defects in the operation of class-
room television. >
4. There were unexpected ben-
efits. Many parents followed
the programmes with interest,
thus learning how their chil-
dren study music and creating
a more direct link between
school and home. Children con-
fined at home voluntarily partic-
ipated, thus opening up a whole
new field of service.
In this connexion, it is inte-
resting to note that ill and crip-
pled children can now earn 3-
diploma in New York City by
watching the"Living Black-
board", a regular series of telev-7 7i 1... 41... i. : Eised lessons prepared by the city's board of edu-
cation.
In the last chapter of his book on American
television, Professor Siepmann sums up his per-
sonal conclusions on classroom TV, based on
these and many other experiments ; in school
television in the U. S. today. He writes :"Televi-
sion of this kind is, at the present time, probably
over-rated by pioneer enthusiasts, as it is also too
summarily dismissed by others. That it has value
as a tool of education is almost beyond cavil..."
Such value depends, he says, on two things-
the quality of teaching and the cost of TV.. Tele-
vision can't replace the teacher. It is a most
effective supplementary tool in the hands of the
gifted teacher. The poor teacher usually botches
the job, and despite its superficial attractiveness,
the screen is likely to be a distractive influence
rather than a teaching aid. As for the cost of
television,"the wise school administrator will
pause before launching on the vast expenditure,
both of money and of effort, which the installa-
tion of receivers and their use involves."
He points out that"in any school system, in
any country, the first consideration is good teach-
ing. Adequate premises and adequate equipment
come, perhaps, second, together with the desir-
ability of classes small enough to allow of effec-
tive instruction."
Variety and relief
HE cautions against believing that a final formof educational broadcast has yet been found
and cites the following opinion of a radio-TV
consultant in an important American school
system :"I have been very unhappy to learn that
in many school systems educators who have
experimented a little bit with television are
convinced that a certain format should be
followed. One group will say, use children in the
telecast ; another says use only teachers ; another
says teachers and a few children ; and so on. I
am sure we are all in an experimental stage yet,
and I hate to see people begin to set up patterns
on television as they did on radio."
Classroom TV has a number of obvious advant-
ages but it also has some distinct disadvantages.
Television can bring current events as they occur
into the class and can thus stimulate a child's
sense of living and participating in a real world
despite the physical remoteness of the events.
Likewise the living presence on the school screen
of distinguished personalities enhances a child's
sense of belonging. Television gives students the
stimulus of variety and is a welcome relief from
the habitual teacher.
All reports indicate that children enjoy partici-
pating in TV programmes. As Professor Siep-
mann says,"Why would they not ?" Whether this
has the educational value usually claimed for
such experience or whether the same advantages
might not be realized even more effectively by
other methods, remains opens to question in his
view.
The value of TV in science teaching, in arts
To appraise television as an aid to teaching, schools in Washington televised a series of eight elementary school music lessons
in 1951, as a means of bringing into the classroom the teaching skills of specialists. Children learned to play simple instruments.
and crafts classes, and in demonstrating the ins-
truments of the orchestra and their use, is ob-
vious. The occasional but not excessive use of
demonstration lessons is likely to provide an
added resource of great value in most classrooms.
Certain educators, however, contend that films
can do everything that television can, and can do
it better-with one exception : television can pre-
sent important public events on the classroom
screen. Films, they point out, are superior in
quality ; cutting and editfng allows for a more
finished product. Films, moreover, can"go
places"just as the TV camera can. Two supreme
advantages are further advanced for films.
First, they are available at call in the school
library or elsewhere. The major criticism of TV
in schools is its"tyranny of time", that is the
necessity of synchronizing viewing hours with
class schedules. Films can be used whenever the
teacher wants to without adjusting his curricu-
lum.
Secondly, films have the enormous advantage
in that teachers can preview them at leisure and
make adequate preparation for their integrated
use in the lesson. They can also be shown more
than once. Screens are larger and much easier
on the students'eyes and colour film can be
shown-those these two advantages of the film
are probably only temporary. Advocates of the
film also claim it is cheaper.
Because of this controversy, Professor Siepmann
questioned school superintendents and teachers
in order to get their opinion on the comparative
merits of films and TV in the classroom. He
found that"no convincing answer has yet been
given by proponents of the use of TV to those
who claim the superior advantages of film, with
the one exception (current events, noted earlier),
which is unreservedly conceded."
The results showed that when faced with the-,----- _L_'= ;'_' : _--..-'---_.... +.... .. 1.-......
choice, a striking number rated the
film higher than TV as a teaching aid.
But Siepmann points out that'''great-
er and longer familiarity with the
film may well have influenced the
choice of many of the respondents,"
and that where school TV has been
used the longest, distinctive and not
comparable advantages for both are
claimed.'''Given opportunity to use
both media,"he writes,'''current ex-
perience suggests the desirability of
using both."
In actual practice, most schools to-
day must choose between the two be-
cause of limited funds. Professor
Siepmann's conclusion is that"as of
the moment, it would appear that
most schools, if forced to a choice,
would chose films, and regard tele-
vision as something of a luxury."
Where classroom TV exists, it has
been criticized by teachers who have
stated that it is often difficult to cor-
relate programmes with class work,
that it takes time from the regular
curriculum without true compensatory advanta-
ges, that a 15-minute telecast is too short, and
that a week between programmes is too long.
Some schools have asked simply for better qual-
ity programmes. As one sympathetic but critical
observer put it after studying television activities
in the classrooms :"My reaction to what I saw
may seem brutal ; nevertheless it can be express-
ed in a single sentence. The TV set wasn't big
enough ; the programme wasn't good enoughs"
Teachers and school officials alike are unani-
mous on one point. They urge that in all school
systems"competent instruction in the intelligent,
integrated use of TV programmes should consti-
tute a regular part of in-service training, as it
should also be part of overall training in teacher
training schools."
Instruction in audio-visual techniques is still
sadly lagging at most teacher's colleges, and only
three States-Pennsylvania, Ohio and California
- make even a rudimentary acquaintance with
these techniques mandatory for obtaining a tea-
cher's certificate, though many offer"elective'
courses on the subject.
.'zit is clear", writes Professor Siepmann,'''that
television education is useless unless it is support-
ed by adequate preparatory printed information
and skilful follow-up work on the part of the tea-
cher. This requires a familiarity by the teacher
with the possible use of television."
And he adds :"The use, even of films designed
for classroom use which have been with us for a
quarter century, remains far less effective than it
might be because so few teachers have been train-
ed to use them intelligently. All the money spent
on television by school systems will be largely
wasted unless this defect at the training level is
made good. It is, indeed, the master key to the
future value of television as a tool of classroom
instruction."
Thanks to TV, people in San Francisco can now be spectators at
important public events taking place 3000 miles away in New-York
