; OURIER JULY 1953. Page 3
DANGERS IN TECHNICAL CHANGE
ALL the great civilizations of the world arehybrids. No matter how far back we go in
history we find that most of the changes
that have taken place, even in the most primitive
civilizations, have had their roots in contacts with
other peoples. The greatest civilizations have
been those which were flexible enough to absorb
the largest possible number of foreign techniques
and ideas.
But whereas in the past changes were, as a
rule, slow and new techniques were blended
harmoniously into the existing order of things
without causing serious upheavals, the changes
in our time are more brutal and the repercussions
swifter and deeper. Instead of the former
harmonious process of evolutionary change we
are witnessing revolutionary changes brought
about by the engulfing sweep of modern techno-
logy.
In the past 500 years, the rhythm of technical
progress has been amazingly accelerated with the
rapid development of the means of commu-
nication. And today, our industrial civilization
is reaching out into every hidden corner of the
globe.
The United Nations programme of Technical
Assistance is a systematic attempt, on an in-
ternational scale, to bring to the economically
unfavoured countries the technical knowledge
and methods that will enable them to raise their
standard of living and to share in the progress
of the highly industrialized countries.
The present gap between the living standards
of the industrialized and the under-developed
countries is a threat to peace. Not only does it
encourage an inclination to rebel, but the poverty
prevalent in large areas of the world is a handicap
to the more fortunate countries in that their level
of production is directly affected by the economic
weakness of potential customers.
The changes that Technical Assistance seeks to
achieve in the under-developed countries has been
defined as"a cumulative process where agri-
cultural improvements, health, education, social
measures and industrialization are introduced in
a gradual interplay".
The promoters of Technical Assistance are fully
aware that economic development is bound to
affect all aspects of a people's life to varying
degrees. Food, health and education are the
main fields in which they wish to introduce
changes and they are persuaded that"given a
wide and equitable distribution of its benefits, it
is likely to result in a substantial increase in the
security of the individual and in social stability".
But there is one basic principle which must
guide all forms of planned economic development.
It is an extremely delicate one ; it amounts to
guiding the transition from one form of culture
to another in order to avert the disastrous
consequences that many countries of the world
have suffered from such changes in the past.
This is the task which the U. N. Technical
Assistance Programme has now begun to allot to
the social scientist.
Progress, in the form in which the United
Nations seeks to propagate it throughout the
world, must inevitably destroy many forms of
local culture still surviving on several continents.
These cultures have their defects, no doubt, but
they are none the less the outcome of a long
adaptation to local conditions, and their followers
find in them a satisfaction for which even the
most advanced technology cannot always com-
pensate. The members of a village community
often enjoy a measure of protection that they
will lose when swamped in a proletarian society.
The leisurely well-ordered rhythm of country life
has all too often been replaced by joyless, soul-
deadened toil.
We have learnt by now that no culture has
succeeded in bringing into play all the poten-
tialities of human nature, and that some of the
humblest forms of culture have solved problems
that baffled the more highly developed. Higher
standards of living, industrialization-these will
inevitably destroy such values and thus tend
towards the impoverishment of the human race.
The choice lies not between guns and butter,
FEW of us change long-stranding habits very easily. Even in a highly-industrialized country where changes from the old to
the new are constantly taking place, it takes a good while before people accept these changes. In non-indus-
trialized countries, where changes are usually much slower, it is not surprising that resistance tc change is even more
deeply-rooted.
Today, under the Technical Assistance Programme of the United Nations and various governmental and voluntary
agencies, great transformations are taking place in the life of millions of people in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
New techniques to increase food production and conserve resources, new methods of nutrition, new health practices, new
education-all of these are being introduced into communities whose way of life has, more often than not, changed little
and slowly for hundreds of years.
This rather sudden impact of technological change has posed critical human problems to technical assistance xperts
working around the world. They have come to realize that it is not enough to move into a country with tractors and
bags of fertilizers and simply tell the people to use them if they want better crops. The reasons why these people have
done things in their own way must first be understood and respected. If they are not respected, then the natural
resistance to change and interference will only be strengthened.
So a new aspect of Technical Assistance is taking on supreme importance. This is the study of a people's culture
- by which the social scientist and the anthropologist mean not only religion and philosophy and the arts, but the small
intimate customs of daily life, how people cook and eat their food, how they manage their children and run their homes.
Cultural anthropology and the other branches of the social sciences have much to offer for the guidance of the
technical assistance xpert, for his task is not only to transfer knowledge but to have it take root. Unesco has now
published such a guide-an absorbing study called"Cultural Patterns and Technical Change", edited by Dr. Margaret Mead,
the noted anthropologist and psychologist, and prepared by a team of social scientists in co-operation with the World
Federation of Mental Health.
Although primarily designed for the technical assistance xpert, the new volume makes fascinating reading for the
layman. (It will be available end of August at Unesco Sales Agents at $2 ; 11/6d ; 550 Fr. Frs). On the following pages
we are happy to be able to present highlights from a few of the chapters of this book.
Dr. Alfred Metraux, of the Social Sciences Department of Unesco which is devoting increased attention to the human
problems of technical change in under-developed countries, speaks out frankly and bluntly, below, ith an anthropologist's
view of some of the dangers which he personally sees if the human problems involved in technical assistance are not
clearly understood and taken into account.
by Dr. Alfred Metraux
but between butter and certain forms of art,
certain religious or philosophical traditions. The
danger of standardization is largely theoretical,
for it must be remembered that requests for
technical assistance and fundamental education
are being received from countries where de-
velopment is in full swing and which have to a
great extent broken with their past traditions.
No reasonable person could suppose that it
would be possible to turn vast areas of the world
into preserves for the protection of native cultures.
Even if, for sentimental reasons, we might wish
to do so, the representatives of the cultures
concerned would undoubtedly be the first to wish
to escape from their traditional way of life and
to denounce our efforts as unjust and dis-
criminatory. It must be remembered that the
initial impetus towards change and development
comes from the governments and peoples of the
under-developed countries.
And they are travelling along the path of
progress faster than their advisers had expected.
Many are trying to go ahead too quickly-at a
dangerous rate. If any attempt is made to check
them, they raise the cry of'''reaction'', or assert
that they are being made the victims of a sinister
imperialism. Heads of missions find that one of
their most difficult problems is to restrain ill-
timed enthusiasm and curb the impulse towards
premature innovation.
Nowadays H is the most highly cultivated
representatives of the coloured races who protest
most vehemently when white men advise them to
maintain their traditional customs. They even
tend to regard anthropologists as the agents of
an insidious imperialism which, under the cloak
of respect and affection, is striving to perpetuate
its supremacy and to debar the coloured races
from all access to power and happiness.
It cannot be denied, however, that too high a
price is often paid for the introduction of in-
dustrialism, and this might perhaps be avoided.
The impact of mechanization is appalling in its
levelling-down effect. Anyone who has ever
visited a mining camp or a sugar cane plantation
can bear witness to the degradation brought
about by the transfer from the tribal way of life
to that of the hired labourer.
Our own society has passed through a similar
crisis, and, the wiser for our experience, we might
perhaps be able to save other cultures from
making the same mistakes and enduring the same
sufferings as ourselves. When the transformation
is on a vast scale, the original culture may be
shaken to its foundations or even destroyed. As
Dr. Bowles so aptly remarks :
"The tragedy lies, not in the disappearance of
a culture, it lies in the replacement of a
functioning society with a mass of disunited in-
dividuals who, as victims of circumstance, can
fall easy prey to exploitation of one sort or
another."
It all too frequently happens that the plans
made for assisting economically backward peoples
make no allowance for the tastes and feelings of
those who are to benefit from the so-called im-
provements. Economists and technicians, because
they deal in statistics and handle practical
problems, become imbued with an alarming self-
confidence. They seldom have any inkling of the
relationship that exists between the various
institutions of a group and fail to realize that its
culture cannot be altered piecemeal.
It requires the experience and acquired instinct
of the anthropologist to foresee what re-
percussions any slight change may have on a
society as a whole. It is the far-reaching
consequences of an apparently desirable reform
which, when perceived by the members of a
particular society, give rise to opposition for
which the technicians and economists can find
no explanation. Hygiene and literacy are not in
themselves a source of happiness and prosperity.
On the contrary they may even, in certain cases,
have a disintegrating effect.
Any educational system which is not suited to
a particular form of culture will tend to un-
dermine its intellectual and moral foundations,
replacing them by standards which are not its
own. As a result we find these groups of uprooted
maladjusted individuals, who are a dead weight
and a danger to peoples at the transitional stage
of culture.
All changes imposed from without, even when
supported by a central government, inevitably
meet with opposition, varying in intensity from
one country, background and social class to
another. The apathy for which foreign experts
so often blame indigenous workers is due in many
instances to a latent antagonism which remains
hidden until, suddenly intensified, it breaks out in
open revolt.
Indifference may also result from a lack of in-
centives. Customs and institutions which to us
seem harmful and incompatible with our
conception of human happiness may nevertheless
represent, to the members of certain groups, a
source of satisfaction for which they are given no
substitute. This applies particularly to im-
provements that require a period of years in
which to make themselves felt.
No change will be accepted, or produce a lasting
effect, unless it is based on a system of values.
The chief task of the anthropologist in technical
assistance programmes will be to discover the
psychological motives underlying customary
behaviour. If a culture is to be transformed, the
innovations introduced, while meeting the wishes
of individuals, must not clash with attitudes
deeply rooted in that culture.
