COURIER
FROM TILLAGE TO FACTORY
 BY UNEASY-STAGES
C IVILIZATION in the last centuryhas meant increasing indus-
trialization in Europe as well as
in the United States, and in the
countries with which they came in
contact, and which, courted or coerced
into commerce with them, also became
progressively industrialized. In the
West and East the process was, for
long, unplanned. The people in res-
pomible positions had, as a rule, no
view of the total picture, and no sus-
picion of the eventual results and
their ramifications.
Even now, after long experience, and
with all our awareness and intensive
investigation of the concomitants of
industrialization, we are astounded
when we see the far-reaching results
of the introduction of money into a
barter economy, or of a new tool as
simple as the kerosene lamp or a
wooden-wheeled wagon.
Industrialization is with us to stay.
We may decry its effects, as did a
Venezuelan editor recently, appalled
at the hidden poverty of rich, indu-
strialized Caracas. Yet,"The demo-
graphic consequences of industrializ-
ation constitute a powerful propulsive
toward further industrialization... It
is not a reversible process."
Life with father
OTHER countries, still primarilyt t agrarian, are now drawn into the
process of industrialization as a
result of contact with Western civi-
lization. Sometimes, in introducing a
programme of industrialization, or the
building of great public works and
large factories, such countries have
introduced radical change in the
standard of living, drastically curtail-
ing consumers'goods. Usually the
effects have been much more far-
reaching and costly in human welfare
than this statement implies.
The areas of agricultural change
and industrialization overlap in cer-
tain respects. Large plantations,
usually owned and operated by people
of Western origin, use large numbers
of labourers as does industry, and,
seeing the process merely as one of
money-making, often exploit land and
people. In Africa, plantations are
often near the labourers'native vil-
lages, so that there is no accompany-
ing disruption of the family and
village life, as there is in connection
with industry ; but in New Guinea,
where labourers were brought from
great distances, there was such dis-
ruption, as well as demoralization
among the large groups of men living
without women and without families
or villages.
In addition, mechanization itself,
whether in agriculture or in industry,
separates man from the traditional
processes and techniques of his social
unit, from the skills which he learned
as an aspect of his belongingness
with his family, or of identification
with his father and his line of ances-
tors. Finally, even on small farms,
where cash crops have been introduc-
ed, the effects of the new money
economy have often been of the same
kind as with the introduction of
industrial wages.
From pitcher to pump
GOVERNMENTS t. hroughout theworld have done away with the
more obvious ills of industrial
labour. But the implications of indus-
trialization for mental health are not
covered by the new laws. For example,
when it wa. s proposed to a group of
fellahin that a village pump be ins-
talled as a labour saving device for
the women, they said,"You say that
the pump will save our women effort
and time. If that happens, what are
they going to do with themselves all
day long ?" And it is not merely a
question of occupying time. This is
one of the components of womanhood ;
a woman carries water from the
fountain. When Arab pictures are
made for the tourist trade, they often
portray a woman with a water
pitcher.
So also, among the Tiv, as well as
the Burmese, women were identified
with the pounding mortar ; and the
wife, whom the Tiv, Akiga, pictures,
was one who spun and wove for her
husband. What happens to the
woman, and to the man's relation
with her, when she ceases to fulfill her
role, to fit the picture of womanhood
and wifehood ? When work is neither
virtue nor necessity, but merely a way
of life, what happens when"labour"
is. saved ? what happens when indus-
triousness is one of the highest virtues,
as it is with some American Indians ?
Such factors must be taken into
account when and if industrialization
is to be introduced without undue
destruction. For
example, the Fay Continued on
mission found that next page
JULY 1953. Page 7

Page 8. JULY 1953
HUMAN PROBLEMS OF INDUSTRI
(Continued from previous page)
Greece must be industrialized and must change
to a predominantly cash crop economy if it is to be
able to support its growing population, and to raise
its standard of living. This would mean that a
larger market for industrial products should be
found at home. It is suggested that women in the
villages be persuaded to buy factory woven cloth,
and to send their clothes to the laundry and to
support processing industries in general. Yet the
laundering on the slab by the village fountain, or
on the rocks by the stream, is a time of enjoyable
social intercourse ; one of the beloved songs of the
round dance tells of such a laundering group.
Again, visitors bring away a happy picture of
the mother weaving under the grape arbor in the
spring, now and then stirring the cooking pot,
while her children play about. Good mothers
start weaving for their daughters almost from
birth. Factory woven cloth is in use to some
extent, but can all home weaving disappear without
impoverishing the life of the individual and of the
family ? And if it does, can industry provide an
equally meaningful occupation to take up the
released time ?
The FAO report suggests that Greeks be per-
suaded to invest their money in industry, so as to
make industrialization possible ; but this runs
counter to the Greek attitude of trusting only a
sure thing, the known present. One speculates
about the future, not in the future. A Greek tra-
ditionally likes his money in the form of a lump
under the mattress, not as so many figures on a
chart, or a number of shares of stock. And when
people love their life on the land so much that the
greatest gift of gratitude they can send to the UN
is a jar of Peloponnesian earth, the displacement
of the individual or the family from the village to
the industrial centre could bring much distress.
All these difficulties are not insurmountable, but to
effect technological change with the least human
destruction, these problems and others of their
kind must be taken into account.
Money was incidental
WE must distinguish between the presence ofmoney in a community and a money eco-
nomy. For example, Burma traditionally
had essentially a subsistence and barter economy,
although money was in use. Money was not used
to create more money, or to found a fortune, or to
make the individual independent of the family ;
and the earning of money was incidental to living,
it was not an end.
Linton reports trying to buy the entire stock of
pieces of raffia cloth from a trader in a Madagas-
car market town, and of being refused on the
grounds that the trader would be bored through
the rest of the days if he had nothing to sell. In
addition, the buyer, being a poor bargainer, was
actually paying too high a price ; yet bargaining
is often considered the spice of social intercourse,
and this too may have caused the trader to refuse
to give up a day's bargaining for the sake of extra
profit. This is not what the Western world means
by a money economy.
Technological change in agriculture, as well as
in industrialization, has introduced a money eco-
nomy in many regions. For example, the Navaho,
who were established by the United States Govern-
ment on farms in an unusually fertile strip,
learned to neglect their farms so as to work for
cash wages. Mothers left their children untended,
gave up time-consuming preparation of their tra-
ditional foods for makeshift, processed store foods.
The health of the Navaho children, it was found,
had been maintained at a higher level under the
conditions of a subsistence economy.
In Africa, the introduction of a money economy
has usually meant atomization of the individuals
within the family, complete destruction of the
structuring of family relationships, and of the
social and economic system of the group.
The money economy has meant secession and
revolt, the undermining of parental authority
and the authority of tradition, and thus has
resulted in the rise of the"younger generation"as
a class apart. Marriage is often no longer a con-
tract between two families but, particularly in the
cities, one between a man and a woman. The tra-
ditional lab ala, the brideprice, which cemented two
families in interdependence and maintained
strongly structured continuities within the family,
is now frequently handed by the boy to the girl.
He convenientiy disappeared
WHERE a traveller always knew he could findready hospitality, he now often has to pay
for food and shelter, even to his relatives ;
or he may find that his friend, seeing a traveller
arriving, has conveniently disappeared, to spare
himself the expense of entertaining with bought
food, or food he could sell for cash. In China also,
industrialization has meant that"family relations
are more and more disregarded in property
ownership."
Where money economy has not been accepted or
understood by people living in the midst of this
industrial society, there is frequently a tendency
toward exploitation.
New tools are being introduced, whether in agri-
culture or industry, to save labour or to increase
production, or to improve a product, but the
change they effect often involves much more than
this. Where technology is simple, the tool is an
extension of the body ; the shuttle elongates and
refines the finger, the mallet is a harder and more
powerful fist. The tool follows the rhythm of the
body ; it enhances and intensifies ; but it does not
replace and does not introduce anything basically
different. But the machine is not body-patterned.
It has its own existence, its own rhythm, to which
man must submit.
The woman at her handloom controls the ten-
sion of the weft by the feeling in her muscles and
the rhythm of her body motion ; in the factory she
watches the loom, and acts at externally stated
intervals, as the operations of the machine dictate
them. When she worked at home, she followed
her own rhythm, and ended an operation when
she felt-by the resistence against the pounding
mallet or the feel between her fingers-that the
process was complete. In the factory she is asked
to adjust her rhythm to that of the rhythm pres-
cribed by the factory ; to do things according to
externally set time limits.
The changes of processes and tools involved in
industrialization have often brought a shattering
break between the living and the all-important,
sustaining dead members of the family unit."To
the Chinese the introduction of power machinery
meant (that)... he had to throw over not only
habits of work but a whole ideology ; for, dissatis-
faction'with the ways of his fathers in one parti-
cular meant doubt of the father's way of life in
all its aspects. If the old loom must be discarded,
then a hundred other things must be discarded
with it for there are somehow no adequate substi-
tutes."
The suggested technological changes are some-
times uneconomical, as the labour they save is
cheaper than the purchase and upkeep of the new
tool. Sometimes they are resisted precisely be-
cause they do save labour, threatening to deprive
workers of their maintenance. A Puerto Rican
company which delayed importation and use of
mechanical and chemical means of lowering pro-
duction costs is much admired by the workers,
partly because it does not displace them, partly on
the ground that"the cane needs the human touch
to grow well,"and because of a feeling that herbi-
cide is evil.
Sometimes machines are introduced without
plan and fail because no provision is made for
upkeep or replacement of parts, as when outboard
motors were introduced in Brazil without parts for
repair, and without, or with exorbitantly expen-
sive, oil for fuelling. Agricultural machinery is
demonstrated to farmers far too poor to afford
its purchase and upkeep and with farms too small
for its effective use, when what they need is an
improved hoe or plough. In sections of Africa, the
sewing machine and manufactured cloth have been
introduced without the use of the needle. Afri-
cans buy clothing made on sewing machines by
Indians, but they have no way of mending it, or
having it mended, since machine mending has not
been introduced.
The introduction of a new tool which is comple-
tely accepted may have unimagined results. In
certain sections of Uganda, the introduction of
lamps meant an added fire hazard to thatched
roofs and provided, in turn, fireproof roofing :
kerosene tins, which, flattened, took the place of
the thatching materials which were rapidly de-
creasing because of the increasing use of land for
cash crops. This affected the health picture, since
the old roofing had harboured rats which were a
plague hazard. However, the next step in effi-
ciency has resulted in the sale of kerosene in the
bulk, and people now carry it home in coca cola
or beer bottles ; the new roofing material has disap-
peared, and the administration of Uganda now has
to experiment with suitable roofing materials.
Distaste for wage earning
OBSTACLES to the establishment of an industry
are often encountered, arising from the values
of the culture involved. The Masai, for
example, will not work for wages, since tending
cattle is the only valued occupation, and cattle
themselves, the highest good. In many parts of
Africa the relationship of obedience to someone
without traditional authority is lacking. The Zulus,
considering themselves a dominant warrior race,
think it degrading to accept the discipline of indus-
trial labour ; they are ready, however, to accept
domestic service, since this falls within a differently
structured relationship. The Tiv say that only boys
who are asocial and who-do not fit into the group
are ready to live away from home earning wages :
that is, boys who are essentially maladjusted. On
the other hand, when the railroad went through
Tiv country, groups of people from the district
concerned worked happily for wages, and revealed
qualities much liked by their employers.
The assumption that all peoples have an incen-
tive to improve the standard of living, and there-
fore of taking on employment, is not justified.
Puerto Rican workers expressed a desire to earn
enough money to pay the first installment on the
installation of electric light or the purchase of a
Technological changes are sometimes uneconomical as the labour they save is cheaper than the purchase and up
precisely because they do save labour. Agricultural machinery has been demonstrated to farmers far too poor to bu
In certain parts of the world women are still identified with the pounding mortar. In others they are pictured spinner
her relation to her husband when techniques are introduced to save"Iabour"-when she ceases to fit what was tha

JULY 1953. Page 9
ALIZATION
radio ; yet this desire often does not counterbalance
the distaste for working for wages, so that pay-
ments may not be completed, or an individual may
leave his employment when he has some money
accumulated.
In the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan when peasant pro-
prietors found their incomes increased to unaccus-
tomed amounts, they did not know what to do with
the surplus, and spent it hiring others to do their
work. Their incomes had been increased through
external aid, not through internal motivation such
as desire for new goods and services. Or, the in-
centive may be present, but not as an incentive to
improve subsistence. For example, in China, one
large employer of a highly skilled class of labour,
not long ago, was moved by the obvious physical
inefficiency of many of his employees and the large
incidence of sickness among them to raise wages
of his own accord. The only result, as he was able
to disern not long afterwards, was that each of
these men was now supporting an even larger
number of relatives than a person in his position
was expected to look after.
In Puerto Rico, where the pattern of supporting
a large number of dependent relatives is pre-
sent along with changing values making for
individualism, men prefer to emigrate alone to the
United States for wage work, so that, if they are
single, they can save or spend their money as they
please with no relatives to claim a share, and if
they are married, they can send money home to
their wives knowing that it will be used for the
immediate family, since women living without men
are not supposed to support dependents.
In Annam it is difficult to get the original inha-
bitants to work in the mines, as they fear to disturb
the fountain spirits ; and their fears are supported
by the high mortality in the mining occupation.
In many parts of the world we find that one
works as necessity calls ; this may be the need for
the day's food, or for preparation for a ceremonial,
or it may be the need of the land or the growing
plant which must be attended to on that particular
day. But the machine has no such insistent need ;
so if the worker has enough food or money for his
needs, he does not see why he has to go to his job.
In fact, if he also has a garden, or if the fish are
running in the stream, he has a valid reason for
not going. This is part of a general attitude which
we find also in connection with school attendance.
And it is an aspect of the different conception of
time as a process rather than as programmatic.
People may operate in terms of mechanical
"time-saving"tools-automobiles, radios, tele-
graph-but this does not mean that they accept
and upkeep of the new tool. Sometimes they are resisted
or to buy it and with farms too small for its effective use.
spinning and weaving. What happens to the woman and
Nas the accepted picture of womanhood and wifehood ?
the need for speed which these implements repre-
sent ; they may only be modern conveniences to
these people. The exact minute may be unim-
portant, and the time'''saved''using such devices
may nevertheless be spent in inactivity ; people
"stand or sit doing very little for hours at a time."
Industrialization, in the interest of good results
and human welfare, must take account of such
basic patterns, either working within them, or else
educating people in an understanding of the
Western framework of industrial work.
Cultural attitudes often determine the compo-
sition and quality of the personnel in an industrial
establishment. Where familial values are of para-
mount importance, as in Greece, China, and Japan,
a man has to give jobs to relatives, choosing them
neither according to ability nor according to merit.
And even when the employees are not all relatives,
the structure of the organization may follow the
iines of the kinship unit. In China, for example,
there was reluctance to fire a delinquent em-
ployee ; as one punished one's own son for wrong-
doing, but did not expel him from the family, there
was an additional preference for punishment, and
for such reasons businesses in China and Japan
were found to lose money. In Japan, when a
business was losing money and there was not
enough work for all the employees, the employer
did not therefore dismiss them ; he was responsible
for them.
In Burma, the attitude against the accumulation
of capital, the tendency to spend much money for
religious purposes, the tenet that a Buddhist can-
not make a valid will, all militate against the
creation of capital needed for industrial enterprise
of any major scope. However, small mills and
small plants in rural areas have been increasing
and fit into the Burmese pattern. Under British
administration, machinery for agriculture was
regarded with suspicion as another device to raise
taxable capacity, but agricultural shows, where
they were exhibited, were attended, since they fit
into the pattern of"convivial celebration, with a
few side shows such as exhibitions of fertilizers
and insect pests, matters to which the government
attaches superstitious importance."
Time on their hands
THE wast-e in human welfare which came intobeing as a by-product of industrialization has
caused much concern among governments, so-
cial scientists, and foundations. There appears to be
general agreement that decentralization of indus-
try, bringing work to the village or to its vicinity,
within the framework of known associations and
associational ties, will make. for less disruption
and, at the same time, will bring the increase in
income needed for raising the standard of living.
Village industries can provide the funds for
raising the standard of living, and can fill the
gap created when handicrafts give way to manu-
factured goods. They can also, in part, be the
answer to the mechanization of agriculture which
often releases time for which there is no provision.
As it is, in many villages in India, China, and the
Philippines, the farmers are actually partly unem-'
ployed. In the Chinese villages it is estimated
that the farmers and farm labourers are unem-
ployed for periods of six to eight months a year.
The introduction of village industries is not,
however, without difficulties. In India it is found
that the villagers often do not want to be orga-
nized into new cooperative units, or any created
units.
Havoc in family life
- w N China, in 1935, village industry in the districtof Kiangying was working havoc in family life.
Before it was introduced, the women had spent
much of their time helping the men in the fields
and had raised silkworms ; they had done their
spinning and weaving only during their free time.
When home knitting with a hand machine was
introduced, women knitted late into the night by
kerosene lamps, and, since they had to spend so
much of their time caring for old people and young
children, they had no time even to eat their meals
with the family, but ate at their work. In times
of crop failure, when the home industry was the
only means of subsistence, the loom had to be busy
all the time if there was only one loom in the
house. This meant that members of the family
had to work at it in shifts twenty-four hours a day.
This was an economic solution, but one that failed
on the social level.
'There have been difficulties and destruction ;
but through a study of the local situation,
through an understanding of and respect for
the existing framework, such difficulties are being
solved. China's cooperatives have become increas-
ingly successful in their social effects. The re-
cently formulated programme proposes to carry
over into industrialization the traditional coopera-
tive relationships of guild and family ; it aims at
industrializing the already present village units.
In India, careful teaching by people who have
an understanding of the need for a long period of
instruction, achieved the introduction of the idea
of village industry. In one village, even the latrine
was incorporated into the home industry scheme,
so that many homes now have two latrines, one
in use while the contents of the other are being
composted for sale as fertilizer. In Mexico and
Ecuador, some home industries have fitted into
existing, valued, and enjoyed patterns, with happy
results.
