Page 18. DECEMBER 1953
A Letter from Great Britain
TECHNICAL CHANGE AND
THE NEED FOR AESTHETICS
TECHNOLOGICAL Change- :-Bane or Boon ? This was the
basic question posed by the Courier in the July
1953 issue which highlighted some of the human
problems involved in attempting to bring about
technological change in under-developed countries. In
a letter to the Editor, Mr. David Hardman, former Mem-
ber of Parliament of Great Britain, has commented on
one aspect of this vast problem-"the aesthetic needs
of a civilized society."} Ir. Hardman's stimulating re-
marks, we feel sure, will interest our readers in all
countries, and we are pleased therefore to publish his
long letter almost in its entirety on this page.
Dear Sir,
MAyan inveterate reader of the Courier sinceits inception in 1948 congratulate the
Editors upon their July issue ? It con-
tained, it will be remembered, a remarkable
article by the distinguished anthropologist
Dr. Alfred Metraux on the dangers associated
with technical change, and a further eight full
pages on the human problems which are bound to
arise with the impact of industrialization from
the West upon the so-called backward peoples.
It is symptomatic of Unesco's vital work in these
fields that the Courier has in the last three years
been paying more and more attention to
technological change and should in 1953 devote
almost an entire number to sagacious thinking on
the subject.
I think it necessary, however, to add a few
thoughts on the aesthetic needs of a civilized
society-a subject hardly touched upon in these
discussions on the fundamental question Dr. Me-
traux and the Editors pose-is technological
change a bane or a boon ? When I speak of"a
civilized society"in this context I am, of course,
referring to the civilizing effects or otherwise of
industrialization. In the West we have learnt
through bitter travail that an industrial
revolution can provide very great benefits to
humanity and at the same time deprive it of the
things of the human spirit. The crying need of
our time is that industrialization should create
its own culture and at the same time zealously
preserve the cultures of the past. The civiliza-
tions of the Middle East, the East and of Africa,
now vigorously applying scientific method and
technology to their own economic conditions,
should be warned of our failures and omissions
in the West.
No one can stop, nor would wish to stop the
changes now taking place. The only way in which
the vast populations of the earth can rid them-
selves of poverty, improve their food supply, im-
prove health, and develop better physical welfare
in all its aspects, is by the methods of scientific
and technological advance, but the fundamental
need of the human spirit is that there should be
a humane industrialization. Robert Bridges, the
English poet, says that the rest of humanity has
"seen the Electric Light i'the West". Let
mankind I>rofit by its gleam and probe into
the shadows that it casts.
For the life of Man is
not only founded on
technology and science
but on art and religion.
Alfred Whitehead, the
great philosopher, ma-
thematician and educa-
tionist, says that"all four
are interconnected and
issue from Man's total
mentality". If human
physical welfare is the
goal of technical assist-
ance we cannot do without
applied science. But there
is equal need for aesthetics
and the humanities if the
profound psychological
and spiritual malaise of
the great industrial cities
of the West is to be
avoided. Science has di-
rected attention to things
as opposed to values.
It may be a proud
distinction that the in-
dustrial civilization of the
West should begin with
the industrial revolution
in England but it has left
a trail of evils from which
the English have been
trying to extricate them-
selves for the last fifty
years. These evils arose
from the aesthetic errors of scientific materialism,
as well as from the natural greed of men which
it intensified. As Whitehead says in his Science
and the Modern World when speaking of the
early industrial system here or in Europe and
America,"The point which I am insisting on is
the stone-blind eye with which even the best men
of that time regarded the importance of aesthetics
in a nation's life. I do not believe that we have
as yet nearly achieved the right estimate."
Speaking on this theme in London in 1946 (since
commented upon by Mr. T. S. Eliot in his Notes
towards the Definition of Culture page 105 : 1948)
I said that the age of industrialism and democracy
had brought to an end most of the great cultural
Man lives not by technology and science alone. He is nourished by the arts and religion as well. In every so-
ciety whatever its level, these four factors cannot be dissociated if happiness is to accompany material welfare.
(U, N. photo.)
There is no doubt that the vast populations of the earth can improve their
conditions of living by applying modern scientific and technological methods,
but"the fundamental need is that there should be a humane industrialization"
traditions of Europe, not least that of the visual
environment, and that fortunes and power had
been obtained by exploiting ignorance and
appetite. As a result the majority of people in
the contemporary world were half-educated, if
that, and there was a vast cultural breakdown
which stretched from America to Europe and from
Europe to the East.
Mr. Eliot comments that'''half-education''is a
modern phenomenon."In earlier ages the
majority could not be said to have been"half-
educated"or less : people had the education
necessary for the functions they were called upon
to perform. It would be incorrect to refer to a
member of a primitive society, or to a skilled
agricultural labourer in any age, as half-educated,
or quarter-educated or educated to any smaller
fraction."The supreme danger of industrializa-
tion without humaneness is that diversification
among human communities will be wiped out,
age-long cultures-invaluable for the Odyssey of
the human spirit-will be wiped out, and there
will be no contemporary culture with its roots in
the past to take their place. The"half-educated",
in Mr. Eliot's sense, will inherit the earth.
Dr. Metraux remarks on the danger arising
from the enthusiastic impatience of the most
highly cultivated representatives of the coloured
races"who protest most vehemently when white
men advise them to maintain their traditional
customs". The warning is timely. Power to
benefit the material welfare of mankind can come
from science and technology, but happiness, as
the many diverse cultures of the world have
proved through thousands of years of trial. and
error, is a tender and more wayward plant,
requiring the inspiration of the arts and religion.
Wherever technology is introduced there must
be corresponding attention given to town and
country planning, architecture, the design of
goods in daily use (especially those mass
produced) if the ugliness and malaise of Western
industrial centres is to be avoided. Community
planning should have cultural objectives as well
as technical. Not only the Temple but the school
and the adult college should be the centre from
which the aesthetic and spiritual life should be
drawn, and when I speak of school and college I
am thinking not only of education through dis-
course, but of activity, first-hand experience and
observation, so closely identified with Technical
Assistance, as the July Courier schows.
Activity, the giving as much chance as possible
of children and adults doing things for themselves,
is vital. This applies equally to aesthetic and in-
tellectual pursuits as well as physical. Those
working in the fields of Technical Assistance
should always be aware not only of the impact of
technology on primitive communities, but of the
frightening influence of the passive amusements
of the West-the cinema, sound broadcasting and
now Television. These can and do serve their
turn in aesthetic and spiritual education of the
right kind, but they can be deadly in their effect
of cultural umformity, in their squashing of in-
dividual and group initiative, and in their drab
tyranny over the realm of aesthetics.
Yours sincerely,
David Hardman.
,
UNESC ! U
