, rr. COURIER NOVEMBER 1953. Page 7
The demolishing of the Bastille by the people of Paris in July 1789, still represents for people everywhere the symbol of justice triumphing over arbitrary legal methcds.
FROM ROMAN LAW
TO HUMAN RIGHTS
HUMAN justice, though it will probably neverbe perfect, has made great strides since it
was originally conceived. A study of
ancient laws and customs shows the state of
personal insecurity and social injustice in which
our fathers lived.
Athenian legislation was somewhat summary in
form. Actually, justice was meted out by the
people, who decided on the sentences to be passed.
But far too much was left to the wantonness of
the crowd, to the eloquence of accusers, and to
the arbitrary caprice of witnesses.
The Sophists endeavoured to preach a more
humane justice, and Theophrastus, a disciple of
Plato and Aristotle, laid down various principles
of jurisprudence. However, Greek history
abounds in glaring injustices, like the conviction
of Socrates and the banishment of Aristides
whose fellow-citizens grew weary of hearing him
called"the Just".
The classical period of Roman jurisprudence
was the first century of the Christian era : it is
curious that the works of such jurists as Proculus,
Sabinus and their disciples should have appeared
at a time when Tiberius, Caligula and Nero were
inflicting on Rome the most arbitrary and
scandalous form of tyranny. Yet it was this
period that produced the first idea of the"Right
of the Person", applicable to citizens and non-
citizens alike.
The laws were codified by Theodosius, and then
by Justinian, so that Roman law reached full
flower just when the empire began to disintegrate
under the attacks of the barbarians.
In the sixteenth century, Roman law ex-
perienced a brilliant revival with the humanists,
and remained a source of inspiration for jurists
up to our own day. However, during the Middle
Ages and until the dawn of the present era,
legislation in the great countries of Europe was
mainly a combination of Norse customs, in-
troduced by the barbarian conquerors, and laws
of ecclesiastical origin, designed to ensure, in
social customs, the supremacy of the Church as
well as the authority of the sovereign.
As for legal respect for the human person as
we conceive it today,"without distinction of race.
sex, religion, opinion, social origin or property".
although this idea vaguely occurred to some men
of judgment and to a few reformers, Western
societies provided very little example of it for
eighteen centuries.
Let us take, for example, a few features of
customary, feudal and royal justice as it existed
in France, and, except for a few differences of
detail, in Germany, Spain and Italy under the old
regimes.
In the first place, customary law varied ad in-
finitum, according to the regimes and the temper
of the authorities. The great feudal lords were
accountable only to the king. They had the sole
right of jurisdiction over their vassals, and over
the serfs and villains living on their fiefs. Lesser
nobles, and the ecclesiastical authorities also
possessed the right of justice, from which they
derived handsome benefits in the shape of fines,
confiscations, fees for procedure, etc.
The machinery of the law, and the laws and
penalties themselves, varied according to the class
to which a man appearing before the court
belonged. Nobles brought to law by their peers
could appeal to the sovereign ; a commoner was
judged by a court that allowed of no appeal, serfs
were judged by a minor officer delegated by their
lord and, of course, had no right of appeal.
Trial by ordeal, or the"judgment of God", was
in general use during the Middle Ages ; it might
. take the form of ordeal by water (for accusations
of sorcery), ordeal by fire (which meant picking
up a piece of red-hot metal), ordeal by boiling
oil, or trial by combat (legal duel) ; this latter was
reserved for nobles and free men. The evidence
of witnesses could always be contradicted by the
"judgment of God".
During the thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries, these forms of judgment were con-
demned by the Popes and gradually disappeared,
to be replaced by enquiry and testimony. From
the time of Saint Louis onwards, royal justice
entered into competition with the feudal courts
and then attempted to supplant them.
In criminal matters, only nobles and eccle-
siastics could be summoned before the par-
liaments. Penalties invariably differed according
to the rank of those concerned ; judicial inquiries
were secret ; and the accused, who was presumed
to be guilty, had no advocate. Lastly, the dis-
cretionary power of the sovereign always allowed
him to intervene, arbitrarily and unrestrictedty.
By a"sealed letter" (lettre de cachet), the
sovereign could order the immediate, definitive
imprisonment of anyone, without previous
was marked by the jurisdiction of
courts extraordinary, illegal acts,
confiscations and the introduction
(Cont'd on
next page)
judgment. By another order (lettre d'abolition),
he could place a culprit beyond the reach of any
punishment. By a third (lettre de surséance), he
could suspend all proceedings under way. Finally,
the King could at any time remove a case from
Parliament and have it judged by his Council.
Justice, moreover, was extremely slow. Owing
to the superposition of seignorial and royal courts,
it was sometimes necessary to pass through four
jurisdictional bodies prior to appearing before the
parliaments. The expense of litigation was so
great that poor people could never obtain justice.
It was only at the end of Louis XIV's reign that
the official drafting of customary laws was
embarked upon by Chancellor d'Aguesseau. The
Constituent Assembly introduced into the Consti-
tution of 1791 an article ordering the estab-
lishment of a unified code of laws. The present
Civil Code, abrogating both Roman and customary
law, was drawn up under the Consulate.
The Constitution of 1791, based on the first
Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen
(1789), established certain principles that are to
be found in various legislations throughout the
world in the nineteenth century. The Universal
Declaration of 1948, particularly in its first twelve
articles, restates and expands those principles.
Henceforth, no one could be arrested except as
prescribed by law and under specified procedures.
Detention before trial was suppressed where
minor offences and misdemeanours were con-
cerned ; in criminal law, a defendant could be
released provisionally on bail. A defendant was
no longer required to prove his innocence ; it was
the court's task to prove him guilty. The jury
system was introduced, together with the right of
the defendant to choose a lawyer to plead for
him.
In England, the judiciary was centralized
earlier than in the rest of Europe. As early as
the latter part of the twelfth century, the
supremacy of the law and the recognition of in-
dividual liberties gave the country a judicial
system that endures to this day.
The Anglo-Norman feudal nobles never pos-
sessed the right to administer justice. In each
country, royal authority was represented by a
sheriff ; judges travelled from county to county
to preside over local assizes. Common law de-
veloped and was early applied everywhere. En-
quiry and jury systems tended to replace the
"judgment of God"and trial by combat.
The Magna Carta of 1215 contained an article
declaring :"No free man shall be taken, or im-
prisoned, or disseized, or outlawed, or exiled, or
in any way destroyed... except by the legal
judgment of his peers or by the legal law of the
land."There was a retrogression of freedom
during the Wars of the Roses and under the
despotic Tudor and Stuart dynasties. This period

Page 8. NOVEMBER 1953
FREEDOM FROM FEAR
OF ARBITRARY ARREST
(Continued from page 7)
of torture. However Parliament revolted
against royal tyranny. In 1679, the writ
of habeas corpus protected personal
liberty. The Bill of Rights was formally
carried in 1689, after William of Orange
came to the throne.
In the eighteenth century, all arbitrary
acts (that is, all tyrannical and despotic
decisions emanating from absolute power)
disappeared, and every man, irrespective
of his station, was judged according to
law by the ordinary courts.
In other European countries, the eigh-
teenth century princes introduced reforms
inspired by the ideas of the English and
French philosophers.
In the New World, the remote settle-
ments and the isolation of the first
communities, the perilous conditions under
which they were organized, and the bold
and independent character of the original
immigrants made justice for a long time
summary, irregular and often arbitrary.
But with the twentieth century,.'lynch
law"lost all semblance of justification.
In the rest of the world, similar progress
has gradually replaced arbitrary justice by
regular laws, that are equally applied to
all and respect the essential rights of the
UNESCO
Widespread penal preforms have taken place during
and since the 19th century. The aim is now not merely
to punish the criminal, but also to reform and educate
him. Note the contrast between the harsh conditions
of an 18th century prison shown in the engraving (above)
and those of today in this photograph taken in the
reading room of a modern prison, in Sudbury, England.
person. In the East, the law of absolute
sovereigns has gradually made way for
more equitable and less cruel legal
systems. In China, habeas corpus was in-
corporated in the Constitution on 21 June
1935. In contrast with the brutal and
unjust practices that still subsist in many
parts of the world, we may quote the
following passages from the New Consti-
tution of India which is now in force, and
frees all citizens from the fear of arbitrary
arrest and wrongful interference at the
hands of the State :
"The people of India, solemnly resolved
to constitute India as a sovereign and
democratic Republic, undertake to gua-
rantee to all its citizens ;
"Social, economic and political justice ;
"Freedom of thought, expression.
opinion, faith and worship ;
"Equality before the law and access to
all rights ; it further undertakes to promote
among all men ;
"Fraternity, which ensures the dignity of
the individual and the unity of the
nation."
These words show us how far the
fundamental ideas as to human rights
have progressed throughout the world.
The conquest of the rights of the person
is a modern enterprise, far from complete
and constantly threatened with setbacks.
The progress so far made, however, jus-
tifies the further efforts that are in-
cumbent on the men and nations of today.

