OCTOBER 1953. Page 3
This is how Abdalla, aged 13, of Egypt, drew a train on a viaduct.
HERBERT SPENCER WAS ON THE RIGHT
TRACK A HUNDRED YEARS AGO
Taketoshio, aged 6, Japan, dit it this way.
and Kishore, aged 7, India, like this.
THE spontaneous attempts made by children to represent the men/,
t houses, trees and animals around them... are familiar to all...
This effort to depict the striking things they see is a further
instinctive exercise of the perceptions... What is it that the
child first tries to represent ? Things that are large, things that are
attractive in colour, things round which its pleasurable associations
must cluster-human beings from whom it has received so many
emotions ; cows and dogs which interest by the many phenomena they
present ; houses that are hourly visible and strike by their size and
contrast of parts. And which of the processes of representation gives
it most delight ? Colouring. Paper and pencil are good in default
of something better ; but a box of paints and a brush-these are
the treasures. The drawing of outlines immediately becomes secon-
dary to colouring...
Now ridiculous as such a position will seem to drawing-masters
who postpone colouring and who teach form by a dreary discipline
of copying lines, we believe that the course of culture thus indicated
is the right one... No matter how grotesque the shapes produced ;
no matter how daubed and glaring the colours. The question is not
whether the child is producing good drawings. The question is,
whether it is developing its faculties... it may be readily inferred that
we condemn the practice of drawing from copies ; and still more so
that formal discipline in making straight lines and curved lines and
compound lines, with which it is the fashion of some teachers to begin...
It has been well said concerning the custom of prefacing the art of
speaking any tongue hy a drilling in the parts of speech and their
functions, that it is about as reasonable as prefacing the art of walking
by a course of lessons on the bones, muscles, and nerves of the leg ;
and much the same thing may be said of the proposal to preface the
art of representing objects, hy a nomenclature and definilions of the
lines which they yield on analysis. These technicalities are alike
repulsive and needless. They render the study distasteful at the very
outset ; and all with the view of teaching that which, in the course of
practice, will be learnt unconsciously.
HERBERT SPENCER, Education : Intellectual, Moral and Physical (1861)
FOURIER
