DECEMBER 1953. Page 19
OR ! ENTEEk) NG...
G I'VE my daughter Marguerite, aged 12, a
t compass and a map. Tell her there is
a a lovety l ke, a few mil s aw y, where
the fairies and"Little Men in the Woods"
used to ptay, where she can have a picnic with
her friends. Or suggest that she go with them
to that farm three miles across country where
there is a new brood of chickens. The girls
will start across country and find the lake or
the farm.
They may not get there the fastest or easiest
way, but with compass and map they will find
a safe track and will not get lost. An expert
would probably find a better
road and take a bit less time.
3ut the point here is that Mar-
; uerite and her friends, town-
bred girls as they are, will take
to the country and the woods like
ducks to water. This is largely
because they have studied"Orien-
teering", which is both a sport
and a school subject in Sweden.
With their"Silva", (the simple
compass with protractor every
child in Sweden seems to possess
and which Marguerite got for her
ninth birthday), map-reading.
the spotting of landmarks and
the art of following a'set course
are familiar to them.
The growth of"Orienteering"
(the name is taken from Swedish
and anglicized by the addition of
an extra"e"), is one of these
remarkable developments which
show how much can be done in
education with a simple idea,
intelligently applied."Orienter-
ing"as the Swedes write it, is
essentially the art of finding your
way with map and compass. It
has now become something more
than that : since it is now a
compulsory subject in the schools
its educational value has been
greatly increased.
Like all things in education
and sport, Orienteering is best
started early and you must catch
the child young. That is why in
Swedish schools, where children
begin at the age of seven, the first
principles are taught in the first
year. This is done by easy
indoor and outdoor games whose
object is simply to give the chil-
dren a sense of direction and
observation.
Diagrams and plans, they are
told, are really maps. They
draw a diagram of the classroom,
a map of the school and school
grounds, then a real map with
simple lines and landmarks.
Elementary pacing and measur-
ing of distances also comes in.
For practice, after-school walks
and Sunday outings soon enlarge
the range of interest.
In the next two or three years,
map symbols are learned. Then
the orienteering lesson turns into
a geography lesson, with incur-
sions into topography, geometry,
mathematics, drawing, the draft-
ing of reports and nature studies.
The experience of teachers in Sweden and
elsewhere provides interesting indications on
the educational use of orienteering.
"The drawing of simple maps", a country
schoolmaster in Central Sweden says,"is in
my opinion the best introduction for children
to the study of geography. The young child
seems to take to drawing maps as he does to
drawing pictures. From the plan of the school
room or school grounds, he will soon be looking
at the country around as he would a map. His
interest and understanding of maps showing
the country and the world is then easily and
rapidly encouraged".
Another teacher has emphasized for me the
interest of the new school subject for social
studies : the child is stimulated by it to learn
much more than he would otherwise about his
own community, his own country and the
different aspects of other countries.
Lessons and practice in'Orientering", as it is called in Sweden, have made this
boy familiar with the symbols of cartography. On the blackboard he is drawing
a map of last Sunday's outing to a nearby ! ake () nsj6n means"the lake"in Swedish).
(U. N. and Unesco photos).
... WITH MAP AND COMPASS OUTDOORS
Still another teacher, in a report sent to the
educational authorities in Stockholm, stresses a
different aspect of the educational value of
orienteering : by inducing children to observe
landmarks, both on the maps and in nature,
their capacity to describe what they see is put
to good use. This particular schoolmaster
found that children were more willing to write
about their outing if they were left to find the
road. They find new interest in the historv
of landmarks, in the nature surrounding them.
Educators both in Sweden and in Canada
have been working out other practical me-
thods for using the compulsory teaching of
orienteering in the schools in other studies. It
is thought better at first not to encumber young
pupils with difficult explanations about the
compass and its geometrical applications while
teaching its use in class. (One teacher found
that instead of 360"degrees"his pupils were
talking about highways by their compass
number : number 90 indicating
East, 180 the road South, etc.).
At later stages, the use of geome-
try for taking bearings and mea-
suring heights and distances
comes in and is learned with
added interest because its useful-
ness has been seen in practice
with map and compass and on
orienteering outings.
The possibilities of combining
orienteering with nature studies,
botany and animal life are also
easily understood by teachers and
children. Notes on things ob-
served on an orienteering cross-
country walk have greatly added
to the value of this new subject
which was first regarded only as
a sport and which is still re-
garded by most of its practi-
tioners as primarily a source of
fun.
Even the original idea of orien-
tiering, conceived some 30 years
ago by Major Ernest KiHander,
constituted an interesting educa-
tional advance. Major KiUan-
der, a Swedish youth and scout
leader, had been worried at the
amount of time the young people
he was looking after were spend-
ing watching sport instead of
participating in it. One Sunday
morning, he gave each of them
an objective they could reach
with the help of a compass and a
topographical map of the coun-
try-side : they could go as they
liked, by the main roads, or
across hill and dale. The idea
was a success and the Swedes
now look upon orienteering as a
national sport-as golf is British,
hockey is Canadian and baseball
American.
In Sweden today over : 150, 00
people (including 135, 000 adults)
take part every year in orienteer-
ing contests. As in Sweden,
orienteering has become a com-
pulsory school subject in Ontario
Province, Canada. Booklets exist
on orienteering sport and the
Swedish orienteering manual
published in H) 43 sold 150, 000 co-
pies. An amusing illustrated
manual has just been published
in German in Switzerland, and the
illustrated leaflets on the"Silva"
compass which provide elemen-
tary instruction on map-reading
are printed in four or five
lane-uae-es.
But the practical usefulness of orienteering
goes far beyond sport, games and exercise. Its
educational value is more and more recognized.
For children of Marguerite's age, it is a way
to start gaining confidence in the country, a
wonderful sport and a fascinating way to dis-
rover the world around.
Yves DU GUERNY
It is a commonplace experience in Sweden to find children, singly or in groups,
finding their way across the countryside with the aid of a compass and a map.
Much more than a game, map-reading and orientation with the aid of a compass
are now an integral part of the Swedish school programme. This instruction
begins in the primary school with simple problems and is developed to include
more advanced mathematics, natural history and botany. (Unesco photos.)
I
: ! URIER
