COURIER DECEMBER 1953. Page 3
Radioactive lements, such as radium, emit high-speed particles, both electrons and protons, but in small quantities. For the exploration of the structure of the
atomic nucleus a powerful stream of very high-energy electronic or nuclear projectiles is needed. The photograph shows a Van de Graaff generator of such par-
ticles, detached from the large shell in which particles are given high velocity and become projectiles which can be effectively used for the bombardment of atoms.
Low activities consist largely in pulling
apart the objects found in Nature and
putting together again the mater als
thus obtained. Huge forests melt under
the lumberjacks'axes and come to life again
as Sunday papers and rayon stockings ; iron
ore deposits combine with rubber plantations
and oil pools to produce the noon-hour traffic
jam ; stone quarries reappear as houses. Man
learns quickly enough that the process of pull-
ing apart becomes increasingly difficult as the
size of its object decreases.
From the earliest times, it was possible to
distinguish two quite different levels on which
the separating and rebuilding operations could
take place. At the nearer level, the objects,
ranging from pyramids to grains of dust, exhi-
bit dimensions comparable to the human size.
Here the processes are mechanical and the tools
consist of the human hand with its multiple
extensions from the sharpened flint to the
watchmaker's drill. Energies which can be
spent in handling a pound of matter are still on
the scalE'of human stl'ength.
By Dr. Lew Kowarski
Director of the Laboratory Group,
European Council for Nuclear Research
Operations which we today call"chemical",
but which started as early as the invention of
fire and agriculture, occur on a quite different
level. We know today that every chemical pro-
cess consists in separating and re-arranging
material objects which are so small that in the
tiniest visible speck or drop of matter they still
number in billions of billions.
To separate these objects-we call them
atoms and molecules-from one another, we
have to exert a considerably greater energy
than on the previous level, and when we bring
them to rest in a new arrangement, similar
amounts of energy may be recovered. To hew
a kilogram of coal out of a coal seam (a mecha-
nical operation), the necessary exertion amounts
to but a small figure, when expressed in some
usual unit such as the kilogrammeter. But the
act of burning this same kilogram (a chemical
operation) produces 3 million kitogrammeters.
The human mastery of chemical forces, as
instanced in the technology of fuels, alloys or
synthetic materials, became fairly complete
during the last two centuries or so ; but as the
art of separating and recombining the atoms
improved, the first intimation appeared (about
00 years ago) that the atoms contained within
themselves still smaller structural units. This
recognition amounted to a new challenge-how
to take the atom apart-and a new promise,
that of an immense new store of energy which
could be gained on that new level of re-arran-
gement.
The taking apart came first. To concentrate
enough energy in the volume of a single atom,
no human too ! is fine enough ; the only think-
able agency is the impact of very small pro-
jectiles moving at a high speed. When a highly
accelerated atom collides with another, (Cont'd
the effect is that of a heavy hammer on next
blow, and if the hammer carries suffi-page)

Page 4. DECEMBER 1953 UNESCO COU
SEPARATING AND THEN
RE-GROUPING THE TINIEST
SPECKS OF MATTER
(Continued from previous page.)
dent momentum, the anvil can be smashed. The first operation of
this sort was produced in 1919 ; the atomic tools were not yet human-
made-use was made of the fact that some naturally occurring
substances, called radio-active, have the property of ejecting streams
of fast-moving atoms.
In 1932 this natural propulsion was superseded by human machi-
nery in which it became possible to subject atoms of hydrogen,
helium, etc... to very strong electric and magnetic forces. With the
help of machines-cyclotrons, Van de Graff generators etc-research
on subatomic,"nuclear", forces became rapid and effective.
It was quickly recognized that all atoms were built up of two main
types of bricks-protons and neutrons-and that the forces involved
in the combination of these bricks were enormous. In fact, in addi-
tion to the mechanical and the chemical levels of human interference,
a third level was discovered, involving energies millions of times
greater than those found on the chemical level.
These energies are often mentioned in terms of a special unit-the
electron-volt (written eV), which requires a few words of explanation.
A chemist likes to know the amount of energy contributed by a single
atom in chemical processes such as burning. Such amounts. are very
small and a very small unit is convenient when describing them ; in
the combustion of coal, one atom contributes about 4 eV.
Mothballs versus atoms
To be effective in nuclear processes, a single atom has to carry afew million eV (written MeV). Forces which, on the customary
human level, are distributed among millions of atoms, have to
be concentrated on a single one to enable it to deal a (nuclearly) telling
blow on the target. So we need powerful and intricate machinery.
During the first ten years of their studies on this level, the nuclear
physicists could only hurl streams of atomic bullets on their targets
and observe the rather few collisions which took place under these
conditions. This method was somewhat reminiscent of the famous
story according to which mothballs are quite effective against moths
if only you throw them adroitly enough to hit the beasts in full flight.
The disproportion between the huge machinery used in nuclear
research and the negligible combined weight of all the target atoms
affected by the lucky projectiles was enormous, but even the few hits
scored in this manner yielded a great deal of information about the
nuclear forces involved, and the nuclear physicists were kept happy
in their impractical pursuit.
The situation changed during the War, when a way was found to
produce in uranium a new kind of reaction capable of being trans-
mitted to neighbouring atoms of the same element. It was as if a
mothball had been invented capable of infecting a moth with a quickly
catching plague. The way was found to release in a kilogram of
matter energies several million times greater than those obtainable
by chemical processes, and a new chapter was opened, for better and
for worse, in the history of human control of natural forces.
For the nuclear physicist, this tremendous by-product of his inge-
nuity was but a small entry in the log-book of his voyage into the
unknown. A new aim and a new level of minuteness began to glim-
mer before his eyes : protons and neutrons themselves gave signs of
willingness to be taken apart. A swarm of tinier moths began to
'haunt the nuclear researcher's imagination and spurred on his quest
for swifter and surer mothballs.
By 1945 ways were found to speed the atom-sized tools-still the
same gaseous atoms, preferably hydrogen--to hundreds (and, by
1952, to thousands) of MeV, thus reaching. levels far above those
which, a few years earlier, led to the discovery of the peculiar pro-
perty of uranium. Today the fission of uranium, the peaceful piles
and the not-so-peaceful stockpiles are a chapter which offers little
professional interest to the nuclear researcher and which he is inclined
to leave to his chemical, metallurgical and engineering colleagues.
The forefront of nuclear research has moved into still higher concent-
rations of energy into still smaller volumes, and in doing so has
again become happily impractical and remote from immediate appli-
cations, lethal or otherwise.
Superhuman sources of energy
It cannot be said that on this"metatomic" (beyond the atom) levelevery phenomenon was a novelty. For th  past forty years a
mysterious agency, apparently coming from the outer space, was
known to affect the sensitive measuring devices user by the nuclear
physicists. These"cosmic rays", where found to carry concentrated
energy, sometimes comparable to that obtained from either radio-active
or human-made propulsive machinery, and sometimes far more
powerful than anything that human means could conceivably contrive.
For a generation, no phenomenon involving more than a few MeV
could be produced in a laboratory ; observers had to climb mountains
or fly balloons, and gather a scanty harvest of cosmic-ray manifes-
tations. Today thousands of MeV are open to experimentation and
tomorrow-the boundary of the human-made phenomena will be
pushed still further into the realm of cosmic-ray induced effects.
In this ambitious and yet disinterested pursuit, our American
colleagues had, so far, the advantage of having at their disposal all
the biggest and most modern nuclear machines. With the creation
of CERN and its plans of building two powerful sources of very
highly accelerated atoms, European scientists hope to be able soon to
resume their place on the advancing front of knowledge.
There will be new discoveries, some of which later on may lead
to new applications, as different from what we call now"atomic
technology"as this technology is different from chemistry. Know-
ledge brings fruit, but it is in his quest for knowledge itself that the
scientist is learning to hit the atomic nucleus with increasingly
sharper and more effective blows.
