THE I3TH CENTURY CATHEDRAL OF RHEIMS is considered the crowning glory of Gothic archi¬
tecture in France, and the Western facade one of the most perfect masterpieces of the Middle Ages. The
great sculptures of the Coronation of the Virgin have been much damaged and repeatedly restored. But now
they are in danger of falling to pieces. A copy of it was msde in 1941 and French authorities
are now considering radical steps, urgently necessary, to preserve what is left of the original work.
This photo shows a detail of the central portal with the figures of the Christ and the Virgin.

Prolormins the life
of our art treasures
Paintings, stone statues, temples and
castles : these are our great "cul¬
tural heritage" of the past and
probably the most precious possessions
of mankind. If we seek to preserve
them it is not just because they are
old but rather for their great beauty.
Yet not even the most persistent
memory of passing generations and no
amount of book knowledge by itself
can hope to keep them alive. No "ima¬
ginary museum" can equal the actual
touch or sight of the frescoes
of Ajanta in India or the
Winged Samothrace in the
Louvre.
But few of us realize how
entremely frail most of these
treasures really are. A mas¬
sively built stone arch can
sometimes be more fragile
than a small terracotta vase.
All of them need care and all
of them need protection
against damage, theft or
A century and a half ago
Napoleon won regrettable
fame for his confiscation of
Italian art treasures, though
his plundering was outclassed
by the systematic and mas¬
sive appropriations of Nazi
art connoisseurs in our own
time. Today it seems that
official thefts of this kind
have been condemned once
and for all.
Certain famous works of
art epitomize in their his¬
tories the vicissitudes suffer¬
ed by art treasures through
theft and damage. None is
perhaps so representative as
the renowned Mystic Lamb, a
work of the van Eyck bro- -
thers, completed in 1432 and
deposited in the Cathedral of
St. Bavon at Ghent. In the
following century one part
was damaged beyond repair
during cleaning ; in 1794 the
four great central panels
were carried off by the
French and only returned
21 years later. Then most of
the panels were sold to
Frederick William III of Prussia
went to the Berlin Museum.
During World War I, what remained
of the Mystic Lamb was kept in a secret
hiding place throughout the German
occupation of Belgium. The return of
the panels from the Berlin Museum in
1920 provided the opportunity of com¬
pletely restoring the famous work, but
some years later one of the finest
panels, The Honest Judges, was stolen
and has never been recovered.
After the outbreak of World War II
the altarpiece was sent for safe keeping
to the Chateau de Pau in southern
France. In the summer of 1942, the
Nazis forced the Vichy Government to
surrender the painting. It was trans¬
ferred to one of the great salt mine
repositories at Alt-Aussee where Hitler
and Goering stored their booty of art
treasures. Finally in 1945, it was restor¬
ed to the Cathedral of St. Bavon.
But after its wartime adventures the
masterpiece showed the ravages of time
and needed immediate attention. In¬
stead of relying solely on its own skill
and knowledge, Belgium called in
foreign specialists as well. Thus for the
BRONZE PORTAL of Basilica of St. Zenoin Verona (12 th century) is
one of most famous in world. It escaped damage during last war but
over 5,000 churches and historic buildings were either destroyedor
damaged. Since then Italy has undertaken the greatest repairing job
in its history. Much of the damage has been repaired.
and first time in history, a nation owning
an outstanding masterpiece regarded
itself not as the exclusive owner but as
a trustee and summoned to its aid some
of the greatest specialists in the world
for consultation and advice. Today,
restored to "good health" the work is
back in its chapel. (See Unesco Courier,
February 1952.)
-' Since then "art doctors" from differ¬
ent countries have gathered round
other ailing masterpieces. They have
examined paintings on wood at Lisbon,
the works of da Vinci in the Louvre,
and the frescoes of the Church of St.
Sophia at Ochrlda in Yugoslavia, and
have advised on methods of treatment.
In all cases cleaning or restoring old
paintings and protecting them against
old age, dry or damp weather, cold,
smoke and dust, are delicate jobs calling
for extremely delicate techniques.
Since the 19th century when it was
the practice to "protect" pictures by
daubing them with varnish that later
went yellow and mixed with the
original colours, notable progress has
been made in methods of cleaning and
restoring. But even today techniques
vary according to the paint-
^^^ ing, its age and its author,
and methods are still largely
a matter of individual taste.
When it comes to statues,
though, science is on much
firmer ground. We are no
longer as completely helpless
as we used to be when faced
with stone or bronze that is
decaying, corroding or slowly
crumbling away. Diseases in
stones, metals and glass were
once dark mysteries ; today
they no longer are at least
for the chemist.
Unfortunately the chemist
is not always called in. A
Swedish scientist, J. Arvid
Hedvall, recently deplored
the lack of systematic colla¬
boration between the expert
on ancient monuments and
the scientific research worker
who understood the various
agents that attack stones
and metals and could help
prevent their destruction.
Offhand one would think
that preserving a building is
a much less delicate problem
than restoring a painting.
This is not so. Moreover the
work is so costly that it often
requires the financial support
of the entire city or the
whole nation and sometimes
foreign aid as well. The care
of historic buildings needs
help from the man in the
street as much as from the
expert.
- "Time passes the stones
remain", the saying goes,
and some of the great structures of
ancient civilizations do seem to have
defied time. The Great Wall of China,
the Pyramids of Egypt and the great
Inca temples appear like age-defiant
"Shangri-las" fixed in a kind of
majestic eternity. But we know just
the same that they cannot escape the
universal law; that they need help in
resisting time's ravages.
The great square-stone buildings of
Cuzco and Machu-Picchu in the Andes
are in a first-class state of preservation
because Peruvian archaeologists recent¬
ly re-erected them by replacing all the
fallen stones in their proper place.
Where the pieces exist no ancient

* PRESERVING OUR ART TREASURES (cont'd)
building is a "Humpty Dumpty."
Patient effort and jig-saw puzzle brain
work will "put the pieces back again."
This was how many famous structures
were resurrected from their ruins.
One of the temples at Baalbek, the
basilica at Pompeii, the temple at
Paestum, the castle at Sidon (where
the masonry was simply fished out of
the nearby sea) and especially the
great temples of Egypt were all no
more than gigantic jig-saw problems
for the engineer.
In most cases though, preserving a
building means having to repair it.
The Chateau of Versailles would soon
be a pitiful ruin were it not for the
carpenters, masons and roof repairers
who are today busily and hastily at
work on it. Engineers predicted the
palace would collapse within 60 years
unless something was done to save it.
France is now raising 5,000 million
francs ($14,000,000) to rescue Versailles.
In Europe buildings that have been
properly repaired may be left alone for
quite long periods, but in the monsoon
lands of Asia preservation demands
frequent attention on a scale unknown
in the West. In India, Indonesia,
Cambodia and elsewhere, annual repairs
are necessary to prevent the infiltration
of water into walls and the invasion of
swiftly spreading weeds and plants
disastrous for ancient buildings.
Threat to Taj Mahal
Thus, the world-famous Taj Mahal
in India has been under constant
care since 1936. The great dome
was completely repaired and the pillars
and broken lintels were dismantled and
replaced. (Fantastic as it may seem,
a proposal was actually set afoot in
1828 to demolish the whole building for
the value of its marble and was serious¬
ly considered for seven years).
Resurrecting a monument from its
original stones and pieces strewn on
the ground is technically known as
anastylosis. There is practically no-
controversy among experts about the
usefulness of this procedure just as
there is general agreement about the
need for regular maintenance work.
But the restoration of damaged or
destroyed sections of an ancient build¬
ing is another matter. Not so long
ago, in fact, just the mention of the
word restoration touched off violent
discussions and arguments between
the experts (1).
In the 19th century, a young French
architect-historian named Viollet-le-
Duc, appeared on the scene. He
revealed to France and to the outside
world the logic and beauty of Gothic
(1) In speaking of preservation, experts dis¬
tinguish carefully between the two words
coiiseruitiuii mid restoration. J he first means
prolonging the life of <i building without mak-
imj any marked changes m il; the second
implies more radical changes such as replacing
destroyed parts or exposing original sections
that had been covered up.
STEFANSDOM: Famous high pitched
roof of Vienna Cathedral, Austria's noblest
Gothic structure ( 1 5th century) burned
for three days in 1945 and was totally
consumed. Photo shows steel framework
built to replace former wooden one. Con¬
crete platform was built to protect the
arches of the aisles. Roof has now been
completely restored.
architecture which was then despised
as a "barbarous" medieval construction.
In due course he became the chief
prophet of the Gothic revival, and
restored the walled city of Carcassonne
and cathedrals at Amiens and Laon.
Unfortunately, Viollet-le-Duc carried
his love of Gothic a little too far. He
felt that the style had reached its most
perfect purity in the 13th century and
imagined therefore that all Gothic
churches and buildings should have a
single unity of style. Under his
influence, many Gothic structures were
rebuilt according to what was consider¬
ed the "pure" Gothic. Where a
church differed it was "brought into
line" by skilful imitation.
Thus the flamboyant balustrades of
Amiens Cathedral were replaced with
parts copied from Chartres, and the
Renaissance features which had been
added to Gothic buildings between the
17th and 18th centuries removed.
Worse was done to the little church of
Saint Laurent which stands next to the
Gare de l'Est in Paris. The facade
with its superimposed columns was
completely demolished to make room
for a Gothic facade. The survival of
two styles in the same edifice seemed
an absurdity to the old restorers and
not worth discussing since it was a
glaring departure from stylistic unity.
The restorers of the Viollet-le-Duc
school actually thought they were doing
a great service to history and art. In
reality they were purists who could not
see that styles, like people, vary and
that buildings, like nations, have
histories that evolve with time.
Today, the old Viollet-le-Duc concept
has been discarded. The tendency now
is toward straight conservation with
all restoration excluded as far as pos¬
sible. As a rule, the experts try to
leave the works of antiquity untouched.
If a new part must be added, they are
careful to construct it with materials
completely different from the original
ones so as to avoid any confusion.
The curious thing is that the old
battle is still going on today more
often between the experts and the
general public which has taken quite a
lively interest in restoration questions.
"Don't restore the crumbling church in
its original form", say the experts.
"Rebuild it exactly as it was before !"
cry the citizens for whom the ancient
edifice was hallowed in tradition. This
was how the great Campanile of San
Marco in Venice was entirely rebuilt
early in the century after its collapse
in 1902, when the whole city' clamoured
for it to be done. The Campanile is
now usually cited as the classical
example of reconstruction by pure
imitation.
War's 'red-hot rake'
Before the last war the preservation
of historic buildings was still a rel¬
atively simple affair. It was nearly
always prompted by the more or less
justifiable desire to restore the original
.appearance of a masterpiece even
though it was neither damaged nor
likely to fall into ruins. Most coun¬
tries cleared away encumbrances block¬
ing parts of a building. Walls
obstructing the view of a loggia or a
porch were torn down ; stones were
scraped clean to uncover ancient
capitals and cornices. There was
nothing urgent about the work and
most of it in fact was hardly necessary.
But when the last war ended, "a red-
hot rake" as Winston Churchill termed
it, had been drawn across all of Europe.
So much had been lost that something
had to be done and done fast to
salvage at least the remnants of what
was left. But what ? Conserve the
ruins ? Restore them partially ?
Restore them totally or construct new
buildings? There was no easy answer.
Great Britain, which has never been
favourable to the idea of restoration
has sought to preserve the ruins of her
abbeys and churches and some of her
bombed monuments. The Ruskinian
tendency to "let approach the sad day
of ruin" was against undue interven¬
tion. Instead of being repaired, cer¬
tain churches were left as ruins and a
garden was made around them. Thus,
surrounded by green lawns and flowers,

UNESCO COURIER. N° 7. 1954
they have an air of romantic charm.
But even the British recognized that
this was no answer for all destroyed
or partially destroyed buildings, and
Exeter Cathedral, for example, which
was severely damaged, was carefully
repaired and restored after the war.
The countries of Europe realized that
they simply could not leave their
churches and other buildings in ruins.
Some compromise had to be reached
with the pre-war rules of restoration.
Restoration for the purpose of simple
consolidation gave way to the recon¬
struction of important parts of a build¬
ing or to something midway between
restoration and the construction of a
new building. Almost everywhere it
was decided to restore badly damaged
historic monuments.
The reconstruction of enormous
surfaces in" cathedrals often seemed
impossible at first sight, but finally it
was accomplished, even down to the
sculptures a job for which craftsmen
had to be trained. Modern engineering
and" architectural techniques have
made much of the rebuilding possible.
Without reinforced concrete and steel
beams, for example, many roofs might
never have been rebuilt nor crumbling
walls strengthened and straightened.
Thus, in the cathedral at Poznan,
Poland, where the walls had been
seriously weakened by fire and threat¬
ened to collapse outwards, a system of
reinforced concrete blocks and props
was used to bolster the structure.
Today the preserving, the repairing,
and the restoring goes on. In the face
of the uncounted ruins of the recent
past, men of all nations have shown
that they refuse to abandon the
artistic wealth we have all inherited,
and of which each generation in turn
is the trustee. Our world is often
accused these days of being too
materialistic. The example of these
men shows that we sometimes do prize
beauty above all else.
Much of the information in this article is
based on material which appeared in Unesco's
publication, Sites and Monuments, a study of
current problems, and also on material publish¬
ed in Unesco's Quarterly review Museum.
GROÓTE KERK or church of St. Eusebius (late Gothic) In Arnhem has been under repair since end
of last war. Famous 318 foot West Tower, almost totally destroyed, is still in ruins. Over 1,000
ancient monuments were destroyed or mutilated by the war in Netherlands.
$ 14,000,000
REPAIR BILL
Three centuries of war, weather and
revolution have dealt severely with
the palace Louis XIV built at Versailles
on the site of a hunting lodge. Leaks
sprouted under Its 30 acres of roofs,
beams were rotting and Its famed Hall
of Mirrors (above) was in danger.
Engineers predicted the palace would
collapse within 60 years, unless some¬
thing were done to save It. Something
is being done. France is raising 5,000
million francs (§14,000,000) to save
Versaillesnot only to preserve it as
a monument to one of the high-water
marks of French civilization but to
recreate the atmosphere of its most
glorious days. Once certain apartments
have been refurnished, once its theatre
has been stripped of gloomy 19th
century alterations, and once its life
is no longer in danger, Versailles is
to be a centre for dramatic and musical
festivals and not merely a museum.
