
MULTIPLYING CITIES
THE SWIFT-CHANGING MAP OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
by Charles Morazé
HAT is civilization,? A strange question it may seem to
ask in connexion with the three maps published here
for the first time. But is it really so strange and
unrelated? Is it not true that most of the magnificent and
fascinating objects of the past that draw millions of ordinary
people to museums every year have come from sites which bear
the marks of organized communities?
Even when an archaeological site of ancient objects is dis¬
covered in an area now totally desert or completely rural, it
always points to a city, a centre of human activity, a converging
point of trade or some social grouping.
No one would deny that agriculture and work on the land
have always occupied an enormous and indispensable portion
of human activity and continue to do so today. But urban
centres have been so singularly important in the development of
human intercommunication, in the elaboration of such great
instruments as languages, systems of numeration, calendars, the
tools of countless trades, and in the creation of works of art
(whether for religion or just for the sake of plain beauty) that
Charles Moraré ¡s a member of the faculty of the Institute of Political
Studies, university of Paris.
one can well ask if the history of the development of cities is
not practically synonymous with the history of the development
of civilizations. Centres of religion, centres of art, centres of
learning and politics, these all bear the characteristic stamp of
city life.
Have cities always had the same importance, and can their
importance be gauged by their size or population ? Who would
venture to say that because Detroit, Lyons and Odessa have
more inhabitants they are more important than was the little
city of Athens at the foot of the Parthenon ?
The three maps showing the growth of the world's cities give
us, therefore, no more than a tiny glimpse of a long history, and
even this is quite narrow and restricted. Yet there is much that
these maps can tell us with their round dots charting the surface
of our planet in the short span of 150 years.
Leaving to one side the nature of urban influence on civili¬
zation which would make a fascinating study in itself, there is
one major thing that stands out at a glance ; the tremendous
increase in the number of cities in the past century and a half.
In my opinion' this is a revolutionary development and marks a
stage in man's history as important as were the metal age and
the alphabet at the dawn of civilization. For huge conglom¬
erations, tentacular cities expanding at amazing speed pose
19

THE CHANGING MAP
OF CITY
DEVELOPMENT
(Cont'd)
THE NEW PERSPECTIVE. Air
view of New York reveals new
urban "façade". Here is no indivi¬
dual building, street or neighbour¬
hood, but the whole city, and with
it a revelation of its composition. It
is typical of the unplanned town of
"the 19th and 20th centuriesa
jumbling-together of industrial,
commercial and residential struc¬
tures. The smoke of its factories
reduces the sunshine by almost
40 per cent. Greater New York
comprises today I 2 million people,
the largest population of any urban
region in the world. (World Wide)
STAGES OF URBANIZATION
THE URBAN NUCLEUS.
In most cases the village
formed the urban nucleus.
It is situated harmoniously
within the landscape. Roads
connect it with other villages
and with farms more or less
evenly distributed through¬
out the country. Popu¬
lation distribution was far
more satisfactory than it
became in the industrial era.
«
J**i > >-*
*&*
3 .«f£<Sfc )
¿TjL
i nt
-"V!
'vi
_
THE EARLY INDUS¬
TRIAL TOWN. Factories
are being erected partly near
the railway line, partly near
the river wherever the
landowner pleases. People .
of the surrounding villages
and farms are flocking to
the city, and with the de¬
population, of the surround¬
ing countryside grows the
overpopulation of the city.
Reproduced from " X-ray the
City 1 " Copyright by the author,
Dr. Ernest Fooks Published by
The Ruskin Press, Melbourne.
THE RAILWAYS COME.
Railroads have caused one
of the most revolutionary
changes in urban develop¬
ment. The growth of urban
population of the last century
follows closely the develop¬
ment and growth of the
means of modern transpor¬
tation: the railroad, the mo¬
tor car and truck, the aero¬
plane, and of water traffic.
,>*'
^ S : &
"A<Ko^V ^
problems of so complex a nature that
only the most evolved techniques can
hope to solve them.
To take only one example, an incred¬
ible concentration of foodstuffs is required
to keep alive the mass of city dwellers
squeezed into a tiny sterile area : swift,
sure highways are needed to siphon agri¬
cultural products into the towns and
permit the farmer to sell his surplus; the
. cities in turn must produce articles
which will attract the farmer in ex¬
change for the food he supplies. Thus
the growth of cities goes hand in hand
with a tremendous general development,
implying advances in agriculture, indus¬
try, commerce, inventions with their
roots reaching out into science and all
fields of human experience.
It is also true that certain cities have
expanded so rapidly that they seem to
have forgotten the need for beauty, and
the unprecedented growth of urban
developments generally has therefore
given rise to a whole series of new prob¬
lems of aesthetics, such as town
planning, slum clearance, etc.
Thus the three maps offer many possi¬
bilities for study. They show that a new
era which began at the end of the 18th
century has' opened in the history of
town development. It is a pity that no
similar maps exist of earlier centuries
for these would enable us to get a better
picture of the evolution of the world's
"cities and the rise and decline of certain
cultural centres. But such maps are no
easy matter to draw up, and would pro-
20

UNESCO COURIER N» 2 - 1954
bably show no major development in any
way comparable to that of the past
150 years. They would show clearly
when certain cities were great in the
past "even though they have diminished
in size and importance in recent times.
Thus, Baghdad was no more than a
small town of a few thousand inhabi¬
tants in 1800 yet in the great age of
Islam, it was one of the largest and most
fascinating cities in the world. The same
is true of Samarkand, or Ispahan and
many of the mighty cities which once
dotted the great routes leading from the
East to the West through Central Asia.
It is doubtful whether the" ancient
cities of America could rival these in
splendour, except perhaps the extraordi¬
nary remains of Chitchen-Itza, in Yuca¬
tan, or Cuzco, in. Peru. Nevertheless,
subject to these reservations, the map
for 1800 would give us a fairly accurate
picture of the relative density of cities
several centuries ago, if we ,'merely make
a few additions in the White areas and
a few deletions in some of the black
areas (particularly in Western Europe).
The spread of urban settlement is a
recent phenomenon, and may be briefly
analysed as follows : there are two great
zones of city development to the West
and East of the Europe-Asia land mass.
This is indicated on the 1800 map by the
different shading used for the two zones,
black for the west and grey for the East.
The cities, in fact, differ very consider¬
ably in type. The cartographer has used
different symbols because, while Europe
in 1800 already had some rudimentary
statistics, there was nothing on the same
scale or of the same significance in the
East.
As early as the 18th century, Europe
had begun to take an interest in the prob¬
lems of population trends which was
to lead to the periodic censuses now
considered so essential. But though pre¬
cise figures are lacking, certain Eastern
cities must have been much larger than
the great capitals of Europe. Pekin, the
city of cities, or Tokyo, must have been
more densely populated than London or
Paris.
An 18th century French traveller tells
us that China had seven cities larger
than Paris. But, while in the West these
cities were still young and expanding
rapidly and more or less systematically
with the development of a new industrial
economy, the great cities of the East
were already ancient. They consisted of
a number of different quarters carrying
on a variety of distinct activities, so that
they were more like conglomerations of
large villages than cities proper. In cen¬
tral Eurasia, there must have been large
floating urban populations following the
king from city to city, moving along the
roads of religious pilgrimages or the
great highways of commerce.
We should also note that, between the
Far East, which apparently was mari¬
time, and the extreme West, which cer¬
tainly was, the towns in the central part
of Europe and Asia were essentially conti¬
nental, indicating that the desert and
the land routes were, then, more reliable
channels of civilization than the sea
routes. But by 1800, maritime trade be¬
gan to change ' the emphasis and thus
the distribution of important cities.
The old inland route city of Trichinopoly
in southern India thus saw Madras rise
and prosper on the east coast.
This development of large-scale world
trade, which also accounts for the estab¬
lishment of Batavia, Singapore, Hong
Kong and Honolulu on the Asian sea¬
board and in the Pacific was coupled
with the amazing growth of cities and
the urban way of life in Europe. For,
while Europe shipped people, capital and
its economic skills to every corner of the
world, its own cities multiplied, espe¬
cially along the broad corridor running
from densely populated England to the
head of the Adriatic. The Rhine valley
was transformed into a gigantic tho¬
roughfare of towns, criss-crossed by
powerful railroad Unes, postal and tele¬
graph services, which speeded business
transactions and encouraged competition
and even bitter rivalry.
From Europe, the great upsurge of
cities spread across the Atlantic. In 1800,
as the map shows, the only great metro¬
politan centre on the American conti¬
nent was Mexico City. By 1900 it had
lost its proud place (if not its historical
prestige), to the mighty cities blackening
(Continued on page 33)
21

City Development
(Continued1 from page 2/)
the Eastern sea-board of the United
States and spreading inland as far as
Chicago.
Meanwhile great Atlantic and Pacific
ports were being established on the
coasts of South America with the arrival
of increasing settlers from Europe. On
the coasts of Africa, too, the same was
happening. First, Cape Town was built
by the white man as a beacon of beauty
to shipweary seamen, then, perhaps as a
consequence of the deplorable slave-
trade, the Negro constructed the gigan¬
tic town of Abeokuta in Nigeria a
typical example of the rise of urban
development in the "Dark Continent".
At the same time, old Islamic cities, such
as Aleppo, maintained their position or,
like Cairo, revived. But the impact of
neighbouring Europe makes this less
surprising.
The changes are important therefore
between 1800 and 1900. But what a dif¬
ference there is when we come to the
next fifty years. ! The 20th century is
marked by a veritable profusion of urban
development despite "the havoc wrought
by the two most terrible wars mankind
has ever known.- In spite of all the
destruction, the map presents the 20th
century as constructive, as if the increase
in destructive power were but the reverse
side of man's new capacity for buUding.
What is particularly striking is the
enormous eastward expansion of the
European city belt. The great Russian
cities date back only to the 19th century
but, in the 20th, they developed into a
series of great conglomerations strung
otit along the major routes crossing Sibe¬
ria, and in a sense are the modern
northern equivalents of the towns on the
ancient southern routes of Central Asia.
The three maps published on the cen¬
tre pages are part of a series which
will be used to illustrate a new history
of mankind.
The preparation of this history
has been entrusted by Unesco to
the International Commission for a
Scientific and Cultural History of Man-
kind. The Commission considers the
three maps as still in the "working docu¬
ment" stage, and they are therefore
being circulated to specialists in different
parts of the world for possible revision
and completion.
Similarly, for the text of the History,
the Commission is publishing the "Jour¬
nal of World History", a quarterly review
in English, French and Spanish edited by
Professor Lucien Febvre of the famed
College de France.
The History of Mankind will seek to
present the scientific and cultural story
of the world, free from national bias, and
show the efforts of the men and peoples
who fashioned the tools of modern
society.
32
