Youth volunteers
at work in the
land of the Berbers
by Pierre Martin
When a small group of international volunteers, set out
for a Berber village in the mountains of Kabylia some time
ago, their principal - awn, was to lend a hand with the
construction of a badly needed pipe-line to bring water to a
new school. But the problems of illiteracy, health and
hygiene they found there soon caused them to organize a
fundamental education campaign for the benefit of the
villagers. The experience of these volunteers from the
Service Civil International organization is typical of many
other work camp volunteers, more than 5,000 of whom
have come from far-off lands'to work in some 300 camps
set up by the work camp movement which is sponsored by
Unesco. Swinging picks and shovels, building, repairing and
nursing, these young men and women have brought help
and hope to people with whom and for whom they were
working in economically under-developed areas in all parts
of the world. Teams have tackled many kinds of jobs
including agriculture, forestry, public health, literacy, home
crafts, .recreation and social welfare. Here, M. Pierre
Martin, a French teacher, describes the experiences of the
group which went to a Kabyle village in the mountains of
Algeria. M. Martin is one of the pioneering volunteers of
the Service Civil International organization in North
Africaj He is the author of En Kabylie, dans les tranchées
de la paix, a book about the first international work camp
to be organized in Algeria.
WE made our camp in a mag¬
nificent natural amphitheatre
in the mountains, a tremendous
escarpment, rising almost vertically to
a height of 3,000 feet, dwarfing the
three tents which were to be our
"home" for the next few months.
There were twelve of us, nine young
and three girls, and some had
come from places as far away as New
York and Norway to this isolated but
strikingly beautiful spot in the Kabyle
mountains of Algeria.
There was Stephen, a Swiss teacher;
Milo, an electrician from the South of
France; Joe, a psychology student from
New York; Oddvar, a Norwegian
farmer; Adber, a Kabyle who had just -
finished studying in Algiers; Ali, a
young Arab mason; Philippe, a
Moroccan student of architecture; Jean,
a mechanic from France; and myself,
an ethnographer from Paris. We all
lived in the largest tent.
In the second tent, the girlsMady,
an English chemist, Claartje, a teacher
of physical education from the Nether¬
lands, and Sylvette, a Parisian typist _
had spread out their sleeping-bags
among the rucksacks and cooking
utensils. The third tent contained our
tools and food and, since the night
when the . jackals had grown bold
enough to- come and devour our
provisions, one of us had always slept
in that tent. That was the camp.
To reach it from the plains below
was a minor Odyssey, and even those
of us who had ' come the longest
distances to Algeria agreed that the
last few miles seemed longer than aU
the rest of the journey put together.
I shall always remember my five-hour
climb up to the camp after fetching
supplies, as we did twice a week, from
the village of the Wadhias, with my "
rucksack weighing thirty or forty
pounds, filled with food, medical
supplies, letters and hardware.
On the first part of the path there
was not a scrap of shade anywhere;
then, at a height of about fifteen
hundred feet, the path ran into the
mountain-side through a cleft, offering
the first oasis of shade in which to take
a rest.
The path continued through a scene
of tremendous grandeur, following a
sort of gigantic stairway half way up
the defile. By steps or steep slopes, I
would go on climbing for hours until,
at a turning point, I would catch sight
of the camp tents hi a meadow down
below.
When we first arrived we seemed to
be far from any sort of habitation.
But when our eyes had become ac¬
customed to the . surrounding country¬
side, we could make out three villages
in the vicinity of our camp. Their drab
colour merging with the nearby rocks,
they seemed to be cowering on the
slopes as if trying to hide themselves.
Image of Bethlehem
ACLOSER inspection revealed that
each of the village huts consisted
of a single, windowless room in
which grown-ups, animals and children
were crowded together. Yet these Ka¬
byle huts were surprisingly clean and
the presence of the domestic animals
in the most exact sense of the term
brought to mind an image of the
stable in Bethlehem. There were no
chimneys. Cooking was done over a
wood fire in one corner of the room
and the smoke escaped through the
door.
The Kabyles of the Kuriets are
Berbers who, though they live less
than a hundred miles from Algiers, a
completely Europeanized town, have
remained quite untouched by Western
civilization.
A mountain people, poor, but proud,
they live by stock-rearing and small-
scale farming. Their village life is
quiet and law-abiding, but they are not
above an occasional act of brigandage
when they follow their flocks up to
the high pastures at an altitude of over
six thousand feet, far removed from the
constraints of the law.
The day after we arrived we made a
. start on the job we had come to do.
Until now there had been no school
anywhere in the district of the Kuriets,
and the French Administration, in
agreement with the village chiefs, had
decided to build one at Tinessouine, the
centre of an area 'where there are
about ten thousand people living. . As
there was no source of drinking water
available at the school site it was
necessary to canalize the waters of a
spring and pipe them over a distance
of some seven thousand, eight hundred
feet through the rocks and meadows.
This was to be our concern.
In such cases, the Administration
requires the people of the district to
contribute about twenty per cent of the
cost of the' work; when (as is almost
always the case) the community is
poor, the contribution is paid in
communal labour. As the Amin (spi¬
ritual and civil head) of Tinessouine
had too few men to carry out the work
in the specified time, he had asked for
help from our Service Civil Interna¬
tional team.
To the Amin, the idea that people
should come in this way from different
countries to do voluntary work simply
as a gesture of international solidarity
was perfectly acceptable, but the same
could not be said of the other people

UNESCO COURIER - N» 3 - 1954
of the district. Their ' imaginative
minds invented all sorts of explana¬
tions: we were deported prisoners, or
the scheme was a Machiavellan plot on
the part of the Administration to plant
spies in their villages, or... Every day
brought a new story.
But the trench was already spreading
in a long dark groove along the slope
of the Jurjura and, working side by
side, making- the same efforts and
sharing the same satisfaction when the
rock broke under the sledgehammer
blows, the men of the villages began to
lose the mistrust they had shown at
the outset. A feeling of comradeship
born of a common effort took its place.
Th& children, too, became friendly
and were always close at hand when
our girls went about their domestic
tasks. Soon they were eagerly taking
part in the simple educational leisure-
time occupations which were organized
for them. Sylvette showed the girls
how to mend their dresses while
Claartje taught them to count with the
help of a set of dominos, made on the
spot by burning marks on little blocks
of wood. Mady would be called upon
to look after those who had hurt
themselves or to give some treatment
to the rare cases of sickness in this
healthy region. People would even
bring their babies to her without fear
that her infidel eye might cast a spell
over them.
The trench grew steadily longer and
the people, seeing what we had done,
and now reassured that our presence
did not interfere with their customs,
began to show more trust.
One evening, when we got back from
work, we came upon an unexpected
scene; Sylvette had organized a real
class; about twenty children were
sitting in front of her under an ash
tree and reading out in chorus the
name of their village which she had
written on a big sheet of paper. They
were enormously proud ; -time and
time again they read us the word.
Their fathers, who were bringing the
tools back to the camp, watched these
children's games with superior smiles
and went off without saying anything.
But the next evening, three of them
came to ask us to teach them to write
their names. "'Why do you want to
write your name?" One of them
explained: "To sign at the post-office;
when there is money to be collected or
a registered letter, we have to take
along two witnesses, but if I can sign
my name, I shall not need to pay the
THE KABYLE MOUNTAINS where the team of volunteers from the Service Civil International
pitched its camp.'are the highest in Algeria, and are snow covered for several months each year.
The team came to help lay a village water supply pipe-line, but soon found itself spontaneously car¬
rying out a programme of fundamental education for the villagers.
witnesses." "And do you often get
letters like- that?" "Sometimes, from
my son in France."
When we considered the educational
value of these activities we realized
that the so-called "side lines" of the
work camp had imperceptibly become
our main interest. We went steadily
on with our digging; but in the
evening, instead of resting under the
mosquito net, we were all caught up in
the fever of fundamental education.
Some of us helped Mady with her sick
nursing; others seconded Sylvette or
Claartje in the evening writing class
theoretically for adults; Milo and Jean
tried out on the brook a new sluice
arrangement for irrigation.
Work camp 'side lines'
THEN, suddenly, we began to have
some doubts about the usefulness
of what we were doing. Not about
our main job, for that was straight¬
forward. Once it was finished, the
pipe would bring drinking water td a
fountain for the use of both men and
animals, and, later, for the school.
Our doubts were about the "side
lines" of the Work camp. After we had
left the area would the men remember
the rudiments of writing we had taught
them? And of what use would it be
to the women to have learnt to mend,
once we were no longer there to give
them needles and thread, should their
menfolk be, unwilling tö buy these?
It was Mady who cleared these doubts
from our minds by reminding us that
the rudiments of fundamental educa¬
tion had tremendously increased the
effectiveness of our work with pick and
shovel, and that all elements of basic
education must go together. '"It is. a
good thing to bring drinking water
within people's reach, but it's even
better to teach them at the same time
what soap is for. Water should mean
more to them than just something to
drink; they should also learn that
babies ought to be washed, and that a
wound is more likely to heal if it is
washed in clean water instead of being
smeared with dung", she said.
¿Srefc:
sr '
AI-
A new thirst aroused
FINALLY, the great day arrived
when the first gush of water came
from the new fountain. Our ori¬
ginal task was accomplished. But as
we packed our kit and said goodbye to
the villagers we reflected that although
water was now flowing in abundance at
Tinessouine, there was another thirst
to be slaked, the thirst for knowledge
that we had aroused in the people.
The children's education is assured
by the new school that has been built.
But the problem of bringing literacy
and fundamental education to the
adults still remains. It is of little use
expecting even literate young people to
accomplish much in villages where the
authority of an older and completely
illiterate generation exists.
If, each time we broke up a work
camp, we knew that we had been
acting as precursors, gaining the con¬
fidence of the people and preparing
the ground for educators to complete
the task, we should take our leave of
them with much easier minds.
27
