STORY OF
PRISONS
Their evolution as an
agency of punishment
by Ronald Fenton
Unesco Courier. Nr 10. 1954
PRISON HULKS like this one in the
dockyard at Portsmouth, England, were
used to confine convicts in the last half
of the eighteenth century. Dirty, crowded
and unhealthy, these terrible floating pris¬
ons were constantly infected with disease.
THE PANOPTICON, a circular prison
with cells around the outside walls, was-
designed in 1791 by Jeremy Bentham, the
English philosopher, jurist and social re¬
former. He called it the "Panopticon" or
'"inspection house" because of the ease
with which the whole building could be
observed from a control point in the centre.
Hait-Plan-
^1 - --»-*.
RISONS, said the Romans,
two thousand years ago, are
places for holding, not for
punishing offenders. Today
we are slowly coming back
to' this ancient Roman definition of
prisons, which modern penologists feel
should not be used for punishing an
offender, but for his safe custody and
rehabilitation.
Does this mean that history is
repeating itself? Only up to a point,
for the ideas behind these ancient and
modern definitions of a prison's role
are poles apart. Today we are coming
closer to the idea that the man goes into
prison but his crime halts at the gate.
In ancient times a - man was not
sentenced by law to spend years in pris¬
on. But he had little to hope for as
he laid in some dark, filthy cell. He
might rot there for years awaiting trial
or because he was unable to pay a fine
or a debt. If he had already been
found guilty of a crime, prison was
merely a prelude to brutal corporal
punishment or a horrible death.
Today hope is no longer locked out¬
side as the prison gate closes behind a
convicted offender. Society claims
"the right to punish" and uses prison
as a weapon of self-defence, but it also
recognizes the prisoner's right to be
treated as a human being.
Slowly, humanity has removed the
sting of hatred and cruelty from
punishment. It has begun to look at
the man beneath the criminal, to see
the need for helping him rather than
making him suffer. Thus a prison's
primary role is to give men and women
treatment and guidance that can help
to reform them and to prevent them
relapsing into crime after their release.
When we pass by some, prison or
reformatory and look up at the high
walls and barred windows we wonder
what prison life is like. We may feel'
sorry for those inside because they have
been deprived of freedom or we may
think, unfeelingly, '"it serves them
right". But in either case we look on
prison as the normal way of dealing
with someone found guilty of a crime.
People today are so used to the idea
of an offender being punished by a
prison sentence that they tend to
forget how long it took for their fore¬
bears to accept the same idea. They
forget, too, that it is not so long ago
since men and women in many coun¬
tries were engaged in one of the fier¬
cest struggles in the history of human
rightsthe fight to end the cruel
and- inhuman treatment of prisoners.
Until less than a century and a half
ago most punishments prescribed by
law were brutal and even barbarous.
It is in the code of Hammurabi,
dating back some 4,000 years, that we
first meet the lex talionis, the demand
for revenge of a crime later expressed
in the Biblical words:"an eye for an
eye and a tooth for a tooth". Offenders
were regarded as "brutes", and treated
as such. From earliest times torture
was used, not only to extract, con¬
fessions, but also as a punishment.
Even Aristotle, the great Greek philos¬
opher, condoned torture, and its
elaborate regulation in Roman law
became the basis for all the gruesome
medieval legislation in Italy, Spain,
France and Germany. Though not
authorized by common law, torture
was .practised in England under royal
privilege in the days of the Tudors and
the Stuarts.
Persons condemned to death were
executed in the most horrible ways
imaginable. They were crucified, ston¬
ed to death, buried alive, torn apart by
wild horses, thrown to wild beasts.
Even when forms of capital pun¬
ishment became more humane, more
offences became capital ones. In the
England. of 1789 there were, according
(Continued on page 14)
II

The horror of
early prisons
(Continued from page II)
to one authority, no less than 350
capital crimes, compared with only
17 in the early part of the 15th
century. Most of those added after
1500 were offences against property
mostly trivial crimes.
But these brutal laws eventually
provoked a revolt against capital
punishment in 18th century England.
Juries either acquitted the accused or
found them guilty of stealing 39
shillings (the theft of 40 shillings was
a capital offence) regardless of the sum
they confessed to stealing or were
proved to have stolen.
Flogging and branding
Brutal punishments were imposed
for minor offences. Flogging,
branding and mutilation were
the most common. In 16th century
England a beggar was whipped for a
first offence; for the second an ear
was cut off; for the third offence the
penalty was death. Reasoning that
"they might as well be hanged for a
sheep as a lamb," beggars turned to
a more rewarding form of crime
robbery.
.Nagging housewives were strapped
in a ducking stool and plunged repeat¬
edly into a pond. For such offences as
seditious libel, especially in books
published without a licence, giving
short weight and brawling in the
street, favourite instruments of pun¬
ishment in England and the Ameri¬
can Colonies were the pillory and the
stocks. These pinned the victim's
wrists or ankles while he was jeered
at and pelted with rotten vegetables in
the market place.
It was only in the 16th century that
THE PILLORY was once a favourite form of pun
Pinned by wrists and head, offenders were jeered
! L
I*v v i^iiÉyMMMM	Ij
LONGITUDINAL SECTION
tlTniTT
WORi HALL
urn
PAPAL PRISON of Saint Michael, built by Pope Clement XI in Rome, in I 704, was the first important
prison to house inmatesin this case delinquent boysin individual cells. Three tiers of ten cells
lined up on both sides of a building whose centre was used as a workshop for the inmates. Thirty
years later the papal authorities built a second prison designed on similar lines for delinquent women.
prisons began' to be used as places for
punishment in England. This was no
humanitarian move inspired by legal
reforms. There was, in fact, little
humanitarian improvement in penal
practices for another two centuries.
The setting up of prisons was brought
about by the increase in the number of
vagrants towards the end of the medi¬
eval system.
Under the feudal system, the landed
classes regularly provided for their
dependents and helped them in sick¬
ness and old age. Such organized
charity as was needed was provided by
ishment in England and the American Colonies,
at and pelted with rotten eggs and vegetables.
the Church. The end of the medieval
system cut off this "social assistance"
and created a serious poverty problem.
This new situation, together with the
enclosure of peasant farming land in
England, swelled the number of unruly
vagrants to such an extent that the
authorities set up crude prisons in
which to confine the army of vaga-,
bonds, and these early institutions
were the forerunners of our prisons.
The first, opened in 1557 at St. Bride's
Well, in London, gave the name
"Bridewells" _ to others which were
established during the next half cen¬
tury. These Bridewells were the earli¬
est work-houses (or poor-houses as
they were called in Scotland, and later
in America.) The Poor Relief Act of
1601 . directed the overseers of every
parish to raise funds "for providing a
convenient stock of flax, hemp, wool,
thread, iron and other ware and stuff
to set the poor on work." But in this
early period authorities preferred to
maintain "houses of correction" for the
punishment of vagabonds.
Work-houses for the poor then began
to be built on the Continent, especially
in Germany and Holland in the cen¬
tury following 1560. But it was not
until 1773 that the first North Euro¬
pean workhouse which had the main
characteristics of a modern prison'
separate cells and work as a disci¬
plinary and reformative measure
was built at Ghent, Belgium.
Orphans herded with maniacs
IN the 17th and 18th centuries pris¬
ons were filthy, -fever-breeding
places in which men, women and
children - were crowded together
without ventilation and with virtually
no food except what friends provided
or jailers sold. In the workhouses
authorities herded together orphans,
14

Unesco Courier. Nr 10. 1954
old people, criminals, consumptives
and maniacs in large open dormitories.
Already in the 17th century men and .
women were trying to improve con¬
ditions in the prisons and workhouses.
One man who put his ideas into prac¬
tice by personal example was Filippo
Franci. A Catholic humanitarian,
Franci first set up a small workhouse
for unruly and vagrant boys in Floren¬
ce, about 1650, and it was probably his
work and also that of Dom Jean Ma-
billon, the great Benedictine scholar,
which inspired Pope . Clement XI in
1704 to create a prison for delinquent
boys as part of the hospital of St.
Michael in Rome.
What distinguished this prison from
others of the period was its individual
cells. These lined two sides of a large
rectangular cell house, the centre space
being used as a workshop by the in¬
mates. Thirty years later the papal
authorities made another innovation,
building a prison on similar lines for
delinquent women. These two prisons
were the first to bear any close
resemblance to those of today.
Breaking the shackles
New and more powerful forces were
then set in motion by the wave
of ideas which swept in with the
Intellectual Revolution of the 17th and
18th centuries. The rationalism of
The Enlightenment, as it was called,
helped to break the shackles of politi¬
cal tyranny, and the humanitarianism
inspiring this opposition to oppression
carried over into agitation for penal
reform and for the abolition of slavery.
Barbarous criminal laws were attacked
in the middle of the 18th century by
Voltaire and also by ' Montesquieu,
. whose Persian Letters satirized the
European criminal law of this period.
But the most influential reformer in
the field of criminal law was the Ital¬
ian nobleman, Cesare di Beccaria
(1738-1794). His Essay on Crimes and
Punishments, written in 1764, was prob¬
ably the most effective book written
in the whole history of criminal-law
reform. Beccaria argued that the
prevention of ^ crime was more impor¬
tant than punishment; that torture
should be abolished; that punishment
should be used to deter men from
committing crimes rather than to
inflict social revenge on an individual;
that imprisonment should replace cor¬
poral punishment and that capital
punishment should be abandoned.
With . the exception of psychology
and psychiatry which have only recent¬
ly been applied to crime, Beccaria
suggested most of the essentials of
criminological progress that have been
achieved since his work was published
nearly two centuries ago.
Beccaria's book created a veritable
sensation. It was translated into a
score of languages, and Voltaire him¬
self wrote an anonymous preface for
the French edition. Above all, it
stimulated people to improve prison
conditions in many lands, directly
influencing several rulers including
Catherine II, Empress of Russia and
the Grand Duke of Tuscany, who abo¬
lished torture and capital punishment
in his realm.
Beccaria's ideas inspired British re¬
formers like Sir Samuel Romilly and
Jeremy Bentham, and strongly in¬
fluenced the revision of the criminal
codes of the new American states after
1776, the new. criminal code of Revo¬
lutionary France and the reform of
the British criminal code in the first
half of the 19th century.
One of the blackest chapters in the
history of punishment concerns the
penal colonies to which many countries
at one time sent convicted men.
Portugal sent many of its criminals to
Ceuta in North Africa. As early as
1497 those from Spain were sent to the
West Indian island of Hispaniola.
England made the greatest use of
this form of punishment, but not as a
humane substitute for other kinds.
Shipping convicts out of the country
was merely an easy way of solving the
problem of keeping criminals in custody
in England. It was considered con¬
venient and economical and it-provided
a labour force for colonial areas.
Until the American Revolutionary War
put an end to penal colonies in North
America .convicts were sent from
England to Maryland and other
southern colonies more than 50,000 of
them between 1607 and 1776.
Then Australia provided a new
RUNNING THE GAUNTLET was one of the
brutal military punishments of the past in which
a convicted man had to run stripped to the waist
between two rows of soldiers who struck at
him with a stick or a knotted cord. This drawing
shows the punishment being inflicted in 18th
century Austria. The victim was forced forward
at the point of the bayonet, but prevented from
passing too quickly, between the ranks by a
soldier preceding him with a reversed musket.
"dumping ground" when it began to be
opened up as a British colony. Be¬
tween 1787 and 1852 more than 100,000 -
men and women were shipped in filthy
vessels to the prison settlements of
Australia, Tasmania and Norfolk
Island. Many died en route, some
starved to death in the colonies and
others escaped to become "bushran¬
gers" who attacked and robbed the
colonists. Only after a British par¬
liamentary inquiry had denounced the
system as "unequal, without terror to
the criminal class, corrupting to both
convicts and colonists", was convict
transportation abandoned.
The inhuman conditions in which
convicts wer« shipped to Australia
were no worse than those to which
were subjected aboard the
"floating prisons" the old hulks
anchored in British ports. These
ships were filthy, crowded and con¬
stantly infested with disease.
Credit for. rousing the public con¬
science to the barbarism of such
conditions belongs to John Howard, ,
One of the greatest names in the his-
tory of prison reform.
Born in 1726, the son of well-to-do
parents, Howard began his humani¬
tarian work while in his twenties. In
1754, when he sailed to Portugal to aid
earthquake victims in Lisbon he ex¬
perienced the harsh prison conditions
of his day after his ship had been
captured by the French.
But it was in 1773 when, as high
sheriff of Bedfordshire, he visited
Bedford Jail that he fully realized the
terrible conditions existing in his own
country. Horrified by what he saw,
he launched his great crusade at home
and abroad, to expose the horrible
misery which prisoners underwent.
Howard was particularly shocked by
the injustice of the system of exacting
fees for safe conduct and delivery from
jail levied by the unsalaried prison
officials. His efforts to obtain salaries
for them brought Parliamentary action
in 1774, and the disgraceful fee system
was abolished. Thanks to Howard
hundreds of innocent prisoners who
had been unable to pay the delivery
fees, were at last released. At his
own expense Howard had the terms of
the new legislation printed and sent to
every jailer and warder in England.
Howard made four detailed inspec¬
tions of British prisons and went
abroad to study the conditions in those
of Germany, France, the Low Countries
"and Switzerland. On his return he
published The State of the Prisons in
England and Wales. Other reforms
were sparked by his revelations, in¬
cluding the passing of a bill for setting
up penitentiary houses in which pri¬
soners would be confined in cells and
given work to do.
The sudden stirring of England's
conscience by Howard's crusade was
the dawn of prison reform which
slowly developed into the modern
humanitarian movement. Howard's
name is commemorated today in the
Howard League for Penal Reform, an
active British organization.
' Hell above ground '
A. Nother great Englishman who
turned his brilliant mind to the,
problem of legal reform and
prison conditions was Jeremy Ben¬
tham, philosopher, jurist and social
reformer, who lived from 1748 to 1832.
He drew up a scheme for the treatment
of criminals under which he believed
"morals would be reformed, health
preserved, industry invigorated and
instruction diffused", and also worked
out plans for an entirely new prison.
A circular building with cells around
the outside walls, this prison was
known as the "Panopticon", or "in-
pection house" because of the ease
with which the whole institution could
be observed from a central position.
Early in the 19th Century a devoted
band of English men and women, the
"Prison Discipline Society", was reso¬
lutely carrying on the work launched
by John Howard, in jails which were
reported as "relapsing into their former
horrid state of privation, filthiness,
cruelty and neglect."
Among the worst of these jails was
Newgate Prison in London, described
15

The revolt from outside
as a "hell above ground". Here,
among the worst possible conditions, a
young woman named Elizabeth Fry
began a lifetime of work. on behalf of
the "victims" of prison systems.
By her amazing courage and per¬
sonality she completely transformed
conditions at Newgate and then went
on to become the chief promotor of
prison reform in Europe. Spurred on
by her example the reformers in
Britain campaigned successfully for
what are now regarded as the first
principles of a prison systemsepara¬
tion of the sexes, the classification of
criminals, female warders for women,
education and useful employment.
The Great Quaker Law
Elizabeth Fry's investigations of
other kinds of institutions -
brought about many improve¬
ments in the British hospital system
and in the treatment of the insane.
From 1838 to 1841 she travelled the
Continent, urging authorities to im¬
prove their prisons, and before her
death in 1845, she heard from most
parts of Europe that her ideas were
being adopted.
European successes in reforming
criminal laws and making greater use
of imprisonment as a punishment were
actually preceded by a great reform of
Quaker inspiration in one of the
American colonies.
In early colonial times the Quakers
were revolted by brutal corporal pun¬
ishments, especially the shedding of
blood, and in 1682 an important
Quaker reform, "The Great Law", was
submitted to the Pennsylvania Colo¬
nial Assembly by William Penn, the
founder of the colony. For the first
time in the history of criminal juris¬
prudence, it was here provided that
the majority of crimes should be
punished by "hard labour" in a house
of correction.
In 1718 the Pennsylvania authorities
were compelled to abandon this Quaker
criminal code and to adopt those
applied in the other colonies, but after
Pennsylvania gained its independence
in 1776, imprisonnment was again sub¬
stituted for corporal punishment by a
law of 1790 supported by the Philadel¬
phia Prison Society America's first
prison reform society.
The man who gave great impetus to
this movement was Dr. Benjamin Rush,
physician, social reformer and pioneer
penologist, and one of the mqst remark¬
able figures of his* time. "Dr. Rush,
one of the signers of the American
Declaration of Independence, was
16
known to later generations as "The
Father of American Psychiatry" for he
wrote the first general study on this
subject in America and raised the
study of mental diseases to a scientific
level for the first time in his country.
The famous reform group in Penn¬
sylvania, of which Rush was a
member, included Benjamin Franklin,
William Bradford and other pioneers
in American humanitarianism. It laid
the foundations for the famous Penn¬
sylvania prison system based on indi¬
vidual confinement in cells and "work.
The system came to life in a block
of cells built between 1790 and 1792 in
the yard of the Walnut Street Jail,
Philadelphia. This new type of prison,
"the first American penitentiary" as
it has been called, was an improvement
on others of that time, but the cells
were still rather grim places to judge
from a description , written in 1798:
"In every cell, there is one small
window, ' placed high up and out of
reach of the convict; the window well
secured by double iron grating, so that,
provided an effort to get to it was
successful, the person could perceive
neither heaven nor earth, on account
of the thickness of the wall. The
criminal/, while confined here, is per¬
mitted no convenience of bench, table,
or even bed, or anything else but what
is barely necessary to support life,
without risk of endangering health."
The confining of prisoners in indivi¬
dual cells became the guiding factor
in prison construction. Authorities
reasoned that solitude would lead to
reflection and penitence hence the
name "penitentiary" for the earliest
prisons. They also considered that
separate confinement would prevent
convicts from corrupting each other,
with each one adding his own special
knowledge of crime to the general
cesspool of vicîousness.
Soon the Pennsylvania system be¬
came world famous. A competing
type the Aubern system provided
for solitary confinement at night and
for association in prison shops during
the day. These two systems struggled
for supremacy during the 19th centu¬
ry, and while the Aubern system won
most favour in the United States, the
Pennsylvania system was widely
adopted in Europe.
New frontiers of thinking
Prisons today are naturally very
different places from those of
even half a century ago. Treat¬
ment is generally less severe, prisoners
are given more varied and useful work
to do and education, athletics and
entertainment all figure in the pro¬
gramme of a well-run modern prison.
But the "humanizing" of prison
conditions is only one aspect of a
broader and more significant change
in the whole conception of crime and
punishments which the findings of
criminology are slowly bringing about.
No one, say modern criminologists,
inherits "criminal tendencies", al¬
though people may inherit some quality
which makes it easy for them to
become criminals. Crime may show
(Continued on page 18)
PRISON LIFE is largely conditioned by the
surroundings in which the inmates serve their
sentences and the staff works. Gloomy and for¬
bidding buildings make it more difficult for prison
administrators to apply rehabilitation training and
less likely that prisoners will respond to it. Photo,

Unesco Courier. N' 10 1954
NEW ARRIVALS
are interviewed,- clas¬
sified, given a uni¬
form and allotted a
cell. Others, sitting
in cubicles, wait their
turn to join Strange-
ways' population of
900 or so prisoners.
THE 'RUB DOWN'
as prisoners call this
search is a regular
feature of prison life
in Strangeways. All
working parties are
searched at the prison
centre for scissors,
knives, razorblades or
anything else that
might serve as a
weapon or could be
used as an escape tool.
TEDIOUS WORK
being done by these
prisoners consists of
untying knots
"Strangeways love
knots", as they call
themin Post Office
string. Prisoners also
shred mattress fibre
and stitch mail
bagstwo mail bags
every seven hours
and forty minutes is
,the standard quota.
taken at Strangeways Prison, Manchester, England,
shows one of the long cell galleries which radiate
spoke-like from the hub of the control centre.
Like many European prisons this one follows the
style of prison construction which was conceived
and first employed in Pennsylvania, U.S.A.
17

The man inside the crimina
(Continued from page 16)
the inability of the individual to deal
with the world he lives in or the ina¬
bility of society to provide a decent
environment for all people. Crime is
often caused by poverty, over-crowded
living conditions, bad associations and
accidental factors such as unemploy7
ment. The criminal may not be to
blame for his crimes, therefore the
idea of "punishment" is not an impor¬
tant one in modern criminology. Thus
it disapproves of courts which seek to
avenge society against the criminal and
to "give him what he deserves."
Psychiatrists have joined criminolo¬
gists in throwing light on the subject
of crime and have provided useful
techniques in dealing with criminals
both in the courts and in prison. But
often criminal practice and psychiatric
theory are in complete conflict.
Guilt and punishment
Psychiatrists complain that crimi¬
nal law, as practised today, is
still guided by the idea of punish¬
ment and deterrence, that rehabilita¬
tion and reformation of the individual
offender is secondary. The psychia¬
trist sees the problem of crime as one
of treatment rather than of punish¬
ment. He approaches the offender as
a patient, not as a prisoner; he is
interested in the individual rather
than the crime.
Does this imply the complete abo¬
lition of all unpleasant ways of dealing
with offenders? No, say psychiatrists,
for even under the best of systems
disciplinary measures, such as confi¬
nement in institutions, would still be
necessary. But such measures would
be imposed primarily because they.,
were felt to be necessary for the~
offender's own welfare and for the
welfare of society, and not as punish¬
ment for an offence against the law.
Psychiatrists, psychologists, sociolo¬
gists, criminologists and jurists have
proposed a number of reforms to bring
criminal procedure in line with pres¬
ent-day sociological and psychiatric
knowledge.
They suggest, for instance, that a
psychiatric service should be available
to every criminal and juvenile court
and to every penal and- correctional
institution, and that a psychiatric
report should be made on every pri¬
soner before he is released.
They have also proposed that in cases
punishable by a prison sentence the
question of responsibility should not
be submitted to the jury. The jury's
role would simply be to determine that
the offence was committed by the de¬
fendant. The disposition and treat¬
ment (including punishment) would
be based on a study of the individual,
offender by properly qualified and
impartial experts co-operating with
the courts. This means a complete
separation of the "guilt-finding" and
the "sentence-imposing" phases in
court trials.
They feel that greater use should
also be made of a flexible indeterminate
sentence which allows for better indi¬
vidual treatment and release- from
prison when progress reports show
that the prisoner is not likely to relapse
into crime. v They also call for a wider
18
use among adults of the probation
system so often employed in Anglo-
Saxon countries for dealing with juve¬
nile delinquents. Probation is usually
applied in the case of a first offence or
where there are extenuating cir¬
cumstances. Punishment is suspended
and treatment and guidance are given.
Progress in improving prison régimes
and reforming criminal law during the
past seventy or eighty years owes a
great deal to the pioneer movement
which began in 1872 when the first
International Prison Congress met
in London. This Congress declared
"Moral regeneration - should be the
primary aim of prison discipline; hope
shbuld be more powerful than fear."
The International Prison Commis¬
sion established by the Congress, and
later called the International Penal and
Penitentiary Commission (IPPC), set
out to internationalize standards of
treatment for offenders and its efforts
led many nations to agree on basic
conditions of imprisonment and me¬
thods of crime prevention. In 1951,
the Commission became a Foundation
devoted to scientific research and
training in criminal science and policy.
Today the prevention of crime and
the treatment of offenders is regarded
more than ever as an international
problem and as an integral part of
social defence policies. The United
Nations has therefore taken over the
, work previously done by the IPPC and
through the Social Commission of its
Economic and - Social Council
(ECOSOC) and through the United
Nations Specialized Agencies, is co¬
operating with the non-governmental
organizations working in this field.
It has organized regional seminars
and ' meetings of experts lawyers,
sociologists, judges, police officials,
jurists, criminologists and many others
to study such subjects as probation,
the indeterminate sentence, standard
rules for the treatment of prisoners,
the training of prison staffs, trends of
crime, open institutions, and the pre¬
vention of juvenile delinquency.
The most recent of such meetingswas
held at Geneva in September 1954,
when European experts in criminal
. policy gave . practical guidance to
countries on probation, prison labour
and programmes for released prisoners.
Today's stumbling blocks
Real progress in dealing with crimi¬
nals and preventing crime is not
likely to come, however, until
the idea that crime cannot be pre¬
vented by repressive measures alone
becomes more widely accepted by the
public as a whole. Both national and
international action to deal with the '
problem of crime as an inherent part
of social defence programmes is still
handicapped by out-of-date ideas still
widely held. An ECOSOC report on
social defence programmes published
last year stressed the need for devel¬
oping a new attitude towards crime as
part of crime prevention policies.
"Existing systems of punishment still
have an emotional content... in which
segregation and counter agression play
a dominant role", it said. "As long as
this is -not overcome, no real progress
can be achieved."
WOMEN PRISONERS are given useful occupa¬
tions in Holloway Prison, London. Th'e largest
women's prison in England, it was built in 1852
as a "House of Correction". Ideas on prisons and
prison treatment having advanced since then, the

Unesco Courier. N' 10. 1954
MORNING EXERCISE for the 500 inmates lasts half an hour. They
walk singly or in little groups, on a stone path round a grass lawn.
On one side they see the prison building, on the other, the prison walls
BATH-TIME for babies who are passing
the first months of their lives in prison.
Some were born there, others came in
when their mothers were sentenced. The
babies spend the daytime in the hospital
ward, and the night in their mothers' cells.
THE DOOR TO FREEDOM opens for a
woman prisoner. Modern efforts to im¬
prove prison conditions and rehabilitate
offenders are based on the knowledge that
practically all people who spend a term
in prison will one day return to society.
old building is far from adequate for present-day
standards. Prisoners make radio parts, stitch mail-
bags, mend shoes or work in the kitchen, laundry,
hospital or garden." In summer, parties are taken
out of the prison to work on farms near London.
