Unesco Courier. Nr 10. 1954
I here is nothing out-
I side the gate of
I Brécourt to indicate
that it is a "public
institution of su¬
pervised education"
or, to really call a
spade a spade, a
reform school for girls.
There -is only a stone post and
weathered letters . which simply
announce "Chateau de Brécourt".
Twenty-five miles northwest of Paris,
Brécourt lies in the pastoral setting of
a valley on the edge of the Beauce,
Prance's great bread-basket plain. It
might be a rich man's country estate
(it was until the previous owner was
found to be a spy during World
War II) but for one peculiarity: you
can walk into Brécourt and out of it
good deal easier than into
anyone's country estate.
There is nothing inside its gate,
either, to tell you that Brécourt is a
reform school. Brécourt is the living
proof of an experiment that began in
1944 to try a new tack on the old
problem of what to do with juvenile
delinquents.
With the blessings of the French
Ministry of Justice, two women,
Dominique Riehl and Genevieve Bou-
tault, took over a reform school at
Cadillac, near Bordeaux, a 16th cen¬
tury chateau wherei young inmates
had been locked into individual "cells
at night. At Cadillac, they opened
the doors and, despite a grim setting
and wartime austerity, their methods
worked. In 1947, they moved to
Brécourt with Miss Riehl as director
of the "public institution", and Miss
Boutault' as her assistant director.


Where the
gate is
always open
A SPECIAL REPORT
Prepared under the direction
of GUY SINOIR, French
Ministry- of Justice
TEXT BY DANIEL BEHRMAN
PHOTOS DENISE COLOMB
Copyright 'Unesco Courier'
Today, there are Cu girls from 14
to 21 years f age at Brécourt (when
a new bm ling is completed in
November t ?re will be 40 more).
Their story is the same drab tale of
juvenile delinquency the world over
with nothing to appeal to lovers of
detective novels.
Nearly always, it is a story of
delinquent parents (statistics show
that divorce, separation and shattered
homes cause 95 per cent of the 18,000
cases of juvenile delinquency report¬
ed annually in France). The girl
who is picked up for petty theft,
vagrancy or prostitution and sent to
Brécourt by a children's court judge
is not a hardened enemy of society.
She merely chose an easy way out of
a hard lot.
"Girls get into trouble mucli less
often than boys, but when they do,
25

FUTURE DRESSMAKERS ply their needles
in a sunny room of what was once a rich man's
country home near Pans. Brecourt's delinquent
THE WORLD WATCHES Brécourt and the school is seldom without visiting students and observers
from abroad. Here, a young Brazilian psychologist studying its methods samples the cooking.
THAT PARISIAN LOOK in hand-embroidered
blouses takes years of patient practice. Gifted
the cause is much more deeply-rooted
and harder to get at", Miss Boutault
told me inside the ivy-covered man¬
sion that now serves as Brecourt's
main building. She was a sturdy,
handsome woman with iron-grey
streaks in her hair and a frank note
in her voice. I was willing to believe
she had done nothing during her life
except run a country home for five
dozen youngsters until 1 learned that
she also had a doctorate in law.
"The emotional problem is much
more important for girls", she
explained. "Teaching them a trade
and keeping them busy are not
enough you have to prepare them
for marriage which, after all, is the
best solution."
This means creating a normal
environment, which is exactly what
Brécourt sets out to do, concentrating
on two main goals a thorough train
ing in useful trades, and the creation
of a healthy family atmosphere.
There is no marching and there are
no uniforms. There are no rows of
iron beds in a chill barracks and
there is no cheerless mess hall.
The pupils of Brécourt Miss Bou¬
tault will only refer to them, as pupils
live in groups of eight. Each group
has its own apartment, its own dining
room, and its own "educator", the
title of the devoted woman who is
assigned to each group. She lives
with her group, she eats with it and
she shares its problems. The girls
do not call her "mother", but she is
the nearest thing to a mother that an
institution could provide. And the
group, all too often, is the nearest
thing to a normal family that these
girls have ever known.
Miss Boutault took me through the
home of the La Grappe group (grappe
means a bunch of grapes in French).
A raffia painting made by one of the
girls lent a spot of colour to the walls
of the dining room. In the bathroom,
there were four wg,sh basins one to
two girls compartinented off for pri¬
vacy. The bedroom sparkled with
gay cretonne bedspreads. One girl
had placed a souvenir Eiffel Tower at
the head of her bed; another a plush
donkey. Dolls were common. Though
all in their teens, the girls, of Brécourt
cling to a childhood of which they
have had only a fleeting glimpse.
"They're a lively bunch, La
Grappe", Miss Boutault commented.
"You see, each 'educator' seems to
stamp her. personality into her
group... the Gerbes are probably a
little quieter and less impulsive. We
try to fit each girl into the group best
suited to her character.
During this visit, the apartments
26

girls live to learn their trades so much so the
some refuse to leave before completing the
courses they are given.
girls in Brecourt's embroidery classes are taught
to work from their own designs.
THE LAUNDRY ROOM is not a chore but another class where girls are taught the tricks of hand-
ironing. Naturally, they learn by doing their own washing.
were empty but Miss Boutault still
took care to keep me and my note¬
book out of sight. "These are girls,
not guinea pigs," she had said and
politely, but firmly, refused to allow
any staged photographs during my
visit.
The apartments were empty be¬
cause the girls were in their classes.
To most of the outside world, Brécourt
is known simply as the Public In¬
stitution of Professional Training
and, unless Miss Boutault told you
otherwise, you _ could not tell the
difference between Brécourt and a
modern 'trade schcol with boarding
facilities for its students.
Every girl at Brécourt learns a
trade, depending upon her aptitudes.
She can be taught stenography, or
dress-making, or hair-dressing or
even farming but, when she leaves,
she takes the same examination in
Pans or in nearby Pontoise as the
pupils in any trade school. Her "cer¬
tificate of professional aptitude," too,
is the same as that given to any
other successful candidate. It bears
no mention of her stay in an "insti¬
tution", nor does she have a black
mark in a police record ...or, in fact,
any police record at all.
Recently, Miss Riehl and Miss Bou¬
tault made a study of what had
happened to 100 girls who had gra¬
duated from Brécourt ("graduated" is
the right word often a girl asks to
stay to complete her training). It
showed that 70 were doing well
married or holding jobs. Twenty
had dropped out of sight (once a girl
is over 21, she no longer needs to
report to probation officers) and 10
per cent were not leading what Miss
Boutault termed "a regular life".
(Continued on page 29)
170 ACRES OF LAND make Brécourt almost
self-sufficient. Some girls are trained as future
farm workers, but all receive an introduction
to country life in the school's gardens and in
its model barns.
27

Re-education: plenty of faith and
UNIFORMS ARE TABOO
for the school's sixty pupils
who work and live in the
sort of setting which might
well be the envy of any
girl's trade school anywhere.
THE LOST CHILDHOOD of a Brécourt girl (authorities estimate that 95 per cent of
juvenile delinquency is "rooted in shattered homes) is reflected in the dolls to which she clings
even in her 'teens. Brécourt girls live in small "family" groups. A group bedroom isshown here.
28
A CAREER WITH A CURLING IRON is very much in
demand at Brécourt whose beauty salon is always full. Even
the school's directors have their hair done there.

few illusions
(Continued from page 27)
Not one, however, had turned to
crime. "Ten per 'cent of failures...
that's quite a good margin of error
in any school", she commented.
One reason for these results prob¬
ably lies in the "open-door" policy
applied to Brecourt's 170 acres of
parks, woods and farmlands (occa¬
sionally, a game poacher' from a
nearby village is flushed). Girls are
often sent unaccompanied on errands
or else visit parents in Paris on Sun¬
days, taking the bus by themselves.
There are about half a dozen "es¬
capes" a year, but they are not plann¬
ed "jail-breaks". A girl might walk
out of the gate on an- impulse but
she nearly always comes back of her
own free will.
None of this should give the im-'
pression that teen-agers are pampered
at Brécourt. Suzanne or Thérèse in
La Grappe or Le Nid begins her day
at 6.45. From 8 a.m. to noon, she is
in her trade class and she goes back
there from 2.30 to 5.15. She has
leisure, but it is organized. Idleness,
the plague of prison 'systems, has
been scoured out of a day at Brécourt.
Sweet-tooth and nest-egg
There is nothing to stop Suzanne
from indulging her sweet-tooth,
either. While the girls are train¬
ed for their future professions, they
earn money, part of which is put
aside to constitute a nest-egg when
they leave Brécourt and part of which
they receive as a weekly allowance.
Here, too, another effort has .been
made to prevent the school from
taking on the heartless character of
an "institution". After all, the old
reform-school with its cells' and its
uniforms could serve only as a pre¬
paratory school for prison later on.
The purpose of Brécourt, on the other
Unesco Courier. N' 10. 1954
hand, is to prepare its girls for life.
The girls are sturdy and well fed.
They prepare their own meals with a
diet based upon Brecourt's farm
production (the day I was there,
pupils were eating veal chops, the
last of a series of veal menus which
followed the killing of a calf). Phy¬
sical culture is an important part of
their programme all the more so
because it demands a mental as well
as a physical effort. As we watched
a group playing volleyball, I noticed
that one girl was wearing a skirt
instead of shorts.
"It's taken us a year and a half to
get her interested in sports",- com¬
mented Miss Boutault. "Now that
we've come this far, the shorts can
wait a little longer."
Teachers want to learn
PEiuiAPs the most amazing feature
of the way Brécourt is run is the
absence of any dogmatic system.
Miss Riehl, Miss Boutault and their
staff of six "educators" and six trade
instructors are always willing to
learn. "In re-education, you never can'
say that you know the answers...
because that means you are suffering
from an intellectual hardening of the
arteries", said the assislant director.
/ In one respect, Brécourt runs con¬
trary to methods used in cerlain other
countries where psychiatric treatment
is stressed. Of course, Brécourt
makes use of educational psychology,
but its directors and French rehabi¬
litation authorities in general feel
that the methods of the psycho¬
analyst, are more valuable in treating
children at home than girls living the
life' of a boarding school type of
institution.
"There's no formula in this work,"
commented Miss Boutault. "In re¬
education, you must have a large
quantity of faith... and a small
quantity of illusions."
THE MENTAL SIDE of sports is just as important as the exercise in Brecourt's programme. French educators
believe it serves an invaluable role by demanding an effort of willpower from girls who had once chosen an easy
way out of difficulties. But to get the girls interested in sport often calls for plenty of patience.
29
