of the South
Pacific
Artists and craftsmen, like these villagers in New Guinea, have made Melanesia one of the richest
primitive art regions in the world.
THE South Pacific in general is' an area of such great
and far-flung diversityin races, customs, beliefs and
in material culture that the arts of this vast area are
as manifold as its races, and the variety of styles even greater
than in Africa.
Of all the arts of Oceania, that of Melanesia is the most
varied and the most fantastic. The region itself is lush,
dramatic and often dangerous. Volcanic eruptions, tidal
waves and storms give to many parts of it a melodramatic,
violent quality that has strongly affected the lives and beliefs
of its inhabitants.
Awed by natural phenomena the people attribute them
to supernatural forces. Believing that spirits invest animals,
places and objects, they perform long and dramatic rites
to venerate and gain the favour of these spirits and to invoke
the aid of ancestors.
Secret societies, initiation rites, elaborate communal cere¬
monies, masked dancing, head-hunting expeditions and
cannibalistic practices are so many expressions of Melanesian
preoccupation with the supernatural..
Melanesian art reflects the same preoccupation. Indeed,
its relation to ceremonies .and occult practices must be taken
into account in judging
its effectiveness. An ac¬
tive cult of the dead ex¬
plains the abundance of
ancestor figures. A rich
ceremonial life requires
all sorts of objects, inclu¬
ding masks, drums, clubs,
shields, paddles and orna¬
ments, and many Mela¬
nesian objects must be
seen as "props" for use in
dramatic ceremonies or as
terrifying "tests" sprung
suddenly on initiation
candidates.
The richest flowering
of Melanesian art is found
in New Guinea over 1,300
miles long and the second
largest island in the
world which has been
described as one of the
three most prolific centres
of primitive sculpture in
wood, the others being
Negro Africa and North- Small clay mask from the New Hebrides.
Carved neck-rest from New Guinea
west America. Through¬
out this vast ' island
there is hardly any im¬
plement, ritual or profane,
.without a plastic or linear
decoration of some kind.
In New Guinea, as else¬
where in Melanesia, the
aesthetic idiom varies
greatly from district to
district, although six main
different local styles can
be distinguished. These
correspond to the six main
culture 'areas: Dutch New
Guinea, in the west; the
Sepik River and the Huon
Gulf, in the north ; Torres Straits and the Gulf of Papua,
in the south ; and the Massim Area in the east.
Among the most striking styles, those of the Sepik River
and the Gulf of Papua are distinguished by their use of co¬
lour to emphasize design and the effect of violence and sen¬
suality they convey. The diversity of conventions used in the
representation of facial features and parts of the body by the
Sepik River artists is bewildering. Eyes, for example,
appear as pin points or as huge circles, as narrow slits or as
wide ovals. Heads may be round, oval or diamond shape.
Such an arbitrary rearrangement gives to these figures an
urgent, excited air.
These carvings beak-nosed figurines and brooding shell-
eyed masks have a peculiar vitality, a kind of nightmare
reality. The striking use of colour red, white, black and
orange accentuates the intensity of expression and the
perversity of form. Never did the primitive imagination
translate more vividly into art the concepts and creatures
which haunt it.
In contrast to this feverish and even morbid art is the
restrained and delicate carving work of the Massim Area of
New Guinea. Primarily an art of line, its designs are pre¬
cisely composed and carefully executed. Magnificent designs
and scrolls, incised on the surface of a hard dark wood and
filled in with white and red, give it a distinctive character.
In Melanesia even utilitarian objects are generally adorned
with motifs derived from the mythology, religions, beliefs,
ancestor cult or the magic of the tribes. One curious
example of art stimulation through the ancestor cult is found
in the carving of mortuary figures called korowaar in, the
Geelvihk Bay area of north-west New Guinea.
Originally a korowaar was simply the relics of a dead per-
32

UNESCO COURIER N" 8-9 1954
son, a handful of dried
bones sewn up in a cloth.
Then it became the cus¬
tom to place the dead
person's skull on a wooden
support, which in turn
became the carving of a
small human figure to
which the exaggeration
of the legs, arms and
head gave a monumental
character.
The figure was carved
during the life of a per¬
son so that at the mo¬
ment Of death the spirit Carved she" ornament, Solomon Isles,
could enter it. When a
village sorcerer wished to contact the ancestors of the tribe,
he would pick up the figure in his right hand and use it to
strike the ground until he went into a trance.
Ancestor worship is reflected strongly in the architectural
carvings on the houses of the Melanesians, notably in New
Caledonia. Human heads and faces are found flanking the
door, on the lintels and windows and on the roof spires. All
house sculptures are meant as memorials to the ancestor and
to preserve his protection. During jedo, the mourning cere¬
mony, the carvings regarded as participating in sorrow are
"killed", by being slashed and mutilated with knives. New
Caledonian art is essentially a sculptor's art as many other
wood carvings show. These include finely' shaped pick-like
or "bird head" clubs, wooden ceremonial knives with heads
or faces carved in relief, decorated combs and round-headed
axes symbols of power.
Intense effort has gone into the production of objects used
at religious ceremonies. This has been specially marked
among tribes in the Papuan Gulf area whose ceremonies were
organized in cycles often spread over a decade. Governed by
strict taboos and ritualistic, often magical, procedures, the
making of huge, elaborate bark-cloth masks absorbed nearly
all of this time. Sometimes as many as 100 masks, some of
them 13 feet high were produced. Ancestor figures and pla¬
ques, shields, belts and clubs were also carved for the rites.
The vast amount of carved, modelled, painted and fabri¬
cated objects produced by the Melanesians using wood, bone,
bark, stone, fibre and pith, as well as decorative materials
such as feathers, shells and leaves, has made their islands
one of the richest primitive art regions in the world. Here
are artistic taste and tra¬
ditions which should be
respected and preserved,
however much the Mela¬
nesian way of Ufe may
change through ever in¬
creasing contacts with
OUT modern Civilization. Bird carving from Solomon Isles.
Mask from New Caledonia,
33

SOUTH PACIFIC ART (Cont'd.)
Canoe ornaments from New Guinea and the Solomon Isles.
Statuette of a "Euro¬
pean", New Guinea. Detail of carved wood crocodile, New Guinea.
Head-hunters' lances, New Guinea. Sculptured wooden he
34

UNESCO COURIER N"» 8-9 1954
Wooden roof spire from New Caledonia. Ancestral figure made of bark cloth, New Hebrides.
J-rests, New Guinea. Sculptured wooden mask, New Ireland.
35
