BIG, OLD PRISONS are still the rule rather than the exception in the penitentiary systems of all countries.
Prison design and construction has not kept pace with progress in penal ideals and methods. The result is
that convicted offenders still serve their sentences in "man-cages", like the prison above, and are often
required to "exercise" in the limited space of a prison yard like the one shown, below. Of these particular
exercise yards, one observer wrote: "They are a maze of concrete, with sad oases of earth, where a few
soot-covered flowers turn their defeated faces to the sky. Here the prisoners walk round and round and
back and forth, clockwise and anticlockwise, as if in a crazy squirrel cage".

Dlne April afternoon many years ago, I found
I myself on the roof of a large school which
I was being built in a suburb of Paris. With
j me were two friends, the architect (one of the
J most famous in Prance) and an Italian anti-
| fascist political leader who had . recently
I escaped from one of Mussolini's gaols.
The three of us were inspecting the new
building which was almost completed. We
admired its beautiful lines, its highly rational structure and
its bold conception. The new school was obviously the
product of a highly civilized world. It was open to the
sun and fresh air and dedicated to children who were free
and carefully looked after.
From the top of the roof, we stopped to look down on the
old houses of the suburb
and the surrounding coun¬
tryside. The architect and
the political leader began
a .discussion on their im¬
pressions. The politician,
recalling his prison exper¬
ience, said that after the
defeat of Fascism, the
architect would have to
help wipe out the shame
of our old prisons by
building new ones design¬
ed like the new school
modern, humane, open
on the world and offering
every comfort required.
The architect replied that
never, at any price, would
he have any hand in the
building of a prison.
Not having any first¬
hand knowledge of prison
life at the time (though I
later obtained it quite a
number of times) I merely
listened. It seemed to me
that both of my friends
were guilty of the same
sin of Utapianism. But if
I had had to choose be¬
tween the two Utopias, I
must say it would have
been that of the architect
who wanted to abolish
prisons altogether rather
than that of the political
leader who wished to
make them comfortable.
When you dream, I said
to myself, you might as
well let the dream be as
perfect as possible.
I was reminded of this
conversation some years
later in a Florence prison
room where I was being
interrogated by a member
of the Fascist political
police, O.V.R.A. By that time I had become an old hand
at prisons. -To me, a prison had always seemed a
complete absurdity, like a place that is not really a place,
or time that is not time.
On entering the prison room I saw that it was almost
entirely taken up by a large iron cage something like
the ones circus people use to exhibit their wild animals.
The thought that this cage had been built to imprison a
human being seemed so ludicrous to me that I could not
restrain a short burst of laughter.
We were in the spring of 1943. By then, a session of
questioning by the O.V.R.A. police was no longer a terrify¬
ing event. Fascism was already dead from exhaustion.
A leading Italian writer and artist. Carlo Levi suffered imprisonment and was banish¬
ed to South Italy for his opposition to the fascist Regime. He is the author of
Christ Stopped at Eboli and other works.
"After some months or years, the prisoner loses his sense of time to the point
where the reality of his own existence blurs and vanishes."
Unesco Courier. N' 10. 1954
I therefore told my police official how utterly senseless
and insane the whole idea of prisons seemed to me with
the iron cage standing as the symbol of our absurd ritual
of punishment. The police official turned to mc with a
look of pitying stupefaction on his face. Then, he pointed
his finger toward the cage, and his eyes lit up with ecstatic
admiration. "What are you talking about, doctor," he
exclaimed, "it's the very foundation of the State !"
What was this State, founded on cages, on walls and
padlocks, on bars and grills, on blind devotion to authority
and on the coercive separation of its inhabitants, which
my police official worshipped? It was the Fascist Slate.
But the Fascist State did not invent the "man-cages". The
march of history does not mean that the slate of the past
is wiped completely clean. Too often, ugly practices of
the past arc carried along
side by side with new
ideas, new developments
and real progress.
Thus even todav, and in
the most advanced demo¬
cracies of our time, we
still find certain practices
and institutions dating
back to the Middle Ages,
and numerous traces of
antiquated authoritarian¬
ism. That is precisely
how I feel about our pri¬
sons. To me, prisons are
a typical relic of archaic
and cruel cults, one of
those carry-overs of past
history which humanity
has allowed to subsist al¬
most through indifference
and inertia, if not through
ignorance.
Let there be no mis¬
understanding about what
I have just said. It is
obvious that the State, any
State, must be able to
defend itself against com¬
mon, even political, crimi¬
nals. It is equally obvious
that when the need arises,
the State must be able to
isolate those dangerous
elements. And it is fin¬
ally obvious that all mea¬
sures that are truly effica¬
cious are legitimate, pro¬
viding one condition, but
an essential one, is met.
That is that the criminal's
dignity as a human being
be scrupulously respected.
Various measures exist :
surveillance, confinement
to an institution for the
mentally ill, restricted res¬
idence, exile, work colo¬
nies and finally imprison¬
ment. But as soon as any one of these repressive
measures becomes an offence against human dignity,
I believe it is no exaggeration to say that from that
moment on the punishment itself becomes a crime.
The idea of punishing people by segregating them from
the rest of society is based on two somewhat different, if
not heterogeneous, nouons. There is the legitimate
desire to safeguard public order, and also a survival of
archaic beliefs requiring that a crime be expiated by
ritual sacrifice.
In a primitive society considered by its members as an
organic whole, the individual exists only as an integral
part of the clan. Any infraction of the- normal rules of
collective life immediately becomes a stain on the social
body, and must be erased by the expulsion or even the
destruction of the guilty member. (Continued on next page)

WHEN THE PUNISHMENT
TOO BECOMES A CRIME
i
(Continued from previous page)
An obvious trace of this mentality remains in our penal
system in the form of the prison, which implies that the'
offender should be hidden from the eyes of others, so
that, having shut out the source of the collective stain,
the public can once again enjoy an easy conscience.
Christian tradition added its ideas of sin, repentance and
redemption to this old-fashioned attitude, endowing
prisons with the strange character they have today, an
anticipation of hell and purgatory." And finally, modern
schools of penal law grafted on to the Christian con¬
ception, the philanthropic idea of re-educating the
criminal.
Obviously, re-education should be attempted by psycho¬
logical and moral means rather than by physical com¬
pulsion. For it would be a patent contradiction of the
idea of re-education to attempt to achieve it by the use of
restraint. But since the notion of physical punishment,
which is the basis of the penalty of imprisonment, has not
yet been submitted to a radical re-examination, it should
be clear that the idea of re-education, although a healthy
one in itself, threatens to add to the physical restraint of
the prisoner a justification of moral constraint which is
extremely dangerous for the inalienable character ot
human liberty.
' Habeas Animam ' as well as ' Habeas Corpus '
t was with this in mind that a young Italian scholar,
to rwhom Fascism had extended the dreadful privilege
of 15 years of prison life, demanded in a series of
articles that the "habeas corpus" should be completed by a
recognition of the "habeas animam". "In a society
founded on respect for the human person," this author
wrote, the soul of even the most abject criminal should
be protected by a habeas animam the sacred right to
inviolability from any judge, or any gaoler... Prison, as
it exists today, is deprived of all redeeming qualities,
because the prisoner gets used to it, and rots there. But.
the prison which has been turned into a laboratory of
redemption, a sanatorium of souls, is a mechanism which
corrupts everyone: those who direct it, those ground down
by it, and those who believe in its utility." . "
It seems to me that so long as the penalty of segregation
retains its character of a sacred vengeance, all attempts to
reconcile imprisonment with the idea of re-education (and
thus with the idea of human dignity which re-education
pre-supposes), will be vain.
The problem posed for modern man
by the persistence of the primitive
conception of punishment as sym¬
bolized by prison, cannot be reduced to
the elimination of physical suffering
such as lack of air and light, dirt, bad
food and the occasional cruelty of
warders. These are conditions 'which
it is certainly worth while trying to
change; but the essential problem is
elsewhere.
Job, seated on his dung heap,
afflicted by a thousand ills and a
thousand woes, loses nothing of his
human dignity, nor of his essential
freedom. But the cleanest and most
scientifically organized prison, the
most humane, in appearance, causes
irreparable harm to the personality of
the prisoner after a certain time, for
the prison strikes at the very depths of
man's being,- at his consciousness of
time. Consciousness of time and exist¬
ence of the individual are two expres-
10
sions of the same reality : the living and moving reality
of the relations between the individual and the World
within eternity. After a certain number of months or years,
the prisoner loses his sense of time to the' point where the
reality of his own existence blurs and vanishes.
He lives in a world without dimensions, without future,
without passions, and thus without humanity.
An unknown force pushes him down
Another Italian intellectual has attempted to draw a
mathematical pattern of what he calls "the wait of
the prisoner". He says : "after a certain number
of years, everything takes place in the consciousness of
the prisoner as if his prison term would never come to an
end. From this moment, all imprisonment is an im¬
prisonment for life. "
"In the 'Metamorphosis' of Kafka, when young Gregory
discovers that each time he tries to get up an -unknown
force pushes him down again, he abandons all hope. He
knows at this moment that he has lost the human dimen¬
sion, despairs and dies. A similar metamorphosis takes
place after a certain time in the personality of the
prisoner : time disintegrates and death, which dominates
his fate, seems infinite and interminable."
The author concludes that nothing can justify a muti¬
lation of the human being which reaches the point of
altering his deepest feelings and his spiritual life. At the
same time, he hastens to add, society is probably not yet
ready for a radical change in the penalties of impri¬
sonment. But the idea that they might be limited to a
maximum of five years, is perhaps not a foolish hope.
I personally believe that in the existing state of society,
any attempt at radical reform of these penalties would be
premature and doomed to failure. But the problem,
nevertheless, remains, and it seems to me that, together
with Unesco's efforts to publicize the Universal Declaration,
an attempt should be made to make present-day society
more aware of these particularly acute problems of human
rights. In my opinion, the problem of the relationship
between the modern penitentiary system and our con¬
ception of human dignity deserves discussion and thought.
I cannot help feeling that the present penitentiary system
as practised in almost every country is marked by the
cruelty, inhumanity and degradation condemned by
Article 5 in the Universal Declaration.
