THE FLAG WITH
THE BLUE AND
WHITE SHIELD
A flag with a blue and white shield
is now the international symbol for
the protection of great cultural
treasures and historical monuments
the event of any future armed conflict.
On May 14, 1954, the representatives of thirty-seven
governments including the United States of America,
Soviet Russia and France, signed their names to a new
International convention to protect cultural property from
destruction should conflict break out within any country
or between countries (1). The new convention thus sets
up what is tantamount to a cultural "Red Cross" under
the banner of which works of art, monuments and historic
buildings would receive the same sort of protection as is
now universally given to hospitals, ambulances and
medical personnel in time of war.
An international code of protection of this kind has
been considered necessary for a long time and has become
particularly vital since the ruthless fury of the first and
second World Wars left a path of destruction in its wake
unprecedented in the history of mankind.
Certain limited steps for safeguarding the objects our
civilization cherishes have been taken in the past by in¬
dividual countries. In 1935 the Roerich Pact was signed
in Washington but it applied only to countries in the
Americas and contained no measures for international'
control. The Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 also
contained provisions for protecting cultural property but
these were so vague and imprecise that its practical effects
were nullified.
In 1937 the International Museums Office drew up a
draft agreement which was submitted to the League of
Nations. Before it could be adopted war broke out.
This preparatory work, however, was not completely
wasted since during the war a number of governments,
influenced by the League's plan, actually adopted some of
.the measures advocated even though they were not bound
by any convention.
Thus the United States set up a special commission in
1943 "for the protection and salvation of artistic and
historic monuments in war areas." A special officers'
corps, known as M.F.A. and A. (Monuments, Fine Arts and
Archives) was set up by the Allies. The German armies
had a "Kunstschutz" as early as the 1914-18 war. Two
orders issued by General Eisenhower, Commander-in-
Chief of the Allied Forces, contained precise instructions
for the safeguarding of cultural property. The first issued
in December 1943 concerned operations in Italy; the
second, in May 1944, operations in Europe following the
invasion of June 6. They laid down the principle that
it was the duty of each army commander, within the
limits of possibility, to respect the cultural heritage of the
countries where troops were engaged.
The last war however was also characterized by sys¬
tematic pillage of cultural objects in the occupied countries.
A new technique was used to dispossess the rightful
owners of their works of art under a semblance of legality.
By demanding huge daily indemnities from the occupied
countries, deliberately forced transactions were made to
appear like free commercial dealings.
(Continuée/ on page 10.)
(1) Andorra, Australia, Belgium, Byelorussian SSR, China, Cuba,
Czechoslovakia, Ecuador, France, German Federal llepublic, Greece,
Hungary, India, Iran, lrag, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Libya, Luxembourg,
Monaco, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Rumania, San Marino, San Salvador, Spam, Syria, Ukrainian SSR, U.S.A.,
Uruguay, U.S.S.H., Yugoslavia. (.Lebanon has since also signed).
8
MOORE IS
BOXED UP
Large sculpture by Henry
Moore in San Francisco Museum
of Art in US is given special
packing for shipment. Special
bolts not nails are used to join
wooden boards and protective
covering is used where each bolt
may touch sculpture. Photos on
this and following page, as well as
page two, are taken from a special
study just published in French
by Unesco which describes the
latest "Techniques for the
Protection of Cultural Property
in ' Case of Armed Conflict".

UNESCO COURIER. N" 7. 1954
SAMOTHRACE
PACKED AWAY
Monuments, works of art, precious
books, scientific collections and all
objects which make up the cultural
heritage of a nation run grave risks
in case of war, and various measures
have been devised for protecting them.
Here, the famous Winged Victory of
Samothrace in the Louvre, Paris, is
shown being packed in case built around
it after outbreak of war in 1939 and
shipped to special shelter. (Photos
Marc Vaux and Lau re Albin Guillot.)

(Continued from page 8.)
In January 1943,' eighteen Powers signed a Joint
Declaration in London solemnly condemning these acts of
pillage. The armistice agreements with Nazi Germany and
her satellite states later provided for the restitution of art
and other types of cultural' property plundered. Often they
were more or less seriously damaged. Many were never found.
The whole problem of the preservation of historic treasures
and famous buildings has since then been reassessed and
new solutions sought in the light of the inadequacy of
existing international agreements and the failure during
World Wars I and H to prevent tragic and irreparable losses.
In 1949, the Netherlands proposed that Unesco investigate
the problem fully. The following year Italy suggested that
an international convention be prepared and submitted a
preliminary draft to Unesco's General Conference in Florence
as a basis for future discussions.
For the past four years Unesco has worked on drafting the
new convention with suggestions coming from its member
governments and the International Council of Museums.
After lengthy discussions at a special conference in the
Hague, it was finally signed by 37 countries and will enter
into force as soon as five of these have formally ratified it.
The Blue Shield Convention represents an important step
forward in international law. It takes into account all
previous agreements on the subject, complements them, and
brings them into line with present-day needs. _ The signa¬
tories recognize that the threat to cultural treasures is today
increased by the suddenness with which hostilities break out,
the force of new destructive weapons and the large areas
. over which wars extend.
While it would certainly be over-optimistic to suppose that
the convention will save all treasures in case of another war,
experience has shown that measures can be taken to restrict
the damage if planned well in advance, during peace time.
The signatories therefore pledge themselves to take a
number of unprecedented peace-time steps: 1) special bomb¬
proof shelters, taking into account the power of modern
weapons, will be built to house movable objects such as art
works, manuscripts, scientific collections, archives and
treasured books. 2) Detailed technical plans will be
elaborated and be ready to be put into operation to protect
buildings; various other kinds of protective measures will
also be worked out. 3) All armed forces will set up
monuments and fine arts services in peace time with special
personnel trained in protection. 4) New provisions for the
respect of cultural property will be introduced into military
regulations applying to all troops, and the importance of the
regulations explained. 5) An International Register, des¬
ignating in advance those edifices which will enjoy special
protection in wartime, will be created and kept by Unesco.
If a civil war or any other armed conflict should occur
these buildings will immediately hoist the 'Blue Shield Flag
or be marked with three huge blue and white shields clearly
visible from the ground and air. Governments agree not
to use such buildings for military purposes and to leave them
immune from attack. This immunity may be waived, says
a clause, "only in cases where military necessity imperatively
requires such a waiver". The inclusion of this clause was
the subject of considerable and heated discussion at the
Hague. It was finally adopted with a limiting proviso
however, stating that immunity cannot be withdrawn for
This reinforced concrete shelter in the Netherlands was
built before the. last war to house works of art in case of
hostilities. When World War II came hundreds of paintings,
statues and other treasures were placed in its vaults for
safekeeping and were thus saved from destruction. Entire
framework is made of steel bars one inch in diameter. The
walls are IS feet thick and the roof, at highest point.
30 feet thick. In most structures roof Is most vulnerable.
reasons of military necessity except by an officer
commanding a force of at least a division or more. In no
case may reprisals ever be made against cultural property.
Special protection will be granted to a limited number of
refuges where works of art and other movable" treasures are
placed in safe keeping. Like Red Cross ambulances,
vehicles transporting works of art to safety will bear the
special Blue Shield markings. They will be granted special
protection to transfer great cultural objects within a
territory or to another territory and will be immune from
"seizure, placing in prize or capture".
Persons guarding property are to be allowed to carry on
their work if captured, and in all cases of either partial or
total occupation of a country, cultural property will be
safeguarded and preserved. All acts of vandalism, any form
of pillage or theft or misappropriation are henceforth
prohibited by the new code of international law. The
signatory states pledge themselves to prevent such acts and
if they should be committed to take the necessary steps to
nalt the expropriation of art treasures.
An additional Protocol provides that works of art cannot
be exported from any territory under occupation and lays
down that they can no longer be retained as war reparations.
The signatories to the Blue Shield Convention finally pledge
that any persons, of whatever nationality, who violate the
Convention or order it to be violated, will be prosecuted on
criminal grounds and penal or disciplinary sanctions imposed.
Hill»-
. Protection of the main portals of the Cathedral
in Genoa, Italy, by strongly revetted sandbag wall.
10
Pulpit of cathedral in Pisa, Italy, protected by
sandbagging against bomb splinters and blast.
