THE HORSE COMES BEFORE THE CART
IN LANGUAGE TEACHING
\
t
* 4
Correct pronunciation must be learned from the start, foreign language experts today declare. Pupils must be told how to set about making the correct
sounds. Later on is too late and makes it almost impossible to correct faulty speech habits. Inset shows typical positions of mouth in pronouncing French
vowels, A, E, I, O, OU. Photo shows position for the sound EU.
Like every other branch of human
activity, modern language teaching
has its sages and its charlatans, its
clamour of rival factions, its current
fashions and its awful heresies. Anybody
who sets out to explore this jungle would
be well advised to tread cautiously.
But at least there are consolations in
such a voyage of discovery... Nobody can
complete it without coming away with
the conviction that here, as in so many
other fields of human endeavour, man is
gaining the upper hand over the general
cussedness of nature.
We really do have a clearer idea in 1954
of how to go about teaching a living lan¬
guage for the common purposes of gene¬
ral enlightenment or general understand¬
ing than we did in 1940. The thirties
were a decade of great progress too, and
if you look back to the turn of the cen¬
tury, and the great controversies that
surrounded the birth of the Direct
Method, you can see how far we have
really come.
There are chastening factors too, of
course. It is a little disconcerting to be
reminded that Renaissance scholars ear¬
nestly recommended some of our most
up-to-date language-teaching methods
three and four centuries ago. Writing
in 1532, a Sicilian, Lucace Di Marinis,
spoke out strongly against over-emphasis
on grammar and urged that what little
grammar instruction was necessary be
taught inductively. Comenius, the
Czech, writing a century later, showed
that he knew more than a little about
vocabulary selection and structure
grading. Montaigne and Luther and
Locke had other enlightened notions on
this general subject.
' Language teaching in that age meant,
of course, teaching Latin, which was
still the living common tongue of scien¬
tists and educated persons generally. It
was a fearful and almost a fatal han¬
dicap for modern language teaching that,
when it did begin to come into its own,
during the second half of the nineteenth
century, it was as a rather despised poor
relation to Latin teaching and to a Latin
now quite thoroughly dead and become
a vested interest.
This had many odd consequences.
Where Latin was well taught, as it still
was in many places, students would
acquire proficiency in reading and writ¬
ing the language. Modern language
teachers were .therefore expected to
impart the same skills and no others,
which was putting the cart before the
horse with a vengeance. As late as 1893,
an eminent educator who occupied the
chair at a meeting of the National Edu¬
cation Association of the United States
exploded with the statement: "'I do not
believe, first and last, that we have
anything to do with the speaking or
conversational use of the modern lan¬
guages in the secondary school. And
the sooner the heresy is banished from
the secondary school the clearer the air
will be." At the time, he undoubtedly
voiced the opinion of the majority.
So for decades the modern language
teacher had to do what the Latin teacher
thought he was doing: sharpen the
intellect, broaden the mind, instill a
sounder knowledge of the mother tongue,
etc. This was an educational pro¬
cess that was all hypothetical by-pro¬
ducts with no end-product, practical or
otherwise.
Then at last came the age of the heroes
who arose in many countries to deliver
the damsel in distress: GouLn in France,
Viëtor in Germany, Alge in Switzerland,
Melon in Belgium, Nystrom in Finland,
Jespersen in Denmark and Sweet, the
Englishman, who was the model for
Henry Higgins the phoenetician in
Shaw's Pygmalion. There was now the
14

beginning of a real theoretical basis to
modern language teaching. The Natu¬
ral or Direct Method flourished, to be-
tolerated'in some school- systems, to be
imposed in others. Like all good things
it suffered at the hands of its more dog¬
matic advocates, but on balance it was
undoubtedly "a good thing" and, at the
hand of qualified teachers, brought life
and reality into many language class¬
rooms.
Since those days, many different devel¬
opments, taking place in many different
parts of the world, have broadened and
refined the techniques available to the
profession. They are not listed here in
any order of importance or even chrono¬
logically ; they all leadTup to the present-
day picture.
It was in the twenties and thirties that
the educational psychologists started to
play a useful part. They have taught
us a good deal already about what sort
of a learning process language-learning
is. They have still, among other things,
to tell us more definitely about the real
as opposed to the theoretical effects of
bilingualism and about the right age for
a child to start learning his first foreign
language, as well as devising tests which
will really measure more than the merely
mechanical aspects of language learning.
Then, in the thirties, much progress
was made by a group of well-trained and
highly intelligent teachers of English,
working in South Asia and in the Far
East. It was an accident that this was
the language they taught. They might
have come from other countries and have
gone out to teach any one of the world's
great link-languages Arabic or Chinese,
or French, or Russian, or Spanish, just as
well as English. The work of French,
Faucett, Gatenby, Palmer, West and
others of that generation is, of course, in
a sense, primarily of interest to teachers
of English, but in a wider and more signi¬
ficant sense it concerns teachers of any
living language.
These teachers learned - primarily to -
appreciate the difficulties which Asians
encounter when they are trying to master
a western world language, be it English
or any other language. They learned
what the essentials of a language are and
how to present those essentials econo¬
mically and attractively. The Basic
English movement and the interest in
simplified texts both owed something if
not everything to the experience these
teachers gained.
Over on the other side of the world; in
Nprth America, linguists who had been
working on Eskimo and Amerindian lan¬
guages were developing new theories of
the nature of language, which were soon
to be expressed by Bloomfleld, Trager,
Nida, arid others. It was their opinion
that the cardinal error of the past had
been to approach language philosophi¬
cally instead of scientifically and to make
statements about the form in terms of
the meaning, instead of doing it the
other way round. Exponents of this new
view passed on from rare languages to
the better known ones and ultimately
devised theories of their own about how
languages should be taught. It was at
about this time too that there occurred
what might be described as the Discovery
of the Phoneme (the sound unit of dis¬
tinctive difference), which to some lin¬
guists is as important as Newton's apple
was to modern physicists.
The "Second World War gave these
theorists a wonderful opportunity. They
were able to test many of their ideas
when the United States set up a scheme
for the language training of military per¬
sonnel under the Army Specialized Train¬
ing Programme (A.S.T.P.). The results
were flattering, though it must be said in
all fairness that other countries,' which
sponsored similar emergency training-
schemes, achieved equally spectacular
though less well advertized results even
though they made use of more - tradi¬
tional methods. It is probably too early
to say whether the theories of the des¬
criptive linguists can ultimately be uti¬
lized in the ordinary language class in a
school ; certainly no wide-awake lan¬
guage teacher can afford to be ignorant
of this whole body of doctrine.
After the last War, the need felt by
countries such as Australia and Israel to
set up machinery for dealing with great
polyglot waves of immigrants led to new
research in a neighbouring field: how to
teach a national language to mixed
groups with widely assorted social and
linguistic backgrounds. In both the
countries mentioned it meant devising
experimental methods, preparing special
text-books and training teachers. What
is really interesting is that both these
countries, working independently of one
another, came to roughly the same
conclusions regarding methods, which
call for marked emphasis on the spoken
language with all material carefully
graded and a marked stress on over-
learning.
Real progress has also been made
during the post-war years in some of the
smaller Western European States, like
the Netherlands and the Scandinavian
UNESCO COURIER - N° 1-1954
countries, speaking languages of limited
diffusion. New and attractive text¬
books have been issued and a special
attempt has been made to make lan¬
guage teaching lead to sound and up-to-
date knowledge of foreign countries.
Finally, in any review of the factors
which have contributed to contemporary
trends in language teaching, some men¬
tion must be made of the experience
acquired in countries such as India, Indo¬
nesia and the Philippines, where the
advent of independence had as one result
the setting up of new national languages
in place of the western languages which
had hitherto been paramount. The
details of this great experiment in pro¬
gress will, of course, take some time to
assess, but it is not unreasonable to
suppose that the East, which has hitherto
learned about language-teaching from
the West, will soon be in a position to '
give lessons as well as to receive them.
So much for some relatively recent
developments. What of the current
trends that have arisen from them ? It
might be worthwhile to try and list some
of them, bearing in mind, of course, that
these are just general tendencies among
up-to-date modern language teachers
and that they primarily concern school
needs and not the needs of, say, scientists
who want to learn to read technical arti¬
cles or tourists who want to buy post-
Thls picture shows a girl "photographing" her voice electronically. The machine Is used by experts In
phonetics to study differences in sound variations in the teaching of foreign languages. (Photo by Fritz
Goro. Reproduced by courtesy of Life magazine.)
15

cards or visit night-clubs when travelling
in a foreign country. And, in spite of
all the advice given by the experts, there
will still be tough-minded individuals
who will prefer to teach themselves lan¬
guages with a grammar, a dictionary and
a text. If they succeed, who is to say
that they used wrong methods ?
The First Approach. Current trends
favour what is called, somewhat pedan¬
tically, the oral-aural approach. This
puts speaking and understanding, before
reading and writing. The descriptive
linguists would say that this method is
sound because language is in its very
essence a spoken means of communica¬
tion and all written language merely an
arbitrary representation of the real thing.
Veterans of the Natural Method will say
that this is the best way because that
is how a child learns a language for the
first time.
What really seems to matter is that
numbers of experienced, non-dogmatic
teachers have in fact found that this
approach gives the best results and that
pupils can be led a surprisingly long way
into the heart of a language without even
opening a book, or taking a single note.
As a forceful participant at the Unesco
Modern Language Seminar at Nuwara
Eliya, Ceylon last August put it: "'You
don't learn to play the >piano by
watching, someone else play or by
studying counterpoint and harmony.
You learn by sitting in iront of.
the thing and pushing on the keys." '
Pronunciation. If the oral-aural ap¬
proach is in favour, it follows that ,the
pupil's (and the teacher's) first problems
will have to do with pronunciation. How
much latitude is to be allowed? Accord¬
ing to present trends, little or none.
The best authorities seem at present to be
convinced -that correct-' pronunciation
must be thoroughly inculcated right from
the start. Later on- is too late, and
merely encourages bad speech habits
that become almost ineradicable. This
does not necessarily call for elaborate
methods. Obviously it will not suffice
to keep urging the pupil to imitate the
correct sounds made by the teacher.^ The
pupil must be told how to set about
making the correct sounds.
The modern emphasis on grading and
selection, as well as on the significance
of phonemes, will normally lead the
teacher to concentrate primarily on the
sounds that matter and on those which
are most difficult for pupils to pro-"
nounce. It is doubtful whether all this .
requires the use of phonetic symbols,
though probably they do no harm. It is
also doubtful whether, as one linguist
advocates, pupils should have to master
the whole jargon of modern phonetics.
A child can probably learn to pronounce
the "th" in then without bothering,
about voiced interdental spirants.
Grammar. The modernists are against
it, or rather they are against the wrong
kind of grammar and against the intro¬
duction of almost any kind of grammar
too early or in massive doses. Certainly
the study of formal grammar for its own
sake is now considered to be the proper
. pursuit of professional grammarians, not
of school children trying to learn a Ian- _
guage. There are, of course, a good
many who say that the traditional gram¬
mar elaborated for most modern langua¬
ges, and based on classical concepts of
case, tense, mood and so on, are quite
meaningless and bear no relation to any
modern language except those directly
derived from Greek or Latin. For these
people, the real grammars of modern
languages are only now being written.
In the meantime, they and many others
think that the problems of grammar
should be dealt with as they arise, quite
incidentally, and that pupils should be
encouraged to draw their own gramma¬
tical conclusions from the linguistic facts
already in their possession.
Graded Structures. "'Structural Ana¬
lysis," "Structural Grading," "The Struc¬
tural Approach" these phrases occur
constantly in the contemporary literature
of modern language teaching. They
refer, of course, not to a new method but
to present-day emphasis on the need for
analysing language difficulties and then
for .presenting the basic patterns or
variants one at a time and in order of
Despite the impressiveness of certain new gadgets, the best aid to language learning is still and probably
always will be the well-qualified teacher. Here in the Trobriand Archipelago of Papua, New Guinea, a
teacher holds an open-air language class. (Australian Official Photo).
A number of new devices now exist to aid foreign
near Paris receiving instruction in special language
language drill. But
difficulty. Naturally the whole grading
process should be and is applied not only
to structures but to other features such
as vocabulary and intonation.
Drill, alias overlearning. There was
a time when textbooks started each
lesson with a list of new words, generally
quite unrelated to one another, which the
unfortunate pupil was supposed to learn
by heart. Even after vocabulary frequency
counts became fashionable the practice of
imposed memorizing did not cease. It only
really started to peter out when, first of
all, it began to be realized that a lan¬
guage does not consist of words stuck
together with grammar, like a wall made
of bricks and mortar, but that it consists
of phrases and, secondly, that there are
less laborious ways of remembering
phrases, or the words they contain, than
just memorizing them parrot-fashion.
Hence the modern technique of repeating
words and phrases aloud in many differ¬
ent real contexts until they are learnt
automatically and directly associated in
the mind with the objects or actions they
represent.
Gadgets. A gadget does not have to
cost hundreds of dollars or be so compli¬
cated that it breaks down every time
anyone looks at it. A blackboard and
a piece of chalk are gadgets, and very
useful ones. Textbooks are gadgets.
Such simple things as a pocket mirror
and a flashlight are almost indispensable
gadgets for anyone beginning to learn .
the pronunciation of a new language.
The more elaborate gadgets exist too,
and undoubtedly they have come to play
a pretty important part in language
teaching, particularly in financially pri¬
vileged parts of the world, such as North
America and Western Europe.
16

UNESCO COURIER -N" 1-1954
language teaching, particularly in financially privileged countries. Photos show multi-national personnel at SHAPE (Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers in Europe)
laboratory equipped with individual sound-proofed compartments. Each student has his own tape-recorder for recording his pronunciation, taking dictation and
such equipment is complicated and highly expensive, and most countries use simpler, though not less effective techniques.
In the United States, to take a rather
extreme example, a good number of
schools and colleges now have well-
equipped language laboratories with
sound-proofed compartments and tape-
recorders for individual use. The tape-
recorder, double or single channel, used
with or without film-strips, and intelli¬
gently used, is an invaluable aid to lan¬
guage teaching, but it is expensive. So
are language films, but so far language
teaching films have somehow ' failed to
measure up to the expectations and the
requirements of language teachers. Disk
recordings have, of course been in use for
years and have been found useful.
Film strips are cheaper and more
abundant than films. In the Nether¬
lands the showing of film-strips to lan¬
guage classes is combined ingeniously
with school radio programmes. Radio, ,
indeed, is perhaps the most effective
of all the audio-visual aids, and it is
used in a number of different ways in
different countries. In Australia, to take
an example, it can follow the migrant
to a remote up-country sheep-station
and enable him to continue his lessons
in the national language. In Sweden
it is one of several factors used in a
unique type of scheme for teaching
foreign languages to adults. In the
United Kingdom it is perhaps the chief
agent for marketing English as a foreign
language abroad. It is too early to
speak of television. All that one can
really say is that experiments in its use
for language-teaching have begun and
that the possibilities are immense.
The Time Factor. Do present-day
curricula give school-children enough
time to learn a foreign language ?
Elsewhere in this issue there is a dis
cussion of the beginning age for language
learning, which suggests that because
modern language teaching has, in so
many countries, been confined to secon¬
dary education, we are perhaps sacrific¬
ing some of the best years for lan¬
guage work. Important though it is,
there is no need to discuss that subject
further here. The question is whether
enough time is given to language-classes
in. most schools even under the present
restricted dispensation.
Experts are now inclined to think that
no pupil can hope to do justice to the
subject if he is only allotted three or four
hours a week. He probably needs five
or six. Educational authorities who
throw up their hands and answer that
there is no more time to spare in an
already overcrowded schedule might
reflect. The physics teacher or the
chemistry teacher who asks for labora¬
tory periods invariably gets them. Why
should not the language teacher ? The
extra hour or so, spent more informally,
with large classes split up into smaller
groups, can, under the guidance of an
imaginative teacher, be of very great
benefit.
These then are some of the trends
which have become apparent in contem¬
porary language teaching. It is these
trends that were most in evidence at
Nuwara Eliya last August when language
teachers from eighteen countries met
under, the auspices of Unesco.
In countries not given to over expe¬
rimentation, and where language teach¬
ing is closely integrated into a tradi¬
tional educational pattern that evolves
slowly, there is as yet only moderate
interest in these trends. Other lands,
with greater needs jfor immediate prac¬
tical results turn to new methods.
If space permitted, a discussion of
current problems should follow any
account of developments and trends such
as this one. And the greatest of these
problems is perhaps motivation. No one
can accurately say how essential a factor
this is in language learning, but cer¬
tainly its importance is very great. One
of the ironies of an educationally unbal¬
anced world is that in vast areas the
desire, or rather the imperative need to
learn languages, is everywhere apparent,
though qualified teachers, proper text¬
books and adequate funds are lacking.
Where teachers and money and books
and mechanical aids of every kind are
available, too often language classrooms
are filled with solid rows of pupils,
merely passive and not greatly caring
whether they learn ' or not. And yet
knowledge öf a language cannot be pour¬
ed through a hole in the top of a
school-child's head ; the will to learn is
absolutely essential.
It should not be beyond the capacity
of teachers to arouse that will. All the .
old bread-and-butter arguments are
still valid and still perfectly respectable
in a practical world. Today's argu¬
ment, the modern, compelling argument,
is the need for knowing and understand¬
ing other peoples in a shrinking world.
It is for this reason that the conscien¬
tious language teacher has come to play
at least as important a role as the teach¬
er of history, of geography, or of civics
in helping children - to understand the
world in which they live. And children,
innately idealistic as they are, can
quickly grasp the importance of language
as a key to international understanding
if it is put to them without mawkishness
and with sincerity.
F.H.W.
17
