-¿
AN INTERNATIONAL
CENTRE for carrying out
nuclear research is being built
near Geneva. This plan shows
layout of the centre which will
house the world's most power¬
ful instruments to explore mat¬
ter and energy. One machine
will generate particles which
approach the speed of light.
Numbers on plan indicate :
(I) entrance, (2) lecture room,
(3) library, (4) restaurant, (5)
laboratories for theoretical
work, (6) experimental labora¬
tories, (7) central workshop.
(8) workshop for synchro-cyclo¬
tron, ' (9) synchro-cyclotron
control room, ( I 0) synchro-cy¬
clotron (a high energy accelera¬
tor), (II) power station, (12)
fuei tanks, ( I 3) cooling towers,
(14) circular magnet for pro¬
ton-synchrotron (this giant
magnet will be buried in a
concrete filled trench), (IS)
experimental halls, (16) pro¬
ton-synchrotron workshop, (17)
generators, (18) laboratories
for theoretical work, (19) lin¬
ear accelerator (machine for
accelerating nuclear particles).



CERN WHERE GIANT FORCES WILL
PENETRATE A TINY WORLD
At the end of the last century, great scientists, often
working alone and under difficult conditions, discovered
radio-activity, radium and the X-ray, but none of them
considered that the atom had an interior. Today scientists
delve within the atomic nucleus and study a maze of funda¬
mental particles of matter and of energy inside electrons
and positrons, protons and neutrons, mesons and neutrinos.
But today, the frontiers of atomic science are so far from
the everyday world that it takes large, expensive and highly
organized expeditions to reach -them. A large cyclotron for
penetrating the nucleus of the atom costs millions of dollars.
To operate it costs thousands of dollars per day and requirec
the combined work of large teams of physicists, chemists,
mathematicians, engineers, and electricians, and also biolo¬
gists and physicians.
The work, in fact, is so expensive that no university can
establish a modern fully-equipped laboratory without help
from its government. And for that matter, very few gov¬
ernments can- afford to finance a major nuclear research
programme by themselves. The only solution is interna¬
tional collaboration.
Unesco has been concerned with this problem since 1950
when it was asked to help bring together European scientists
and governments to establish a European centre for nuclear
research. A few months ago this project became a reality
when the European Organization for Nuclear Research came
into being following the ratification of an international
convention by nine countries.
CERN, as the Organization is usually called (from the
French title Conseil Européen pour la recherche nucléaire
of the temporary body which preceded it) is the first in¬
ternational organization for scientific research set up by an
intergovernmental Convention. Today this Convention has
been ratified by ten countries: Belgium, Denmark, France,
23

EUROPE'S NUCLEAR EXPLORERS
DIRECTOR-GENERAL of CERN is Professor Felix Bloch, of
Switzerland. Professor Bloch was winner of the I 952 Nobel Physics Prize.
German Federal Republic, Greece, Netherlands, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. Italy and
Yugoslavia have also signed the Convention but have not yet
ratified it.
CERN is not concerned with atomic energy, but only with
basic research on the structure of the atomic nucleus. The
part played by Unesco in its establishment offers a good
example of the way the Organization can help to develop
international co-operation in the field of scientific research.
M. Henri Longchambon, Secretary of State at the French
Department of Scientific and Technical Research, recently
said that while technicians now know how to produce atomic
energy, the mechanism and behaviour of nuclear forces are
still shrouded in mystery. In investigating these pheno-
PRESIDENT of CERN is Sir
Ben Lockspeiser, Director,
Department of Scientific and In¬
dustrial Research, Great Britain.
mena, research is focussed on
very high-energy particles,
found principally in cosmic
rays reaching the earth from
outer space, but which can be
created artificially by bom¬
barding atomic nuclei with
the help of machines called
particle accelerators.
The creation of these artifi¬
cial cosmic rays in laboratories
is an essential part of nuclear
research. That is why physi¬
cists and engineers, for the
past twenty years, have been
building more and more po¬
werful accelerators. In Europe only a few countries have
enough money and a sufficient range of scientific and tech¬
nical resources to build their own machines.
England, with a thousand-million electron-volt accelerator,
is very advanced in this field, and France has just decided to
build one which is to reach- 2.4 thousand-million electron-
volts, and several medium-power accelerators.
But even for such countries, the advantages of interna¬
tional co-operation in this field are very great. Even the
most modern American institutions, which were still, quite
recently, leading in this field, entrust such research to spe¬
cialists recruited from all over the world, and particularly
from Europe.
CERN has therefore set up teams of the foremost special-
its in its Member States to design the two accelerators : a
600 million electron-volt synchro-cyclotron and a 25 thous¬
and-million electron-volt proton-synchrotron. The construc¬
tion of the first machine one of a classical type raises no
special difficulties and can be completed in 2 or 3 years.
The construction of the second machine, however, is a dar¬
ing venture. It' is to have five times the power of the most
powerful accelerator at present operating in the USA (the
Berkeley Bevatron) and is to be built on an entirely new
principle. The speed of the particles it generates will
approach the velocity of light the absolute ceiling. It will
take six or seven years to build.
There will be nothing secret about CERN's work. Its
creators hope that it will mark the beginning of a new era
of international collaboration in atomic research. Its ela¬
borate and costly equipment will serve all science and
through it a world that is anxious to make good use of the
secrets of the atom.
CONSTRUCTION of CERN'S central laboratory is now going ahead on a site some 2,000 feet square about three miles north¬
west of Geneva, Switzerland, and adjoining the French border on land offered by the Geneva Canton. The cost is estimated at
120 million Swiss francs (28 million dollars) for the first seven years, including construction and operation. Project was first
proposed by the European Cultural Conference in 1949 and adopted by the Unesco General Conference in 1950. In 1953, a
Convention establishing the Organization was signed in Pans. CERN became a reality on September 29, I 954, when the Conven¬
tion had been ratified by nine of the twelve nations which have signed it.
24
