EL DORADO' IN COLOMBIA
Art worth its weight in gold
For centuries the golden treasure of the
pre-Conquest inhabitants of South America
has captured man's imagination. The various
legends of "El Dorado" led to the exploration
of half a continent and the discovery of the
Amazon River, and lured Sir Walter Raleigh
on the ill-fated expedition that .finally cost
him his head ; legends that were immortal¬
ized in literature by Milton and Voltaire.
In both America and the Old World gold
was the first metal to be known and worked
because it was found in rivers or in veins in
the mountains, and because the most prim¬
itive technique for working gold was much
the same as that of working stone. Man
. was attracted by the colour of gold, and could
make a piece of nugget into a sheet by
beating it with one stone," using a fiat stone as an anvil.
It is not yet definitely known when and where the
invention of working gold took place in America but the
most likely regions are Peru, Equator and Colombia. In
these countries gold objects dating from about 300 AD.
have been identified, and allowing for the time required
to develop working techniques, it is possible to place the
origin of goldwork in this region as several centuries before
the Christian era.
The area's extraordinary wealth of native gold suggests
that it wa,s here that the working of gold first began in
Latin America, and certainly in no region did the art and
techniques of the indigenous goldsmith reach a higher state
of development than it did here.
Gold was melted in stone or clay crucibles and the molten
metal was poured into open or two piece moulds of stone
or fired clay.
Ornamental elements were attached by welding or by
using as a solder some other metal, having a lower melting
point than the parts to be joined. Metal, wood, stone or
shell objects were covered or sheathed with gold foil.
Sometimes sheets of gold foil were moulded in sections on
an object and were joined together with staples of gold
wire or tiny gold rivets.
These were the treasures prized only for their intrinsic
value and sought after by the Conquistadores and those
who followed them. It was, in fact, only a century ago that
.the first scientific studies of .the native pre-Hispanic gold-
work found in Colombia were made.
Towards the end of the 19th century, however, some
Colombians began to form private archeological collections
which included not only ceramics and stone pieces but
also gold objects. Some came from accidental finds and
others were bought from the "guaqueros" who made a
living by hunting for and robbing pre-Hispanic tombs in
which a wealth of gold was hidden.
Since 1939, many of the most important private collections
have been purchased by Colombia's National Bank, the
Banco de la República, and are now assembled in the Gold
Museum established by the Bank in Bogota, the capital.
The Museo del Oro was set up as a cultural centre to house
what Colombians rightly regard as an important part of
the nation's artistic and historic patrimony.
Today the collection of the Museo del Oro numbers 6,726
pieces, four times as many pre-Hispanic gold objects from
Colombia as exist in all the other museums and private
collections in the world put together. Human and animal
figures, armlets, bangles, necklaces, ceremonial implements,
body ornaments representing individual styles peculiar to
certain regions leave the visitor to the Gold Museum
marvelling at the mastery of technique and expression of
beauty achieved by the ancient craftsmen.
Recently, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York,
and several other museums in the United"States have been
exhibiting a selection of 80 of these golden treasures, "which
were loaned to them by Colombia's Gold- Museum and from
which the examples published , in these pages are taken.

UNESCO COURIER. N°" 4-5. 1954
