KzjékMâqbe
by Jean Price-Mars
CULTURAL ASPECTS
OF LIFE IN HAITI
AMID the tremendous birth pangs
of the new world which was
engendered by the ideological
movement of the eighteenth century and
found expression in two revolutions
the American Revolution of 1774 and the
French Revolution of 1789 some of the
strangest, most paradoxical and most
unexpected events occurred in the West
Indies.
Saint-Domingue, the wealthiest and
most flourishing of the French colonies,
rebelled against France. And after a
struggle which lasted 14 years, amid ruin,
destruction and catastrophe, its people
declared their independence.
But who were these people ?
Were they the owners of the plan¬
tations where sugar-cane, coffee and
indigo were plentifully produced ? Were
they the rich aristocrats, the pompous
bourgeois, the arrogant government
officials who had set up sugar factories,
rum distilleries, coffee factories and tan¬
neries and were drawing enormous
profits from them ? Were they the rank
and file of the comparatively poor the
labourers, tradespeople or craftsmen "
bitterly resentful of their subordination
to the privileged classes ? Were they,
in short, the members of the European
minority, which totalled over 30,000 ?
Not at all. Those embarking upon this
incredible adventure were the amor¬
phous mass of 600,000 black slaves who
had been brought from Africa in the
course of three centuries of slave trad¬
ing, to be used as tools in promoting
the colony's prosperity. The outstand¬
ing fact about their existence was that
they were regarded, not as human beings
whose individual merits served to
reinforce those of the rest of the com¬
munity and so increase its collective
value, but as mere instruments, whose
only useful purpose was to contribute to
the development and exploitation of
France's wealthiest overseas possession.
Real wealth
it was that while, according to
Mr. Barbé de Marbois, the last Fi¬
nancial Administrator of Saint-Domin¬
gue, the total wealth of the colony
amounted in 1790 to 1,487,840,000 livres
tournois equivalent, as calculated
by an economic expert in 1938, to
5 275,537,487,50 (gold standard) the
chief item in this impressive total was
the market value of the Negroes, enter¬
ed in the same account at 1.137.500.000
livres tournois, or, S 210,648,506.25.
Jean Price-Mars is a former di¡ilomat and one
of Haiti's leading liistorians, ethnographers and
sociologists. He is the author of "Ainsi parla
l'oncle", a remarkable booh on Haitian life and
other works surveying the intellectual and cultu¬
ral achievements of Haiti.
It is therefore clear that the real
wealth of San Domingo resided in the
economic power of its slave population.
It was, in fact, at once the condition and
the consequence of the slaves', existence.
When, in 1790, those slaves rose up and
demanded the unconditional restoration
of their former status as free men, they
were, in our opinion, initiating the
greatest revolution the world had ever
seen a revolution whose success
depended upon the savage annihilation
of everything that could serve as a
reminder of the former system of slavery.
No virgin soil
"P UT the destruction was only of a
JJ material nature. For in any event
this new society was born under the spi¬
ritual sign of Western civilization, of
which France was at that time the most
brilliant representative ; and to that
civilization it was indissolubly bound.
From its former mother country it
borrowed, as occasion arose, a super¬
structure of language, political consti¬
tution, administrative organization,
manners, customs, and so on. The
result was a phenomenal feat of socio¬
logical mimetism accomplished by a
magnificent effort of adaptation and
redemption to which Michelet, that seer
among historians, paid tribute by refer¬
ring to the new nation as "black
France".
Can it be said however, that this deli¬
berate transmutation took the form of
complete "integration"?
By no means. And we may be glad of
the fact.
For such a course of events would have '
been contrary to reason. We must
remember that we are dealing here with
human beings and that human willpower
alone is not always enough to bring about
change simply because it is wanted or
needed. Besides, the Negro community
of Saint-Domingue which in 1804 became
the State of Haiti, did not consist of
homogeneous elements brought across
the Atlantic en bloc with no past and
no history. Thus this was no virgin
soil for experimentation providing -a
convenient foundation for whatever
artificial structure the fancy of would-
be nation builders might conceive.
It consisted of men scattered through¬
out the length and breadth of the
colony, men so shackled by their fate of
servitude that they could not even
maintain daily contact and thus agree
on a measure of concerted action.
Moreover, these men were descended
from many different Negro races, ele¬
ments of which had . been brought to
Saint-Domingue by slave traders who
had operated along the entire western
coast of Africa.
In the land of their slavery they had
. all, it is true, been subjected to the same
physical and moral suffering, which
ultimately led them to unite their
demands in a single outburst of rage.
That was the miracle resulting from the
revolutionary era which provided' the
atmosphere, the opportunity and the
moment. But was it not to be feared
that, victory once gained, tribal differ¬
ences would revive ?
This did not happen, because the
members of the community, whatever
their origin, were unconsciously linked
together by another factor, which acted
as a catalyzer of activities and move¬
ments the similarity between their
religious beliefs, of which animism was
the common denominator. It inspired
their actions and outlook and though
hidden in the depths of the collective
consciousness, penetrated even into the

UNESCO COURIER - N» 2 - 1954
ceremonies of the other religion the
Catholic, Apostolic and Roman faith
which had originally been forced upon
the community and later became its
official creed.- As though religious
belief were a mental attitude which
could be decreed by officialdom. The
result was that between the real outlook
of the people and this officially expres¬
sed "conformism" there remained a
discrepancy in time certainly the most
arresting and fascinating of all the prob¬
lems presented by the society based on
the former slaves of Saint-Domingue.
This problem has not yet been solved,
despite the '"Bovarysm" displayed in
orthodox circles.
The more rigidly conventional quarters
refuse to admit the existence of this
duality, closing their eyes to everything
save the semblance of a Western culture,
more in line with their plans and their
conception of' greatness an Ulusory
conception, because they judge civiliza¬
tions according to a "'scale of values".
But the problem exists, and has reper¬
cussions in every sphere of social Ufe.
And it is because sociologists, ethnogra¬
phers, historians and psychologists have,
in recent years, endeavoured to identify
it in the many different externalizations
of our community life that they have
ended by engendering a real literary,
scientific and artistic renaissance move¬
ment in Haiti.
They looked into Haitian folklore and
found, to everyone's surprise and delight,
a whole galaxy of works which reflected,
and stUl reflect, the different aspects of
our culture. Dancing, music, poetry, the
story, and works of science all this
belongs to the choicest harvest of the
people's talents.
It would be tedious and pointless to Ust
these works and their authors here ;
still less is it our intention to suggest
any order of merit for them. We merely
wish to stress the extent to which our
intellectual heritage takes shape in the
externalization of a culture that is pecu¬
liar to ourselves and characteristic of our
society.
We would mention only a few examples
of this. In the first place, could any¬
thing be more truly Haitian than that
special quality of rhythm in our music,
which imprints upon it the indelible
mark of the Negro spirit ?
As we wrote some 20 years ago, "'There
is no denying that even the slightest of
our gestures reveals this expressive
sense of rhythm. Rhythm in walking, to
the "stroke" of arms and shoulders, Uke
that of oars driving a boat forward.
Rhythm in the crushing of grain in
(Continued on page 32)

Kaleidoscope
(Continuée/ from page 9)
wooden mortars, to the accompaniment
of a melancholy chant. Rhythm in the
'work songs' sung by the groups of
peasants, the combites, as their picks
strike down in unison into the rich soil,
preparing it for the coming seed time".
All this, surely, forms part of the law
and essence of our Negro life.
Again, could anything be more typi¬
cally Haitian than the passion for
dancing shared by the great mass of the
population, in town and country alike
for ths religious dances of voodoo and
for the secular dances of the rara (1),
the mahi and the congo ?
Even the least observant onlooker is
struck by the infectious delight displayed
by the spectators during the sacred
dances in which, as we have written
elsewhere, "the gods may, on occasion,
usurp the bodies of mortals and borrow
their voices to proclaim, with delirious
excitement, their right to share in the
ecstatic performance". Dances of en¬
chantment, where the frantic beating of
the drums and the deafening clamour of
voices communicate to the spellbound
audience the madness of crazy, fantastic
motion. Hypnotic dances, where the
performers are so agile and supple that
their bodies seem jointless. Exhausting
dances, where intoxication of sound,
combined with' Bacchic uproar of the
"possessed", smites the quivering, dust-
enveloped audience with what would
appear to be mass dementia.
Another thing too, must be recognized
as an expression of the collective spirit
the new manifestations of "primitive"
painting and sculpture which, thanks to
the initiative ' of the American, Mr. De
Witt Peters, have won recognition as part
of our spiritual heritage.
The work of the Haitian primitive
painters has developed along extraord¬
inarily realistic, and zestful lines, bright
colours and simplicity of design im¬
parting- a special feature to this fresh
evidence of the Haitian people's marked
artistic gifts.
All this establishes the dazzlingly
varied nature of Haitian culture, which
even the most superficial observer cannot
ignore and in which the tourist seeking
"local colour" cannot but delight.
In my- Father's house ,are many
mansions, said the Nazarean.
(I) Peasant carnival.

