Let's use
the atom
for the
good of
mankind

Unesco Courier. Nr 12. 1954
HISTORIC PROPOSAL for international co-operation in the peaceful
development of atomic energy and atomic materials was made by
President Eisenhower to the United Nations General Assembly, on
December 8, 1953. (Photos, above and inset, show President Eisen¬
hower addressing the General Assembly. Seated behind him are,
left to right: Mr. Dag Hammarskjold, Secretary-General of the United
Nations; Madame Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit, of India, President of the
General Assembly at that time; and Mr. Andrew W. Cordier, Executive
Assistant to the Secretary-General. Just under a year later, on December
4, I 954, the General Assembly unanimously voted for the establishment
of an international atomic energy agency and for a United Nations
conference on the peaceful uses of atomic energy. (U.N. photos)
During the years since the end of
World War II in 1945, the power
of the atom seemed too great
for human wisdom. Developed under
military necessity and regarded in a
time of tension as the supreme weapon,
it forced its sponsors into rivalry and
secrecy. Persistent efforts to abolish
its military use failed for lack of
mutual trust between the nations
involved. Instead, its power grew
under the fierce competition and mul¬
tiplied a thousandfold until, if it were
now used in war, the entire human race
would suffer and perhaps perish.
Meanwhile, any wide use of that great
power for the peaceful work of the
world has been impossible because
relaxation of secrecy also requires in¬
ternational control based on mutual
trust. So the world stood still while
the evil grew.
Door to the future
Then, on December 8, 1953, the Pre¬
sident of the United States ad¬
dressed the General Assembly of
the United Nations and opened a new
door to the future. He said in part:
"The United States knows that if
the fearful trend of atomic military
build-up can be reversed, this great
est of destructive forces can be deve¬
loped into a great boon, for the henefit
of all mankind. The United States
knows that peaceful power from atomic
energy is no dream of the future.
That capability, already proved, is
here now today. Who can. doubt, if
the entire body of the world's scientists
and engineers had adequate amounts
of fissionable material with which to
test and develop their ideas, that this
capability would rapidly be transformed
into universal, efficient, and economic
usage?
"To hasten the day when fear of the
atom will begin to disappear from the
minds of the peoples and the govern¬
ments of the East and West, there are
certain steps that can be taken now.
"I therefore make the following pro¬
posal:
"The governments principally involv¬
ed, to the extent permitted by elemen¬
tary prudence, to begin now and conti¬
nue to make joint contributions from
their stockpiles of normal uranium
and fissionable materials to an inter¬
national atomic energy agency. We
would expect that such an agency
would be set up under the aegis of the
United Nations...
"Undoubtedly, initial and early
contributions to this plan would be
small in quantity. However, the pro¬
posal has the great virtue that it can
be undertaken without irritations and
mutual suspicions incident to any
attempt to set up a completely accept¬
able system of world-wide inspection
and control."
Protecting the ' bank '
çç r-pi he atomic energy agency", said
I the President, "could be made
responsible for impounding,
storage, and protection 'of the contri¬
buted fissionable and other materials.
The ingenuity of our scientists will
provide special safe conditions under
which such a bank of fissionable ma¬
terial could be made essentially im¬
mune to surprise seizure.
"The more important responsibility
of this atomic energy agency would be
to devise methods whereby this fission¬
able material would be allowed to serve
the peaceful pursuits of mankind.
"Experts would be mobilized to apply
atomic energy to the needs of agricul¬
ture, medicine, and other peaceful
activities. A special purpose would be
to provide abundant electrical energy
(Cont'd on next page)

Pool i ng atomic
knowledge (Cont'd)
in the power-starved areas of the
world. Thus the contributing powers
would be dedicating some of their
strength to serve the needs rather than
the fears of the world.
"The United States would be more
than willing it would be proud to
take up with others 'principally involv¬
ed the development of plans whereby
such peaceful use of atomic energy
would be expedited.
"Of those 'principally involved' the
Soviet Union must, of course, be one.
"I would be prepared to submit to
the U.S. Congress, and with every
expectation of approval, any such plan
that would:
First. Encourage world-wide in¬
vestigation into the most effective
peace-time uses of fissionable mate¬
rial.
Second. Begin to diminish the
potential destructive power of the
world's stockpiles.
Third. Allow all peoples of all na¬
tions to see that, in this enlightened
age, the great powers of the earth,
both of the East and of the West, are
interested in human aspirations, first
and foremost, rather than in building
up the armaments of war.
Fourth. Open up a new channel
for peaceful discussion and initiate at
least a new approach to the many
difficult problems that must be solved
in both private and public conferences
if the world is to shake off the inertia
imposed by fear and make positive
progress toward peace.
"Against the dark background of the
atomic bomb, the United States does
not wish merely to present strength,
but also the desire and hope for
peace."
A fearful dilemma
This effort to help solve the fearful
atomic dilemma at once inspired
new hope in the hearts of many
nations. In the British House of Com¬
mons, Sir Winston Churchill said that
he considered the speech as one of the
most important events in world history
since the war and referred to it as pos¬
sibly "a turning point in our destiny".
The speech was, however, but a first
step and not a complete solution. In¬
deed, the Soviet delegate, the late
Andrei Y. Vishinsky, soon pointed out
that it did not mention banning of
atomic weapons, would involve only a
small part of the existing atomic ma¬
terials, and, in effect, merely transfer¬
red the. discussion to a new aspect of
the problem. But in most nations this
was nevertheless considered a major
step in advance. Mrs. Vij aya Lakshmi
Pandit of India, then President of the
United Nations General Assembly,
stated that "the proposal was of the
highest importance and deserves the
careful consideration of all the gov¬
ernments of the world. It is something
my country welcomes."
Months of careful consideration by
governments, scientists and leaders of
thought raised no doubts as to the
value of atomic energy in the peaceful
ways of life. The questions related
only to the other and deeper purpose
of the proposal: the extent of interna¬
tional co-operation. Did it mean an
international "pool" of atomic mate¬
rials? If so, which nations would
contribute and which receive? Did it
mean that an international staff in an
agency of the United Nations would be
in charge of operations and research?
If so, from which nations would they
come and how would their expert secret
knowledge be safeguarded? Above all,
did the proposal imply any reduction
of atomic armaments?
This last point was the major ques¬
tion raised by the Soviet Government
on December 21, 1953, in stating that
its attitude was: "to turn this great
discovery of the human mind not
against civilization, but for its thor¬
ough progress; not for mass extermi¬
nation of people, but for their peaceful
needs; for thorough safeguarding and
raising the welfare of the population."
(Cont'd on page 8)
ÛTflMIP PíllAiTR FílR PFflPF is symbo,ized ¡n the coat of arms adopted
nlUlTlIU rUVlLK füll iCntlL by Britain's newly created Atomic Energy
Authority. Savage heraldic animals chained to the earth represent the power of
the atom brought under control. The stars on each animal having a total of 92 points,
symbolize uraniumNo. "92" in the list of chemical elements. Inverted triangle
on the shield is a heraldic symbol called a "pile" the first name for an atomic reactor
or power furnace. The zig-zag lines represent the electricity developed from
atomic energy. On top of the helmet, which is a symbol of co-operation, a
sun signifies the benign power of the atom. The bird inside is a sign taken from the
crest of the late Lord Rutherford, one of the world's most distinguished pioneers
in nuclear research. The motto chosen by the Atomic Energy Authority, which
forms part of this coat of arms, means : " The most from the smallest."

Unesco Courier. Nr 12. 1954
? lâ -¿ ATOMIG POWERHOUSES
A few months ago the Soviet authorities announced
that the world's first electric power station to make
use of atomic energy had begun operating in the
U.S.S.R. on June 27, 1954. The plant, with an output
of 5,000 kilowatts, provides electricity for neighbour¬
ing industrial and agricultural installations. Soviet
scientists and engineers, it was also stated, are working
on the construction of other atomic power plants
whose outputs range from 50,000 to 100,000 kilo¬
watts. Drawing on left, taken from " Teknika Molo-
dieji ", (a Russian popular science and technology
magazine for young people) represents " one type
of electric power station using nuclaar energy.
The key accompanying the drawing describes the
different elements as follows : (I) atomic reactor
(2) heat exchanger (3) steam condenser (4) main
steam pipes (5) condenser pumps (6) turbo-generator
(7) cooling towers (8) water cooling tank (9) transfor¬
mer station (10) pumping station (II) workshops
( 1 2) stores ( I 3) administrative buildings. Other coun¬
tries, in particular the United States, and Britain,
have for some time past been working on projects
to use heat provided by atomic reactors to generate
electricity. On September 6, 1954, work was
begun on a commercial atomic power plant in Pennsyl¬
vania that is expected to provide electricity for
100,000 people. Artist's sketch (below) shows how
two nuclear reactors might be used to produce elec¬
trical power from atomic energy. Such an arran¬
gement might be one of the applications leading from
an experimental programme now underway in the
United States. Atomic fission in reactors, (centre,
and lower centre) would produce heat which would
be transferred by liquid sodium through primary and
secondary coolant systems to produce steam in the
steam generators, (right). Steam would be used to
power turbo-generators, (top) to produce electri¬
city. About 200,000 kilowatts of electricity could
be generated. (Photo North American Aviation, Inc.)
COOLING TOWERS
STEAM GENERATORS
SECONDARY COOLANT
SYSTEM
U.S.A.

Pooling atomic
knowledges co ntc/j ^
THE UNITED NATIONS SCENE: Architectural and
decorative beauty of the world's "workshop for peace"
United Nations Headquarters in New York is high¬
lighted by photographs on these pages. (U.N. photos)
The Soviet Government expressed its
readiness to take- part in negotiations
on the United States proposal but
would expect that a proposal of its
own would be considered at the same
time, namely that:" The States taking
part in the agreement, guided by their
wish for reducing international ten¬
sion, undertake solemn and uncondi¬
tional pledges not to use atomic,
hydrogen or other weapons of mass
extermination."
This disarmament proposal would
return the discussion to the military
area where no progress had been found
possible in seven years and which the
United States had tried to avoid. Thus
sentiment grew in the United States to
proceed without Soviet participation.
Mr. David Lilienthal, a private citi¬
zen but also the former chairman of
the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission,
for instance, suggested, late in Decem¬
ber, that there was no time to be lost,
that a United Nations agency could
have the plan in operation by August
1954, preferably with Soviet participa¬
tion but, if necessary, without.
He proposed that an experimental
power plant be located- at Brussels and '
an international atomic research cen¬
tre at Geneva. He listed the possible
participants as Great Britain and the
United States, which have stocks of
high-energy or "fissionable" materials;
Canada, Belgium and Australia, which
have large quantities of natural ura¬
nium; Brazil and India because they
have large deposits of thorium which
can also be converted into atomic fuel;
Norway, Holland and France, which
have a supply of radio-active materials
for research and highly competent
leaders in the atomic sciences.
But private discussions between the
U.S. and the Soviet Governments
continued from January 2 until March
19, 1954, when the U.S. proposals took
a more definite form in a memorandum
from the U.S. Secretary of State to the
U.S.S.R. Ambassador at Washington.
They included:
Formation of an international atomic
energy agency "under the terms of a
treaty among the participating nations"
which would be financed by contribu
tions from the member states; its faci¬
lities would include storage of nuclear
materials, control laboratories, admi¬
nistrative offices and such facilities
"as might in time be necessary" for
education and training, research and
development, fuel fabrication and che¬
mical processing!
Again the weeks passed until in April
and early May, Soviet Foreign Minister
Vyacheslav M. Molotov and U.S. Secre¬
tary of State John Foster Dulles
conferred at Geneva and again failed
to agree on the prohibition of atomic
weapons as a preliminary to the estab¬
lishment of the atomic power agency.
This question was then referred to a
new sub-committee of the United Na¬
tions Disarmament Commission which
met; without result in London in
May. This seemed to mark the end of
President Eisenhower's proposal to the
United Nations as well as the failure
of the Soviet effort for atomic disarm¬
ament.
As a result, American thought turned
again to the development of peace¬
ful atomic power without Soviet co¬
operation and even without the United
Nations. An emissary of the Atomic
Energy Commission visited Brazil, Uru¬
guay, Peru and Chile in August to
discuss the feasibility of small atomic
power plants in those countries.
On September 6, President Eisenhow¬
er participated in the start of con¬
struction on a commercial atomic power
plant in Pennsylvania that is expected
to provide electricity for 100,000 people.
On this occasion he announced that
the United States had agreed with "a
number of other nations to go ahead
now with the formation of an interna¬
tional agency which will foster the
growth and spread of the new atomic
technology for peaceful use... We hope
that no nation will long stand aloof
from the work of this agency."
The President mentioned negotia¬
tions to this end as beginning with Ca¬
nada and Belgium and the press re¬
ported that Britain, Australia, South
Africa and France were also included.
It was widely noted, however, that
there had been no mention of the
United Nations. Three days later,
Admiral Lewis S. Strauss, Chairman of
the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission,
stated that the United States was
preparing to call an international
conference of nuclear scientists in 1955
in which all interested countries,
including the Soviet Union, would be
invited to participate.
But on September 23, Secretary Dulles
again appealed to the United Nations
General Assembly in these words:
"The United States Is determined

that President Eisenhower's proDOsal
shall not languish until it dies. We
are determined that it shall be nurtur¬
ed and developed. And we shall press
on in close partnership with those na¬
tions which, inspired by the ideals of
the United Nations, can make this
great new force a tool of humanitarian-
ism and of statesmanship and not
merely a fearsome addition to the ar¬
senal of war.
United States is here proposing
an agenda item which will enable us to
report further on our efforts to explore
and to develop the vast possibilities for
the peaceful uses of atomic energy.
These efforts have been and will be
directed primarily toward the follow¬
ing ends:
(1) The creation of an international
agency, whose initial membership will
include nations from all regions of the
world. And it is hoped that such an
agency will start its work as early as
next year.
(2) The calling of an international
scientific conference to consider this
whole vast subject, to meet in the
spring of 1955, under the auspices of
the United Nations.
(3) The opening early next year, in
the United States, of a reactor training
school where
students- from
abroad may
learn the
working p r i n -
ciples of atomic
energy with
specific regard to
its peacetime
uses.
(4) The invi¬
tation to a
substantial
number of me¬
dical and sur¬
gical experts
from abroad to
participate in the
work of our
cancer hospitals
in which atomic
energy tech¬
niques are among
the most hopeful
approaches to
controlling this
menace to
mankind. "I
would like to
make it perfectly clear that our plann¬
ing excludes no nation from partici¬
pation in this great venture. As our
proposals take shape, all nations inter¬
ested in participating and willing to
take on the responsibilities of mem¬
bership will be welcome to join with
us in the planning and the execution
of this programme."
The response to the American
proposal before the General Assembly
was immediate and favourable. After
almost ten months of delay, -during
which the fear of the atom had grown
throughout the world, the members of
the Assembly showed eagerness to
make a start in the opposite direction.
On the following day, Mr. Vishinsky
expressed the approval of the Soviet
Delegation for incorporating the Ame¬
rican statement in the agenda and
asked for unanimous approval by the
General Assembly in favour of studying
the United States proposal. The report
mentioned by Mr. Dulles was immedia¬
tely referred to the Political and Secur¬
ity Committee of the General Assem¬
bly. In a few days, a number of nations
endorsed the U.S. proposal.
Then, on October 1, a study of the
proposal was begun by a special UN
committee, headed by Dr. Ralph J.
Bunche, who has been named as Un¬
der-Secretary of the U.N. Secretariat.
At the same time, Mr. Henry Cabot
Lodge, Jr., permanent U.S. represent¬
ative at the United Nations, said at a
press conference that the United States
would submit a resolution to the Gene¬
ral Assembly asking the United Nations
to call a conference of scientists and
others to settle the details of the new
agency. He said that the United States
would suggest that the entire pro¬
gramme be placed in the hands of a
new agency similar to the World Health
Organization, for instance, which would
decide on its own relations with the
United Nations.
On November 5, Mr. Lodge addressed
the Political and Security Committee
to propose the organization of such an
agency. A draft of the resolution was
submitted jointly by Australia, Belgium,
Canada, France, South Africa, Britain
and the United States. The resolution
suggested that a technical conference
be held not later than August 1955 at a
place to be selected by the Secretary-
General and an advisory committee.
On November 12, Mr. Vishinsky ad¬
dressed the Com¬
mittee and stat¬
ed that he would
vote for the reso¬
lution provided
the proposed in¬
ternational agen¬
cy were placed
under the U.N.
Security Council
instead of having
the separate
status of a spe¬
cialized agency.
This was on the
ground that the
production of
atomic materials
for peaceful pur¬
poses would in¬
crease the amount
available for
weapons and that
the production
of radio-isotopes
would itself have
military impor¬
tance.
This Soviet pro¬
posal lead to further long discussions.
Unexpected action by the United
States on November 15 had the effect
of bringing the discussion to a conclu¬
sion. On that day, Mr. Lodge told the
Political and Security Committee that
the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission
had allocated 100 kilogrammes (220 lbs)
of fissionable material for use by the
proposed international agency. This
material could be used in a considerable
number of small experimental atomic
reactors, but it could not be put to use
in the form of weapons.
On the next day, Anthony Nutting,
Head of the British Delegation to the
General Assembly, announced that the
British Government would hold avail¬
able 20 kilogrammes (44 pounds) to be
used by the international agency as
fuel in experimental atomic reactors.
The composition of the advisory com¬
mittee for the creation of the interna¬
tional agency was announced as: Uni¬
ted States, Soviet Union, Britain,
France, Canada, Brazil and India, and
Mr. Vishinsky accepted for the U.S.S.R.
the invitation to serve on this com
mittee. This was taken to mean that
the Soviet Union would participate in
the conference planned for 1955.
Finally,- on November 23, the Political
and Security Committee of the United
Nations voted unanimously to endorse
the proposal as made by the seven
nations: United States, Britain, France,
Canada, Australia, Belgium and South
Africa. The resolution thus unani¬
mously carried expresses the hope that
"international co-operation in develop¬
ing and expanding the peaceful uses
of atomic energy will assist in lifting
the burdens of hunger, poverty and di¬
sease" and suggests that "once the
agency is established, it negotiate an
appropriate form of agreement with
the United Nations, similar to those of
the Specialized Agencies".
respect to the international
conference on the peaceful uses of ato¬
mic energy, the decision was made that
"an international technical conference
should be held under the auspices of
the United Nations" in which all Mem¬
ber States of the United Nations or of
the Specialized Agencies would be invi¬
ted to participate "in order to explore
the means of developing the peaceful
uses of atomic energy through interna¬
tional co-operation, to study the deve¬
lopment of atomic power", and to
consider related questions in the tech¬
nical areas and fundamental sciences.
The resolution requested the Secre¬
tary-General to call such a conference
not later than August 1955, and sugges¬
ted preliminary consultations "with
the competent specialized agencies, in
particular fao, who and unesco".
One final formal action was needed,
namely the approval of this committee
action by the entire membership of the
General Assembly. This was done by
unanimous vote on December 4, just
under a year after President Eisen¬
hower made his historic proposal.
