UNESCO COURIER. _ N» 7. 1954
N December 21, 1872, the 2,300 ton wooden
corvette H.M.S. Challenger sailed out of
Portsmouth, England, to explore "condi¬
tions of the Deep Sea throughout all the
Great Oceanic Basins". During three
and a half years she sailed and steamed
nearly 70,000 nautical miles around the globe, and
made observations by soundings at 362 stations scatter-
- ed over the 140 million square miles of the ocean
floor. When she returned to England in May 1876,
she had sounded the depths of every ocean except the
Arctic and had laid the foundation for the modern
science of oceanography.
The scientific expedition,^ coming only 40 years
after the famous voyage of Darwin aboard the Beagle
(1831-36) aroused considerable public attention. It
proved beyond question that life existed at, great
depths in the sea, disproved the myth of the lost conti¬
nent of Atlantis, charted the first systematic plot of
ocean currents and temperatures, showed that the
temperature in each zone was fairly constant in all
seasons , and charted what is ' still today our basic
map of the world under the seas.
Before the Challenger only a few isolated soundings
had been taken of the ocean depths , and it was generally
believed that nothing could live in the cold , black waters
of the deep sea.* Even the British biologist Edward
Forbes, one of the first men to take a scientific interest
in the ocean depths held the belief that no life existed
below 1,500 feet. A century ago he wrote: "As we
descend deeper and deeper into this region, the inha¬
bitants become more and more modified, and fewer
and fewer, indicating our approach to an abyss where
life is either extinguished or exhibits but a few sparks
to mark its lingering presence."
But Forbes urged more exploration of "this vast
deep-sea region" to settle the question definitely, and
his own pioneer work in the Aegean Sea led the way
for the Challenger expedition. In 1818 worms were
brought up by an Arctic expedition from 1 ,000 fathoms ;
in 1860, a cable in the Mediterranean bed at 1,200
fathoms was found encrusted with corals and other
animals.
Then came the voyage of the Challenger. "From
bottoms lying under miles of water", writes Rachel
L. Carson in her now famous The Sea Around Us,
"from silent deeps carpeted with red clay ooze, and
from all the Hghtless Intermediate depths, net-haul
after net-haul of strange and fantastic creatures came
up and were spilled out on the decks. Poring over the
weird beings thus brought up for the first time into the
light of day, beings no man had ever seen before, the
Challenger scientists realized that life existed even
on the deepest floor of the abyss."
The Challenger was fitted with everything that could
be carried in the way of appliances for scientific research
at the time. Its equipment included sounding
instruments, water bottles, undersea thermometers,
144 miles of sounding rope and 12.5 miles of sounding
wire; sinkers, nets, dredges, and "spirits of wine"
for preserving specimens. A fully equipped zoolo¬
gical laboratory was set up on board. The Royal
Society drew up a complete scheme of instructions for
the voyage, captained by George Nares and led by
. Charles Wyville Thomson.
For a year the Challenger fitted with auxiliary
steam power in addition to her sails, explored the
Atlantic depths, crossing from the Canary Islands
to the West Indies, skirting the American side as far
north as Nova Scotia, then recrossing the" Atlantic
to the Azores. She then sailed to the Brazilian coast
and crossed the southern Atlantic to the Cape of Good
Hope. From there, the Challenger headed into the
southernmost part of the Indian Ocean and was the
first steamship to cross the Antarctic Circle. After
reaching the ice-pack she was caught in a dense snow¬
storm and crashed into an iceberg (losing the jib boom
and other rigging, later recovered.) The Challenger
then proceeded to Australia, Fiji, the Philippines,
Japan, China and the Sandwich Islands.
On March 23, 1875, off the Marianas Islands, the
expedition made its deepest sounding 26,850 feet.
With a little luck, the Challenger might have disco¬
vered the deepest known place in the ocean, the Maria¬
nas Trench, some 200 miles southwest of Guam. It
was a second H.M.S. Challenger that obtained a
sounding of 35,640 feet in October 1951, 200 feet
deeper than the Mindanao Trench off the Philippines
reported by a German cruiser in 1927.
After sailing due south to the Tropic of Capricorn,
the Challenger expedition took an easterly course to
Valparaiso, Chile, made its way into the south Atlantic
again through the Straits of Magellan and ended
its remarkable voyage in England on May 24, 1876.
The narrative of the expedition has been told in popu¬
lar form in Moseley's: "A Naturalist on the Challen¬
ger." Thecomplete account of the scientific results of the
voyage was published over a period of ten years in 50
volumes , the first of which contains an Interesting
"Narrative of the Cruise".
