RED BLOOD CELL. This is a normal human red blood corpuscle
photographed with an electronic microscope and magnified
32,000 times. To try to understand the structure of cancer cells
scientists are today carefully studying all types of cell life. It is
a slow and difficult job of penetrating the secrets of a world that
is still full of mystery.
CHICKEN EMBRYOS. Scientist at French Institute of
Cancer Research injects chicken embryo with a special cancer
yirus and will study results. In many parts of the world
today the resources and ingenuity of research workers are¿¡
being applied through varying techniques in an effort to
vanquish this malady one day.

science knows about it today
by François Le Lionnais
A proposal that Unesco should Initiate interna¬
tional action in the struggle against cancer in
co-operation with the World Health Organiza¬
tion was made by Unesco's Executive Board
at a meeting in Paris last April. The Unesco
General Conference, which meets in November, will
be asked to approve a project for international co¬
operation in biological, physical and chemical research
aimed at fighting cancer. The proposal was made by
Professor Laugier who is a member of the Unesco
Executive Board and President of the French Commis¬
sion for Technical and Scientific Research. Professor
Laugier said that international institutions should try
to remedy the dispersion of effort of research workers
all over the world. The Courier has asked M. François
Le Lionnais, President of the French Science Writers
Association to explain briefly what science knows
today about this world scourge.
CANCER is one of the major
concerns of present-day medi¬
cine. Hardly a day passes
without the publication of -articles,
often highly sensational, about the
disease. Many such articles and
even certain books have served to
mislead, a large number of people and
have actually done more harm than
good.
What are the facts about cancer?
Every living being consists of one or
of many living cells; the body of man
is composed of several thousand
millions, grouped in tissues which
form the various specialized organs.
These individual . cells are constantly
dying arid being replaced by new
cells. In the human adult, this repla¬
cement is rigorously exact one cell
forone-cell so that the total number
for an individual who is in normal good
health, hardly varies at all.
It sometimes happens, however,
that certain cells "break the law" and
begin to multiply in excess of the
body's needs. These "extra" cells
constitute a group which is called a
tumour.
A malady as old -
as humanity
AGREAT many such tumours remain
localized and cause little if any
trouble, such as warts which are
called "benign tumours". On the other
hand, as noted by Galen the Greek
physician as early as the second
century A. D., cancer is a "malignant
tumour".' The multiplication of cells
does not remain localized ; the new
cells invade nearby tissues and organs,
choking them, causing haemorrhages,
obstructing open passages, preventing
essential parts of the body from
performing their normal functions, and
finally causing their destruction. When
cells with this diabolic capacity for
multiplication enter into the blood or
lymph, they may be carried to more
remote parts of the body, where they
start new cancer colonies. This pheno¬
menon is called a metastasis. When
metastasis has already begun before
surgery takes place at the original site,
there is often a new outbreak.
The word "cancer" covers a series of
ailments having.different forms, which
may attack the skin, the glands, the
blood, etc. All the organs of the body
are susceptible, but the digestive tube
among men and the reproductive
organs of women -are most vulnerable.

One person out of ten
now dies of cancer
IN THE LABORATORY cancer cells from different animal
tissues are cultivated to permit scientists to study cell growth and
test action of various chemicals on cells. Healthy cell tissue is also
used in research to produce cancer artificially.
Cancers of the respiratory organs and
of the mouth are less frequent.
The disease appears to be as old as
humanity. Hippocrates, the "father"
of médecine, described it during the
fourth century B.C. and gave it a
name which means "crab". Still more
ancient texts from Egypt and India
also mention it. It is reasonable to
suppose that cancer was widespread in
prehistoric times, but as it attacks
flesh far more often than bone there
is little evidence of this in fossils.
It is said that cancer is increasing,
as a result of civilized modes of life,
and statistics have been -published
indicating an increase . of cancer pre¬
valence In modern countries. These
statistics are correct, but they do not
necessarily prove what is claimed.
Heart disease a
greater killer
THEY do prove three things: mo¬
dern diagnostic procedures have
improved, the average life span
has increased, and the fight against
most other maladies has been increas¬
ingly successful. Many people who
die of cancer do so because they have
lived beyond the time when, in previous
centuries, they would have been struck
down by other diseases. We - should
add that, contrary to widespread belief,
diseases of the heart and blood vessels
continue to claim more victims than
cancer, especially in the most developed
countries of the world. '
Cancer is not exclusively a human
affliction. Not only has it been noted
and studied in animals of many dif¬
ferent species, but similar phenomena
have been observed in various plants.
Microscopic examination of cancer
tissue, and research in physics, che¬
mistry and biology, have provided
of enormous value, but
these direct methods have not solved
the fundamental enigma. Research
has also turned to the indirect but
powerful weapon of statistics, in the
hope of discovering significant cor¬
relations between the affliction and
various factors which may be relevant.
Is cancer related, for example, to cli¬
mate, to diet, to various ways of life,
to age, sex or occupation? Many
studies have been undertaken to
answer such questions.
Thus far, only some conclusions are
clear. One study noted that Negroes
are relatively immune to cancer of the
skin; that stomach cancer is especially
common in Japan arid Indonesia;
that cancer of the liver is encountered
most frequently in tropical areas.
One must be very careful however in
interpreting such statistics because
countries having the same climate and
the same ways of
life sometimes pre¬
sent inexplicable
differences in the
incidence of can- .
cer cases.
At the outset of
these studies, it
was believed that
cancer chiefly
affects the most
highly developed
countries with
temperate climates
and is rare in very
cold or very warm
countries. This
belief resulted lar¬
gely from the diffi
culty in obtaining exact statistics in
under-developed countries, and it
appears now that cancer occurs in all
latitudes and afflicts all the peoples of
the earth, with a terrible indifference.
Fifty is the
dangerous age
I
T is generally agreed that about
10 to 15 % of all deaths throughout
the world are due to cancer. This
means that one out of seven to ten
people dies of cancer.
Cancer affects both sexes in about
equal proportions and may affect
individuals of any age, though its
incidence appears greatest at about
the age of 50.
Correlations have been noted bet¬
ween the frequency of cancer and
certain occupations. At the end of
the 18th Century, the English surgeon
Percival Pott described a cancer caused
by the rubbing of soot on, the skin oí
young chimney-sweeps. This is a

cause which is disappearing in our
time along with the occupation. A
high incidence has also been noted
among workers in various industries
who handle certain hydrocarbons, such
as tar, pitch, and some of the mineral
oils and dyes.
Cancer, houses a
superstition
THE belief that certain streets or
houses are responsible for cancer
is only a matter, of superstition.
Sometimes this belief is .based upon
unfounded rumours; sometimes there
may be many cases in a particular
place, but not more than can be
accounted for by simple coincidence.
Cancer . unhappily is so widespread
that it is not surprising to find various
victims living at the same time, in
the same house or in the same street.
What are the basic causes of cancer?
How and. why does a healthy cell
transform itself into a cancer cell? At
present, little is known in answer to
these questions. The idea that it is
due to irritation of the tissues is not
accepted by most experts. Other
theories most frequently advanced
today are (1) that cancer is the result
of a cellular upset in the embryo stage
of life which survives through the
years, (2) a virus infection, (3) the
sudden transformation of cells into a
different type which is referred to as
somatic mutation.
Scientists hope that the electronic
microscope, or even more powerful
instruments which will permit explora¬
tion of the molecules of the cell, may
soon reveal more definite information.
Though the causes of cancer are
unknown, the actual growth has come
to be better known through the use
of very short electro-magnetic waves
(ultra-violet, X-rays and gamma rays).
Ultra-violet rays, as such or in sun
light for example'' have given rise to
cancers of the skin- tissue. X-rays
and gamma rays have been responsible
- for the so-called "radiologist's cancer"
affecting doctors, handlers of radio¬
active substances, X-ray technicians,
who are repeatedly exposed to such
rays. (1) In the same category are
cancers which may be produced by'
radio-activity released by atom ex¬
plosions.
A number of chemical substances,
known as carcinogens may stimulate
the development of cancer, tar being
one of the best known. Other subs¬
tances such as the female hormone
called folliculine may play a secondary
role in stimulating its development;
still others may retard it.
In some cases, cancer may be pro¬
duced by a .virus. This has been
experimentally demonstrated with
various animals, but the role of bac¬
teria or viruses in human cancer
continues to be uncertain, though
many eminent scientists are studying
the question. There is no positive
evidence relating . cancer to repeated
minor _ burns, irritations caused by
"badly fitting dentures, etc.
No chance of
contagion
WHATEVER the origin of cancer,
one thing appears to be defi¬
nitely established. It is not
contagious. Except in. one particular
case, a sarcoma of birds, innoculation
with pulverized cancerous _ tissue has
not resulted in cancer. The question
of heredity is more complicated. It
does not appear that cancer itself is
hereditary, but it does seem likely that
a " pre-disposition toward it may be
inherited.
(1) Patients under examination or treatment
by such rays are in no danger from the short
periods of exposure prescribed by physicians.
UNESCO COURIER. N"" 4-5. 1954
It is common for cancer to begin
without any obvious symptoms. In its
first stages, ordinarily, there is no fever
and no pain, a fact which has rendered
diagnosis so difficult. Certain in¬
dications call for examination, but they
should not encourage needless fear,
because examination will often prove
that there is no need for alarm.
A
CELL FROM CHICKEN
CANCER (sarcoma) cultivated
independently and magnified
10,000 times (Left). Note the
highly complex structure of the
cell. Right, another cancer cell
of the same type magnified
26,000 times reveals myste¬
rious black dots which may hold
a clue to the cause of this parti¬
cular type of cancer in chickens.
Delay is likely
to be fatal
MONG these indications are
swellings or small painless tu-
- mours, such as warts or beauty
marks which change quickly; haemorr¬
hages, even when painless; persistent
hoarseness; chronic digestive disorder,
stubborn constipation; anaemia; loss of
weight; unusual whiteness or yellow¬
ness of the skin. One should repeat,
there is nothing in itself alarming
about such symptoms and they do not
justify a cancerphobia which can make
life miserable for those who are affect¬
ed and for their families and friends.
These are simply indications that it is
worthwhile to consult a doctor, who
will make the necessary examinations
and, if necessary, refer the matter to
a specialist or to a cancer clinic. One
of the most usual tests is a biopsy, or
microscopic examination, of a piece of
the suspected tissue. When possible,
there is also an X-ray examination of
the organs affected.
One can never act too quickly in
detecting a cancer. It is most impor¬
tant to note that a cancer discovered
at the beginning is nowadays almost
always curable. Delay, however, is
very likely to be fatal. Cancer is one;
of the rare maladies which does not
heal itself; sooner or later it is fatal if
it has not been treated in time. "
As long as the causes - of cancer
remain unknown, knowledge of its
treatment will remain incomplete.
The present strategy of
defence against the affliction
is based mainly on pre¬
ventive measures of hygiene
and cleanliness, and know¬
ledge of the symptoms to
which we must pay attention.
Until regular examinations
are compulsory, even for
those who believe they are
in good health, it is urgent
to carry on public informa¬
tion campaigns to advise the
public of the necessity for
early diagnosis.
Despite the existing gaps
in our knowledge, there are
nevertheless treatments
which are successful for

The need to link
world-wide research
certain cancers, especially those which
are discovered early. Year after year,
these treatments become more varied
and successful. First of all there is
the surgical removal of the tumour.
This is sometimes completely success¬
ful although, in some cases, it is not
sufficient to prevent a regrowth. For
this reason, operations are sometimes
completed by irradiation treatment.
Magnetic passes
and incantations
THE Curie treatment by the use of
gamma rays emitted by radium
and various radio-active isotopes
of cobalt, phosphorus or iodine, as well
as X-ray treatments, often has decisive
results. Electro-coagulation and hor¬
mone therapy are sometimes remark¬
ably successful too. Encouraging, if
not definitive, results have recently
been obtained through chemical treat¬
ment. The latter offers very great
hopes for the future but more extensive
research is needed, substantial funds
and many highly qualified researchers.
Whatever the treatment, it can only
be carried out under the direction of
a qualified specialist. It is imperative
to reject all other treatments. This is
true not only of "'magnetic passes",
incantations, etc., but also of homoeo¬
pathic remedies and nature cures.
At present, there is no serum and no
vaccine which is in any way effective
against cancer. In cancer, more
than in any other illness, charlatan¬
ism is fatal because it delays recourse
to a qualified specialist and can trans¬
form a cancer, curable at the begin¬
ning, into an inevitably fatal illness.
In 1791, England set an example for
the World by launching a public cam¬
paign against cancer, setting up a
special service for patients in a London
hospital. Since the end of the 19th
century, the scientific offensive against
the disease has enormously expanded.
Today, all advanced countries have
established treatment centres and
scientific institutes. , Development of
these national organizations led natur¬
ally to concerted international action
and the creation in 1933 of the Inter¬
national Union against Cancer. . The
Union, with headquarters in Paris, has
42 national affiliates and publishes a
quarterly bulletin in six languages.
Its sixth International Cancer Congress
will be held at Sao-Paulo, Brazil, in
July of this year.
This is the framework in which in¬
ternational action against cancer was
discussed at the recent Unesco meeting. .
Such action would not be a duplica¬
tion of the work being done by exist¬
ing national and international bodies,
who are building new hospitals and
cancer clinics, launching extensive
education campaigns for cancer pre¬
vention and detection. The proved
methods of treatment must also be
generally applied and preventive
measures more widely encouraged.
From mathematics
. to biochemistry
BUT all this is still not enough.
Only scientific research is likely
to strike the disease at its roots
and finally vanquish it.
But national and international
research today is still operating in far
from perfect conditions. Funds are
limited, research work is not suffi-
CANCER CELLS ENTERING the blood may be
carried to remote parts of the body and start new
cancer colonies. Here scientists have magnified a
drop of healthy human blood 12,250 times with
electronic microscope. It is hoped that with the
electronic microscope, capable of magnifying matter
ciently co-ordinated, and widely differ¬
ing sciences must be mobilized in this
highly complex battle. These range
from, the most abstract forms of ma¬
thematics to exacting kinds of cell
studies, from physics to chemistry and
from biophysics to biochemistry.
One example of this interplay of the
different branches of science is the
research into carcinogens (cancer sti¬
mulating substances) which has made
much progress in recent years. Cer¬
tain chemicals that occur in tars are
able to produce cancer, because of the
nature of electron distribution within
ALL CELLS MULTIPLY by splitting
into two. These remarkable photographs
show three successive stages of a healthy
living cell becoming two cells. Left, cell
has taken a ball shape and chromosomes,
carriers of heredity, are grouped in middle.
Centre photo shows chromosomes sepa¬
rated in two groups and cell pinching at the
waist. Right, cell separates into two,
each with new. nucleus of chromosomes.
Bottom right another cell begins to split.
' (Photos M. Chèvremont, Institute of Histo¬
logy, University of Liège.)
+r*f,
UNESCO COURIER. N"" 4-5. 1954
up to 300,000 times and other even more potent
instruments, science may obtain more precise infor¬
mation on the structure of cancer cells and the cause
of cancer itself. (This photo and those on four
previous pages are published by permission of the
French Institute of Cancer Research at Villejuif.)
their molecules.- The role of these
electrons was established by making
use of a theory of pure physicswave-
mechanics which itself requires the
use of higher mathematics.
This inter-dependence of the many
forms of science and the need for a
great increase in the number of spe¬
cialists and in the means at their dis¬
posal is a problem transcending na¬
tional frontiers and calls for action on
a similar scale.
The 20th century ought to be the
century of man's victory over cancer.

