UNESCO COURIER N°" 8-9 1954
THOUGH SPREAD OUT OVER AN IM-
MENSE- TERRITORY ranging from the Aleu¬
tian Islands in the Pacific to Greenland, the
Eskimos have managed to preserve an' amazing
unity of language and culture. This photograph
of a woman carrying her child In Greenland could
well have been the inspiration for the statuette"
executed by an Eskimo artist in Canada. (Photo
at right copyright Paul Emile Victor, Collection
Musée de l'Homme, Paris).
MANY years ago, I excavated an
old Eskimo site in West Green¬
land. Human bones were scat¬
tered where the sleeping platform had
been and all sorts of implements
appeared during our- digging. Local
tradition told us that the inhabitants
had starved to death during a par¬
ticularly severe winter. Some years
later, when travelling with some
Eskimos over the Barren Grounds in
arctic Canada, we had ourselves to go
four days without food.
The Eskimos, living at the northern
boundary of the inhabited earth, have
always been in danger of extermina¬
tion. The failing of the hunt, a violent
epidemic, or a case of ptomaine poi¬
soning might lay a whole settlement
waste even in Greenland, where living
conditions are easier than in the arctic
regions of Canada.
It should be remembered that
although Greenland is the largest


the eskimos
Denmark's formula for
world's northern outpost
by Professor Kaj Birket-Smith.
19

NEW SOCIAL IDEALS FOR GREENLAND'S ESKIMOS
island in the world, about ten times
the area of Great Britain, little more
than eleven per cent of its surface is
free of ice and still less is inhabitable.
In 1953 the native population
amounted to 23,360. By far the greater
part, mostly of mixed descent, lives on
the west coast south of Melville Bay.
Farther north, in the Thule District,
the so-called Polar Eskimos number
only 372, while 1,588 live on the east
coast in the Angmagssalik District and
around Scoresby Sound.
Except for the period from 1860. to
1880, the population has been constant¬
ly growing for the last 150 years, and
the annual increase is at present consi¬
derably greater than in Denmark
proper. There can be no doubt that
this gratifying state of affairs is, to a
great extent, the result of efforts made
by Denmark.
For nearly two hundred years after
the medieval Norse settlements in
Greenland had disappeared, only a
few British and Danish expeditions and
some Dutch whalers visited its coasts.
However, whaling proved profitable. In
the early 18th century, the increasing
number of whalers in Davis Strait
meant a new threat to the existence of
the Eskimos, not only because of the
recklessness of the crews, but also be¬
cause they lured the Eskimos into
Professor KAJ BIRKET-SMITH, head curator of Den¬
mark's National Museum at Copenhagen, is a veteran
o/ expeditions to Greenland, Alaska and other regions
north of the Arctic Circle. He is today considered one
of the world's leading authorities on the Eskimos and
is the author of many books on the subject. <
selling products which the Greenlanders
needed for their own use.
However, when Hans Egede,' a Nor¬
wegian Lutheran missionary, came to
Greenland in 1721 with the support of
the Danish Government, he introduced
a new era in the history of the Arctic.
His object from the beginning was to
revive the belief in the Gospel among
the descendants of the Norsemen who,
according to general belief, were still
to be found in the country. For good
reasons, this came to nothing ; instead,
he threw himself with zeal into the
conversion of the Eskimos.
It was the intention that the expen¬
ses involved in this work should be co¬
vered by trade, and in the course of
half a century, trading and mission
posts were spread over the west coast.
Much later, posts on the east coast and
at Thule were established.
At first, various private companies
attempted to carry on the trade, but
they suffered heavy losses. In 1774, it
was taken over by the Danish crown.
This made it a government monopoly,
and it was forbidden for others "to na¬
vigate to or trade with the said country
Greenland and adjacent islands, places,
and harbours."
Right from the beginning, the go¬
vernment trade had quite a special
character owing to the fact that, as
expressed in the important Instructions
of 1782, the leading principle was to be
the welfare -of the Greenlanders, and
assistance was to be rendered to them
in times of dearth. And it must be
acknowledged that, in- spite of inevit
able mistakes, thoughtful care has
always dictated the steps the adminis¬
tration has taken.
Gradually the old Eskimo culture was
transformed. Christianity and school
education were introduced and sanitary
conditions were improved. The leading
principle was, however, that sealing
should remain the key industry. As
hunting requires that the population be
scattered, a clash of these economic and
cultural efforts was, to some degree,
unavoidable. Still worse was the fact
that, iwith the breaking down of the
old cultural pattern, the aboriginal
Eskimo social ideas disappeared with¬
out being replaced by new ones.
A sort of general dejection was, in
fact, predominant within Greenland's
population when, at the suggestion of
the great friend and champion of the
Eskimos, Dr. H. Rink, the so-called
"managements" were set up in 1862-
1863. They were the first step towards
letting the Greenlanders settle their
own affairs and creating new social
ideals. The success of this reform can
be measured by the steady growth of a
community spirit amongst the Eskimos.
' About the beginning of this century
a new danger turned up. While the
population was steadily on the increase,
there was particularly since 1920 a
very considerable decline in the num¬
ber of seals upon which the whole
existence of the people was based.
The cause of this unfortunate condi¬
tion cannot be stated with certainty.
It is probably the result of a coinci¬
dence of factors,, among which the most
IN ADDITION TO THE 23,000 ESKIMOS in
Greenland, the world's largest island, some 22,000
more live in the Far North of the mainland. Among
these are the Caribou Eskimos (named after the animal
which serves as their staff of life) on the barren grounds
of Canada. (Photo, National Film Board of Canada.)

UNESCO COURIER N«" 8-9 1954
FROM CLASSROOM TO THE
COUNCIL ROOM. Illiteracy
has disappeared in Greenland where
schools have succeeded in training
young Eskimos to shoulder their
responsibilities as citizens. In 1953
Greenland shed' its status as a
colony and was incorporated into
the Kingdom of Denmark; it now
sends two representatives to the
Danish Parliament. These pictures
show an adult class in Greenland
and a provincial council meeting.
important are the amelioration of the
climate during the last decades, the
brutal butcheries ion the breeding
grounds by foreign sealers, and the
Greenlanders' increasing propensity
for using the rifle instead of the
traditional harpoon.
Whatever the reason may be, it be¬
came necessary to look for new resour¬
ces. Fortunately the improvement of
climate which contributed to the de¬
crease of the number of seals also
resulted in a steady northward spread
of cod, now found along most of the
west coast. Fisheries have" been de¬
veloped by the introduction of improv¬
ed gear and methods, and the appoint¬
ment of Danish fishermen as tutors to
the Greenlanders. There are at pre¬
sent 79 government stations for
buying, salting and drying cod for the
export trade.
A new jobsheep farming
WHILE fisheries are a further de¬
velopment on old Eskimo lines,
animal husbandry and farming
involve a breach with all Eskimo tra¬
ditions. A sheep farming experiment
was started on the initiative of the
government as early as 1906, and there
are now about 19,000 sheep in Green¬
land. Experts claim that their num¬
ber may be increased fourfold.
However, the sheep industry must"
always, for natural reasons, be limited
to the southernmost parts of the
country and hence an attempt has re¬
cently been made to introduce reindeer
breeding. In 1952, about 300 Lappish
reindeer, accompanied by some Lapp
herdsmen as tutors, were transferred to
the Godthaab District.
What, then, are conditions in Green¬
land today? It is difficult, not to say
impossible, to give an adequate pic¬
ture. Since World War II, the radical
changes which began slowly more than
200 years ago, have increased with ra¬
pidly growing speed. At present, Green¬
land is actually in a melting pot. The
transition from a natural to a money
economy is continuing, and at the same
time the first steps are now being taken
towards a gradual abolition of the mo¬
nopoly and an adjustment of the differ¬
ence between the price levels of Green¬
land and the world markets.
Social care has been improved. Any
Greenlander more than 55 years of age
who is not able to support himself or
his family is entitled to old age assis¬
tance, as also are orphans and widows,
and there is also ordinary relief for the
poor. As for sanitary conditions, the
country is divided into districts, each
having a medical officer, one or more
hospital-trained nurses, and a hospital,
and there are also a large number of
midwives. In order to improve hygiene
and make healthy dwellings easily
accessible, loans are granted by the go¬
vernment to enable the Eskimos to
start the building of new houses.
It is generally admitted, however,
that sanitary -organization is insuffi¬
cient and must be further developed.
Tuberculosis is, perhaps, the most
dangerous enemy of the Greenland
community ; between two and three
per cent of the population suffer from
active tuberculosis of - the lungs.
Like sanitary organization, education
is one of the greatest problems in
Greenland, because the extremely
scanty population is scattered over an
enormous area. School attendance is
compulsory for children between the
ages of seven and fourteen, and there
are no illiterates.
There are four continuation schools,
one of them for girls, and the seminary
at Godthaab, which originally served
only for training catechists (Eskimo
teachers and assistants of the parsons)
has been extended to include a two-
year commercial class. There are now
also a technical school and a special
school for wireless operators.
Among other reforms, the new
School Act of 1950 provides that there
be erected bilingual (Greenlandic and
Danish) elementary schools. While
nobody thinks of contesting the rights
of the native language, in which there
is already a small but steadily growing
literature, it is nevertheless generally
considered of paramount importance
that the instruction in Danish be
(Photos Vagn Hansed, Copenhagen.)
extended in order to facilitate the
absorption of European culture. It
should be added that there are three
public libraries in Greenland, and that
for many years, selected intelligent
Greenlanders have been given an op¬
portunity to study in Denmark through
two- or three-years schoarship grants.
No longer a colony
THE old-fashioned "management"
system, which at one time served
its purpose so well, has been
abolished and replaced by municipal
councils and a council for the country
as a whole, elected by universal suffrage
and possessing considerable authority.
Since 1953, when the colonial status of
Greenland was rescinded and the
country was incorporated in the
Kingdom, the Greenlanders elect two
members to the Danish parliament.
There can be no doubt that the
greatest problem of the future is the
inevitable transition from a natural to
a money' economy, and as long as it
has not been completed, considerable
dangers are involved. It is to be hoped
that the feeling of responsibility which
has always characterized Denmark's
attitude towards Greenland will finally
triumph.
21
