UNESCO
PRESENTS
WorldWithoutEnd
"E,
1VERYTHING that has to do with human beings has something to do with me too. " This
is the enduring vision and the enduring fact that the Unesco film "World Without End" vividly
proclaims. "World Without End" is a story about the United Nations and the people of the United
Nations about fishermen and doctors, rice-farmers and teachers, nurses and mothers, children
and grown-ups. The story unfolds in Mexico and Siam but is just as true for other countries where
today people are at work teaching and learning how to grow more food, how to live healthier lives,
how to share the United Nations' ideal of progress and prosperity in a peaceful world.
Two world-famous film makers, Paul Rotha and Basil Wright, working together at opposite ends
of the earth, have created this one hour documentary film of the world's knowledge at work for the
people of the world. The film has already been seen by some 250 million people on TV screens and
in theatres in the United Kingdom, United States, France, Germany, Denmark and numerous other
countries. In the United States, the "Saturday Review" called "World Without End" "...the most
vibrant and emphatic statement yet made on film about our postwar world..." The "New York
Times" critic, Howard Thompson, termed it "a truly masterful blend of sensitivity and realism...
directed with compass-needle precision." "Canadian Newsreel" wrote, "film societies should hound
their cinemas, public libraries, film councils... even write letters to Parliament if need be, in order
to get it shown as widely as possible." Film critic Jack Smith of "Look and Listen", London, said,
"the film should be shown often and everywhere ; in schools it will teach young people to see
that benevolent internationalism is no cold ¡deal but can have a warm heart and a sturdy pur¬
pose... It could tug at the conscience of the world." On the following pages, "The Unesco Courier"
is proud to present the script of "World Without End" written by Rex Warner and selected
photos from the film. A few short passages are omitted for reasons of space.
40

UNESCO COURIER. N" 4-5. 1954
"lama man myself, arid I think that everything
which has to do with human beings has something
to do with me too. "
We are looking at human beings and we are
seeing something oí two countries where they live.
In the West, Mexico. In the East, Thailand, or Siam.
as many people still call it. Different languages,
different religions, different animals, trees and
flowers.
Yet in both places people get their living from
the earth and from the water; in both places people
feel pain and hunger, and people enjoy health and
the good things of life. They have enemies and
they have friends. They have children and they
want their children to be happy.
MEXICO
This man's name is Faustino. He is a Tarascan
Indian. His country is Mexico. He is a fisherman
who lives on an island in Lake Patzcuaro.
Long ago, before any European came to the Amer¬
icas, this lake was the centre of the great Tarascan
Empire. The Tarascan Indians still live here. They
have lost their empire; but they still get their living
from the lake, and they retain their old love for
music and for singing.
It is a market day in Patzcuaro and the Indians
have come in to the town from the islands where
they live, from the settlements along the lake shore
and from the villages in the mountains that
surround the lake., This is a social occasion,' as
well as the occasion for buying and selling. There
1
are processions to be enjoyed, and all the noise too.
It's like an old-fashioned revolution.
Here also is something which is, in its own way,
like a revolution. The people In the launch are
students who belong to an organization called
Crefal... Crefal means "the Fundamental Education¬
al Centre in Latin America". It is supported by
"Unesco and by the governments of 21 nations in the
New World.
3
Every day this team
of students goes to one
of the "islands in Lake
Patzcuaro this one
is where Faustino Uves.
It is an island where,
since men first came to
it, Ufe has depended
on the water of the
lake and on the fishing
nets that are the
islanders' most
valuable possessions.
By this time the
people of the island know the students from Crefal
well and are glad to see them. There is Moreno,
who is a Mexican; Nellie who comes from Uruguay;
Tristan, the man who sings, is from Panama;
Torrico from Bolivia; Rene from Haiti; Violetta
from Cuba.
'3
4
Each student is studying some particular subject,
Uke agriculture, health or education. They are
Unked by these interests of theirs with one or other
of the United Nations Agencies which are dealing
on a world scale with the problems of knowledge,
health, food, work and the conditions of work. And
when, in the end, these students go back to their
own countries, they will no longer be students, but
teachers among their own people.
Now, what Crefal is doing for them is to prepare
them for this task and to give them the chance of
learning not only from books and lectures but also
from human beings. Their job is to learn about
how people Uve. To do this they must be able and
willing to help them.
'"* **Ç
41

- 5 -
It has become a custom for one
of the students to ring a bell, just
to show that the team has arrived.
Now they all set off to different
parts of the island. They are
here to learn how people live. You
cannot do this unless you under¬
stand the people. You cannot
understand them unless you
receive their confidence. You do
not deserve their confidence unless
you are prepared to love them and
to help them.
By now Moreno is an old friend
of Faustino and his family. He
can often give them advice which
is useful to them. A Mexican
himself, Moreno may, later on, be
able to help even more actively in
solving some of their problems.
But now, while he is training him¬
self for the future, he is learning
rather than teaching. He is
learning some very simple things
from a man who knows what he
is talking about.
For Faustino everything in¬
cluding his plans for the future of
his children depends on the lake,
the level is rapidly sinking?
Twenty years ago there were boats moored against
jetties that are now high and dry. Why is it that
there are not so many fish as there used to be,
and they are getting smaller, too ? It is not so
easy as it was to catch the big fish that can be
sold at a good price in the market. Why are weeds
and thick mud appearing in parts of the lake where
the water used to be clear and deep ?
SIAM
Life, Death, what changes and what does not
change. These are the themes of the religious
teachers, of poets and of philosophers.
In different countries .there are different ways. of
Why is it that approaching these problems, but the problems are
the same for all.
Here the religion is Buddhism. The country is
Siam. The people are by nature a happy people.
, Here, as in the island in Lake Patzcuaro, life
depends on water. The rich rice crops grow in the-
water and in the same fields grow the fish.
People talk of "the unchanging East". But there
are changes' all the same. Here the new and the
old, the changing and the unchanging are side by
side and are inter-related.
This is Bangkok, the Temple of the Dawn. Here, .
too, there is music on the water old tunes and
new tunes.
Those who live in this big city with its rich and
various life have the same difficulties as are known
in all big cities. Here, -too, there are slums as well
as fine buildings. There is tuber¬
culosis in the East as well as in the
West.
There are clinics to go to and
hospitals. - But it is also important
to deal with the disease in the
home itself, to give advice and
instruction which wUl help to
prevent spreading the infection to
other people in the family.
MEXICO
The work the nurses in Siam are
doing is the same kind of work,
perhaps, that NeUie wUl organize
later on in her own country in
Latin America.
- Now, by Lake Patzcuaro, in
Mexico, she is being rather success¬
ful at getting these chUdren
actually to like a haircut. When
she first suggested the idea, they -
used to run for miles; but now
they look forward to it. It isn't
entirely a joke. ' This beautiful
long hair is often crawling with
lice.
42

UNESCO COURIER. N°» 4-5. 1954
_ 6
Violetta, who comes from Cuba, is good at embroi-'
dery, and Señora Salud enjoys learning. It is a
useful thing to learn, since embroidery fetches a
good price at the market, and when fishing doesn't
pay as well as it did an extra source of income is
all the more welcome.
There are moments in the life of the island when
everything seems to stand still, when everything is
calm.
SIAM
How can you be calm when your skin is covered
with painful and disgusting growths? These people
in Siam are suffering from a disease called Yaws,
which is found in nearly all tropical countries. It
is a disease which gets into the blood and affects
not only the skin but also the structure of the bones.
7
*S& It is extremely infectious; both the old and the
young can have it, and sometimes as many as 14 %
of the inhabitants of one village have it at the same
time. It poisons your mind as well as your body.
Your energy ebbs away and you lose hope. You lose
the will to live. And, so far as you know, there is
nothing whatever to be done about it; no possible
cure; no relief.
Within the last few years scientists have discov¬
ered that one injection of penicillin will produce a
complete cure in ten days.
But the medical team, has first to convince the
villagers that penicillin really is going to do them
8 9 -
good. It is a difficult thing for them to believe.
The teams who give the injections have had to
discover what is the quickest and least painful
method. This is because their own time is short.
MEXICO
There is a good deal of filth in the water of Lake
Patzcuaro. - People have washed their clothes in it
for generations, but they have not all been lucky or
strong enough to escape from the various illnesses
which come from the water. Here too, as Violetta is
explaining, the right kind of soap, full of DDT will
help. ,
Moreno and the other students, while they have
been learning from the islanders, have also been
spending their leisure hours with them. They have
^^^^^^^ worked together in
making a new
j basket - ball pitch
for the village.
As night begins to
fall the Indians and
the students gather
i % fort the local Fiesta.
i Together they sing
an old Tarascan
song which is called
"The Drum of Hap¬
piness".
SIAM
It is now dawn in
l> Siam, and here the
fishermen are casting their nets. Here there are
plenty of fish, and here the fishermen are untroubl¬
ed by the weeds which Faustino knows. But not
everywhere. Originally one or two roots of the
water hyacinth were introduced into Siam because
of the beauty of the flower. But this beautiful
flower, with its long roots, spread and spread,
choking up the water-ways, and making even the
water barren.
The farmers with handrakes will never catch up-
with-the flower they are attempting to destroy.
Dr. Ling, who comes from China, has been sent
43

- 10 -
by the Food and Agriculture Organization to work
with the Siamese.
By spraying the water hyacinths with hormone
weed-killer room can be made once more for the
fishermen and for the fish. Dr. Ling and his experts
are not only clearing the water; they are putting
bigger and better fish into it. So, in these waters,
there is likely, before long, to be more food than .
there has ever been.
MEXICO
The problem of water supply can be a big one
even if you live near a lake. The water has to reach
II
s^the higher ground where the villages are, and where
it is needed for irrigating the land and for house¬
hold purposes... These women have to carry every
drop of it for a mile up from Lake Patzcuaro.'
At this place the men are building a new well.
The next thing they will have to do is to save or to
borrow enough money to buy a pump and a filter.
When they get these, life will be a good deal easier
for the women, and the water will be pure.
SIAM
In Siam the great wealth of the teak forests in
the northern mountains has for a long time been
- 12
carefully preserved. A tree may take 100 years to
grow, and there is regular replanting of seedUngs.
None of the people who are doing the planting will
live to see the fuU-grown tree.
But there is no doubt about their interest in what
they are doing for future generations. It is a satis¬
faction to know that your work will live on after
you, and these men's work for the future makes it
safe to take the harvest of the present.
Five hundred "miles to the south of the teak
forests there are some villages where the farmers
also are thinking about ' the future. They have'
reclaimed land from the salt-mar-shes and on their
newly-won land they are experimenting in a new
way of living, pooling their manpower and their
equipment, and making their own plans for the use
of what they gain. In all this they are helped by
- 13
their own government and by experts from the
United Nations. In these communities books are
really valuable. Not a very great number of books
can be carried on a van on wheels, but a mobile
library is much better than none at -all, and all the
books that can be brought here will be read. These
libraries are provided by Unesco and by the Siamese
Ministry of Education.
Ignorance is not bliss, and wherever the opportu¬
nity is offered people are glad to escape from igno
rance. - Here, by Lake Patzcuaro, the first steps are
slow ones. But they become effective. People want
knowledge, and once they have begun to acquire it
they extend it amongst themselves.
In Siam new educational methods are being
.employed throughout the country. But when you
have a fine and old culture of your own, however
44

UNESCO COURIER. H°" 4-5. 1954
- 14 -
useful new methods can be, you don't want your
own unique things to disappear. It has -happened
too often in the world that an old culture has been
destroyed by contact with something new. It is
as important to carry on a cultural tradition as it
is to make certain that the forests are being
replanted.
Children here, as everywhere, like to act and to
dance. Later, when they grow up, they will be able
to appreciate and some of them will be able to carry
on the great tradition of their land.
We cannot dance or think; we cannot live at all
without food, shelter and health. Health has come
back to this vJUage which we last saw ten days ago.
How 'can you believe in a
miracle unless you have
actually seen it happen ? To
these people, who have seen
it and felt it, it still seems
too good to be true. And the
experts who h e lp e d to
organize the miracle are
rewarded by what they see.
They came a long way to do
this work. The man is from
Trinidad. The woman is
from Canada. Quite simply,
they wanted to do good, and
they have "succeeded. Child¬
ren are smiling who have sel- -
dorn or never smiled before.
MEXICO
When the students of
Crefal and many more like
them have finished their
course they will return to
their own countries in"Latin
America to apply the know¬
ledge of life and the sym¬
pathy with living people
which has come to them
partly by nature and partly
' by study and experience.
NEW YORK
Here, at the headquarters
of the United Nations at New
York, there are more flags
than those of Latin America,
and many more countries are
represented than Mexico and
Siam. It is an organization
which was formed because
people were, ashamed of the
past and because they had
hopes for the future. For
a long time the peoples of .the world have been"
organizing their fears and their hatreds.^ This is
something ' different ; and, though no organization
is perfect, no plans can be guaranteed to be success¬
ful, we do know this :
Love can cast out fear, and, as we have seen, it
is not impossible to love your neighbour. Now, as
the world shrinks, the neighbours are closer toge¬
ther. Moreno the student and the man on the
elephant, the fisherman and the farmer, the chil¬
dren, happy or unhappy, are not so far apart; and,
though we may not all have learnt to accept this
fact, .it is a fact that we all live in the same world,
with them and with others.
45
