TOO YOUNG TO LEARN
A FOREIGN LANGUAGE ?
It is traditional in many countries to intro¬
duce the first foreign language " at the
beginning of the secondary school. Tra¬
ditions are often valuable or picturesque and
should be treasured. In education, however,
it seems appropriate to re-examine our tradi¬
tions periodically and I propose to re-examine
this one.
Why have foreign languages been introduced
at the beginning of our secondary schools or
.later? I can only surmise. Here are my
conjectures, for -what they are worth. It is
grown-ups who prepare the education fare for
our children. As those who have kept in touch
with children know, grown-ups are notoriously
lacking in imagination. They began their
second language in the secondary school and
therefore their children should obviously
begin there. They also remember the study
of a foreign language as a difficult and compli¬
cated business, clearly too difficult and
complicated for young children.
This line of thought rests on the assumption
that a foreign language is just another school
subject, to be mastered by dint of, hard work
and mental discipline. This view does not in
my opinion take into account adequately the
fact that a language, particularly in the early
stages is a skill, a skill involving the training
of the auditory and vocal organs and indeed
the entire behaviour of speech.
This "skill" aspect of the language, which is
basic to any real learning of a language, that
is, to the speaking of a language, is precisely
what adolescents and grown-ups come by with
such difficulty. A person who begins a foreign-
language in adolescence rarely learns to speak
it without accent. Adolescents find the mim¬
icking and facial contortions necessary to re¬
produce foreign sounds a little silly and they
tend to be self-conscious about it. They put
me in mind of Baudelaire's albatross. Ready
to 'soar in intellectual flight, they are held
captive on the - narrow deck of a ship and
waddle about clumsily and ludicrously.
The child, on the other hand, takes to a
foreign language like a fish to water. Placed in
a foreign environment, children can learn not
only one but several languages with incredible
ease and without accent. A British psycho¬
logist, J.'W. Tomb, living in, Bengal, has. cited
the case of English children born in Bengal
speaking Bengali with their nurses, Santali
with the garden attendant, Hindustani with the
house servants, and of course English with
their parents.
Mr. E. V. Gatenby, who writes perceptively
on this subject, observes that children don't
use languages but language to communicate.
He cites the case of the Turkish novelist Halide
Edip who noted in her memoirs that she Was
twelve years old before she realized that she
spoke two languages, English and Turkish.
And the Canadian Prime Minister, Mr. St. Lau¬
rent, thought in his youth that English was the
form of speech one used to communicate with
mothers and French the form used to commu¬
nicate with fathers.
The moral that Mr. Gatenby very properly
draws from all this is : "Let the pupils have
a chance. Give them a teacher who ¡knows the
language thoroughly and will use it all the
lime. Let them start learning at the earliest
possible age through pleasurable activities,
with the minimum of formal teaching and the
maximum use of the language in natural si¬
tuations."
Let us glance a little more closely at the
way infants and young children learn language.
In their babbling stage infants have been
observed to produce an amazing variety of
sounds, not only sounds in their own language
but also sounds of other languages and indeed
sounds which may belong to no language. In
fact, there is no reason to believe the very
young child incapable of producing any sound
in any one. of the nearly 3,000 languages of
th« world.
If the child is able potentially to utter any
sound in any language, why does he not retain
this wonderful gift ? The reason seems to be
that in addition to the joy of imitating and
inventing sounds the child craves the joy of
response. As he finds that the oh, so limited
grown-ups about him respond only to certain
sounds, he gradually discards the sounds which
fail to elicit a response and which thus prove
to be useless for communication. Gradually
his phonetic range contracts until he finds
by Theodore Andersson
himself hemmed in between. the narrow walls
-of his own mother tongue.
What conclusions may be drawn from all
this ? I believe that tentatively we are justi¬
fied' in establishing the following hypothesis :
Children possess in infancy great potentialities
for learning tha language skills and these po¬
tentialities decline steadily throughout child¬
hood, adolescence, and maturity. On the
" other hand, the rational or conceptual faculties,
which are present in embryonic state in infants
develop steadily through childhood, adoles¬
cence, and into maturity.
If this hypothesis is sound, the very first
year of school is none too early to begin a
second language. Every year's delay thereafter
represents a loss of the most precious language-
learning period. Differences in language apti¬
tude, which in adolescents are so marked and
so discouraging to teachers, appear to be
negligible in early childhood. Indeed, a num¬
ber of the teachers engaged in experimental
teaching at this level in the United States
report that there is by no means a dependable
correlation between general intelligence and
language aptitude. Some teachers report a
better correlation between musical aptitude
and language aptitude, but data in this field
are as yet inadequate and careful research is
needed.
What are the obstacles in the way of intro¬
ducing a second language at the age of 5 ? One
of the first objections raised is that the early
exposure to a foreign language may interfere
with the learning of the mother tongue. This
fear is, in my opinion, groundless. At the age
of 5 a child has had a four-year start in learn¬
ing to 'speak his own language. In the first
grade of school he has according to recent
estimates an active vocabulary of about 2,000
words and an understanding vocabulary of
about 24,000 words and is talking about as
easily as the grown-up in his environment. -
At school he is beginning to read and write,
whereas for the first two or three years his
exposure to the foreign language is aural and .
oral exclusively. Normally therefore there is
no possibility of interference between one's
mother tongue and one's second language. On
the contrary, the stimulation of learning a
second language and the resulting increase in
linguistic competence is likely to benefit the ..
mother tongue greatly.
A second objection which is frequently raised
is that the addition of a second language
crowds the primary-school curriculum, making
it more difficult to do the teaching of the basic
subjects, the so-called three R's properly. But
the testimony of the primary-school teachers
who have tried adding a language contradicts
this objection. The evidence is that, if any¬
thing, the children do better in the. three R's
after they start to learn a second language.
A third objection is the only one which in
my opinion has much validity: the .lack of
qualified teachers. There is of course a great
scarcity of teachers qualified to teach foreign
languages properly, especially in the early
stages, where a maximum of artistry and en¬
thusiasm are required and where a legitimate
accent is essential. But the solution of even
this difficulty has been suggested in some of
the American programmes.
In the first place, when we really start look¬
ing for native speakers of French or Spanish ~
the two languages in greatest demand in the
United States we find a surprisingly large
number of them able to teach young children
or willing to learn. Secondly, there is the pos¬
sibility of greatly increasing the exchanges of
teachers which already exist on a small scale.
And thirdly, so-called workshops for the train¬
ing of interested primary school teachers in a
foreign language have in some places' been
successfully organized.
In Los Angeles, for example, an enthusiastic
superintendent of schools announced in the
spring of 1943 that Spanish would be taught
on a city-wide basis starting in the Kindergar¬
ten. A workshop was organized in the sum¬
mer, .which has since then been continuous,
summer and winter, for the training of teachers
in Spanish. The programme has been very
successful.
Most of the existing programmes are ground¬
ed in sound theory though there is also room
for much improvement the quality of
teaching. Almost invariably the ear is trained <
before the tongue and the tongue is trained
before the eye and hand. In Cleveland and
Los Angeles, for example, the aural and oral
training continues throughout -the six years of
the elementary school before reading and
writing are begun. In my opinion reading
and writing are in these places postponed too
long. Secondly, tho important matter of moti¬
vation is usually well taken care of by the
judicious use of games, songs, and plenty of .
action and dramatization. The classes in the
early grades usually do not exceed 20 minutes
in length but they frequently occur every day,
Monday through Friday. Thirdly, the aims
are usually defined clearly. The two principal
ones are: (1) learning to speak the language
20

UNESCO COURIER -N" 1-1954
and- (2) getting to understand better the
people whose mother tongue is being studied.
In some areas, notably in the Southwest and
in the state of Louisiana, improvements in the
social relations between different cultural
elements have been nothing short of revolu¬
tionary. In many towns in Louisiana where
children were formerly prohibited from speak¬
ing French in school or in the school yard the
French children are now looked up to and
respected for their knowledge of a language
that all the children are trying to learn. Thus
at one free stroke some 400,000 French-speaking
citizens of Louisiana are being more fully in
corporated into the life of the state and their
social status is being greatly improved.
In conclusion let me describe briefly the
twelve-year course I envisage as the ultimate
goal of this trend. I divide it into four parts
of three years each. The first three years are
given over entirely to aural and oral drill in
a large variety of ways, the emphasis on aural
and oral work continues throughout the twelve
years, but in grades four, five, and six training
in reading and writing is begun, which is then
continued throughout.
In grades seven, eight, and nine when,
children are of an age to take an active interest
in theoretical questions the grammar of the
language is analyzed. Structural patterns have
become automatic by' virtue of constant re¬
petition with variations, but children have now
reached the age of conscious analysis.
Grades ten, eleven, and twelve seem like
the proper time to study, in more systematic
x fashion than before, the history, geography,
civilization, and literature of the people whose
language is being studied. The students now
possess the instrument necessary for doing
this they cart understand, speak, read and
write the foreign language with reasonable
ease and accuracy.
21
