A U.N. REPORT ON
PRESS FREEDOM
AND CENSORSHIP
by Salvador P. Lopez
The term - "freedom of information"
is a relatively new one. The con'-
cept, however, is old, being little
more than the aggregate of the more
familiar antecedent principles of free¬
dom of thought, freedom of expression
and freedom of the press. Where free¬
dom of information involves freedom of
thought, it has deep roots in man's
inborn thirst for knowledge, in his first
struggles against ignorance and super¬
stition, and in his earliest strivings after
truth; where, on the other hand, it
involves freedom of expression, its
mainspring lies in the emergent poli¬
tical consciousness of man, his growing
realization that this freedom is an
indispensable weapon in the struggle
against arbitrary and oppressive autho¬
rity. Freedom of information is freedom
of the press by extension; it takes into
account the other powerful media of
mass communications which modern
technology has placed in the service of
Number of countries censoring news
When a government bans or suppresses a newspaper or hinders a foreign corres¬
pondent in his task of reporting world events, it abridges the right proclaimed in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights "To seek, receive and impart information and
ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers." This Declaration was adopted
by the United Nations in 1948. Here we see how many countries applied censorship
in I938, ten years before the Declaration, then in I948, the year of its adoption, and
finally in I952.
NUMBER OF COUNTRIES
WHICH IN
1938 ^
atCensored or controlled news
the source
Suppressed domestic
newspapers
Banned foreign
newspapers
Barred foreign correspondents
1948
Censored or controlled news at
the source
Suppressed
domestic newspapers
Suspended
domestic newspapers
Banned foreign
newspapers
Barred foreign correspondents
1952
Censored or controlled news at
the source
Suppressed
domestic newspapers
Suspended
domestic newspapers
Banned foreign
newspapers
Barred foreign correspondents
^
9999999999 9999999999 999
9999999999 9999999999 99
9999999
9999999
9999999
999999
A _ 9999999999 9999999999
^A 9999999999 999999999
9999999999 99
9999999999 999
¿7 9999999999 9999
9999999999 9999999999 9
J
A _ 9999999999 9999999999 99999
^W 9999999999 9999999999 99999
999999999
9999999999 9999999
¿7 9999999999 99999999
9999999999 999
J
ideas, as well as the rights and interests
of the consumer of news.
In varying phraseology, the constitu¬
tions of the different states declare that
every citizen may freely speak, write and
publish his sentiments, on all subjects,
being responsible for the abuse of that
right : and no law shall be passed to
restrain, or abridge, the liberty of speech,
or of the press.
Soviet theorists consider freedom of
speech and of the press to be "among
the most important political freedoms".
However, their approach to securing free¬
dom of information is conditioned by
the basic Marxist opposition to private
ownership of the means of production,
distribution and exchange.
Mr. Andrei Vychinsky has stated that
"freedom of speech, of the press... are
the property of all the citizens in the
UJSjS.R., fully guaranteed by the State
upon the sole condition that they be
utilized in accord with, the interests of
the toilers and to the .end of streng¬
thening the socialist social order".
Freedom of speech and of the press
are denied to the foes of socialism, and
"every sort of attempt on their part to
utilize to the detriment of the State
that is to say, to the detriment of all the
toilers these freedoms granted to the
toilers must be classified as a counter¬
revolutionary crime."
Although the Soviet theory and prac¬
tice in this field does represent a signi¬
ficant exception, freedom of information
in the traditional Western concept has
received widespread recognition as a
fundamental human right. " Both in
theory and in law the essence of the
principle is the recognition of complete
freedom of expression, by writing or by
other means, without prior restraint, but
subject to the consequences of the law.
The limitations relate to a number of
strictly defined matters, principally libel,
slander, obscenity, sedition and national
security.
Right to harangue
By analogy with the older concepts of
freedom of thought and freedom of
expression, freedom of information
should be regarded as a fundamental
right which must be defended at all
times against infringement or denial by
governmental authority. But, in accor¬
dance with the principle that every
human right is necessarily limited by
respect for the equal rights of others,
freedom of information has unavoidable
social implications. A man's right to
impart information has no meaning of
itself except in relation to the right of
others to receive information.
The press, film, radio, and television
have become highly organized institu¬
tions requiring considerable financial
and technical resources for their ope¬
ration. The right of a man to harangue
a small group of persons at a street
corner is one thing, but the right of a
man or group to establish a newspaper,
a radio or television station is another
matter altogether.
Dr. Lopez, editor and journalist, lías been a mem¬
ber of the Philippines delegation to the United
Nations since 1946 and is now Minister in charge
of that delegation. Delegate to the united Na¬
tions Conference on Freedom of Information at
Geneva in 1948 and member of the United balions
Sub-Commission on Freedom of Information and
of the Press, 1947-52. he was appointed by the
Economic and Social Council, 1952, as first United
Nations Iiapportcur on Freedom of Information.
The article published here is condensed from, his
Report on Freedom of Information, 1953, pub¬
lished by the U.N. Economic and Social Council
and to be discussed by the Council in April.

UNESCO COURIER . N» 3 - 1954
' Gigantic systems of information
present organized society with problems
of a different order, quantitatively as
well as qualitatively speaking. There is
need for effective guarantees to ensure
their successful operation, as well as for
measures to minimize the possibilities of
abuse and to prevent tendencies which
would sacrifice the general welfare in
the interests of private economic power.
The degree of freedom of information
varies from country to country and
technological advances are rapidly
changing the nature of the problem
everywhere. The important thing is to
determine, in the light of existing
conditions, how the principle the right
to impart information as well as the
right to receive information can be
most effectively guaranteed.
They never learn
It is doleful to remark that history
repeats itself, but doubly so to
realize that men do not seem to
learn much after each repetition. At
the end of the Second World War, the
peoples . and governments of the vic¬
torious Powers were gravely concerned
just as they had been at the end of the
First World War over the need to
safeguard and promote freedom of
Information.
They knew that nazism and fascism
had been able to mislead and dominate
millions of people as much by the
power of the word as by the power of
the sword. They - had observed that
wherever dictators seized authority in.
any country, they proceeded immedi¬
ately to place the organs of public
opinion completely under their control.
Freedom of the press and of information
was usually the first victim in their mad
quest for power.
This anxiety was clearly evident during
the drafting of the United Nations
Charter in San Francisco. Some dele¬
gations expressed the view that the
Charter should include an elaborate
declaration on human rights. However,
it was finally decided to include a
general obligation for Member States
"to take joint and separate action in co¬
operation with the Organization" to pro¬
mote "universal respect for, and obser¬
vance of, human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction as
to race, sex, language, or religion."
Accordingly, the Economic and Social
Council established forthwith a Commis¬
sion on Human Rights. Keenly aware
of two particular evils which nazism and
fascism had inflicted on mankind tota¬
litarian propaganda and racism the
Commission in turn created a Sub-Com¬
mission, on Freedom of Information and
of the press and a Sub-Commission on
the Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities.
The world had reverted to the old
Biblical injunction that truth alone shall
make men free free of the scourge of
ignorance, superstition, hate and war.
The Constitution of Unesco marks the
rediscovery of the .ancient truth in
words of bell-like clarity: "Since wars
begin in the minds of men, it is in the
minds of men that the defences of peace
must be constructed".
In a world racked by ideological
contention and insurgent nationalism,
there has grown an ever-sharpening
struggle for the minds of men. Highly
developed techniques are being employed
for the purpose of information, propa¬
ganda and indoctrination, with the re¬
sult that each is often indistinguishable
from the others/
Inevitably in this struggle, the basic
THE FIRST READERS of the morning papers are the printers working in the
machine rooms where the giant presses pour out up to 50,000 newspapers in the hour,
printing, folding, counting and gathering them together. From here the papers go to
the despatch room where they are stocked, sorted and labelled and from where vans
take them to distributors and railway stations. Schedules must be strictly adhered to.
human right to freedom of opinion and
expression has become, in many parts of
the world, a casualty. This is true in
the authoritarian States, but even in
other countries this right is constantly
menaced by the tendency to sacrifice
freedom in the ostensible interest of
defending freedom. The result is a
complex social and political problem,
marked by continuous interplay between
abuse and' efforts to correct abuse,
between attempts to restrict freedom
and attempts to widen it.
Nazi Germany, fascist Italy and mili¬
tarist Japan have not been the only
parts of the world where, in the twen-,
tieth century, the press and other media
of information have been coerced or
suppressed.
There are, of course, countries and
regions of the world where genuine
freedom of speech and of the press is
denied on ideological grounds and where
an opposition press is not permitted to
exist. But we are here concerned with
those countries which, while professing
belief in the liberal Western concept of
freedom, have permitted authoritarian
methods to be used in silencing criticism.
Such methods may include not only
arbitrary and dictatorial measures but
action taken under legislation which,
while ostensibly aimed at the correction
of abuse or the preservation of "public
order", can and does serve the purpose
of stifling criticism and opposition.
The degree of internal censorship in
different countries is difficult to esti¬
mate at any given time. In a large part
of the world (the USSR, the mainland of
China, Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslova¬
kia, Hungary, Poland and Rumania)
there is control in the interest of well-
defined ideological ends. In Argentina,
Portugal and Spain, varying types of
controls exist. In many parts of Latin
America there is what may be described
as a condition of "fluctuating" controls.
A government is overthrown or a crisis
develops during an election and controls
are imposed. As the situation stabilizes,
they may be eased.
But even where conditions are more
stable, the degree of control may vary
from "year to year.
A survey of the world censorship
situation is made periodically by the
Associated Press (USA), one of the
several hundred information enterprises
and professional organizations whose
co-operation was sought in the prepara¬
tion of this report. The latest such

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION- A 20th CENTURY CASUALTY?
THE NEWS COMES IN at the rate of hundreds of words every minute to
the world's great daily papers by telephone and tape machine. Stories from
correspondents are taken down by telephone reporters such as those seen here
working in the editorial offices of a large American newspaper. (Photo USIS.)
survey was completed by the Associated
Press toward the end of 1953. Princi-
pally concerned with the censorship of
outgoing news dispatches it also com¬
ments on internal censorship and other
restrictions in a number of countries.
The International Press Institute has
also, from . time to time, published
reports of restrictions in various
countries.
Another attempt, on a regional basis,
to survey press freedom in a number of
countries is that made periodically by
the Freedom of the Press Committee of
the Inter-American Press Association.
Reporting on conditions in the Western
Hemisphere at the Eighth Annual Meet¬
ing of the Association, held in Chicago
in October 1952, the committee stated:
"The state of freedom of expression...
has suffered serious setbacks in certain
countries, notable gains in others and
ominous trends appear in still others".
The committee went on to reaffirm a
previous conclusion that "through de¬
crees and laws which are designed to
intimidate editors and publishers of
newspapers, radio broadcasting station
owners, and managers of communica¬
tions companies, there has been created
an atmosphere of fear which not only
produces a menacing self-censorship but
deprives the public of legitimate news.
This situation obtains especially in
countries where governments restrict
the freedom of expression through those
decrees and laws but exercise no prior
censorship in editorial offices, radio
news rooms or in the offices of commu¬
nications companies in a hypocritical
simulation that freedom prevails".
There are many variations of such
practices. Where it is desired to avoid
the crude act of suppression, measures
may be taken to cut off newsprint
supply, to embarrass the newspaper by
various economic and financial pressu¬
res such as threat of foreclosure, with
drawal of govern¬
ment advertising
or denial of the
mails.
Given some sup-
plementary
measures of imple-
mentation, the
Convention
on Freedom of
Information can
make a substantial
contribution.
Remedial processes
will inevitably be
gradual. An
immediate first
step would be to
systematize, co¬
ordinate and
enlarge upon the
reports already
being compiled by
such organizations
as the Associated
Press, the Inter¬
national Press
Institute and the
Inter - American
Press Association.
A world - wide
survey of internal
censorship
practices and
abuses, repressions
and violations of.
freedom of infor¬
mation should be
undertaken perio¬
dically by a rapporteur on freedom of
information, using reliable data from
non-governmental professional sources.
While the survey would be submitted to
the Economic and Social Council,
information enterprises and professional
associations everywhere would be en¬
couraged to give it the widest possible
publicity. .
Peacetime censorship of dispatches
which a correspondent sends from one
country to another has plagued agencies
and correspondents ever since the deve¬
lopment of radio and telegraphic com¬
munications has made it an easy matter
for governments to inspect and control
messages sent by
been done to his dispatch until informed
by his home office.
Even more dangerous perhaps is the
practice of government telegraph offices -
delaying "unfriendly" dispatches until
they are "no longer newsworthy. Govern¬
ment officials may also be informed sub
rosa of the content of "unfriendly" dis¬
patches, with the result that the
correspondent may subsequently expe¬
rience difficulties with his news sources
and possibly in obtaining re-entry per¬
mits and visas.
An even more insidious form of
censorship consists simply of a discreet
warning that while the correspondent is
nominally free to write and. send what
he likes, "unfriendly" articles about the
host country will lead to "difficulties".
What are the correctives? Attempts
to alleviate censorship are as old as the
problem itself. The League of Nations
Conference of Press Experts, held in
Geneva in 1927, proclaimed that no form
of censorship should be established or
maintained except "for vital reasons",
and if it existed it should be abolished.
However, if it continued to exist, the
conference thought there should be cer¬
tain minimum guarantees, e.g., tele¬
grams should be examined by specialists
and sent as quickly as possible; corres¬
pondents should be instructed by the
specialists and should be informed of
suppressed passages and of delays in
transmission; there should be refunds
when press telegrams are paid in
advance, corresponding to the number of
words cut; and all correspondents
should receive equal treatment.
The world was not in a sufficiently
liberal mood however; shortly after¬
wards began the downhill descent into
the Second World War with its closing
of doors and windows and its widespread
censorship.
After the Second World War, the first
attempts to throw off the shackles of
wartime censorship found expression in
the Declaration of Chapultepec adopted
(Continued on page 31)
this means. Like
internal censorship
and control of the
domestic press,
this is a "fluctuat¬
ing" problem,
usually difficult to
survey and . assess
at any given time.
And it may be
imposed in various
ways, some overt,
some covert.
Overt censorship
may be "blind",
, with the censor
' refusing to tell the
c o r respondent
what has been
deleted. Occasion¬
ally the corres¬
pondent may be
able to discuss
deletions with the
censor across the
table. Needless to
say, all sorts of
complications arise
when the corres¬
pondent is , un¬
aware of what has
THE NEWS GOES OUT across the counters of newstands like this one
In Stockholm, Sweden. A total, of 12 million copies of 402 daily newspapers
'are printed in the Scandinavian languages. The English language press is the
world's largest with 2,348 dailies and a circulation of 96 1/2 million copies.
(Photo Dagens Nyheter.)

FREEDOM OF
THE PRESS
AND NEWS
CENSORSHIP
(Continued from page 8)
MILES OF NEWSPAPER are repre¬
sented by these reels of newsprint
which are about to become "The
Times of India", in the modern rotary
presses of this Bombay daily. A full
reel of newsprint contains something
like five and a half miles of paper.
(Photo copyright "Times of India".)
30

UNESCO COURIER - K» 3 - 1954
by the American States early in 1945.
Even before the war ended, however,
editors in the United States of America
had begun to interest themselves in the
freer flow of information, and their,
efforts eventually inspired the drafting
of the Convention on' the Gathering and
International Transmission of News
adopted by the Geneva Conference on
Freedom of Information. And cen¬
sorship, as one of the obstacles prevent¬
ing "peoples speaking to peoples" was
studied by the American Commission on
Freedom of the Press in a 1946 report.
The problem of censorship was exten¬
sively discussed at the Geneva Confe¬
rence on Freedom of Information, the
representative of France summing up a
general feeling that there - should be
"total abolition of censorship, but if
maintained in certain countries it
should be so organized as to permit
journalists to carry out their functions
in a rational manner".
The conference then proceeded to
include in the Convention on the
Gathering and International Transmis¬
sion of News an article containing a
positive injunction against censorship of
outgoing dispatches, with the provision
that Contracting States could make and
enforce regulations "relating directly to
the maintenance of national military
security". The article added that if it
were necessary to impose censorship in
peacetime, it should be carried out
under certain ' stipulated conditions
aimed at facilitating the work of foreign
correspondents. These conditions re¬
mained substantially the same in later
redrafts of the Convention and appear
in the text eventually adopted by the
General Assembly.
Abuse of freedom
The Economic and Social Council at
its seventh session decided that the
concept of "national military secu¬
rity" was too restrictive and employed
the words "national security". However,
the General Assembly considered that
the Council's language was. too broad
and reverted to a narrower expression,
"relating directly to -national defence",
What action is possible" to alleviate, if
not abolish peacetime consorship? First
;of all, an earnest effort must be made
to rescue the convention articles relating
to the international transmission of
hews, which have been approved by the
General Assembly, from their state of
suspended animation and to have them
opened for signature. This should be
possible when work on the draft Con¬
vention on Freedom of Information is
completed.
Even in countries where the concept
of freedom of information is accepted,
restrictive measures have in many
instances been imposed ostensibly for
the protection of the common interest.
This fact makes it all the more ne¬
cessary to safeguard this freedom
against encroachment and attempts to
curtail, cripple or even destroy it by
legislative or administrative measures.
On the other hand, the misuse or
abuse of this freedom may constitute a
serious threat both to the community as
a whole and to individual citizens, and
unless the law provides sufficient means
of protective action and redress, the
private citizen is left without defence
against the powerful organs of infor¬
mation.
It follows that the problem here, as
with human liberty in general, is to
regulate this freedom without destroying
it. Though a great variety of systems
are conceivable for this purpose, two
main trends can be distinguished.
Countries committed to the principle of
freedom of information are moving
along similar lines and have adopted
legislation which, while differing in
details, has the same starting point and
seeks the same results. On the other
hand, the legislation of countries where
information media are regarded as
having a social function which should
be directly supervised by the State,
moves along different lines.
Obviously, a balance must be found
between the freedom to seek and disse¬
minate information and the necessity of
protecting the individual and the com¬
munity as a whole against misuse of this
right. Therefore most countries have
promulgated legislation enabling the
authorities to intervene in case of need.
In general, the publication of certain
types of news endangering national
security is everywhere liable to punish¬
ment; while publications offensive to
good morals expose their authors to
penal sanctions. Press laws almost
everywhere tend to protect family life,
and information likely to impede the
course of justice, contempt of court and
similar offences exposes the author to
more or less severe penalties.
Freedom of information is con¬
stantly faced with the possibility of
intervention by the State. By claiming
that it is necessary to prevent the
diffusion of false or distorted news, to
prohibit propaganda subversive of public
order or the existing system of govern¬
ment, to protect youthful readers, to
maintain high standards of morals, to
uphold religion and punish blasphemy
and so on, the State can and often does
intervene, and this may easily become
permanent, impeding the free publica¬
tion of information and opinion.
"It follows that no constitutional or
legal provisions as such can guarantee
freedom of information unless a people's
fundamental conception of society
recognizes that the best government is
that which allows citizens to form and
express .their own opinion on all
matters, including the government, and
unless that conception pervades the
entire fabric of national life.
A present danger
To say that every man -is entitled to
freedom of expression subject to
consequential penalties for abuse
is not enough and, indeed, may be dan¬
gerous. It is like telling a man that he
may say whatever he likes, reserving to
yourself the right to bash his head in if
you do not agree with what he says.
Restraint in the application of conse¬
quential penalties must be regarded as a
vital ingredient of. freedom of infor¬
mation.
Perhaps more than any other human
right, freedom of information lends
itself to extremes of abuse and repres¬
sion. It is not easy to indicate precisely
where freedom ends and license begins,
or, even if this could be done, to indicate
where license begins to be a "clear and
present danger". The bewildering va¬
riety of libel laws and press laws
throughout the world shows how com¬
plicated the problem and the present
situation are.
Nevertheless, it is clear that such
laws, together with the practices to
which they have given rise, actually
determine the degree of freedom of
information which exists within each
country, as well as the highest common
denominator of freedom which is pos¬
sible in the world. Therefore a detailed
study of this difficult subject would be
useful in showing the possibility of
establishing common standards, within
the framework of which a working
compromise between freedom and res¬
ponsibility can be achieved.
31
