Our folly toward nature
BITING THE
HAND THAT
FEED S D S
by
Gerald Wendt
The protection of nature is some¬
times considered a sentimental
notion, an idealistic desire to
preserve unique or beautiful plants and
animals, especially in reserves or na¬
tional parks. It is much more. It is a
stern and practical realization that
man is completely dependent on the
resources of nature and that these are
by no means inexhaustible. It is an
international effort to assess and safe¬
guard the sources of our food, energy,
material wealth and those of aesthetic
inspiration too.
SOME REFUGEES
SET UP THEIR
NEW APARTMENT
National parks, forest preserves and wild-life refuges are quickly
populated by the many animal species that recognize them as home.
In a new marsh, created primarily for ducks and geese, a mixed
colony of double-crested cormorants and blue herons have set up
nature's equivalent of an apartment house. (Photo C.-J. Henry.)
In past centuries, when men were
few in number and scattered widely
across the continents, the riches of the
earth seemed endless. But today the
earth is crowded with 2,400 million
persons, an average of 47 for every
square mile. And the population is
growing more rapidly than ever before,
with an increase of twenty-five million
persons per year.
This means that every week the
added population is equal to that of
Oslo, Athens, Düsseldorf or Kansas
City, and the annual increase equals
the entire population of Korea, Spain
or Mexico. In, a mere eight years the
added population will equal the pre¬
sent population of all Africa, of North
America or of the U.S.S.R.
If the present growth-rate persists
the population of the world will be
3,500 million by 1980, more than 4,000
million by the end of the century, and
about 7,000 million a hundred years
from now. - By the year 2000 there
would be an average of 30 persons per
square kilometre (78 per square mile).
To provide them with the necessities
of life will certainly be a problem of
world dimensions.
This has been said many times by "
Gerald WENDT is a member of the Unesco
Staff in Paris in charge of the improvement of
science education in schools and its dissemina¬
tion by press, radio and film. Formerly he was
' Professor of Chemistry at the University of
Chicago and Dean at the Pennsylvania State Col¬
lege in the United States and science editor of
the Time publications. In recent years he has
devoted all his time, as a leading writer and
lecturer on science' In his country, to improving
public understanding of science.
48

UNESCO COURIER. N°" 4-5. 1954
UP GOES A DAM
FOR ANIMALS
Great dams on rivers and mountain torrents provide much-
needed hydro-electric power. But valuable too are dams on
small streams among lowland hills, partly as a means of flood
control, but also to create small lakes for fishing and as wildfowl
breeding grounds. They also spread the water resources for
grazing animals and generally enhance the refuges for animals
and birds. Photographs show one such lake under construction
and as it appeared when completed. (Photos U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service by T. R. Lawhorn and E. Hackenberg.)
scholars and experts. The United
Nations Food and Agricultural Organi¬
zation at Rome devotes all its efforts
to the nutritional aspects of the prob¬
lem. Yet it is only a minor item in
the programme and budget of most
governments and plays almost no part
in the thought of most people. Except
in time of local famine, the problem
seems remote because the twenty-first
century^ seems a long way off. Yet in
many countries the average length of
life is today almost seventy years so
that in those countries most children
will live well beyond the year 2000.
They cannot escape the problem.
It also seems remote because more
and more people are crowded into big
cities and forget their dependence on
nature. They buy their food, clothing
and fuel in the shops and forget that
the shops must get them from the
farms, the forests and the mines.
The metals, minerals and .major
fuels lie deep in the earth, deposited
there during the millions of years of
previous geologic epochs, ample in
quantity for present needs but limited
in amount and irreplaceable. The
most optimistic estimate of the
amounts of fuels underground is about
8,000,000 million tons but these fuels
are now being used at the rate of
2,400 million tons, a year. At this rate
there is enough for. -some 3000 years.
But the consumption in the highly in¬
dustrialized United States is far
higher than the world's average. Its
own coal resources may be exhausted
within the next 75 years.
In a recent book (1) Professor Harri¬
son Brown of the U.S.A. has estimated
that if the rest of the world develops
its industries to a similar degree and if
the estimates of population increase
are correct, the world's resources in
underground fuels will become inade¬
quate within a century. Iron ores are
also being used up and the lesser
metals, such as copper, lead and tin are
disappearing rapidly. Once used, such
materials are gone . forever. For this
reason the conservation of natural re¬
sources is a major project for industrial
engineers and for governments.
Even more important are the pro¬
ducts of the fields, the forest and the
seas that provide food and clothing for
mankind. They grow under the rays
of the sun and are renewed each year.
They have always been lavishly wasted
In most countries. Even the soil has
washed into the rivers and then to the
sea so that vast areas that once fed
large populations are now barren. For¬
ests have been cut and grasslands cut
by the plough, their fertility exhausted
by over-use. In dry regions the
sparse vegetation has been devoured by
animals or cut for fuel so that the
wind carries off the soil as dust and a
sandy desert remains. Since the soil
gives us our food this is indeed biting
the hand that feeds us.
' Thus the problem of protecting na¬
ture includes the conservation of miner¬
als and of the soil. 'But pure air and
(1) The Challenge of Man's Future, by Har¬
rison Brown ; New Yor'c : The. Viliing Pres-,.
1934.
water must be preserved also and the
insects that fertilize the flowers, the
natural balance of animal species and
the forests that conserve the rainfall.
Much can be done on a national scale
by wise legislations and internationally
by the Specialized Agencies of the
United Nations.
But fundamentally the solution of
the problem lies in the education of the
peoples of all nations to make them
aware of the danger to their own chil¬
dren, to obtain support for local laws'
and campaigns, and to co-operate with
the international agencies. The entire
world must learn to understand nature
and to live with her, not on her.
In some cases this means' that
world-wide research studies must be
made. To avoid the spread of the de^
serts and to improve the food produc¬
tion of dry areas, for instance, the
special Unesco "Advisory Committee
on Problems of the Arid Zones" has
already brought together the experts
in all the sciences involved and from
nations where rainfall is inadequate.
The aim is to plan a world-wide
programme of research and education
that looks to increased rainfall, con¬
servation of water resources, irrigation,
the use of wind energy and of dew, the
selection of plants that thrive with
little water, and the control of land-
use. Since nearly one third of the land
area of the earth is deficient in rain,
the committee's task is a vital one. "
But for most of the world what is
needed is chiefly a friendly understand¬
ing of nature, based on direct contact.
49

PROTECTING
NATURE
SOMETHING
MORE THAN
SENTIMENT
THE GREAT Forest and brush fires are sometimes started by lightning,
DESTROYER ^ut most °^ten ^y man's carelessness. They not only destroy
timber and game, but also open the soil to erosion and the
rivers to floods that threaten homes and lives. Equipped with water-tank and hose and able to cross
rough ground, a fire-jeep is an effective weapon for forest rangers.- Controlled burning of dried brush
and weeds (photo, right) at the right season and under proper conditions soon replaces them with
new green shoots which provide ample food for wintering birds. (Photos F. Dufresne and P. Haddon.)
This is the aim of the International
Union for the Protection of Nature,
founded in 1948 under the sponsorship
of Unesco, with headquarters in Bel¬
gium at 42, rue Montoyer, Brussels. Its
members are governments as well as
national and international organiza¬
tions.
The Union calls together experts
THE BISON RETURNS
At least 75 million bison once roamed the prairies of western North
America. They were reduced almost' to extinction by the advance
of wheat, maize and cattle farming. Today, protected by law, they are
multiplying on the natural grasslands of their old home in Montana.
from many countries for frequent
meetings to discuss such topics as
"Nature Protection and Tourism",
"The Protection of Fauna and Flora in
High Altitudes", and "The Protection
of African Fauna and Flora". These
were the topics at meetings in 1953 at
Salzburg in Austria and at Bukavu in
the Belgian Congo.
The 1954 meet¬
ing will be held
at Copenhagen
in August to
discuss the pro¬
tection of Arc¬
tic animals, the
effect of mo¬
dern insectici¬
des on mam¬
mals, birds and
insects, and the
methods and
'. means of publi¬
city for the pro-
" tection of na¬
ture.
The recom¬
mendations of
the Union for
the official pro¬
tection of na¬
ture take effect
in laws and
actions of the
member go¬
vernments, but
the important
work of the
Union is the
education
of the peoples,
and especially
of the children
of all lands so
that the value
of nature may
be understood
and its beauty
appreciated by the people themselves.
The Union has issued many pam¬
phlets on nature protection and re¬
cently has published "A Guide to Con¬
servation" by E. Laurence Palmer of
Cornell University, U.S.A. The Union is
also a stimulus for the organization of
nature clubs in many countries, espe¬
cially in Europe and is now producing,
under contract with Unesco, a film
strip on nature education for the use
of such clubs.
A typical project of the Union is the
sponsoring of international summer
camps for nature study. The first of
these was held at'Houyet in Belgium
in July of 1952 which -was attended
by about fifty young men and women
from ten different countries of Europe.
In 1953, a second summer camp met at
Hasselfors in Sweden; plans are now
being made for . a third camp to be
held at Terschelling in Holland this
year. These camps brought together
youthful nature lovers from Austria,
Belgium, France, Germany, Greece,
Holland, Italy, Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey, Yugoslavia and the United
Kingdom , to study methods of nature -
study and of organizing nature clubs
For the 1954 camp at Terschelling,
Unesco has granted two travelling fel¬
lowships, one to a young Canadian,
another to a youth from India.
The participants return -to their home
lands to take a lead in the development
of public sentiment for the enjoyment
of nature and for governmental mea¬
sures which will protect the value and
beauty of their natural resources and
thus eventually help to preserve the
sources of national wealth in the form
of food, fuel, clothing, shelter, good
water and fresh air. It is a movement
on which future generations depend for
their very life.
o
z
<
SO
