u a y
A P r i 1 7 B|
1
A century oí
progress since
^ the 'lady with
IB the lamp'
UNTIL 1854, when Florence Nightingale, lamp in hand,
passed among the dying in the terrible military hospitals
of the Crimea, it was universally assumed that the only
qualification needed for taking care of the sick was to be a
woman. Training schools for nurses were then non-existent.
But the "Lady with the Lamp" as first the suffering soldiers
in Scutari, and later, the whole world came to know her,
understood that for such work the loving heart was not enough.
The art of caring for the sick, the knowledge of the laws of
life and death, she said, were matters of "sufficient importance
and difficulty to require learning by experience and careful
inquiry, just as much as any other art".
Her courage, effort and selfless example were such that a
completely new conception of nursing and of nurses was born,
and by the time she died in 1910, the transformation had been
so great that in the United States alone there were already over
1,000 training schools for nurses.
The celebration of the Florence Nightingale Centenary in 1954
has inspired the choice of the theme "The Nurse, Pioneer of
Health" for . World Health Day on April 7 an annual
observance, marking the constitution of the World Health
Organization (WHO) as one of the United Nations Specialized
Agencies, in 1948. .
Thus, while paying tribute to the great pioneer of the nursing
profession the occasion will underline the importance of - the
nurse and of the practice of' nursing in its many forms in
helping the peoples of the world toward the goal of complete
health.
The need for nurses is immense. Hospitals, with their mul¬
tiple and varied services for both in- and out-patients, must
be staffed. Nurses are needed in the armed forces, In colonial
services, in penal institutions, in land, sea and air transport,
in homes for old people and for cripples, and in almost every
kind of institution. Moreover nurses must be widely available
21

NURSES OF TODAY: SIIJA IN THE
NORTHLAND ; KARMA ON THE NILE
to give home care, a need which is multiplied wherever there
is any widespread epidemic or endemic disease. And all -this
still represents only a fraction of the total numbers required.
Within the last 60 years' nurses have been increasingly
occupied with health protection. It was in the fight against
infant mortality that, the public health nurse scored her first
victories by going right into the home to instruct the mother
in the care of her baby and to persuade her to take it to the
doctor at the baby-clinic.
Wherever she is, the nurse prepares and completes the doc¬
tor's work. Both in her role as hospital nurse and outside the
hospital she must win the esteem and appreciation of the
people she works among. Her work is unending and her know¬
ledge has to be all-embracing. It is not enough for her to be
nurse she must also be housewife,- teacher and guide.
According to recent estimate there are some 1,250,000 nurses
in the world. But if there were enough to meet all needs there
would be nearly 6,000,000 of them. In the more fortunate areas
it is estimated that there is one professionally-trained nurse
to every three hundred of the population. But in some coun¬
tries the ratio is about one to one hundred thousand.
In many places there -is an acute shortage of qualified
teachers to train nurses. The WHO has attempted more and
more to assist governments to overcome this problem.
Among other activities, WHO has started to train local nursing
instructors in many places. WHO teams assigned to demons¬
tration and training centres in maternal. and child health and
in the control of tuberculosis and venereal diseases are helping
to train "on the job" local nursing personnel, for auxiliary
services with the centres. Of the 144 international nurses now
employed in WHO field programmes, 54 are working in schools
of nursing and 90 in field demonstration and training centres.
Ailing children and stubborn old men
JUST how important nursing work is in the life of a com¬
munity can perhaps best be explained by the story of the
daily work of two of the world's nurses Silja, in Lapland,
and Karima,. in Egypt.
Silja Laaksbnen is one of Finland's 852 public health nurses.
Aged 23, she was trained at Helsinki, worked in a hospital and
then went north to Lapland because she preferred the greater
freedom of public health work. Today she watches over the
health of a community of woodsmen and reindeer f armers
around Isokyla, 80 miles north of the Arctic Circle.
Because of the climate she dresses in ski clothes and often
travels by sled, but once she enters a home her work is much
the same as that of a nurse anywhere in the world giving
injections and medicines on the doctor's orders, checking the
health of schoolchildren, helping mothers to solve the problems
of feeding and caring for their babies,, pursuading stubborn old
men to follow the doctor's orders.
Her work is often arduous for in her part of Lapland there
are only three hours of daylight during the winter, and she has
to travel in sub-zero temperatures to visit her patients in the
tiny scattered villages. But she does not regret her choice.
In Finland nurses are well paid, well housed and their work is
recognized by the whole community. "
Karima Shaaban, the Egyptian nurse, is 21 years old. She
trained at .the Kasr El Aini Hospital in Cairo and was recently
assigned to the Tuberculosis Demonstration and Training Centre
in Bab-el-Sharia where a World Health Organization team is
demonstrating T. B. control methods.
She takes a different job each month, doing BCG vaccinations
one month, keeping records in the clinic another, travelling
with the mobile unit that circulates through the streets doing
X-rays another, covering the entire T.B. control programme.
Karima, however,- is a rarity even in modern Egypt, for until
recently women in many Mediterranean countries led sheltered
and segregated lives. But attitudes are changing and women
are becoming doctors, teachers, secretaries and nurses. Karima's
family is a good example of the new attitude toward the rights
and duties of women. Her father is a modest farmer in the Nile
Delta, but he allows his family to live in Cairo so that the
children can go to good secondary schools and receive pro¬
fessional training. Karima's two sisters are already school
teachers and her brother will also enter the profession.
Whether they are in Lapland or Cairo, or anywhere else in the
world, whether at the bedside, in the operating theatre, in the
clinic, the school ot the home, nurses of today, like Silja and
Karima, are the friends and counsellors of all, and teachers in
a world crusade toward better health.
By Sled and Station-Waggon
Silja's day starts early. She reaches remote patients by reindeer
sled. The farmer brings her "taxi" to the door. At other times she
may go on skis, by bus or on foot. A station-waggon takes Karima
through the narrow streets of Bab-el-Sharia to the homes of her
parents. Tuberculosis is prevalent in this populous part of Cairo.
(Pfioto story WHO.)
22

Health Begin«
in the Home
As public health nurse for the
community Silja spends much of
her time in the homes of the
farmers and woodsmen of Isokyla.
Here she has stopped to give an
anti-diptheria injection to the young¬
est child and to check the health
cards of the others. When Ka¬
rima visits tuberculosis sufferers
in Cairo she teaches people how
to take care of their sick and how
to prevent the spread of infection
to the rest of the family.
1 '> .
' A
m
It
mm ^^^
[Tr
^^B^3
VA
H *
^fll
Emergency aid;
T B prevention
Prompt first aid to prevent infec¬
tion of a cut arm is given by Silja
to a reindeer farmer whose home
she called at on her rounds. The
colourful costume is traditional
and all reindeer farmers wear it.
At the TB Training and Demons¬
tration Centre in Cairo, Karima
does a different job each month
so as to learn all aspects of tuber¬
culosis prevention and detection.
Here she gives a BCG injection
to one of her patients.
The End of a
N n r s e D
Silja's day is long and tiring. When she finally comes home at night her first move is to kick off her
boots and brew herself a cup of coffee. By the time Karima returns from the clinic each day her family
have already finished eating, but wait for her to have their coffee. Here Karima serves her mother and
young brother with the traditional "café turc".
23
