YOUTHFUL ADVENTURERS IN SCIENCE
by
Gerald Wendt
HOLLAND. A Hobby
Club In Amsterdam watches
-a demonstration of a voice
and sound recorder with
which they can record and
hear their own voices. Some
of the members will then
build their own recorders
from spare parts and sup¬
plies which they buy with
their savings. Hobby clubs
are popular in Holland. Most
are devoted to radio tech¬
niques, photography, che¬
mistry, biology and phy¬
sics but also include carpen¬
tering, metal-working, draw¬
ing and the building of
models. They obtain some
financial support from Dutch
industries. The demons¬
trator in the picture- is
Mr. Leonard de Wies -who
has written a handbook
for Unesco on the organiz¬
ation and activities of science
clubs, (not yet published.)
ALL children are born explorers.
Before they can talk they explore
the world around them, looking,
feeling, listening, tasting. They explore
their own bodies, then their clothes and
toys, then the room around them. They
learn by experiment, not by words. Later
they ask endless questions. The world
is mysterious and wonderful to them, and
their curiosity is a natural human im¬
pulse. It is the same impulse that gave
mankind all its ^discoveries and all
science.
It is a precious source of pleasure and
of understanding for a lifetime If it is
kept alive. ' But there is much to learn
and schools must compress it all into a
few years. And so children soon must
learn from books and from teachers who
tell them the answers. There is not
time to explore, to discover, to prove
what the teacher or the book says. So,
too often, the instinct to explore is lost
and the child becomes a docile learner
who can memorize his lessons without
thinking and without questions. Such
children lose both the joy of exploration
and the ability to face gladly the many
problems that life brings and that cannot
be answered from books.
Many modern schools, especially in the
advanced countries, provide workshops,
laboratories and field trips under the
supervision of a teacher who does not
teach so much as he stimulates the chil¬
dren to learn for themselves. They
study the plants and animals of their
locality under the conditions of nature
and soon grow their own plants and raise
their own pet animals. They make their
own equipment in the workshop and do
their own experiments in electricity, with
light and sound, or in chemistry. They
learn accurate observation, learn the
laws of nature by discovering them for
themselves and, above all, learn to think
with precision. Indeed, they acquire the
habit of research which is the very
essence of science.
But in many countries the official
curriculum does not yet provide such
opportunities, partly because laboratories
are expensive and partly because busy
teachers have no time for such methods.
There the science club has its place.
The boys and girls organize it informally
under the guidance of an older person,
who may be a friendly teacher or a gra¬
duate of the school, a physician, some¬
times even a priest or a minister, or
perhaps some parent who enjoys scien¬
tific experiments. They can often impro¬
vise their own equipment and materials
and always work together in a spirit of
adventure and constructive play. Some
clubs are made up of young children in
the primary school, some do more. ad¬
vanced work based on -their studies in
secondary school, and others are compos¬
ed entirely of adult amateurs who find
relaxation and pleasure in scientific,
experimenting.
There are such clubs in many countries,
perhaps in all. And there are clubs in
almost every kind of science. A large
number are nature-study clubs, whose
activities include trips to the woods and
fields, to the ponds and streams, for the
collection of plants and the observation
of animals living in the wild. Some
specialize in birds or butterflies, some in
snakes or even in worms. Most of them
start their own gardens for wild flowers,
for mosses or for edible vegetables.
Others conduct aquaria for the culture
of , fishes or terraria for worms, small
reptiles or insects.
Closely related are the agricultural
clubs that study the best methods of
farming and raise their own food crops or
domestic animals. These children have
more time to learn than their parents
do and often -teach their fathers
new tricks in farming and even their
mothers new ideas in housekeeping.
But older youngsters, and especially
boys, are more likely to organize clubs in
technical subjects such as model air¬
planes, or railroads or automobiles, or
clubs that build radio receivers or even
transmitters and conduct programmes
for their village or their neighbourhood.
Often the boys become inventors and are
led to make a thorough study of the
sciences that are the foundation of their
hobbies. They become the best students
of physics and chemistry in their schools.
Another type of flub, "in industrial
cities, makes trips through factories,
mines, railroad shops and often builds
small models of their processes and
structures. - For this, chemical plants -
such as petroleum refineries, dye works
and drug plants are especially interest¬
ing. Other clubs often specialize in
building demonstration apparatus for
classroom use and thus help the teacher.
In the United States there are more
than ten thousand science clubs with
annual competitions among them and
many successful public science fairs at
which the members exhibit their work.
They are aided by Science Clubs of Amer¬
ica, which provides helpful materials,
such as project lists. (1). There are
several hundred clubs in India. In Hol¬
land, Belgium, Sweden, Germany,' Fin¬
land, there are active nature clubs some
of which undertake international summer
camps.
. If older persons are not attracted to
science it is because in their school days
science was a "discipline". But the
youth of today realizes that the instinct
to explore is natural and that . the
creative activities of amateur science and
hobby clubs are not only fun but just as
satisfying as amateur expression in art.
(1) Clubs may obtain such material by writing
to Science Clubs of America, c/o Science Service,
1719 .\ Street N. W., Washington 6. D. C. U.S.A.
26

UNESCO COURIER -N» 1-1954
INDIA. A girl in the science club of the Lady
Irwin Secondary School for Girls at New Delhi
has set up her own testing apparatus and is using
limewater to show that her exhaled breath con¬
tains carbon dioxide. Other members of the club
watch the test and take their turn. Miss K. Sen
Gupta, Principal of the Lady Irwin School, has
written and published an illustrated "Handbook
for Science Clubs in India" for Unesco, which
can be obtained by writing to the Unesco Science
Co-operation Office, C.S.I.R. Building, Old Mill
Road, New Delhi.
UNITED STATES. The sound from a musical broomstick Is playfully analyzed with an oscilloscope. There
are more than fifteen thousand science clubs, with more than 300,000 members, enrolled with Science
Clubs of America, and there are affiliated clubs in 48 other countries. Once a year most clubs give an
exhibition of their work and in 26 states there are state science-club fairs. For the entire nation there
is an annual "talent search". In 1952, 2,264 boys and girls competed in examinations for ten university
scholarships, worth SI 1,000, donated by an industrial corporation.
BRAZIL. Prof. Alberto Mello explains the operation of an electric distribution panel to members of a
science club sponsored by the Sao Paulo Section of the Brazilian Institute for Education, Science and Culture,
the National Commission for Unesco. The objectives of the club are to "train its members in scientific
techniques and methods, to serve the State and the nation, and to'stress the importance of science in every¬
day life". The Institute is organizing a series of clubs in various sciences and in several cities of Brazil.
Prof. Jayme Cavalcantl, Director of the Faculty of Medicine at the University of Sao Paulo, has said : " The
teaching of science in many of our schools is still too bookish. There is too much theory and almost no
laboratory work. At the clubs the opposite is true, and the student's enthusiasm for science develops
tremendously when he can take the Initiative and carry out his own experiments."
GERMAN FEDERAL REPUBLIC. - Members of
the German Youth Society for the Study of
Nature, at Liineberg-Kalkberg, are fascinated as
an expert prepares a bird that is to be stuffed and
mounted. They learn to do this work themselves
and prepare their own exhibits. The Nature
Study Clubs In Germany enjoy exploring the
fields, woods and beaches, especially in their
summer camps. They also exchange visits at
camps and on hikes with the members of Dutch,
Belgian and Swedish nature" study clubs. The
International Union for the Protection of Nature
is co-operating with them.
27
