L
f y '
l V
Black Islands' of the Pacific Milky Way'
The Pacific islands, or "Oceania" as they are often called,
form a kind of "Milky Way" some 8,000 miles long,
stretching from the Philippines and New Guinea to
lonely Easter Island, about 2,500 miles west of Chile. They
consist of three great branches a northern chain, Micro¬
nesia ("small islands") ; a southern, broken double chain of"
islands, Melanesia ("islands of the blacks") and, where the
eastern ends of these two crescents meet, the groups of far-
flung scattered islands known as Polynesia ("many islands").
By far the largest single islands in these three chains are
found in Melanesia whose most important islands and groups
of islands are New Guinea, New Britain, New Ireland, Admir¬
alty Islands, Solomon Islands, New Hebrides, New Caledonia
and the Fiji Islands.
Melanesia was given its name (black islands) because most
of its inhabitants are of Negroid stock. Two races, the Pa¬
puans in the southwestern part and the more numerous Me¬
lanesians in the other regions, make up the greater part of
the population. In the east there are some Polynesian
admixtures and in the west live the Negrito, a pygmy people.
It is probable that the Melanesian Islands, which lie close
to the Malay Peninsula, were settled before those of Micro¬
nesia and Polynesia. Yet despite their proximity to the
mainland of Asia, the Melanesians are the most primitive
people in the Pacific. They are not such accomplished sail-
lors as other -Pacific islanders, but they are better farmers,
raising the starchy taro plant, sweet potatoes and yams, ba¬
nanas, squashes and pumpkins in their garr'cns and small
fields. Although their social and political cu* toms are crude,
the Melanesians show marked skill in wood c.rving and other
decorative arts. (See article on Melanesian a:t, page 32.)
Their first regular contacts with Europe in civilization in
the 19th century, through the arrival of go-< ernment officials,
missionaries and traders, gave them an approach to modern
civilization which was piecemeal and non-comprehending. It
was not until military forces American, Australian and
Japanese' suddenly arrived in their midst during World
War II that they were able to see that European life was a
system in which the various parts religion, political or¬
ganization, currency, dress, etc. all fitted together.
This experience of seeing European customs as part of the
day-to-day life of a large community instead of encountering
them in piecemeal fashion has been an unsettling one for a
people who have hitherto always lacked a feeling of group
or cultural unity. But, as Dr. Margaret Mead, one of the
world's leading anthropologists, has pointed out in the follow¬
ing article, it has also opened up new possibilities for a
genuine integration of the Melanesians into the modern
world.
25

The Melanesians
A PRIMITIVE PEOPLE'S
SUDDEN AWAKENING
ANCESTOR WORSHIP is a
widespread cult among islanders
who believe that the dead have a
dual soul, one part of which goes
to the land of spirits, usually on a
mountain top or a remote island,
the other remaining around the
village. Communal rites long ela¬
borate and dramatic spectaclesare
performed to honour the spirits
and to ensure prosperity, Apart
from " the dead there are other
spirits. Shark spirits, for example,
give safety on the sea, eagle spirits
success in war, and snake spirits
success in agriculture. Images
carved from tree trunks (below) at
Malekula, in the New Hebrides
group, are made to honour revered
ancestors whose spirits they tem¬
porarily house during the rites.,
Forest clearing (right) has been
prepared for a marriage feast.
Each of the yams (a kind of potato)
attached to the posts represents a
chief who will be present. (Photos
copyright Aubert de la Rue and
Van den Brock.)
26

by Margaret Mead
HE Melanesian people of the Southwest Pacific
share with other South Sea Islanders their type
of habitat, small islands, either coral or volcanic,
and an occasional larger island which has served
the function of a "mainland" to the people of the
smaller islands. Like the other South Sea islanders they
were cut off from the main body of civilization until the
19th century, and experienced mainly contact with European
forms of exploration, trade, missions, recruiting and pros¬
pecting. Like the other South Sea islanders, their original
value to European men was seen as souls to save, labour for
plantations and* means to the acquisition of island raw
materials like copra, bêche de mer, and in- a few cases
mineral products.
They differed, however, from the Polynesians the South
Sea islander who has become familiar in song and story
in having a far less developed type of culture, lacking the
political ideas necessary for the development of kingdoms,
the Unking together of many people in one group, and lacMng
any developed historical sense. Darker skinned than the
other islanders Polynesians and Micronesians with stiff
frizzy hair, there was more probability of their being classi¬
fied with the people of Africa and so subjected to attitudes
developed during African-European contact.
Characteristically they were divided, one small group from
another, by differences in language often a language
would be spoken by less than a thousand people and the
practice of head-hunting, and linked together by. elaborate
trade arrangements which made possible a great deal of
geographical specialization.
Because they themselves lacked any kind of large group
political organization, and were also so accustomed to
forming economic ties outside their group, the -irregularities
of their contact with Europeans were accentuated. Different
missions, different recruiting practices, accentuated by the
rivalries, compromises, and fortunes of war among the
17

THE MELANESIANS (Cont'd.;
FROM HEAD-HUNTING
TO MODERN WAYS
LONG GRASS HEAD¬
DRESS is worn by wo¬
men of Malekula (New
Hebrides) for village fes¬
tival. In some islands
husband and wife have
different dwellings, and
at dances separate spaces
are marked off for men
and women spectators.
This is a strict rule, as
dancing is sacred and
female influence is regard¬
ed as defiling. (Photo
copyright Van den Brock.)
metropolitan powers concerned, have
given each small island group, or
sometimes one part of one archipelago,
a different history from another.
Where any small group became com¬
pletely missionized it also tended to
lose its own fragile traditions and sink
to what appeared to be a less complex
level of culture, but one which inte¬
grated better with the needs of the
European economy, with indentured
labour and trade the basis of the na¬
tive economy of a people who paid
taxes, went to church and gradually
became literate at a very low level.
Those concerned with the fate of the'
Melanesians before World War II felt
that people with such a rudimentary
form of political organization, living
in such small groups, could not hope
to withstand the advance of civiliza¬
tion with enough vigour to produce any
distinctive blend between the old and
the new such as had occurred and was
occurring in the more populous parts
of Central and South America and
Africa.
Where the old distinctive tradition
contained so many elements incompa¬
tible with modern civilization head¬
hunting, often cannibalism," complica¬
ted initiation rites and men's cults, '
extortionist secret societies, sorcery and
magic and so few of the social forms
on which a modern political system
Dr. Margaret MEAD, one of the world's leading
anthropologists, is now associate curator of the American
Museum of Natural History with which she has been
associated tor 28 years. A specialist on the Pacific area
where she has conducted extensive studies, she has
recently returned from a research trip among the Manus
people of the Admiralty Islands. She is_ the author of
many books on the subject: Coming of Âge in Samoa,
Growing up in New Guinea, Kinship in the Admiralties,
and for Unesco, Cultural Patterns and Technical
Change.
can be grafted, such as effective chief¬
tainship, division of labour within the
society, high level craftsmanship, what
hope was there that Melanesians
would survive except as bodies, to
become the physical ancestors of peo¬
ple who would know nothing of their
own pasts.
It was true that when it came to
understanding European culture, Mela¬
nesians had one great advantage over
peoples like the North American In¬
dians. They understand money and
CHEWING BETEL NUT is an almost universal
island habit. The nut of the areca palm and the
fruit of the betel pepper plant are crushed toge¬
ther and mixed with lime. This man from
Wogeo (New Guinea) carries his lime in a gourd
and uses sharpened piece of bone as a spoon.
trade ; the whole of their social life is
shot through with ties based on reci¬
procal economic obligations. They also
understand that human custom is re¬
lative to human society, that what is
customary and correct for. one people
is not customary for their neighbours,
that custom, like language, has both
universal and variable characteristics.
This means that they need not
oppose one sacred unalterable absolute
(Continued on page 31)
VISITING FRIENDS at Longgu, Guadalcanal
(Solomon Islands). These women have taken
along wooden bowls of food on their heads a
common way of carrying burdens in the islands.
Babies are carried in slings so that- mothers
can shelter them from the sun with a mat.
28

UNESCO COURIER N°« 8-9 1954
SILHOUETTES
AT SUNSET
(Photo copyright Leralle.j I
Islanders use every conceivable method to catch fishwith hooks and lures, with nets of all shapes I
and sizes, with poison, with bow and arrow, and with spear. If hand nets are used, each person]
takes two and the shoal is gradually driven to the shore. Often, however, the fish are surrounded!
by big nets dropped from canoes and then speared. Speir and arrow call for fine co-ordination |
of hand and eye. The fisherman stands on a rock close to d«p vrttw, potad to shoot or spear.

THE MELANESIANS (Cont'd.)
HUMAN SKULLS both of relatives and of enemies are carefully preserved by people of the Papuan Gulf, NewGuinea.
Papuan widows (above left) carry skulls of their former husbands slung round their necks. In the ceremonial hut (above
right) skulls are kept, in racks, each in its own compartment. Wooden plaques beneath, decorated with conventional
faces, are considered very sacred and are associated with powerful spirits of the dead. These plaques are also placed near
the skulls of enemies killed during head-hunting expeditions as protection against the spirits of the enemy dead. Under'
the plaques are the skulls of pigs which have been sacrificed. (Photos copyright Demaître and Hurley.)
SACRIFICIAL HUT on
island of Ambryn (New
Hebrides) can only be
entered by men. At so-
cio-rehgious ceremonies
men advance in social
position depending on
their wealth (number of
pigs) and the securing of
masks and statues pres¬
cribed for such ceremo¬
nies. Pigs are killed with
clubs hanging from hut
(left), cooked and then
eaten on the wooden
tray (right). The white
woman in the photo is
a French ethnologist,
Mme E. Aubert de la Rue.
30

UNESCO COURIER N<" 8-9 1954
(Continued from page 28)
way of life to the demands of the
Western world, or conclude' that if the
new lives, the old dies.
Furthermore our calculations about
their future reckoned without the
unprecedented experiences of World
War II, when the Melanesians encoun¬
tered, not the isolated government
official, missionary or trader, but large
groups of men from highly organized
societies who were concerned with
their own affairs fighting a world
war rather than with persuading,
or forcing a handful of "natives" to
gather coconuts, bury their dead -
differently or pay a small head tax.
Anthropologists know that when
members of one society immigrate into
another society where they can witness
the whole on-going life of a large com¬
munity, they learn much more rapidly
than when the customs of a country
are brought to them piecemeal by sin¬
gle emissaries. In the case of the Mela¬
nesians whole villages, whole tribes had
the experience usually reserved for
single immigrants, and they combined
with it the security of remaining in
their own land, where the reefs and
bush are well known to them, the fish
and birds familiar.
Equipped with the by-products of
the economic relationships of the last
century a knowledge of money, and
a trade language, Neo-Melanesian,
which is based on the grammar of
Melanesian with a vocabulary from the
whole world, although preponderantly
English in origin they have begun
to comprehend with great rapidity that
European life is a system, a whole way
of life in which all the various parts
religious belief, political behaviour
currency, dress, sex ethics, medicine
all fit together. From an approach to
modern civilization which was piece¬
meal and non-comprehending, they
have moved to one which has the possi¬
bility of a genuine new integration.
The Polynesians like the Samoans
and Tongans were able to work out
new cultural forms which included
Christianity, literacy and the incorpo¬
ration of European manufactured pro¬
ducts and still maintain their sense of
dignity because before the coming of
Europeans they already had the neces¬
sary sense of themselves as a people.
The Melanesians are getting a similar
sense of Ethic Identity by having ex¬
perienced the same sense of what being
a people is, in their contact with large
Australian, American and Japanese mi¬
litary organizations in World War II.
All over Melanesia since the war
there have been attempts on the part
of local groups to establish a local ver¬
sion of European-American culture.
Old rudimentary political forms of their
own, and the systems set up by Euro¬
peans local constables appointed by
government officers with limited police-
power or liaison duties^have been
called in question, as the Melanesians
attempted to work out line .and staff
organizations, to " include "councils",
"committees", "customs", "passes", etc.
into their local Ufe.
It is they now who are insisting on-
the individual right of contract" and
right of a man to the money he earns,
an insistence which is often inconve¬
nient to the trader and recruiter, who
has learned to exploit the older kin
organization and "buy boys" from the
old men, or bribe the government
appointed constable illegally to use his
power to recruit labour.
Local leaders- have set up "armies"
and "navies", have collected sums of
two most unfortunate labels, being
called either "cargo cults", that is mys¬
tical nativistic cults which arise out of
the disappointments of contact between
a more and a less developed civiliza¬
tion, or "Melanesian nationalism".
The task before us is to realise that
this mid-20th century renaissance of
one of the most primitive groups of
people in the world, must be seen in
mid-20th century terms, as part of a
CANNIBALISM still exists in the interior of some islands although the open warfare between
tribes which once provided the victims is now infrequent. After wreaking vengeance on their
enemies, the victors ate them, believing that they would thus acquire the virtues of the dead.
This old man from Malekula Island (New Hebrides) has practised cannibalism but the weapon he holds
is simply a chopper for cutting his way through the forest. (Photos copyright Aubert de la Rue.)
money which have been branded as
"war chests". There have been diffi¬
culties with the Missions, many of them
still operating in the climate of opinion
of pre-World War I, insulated for half
a century from a world which has pass¬
ed from a belief that it was necessary
for men to submit to deprivation with
good grace to a world in which educa¬
tion, medical care and economic ade¬
quacy for every human being is seen
as an obtainable goal.
Government officials, most of them
fresh from the sufferings and hard¬
ships of World War II have tended to
look with a jaundiced eye on all these
manifestations which have received
world which has conceived the U. N.
and the possibility of nationhood.
These Melanesian movements are
not nationalistic yet although we
may" make them so by our own .mistak¬
en tactics. They are not mere "cargo
cults", or blind alley defeatist attempts
to cut themselves off from the religion
and politics of a world with which they
are unable to deal. They are a search
for an ethnic identity, a sense of them¬
selves as a people, grounded in their
realization of what being American, or
Australian or Japanese means. It is a
20th Century task to find, and that
quickly, formulas for bringing them
into the modern world.
31
