THE QUEST FOR FOOD and animal fat for heat dominates the Eskimo's entire existence. He
keenly portrays the other hunters, the animals and objects around him, and manages to Infuse
his carvings with the excitement of the hunt. Each animal is depicted with the concentration of a
carver whose whole mind is focussed on his future food supply. Among the Eskimos it is thought
good luck to carve the animal one is about to hunt.
ESKIMO ART portrays subjects through a hunter's
eyes yet reveals typical traits of playfulness and good
humour. This little figure, "Man on Walrus Head with
Fish", is work of Ningeeuk, East Coast Hudson Bay.
ANGRY OWL' as seen
by hunter who approached
its nest was carved by one
of the best known of
Eskimo artists, Kopeekilok
of Povungnetuk.

UNESCO COURIER N°" 8-9 1954
BEAR HUNTING perils are suggested by the
long fangs and claws which Anudilak, an Eskimo
from Port Harrison, has carved on his "Angry
Bearhead", a seven inch stone figure.



Canada's Eskimo Carvings
IF you ásk an Eskimo of the Cana¬
dian Eastern Arctic if he carves
sinourak (art objects), he will
answer "Certainly !" For in a land
where life is governed by hunting and
where any one area will produce only
enough game to support a few
families there, is no specialization.
Every family must be able to do
everything : make a pair of boots,
build a kayak, fashion a knife, shape
a harpoon, sing a song and, of course,
create a pleasing object of art. Many
experts believe that their art equals
or surpasses any native art produced
on the North American continent. It
seems strange to find a rich, creative
and productive art flourishing in such
a barren land.
Living a semi-nomadic life in tents
and snowhouses along the treeless
shores - of Hudson Bay and Baffin
Island, the Eskimos are hindered by
a severe climate. Fewer than 5,000
in number and scattered over an area
of more than half a million square
miles, they rely entirely on the ' sea
and land animals around them to
provide food for themselves and fat to
heat their dwellings.
It seems probable that they first
introduced tailored clothing in Ame¬
rica.' Their parkas, trousers and boots
are unequalled for warmth and
comfort by anything we have yet been
able to design. The slim kayak is said
to be the world's most perfectly devis¬
ed craft. The seal oil lamp, the har-
.poon and fish spear are unique in de¬
sign and perfectly suited to their needs.
The Eskimo possesses a cheerfulness
James HOUSTON, a Quebec 'artist, first became
interested in Eskimo art during a trip to the east
coast of Hudson Bay in 1948. He returned with some
examples and interested the Canadian Handicrafts
Guild, a non-profit organization, and the Canadian
Government in developing an art project to encourage
the Eskimos' carvings and the sale of their work.
by James A. Houston
and tranquility of mind that seems
almost unknown in our modern civi¬
lization. He finds ample time in his
life of hardships to carve the fine
plastic forms that perfectly portray
his cultural rise above his savage
surroundings as well as his feeling
about the people and life around them.
The surge of civilization that swept
the North American continent in the
past few centuries stamped out many
Indian ritualistic tribal arts, leaving
in its wake a meaningless souvenir
trade ; but the Eskimos were protected
by their geographical remoteness, and
the link between past and present in
their art remains as yet unbroken.
The severe climate demands that the
Eskimo spend a good part of his life
inside his home ; he is invigorated by
the cold weather. As he has never
wasted his time on warfare and is by
nature industrious, he finds time to
contemplate ' and to perfect his
carvings.
In his art we see life through the
eyes of a hunter as he perfectly
portrays the moving things around
him with the keen, trained senses of
one whose very life depends upon
observation. -
"When hunting caribou one must
think like a caribou" say the Eskimos.
"Try to understand from its move¬
ments what it will do next."
As the season approaches for the
various animals to migrate to his
land, the Eskimo visualizes the thrills
of the hunt. As they bring in the
carvings you can feel the excitement
of the search for walrus, the snake¬
like thrust of the bear's head, of the
seals on new-formed ice, the first
coming of the geese, the salmon in the
rivers the fatness, the cunning, the
agility of, the animal portrayed with
the concentration of a carver whose
whole mind is focussed on the endless
quest for food.
The Eskimo's expert dissection of
game gives him a fine anatomical
knowledge clearly shown in his well-
proportioned carvings.
In their art the Eskimos still use
many primitive tools. They fashion
knives shaped to their individual
requirements using a shard of scrap
metal set in a bone handle. A steel
needle is employed for fine detail on
plastic forms and for incised drawings:
The bow-drill is operated by placing
the short rotating drill shaft in a
bone socket held in the mouth, leaving
the carver one hand with which to
work the bow back and forth and the
other hand free to hold the carving.
After the stone has been carved and
drilled into the desired shape, a rough
stone is used to attain smoothness,
then the carving is submerged in seal
oil for several days to allow the grey
stone to darken, bringing out the rich
serpentine greens and reds. After
this the carving is rubbed to its final
finish with stone dust and much hand
polishing.
Some carvers work with infinite care,
portraying the subject in minute
detail ; others prefer to create on a
wider plane, merely suggesting the
details while concentrating on compact
form suggestive of movement. However,
no art controversy exists among them,
since' the inherent politeness of the
Eskimo requires him to praise highly
the work of his fellow man no matter
how inferior it may be and to malign
his own efforts. The finer his carvings
are, the louder his protests that he
is unskilled and his work worthless.
Like the Chinese, the Eskimos keep
their small objects wrapped away
instead of on constant display, until
23

Eskimo Carvings
(Continued )
they are passed to ' a guest for in¬
spection.
Just before a walrus hunt, I visited
the camp of Kopeekolik at Povungne-
tuk on the east coast of Hudson Bay.
He offered nie the most perfect stone
walrus I had ever seen. I praised it
and asked him if he could make' me
another. After a perplexed silence he
said "You can see that I can carve
the likeness of a walrus ! Why should
you want another one ?" As far as
he was concerned he had proved his
craftsmanship as a walrus carver and
that was enough.
I suggested that I had never seen
him carve a caribou. After thinking
about this he became so excited that
he immediately went off to select a
piece of stone. The Eskimos
of the east coast of Hudson Bay are
fortunate in having many deposits of
stone along the coast suitable for
carvings and for making their tra¬
ditional stone lamps, though it must
sometimes be quarried under 15 feet
of water. Baffin Islanders are not so
fortunate and often must travel long
distances to obtain okusiksak (literally,
material for making kettles).
The Canadian Handicrafts Guild,
which has collected thousands of
pieces of carving for sale, is aware
that a demand for mass production
has, in the past, destroyed many
creative arts. In order not to kill the
Eskimo's creative ability, the Guild
does not seek to increase the present'
volume of the craftsman's 'work nor
change his methods in any way.
In the past four years the Eskimos
of the Canadian Eastern Arctic have
felt a real benefit from the sale of
their art and craftswork. It has .
eliminated government relief in areas
where _ hunting, has failed and has
given the Eskimo the opportunity to
support himself and maintain his self-
respect. It has not disrupted his
normal way of life since carving is
done in his spare time when the
weather will not permit hunting.
The Eskimos are happy in the
work of carving objects of art, and
given proper encouragement and
protection, It should continue to gain
recognition as a definite art form of
which Canada may well be proud.
1 Woman and dog, a 6 in. high stone
" carving, the work of Akeeaktashook,
Port Harrison.
2 Birds in trees, an imaginary subject
(no trees grow in Canadian Eastern
Arctic) by Itorchiak, Frobisher Bay.
3 Raven hovering over nest, a stone
" carving by Toolawak, East Coast
Hudson Bay.
4 Snow geese and their young, carved
in stone and ivory by Poota, an artist
from Hudson Strait.
24
