We must ¡earn to live
with the atom today.,.
...TOMORROW
WILL BE TOO LATE
The atomic bomb erupted unan¬
nounced in August of 1945 from
behind an impenetrable wall of
military secrecy. The world was totally
unprepared. Since then every nation
has been revising its military and
political plans to adjust to the global
consequences of that explosion. The
peaceful uses of the power of the atom
have been slower in coming and their
consequences will also be less sudden.
Yet in the perspective of history the
effects will be both large and relatively
rapid.
The new products of science and its
major ideas have always in the past
had far-reaching influence on man's
| way of life and on the social structure,
particularly during the rapid progress of
the past century. Ages ago it was the
invention of the smelting of bronze and
iron from their minerals, or it was the
proof that the earth is a sphere, or the
invention of gunpowder, that led to
large political, geographical and social
readjustments.
The era of machines was made pos¬
sible by Sir Isaac Newton's exposition
of the principles of mechanics. Less
than a century ago Charles Darwin
changed human ideas everywhere by
his theory of evolution. It was the
invention of the steam engine and
the railroad, then the electric motor,
then the internal combustion engine
and the automobile that led to the
development of great cities and the
word "civilization" comes from the
Latin word for city. Still more re¬
cently, medical advances have increas¬
ed the average .length of life from
some 30 years to almost 70 in the
scientifically more advanced countries.
Idea of the century
Each of these developments has
changed the very structure of
society, and has altered human
culture, education and even the attitude
toward religion. Such changes are the
combined effect of the new things and
devices, of new practices in industry,
medicine and agriculture, and of new
philosophical ideas. Together they
are the most powerful of all the forces
48
that continually change life and so¬
ciety, and speed social evolution.
In this century the basic new idea
is Einstein's theory of relativity. This
has as yet hardly begun to influence
popular thinking. But its greatest
consequence today is the fact that, as
Einstein predicted, matter and energy
are not two separate, immutable com¬
ponents of the universe but that they
can by proper means be changed one
into the other.
This is probably the most revolu¬
tionary idea that has come from
the mind of man in all the centuries.
It was a mathematical theory, generally
disregarded, until Otto Hahn and F.
Strassmann in Germany in 1939, con¬
ducting esoteric experiments with
single atoms of uranium, showed that
these atoms, when struck by neutrons,
explode with the annihilation of about
1 % of their matter and the corres¬
ponding generation of an almost
incredible energy.
Fearand its antidote
That was the year in which the
second great World War began
so that the experiment was almost
unnoticed by a frantic world. Yet in
the records of history it will probably
appear as far more important than the
war itself. It proved that Einstein was
right. Only three years later at the
University of Chicago a group headed
by the Italian Professor Enrico Fermi
was generating energy on a respectable
scale by this method and three more
years later the atomic bomb, based on
the same principle, made all the world
realize that a new era had begun.
If science is the most powerful force
acting on society, then Einstein's idea
that energy can be created out of
matter is now the primary force for
change in man's way of life and in his
attitude toward the universe. This will
become evident during the next fifty
years,, perhaps by the end of the
century and that means within the
period when our present youth and
children will inherit the earth.
Science enforces social change. Yet
to the human mind change is seldom
welcome. It is opposed because it is
feared and feared because it is not
understood. The fear of the atomic
bomb is universal and hysterical. The
fear of the beneficent atom will develop
later when its consequent social chan¬
ges become evident. Governments may
decree that such changes are desirable
and will result in improved living for
more people. So they will, probably.
But if means are not taken in advance
to safeguard the individual persons
who will be displaced or whose lives
will be changed, evil results will
accompany the good.
It cannot be forgotten that the
industrial revolution that followed the
invention of the steam engine created
appalling social conditions in England
a century and a half ago, chiefly
because no one foresaw the inevitable
developments. This time consequences
must be foreseen. Above all, the
element of fear must be reduced or
eliminated.
Since fear is usually fear of, the
unknown, the preventative of fear is
education. The United Nations project
for the wide use of atomic energy and
materials must , consider well the
experience in the work of Technical
Assistance to underdeveloped countries,
namely that new powers, new methods
and new wealth cannot be imposed by
the donation of machines and facilities,
however precious, unless they are
understood and are welcomed by a
people that understands them and
wants both, them and their con¬
sequences.
Science-conscious world
The atomic power project is there¬
fore not merely a matter of
placing great nuclear reactors in
countries that need more energy and
more wealth. It requires not merely
the education of scientists and en¬
gineers. Even more it needs a prelimi¬
nary programme that may require years
but must prepare the minds ,and the
hearts of the peoples who are to receive

Unesco Courier. Nr 12. 1954
ATOMIC-POWERED LOCOMOTIVE shown here only exists today in
Lilliputian form as a model designed at the University of Utah, U.S.A., anticipat¬
ing the day when railroads will make practical use of nuclear energy for power.
Cutaway section (left) illustrates basic principles of the engine. Nuclear
reactor (A) containing a solution of uranium 235 would produce steam which
would pass through pipes (B) to steam turbine (C). Turbine would drive
four generators producing electricity to drive the locomotive. A 500,000
pound steel block four feet thick (D) would protect the train crew from radiation
its benefits for the changes that are
to come.
Such education of the public, and
particularly of the adult public, in turn
means much more than explaining
atomic energy. In a sense it will, in
many lands, require what amounts to
a cultural revolution.
It will involve first the adoption of
the scientific attitude of mind which
is in its essence one of welcoming a
problem to be solved whether it be a
problem in mathematicsf mechanics or
science, whether it be a problem in
economics, world trade or in relations
between social classes or between
nations. In an unscientific culture a
problem of whatever sort is often the
occasion for despair, for violence or for
prayer. Then a problem is a thing to
be avoided because thé answer seldom
comes with it.
But the scientific mind thrives on
problems, analyses them, attempts one
solution after another until the answer
is found, usually on the basis of past
experience or general principles. In
science most problems eventually
though sometimes only after extended
and patient effort find a satisfactory
answer. Thus scientists typically wel¬
come a problem as a challenge to their
intelligence, as an inspiration to their
best thought. Such an attitude will
certainly be needed in the face of the
enormous possibilities that are in¬
herent in the atomic project.
Try it and see
Secondly, an economy based on
atomic energy must certainly adopt
what is often called the scientific
method but which is in fact the simple
method of experiment. Its first im¬
pulse is to "try it and see", if possible
on a small scale, in order to test
whether the idea, explanation or
project is correct or feasible. In the
dawn of the atomic age there will be
numberless concepts and plans in
engineering, public works, legal mea¬
sures and social readjustments, whose
consequences cannot be foreseen for
lack of experience. It will be the part
of wisdom to test such ideas experi¬
mentally and to adopt a conclusion or
a plan after such tests and not hastily
under pressure of emotion or prejudice.
Such considerations are cultural.
They imply not the substitution of
science for an unscientific culture but
the integration of scientific -attitudes
with cultural ideas that have come
down through the centuries, largely
untouched by science. In many in¬
dustrial countries scientific ideas have
perhaps been all too dominant so that
ethical principles and spiritual ideas
have faded. A synthesis would there¬
fore be desirable on both sides. If this
is so, a profound revival of values- is
everywhere desirable.
If the atomic age is to be one of
plenty, of good living and of benefits
both broad and deep in all nations, it
must be accompanied by a revision of
education in. all countries, both ad¬
vanced and underdeveloped, which
must start in the primary schools in-
49

a c i n g up to the problems ahead
deed in the home and hence must start
even further back with the re¬
education of parents and teachers.
If, under the incentive of the
development of atomic power science
thus achieves a place in older cultures
and the scientific attitude and scien¬
tific method become a part of popular
thought, then the practical facts of
life will also result in the assimilation
of a host of incidental concepts and of
new words. Matter and energy, space
and time, will be discussed with
precision, in poetry and in prose. The
concept of velocity, as a change of
position in space in relation to the time
elapsed, will be commonplace.
From proteins to genetics
The difference between quantities
and rates will not always need
to be explained by scientific
writerssuch as the difference bet¬
ween a kilowatt and a kilowatt hour
or the difference between calories and
horse-power. Such simple words from
the world of science will be commonly
understood when energy and power
are everywhere supplied to remote
farms by transmission lines from the
atomic reactors. Common also will be
the understanding of what electricity
is, and electrons, solutions, proteins, vi¬
tamins and hormones. The principles
of heredity and genetics will be
understood to the great benefit of race
relations.
Large principles, such as evolution,
celestial mechanics, the nature of the
planets and the origin of the earth,
will all merely be background for
human studies, not academic specia¬
lities limited to the erudite. Such
topics will be part of the curriculum of
the primary schools and it is in
learning the facts and the logic on
which they are based that children and
adults will learn the methods and mode
of thought of science.
Job for the State ?
If this seems visionary it is because
the time is still far off. Yet it must
come if the human race is de¬
mocratically to solve such problems as
the atomic age will certainly bring
problems such as how to grow enough
food to support the workers that the
atomic industries will require; how to
provide water to the arid zones so that
the population can thrive and use the
electric power that can easily be
brought there; how to provide medical
care to large populations that atomic
energy will make possible; how to
distribute the wealth that great atomic
industries will create and that auto¬
matic factories, perhaps, will convert
into tangible goods; how and by what
steps it will be possible to increase the
standard of living.
These are problems that each nation
must solve for itself. There will be
diverse answers. An example is in the
statement of Prime Minister Nehru of
India who said, in opening the Confer¬
ence on the Development of Atomic
Energy for Peaceful Purposes in India,
on November 26: "No State can allow
atomic energy to be developed in a
private way it is much too dangerous
a thing for a private agency to
develop... it is six years ago that we
envisaged the development of atomic
energy and stated that this is the
exclusive responsibility of the State."
On the contrary, the same problems
h^ve led the United States during the
past year to deprive the Government
of its former exclusive monopoly,
precisely because it was considered
much too large a responsibility to be
left to a central authoritative group but
should be broadly developed through
the various venturesome ideas of
private groups.
There are even larger questions that
will arise. As countries profit from
ample energy and thus increase
their productivity and reduce the cost
of their goods, there will be in¬
creased competition in the inter¬
national markets and radical re¬
adjustments in international trade.
These, in turn, will lead to new
tensions between States. And finally,
in all countries increased production
will mean more things and more money
but it will also mean more free time
for the workers.
In the hard-working industrial
countries this payment of profits in
time rather than in money will present
a major problem. It will, however, be
an unequalled opportunity for the
development of a true culture based
on the assurance of an adequate income
in things and in money plus time to
enjoy them. In the non-industrial
countries, where leisure has often been
more prevalent than money, it will
present a problem of maintaining the
values of a leisurely life while letting
the engines and the machines do the
bulk uf the work.
After such a brief review of the
prospect it is no longer startling to
speak of -a revolution in the world's
work and in its way of life. Perhaps
the term should be "rapid evolution",
not quite so fast as a revolution. In
any case, one's vision must go far
beyond mere nuclear physics and the
technology of reactors. It is obvious
that the coming atomic age requires
foresight not merely from physicists
and engineers but also from educators,
social scientists and exponents of
culture. It requires not only foresight
but planning and action, lest the
revolution overwhelm us. This great
development must be guided for the
benefit of mankind.
World plan for progress
Under its charter, Unesco faces a
new challenge long before it has
solved the problems of the pre¬
sent. Every department of Unesco will
be concerned in the development of the
atomic age and the special functions of
the World Health Organization and the
Food and Agriculture Organization will
also be needed. The Specialized Agen¬
cies of the United Nations will there¬
fore welcome a new Agency when it is
created and will be prepared for the
sake of their member states to co¬
operate in the discussion, the planning
and the operation of a programme for
world development that is inherent in
the programme for the peaceful uses
of atomic energy.
GERALD WENDT
The series of articles on atomic energy
in this issue of the Unesco Courier
was written by Dr. Gerald Wendt,
Head of the Division of Teaching and
Dissemination in Unesco's Department
of Natural Sciences. He is the author
of The Atomic Age Opens and of Atomic
Energy and the Hydrogen Bomb. For¬
merly a professor of chemistry at the
University of Chicago and Dean at the
Pennsylvania State College, he has devoted
recent years to the interpretation of
science and its social consequences in
public lectures, on the radio and by
television. He has been Director of
Education at the World's Fair in New
York, Science Editor of the American
weekly, Time, and Editorial Director of
the 'monthly, Science Illustrated. At
Unesco he organized Impact as a
quarterly journal on the effects of
science on society and is editor of
Unesco Science News. His articles on
science in the Unesco Courier and in
Unesco Features have been translated
into many languages and reprinted in
the newspapers and magazines of a
large , number of countries.
50
