CHARTERS AND
TRUE FREEDOM
by Dantes Bellegarde
HAITI'S CAPITAL, Port-au-Prince is the
country's chief port and commercial centre.
Situated against a crescent of wooded moun¬
tains, the city faces the emerald-blue Gulf of
Gonave. Into the city on market days
come peasants, like the old, pipe-smoking
woman (above), to sell their produce.
(Photos Haitian Tourist Office).
THE proclamation of Haiti's in¬
dependence, on 1 January 1804, was '
not merely the birth of a new
State, but resounding affirmation of the
principle of human freedom through the
abolition of slavery, and a decisive vin-
Dantes Bellegarde, ili¡)lumul, educator, author,
is nue uf Haiti's most distinguished scholars. He
is Ihr author of numerous u-oiks on the history
>// his couiitri/. 'mctudinij "Haiti and its Peo/ile",
and "I'll llndirii I'm le".
10
dication of the idea of racial equality
through the triumphal entry of a Negro
people into the comity of civilized
nations.
Born of the courage and enterprise of
the slaves of Saint-Domingue, and
drawing its inspiration from the prin¬
ciples of the French Revolution, the State
of Haiti was bound to adopt the demo¬
cratic system. Its social policy was
defined and proclaimed at a very early
stage. The Haitians claim for both the
"Preliminary Declaration" of the 1805
Dessalines Constitution and the "Gener¬
al Provisions" of the 1806 Republican
Constitution, a place alongside the Eng¬
lish "Magna Carta" and the Bill of
Rights, the American Declaration of In¬
dependence, the French Declaration of
the Rights of Man and the Amerioan Bill
of Rights.
The 1805 and 1806 Declarations
together form the Charter of Haitian
freedoms, proclaiming those conceptions
of liberty, equality and fraternity which
are the hall-mark of our democratic
civilization. It is astonishing to see how
faithfully these three great ideas the
very essence of democracy are reflected
in three of our national heroes. Tous-
saint-Louverture personifies liberty. Des¬
salines stands for equality, for in leading
Haiti to independence he was affirming
the right of a black people to rank as an
equal with all the other nations of the
world. Alexander Pétion represents
fraternity which today we call social
justice because in founding the Re¬
public he appealed to all Haitians to
participate in the government of their
country, for the common good; and
because, in helping Simon Bolivar to
liberate the Spanish colonies- in the
Western hemisphere, he ensured the
abolition of slavery in Spanish America,
and gave the first disinterested example
of inter-American solidarity.
Since the proclamation of the Republic
in 1806, the form of its government has
never been seriously challenged. History
does, it is true, record the "imperial"
designs of Soulouque in 1849; but none
of our subsequent Heads of State was
tempted to :emulate the grotesque
behaviour of this man who reigned as
Faustin the First.
All our constitutional Charters and
we have had a great many have re¬
spected the republican principle.
Creaking machine
"pVER since 1816, Haiti has adhered to
-*-* the representative system, with uni¬
versal suffrage and separation of powers.
It has a House of Representatives,
a Senate and responsible Ministers in
. fact, all the components of an up-to-
date political structure. .Our Constitu¬
tion embodies all the principles proclaim¬
ed in the French Declaration of the
Rights of Man civil' equality, freedom
of thought and conscience, freedom of
the press, the right to property, the
right to freedom of assembly and asso¬
ciation, freedom of teaching, the right
to education free of charge, and invio¬
lability of domicile and correspondence.

UNESCO COURIER - N» 2 1954
PORT-AU-PRINCE was founded by the French in 1749 but two earthquakes and a icore of devastating
fires have left little of the original French colonial city. Among the city's imposing public buildings are the
Palace of Justice (above) and National Assembly (below). (Photos Haitian Tourist Office and Denise Colomb.)
The legislator has striven to protect
these rights by all the necessary guar¬
antees.
Are these guarantees effective in
practice? It would be hypocrisy to claim
that they are.
The machinery set up by our various
Constitutions has never really cor¬
responded to reality, because the public
does not, in practice, pay sufficient
respect to constitutional principles.
Except at a few junctures in our history,
our institutions have functioned un¬
evenly; the machine creaks, the springs
groan, and principles are sometimes
" curiously deformed in the process of
their application. .
This is not to imply that the Haitian
people are incapable of self-government.
Such a conclusion could be reached by
no one at all familiar with the history of
the political development of nations.
Those versed in the secrets of the
militant policy of certain States that are
regarded as the most advanced and
democratic in the world know what often
lies behind the deceptive façade of
parliamentary institutions. The point _
in favour of the Haitian people is this:'
the democratic instinct is- so firmly rooted
in them that it has enabled them to
resist all attempts at absolutist govern¬
ment made throughout their stormy
history.
To this resistance must be ascribed
most of those violent reactions which we
are pleased to call revolutions. The
Haitian people may undergo the tyranny
of a dictator for long periods, but they
.will never accept it.
The experience of over a century has
convinced the Haitian people that, in
order to guarantee the internal pro¬
tection of human rights, it is not enough
merely to embody noble democratic
principles in the country's Constitution.
Public opinion and customs must be
strong enough to impose respect for
those rights, and their impartial ap¬
plication must be guaranteed by in¬
stitutions that" are firmly established.
The first of these institutions is the
Law, which, to ' be effective, must be
administered by persons of real com¬
petence, complete independence and
absolute integrity. Those responsible for
prejudicing human rights are usually
persons who fail to understand that
'freedom stops at the point where the
next man's freedom begins'. Such
attacks on the rights of others should be
tried by courts which are open to all
without distinction; the law must be the
same for everyone, and the courts must
enjoy the confidence of all, plaintiffs and
defendants alike.'
Privileges abused
T T often happens that the Executive,
-* with armed forces at its disposal,
takes action which infringes the free¬
dom of the individual and other funda¬
mental human freedoms. There must
be honest, independent judges to con¬
demn such acts. And in cases where the
Legislative itself abuses its privileges
.and passes measures contrary to consti
tutional law or international treaties,
such measures must be proclaimed in¬
valid on the ground that they infringe
the Constitution.
In principle, a country's Constitution
and the laws deriving therefrom are
confined to determining the rights and
duties of .that particular country's
nationals. But ideas have so progressed
that a purely "national" approach in this
matter is no longer possible; it is the in¬
ternational rights of man that now have
to be established.
Haiti, a signatory of both the Act of
Chapultepec and the San Francisco
Charter, was one of the first to ratify
these two international instruments.
The Act of Chapultepec gave birth to the
Organization of American States, and
the San Francisco Charter to the United
Nations. It was under the aegis of these
two great organizations to which, from
the outset, Haiti has belonged that in¬
struments such as the American
Declaration of the Rights and Duties of
Man, signed at Bogota on 2 May 1948,
and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, issued at Paris on 10 December
1948, were adopted.
The international treaties and con¬
ventions to which Haiti has subscribed
have added, to the traditional rights and
obligations recognized by all Consti¬
tutions, a number of new duties, in¬
cumbent upon the modern State by
reason of mankind's social evolution.
(Continued on page 32)

Charters and Freedom
(Continued from page il)
Meeting at the "'sacred city" of
Gonaives in November 1950 for the great
task of giving the Haitian people a
democratic Constitution "'safeguarding
its rights and freedoms", the Constituent
Assembly, followed the liberal ' tra¬
dition of lour, first legislators land
endeavoured to model the new Consti¬
tution, so far as possible, on the demo¬
cratic ideal - proclaimed in Abraham
Lincoln's famous words: "Government
of the people, by the people,- for the
people."
The Assembly granted Haitian women
the right to vote and drew up detailed
regulations on such matters as marriage,
- the family, children, family property, the
provision of education at all levels, the
protection of agricultural and urban
workers, rural public order, rural branch
banks and banks for urban workers,
social security, pubUc health and poor
law administration.
The Constitution of 25 November 1950
now in force is designed to give
the Haitian people a tool for the
building of a free, peaceful and prosper¬
ous civilization based on collaboration
between the social classes and co-op-
- eration between the nations. It gives the
Government a legal and social pro¬
gramme for transforming Haiti into a
modern State. As the Message from the
Constituent Assembly to the Haitian
people stated: "'the State must seek
to improve public health, raise the
living standards of all sections of the
population, and organize an educational
system based on the principles of liberty,
morality, civic responsibUity and human
solidarity and providing equal oppor¬
tunities for aU, so that every individual,
according to his gifts and merits, may
share in the advantages offered by his
national community and enjoy the
benefits of the intellectual, literary,
artistic, scientific and technical progress
made throughout the world."
The Government of Mr. Paul E. Ma-
gloire has, since December 6 1950, been
striving earnestly for the implementa¬
tion of this programme which is so com¬
pletely in line with the United Nations
Charter. In this task it relies on the full
collaboration of the United Nations.
