Respect for local traditions and (he
rights of minorities is applied to
legal matters in French Morocco,
where several kinds of courts
function side by .side. Koranic
courts for Arabs and Rabbinical
courts for Moroccan Jews deal with
religious and family questions such
as marriage, divorce, inheritance,
etc. Offences carrying sentences of
less than two years' imprisonment,
whether involving Arab or Jewish
Moroccan citizens, are judged by
local "Pacha" courts, while more
serious cases are heard in higher
"Shenfian" courts. In cases where
one of the two parties concerned
is French, judgment is delivered by
a French court. Photos on these
pages show: above, a "Pacha"
court judge, an accused person and
his lawyer; below, a Rabbinical
court and a French court (Photos
copyright Paul Almasy).

JUSTICE
A net freeing the innocent
but trapping the guilty
By Reginald Hemeleers
knows that they
NO peace-
loving citi¬
zen with a
clear conscience
ever takes to his
heels at the sight
of a policeman.
On the contrary,
the badge and
the polished but¬
tons usually give
him a sense of
security. He
will protect him
¡ against danger and injustice.
The role of the policeman and of
! the entire judicial structure is to
protect the security of the citizen. The
! policeman is not an enemy of freedom;
I instead, he is its guarantor. It is he
who prevents the anti-social citizen
from disturbing the peace of society.
Few people will quarrel with these
statements. But they probably will
tempt a good many people to wonder
why men have always fought so
desperately against excesses of power
| and why the severest criticism which
can be levelled against a political sys¬
tem is the label "police state".
The answer, of course, is that the
police can quickly become the worst
possible menace to individual freedom
if free institutions are not solidly
established or, even worse, if the
morality of society is decaying.
The police, in themselves, are only
an instrument. In the hands of
arbitrary power, this instrument can
become a blind force of evil. Naturally
not all authoritarian regimes have
been inhuman. Despotism can be
enlightened. Did not Plato proclaim in
his Republic that men shall be happy
when kings become philosophers or
philosophers become kings? Machia-
velli, Rousseau and a good many others
meditated over the eternal problem of
the "good tyrant".
Nevertheless, man prefers not to put
himself in the hands of fate. Instead,
he demands guarantees the t's crossed
and i's dotted on his rights.
Men have fought hard to obtain such
guarantees of individual liberty from
Reginald Hemeleers was formerly a barrister at the
Brussels Court of Appeal. A founder and editor of
La Revue nouvelle and a former director of the Belgian
weekly, La Relève, he is the author of many papers
on legal questions. Since 1953, he has been head of
Unesco's Press Division.
their rulers. In England, centuries of
struggle led to the Habeas Corpus Act
adopted under Charles II in 1679 and
it was this act which spelled out the
main safeguards of individual liberty
to be found in most modern con¬
stitutions. The storming of the Bas¬
tille in Paris, a turning point in
Western history, was no more than a
popular uprising against a reign of ar¬
bitrary arrests and "letters of cachet".
Today, what guarantees do we have
of individual liberty? First, it should
be noted that they vary from country
to country. They have been stated
differently, having been integrated into
different legal structures but their
principles are generally the same.
The first of these principles is that
no man can be punished unless he has
violated a law already on the statute
books. The second is that his punish¬
ment must be decided by an inde¬
pendent magistrature independent,
that is, from the ruling power. At the
base of this system is the legislator
who must define prohibited acts in
advance and lay down penalties to
enforce his prohibitions.
Adopted by the United Nations Gen¬
eral Assembly on December 10, 1948,
the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights states, as a general principle,
that "no one shall be subjected to
arbitrary arrest, detention or exile".
Then it goes on to underscore the need
of a legal basis for any condemnation.
In Article II (section 2), it declares:
"No one shall be held guilty of any
penal offence on account of any act
or omission which ' did not constitute
a penal offence, under national or
international law, at the time when it
was committed. Nor shall a heavier
penalty be imposed than the one that
was applicable at the time the penal
offence was committed".
This is an enormous guarantee. The
definition of a crime and the fixing of
its penalty must be established in
advance and made known. Under this
article, it is not possible for the state
to concoct an infraction at the last
minute to imprison a citizen as has
been done so often in the past.
Still, it is only a guarantee in law.
It is not enough, unless it is reinforced
(Cont'd on next page)

JUSTIGE (Cont'd)
CAMEL-MOUNTED police capture a suspected bandit after a
wild chase across Syrian desert (lower photos). Above, suspect
'is interrogated by police authorities to determine whether formal
charges are to be preferred. (Copyright Paul Almasy).
by another concerning the enforcement
of the law. It is the judge, after all,
who must decide whether or not an
infraction has been committed and, if
necessary, pass sentence. He cannot
do so conscientiously unless he has a
clearly-defined status guaranteeing his
independence.
The Anglo-Saxon system of the
separation of powers, which has been
widely imitated, safeguards the inde¬
pendence of the judiciary both from
the legislative and the executive arms
of government. This independence
the law of the land in most nations
demands of any judge an acute aware¬
ness of his responsibilities and the
gravity of his mission. There would
be no point in protecting .the inde¬
pendence of a. judge willing to take
orders or vulnerable to corruption.
In France, Henri François d'Agues-
seau, chancellor of France in the early
18th century, has come to symbolize
the judge of integrity, fiercely jealous
of his independence. D'Aguesseau did
not hesitate to lay down a maxim
which remains true to this day: "The
judge who is not a hero is not even
an upright man."
Strictly speaking, the principles of
the legality of punishment and the
independence of the judiciary are not
guarantees of individual freedom. They
are merely two main prerequisites for
an equitable system of justice. Of
course, they give a defendant a
.maximum of opportunities to stand on
his rights, but they are only part of a
series of principles whose objective is
to avoid, insofar as possible, condemn¬
ing an innocent man.
The entire question of individual
liberty cannot be separated from the
problem of preventive custody. Ob¬
viously, if ,a man is suspected of a
serious crime such as a murder, he
cannot be left completely free until a
verdict is rendered. There is always
the risk that he may go into hiding
or flee the country. Secondly, in a
serious case, investigators nearly
always require that the suspect be
kept in custody if only to prevent him
destroying the evidence of his guilt.
This principle of preventive custody
is widely accepted and it does not
conflict with the Declaration of Human
Rights (Article II, Section 1) where it
is stated that "everyone charged with
a penal offence has the right to ' be
presumed innocent until proved guilty
according to law in a public trial at
which he had all the guarantees
necessary for his defence".
But preventive custody does carry
the seed of a grave danger to indi¬
vidual liberty the possibility that,
once a suspect is arrested, he may be
simply left to rot in prison by authori¬
ties that never go to the trouble of
accusing him formally and never give
him his day in court.
The insidious growth of a form of
administrative detention without any~
admitted causeand without any
fixed limit in time must be avoid¬
ed at any price. A perfect penal code
would be meaningless if authorities had
the power of locking up a citizen
without telling him which of its laws he
had violated. A corps of honest,
independent judges would be useless
if men could be imprisoned without
their cases ever coming before these
judges. And the accused man's care¬
fully-defined right to a defence is
valueless if he never has the possibility
of defending himself. Under such
conditions, society returns immediately
to the "letters of cachet" which the
burners of the Bastille thought they
had destroyed for eternity!
When burghers fled
To avoid these abuses, nearly every
country has laws to limit preven¬
tive custody. In most natrons, no
man can be arrested without a warrant
delivered by a judicial authority. Under,
the justly-famed principle of habeas
corpus, charges must be preferred
against him after an extremely short
period following his arrest. The burden
of proof is on the state to show why
preventive custody is believed neces¬
sary and why the suspect should not
be allowed to go out on bail.
In some countries, the procedure is
somewhat different. There, the state
must obtain a "confirmation" of the
warrant in court and, if the warrant is
not confirmed, the prisoner must be
set at liberty until his trial. In any
case, this confirmation is only for a
short period, usually several weeks,
and the warrant must be confirmed all
over again if the suspect is to be kept
behind bars.
This is a brief and simplified des¬
cription of the system of preventive
custody which varies in its finer points
from one country to another. It is
intended to provide only a general
- - r-
- J^"^'*-
.--*>*.'15*¿L'

view of a technique which has been
developed in the - long struggle for
human freedom to protect the citizen
in his dealings with authority.
Earlier, I mentioned that the average
citizen is usually comforted by- the
sight of a policeman. This has not al¬
ways been the case. For centuries,
burghers fled automatically at the
approach of the watch. Only a few
years ago, the Nazi regime filled pri¬
sons and concentration camps with
men who had never been judged, men
who were to die shamefully without
ever knowing the reason why. Even
today, all of the fundamental guar¬
antees of individual liberty proclaimed
in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights are not fulfilled everywhere.
On this anniversary of Human
Rights Day, it might be wise to medi¬
tate for a few moments on the long,
hard road . which men have had to
travel before their "right to liberty and
security of person" was formally
recognized. This is the most basic of
rights after the right to life itself.
Until he is condemned, a defendant
is presumed innocent. It is up to the
state and its representative to prove
the accusations against him.
More than at any other time, it is
during the phase of investigation that
the state must remember that the
accused is presumed innocent and that,
even if -he is found guilty, he remains
a man and must be treated as one.
The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights states very simply: "No one
shall be subjected to torture or to
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment".
Curse of all eras
THERE is a good deal in this short
sentence. In its soberness, it
opens some frightening glimpses
of the infinite range of human agony.
Torture was not the exclusive property
of the Middle Ages. It has been the
curse of all eras and of all countries.
For there has always been and there
always will be the irritating case of
the defendant accused from all sides
but without any proof against him.
At this point you can find the
obsession of nearly every police force
the extortion of a confession.
Though the rack and the thumb¬
screw may not be used today, there
are still endless sessions of grilling
without food or sleep, to say nothing of
the more or less refined form of the
"third degree".
No doubt, the job of tracking down
criminals is a delicate one and basic
to the survival of society. But a
balance must be struck between the
demands of society and an elementary
respect for the man who is presumed
innocent under accusation.
'Occupational disease'
IT is this preliminary investigation
which is the most delicate phase of
the relationship between the citizen
and the judicial authorities. This is
the phase which is the least controlled
by law; therefore, it demands the
highest degree of education and of
conscience from judicial personnel at
all levels.
Once the investigation is complet¬
ed, the defendant is brought to
trial. In addition' to those two
basic guarantees of a legal basis for
punishment and the independence of
the judiciary, there are two other prin¬
ciples fundamental to equitable justice:
a public trial and the presence of
counsel for the defendant.
Low blows are always struck in the
dark. Throughout history, one-sided
trials have been held behind closed
doors and often before special juris¬
dictions created to hear a single case.
The public trial is a strong guarantee
of justice. Within a locked room, a few
accomplices can perjure away the
weight of evidence. But it is much
more difficult to do so in public,
especially in front of press writers
whose accounts of the testimony may
be printed for millions to read.
This does not mean that justice
should be rendered with an eye to
public opinion, which is often impas¬
sioned and ill-informed. The verdict
is the province only of the judge's
conscience and it is up to him to
divorce himself from any external
influences.
The right of the defendant to a
counsel of his own choice to aid him
Unesco Courier. Nr 10. 1954
and act in his name is so essential
that, without it, all of the other
guarantees become almost illusory. A
defendant .can be illiterate or, at any
rate, unfamiliar with legal procedure,
where only a specialist after all is at
heme. If a competent person cannot
act fcr him, then the advantages of the
prosecution are absurdly one-sided.
Many countries accord another
guarantee to defendants facing serious
charges: the right to trial by jury. The
jury, you might say, offsets the risk
that the judge might suffer from a sort
of "occupational disease" as the result
of his coming into contact every day
with criminals and, therefore, might
tend to see criminals everywhere. The
jury relieves the specialist of his
heaviest responsibility and confides it
to a dozen citizens chosen by. lot.
Experience has proved that jurors,
freed as they are from the grinding
routine of law, usually perform their
duties with the utmost conscientious¬
ness and often lend a more willing
ear to the Counsel for the defence
when he argues the weaknesses of the
evidence presented than might a judge
who had heard such arguments all too
often in the past.
No courts infallible
ONE after another, these guar¬
antees have made justice a net
whose mesh allows the innocent
to pass but traps the guilty. The
guarantees cited here are only the
most often applied. They provide a
picture of humanity's eternal effort to
bring order to society without menac¬
ing the peaceful citizen.
Courts have always made mistakes.
The most perfect technique can only
serve to reduce the number of these
mistakes to a minimum. But anyone
who has studied the problem closely
will agree that judicial error is one of
the most flagrant scandals which can
afflict society, a scandal which must
be combatted as if it were the plague.
. When citizens lose confidence in
justice, they return to the anarchy of
personal revenge. This means nothing
less than the death of liberty, the
oppression of the weak by the strong
and the very negation of rule by law.
^iteî^^^&Ésa Afc.«
' ' ¡-TU >373y%$S*ii**V^
7
