A NEWSFLASH
CROSSES
THE WORLD
by Percy Winner ,
It's well after dark on a hot midsummer night in a small
town, let's call it Jonesville, though that's not its real name
in the southwestern corner of the prairie state of Kansas
close to the centre of the United States of America. Most people
are in bed trying to sleep despite the heat, which is unusual
even for the time of the year. Here and there, however, some
are just passing the time.
For example, there's a group of men on the porch of the hotel
on Main Street. Among them is Bill Sommers, swaying in his
favourite rocking chair, smoking his corn-cob pipe, listening
with half an ear to two young fellows, Jim Peters and Artie
Carruthers, just back from action in Korea, and now complain¬
ing to each other that nothing ever happens in Jonesville; and
also to a vague, heavy droning sound somewhere in the distance.
Further along Main Street in the office of the weekly farm
newspaper which we can call the Amos County Gazette
Harry Eccles, the editor and the local "stringer" (part-time cor¬
respondent) of the Associated Press (AP) is busy "putting the
paper to bed" which means getting it ready to be printed and
circulated. He too hears the distant noise and wonders what it
can be.
Suddenly," on the porch of the hotel, Jim and Artie stop
talking at the same moment. Both of them listen intently.
"Say," says Jim to Bill Sommers, "there never used to be big
planes flying over there. And that sure is a big one." Artie,
bolting from the group to the middle of the street, looks upward
toward the starless, velvety black of the night sky. He points
excitedly toward the west, shouting: "Look, a real big one, low,
and in trouble, I'm sure."
By now the distant drone has become a fretful, coughing
roar. Eccles at the window of his office, and other residents
of the town, at their "windows, can now see plainly in the sky
Percy Winner of Unesco's Press Division has had news agency experience
including service as toi respondent of the Associated Press in London, Paris
and Rome ; correspondent in Paris and chief of the Rome Bureau of the Inter¬
national l\ews Service; chief correspondent m New York of the Havas News
Agency of France (pre-war predecessor of the Agence-France-Presse). Ile has
also been director of Uie international division of the National Broadcasting
Company and a broadcaster in French for the Columbia Broadcasting System.
the wide-spaced red and green wing lights of a large plane,
and between them, close to the red light, two spurts of flame.
Artie is running in the direction of the plane's movement, and
as he passes the office of the Gazette, he calls out: "Two motors
afire. She's going to crash, sure. Get help, help..."
Before the plane swoops downward, Editor Eccles' warning
telephone call has been received by the correspondent of the
AP in Dodge City, Kansas. Well before the real tragedy occurs
the failure of the pilot to clear the telegraph wires alongside
the road a mile and a half
west of Jonesville the call
has been relayed to Kansas
City, the key point on the
AP's "A" wire, the main
artery of the news agency's
domestic services, which con¬
nects the Atlantic and Pacific
Coasts, '.and the Canadian
frontier with Texas and Flo¬
rida.
When the would-be rescue
workers are standing helpless,"
kept back by terrible heat,
several score yards from the
splintered and charred steel
remains of what was a great
plane, the Kansas City office
of the AP has already check¬
ed by telephone, teleprinter
and telegraph with a dozen
offices in Chicago, New York
and Washington to find out
what plane could have been
in the vicinity of Jonesville.
And by the time the small
boys carrying messages from
the scene of the tragedy, in
a motor-car relay service
quickly organized by Artie to
FROM BERMUDA TO
THE FRONT PAGE
All the technical resources at
the disposal of modern news
collection and diffusion are
brought into play when an
important world event takes
place. At a meeting of leaders
of the major powers, such as
the Bermuda Conference, news
coverage becomes a major oper¬
ation, requiring the installation
of vast quantities of equipment
(upper photo). A few hours
later, people many thousands of
miles away will be reading
reports of the conference on
page one of their newspapers.
Those listening to their radios
will already have heard short
accounts. Where direct tele¬
vision coverage has been possible
people will have watched the
event as it was taking place.
10

UNESCO COURIER - N» 3 - 1934
help Editor Eccles, have brought word that there can't possibly
be survivors, Kansas City knows that Jonesville has been the.
scene of a news event of international importance. For the
plane that crashed for reasons as yet unknown was
carrying a group of leading government officials from several
countries, including the United States, Australia, Great Britain,
France, Norway and a number of South American countries
all due to attend a conference in San Francisco.
The news everything that can be learned from Jonesville,
where a staff man of the AP is now present, and everything
that has thus far been learned about the plane and its dis¬
tinguished passengers is now moving over Kansas City's
20 wire circuits, especially to New York and to San Francisco,
from where it is being relayed across the Atlantic and Pacific
Oceans, and also southward to Latin America.
'Big six' of the agencies
THE Associated Press which we have chosen as an example
of a vehicle for the transmission of a news event in one
part of the world to newspaper readers, radio listeners and
television viewers in a number of countries in the same and
other parts of the world, is one of the so-called world tele¬
graphic news agencies. There are only six such world agencies,
the other five are the Agence France Presse of France, Reuters
of Great Britain, Tass of the Soviet Union, and the United
Press and International News Service of the United States.
This term a world agency is used to denote an agency
which maintains a network of correspondents to collect news
in a great number of countries and a headquarters staff which
edits these news items, as well as domestic " news, and sends
them as quickly as possible to the agency's bureaux abroad
for local distribution to newspapers and broadcasting stations;
to national agencies abroad with- which it has working agree¬
ments; and directly to press and radio subscribers abroad.
Naturally, the AP has, in common with the other five world
agencies, an extensive network of telecommunications facilities
for gathering and transmitting news. In addition- to large
offices in such cities as New York, Washington, Kansas City,
San Francisco, Los Angeles, it has in the United States some
100 bureaux, some staffed by a single correspondent; and it
also has many "stringers" like Editor Eccles in Jonesville. The
collection of news outside the United States is carried out by a
staff of about 50 bureaux and by a large number of corres¬
pondents working in every continent. The number of countries
in which n the AP has subscribers is now more than 70.
Because of the nationality and prominence of some of the
victims of the disaster at Jonesville, the news is of special
interest all over the world, especially in the British Common¬
wealth, Western Europe and Latin America. From New York
" to which the news has been transmitted over the AP "A" wire
from Kansas City, it is relayed by a cable which runs directly
to the AP /'world desk" in. London". To this central routing
point, thousands of words of news come daily, most of ' them
concerning happenings in -the. United States, the Western
hemisphere generally and the Pacific area.
From London, the news is distributed in the United Kingdom
by an organization called the Press Association. It is also sent
by leased teleprinter to a large number of subscribers in Europe.
The teleprinter network links London with Amsterdam, Berlin,
Brussels, Copenhagen, Frankfurt, Hamburg, Luxembourg, Milan,
Oslo, Paris, Rome," Stockholm, Vienna. Connecting circuits
supply subscribers in France, Germany, the Netherlands, Scan¬
dinavia, Italy and Belgium, who are not in the cities mentioned
above. From Stockholm, the news goes to Finland; and from
Frankfurt, it goes to Hungary, Greece, Turkey, Egypt, Israel,
Malaya, Burma and Iran.
Subscribers in Latin America get the news by radio newscast
from New York, a service transmitted for 18 hours daily; or by
radio-teleprinter service, also from New York. There are also
wire connections to Mexico City and Havana.
From San Francisco, the western terminus of the "A" wire
from Kansas City, the news is conveyed by radio-teleprinter to
the entire Pacific area. The news from the small town in the
southwestern corner of a prairie state is received in such distant
places as Manila, Tokyo, Singapore and Hong Kong.
Thanks to news exchange arrangements between world
agencies, the story of the plane crash at Jonesville has been
made available in New York 'by the . AP to Reuters and the
Agence-France-Presse. Other agencies with which exchange
' arrangements exist are the Canadian Press, the Australian
Associated Press, the Austria Presse Agentür, TASS, the
Associated Press of Pakistan, the Kyodo News Service of Japan,
the Agentie de Informatii Telegrafice of Rumania, the Magyar
Tavirati Iroda of Hungary, the Haptong Tongshin of (South)
Korea, and the New Zealand Press Association.
Millions have been informed
PARALLEL with the AP, the other two world telegraphic news
agencies in the United States the United Press and the
International News Service have provided their sub¬
scribers and associated agencies in many parts of the world
with full information about the crash at Jonesville. All three
agencies have given service to radio networks and television
stations both in the United States and abroad. Moreover, cor¬
respondents in New York, Washington and San Francisco of
major foreign newspapers have sent articles about the news
and reporters of foreign radio networks have broadcast it.
Within a few hours of the moment on a hot midsummer
night when two young men lamented that nothing ever happens
in Jonesville, Kansas, U.S.A., many millions of persons all over
the world are fully informed by news agencies, newspapers,
radio and television of the tragic event that occured there.
