TEACHING SCIENCE WITH
ODDS AND ENDS
by
Daniel Behrman
INGENUITY AND A SOAP
PLANT are the main ingre¬
dients of these molecular models
Elvira Salazar is demonstrating
to two pupils in a Lima secon¬
dary school. The round pips
of the soap plant and a few
lengths of iron wire are all that
is needed for this introduction
to the atom. Miss Salazar is
only one of a team of six young
Peruvian chemistry teachers
working with Dr. Jose Martinez
Cros, a Spanish scientist sent
to Peru on a Unesco technical
assistance mission. Faced with
a shortage of teaching equip¬
ment and currency they de¬
cided to devise their own.
In a freshly-painted room in the Teresa Gonzalez de
Fanning School in Lima, Peru, Elvira Coloma, a fourth-
year student, was preparing her laboratory table for the
production of ammonia, the day's experiment in inorganic
chemistry, in this secondary school's programme.
First, she half-filled a test-tube with caustic soda solution,
measuring it by eyedropper from its flask, a syrup bottle.
She dropped three small lumps of ammonium carbonate into
the solution and plugged the test tube, using a cork with a
hole drilled through its centre. On top of this cork, she
fitted another test tube and then placed the whole affair on
a wooden ring stand, clamping the test tubes into position
with a clothes peg.
Elvira lit a match to her laboratory burner, an ink bottle
with a cotton wick, soaked in alcohol, rising through a hole
punched in the bottle's metal cap. As she slowly heated the
solution, bubbles of gas formed and rose into the upper tube.
She blew out the flame and removed this tube, stopping it
with her finger. She turned it right-side-up and filled it
' with water from a wine bottle with an eyedropper spout in
its cork. Then she sniffed. A strong smell of ammonia
came from the tube. To complete her test, she added a drop
of phenol-phthalein. When the colourless liquid came into
46
contact with the. ammonia, it turned pink. The experiment
was overhand Elvira began to write in her note-book.
Instead of watching a passive demonstration by a teacher
or simply memorizing a few passages from a chemistry test,
Elvira and her eighteen classmates had done the experiment
on their own. Their laboratory was an ordinary classroom
not even equipped with gas for Bunsen burners nor with
water outlets for each laboratory bench. But to do their
experiments Elvira and her friends had a kit of basic appa¬
ratus,- a "minimum laboratory" quite adequate enough to
conduct all of the organic and inorganic chemistry experi¬
ments in a secondary school science course. Its total cost
12 soles (60 cents or 4/-).
This "minimum laboratory" has been developed by Dr. Jose '
Martinez Cros, a Spanish scientist iwho took leave in 1951
from the Higher Council of Scientific Research in Madrid to
join a Unesco technical assistance mission working with
Peru's Ministry of Education on the training of science
teachers.
A nervously energetic man full of drive, Dr. Martinez Cros
built up this laboratory with the help of six young Peruvian
chemistry teachers. Beginning in 1952 they had studied
with him intensively to become a team of missionaries in

modern science teaching. In their own,work, they conducted
experiments with precision apparatus supplied by the Peru¬
vian Government and installed in the Fanning School while
it was still the Pedagogical Institute of Lima (it became a
girl's secondary school in 1953 when Peru opened its new
Central Normal School).
Precision apparatus was essential for these refresher
courses, but it was expensive. And it was no answer to the
problem of introducing experiments by individual students in
the average school. Another method had to be found
otherwise chemistry would remain a dull textbook subject
or, at best, a demonstration course.
The Peruvian teachers and Dr. Martinez Cros decided to
follow a line already traced by science teachers on United
Nations technical assistance missions for Unesco in Indo¬
nesia, the Philippines and Thailand. In these countries,
school experiments in chemistry and physics had been
conducted using equipment built out of anything at hand
from electric light bulbs to discarded telephones. However,
Dr. Martinez Cros and the Peruvian teachers did their own
research. Dr. Martinez Cros had not brought any prefabri¬
cated ideas into Peru from Spain,- nor was there any magic
-Unesco formula for teaching science without apparatus.
In the "minimum laboratory" they built up in Lima, two
points have been stressed simplicity and precision. "Home¬
made apparatus is as good from a pedagogical viewpoint as
expensive equipment", Dr. Martinez Cros told me. "It has
one great advantage if the student is interested in che¬
mistry, he can duplicate it at home and make his own
experiments."
In terms of precision, the group decided that, while an
electric light bulb with its metal base filed off may serve as
a laboratory flask for primary school lessons, it was not
adequate for experiments at the secondary level. Therefore,
a set of 16 pyrex test tubes is among the three items in the
"'minimum laboratory" which must be purchased from a
chemical supply house, the other two being a glass funnel
and a few feet of glass tubing.
Using the versatile
electric light bulb
THE test-tubes go into a home-made wooden rack with
numbered corks to identify their contents. Another
rack is filled with syrup bottles containing the six
reagents needed for secondary school chemistry experi¬
ments ammonium hydroxide, caustic soda, sulphuric acid,
nitric acid, hydrochloric acid and phenol-phthalein. In the
interest of safety and economy, they are corked with
-eyedroppers. Students are never required to pour an acid.
The wooden ring-stand is a basic feature of the laboratory.
It consists of a flat (wooden base with a dowel nailed to the
bottom. A horizontal slat of wood is attached to the dowel
by clothes pegs, permitting it to ride up and down or to be
rotated. To this moveable slat are nailed two more clothes
pegs, one for holding test tubes vertically and the other
slanted for experiments in which the test tube must be kept
at an angle to protect the student against escaping acid.
The laboratory burner is a descendant of the ink bottle
burners used by Unesco technical assistance workers in Asia.
Then there are sundry accessories test-tube holders of
scrap metal salvaged from shipping crates, waste jars
consisting of wine bottles with their upper halves filed off,
pieces of window glass to handle products which might harm
a wooden table; a heating pan devised from a bottle cap
with a handle of bent wire soldered to it, small test tubes
made from glass aspirin tubes (better than the factory-made
article in some cases because their flat bottoms make it
easier to calculate volumes), boiling flasks made from the
bottom half of the versatile electric light bulb,' and a length
of -electric wire and two dry cells for carrying out experi¬
ments in electrolysis.
The key to the laboratory is the use of materials found in
Peruvian homes or available in shops at low cost. For
example, models of molecular structures are made with their
atoms represented by the hard round pips of a Peruvian soap
plant sold on the market for 3 cents a pound and linked
together by pieces of iron wire. , Molecular models made from
UNESCO COURIER N°« 8-9 1954
the soap plant are just as good for teaching purposes as
those built from imported kits which cost as much as $ 80.
Dr. Martinez Cros has gone much further in his laboratory
for training teachers. Although much of its equipment was
made in the Fanning school, it is at a much higher level
a prototype of a rational, low-cost laboratory for a normal
school. Each table is equipped with bases inserted flush into
its surface to take metal ring stands, merely lengths of pipe
threaded at one end to screw into the tables. Gas-operated
Bunsen burners are used here and they are prepared from
lengths of 17 mm pipe equipped with jets used by Peruvians
for their kerosene stoves. The tables are of wood, covered
with an anti-acid paint. Wood is cheaper than tile in Peru
and it reduces the breakage of glass equipment.
Scales from thread,
corks, wood and needles
MOST of this equipment is now manufactured in the
school by Felix Jacinto Bravo, a handy laboratory
assistant whom Dr. Martinez Cros trained in laboratory
glass blowing. While no attempt is made to produce com¬
plicated precision apparatus, the laboratory meets its own
needs in tubing and can handle repairs of broken equipment.
Training in glass blowing is included in the course which
Dr. Martinez Cros conducts for chemistry teachers.
A similar job of training teachers and improvising apparat¬
us was carried out next door to the chemical laboratory by
Dr. Raymond Zuckermann, a French physicist who complet¬
ed a Unesco mission in Peru in 1953. While Dr. Martinez
Cros was conducting experiments with his six chemists, Dr.
Zuckermann was working with six physics teachers.
There was one important difference in their tasks. Che¬
mistry experiments require only basic equipment, but physics
demonstrations need different apparatus for virtually every
principle to be proven. Dr. Zuckermann and his students were
confronted with experiments requiring equipment far too
costly for the budget of an average school. They decided to
go ahead with what they could find.
The results are in the physics laboratory of the' Fanning
school, a house of ingenious marvels. In this laboratory,
scales sensitive to 2 milligrams are produced out of thread,
corks, wood and needles (the scales are so sensitive that they
cannot be operated with a window or a door open in the
laboratory). An old Model T Ford magneto and a magnify¬
ing glass have been transformed into a mirror galvanometer.
A discarded phonograph motor plays a major part in an
apparatus for demonstrating the law of falling bodies.
One of the most fascinating of these instruments is the
laboratory's extensometer, a device for measuring the expan¬
sion of metals when heated, and contrived from wood, paper
and wires. When a current is passed into it to heat the metal
being tested, the expansion is indicated by a wooden needle
registering on a gauge inked out on paper. Exact measure¬
ment of this expansion requires exact knowledge of thu
temperature to which the metal has been heated. This is
determined with surprising simplicity: a piece of wire is
attached to the metal under test by a lump of sulphur and.
as soon as the sulphur melts, the experimenter knows how
hot he has heated the metal because he knows the melting
point of sulphur.
Outgoing fellows
incoming experts
IN this laboratory, as in the chemistry room of Dr. Mar¬
tinez Cros, delicate equipment is used only in working
with teachers. Here, too, simplified models have been
devised for use by individual students in physics classes.
Both of the laboratories are being moved out to the new
Central Normal School at Chosica, an ultra-modern structure
basking in year-round sunshine.
In Peru the 25 miles from Lima to Chosica equal the cli¬
matic difference between New York and Miami in the United
States or Paris and the Riviera in France. Lima has a cool
climate with overcast skies, the gift of the Humboldt Current
47

'Minimum
Laboratory
(Continued)
on the shores of the Pacific. Chosica,
inland in the valley of the Rio Rimac
never sees a cloud.
The new normal school now has an
enrolment of 280 future teachers.
Besides developing the science la¬
boratories, technical assistance has
been able to play a part in the school
by providing Unesco fellowships for
two vocational education teachers to
study at the University of Puerto
Rico. The director of the school'f
audio-visual section, Manuel Vera,
also studied for a year at the Uni¬
versity of Wisconsin in the United
States under a technical assistance
fellowship and he is introducing
films, film strips, records, charts and
other teaching aids in the normal
school's laboratory classes.
This method of complementing
incoming international technical as¬
sistance workers with outgoing Peru¬
vian fellows has the unqualified appro¬
val of such Peruvian education leaders
as Carlos Teixeira, the country's direc¬
tor of technical education, who be¬
lieves that "the fellow is as important
to Peru as the expert."
Mr. Teixeira is at the head of
a mushrooming technical education
system which is placing heavy de¬
mands on Peru's available supply of
teachers of science and trade. From
1948 to 1952, the number of students
attending industrial, agricultural and
commercial schools jumped from 9,500 to 20,000. The
vocational training department in the Central Normal
School is the first of its kind set up in Peru specifically to
train teachers of vocational education to staff the classrooms
which are being built throughout the country.
These teachers are badly needed. Early in 1954 among
those in Peru's 34 vocational schools, there were only 44 who
had graduated from a normal school, although Mr. Teixeira
hoped to double their number before the end of the year.
"We are giving technical school teachers the same privileges
THE CHILDREN'S HOUR on this record player is part of the programme of the audio-visual section
at Peru's new Central Normal School at Chosica, 25 miles from Lima. Manuel Vera, who studied
for one year at the University of Wisconsin in the United States under a Unesco technical assistance
fellowship, is now director of this section of the school.
and the same salaries as academic teachers", he explained.
"This is a fight to dignify technical education so that we
can attract good teachers and it is going on elsewhere in
the world as well as in Peru."
"Economic progress brings up the old question of the
chicken and the egg", Mr. Teixeira told me. "Should a coun¬
try train skilled workers first or wait until its industries are
desperately short of labour? We are now going ahead with
the training of workers and that is why we need more and
better teachers. We believe that Peru will not stand still."
EVERY EXPERIMENT required in a secondary
school chemistry course can be performed with
this "minimum laboratory" put together by
Dr. Martinez Cros, which can be used even in
rooms without water or gas facilities. Here,
two pupils are conducting an experiment in
the production of ammonia.
A BREATH OF AIR is enough to disturb
these scales, sensitive to two milligrams though
they consist of wood, corks, needles and string.
Here, Carmen Cassano, a member of the team
of physics teachers chosen to work with the
Unesco mission, is seen here testing a scale at
the end of her "production line".
EXPANSION OF METALS when heated by
an electric current can be measured with this
home-made "extensometer" operated by Mesias
Huannga, another member of the team of
physics teachers. The paper tube around the
wire prevents it from being cooled by air cur¬
rents during the experiment.
48
