IT WAS COLDER
WHEN WE WERE YOUNGER
RECEDING GLACIERS in Greenland, Alaska, the Alps
and elsewhere are an indication that the average world
temperature is increasing. The base of the Swiss Alpine
glacier shown in the centre of this photo is at. an altitude
of about 6,000 feet. Glacier on left is receding rapidly.
Its base is nearly 1,200 higher. (Photo Swissair.)
THE changes in climate that people
think they experience are seldom
real. Extremes of heat or cold, of
drought or rainfall, occur at intervals,
many years apart. Because those of
childhood seem most dramatic they are
longest remembered, and we are easily
tempted to compare present average
weather with the remembered extremes.
These extremes, however, can be
expected to recur, and do not constitute
a lasting change.
Nevertheless it is now quite certain
that the average temperature of the
inhabited parts of the earth has risen
about 2°F (1°C) 'within the past 100
years, with most of that change since
1890.
This seems a very small change but it
is important. If the average tempera¬
ture of the earth should drop by only
4°F (2°C) ,the glaciers would again
advance from the Poles and eventually
cover large parts of Canada, Northern
Europe and Asia. On the other hand, if
the present process of warming con¬
tinues to the end of this century, the
melting of Arctic ice will cause a rise in
the sea-level that may be troublesome
on many sea-coasts. Over a longer
course of time, this slow rate of change
would transform the earth.
It has happened often in. past ages.
The earth is at least 2,000 million years
old and in that time the temperature
has gone up and down repeatedly. For
about 99 per cent of its existence the
earth was much warmer than now and -
tropical conditions prevailed over most
of the surface. The coal deposits in
England, in Siberia and Alaska, and even
on the Antarctic continent, are the
remains of luxuriant tropical vegetation,
long since extinct. At intervals of about
250 million years there have been relati¬
vely short periods, only a few million
years long, of intense cold when glaciers
covered a large portion of the continents
of the earth. Only ten to twenty
SCIENCE CHRONICLE
by Gerald Wendt
thousand years ago vast sheets of ice
extended from the North Pole down into
Germany and France, and covered all of
Canada and the northern part of the
United States.
We are still in the period ofwarming up
after the last glacial age. In Greenland,
in Alaska, in the Alps and elsewhere the
glaciers are still receding because the
snow that falls in the short and rela¬
tively mild winters does not make up for
the melting of ice during the long, warm
summers. In Spitzbergen the average
winter temperature has risen 18°F
(10°C) since 1910, and the harbour is now
open 200. days .a year. Where records
have been kept the facts are beyond
question. In Philadelphia, the rise in .
temperature has been 4°F (2°C) in the
past century. In Montreal, Canada, in
Britain and in Scandinavia, the increase
has been about 2°F (1°C) since 1850.
The future of many lands depends on
whether. this change will go on and for
how long it.will continue. No one knows
because no one can be sure (why such
changes take place. They may be due
to conditions on '.the sun and a fluc¬
tuation in the amount of heat that
reaches the earth. Or - they may be
caused by a shift in the tilt of the
earth's axis. But there is no definite
evidence for either of these two possibi¬
lities. Most experts agree that they are
caused by changes in the earth's
atmosphere, for which two principal
possibilities have been suggested.
One of these is a change in the activity
of the earth's volcanoes. A really large
volcanic eruption, such as that of the
island of Krakatoa in the East Indies in
August of 1883, throws enormous quan¬
tities of fine ash many miles into the
sky and winds carry the ash to all parts
of the earth to dim the sunlight. After
the eruption of Krakatoa, astronomers at
the Montpellier Observatory in France,
noted a 10 % decrease in the ;amount of
sunshine. For about three years the
thin cloud of volcanic ash apparently
prevented the full strength of the sun
from reaching the earth's surface. The
eruption of Krakatoa, however, was the
last of the great eruptions. So the air
may be clearer now and the sunshine
brighter and hotter. It is possible,
though not very probable, that volcanic
26

ash in the air is the cause of periods of
cooler weather.
Nearly a century ago the British
scientist John Tyndall suggested that
the cause is to be found in the increase
or decrease of carbon dioxide gas in the
atmosphere. This theory was recently
developed by Professor Gilbert N. Plass
of Johns Hopkins University in a radio
broadcast.
Normally, the air contains 0.03 per cent
carbon dioxide. This gas acts somewhat
like the glass roof of a greenhouse
because it is .transparent -to the direct
rays of the sun and lets them strike the
earth and there change into radiant heat
waves. These rays are absorbed by the
carbon dioxide just ',as they are by a
greenhouse roof. They do not. escape
into empty space but remain to warm
the air and thus the earth itself. .
Tons of Co2
INCREASES in the amount of carbon
dioxide in the, air would therefore
result in a warmer climate. And the
fact is that direct measurements of the
carbon dioxide content of the atmos¬
phere tend to show that the. amount has
increased by about 10 per cent during
the past 50 years. That would nicely
account for the increase in the average
temperature.
But the question then becomes: what
causes the carbon dioxide to vary?
There are several possibilities. Green
plants absorb carbon dioxide from the
air and water from the earth and under
the action of sunshine combine them to
make sugars, starches and cellulose and
thus to build their structures. About a
million million tons of carbon dioxide
are thus taken out of the atmosphere
every year in the life process of growing
plants.
But this is not a total loss because the
plants, and the animals that feed upon
them, eventually die and decay and in
decaying the carbon dioxide is reformed
and escapes back to the atmosphere. If
this decay does not occur, as in the
formation of coal where the plants are
buried and protected from decay then
the growth of plants results in a gradual
loss of carbon dioxide from the air.
But only some ten million tons of carbon
dioxide are thus buried in the earth
each year and lost to the atmosphere. It
is a comparatively small amount and
cannot be an important factor.
Weathering rocks
ANOTHER influence on the carbon
dioxide content of the air is geolo¬
gical. The weathering of rocks
and their conversion into soil is to a
large extent an attack upon the rocks
by carbonic acid, the weak acid that
forms when carbon dioxide dissolves in
water. The result is a slow change of
the rocks from silicates to carbonates.
This process takes about 100 million tons
of carbon dioxide from the air every
year. But this process is balanced by
another geological process. Hot springs
and volcanoes pour large quantities of
carbon dioxide into the air, approximate¬
ly 100 milUon tons a year. Thus the
' two geological processes normally count¬
eract each other.
But neither of them is steady. Both
change with the conditions of the earth's
surface. In periods of the 'earth's his¬
tory long ago huge mountain ranges
were raised" so that the surface was
higher and more rugged than now. This
exposed new "rock to weathering and in
such periods the rate of removing carbon
dioxide from the air is greatly increased,
j This means that the heat rays from the
earth can more easily escape into empty
space and the average temperature falls.
The records of the earth's history show
that periods of mountain building were
followed by periods of glacier formation
a few milUon years later.
On the other hand, in those periods
of the earth's history when the land
was generally flat and marshy and
there was less weathering of the rocks,
carbon dioxide tended to accumulate and
the weather during such periods was
tropical. The rise and fall of the average
temperature may thus well depend on
the relative rates at which carbon
dioxide is removed by weathering or is
supplied by springs and volcanoes.
It is interesting that this change in
the carbon dioxide content would also
affect -the amount of rainfall. A cloud
sheds its rain when there is a consider¬
able - difference of temperature between
its lower and upper surfaces. With less
carbon dioxide, the upper surface of the
cloud cools more quickly and thus in¬
creases the rainfall. Periods of low
carbon dioxide are both cooler- and
wetter. Periods of high carbon dioxide
are hotter and dryer.
But there is one new factor that would
increase the carbon dioxide content of
the air. It is an effect of man's activity:
the burning of coal and oil. The carbon
dioxide produced by combustion is much
UNESCO COURIER - N» 2 - 1954
larger than is generally reaUzed. The
burning of one ton of coal produces
about two and a half tons of carbon
dioxide. It is estimated that each year
six thousand million tons of carbon
dioxide are poured into the atmosphere,
chiefly by industrial plants. This is a
much larger amount than from any
other cause. If all this additional carbon
dioxide stays in the atmosphere it alone
could account for a temperature rise of
2°F (1°C) in a century. Strange as it
may seem, this is very close to the rate
at which the temperature is actually
rising now. » Thus man himself may be
responsible for the changing climate.
If this is so, and if no other process
appears to counterbalance it, then the
climate of the earth will become contin¬
ually warmer and possibly also dryer
for the next few centuries. This, in turn,
means that crops such as grain, or
grapes which could formerly be grown
only in> southern areas, will become
available much nearer to the Arctic.
Already in Finland and Scandinavia,
farmers are ploughing fields that had
lain under the ice for centuries. In
Canada and Siberia, the area of perma¬
nently frozen ground is retreating
toward the Pole at the rate of a hundred
yards to several miles a year. Time was
when Greenland and Iceland supported
a flourishing culture and grapes could
be cultivated in .England. Such times
are likely to return and vast areas of
Canada, Alaska and Siberia may become
available for food production.
VOLCANIC ACTIVITY is one suggested cause for changes in the
world's climate. After the gigantic eruption of the East Indian island of
Krakatoa in 1883 scientists in France noted a 10% decrease in sunshine
apparently due to the thin cloud of volcanic ash which stopped the full
strength of the sun from reaching the earth. Since then there- have been
no great eruptions so the air may be clearer and the sunshine brighter
and hotter. (Photo American Overseas Lines).
27
