THE
COURT
STEPS
Vß ] "*
¡JböJ
SEAT OF THE GOVERNMENT. When the French architect
Pierre l'Enfant arrived in 1790 to help establish Washington,
he at once spotted the logical location for the new "Congress
House"'Jenkins Hill, 88 feet above the river. .Here, the Capitol,
which cost S 20,000,000, was built. It is now the home of
the House of Representatives, the Senate and various adminis¬
trative services, which together constitute the Congress.
EARLY in the development of the United
States it became established that the
Supreme Court, the highest tribunal in the
land, had the right and the function of passing
upon the constitutionality of federal, state and
'local legislation. Theoretically, the Court may
not pass upon the wisdom of such legislation
but merely -upon the right, according to the
Constitution and previous judicial decisions, of
any law-making body to enact a specific law.
But the broad language of the Constitution
and the great variety of "precedents" created
by earlier decisions have given the Court
considerable freedom in selecting policies it has
wanted to advance at the expense of alternatives
it has not found attractive. The Court,
throughout its long and controversial history,
has in fact often been able to impose its own
philosophy of government and, by its inter¬
pretations, to engage in what is tantamount to
the act of legislation.
It is necessary to understand how the
Supreme Court has interpreted the Constitution
and its amendments, for its decisions have
defined the power of the federal and local
governments to enact laws and issue regulations
protecting the rights of victims of discri¬
mination. In addition, the Court has recently
been in the forefront of the trend toward
greater protection of civil rights of all kinds,
including the right to obtain employment
without disadvantage because of race, creed,
colour, _ or ethnic origin.
The decisions of the United States Supreme
Court on matters of group relations have varied
greatly, during the last 100 years. From about
1868, when the Fourteenth Amendment to the
Constitution went into effect, until about 1937,
the Court usually supported those laws which
tended to enforce the separation of Negroes and
whites. Concomitantly, it acted in such a way
as to weaken the effects of those tending to
promote the association of Negroes and whites
except in situations where the superiority of
the whites was clearly maintained.
Since 1937, however, the policy of the Court
has changed drastically and it has consistently
upheld the rights of victims of discrimination.
Before 1937 the Court felt it imperative to
restrain the legislatures, from regulating and
limiting the rights of property holders: thus,
during the 1920's it blocked legislation on child
labour, minimum wages for women, farm
problems, and public utility valuation. About
1937, however, the Court elevated the protection
of civil rights to a preferred position; since then
it has tended to refrain from blocking
legislation on economic rights and to restrain
legislatures, individuals and groups from un¬
fairly discriminating against "minority" groups.
(Photo Ropho-SJock Star)

The new outlook of the tribunal ~was
clearly expressed in 1940 by Associate
Justice Hugo L. Black, when he stated
for the entire Court : "No higher duty,
no more solemn responsibility, rests
upon this Court, than that of translat¬
ing into living law and maintaining
this constitutional shield deliberately
planned and inscribed for the benefit
of every human being subject to our
Constitution of whatever race, creed
or persuation."
Three historic clauses
OF all the provisions of the United
States Constitution none has
been more significant for the
rights of Negroes and other minority
groups than the Fourteenth Amend¬
ment. This amendment reads: "No
State shall make or enforce any law
which shall abridge the privileges or
immunities of citizens of the United
States, nor shall any State deprive any
person of life, liberty, or property
without due process of law, nor deny to
any person within its jurisdiction the
equal protection of the laws."
Over and over again, in any study of
minority problems, mention will be
made of the three main clauses of this
amendment, the "privileges and im¬
munities" clause, the "due process"
clause, and the "'equal protection"
clause. Endless scrutiny and inter¬
minable debates have gone into the
attempt to fix the precise meaning and
application of the words of the
legislators. Various interpretations of
these clauses have had through the
years a crucial impact on the welfare
of minorities in the United States.
In 1873, in the very first case under
the Fourteenth Amendment to reach
it, the Supreme Court laid the basis
for a lengthy series of decisions which
weakened the force of its provisions.
In its final opinion, the Court estab¬
lished a distinction between the rights
of an individual as a citizen of the
United States and the rights of an
individual as a- citizen of the state in
which he or she resides. The privileges
and immunities clause, it ruled, pro¬
tects' only federal rights from hostile
state action.
Privileges violated
FROM that time onward, the Court
refused to consider the civil
rights of "minority" groups as
rights which they had by virtue
of their United States citizenship;
such rights, the Court stated or
implied, were enjoyed by virtue of
state citizenship and hence were not
affected by the Fourteenth Amend¬
ment. In 1935, however, the Court for
the first time invalidated a state law
on the ground that it violated the
privileges and immunities clause. But
five years later the Court flatly reversed
its position, and thus made the clause
virtually inoperative again.
The "due process" clause has,
likewise, been the subject of changing
interpretations in a changing world.
Although "due process of law"
originally meant a fair hearing by a
properly constituted authority in
criminal and civil cases, in 1890 the
Court began to invoke it to invalidate
legislation which it held to be un¬
reasonable.
For many years the Court protected
property rights by means of this clause,
but restricted the federal government's
power to use it for the protection of
the rights of accused persons against
various forms of state action. Then, in
1925, it accepted the notion that the
"due process" clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment forbids the state govern¬
ments to do what the First Amend¬
ment (1)' forbids the United States
Government to do.
Thus, in piecemeal fashion, the
Court's interpretation of the Fourteenth
Amendment has extended the scope of
the Bill of Rights until it now serves as
a means of protection not only against
the actions of the federal goverment
but those of the 48 state governments
as well. This extension has meant a
great deal, particularly to Negroes,
who have always found state legislation
and state authority more oppressive
than federal law and authority. In
1945 the Court took an important step
in this direction when it upheld the
constitutionality of a federal law
(originating as far back as 1866) which
has since served to deter state and
local officials from depriving Negroes
accused of a crime of the protection to
which they are entitled.
The third of the clauses in the
(1) "Congress shall make no law respecting
an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the
free exercise thereol ; or abridging the freedom
of speech, or of the press ; or the right of the
people peaceably to assemble, and to petition
the Government for a redress of grievances."
UNESCO COURIER. N° 6. 1954
Fourteenth Amendment, the "equal
protection" clause, has been the chief
constitutional source for the protection
of the rights of minorities. Its scope
was considerably limited only a few
years after it came into being, when, in
1883, the Court held that the Four¬
teenth Amendment restricted only the
state governments, and not private
citizens, from discriminating. This
interpretation still stands.
Birth of a doctrine
IN 1896 the Court upheld a state law
requiring separate but equal ac¬
commodations for Negroes and
whites on railroads moving within the
borders of Louisiana. In deciding this
case, (Plessy v. Ferguson) the Court
stated the famous "separate but equal"
doctrine, which inaugurated a new
epoch in United States group relations,
in the following words :
"A statute which implies merely a
legal distinction between the white and
coloured races a distinction which
is founded in the colour of the two
races, and which must always exist so
long as white men are distinguished
from the other race by colour has
no tendency tö destroy the legal equality
of the two races, or re-establish a state
of involuntary servitude."
True, the Court insisted, in cases it
decided later, upon adherence to this
"separate but equal" rule but with only
moderate practical consequences. Thus,
despite the Fourteenth Amendment,
which forbids the states to "deny to
any person within its jurisdiction the
equal protection of the laws," Negroes
have in fact enjoyed separate but far
from equal facilities in the Southern
(Acme)
THE HIGHEST JUDICIAL BODY The drafters of the Constitution of the United States divided
federal power into three parts to form a system of checks and balances executive, legislative and
judicial. The executive is the White House, that is, the President and the government ministers; the
legislative is the Congress and the highest judicial body is the Supreme Court. Originally the Court sat
in the same building as Congress, but since I 935 it has had its own white marble home on Capitol Hill.
15

THE COURT
STEPS IN
(Continued)
states. But, even under the "separate
but equal" doctrine, Negroes have been
able to win rulings that materially
weakenejd the entire system of colour
segregation in the United States.
A costly business
THESE gains have been made in
two ways. First, the Court has
adopted a progressively stringent
interpretation of what "equal facilities"
means, thus making segregation more
costly and cumbersome than ever.
As a result of a series of cases
involving discrimination In education, *
there are, today, thousands of Negroes
attending unsegregated, state-support¬
ed institutions of higher learning in
the South, whereas there were none a
decade or so ago. Similar, although
less spectacular, gains have been made
in the effort to eliminate discrimina¬
tion and segregation in transportation
facilities, mainly through decisions that
interpret broadly the power of Con¬
gress to regulate interstate commerce.
The second way in which the
Supreme Court has weakened the legal
basis of discrimination and segregation
has been by a broadening interpretation
of what constitutes action by the state
and by state and local officials falling
under the purview of the United States
Constitution and certain federal laws.
In this way Negroes have been able to
advance their rights to be considered
for membership of juries and, if under
trial, to be judged by a jury from which
none has been excluded because of race
or colour. They have also been able
to strengthen their vote in the
Southern primary elections, where the
right to vote counts most.
After many years of seeking to
weaken discrimination and segregation ,
by securing Supreme Court decisions
of these two types, a few years ago the
leaders in this struggle adopted a new
plan they began to challenge the
"separate but equal" doctrine directly.
20th century trends
BY and large, the history of the
Supreme Court decisions has run
parallel to the development of the
American nation, influencing and being
influenced by new trends in an evolving
society. In the great nineteenth cent¬
ury period of commercial and industrial
expansion, its decisions seemed to place
the greatest emphasis on the protection
of individual economic rights against
government interference. In the twen¬
tieth century, when local events often
have nation-wide consequences and in¬
dividual and national welfare are more
closely .bound, its interpretations have
tended to support those seeking to
reduce discrimination and segregation.
Recent Supreme Court decisions have
thus set the stage for major advances
in the protection of civil rights, while
its hearings and opinions have served
to educate the public and clarify the
complex issues involved in the problem.
16
