HOW NATIONS WILL WORK TOGETHER
"The entire world will
rejoice", said Dr. Eelco
N. Van Kleffens, Presi¬
dent of the U. N. Gene¬
ral Assembly, comment¬
ing on the decision which
opened the way to inter¬
national co-operation
in the use of the atom.
ON December 4, 1954, the atomic age entered into a new and promising phase.
Meeting in New York on that day, the General Assembly of the United Nations
unanimously adopted a seven-nation resolution for the international develop¬
ment of atomic energy for peaceful uses and expressed the hope that an international
atomic energy agency would be set up without delay.
About the same time, the General Conference of Unesco, meeting in Montevideo,
had proposals from India, France and Japan to undertake studies on atomic energy,
isotopes and radiation effects. It delayed action, however, until the United Nations'
decision had been made, then adopted a programme to accord with it. "This is a
matter of momentous importance", said Dr. Luther Evans, Unesco's Director-General,
"Unesco must respond to this great opportunity".
A full account of the United Nations action and the discussion that preceded it
is given in the article on page 5 of this issue. Here are the main features of the
projects adopted by the United Nations and by Unesco :
THE UNITED NATIONS
Two separate projects are authorized,
not formally connected with each other :
The International Atomic Energy Agency
This 'will be organized in joint discussions between the
seven nations who sponsored the U.N. resolution : Australia,
Belgium, Canada, France, Great Britain, South Africa, and
the United States, and others that desire to join. All states
that are members of the United Nations or of one of the
Specialized Agencies will be eligible to membership. It will be
financed by its member states, as are the existing Specializ¬
ed Agencies such as the Food and Agriculture Organization
in Rome, the World Health Organization in Geneva, and
Unesco in Pans. Once established, it will negotiate an
appropriate form of agreement with the United Nations, and
it is thus expected to become one of the Specialized Agencies.
As conceived by the General Assembly the agency will
act as international broker for the allocation of fissile, or
atomic-energy materials, and will study and supervise the
world-wide use of atomic energy for industrial power and
of atomic materials and isotopes for research and scientific
applications. It may also undertake the training of spe¬
cialists in nuclear science. Its work will be related to that
of the atomic energy commissions of member states, the
European Centre for Nuclear Research in Geneva, and the
existing Specialized Agencies of the United Nations.
Conference on Peaceful Uses of Atom
The Secretary-General of the United Nations will call an
international conference to be held not later than August
1955, to "explore means of developing the peaceful uses of
atomic energy through international co-operation and, in par¬
ticular, to study the development of atomic power and to
consider other technical areas such as biology, medicine,
radiation protection, and fundamental science in which
international co-operation might most effectively be
accomplished.
The Secretary-General will have the advice of a committee
composed of representatives of Brazil, Canada, France, India,
the U.S.S.R., the United Kingdom and the U.S.A. in selecting
the place of meeting, in issuing invitations, and in prepar¬
ing a detailed agenda for the conference. The Specialized
Agencies, in particular Fao, Who, and Unesco, will be con¬
sulted in connexion with the planning of the conference and
will be represented at it.
The conference will cover" the wide variety of topics that
are touched by this new phase of science, including those
discussed in the articles in this issue of the Unesco Courier.
It may discuss the functions of the international atomic
energy agency. But the agency does not need to await the
report of the conference and there is some international ,
enthusiasm for the establishment of the agency in the
immediate future, well before August.
14
UNESCO
Unesco's own function ¡n support of the United Nations'
atomic energy programme has three phases :
Research Co-operation
Unesco is the United Nations Specialized Agency especially
responsible for the promotion of international co-operation
in science, and in particular for research and training and
the diffusion of scientific knowledge. It was responsible for
the establishment of the European Centre for Nuclear
Research and will now assist in the preparation of the scien¬
tific aspects of the international conference. Unesco will
also assist other U.N. Specialized Agencies, such as the World
Health Organization, in studying the effects of radio-activity
on life in general. It will continue to study ways of aiding
international scientific co-operation in such questions as
the use of radio-isotopes in research and industry. It may
prepare preliminary reports on scientific subjects that. are
essential to .both the conference and the atomic energy
agency, and will be ready to carry out conference suggestions
relating to international research co-operation.
Scientific Training
The conference and the international atomic energy
agency will certainly provide a stimulus to scientific edu¬
cation and technical training in many parts of the world.
Even in the industrialized nations, there is already a grave
shortage of competent science teachers. The sudden dawn
of an atomic age will create an emergency demand for
vocational training, for science teaching in the secondary
schools and for specialized courses in the universities of
almost all nations. Unesco will expand its services in these
fields, particularly in the underdeveloped countries. It will
hold a workshop conference on vocational training in the
Middle East in 1956. In addition, Unesco will prepare ma¬
nual and visual aids for the introduction of the facts and
concepts of atomic energy, radiation and radio-active
materials into school science teaching.
Public Education
The large public expenditures necessary for the develop¬
ment of atomic power in many nations will demand informed
public support. The fruitful application of the results of
atomic research in agriculture, medicine and industry also
require public understanding. Most of all, the economic
and social consequences of the imminent power-revolution
in countries that have not yet felt the impact of technology
demand foresight in government and a broad incorporation
of science into cultures. The atom can become a friend to
humanity only when it is universally understood and wel¬
comed. Unesco will call two conferences on the public under¬
standing of science, with the participation of national science
associations, science writers, and science teachers. One will
be held in Europe in 1955, the other in Latin America in
1956. The media of public education "will be widely used,
as is exemplified by this issue of the Unesco Courier.
