INFORMATION is becoming more and
more an essential part of our every¬
day lives. This is a development
which springs from the age of industrial
change in which we live for under
the impact of mechanical progress our
horizon has widened to such an extent
that the conditions determining our
need for information have nothing in
common with those which prevailed be¬
fore the machine age."
In the old days in fact until quite
recently a man was closely dependent
on his surroundings : the peasant's
concern was with the soil he tilled, the
craftsman's with the craft he pursued,
the manufacturer's or tradesman's with
the purely local market he supplied.
Each was thus familiar with his environ¬
ment and only needed the information
derived by day-to-day experience.
But nowadays our horizon is that of
the Earth itself; the conditions govern¬
ing production are now such that it is
dependent no longer upon local but upon
world markets, while politics are con¬
ducted no longer on a national or even on
a continental, but on a global scale : One
World, as an American writer has put
it ! So the citizens of this tremendously
expanded world can no longer be edu¬
cated solely by contact with their imme¬
diate surroundings : their education
must include "information", systemati
cally planned and effectively brought
within their reach.
In democratic countries, where univer¬
sal suffrage and the parliamentary sys¬
tem have trained the general public to
discuss the actions and statements of
governments, where the press is free and
opinions can be expressed without
constraint, citizens are normally called
upon to use their judgment, since it is
their votes which determine national
policy. But to do so, they must be gi¬
ven the right facts on which to base
their decisions.
All-powerful techniques
ROUSSEAU considered that demo¬
cracy was possible only "in a very
small State, where the people can
be brought together without difficulty
and every citizen can easily be acquaint¬
ed with all his countrymen". In his
view, anything larger than the Agora of
ancient times was too big. The advanc¬
ed level of development of our technical
resources, many of whose possibilities
have still to be explored, allows us to
take an entirely different view from
Rousseau's.
Printing has long since made possible
the diffusion of the written word in unli¬
mited quantities, while further and re¬
cent progress enables ideas to be in-
tantly conveyed, in any language, to the
uttermost parts ot the earth. Radio
allows us to listen, thousands of miles
away, to a speech while it is actually
being made, and television reveals to us
a distant speaker's every gesture and
every expression that crosses his face.
Discussions in parliaments or their
committees are brought before us in the
fullest detail, so that we have the im¬
pression of feeling their heat, of being
plunged in their atmosphere. As in
almost every transaction of present-
day civilization, we may be excused for
feeling that technique has a sure
solution for every problem submitted to
it.
The difficulty is not, therefore, in the
technique of information, but in the use
to which we are to put it. Shall we, for
instance, be able to ensure an objectivity
in our information services, recognizing
the dignity of the individual by leaving
him free to form his own opinion? In a
social structure so complex as ours, an
increasing number of questions must be
left to specialists, for most of us are not
equipped to deal with them. But to
assume that the specialist can invariably
supply the answer would be a serious
mistake. Whenever the human factor
makes itself felt and it pervades the
whole sphere of politics the expert's
specialization may become a drawback.
Much fun has been poked at the man-
in-the-street with his sturdy common

UNESCO COURIER . N° 3 - 1954
sense,' but not enough" . perhaps, at
the blunders of the specialist who
oversteps the bounds of his competence.
To enable each of us to use our judg¬
ment, we need unbiased that is,
honest information. And here compli¬
cations arise, for truth is not in the
interests of everybody : it has to, be
defended against the large and power¬
fully equipped army of those whose
secret purpose is to distort it. The basic
need is for everyone to be properly in-
, formed about current events, especially
about those facts which will influence his
opinions. This does not entail revealing
the secrets of diplomacy or big business :
the simplest and most general facts pro¬
vide the best basis for reflection, and a
search for the ins and outs of things
often leads people astray. I have come
to the conclusion that, in politics, only
the relatively cultivated mind is prepar¬
ed to accept simple explanations. And
even so, the facts must be presented
objectively and dispassionately.
Let us be optimistic enough to believe
that in this field, honesty is the best po¬
licy. As business magnates and respon¬
sible advertisers are well aware, you can¬
not fool all of the people for very much
of the time. But those whose jol" it is,
or who make it their business to
collect information and make it avail¬
able to the public are naturally tempted
to pick and choose, and selection may be
based on preferences which are not al¬
ways disinterested.
This slippery slope leads from the
sphere of information to that of educa¬
tion, not to say propaganda, the bounda¬
ries between the one and the other being
sometimes almost imperceptible. Com¬
petition may serve as a corrective, but in
its absence there is a real risk of distor¬
tion. When control of the press, or of
any other source of information, be¬
comes over-centralized, supervision by
a higher authority is needed, to ensure
that all points of view find expression
and are put before the public.
To 'educate' the people
THIS brings us to another danger,
which is most rife under totalitar¬
ian governments, but from which
not even the genuinely democratic
countries are completely exempt that
of a government-controlled information
service. Since the first world war,
propaganda (to call it by its proper
name) has led to the rise of many
official bodies, undoubtedly charged
with informing the public but also
designed to "educate" in a rather
special sense of the word.
This is the point at which truth and
action, two different things, intersect.
The programme we need should include,
as its most important item, the sifting
of " information " in order to separate
truth from propaganda, both in national
and international affairs.
The United Nations and Unesco, like
' the League of Nations in its day, repre¬
sent the common factor between coun¬
tries of infinite diversity, brought toge¬
ther by the need to preserve and
safeguard peace. It would be optimistic
to suggest that closer acquaintance will
increase mutual affection; but if our
lives are to be linked we do, after all,
need to be informed about the charac¬
ters and activities of those with whom
we are likely to come into more and
more frequent 'contact in a world where
the perpetual increase of speed results
in a constant shrinkage of distances.
Complete objectivity is probably unat¬
tainable. Even historians, who are
supposed to be pledged to the service of
truth, never entirely achieve it. But we
must strive for it, either by advocating
honesty, on an international scale, in the
presentation of facts, or indirectly, by
adopting Renan's concept of truth as a
dialogue in which the conclusion is arriv¬
ed at from opposite angles. In fact,
the problem of information resembles all
the great problems of our epoch :
technology has provided us with invin¬
cible weapons ; the difficulties begin
when the human factor supervenes. But
it is precisely that factor which makes
the struggle, and life itself worth while.
