Newspapers are as good
as their readers make them
-
.ájJJ^BkHL ' A .A*/. ik
ir ¿A %W*' %/
Aw? f Pr
f
f .
4¡
k
m ik
^^^^^ w^s^
Ï I F% #,é^^F 1^1 t'y
¡ISiËËÉ A
I - ^2 ^
j^aBiBP-- --
A PAGE TAKES SHAPE on the "stone" the table on which the newspaper type is assembled in a
metal frame called a forme. Here a sub-editor supervises the make-up of the page as it is placed in the
forme according to an editorial plan. (Photo C.O.I.)
There are two essential qualities of a
good newspaper freedom and
responsibility.
Neither is exclusively dependent upon
its Editor and. controllers. Both depend
also upon the acceptance by Governments
and officials of all kinds, of their public
obligation to make fully and freely
available all the facts required for the
full and impartial reporting of public
affairs. And their acceptance also of the
obligation to permit full and free
comment on those facts.
Nor is this all. Freedom and respon¬
sibility are not qualities which grow of
themselves.- They require the support '
and stimulation of a public opinion which
recognizes their value. Newspapers are
as good as their readers make them. The
quality of news depends as much upon
those who read it as those who write it.
It is obvious that neither of these
circumstances exists "in all parts of the
world. Over great areas newspapers are
regarded as the instruments of Govern¬
ments to report only what is acceptable
and . useful to those in power and to
comment only as officialdom requires.
In many other areas where the press is
nominally free, the obstacles that stand
in the way of full and honest reporting
are formidable obstacles in some cases
Franols Williams, Bnlish journalist and author,
has long been active in efforts through the United
Nations to improve international communication
" of neics. He is the author oí "Press. Parliament
and People", a study of the relationship between
governments and newspapers. His . latest work,
"Transmitting World News A Study of Tele¬
communications and the Press", has recently been
published by Unesco.
of legal prohibition, in others of official
attitude.
Nor is a public "opinion which is ready
to accept still less to demand honest
and impartial reporting and objective
comment, by any means universal even
in those countries where newspapers are
nominally free, and democratic institu¬
tions a part of the constitution. Where
political development is - in its early
stages, and where education is restricted
and illiteracy high, public opinion, al¬
though it may nominally embrace the
need for a free press, is unlikely to be
much interested in a responsible one.
The price of circulation and with it of
economic survival in such circumstances
may be not responsibility but irres¬
ponsibility.
It is necessary to say this since it is
unrealistic to write of the quality of the
news without appreciating that many of
the circumstances which make quality in
news reporting possible are wholly or
partially non-existent over large areas of
the world."
The basic principles of good journalism
may be universal. The factors which
alone make possible their practical
application are far from being so.
Even where such principles are
theoretically accepted the means ,to
translate them into positive term^ do not
exist in considerable areas of the world
a fact which those who look at the
problems of journalism from levels of
sophistication made possible by the
existence of mature press" systems need
to bear in mind.
I have recently been engaged on an
examination of the press of one Middle
Eastern country, Iraq. Iraq is more for¬
tunate than many in the fact that its na¬
tural resources, particularly in oil, are
enabling it to carry through a substan¬
tial programme of economic and educa¬
tional development. Great dams, irriga¬
tion schemes and electric power projects
are being carried through. New schools
and colleges are being built.
The problem of mass illiteracy is also
being tackled, yet many of the news¬
papers lag behind and the vast majority
are still small and economically insecure.
Their circulations are to be counted in a
great many cases in a few hundreds.
Even in the case of the most successful,
circulation is no more than five or six
thousand at the most. Facilities for
reliable reporting even of domestic
affairs are almost non-existent. . There
is no domestic news agency, hardly any
consistent exchange of information bet¬
ween the leading towns. The supply of
international news is small : its trans¬
mission costly.
Such conditions can be duplicated in
many other parts of the~world indeed
in very many areas they are much worse.
Where they exist the quality of news is
bound to be affected for such quality
depends first of all upon existence of the
means to report adequately, fairly, and
objectively all happenings of public im¬
portance both domestic and international.
12

Co-operative news agencies linked by
exchange and other agreements with the
great world news agencies seem. to me,
therefore, to be an essential part of the
effort to raise' the quality of news
throughout large parts of the world.
Advice and assistance in their develop¬
ment is one of the first tasks with which-
all who are concerned in raising the
quality of news should concern them¬
selves. . .
This being said, what are the essential
qualities which ought to be displayed by
newspapers which do not, suffer from
such disabilities ? .
I believe the first essential to be the
separation of news from comment. It is
part of the responsibility of a newspaper
to comment on what is important in the
news of the day : it is "no less a part of
its responsibility to leave the reader in
no doubt where reporting ends and
comment begins.
Unbalanced news
Stated thus baldly the issue seems
clear and simple a mere matter of
restricting the reporting of events
and policy developments to the news
pages and the comment on them to the
leader page. It is far from being so in
fact.
. In the first place iL is impossible for
any newspaper serviced by a highly
developed and mature system of national
and international news collection to print
all the news that flows into its office
from all parts of the world almost every
hour of the day and "night. There must
be selection especially so where news¬
print is scarce and costly and newspapers
are severely restricted in space. And the
very fact of selection implies comment.
There is no comment more absolute than
the decision to exclude a piece of news
as unimportant.
Nor does the comment implicit in the
inevitable exercise of editorial judgment
as to the relative importance of the news
available end with the decision to print
or not to print." It finds hardly less
significant expression in the placing and
presentation of the news selected the
decision as to whether it shall go on the
front page or on an inside page, at the
top of a column or at the bottom, shall
have large headlines or small.
Such indirect comment is inevitable.
But it has been made more emphatic
-with the development of modern tech¬
niques of newspaper make-up. These
tend to concentrate immense resources
of typographical skill on making the
appearance of a page attractive even at
the expense of a lack of balance in the
treatment of the news itself.
Reader's safeguard
The only safeguard open to the reader
in such circumstances is that of a
choice of newspapers. With such a
choice he can at least elect to buy the
newspaper whose editorial judgment of
news values experience has shown to be
nearest to his own or whose bias in the
selection and presentation of news he it-
aware of and can -consequently be on
watch against. And if he is wise he can
buy a second paper against which to
check the first.
. Objectivity is one of the most difficult
of all virtues. In the nature of things
journalists like other men are
subjective thinkers. They are writing
for readers who .are also subjective
thinkers. A policy decision which to the
supporters of the Government making it
may quite honestly appear wise and
statesmanlike may no less honestly
appear to its opponents as shortsighted
and foolish. It is almost impossible to
avoid some reflection of this in the treat¬
ment and headlining of news.
- Gross bias can be avoided by the exer¬
cise of normal professional standards of
accuracy and fairness. Bias of a' less '
obvious kind is almost impossible to
avoid because it may be no more than
the reflection of the impact of the news
upon the editor or sub-editor himself or
represent his almost instinctive profes¬
sional appreciation of how the news will
strike his particular readers. , -
I said earlier that ideally there should
be a complete separation of news and
comment. Yet within this ideal there
are, I think, certain exceptions which,
so long as they are made openly and
without " disguise, can be useful and
justifiable.
. The increasing complexity of much in¬
ternational and economic news is such
that it is difficult for the ordinary gene¬
ral reader to find his way among much
of it without expert guidance. In such
circumstances the bare reporting of facts
may itself be misleading, since without
help " the reader cannot possibly un¬
derstand their implications.
It seems to me, therefore, that in such
fields the quality of news may be not
reduced but enhanced where an ex¬
perienced correspondent diplomatic, po¬
litical, economic or whatever the subject
may benot only reports the facts but
himself interprets and even comments
upon them. What is essential is that it
should always be. made clear that he is
doing so and that he himself should
plainly differentiate between what is re¬
port and what is comment in his article.
The means to collect and distribute
news; acceptance of the responsibility to
report the facts not necessarily all of
them, for that, indeed, would often be
physically impossible," but enough" of
those that are significant to give a. fair
and balanced picture: as clear" a discrimi-
UNESCO COURIER - N» 3 - 1954
nation between news and comment as
the inherently subjective nature of most
human judgment- makes possible all
these are necessary if the quality of news
is to be maintained.
But more still is needed continuity of
reporting. And this is a quality not al¬
ways to be found even in many other¬
wise excellent papers.
In the recent survey of news treatment
by seventeen major dailies made by Unes¬
co in the publication "One Week's News"
the conclusion was reached that although
most of the seventeen papers referred to
all major events in one form and another
the news was seldom presented in a sys¬
tematic way.
Journalistic defect
This is true of almost all newspapers
of large circulation. It is becoming
not less but more so with increasing
emphasis on display and headline treat¬
ment.
"The reader consequently", continues
the Unesco report, "has to make an effort
to inform himself. If he really wants to
know what has occurred his close atten¬
tion-is required even for papers wThich
are intended to be read quickly and su¬
perficially".
. Although this absence of systematic
reporting is a defect of modern journal-
. ism and one to which those who are pro¬
fessionally concerned about the quality of
news need to give their most serious con¬
sideration, its indirect effect may not be
wholly bad. . If it should, indee'd, bring
the reader "to make an effort to inform
himself" then its ultimate consequences
are likely to be excellent. In the last
resort the quality of news depends, as
I said earlier, upon the reader no less
than the writer. The wise reader is he
who takes what his newspaper has to
offer, not as a final statement on events,
but as raw material from which - to
fashion an independent judgment of his
own.- y
COPYRIGHT S. STEINBERG.
13
