^ Courtes/ "Scientific American '
UP FROM THEOCEAN FLOOR comes a water sampler
(right) used by oceanographers to explore the lower depths.
Above, six other exploring instruments: I) fine net to
filter plankton out of water. 2) a "grab" to bring up samples
showing the composition of the ocean bottom. 3) thermo¬
meter. 4) bottle for sampling water at different levels.
5) reel to measure length of cable paid out. 6) bathyther¬
mograph to record temperature and pressure.

THE UNTOID
TREASURES
OF THE SEA
Geography is a Mature
Science, Oceanography
a Growing Infant
by Gerald Wendt
Courtesy " Scientific Monthly "
The soil and the sea are the two great resources of mankind. Both
have been explored for centuries and have yielded their treasures for
man's use. But man can walk on the land and cultivate it for food and
clothing; he can dig holes in it to bring up fuels, minerals and building
stones from beneath. Though part of the land is too dry, too cold, or too
steep to have much value,. most of it offers an adequate abode for man
and has been inhabited for many thousands of years. Within the past
century geographers have studied and mapped nearly all of it, seeking
the best utilization of its resources.
Not so the sea. Its vast fluid mass offers no home, no foothold.
Courage and much skill were needed by ancient Phoenicians and Poly¬
nesians to embark upon it and by Columbus to cross it. It has majestic
beauty but it is not hospitable and defies permanent conquest. Its rest¬
less surface is familiar but its treasures are in the mysterious depths
wnere no man can live. There life began and there it is still the richest
on earth. As the resources of the land become exhausted by a crowding
population, the unknown and unused resources of the sea become an
insistent challenge to man's intelligence. The science of oceanography
succeeds geography as the guide to future wealth.
Like the weather, the sea is of universal interest. It touches all
countries except a very few, among them Switzerland, Austria, Czecho¬
slovakia, Hungary, Bolivia, Paraguay, Afghanistan and Rhodesia. The
island and peninsular nations such as England, Greece, Norway, Den¬
mark and Japanhave had the longest contact with it, both in coastline
and in history.
In the Philippines, for instance, none of the 20 million people is
more than 75 miles from the seashore and most of them live close to it.
There are 7,100 islands with a total coastline of 10,800 miles. Their land
area is about 115,000 square miles but the Philippine marine waters
cover almost six times that area, or 650,000 square miles. Such nations
know the sea and depend on it for food and trade. But the oceans are
free except for a narrow strip near the shore. They belong to no nation
and their resources and problems are essentially international.
Nearly three quarters of the earth's surface is covered by the sea.
The total ocean area is 139 million square miles compared with 58 million
square miles of land and less than 10 million square miles under
20

UNESCO COURIER. N» 7. 1954
cultivation. Thus almost 72 percent of the life-giving sunshine
falls upon and into the sea and at present is chiefly useful
to man by evaporating the surface water to form clouds and
rain upon the land. Most of the sunlight, penetrating into
the water, keeps the ocean warm but is otherwise lost to
man's use. It is mankind's greatest waste.
Unlike the land, the ocean has three accessible dimensions.
It is not only wide but deep, and the depths can be reached.
There are shallow waters close to the continents but the-
deepest areas are farther beneath the surface than the
highest mountains are above it. If the earth's highest
mountain, Mount Everest in the Himalayas, could be dropped
into the Marianas Trench in the Pacific its peak would be
more than a mile under water, for it is only 29,002 feet high
while the floor of the ocean trench lies 35,640 feet down. The
average depth of the ocean, the world over, is about 12,450
feet (2.38 miles).
Covering such an area to such a depth, the total amount of
water in the ocean surpassés the imagination. It occupies
331 million cubic miles. While one cubic mile is a mere drop
in the ocean, a cubic mile is so large that the entire human
race could be packed into less than one tenth of it. Or, if a
cubic mile of water were loaded into railway tank cars, each
containing 10,000 gallons and 40 feet in length, it would fill
113,200,000 such cars. They would make a train 834,000 miles
long. Running steadily at 40 miles an hour, the train would
take two years and five months to pass any one point.
Compared with- man's needs and dimensions, the sea is
practically infinite.
The sea is much more than water. It holds in solution
enormous quantities of materials dissolved from the rocks
and washed from the land by the rain and the rivers. Every
cubic mile of it contains 141 million tons of common salt.
There are other minerals, such as magnesium and bromine
which have already been extracted commercially. It contains
gold and iron in solution and can perhaps provide man with
metals when the mines are exhausted.
Most important of the dissolved minerals, however, are
those that are necessary to plant growth and are used by
man as fertilizers for the soil. Each cubic mile contains
750 tons of nitrogen as nitrate, 225 tons of phosphorus and
1.8 million tons of potassium (potash). They are not impor¬
tant because they can be extracted from the sea but because
they are available in the ocean waters to play their part in
the luxurious growth of sea plants of all kinds.
Even more important is the fact that sea water contains in .
solution twenty or thirty times as much carbon dioxide as
there is in the earth's atmosphere. Plants are built up from
carbon dioxide and water under the energy of the sun, with
the assistance of a few fertilizer minerals. The ocean has
them all. It is the scene of enormous plant growth and thus
of teeming animal life that feeds upon the plants.
Since plants need sunshine and the sunshine is absorbed
in the upper regions of the sea, there is little or no plant
growth in the dark depths. Most of it occurs near the
surface. No accurate measurement is possible of the amount
of growth each year but experts estimate it at about 18 tons
per acre of ocean surface.
:'
FISH AT THE BOTTOM is photographed at the
great depth of 1,000 feet by an underwater television
camera. Underneath the fish is its shadow. Television
cameras first showed their great possibilities for glean¬
ing information below the sea surface in 1951 when
one of them identified the wreck of a British submarine,
280 feet down at the bottom of the English Channel.
Photo courtesy " Scientific American "
This is a greater average than plant production on land
and, because the ocean surface is so much larger than the
land surface, the total production in the ocean far exceeds
that on land. It is never interrupted by droughts, storms or
other natural catastrophes and is also entirely independent
of what man can do to increase or decrease it. This steady,
unseen production of 12,000 tons of new vegetation per
square mile every year over an area of 139 million square
miles is probably nature's most impressive feat.
Most of the plants thus produced are microscopic and are
consumed by microscopic sea animals. The two together are
called plankton and form the food of. the smaller fishes,
which, in turn, feed the larger ones. Some of the plankton
settles to the bottom to feed the crawling life there. Even¬
tually the plant and animal residues on the bottom form an
organic deposit which is the source of future petroleum.
Meanwhile the sea supports an enormous population of
swimming fishes whose number and weight are beyond
estimate. This mass is certainly comparable with the
12,000 tons of vegetable plankton produced annually per
square mile. Yet the amount of ocean fish caught each year
is only 396 pounds per square mile or 0.6 pounds per acre.
(Continued' on next page)
M I 1> 6 E T
L I Vï A
MONSTERS
MILE DOWN
These ferocious little fishes live in a dark and cold world. Scarcity of food
stunts their growth to about four inches or less. Water pressure is a to« per
square inch. If the fishes rise too high above the sea bed the gases in their
swimming bladders expand and they become lighter. Once they lose control
of their movements they are doomed to rise until they burst. These deep-sea
creatures are thus in the curious danger of dying by "failing" upwards.
DRAGON FISH, like its fellow
deep-sea fish would burst if
it was ii.ougnt to the surface.
LINOPHRYNE ARBORI-
FER Is a fish with a
luminous bulb and a beard.
PHOTOCORYNUS SINICEPS though only
two and a half inches long, is a fierce prowler.
THE ANGLER FISH attracts its prey with
the light which grows from its head.
21

THE UNTOLD TREASURES OF THE SEA (Continued)
It is evident that the food resources of the sea
are as yet hardly touched by man.
Nevertheless the total annual catch of sea¬
foods the world over amounts to ,25,000 million
tons, not including whales which would add
another ten percent. But this weight includes
the shells of oysters and of crustaceans and
large quantities of fish that are used for bait,
oil, fish meal and fertilizer. The edible por¬
tions of the . fish caught amount to about
10,000 million tons a year. As food for the
earth's 2,400 million inhabitants this provides
a yearly average of nine pounds per person.
But the average consumption of all foods is
about 1,100 pounds per person per year; thus
fish and all seafoods account for less than one
percent of human nutrition. Since fish is a
cheap and healthy food with 18 % protein,
5 % fat and about 500 calories per pound, it is
apparent . that the consumption of fish could
be greatly increased with benefit to all. Thus
from the standpoint of both consumption and
production a precious and
much needed resource laps
on the shores of, most
nations of the earth.
The United "Nations
Food and Agriculture
Organization (F.A.O.)
asserts that the world
aquatic resources are
capable of furnishing man
with a quantity, of food
many times larger than at
present and that one of
the chief obstacles to an
increase in the fish supply
is the lack of a larger
demand. This, in turn, is
partly because of com¬
mercial and economic fac¬
tors but also is largely a
result of ignorance of the
nutritive value of seafoods
and of prejudices and
taste habits.
A great increase in the
fish supply can be attained
by greater mechanization
of - the fishing boats so
that they can cover larger
areas and by better
methods of locating fish.
But a great underlying
need is better knowledge
of the life-habits ' of fish
and the interrelations
between the many forms
of life in the ocean, the
possible destruction of
predators and the culti¬
vation óf preferred species.
The practical improvement
of fishing is, indeed, only
one aspect of research in the larger problems
of oceanography.
Marine biology has long been a fascinating
study, conducted largely by many government
agencies and by private laboratories such as
the Océanographie Museum founded by the
Prince of Monaco and by such foundations as
the Carnegie Institution at La Jolla, California
and the Wood's Hole Océanographie Institu¬
tion established by the Rockefeller Foundation
in the U.S.A. Deep-sea expeditions, such as
that of H.M.S. Challenger in 1872-75 and of
the Swedish Albatross, in 1942-48, have long
explored the depths and the life in them. But
the systematic exploration of the sea and its
complex physics, chemistry, biology and geo¬
logy is now seen as an international problem.
Oceanography includes the study of the
oceans themselves, their contents and their
interrelations with the rocks, sediments and
shores and with the atmosphere. -It is the
study of the water masses, their chemical
composition and movements and the vast
complexity of biological organisms which they
contain. It includes the effect of atmospheric
changes, winds, the effect of the sun's radiation
4 M 1 LES
5 MILES
3500
40O0
	
4500
6 MILES
5000
DEEPEST POINT SO
FAR DISCOVERED OFF
GUAM 35,640 FEET.
PRESSURE ABOUT
15,800 POUNDS,
NEARLY 8 TONS PER
SQUARE INCH.
6.7MILES \
5500
5900
£» ç-ïtea'jr..
A MIGHTY GULF in the floor of the
Atlantic Ocean is the Lydonia Canyon
whose profile is" shown here as it was
traced with a fathometer (echo sounding
device) by the U.S.S. Albatross. Scien¬
tists of the I 947 Swedish Deep-Sea Expe¬
dition crossing the Atlantic in another
Albatross found that the ocean floor
rose and fell in curious steps on a Gargan¬
tuan scale, half a mile to several miles wide.
SIX MILES
OF OCEAN
If you could ' drop
Mount Everest, the
world's highest moun¬
tain, into the Marianas
Trench, the deepest
part of the ocean, it
would not reach within
a mile of the surface.
Note that only a thin
layer at the top is
lighted by rays of sun.
and the circulation of currents "in the ocean.
It includes also the study of the ocean
bottom, its geological features and history
and the study of the deep sediments that
" have accumulated there through the ages.
The study of the ocean floor is already
the subject of specialized international study
under the leadership of the Joint Commission
on Oceanography of the International Council
of Scientific Unions. This Commission has
recommended the establishment of an Inter¬
national Deep-Sea Council for the world-wide
co-ordination of these researches.
In 1952 the Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council
proposed a programme of international co-ope¬
ration in océanographie studies which would
establish a complete register of all laboratories
and vessels engaged in such research, a file of
all available data and publications, a consult¬
ing service for governments in the planning of
océanographie researches and of industrial
applications, and which would co-ordinate all
national programmes with
the co-operation of Unesco
in the fundamental
oceanographical sciences
and of the U.N. Food and
Agriculture Organization
in the application of these
sciences to fisheries.
In the Indo-Pacific area
many laboratories already
exist for océanographie
researches. They include
the Central Marine and
Fisheries Research Station
at Mandapan, South India,
the Océanographie Insti¬
tute of Indochina at
Nhatrang, the océanogra¬
phie department of the
Bureau of Fisheries in the
Ministry of Commerce and
Agriculture at Manila,
the Philippines, the Océa¬
nographie Institute of the
Fisheries Department of
Singapore and The Fede¬
ration, the Laboratory for
the Investigation of the
Sea at Djakarta, Indone¬
sia and the Océanographie
Institute, New Caledonia.
Japan has more than a
dozen organizations devot¬
ed to océanographie re¬
search and has organized
a Special Committee on
Marine Resources in the
Unesco Committee of the
Science Council of Japan.
The Japanese National
Committee for Unesco in
1953 revived the publica¬
tion of the Records of Océanographie Works in
Japan which World War II had interrupted.
In November, 1953, a group of experts met
at Manila in conjunction with the Eighth
Pacific Science Congress and under invitations
issued jointly by Unesco and F.A.O. to discuss
the possibilities of establishing an interna¬
tional océanographie organization in the Indo-
Pacific region.
Thus the earth's last great frontier is under
increasing exploration. There are spectacular
forays such as Professor Piccard's descent in
his bathyscaph and those pleasant scouting
expeditions by many amateurs armed with
oxygen tanks who swim freely in shallow shore
waters to study marine life, or undertake
archaeological treasure hunts for sunken ships.
But the real treasures of the sea lie far off
-shore and far beneath the waves.ä They are
the vast quantities of food for the ever-grow¬
ing human race and, even more important, the
hidden secrets of how life originated a thous¬
and million or more years ago. If earth is the
mother of man, the sea is the mother of life.
The earth's lesson has to a large extent been
learned. Those of the sea have just begun.
22
