From 'Indigenous Peoples" Published By 1. L.O.
DISTRIBUTION OF BRAZIL'S INDIAN POPULATION BY STATES
State
Number
of Indians
Number
State of Indians
Mato Grosso
Acre
Amazonas
Para
Goiás
500,000
300,000
200,000
100,000
100,000
Maranhäo, Espirito Santo, Bahia and
Minas Gerais 10,000
Paraná 10,000
Santa Catarina 10,000
Rio Grande do Sul 2,600
Sâo Paulo 2,170
BRAZIL : GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF TRIBES
State
Number
of tribes
Number
State of tribes
Amazonas and Acre Territory 108
Bahla 2
Goiás 9
Maranhäo 10
Mato Grosso 79
Minas Gerais 3
Para 22
Paraiba 1
Paraná 1
Pernambuco 1
Rio Grande do Sul 1
Santa Catarina 1
Sâo Paulo 3
Espirito Santo 6
General
Rondón
Brazil is a country
where primitive Indian
tribes still live next to
huge modern metropolises.
Brazil is a country of vio¬
lent contrasts, contrasts
arising both from her enor¬
mous area and the uneven
rate at which regions with¬
in this area have been pro¬
gressively developed.
The Brazilians them¬
selves say that, when you
travel in the direction of
the setting sun in their
country, you journey backwards
through time. Sooner or later, you are
bound to meet forgotten centuries.
Even today, the Brazil of the prairies
and unexplored jungles is only begin¬
ning to be integrated into the life of
the nation. This Brazil is an ever-
moving frontier and it marks the pro¬
gress which has been made by Brazi¬
lian society in what amounts to the
conquest of its own territory.
This is a borderland where Indians
and the forces of civilization face each
other under much the same conditions
as those of the first meeting of Europe
and America. At times, the clash is
even more violent than it was in the
past for it has now been heightened
by centuries of bloody conflict.
The Indian who sees an outsider
move onto the territory of his tribe is
convinced that there is no hope of any
agreement. From tradition and per¬
sonal experience he has learned that
he can expect nothing but the worst...
	 by 	
Darcy Ribeiro
and that he has no other course but to
defend his rights.
The pioneer, opening up new grazing
lands or jungle areas, looks upon this
soil as his own. He resents the Indian
and he is suspicious of him. The atti¬
tudes of both sides being what they
are, it is no great wonder that a fight
is inevitable.
Up to the beginning of the 20th cen¬
tury, Indians who dared to resist an
invasion of their territory were hunted
down like wild beasts. Vast regions
only a few days' journey by horseback
from big cities such as Sao Paulo, Vito¬
ria, Ilheus or Blumenau lay untouched
because they were battlegrounds for
whites and Indians.
Entire tribes were wiped out.' Gangs
of professional killers hired themselves
out to local governments or colonization
companies to massacre Indians and
make room for European settlers.
The fate of the Indians who lived
peacefully in contact with white civili¬
zation was no less tragic. They were
treated mercilessly and frequently they,
were thrown off their land if it proved
to be of any value. When they could
be used in any way as a source of lab¬
our, they were ruthlessly exploited,
often reduced to slavery and stripped
of their most elementary rights. Their
women and children were playthings
of village tyrants.
But as the advancing frontier pushed
Darcy RIBEIRO, is the director of the Indian Museum
m Rio de Janeiro, and a social anthropologist on the
staff of the Bureau of Indian Affairs of Brazil.
For many years he has had close contact with
Indians of the Brazilian ¡ungle and is the author of
several outstanding studies of their life and customs.

THE SOLDIER WHO
WOULDN'T SHOOT
DIE IF YOU MUST BUT NEVER KILL AN INDIAN'
the Indian further and further away
from Brazil's large towns, a new atti¬
tude took form in the minds of the
distant city-dwellers. The Indian be¬
came a romantic figure, resembling one
of Rousseau's "good savages" and a
flood of poems and novels began -to
sing his praise.
This, of course, did not stop the fron¬
tier settlers from painting him as black
as possible so that the great Indian
hunt could go on with some sort of
justification.
The beginning of the 20th Century
saw an increase in world demand for
rubber and other tropical jungle pro¬
ducts. This led to the invasion of the
last of the land where the Indian re¬
mained unmolested. New conflicts
between whites and Indians sprang up
and new massacres followed. But, this
time, an aroused public opinion
brought pressure to bear on the govern¬
ment to put an end to the slaughter.
It is against this background of vio¬
lence and murder that the figure of a
young soldier first appeared. - Soon,
the eyes of the entire country were to
be on him.
This officer, assigned to build a tele¬
graph line linking the Brazilian coast
with the country's western border, had
adopted a new policy towards the In¬
dians. He wanted to demonstrate that
it was possible to pacify even the most
hostile tribes merely by persuasion.
His troops had to push' through
regions ' occupied by the most feared
Indians of the interior, regions where
no white man had ever dared venture.
They did go through, systematically
winning the Indians' confidence and
with never an act of violence.
The man behind this miracle was
Candido Mariano da Silva Rondon. He
had been a professor of mathematics
and astronomy at Brazil's military col¬
lege until the day, a few years pre¬
viously, when he decided to find a
humanitarian way of using the troops
under his command.
Rondón was a "positivist" for the
driving force behind this epic of the
Brazilian jungle was the philosophy of
the French thinker, Auguste Comte.
Putting positivism into practice meant
leading an armed expedition through
territory occupied by hostile tribes
without ever authorizing the use of
arms, even under attack... and all of
this in the name of an abstract prin¬
ciple of justice.
Rondón became the head of a com-
(Continued on page 12)
OYANA INDIANS who live in the border areas between Brazil and the
French and Dutch Guianas build circular homes whose frameworks are made
from saplings bent over and tied with lianas. Nails and carpentry joints
are unknown there. Roofs and walls are made waterproof by an overlapp¬
ing thatch of palm leaves. In a country as vast as Brazil the type of village
house varies according to the region and the state of tribal development.
H^^^ -ai i^mm
i -Ä ^^^F'' ^s&^^^K^^ \ §
I 1 9
^^^^flST' ^L ^^4r^^ E - jJ i
9^¿ Ei k / v <^^L
1

(Continued from page 9)
mission which set out to apply Comte's
ideas to an army. Rondon's plan had
three basic points: the peaceful use of
troops to survey unknown regions, mili¬
tary construction of public works such
as telegraph lines and, finally, the
application of humanitarian principles
such as the protection of the Indians.
In the cruel history of relations bet¬
ween primitives and civilization, it
would be difficult to find a policy
bearing such a stamp of generosity.
Even the 16th century missionaries who
brought the Gospel to the Indians of
Brazil did not disdain to use the secular
arm. On more than one occasion, they
asked the aid of the army. But Ron-
don was the secular army personified.
He was at the head of a conquering
army, and he was able to make it an
instrument which combined both .wis¬
dom and understanding.
His troops marched under his motto:
"Die if you must, but never kill."
Twsnty years of life in the jungle
brought him into contact with many
tribes, a good deal of them pacified by
his men. These years gave Rondón
precious experience in the problem of
relations existing between Indians
and Brazilians.
Eventually, he succeeded in training
a team of men as conscious as he was
of the complexity and the importance
of Brazil's Indian problem. This
school produced the first of the Brazi¬
lian "Indianists", men who had learned
from Rondón that force should never
be used, even to stand off an attack.
Above all, they learned that the most
warlike of tribes might very well be
peace-loving and willing to fraternize
with white men once they had been
convinced that they were not dealing
12
with the usual sort of white men. In
other words, the Indians had to be
shown that civilization had a face
other than the one with which they
were all too familiar.
In 1910, when the Brazilian Govern¬
ment yielded to public opinion and
decided to create an organization to
protect the country's Indians, Rondón
was immediately hailed as the best man
to set it up. This was the birth of the
Serviço de Proteçao aos Indios, set up
to carry out a realistic demographic
- policy: the preservation of a popula¬
tion indispensable to Brazil because it
was already occupying vast areas of
the country. This organization was
also entrusted with bringing peace to
regions torn by Indian-white conflicts.
It was understood that the service
would be devoted exclusively to aiding
the Indians and would abstain from
any religious proselytizing. The law
setting up the service established the
principle that the Indians would be
respected as a people with the right to
be themselves, to preserve their beliefs
and to live as they wanted to live that
is, according to the traditions handed
down to them by their ancestors.
This service heralded a new era for
the Indians of Brazil. No longer were
all customs, beliefs and institutions to
be reduced to one all-inclusive stan¬
dard or cast into a foreign mould. The
new policy was based on what sociolo¬
gists term "cultural relativism". In
other words, there was a willingness to
admit that certain conceptions of the
supernatural and certain social customs
could fulfil a useful purpose within the
framework of a specific society.
Protection of Indians on their own
land was another major objective. The
service put an end to the old practice
of forcing Indians to abandon their
FESTIVAL DRESS
of Boro Indian in¬
cludes feathers driven
through the nose
and ears and beads
through the lower lip.

BRAZIL'S GENERAL RONDON -
THE SOLDIER WHO WOULDN'T SHOOT
homes and eke out a miserable exis¬
tence elsewhere. This method of "civi¬
lizing" Indians had been one of the
main causes of tribal disorganization.
Ripped loose from the surroundings
where he had been raised and where "
he had learned to fight for life, the
Indian could not meet his own needs
and he had been faced with a choice
of fleeing or submitting.
No longer would families be separat¬
ed under the pretext of education or
evangelization. Previously, the remo¬
val of children from the homes of their
parents had been the cause of specta¬
cular failures and bloody insurrections. .
Traditions shattered
THIS practice had been widespread
and justified by the hope of trans¬
forming new generations oftln-
dians. Unfortunately, it only resulted
in depriving Indians of an education
which would have enabled them to
learn how to meet their own conditions
of existence. It also shattered tribal
traditions essential to them for surviv¬
al as a society.
Considering the period of his work,
Rondón and the "positivist" policy of
his service represented a big step for¬
ward especially in view of the atti¬
tude of anthropologists and sociolo¬
gists of the time. They were mainly
interested in describing exotic customs
and had little concern for the future
of the people they were studying. The
Indian was a sort of human fossil enab¬
ling them to shed light on the past.
Rondon's Bureau of Indian Affairs
was established in Rio de Janeiro, with
branches Inspetorias throughout the
country and also a network of "Indian
outposts." Each of these outposts rep¬
resented a territory belonging to an
Indian tribe which was assisted by
government officials.
These officials were given the task of
organizing Indian economic life, pro¬
tecting the Indians from famine and,
in general, raising their standard of
living. In addition, government repre¬
sentatives were in charge of relations
between their Indian community and
the whites to prevent exploitation and
to punish crimes which had been com¬
mitted against the tribe.
If necessary, officials were empower¬
ed to intervene in quarrels among In¬
dians but only if the Indians had re¬
course to their authority after failing
to settle the disputes under their own
traditional system of justice.
106 outposts
FINALLY, Indians were given medi¬
cal aid, mainly to protect them
against diseases transmitted by
white men. In short, outpost officials
had the job of directing the entire
process of assimilation of the Indian
to avoid violent change which might
harm his traditional way of life.
Sudden change often proves to be
harmful when a primitive people can¬
not meet a new situation with its tra¬
ditional ways of life and when it has
not yet been convinced that there are
any valid reasons for changing the way
- of life it has always known.
- Today, thousands of Indians live
under the protection of 106 "outposts".
Many of them would not have survived
without Rondon's service assuring them
possession of their land and the right
to live according to their customs.
The service has always faced another
problem the pacification of hostile
tribes. It has devoted itself to this
task for forty years while Brazil has
pushed back her frontier. The men
who followed Rondón continued to use
only persuasion and several of them
paid with their lives for the faith they
showed in the motto : "Die if you must,
but never kill."
soap, metal tools, etc. and that he has
to work for wages to satisfy them.
What chance does he have to meet
these needs with the resources of his
basically rural economy an economy
precarious even for Europeans? It is
no wonder that the Indian often finds
that his status is inferior to that of
better equipped competitors who are
adapted to a complex civilization.
Uprooted, the Indian may lose every¬
thing even his will to live. He no
longer feels secure in a changed world
after having lived among men who
shared his viewpoint and his philoso¬
phy. Among Indians, the loss of tra-
HUNTING PARTY of Oyampi Indians who inhabit the frontier lands of Brazil and French Guiana,
returns to its village. In some tribes canoe hunters use a calabash to imitate the roar of the jaguar.
Attracted by the call, the jaguar swims out to the canoe where it can easily be stunned with a club.
This policy has proved profitable for
Brazil as well as for the Indians. Huge
regions have been settled peacefully
and integrated into the national eco¬
nomy. The service has no secret of
success other than the patience and
the spirit of sacrifice which Rondón
was able to awaken.
But what can be done with Indian
tribes once they have been pacified?
How can they be saved from the harm¬
ful influence of everyday contact with
their onetime traditional enemies?
The loss of part of their territory is
a hard economic blow to Indian tribes
dependent for survival upon hunting
or upon plants growing wild. To make
matters worse, they are killed off by
epidemics of influenza or measles and
the high mortality rate destroys their
social structure and shatters their tra¬
ditional system of maintaining order.
At the same time, the Indian finds
that he has new needs clothing, salt,
ditional values breeds demoralization
and, above all, loss of self-respect.
The activities of the Servigo have
posed many questions, some difficult to
answer. These problems are still await¬
ing solution, a solution requiring the
contribution of anthropologists interest-
ed in the future of so-called "primi¬
tive" peoples. General Rondón had
foreseen these new problems and, in
1942, he created a research section at¬
tached to the Servigo.
Millions of men in the present-day
world live under conditions little dif¬
ferent from those faced by the Indians
of Brazil. The example of Brazil is a
lesson: it teaches us that their fate
need not be tragic. But a profound
understanding of their problem and of
the situation which is confronting
them with the advance of modern civi¬
lization is essential.
Photographs copyright Dominique Darbois, E. Aubert de la
Rue, Claude Levi-Strauss.
13
