A look a
THE
SCOREBOARD
FOR THE NEGRO
by
Morroe Berger
Princeton University
Dr. Berger, formerly political
analyst, Foreign Affairs Depart¬
ment of the American Jewish
Committee and instructor in
sociology at New York Univer¬
sity is assistant professor of
sociology at Princeton Univer¬
sity. He is the author of an
authoritative " study on local
controls over group discrimi¬
nation entitled "Equality by
Statute" (Columbia University
Press, New York, 1952) and
the author of the Unesco
study published early this year
entitled "Racial Equality and
the Law" from which the articles
on pages 4-15 are taken.
0
(Photo USIS )
SPORTS OF ALL KINDS have helped to reduce racial discrimination in the U.S. Major leagues
In professional baseball began in 1947 to hire Negro players, and by now they are so well accepted
as to occasion little comment. In college basket-ball (above) Negroes are "one of the team".
IT is something of a paradox that the
world has long pointed to the
United States as a classic, example
of both political democracy and social
inequality. Indeed, as political freedom
has diminished in large areas of the
globe and colour discrimination arouses
even more bitter resentment with the
decline of colonialism, the United
States has become the object of much
critical examination:
While observers most concerned 'with
political freedom and economic and
technological advances have been
favourable in their comments on United
States institutions, observers more
concerned with group relations and the
problems of social equality have often
been highly critical. What both groups
have tended to overlook is that in
recent years the United States has
applied the identical machinery that
operates its political democracy to
effect considerable improvement in its
traditional pattern of social, discri¬
mination.
Indeed, it already seems safe to say
that in the "contest" between the
implications of political democracy in
the United States and the implications
of its system of unequal social status
based in part on custom and in part
on law, the former are prevailing over
the latter. The issue is certainly not
fully settled. Yet, unless there is a
sudden and sharp reversal, all present
trends show the "contest" resulting in
a clear-cut, if not uniform, victory for
the principles of democracy over those
of inequality. Such a victory will
serve also to demonstrate that le¬
gislative and legal techniques can
effectively reduce and even eradicate
deeply rooted prejudices and habits.
While discrimination in any form is
Itself undemocratic (although there
are theorists and groups who have held
that the milder forms of it are wholly
compatible with democracy where
everyone has the right to express his
tastes) its most injurious aspect is
economic. Before equality of status
and other minority rights can be
assured, it is above all essential to
remove the barriers to earning a living
and other impediments which block
anyone from attaining the more
desirable professions and vocations.
In developing relations with other
people, all of us are constantly making
choices on the basis of more or less
conscious deliberation. We select this
person over that one as a friend; we
adopt attitudes towards others ranging
from love to hostility; we choose to be
intimate with this acquaintance and
prefer to remain more formal with that
one. In one sense this process might
be called discrimination, since by it we
select one among several courses of
action and exclude others. But so long
as this selection is based upon
consideration of the individual qualities
of other persons, we do not call it
"discrimination" in the sense in which
this word is used in the analysis of
group relations.
Consider now another sort of se¬
lection. Suppose a man to select his
friends, or the neighbourhood in which
he will live, or the school his children
will attend, in such a way as to bring
him and his family into as little
contact as possible with individuals of
a certain religion, nationality, social
class, or skin colour.
Suppose further that he arrives at
these decisions not -by evaluating the
merits or demerits of members of these
groups but simply on the basis of his
dislike or fear of those groups as such;
or, as is frequently the case, on the
basis of his belief that all the members
of a particular group are inferior to
him or unworthy of his association.
Such a person can be called prejudiced.

This person groups and evaluates
people on the basis of traits which
have no validity, according to the
scientific data we now have, as an
index to individual intelligence, taste,
capacity to learn, or to such qualities
as honesty, trust-worthiness, ambition,
and so on. Nevertheless, the actions of
a person who makes such prejudiced
judgments is not discrimination in the
sense in which the word is used here,
although it usually leads to it.
Discrimination, in this sense, is not
simply an attitude or an opinion,
although it may be (and usually is)
based upon either or both. Discri¬
mination, rather, is a specific act, a
deliberate attempt to exclude some
individuals from something desirable
because they are presumed (correctly
or incorrectly) to belong to a certain
group. The groups that are most often
the objects of discrimination are
identified by means of religion, national
origin, colour, language, and social
class.
Discrimination on such grounds
means the denial of a right or privilege
to a person on the ground of his
presumptive membership in some
group, regardless of his individual
qualities. We may accept the following
brief definition given by the United
Nations Sub-Commission on Prevention
of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities: "... discrimination includes
any conduct based on a distinction
made on grounds of natural or social
categories, which have no relation
either to individual capacities or merits,
or to the concrete behaviour of the
individual person."
Discrimination, then, is an overt act
usually, although not necessarily,
derived from an attitude of prejudice.
We say "not necessarily" because we
know that many persons who discri¬
minate do so not out of their own
prejudice but out of a tendency to
conform to a discriminatory pattern
they find in their communities or at
their place of work. Since it is an act
rather than a feeling, discrimination is
more easily combatted than prejudice,
is more amenable to control by law,
and is more easily measured by the
student of social relations. Likewise,
its growth or decline is more easily
studied and measured than is the
decrease or increase of prejudice.
Among the most recent efforts to
determine quantitatively the amount of
discrimination in various areas of
American society is a study by Ralph
H. Turner of employment discri¬
mination against non-white (mostly
Negro) Americans. Mr. Turner, by
measuring the differences in occu¬
pational distribution of whites and
non-whites having the same degree of
formal education, has reached some
noteworthy conclusions, among them,
the following:
1..Nearly two-fifths of the difference
in occupational distribution between
whites and non-whites is due to the
fact that whites have more formal
education. But the remaining , three-
fifths cannot he traced to educational
superiority and may therefore be
attributed to discrimination.
2. Unemployment strikes non-whites
more heavily than it does whites. Only
about one-fourth of this difference can
be attributed to the lower educational
level of the non-whites. The re¬
mainder may be said to be due to
discrimination.
3. Discrimination against non-Whites
does not occur primarily in the form of
a complete refusal to hire them but in
the refusal to hire them in those
capacities for which their formal
education qualifies them.
The assumption that education is
the chief determinant of employment,
qualification also points to another'
significant form of discrimination,
(Photo? USIS)
THE GREAT
EMANCIPATOR
The United [States fought a bloody war over the question of Negro slavery. In
1 863 while the war was still in progress, President Abraham Lincoln issued his famous
Emancipation Proclamation which declared all slaves within the states which had seceded
from the Union to be free. As soon as the Northern armies captured a region, the
slaves were immediately freed. The remaining slaves in the U.S. were freed by the
13th Amendment to the Constitution (ratified December 18, 1865). Above, the
statue of Lincoln in the Lincoln Memorial, Washingtona shrine visited by thousands
of persons every year. Left, in the simpler setting of a housing development one
of the many statues raised to Lincoln by the people of the United States.

* A LOOK AT U.S. RACE RELATIONS (Cont'd)
(Photos UM)
CHANGING PATTERNS. The federal
government has taken an unequivocal stand
against colour discrimination In the civil
and armed services of the U.S. Today a
new pattern is being set in the Army,
Navy and Air Force. Men of both races
train, work and live together (above).
The change-over from segregation to non-
segregation has been achieved without
serious friction. In a modern housing
.development, children of all races play
together in "Jungle Gyms", left.

the deep-running currents of change
inequality of educational opportunity.
In a society where training is so im¬
portant, practices of this type are
simply an early form of occupational
discrimination. The groups that suffer
most in this respect are the Negroes,
who find that their access to higher
education is severely limited, and the
Jews who are not freely admitted to
some privately supported colleges and
professional, especially medical, schools.
It would be futile to deny that these
conditions in education and employ¬
ment do exist in the United States.
But it would be equally futile, after
considering the changes that have
recently occurred and comparing past
and present conditions, to deny that
noteworthy advan¬
ces have been made in
eliminating these evils.
It is highly significant
that most of the
recent advances have
been closely connected
with the policies and
acts of the federal
and state governments.
During the great de¬
pression of the 1930's,
the United States un¬
derwent a profound, far-
reaching and probably
lasting change in its
conception of the proper
role of government.
New interpretations of
the United States con¬
stitution greatly en¬
larged the power of the
federal government at
the expense of the states,
particularly in the re¬
gulation of economic
affairs.
At the same time, the
state governments found
their own power to
regulate their internal
social and economic re¬
lationships strengthened
and increased. De¬
cisions of the United
States Supreme Court acknowledged
and confirmed that government had
the power to regulate, in some respects,
the hiring and firing of workers and to
prescribe working conditions.- And it
was this change in the broad philo¬
sophy of government that set the stage
in America for the newest and most
effective methods of coping with
discrimination.
It was in 'response to the depression,
too, that the federal government
instituted programmes that eventually
affected group relations in every
community in the country. Many of
these programmes were designed to aid
the indigent and inevitably reached
those groups that had suffered most
from discrimination. Although the
anti-depression measures were not
aimed specifically at these "under¬
privileged" groups, the government
definitely sought to carry them out
without regard to the colour, religion
or origin of the beneficiaries.
Money was distributed directly to the
poor; plans were developed for aiding
farm owners, tenants and workers; the
government built houses or contracted
for them to be built; through a vast
public works programme hundreds of
thousands of men and women were
hired for every kind of work from
menial labour to the most advanced
kind of artistic creation. In all this
variegated activity, minority groups of
every kind received fairer treatment on
a national scale than they had ever
enjoyed before.
The Negroes, in particular, ex¬
perienced a much greater measure of
equal opportunity and treatment than
they had enjoyed in the past. Of
course, equality in the distribution of
charity or government relief funds is
not precisely the answer to the
aspirations of underprivileged groups.
But the full acceptance of their rights
was an indication of the new spirit in
, the land and an augury of more
significant gains. Taken in con-
INCREASED MIGRATION of Negroes from the south to the north of the U.S.
took place between 1930 and 1940, and was again sharply accelerated during World
War II. It was accompanied by an urbanization of the Negro population. Between
1940 and 1950 the proportion of Negroes in 27 cities rose from 17.5 per cent to
30 per cent. Industry also opened its doors to Negro workers, more and more of
whom are now employed in skilled jobs and therefore enjoying an improved economic
status. The one shown here is a worker in a Detroit automobile factory.
junction with vast changes in the
distribution of the Negro population,
federal recognition of their status
helpçd to set in motion forces tending
to make for their greater participation
in the benefits of democracy.
A considerable migration of Negroes
from South to North had begun during
World War I. This trend continued
during the post-war period, increased
during the thirties, and, owing to a
variety of factors, was sharply acceler¬
ated during the war-interrupted decade
of 1940-50. The suddenness and size of
the change may be measured by the
fact that during . this last-mentioned
decade the total population of 16
Southern states nearly doubled, where¬
as their Negro population increased by
only 2.5 per cent.
Another aspect of the changing role
of the Negro in American life was his
growing urbanization. In 1940, 27
cities contained 17.5 per cent of the
total Negro population; 10 years later
the same cities contained more than
30 per cent of the total. The hectic
pace of Negro urbanization can be
measured by the simple fact that
whereas from 1940 to 1950 the white
urban population rose from 58 to 64
per cent of the total, the Negro urban
population expanded at more than
twice the white rate, rising from 48 to
61 per cent.
Along with increased educational and
employment opportunies, an important
consequence of these population trends
is that Negroes are more concentrated
than before in ' Northern cities and
states where they are free to vote and
to utilize their strength at the polls.
These cities and states, moreover,
owing to their large populations, are
influential in national elections. One
indication of the potential power of the
free Negro vote is that in 1948 and
1952 this vote was greater in many
states than the margin of victory of
either of the two major political
parties, Republican and Democratic.
Negro voting has like¬
wise grown rapidly. In
1948 it was estimated
that there was a record
Negro vote of 750,000; in
the 1952 national election
this vote was put at
1,350,000. These gains
were registered not only
in the North but also in
the South, where the
trend toward Negro
disfranchisement has
been decisively reversed
and Negroes are becom¬
ing an important in¬
fluence in elections.
Meanwhile, during
this period of the 1930's
and into the next two
decades as well, the
United States Supreme
Court was both respond¬
ing to this new spirit
and stimulating i t s
growth. In a series of
remarkable decisions,
the Court reversed a
tradition of a half-
century and began to
give special protection
to the rights of minority
groups protection re¬
dounding especially to
the benefit of Negroes, the most under¬
privileged among these groups that
have suffered from systematic ' discri¬
mination.
During the decade following the end
of the Civil War, the federal govern¬
ment had sought, through five major
laws and three constitutional amend¬
ments, to protect the newly-eman¬
cipated Negroes in their exercise of the
rights and privileges of United States
citizens; but in the period that
followed, the Supreme Court by its
verdicts in case after case restricted
the application of these statutes and
amendments.
During the 1930's, however, the
decisions of the Court began to
emphasize the protection of civil
rights. As we shall see later in
more detail, the Court gave the
federal and state governments greater
power in protecting minority groups
against discrimination by private in¬
dividuals and groups, and at the same
time diminished the power of govern¬
ments themselves to discriminate.
These decisions bolstered minority
rights in the administration of justice,
citizenship, employment, and voting,
and helped considerably to weaken
segregation in education, housing, and
public transport, (continued next page)

A LOOK AT U.S. RACE RELATIONS (Cont'd/
In the thirties, too, a. period began
during which the legislative bran¬
ches of both the federal and state
governments were continuously in¬
fluenced by the trend towards equality
of opportunity. True, up to the end of
1953, the United States Congress had
been unable to overcome the tenacious
opposition to major civil rights
legislation. But even this body, which
reflects all the interests of every
geographical region, including the
South, where discrimination and se¬
gregation are strongest, has felt the
powerful impact of the new spirit.
400 Anti-bias Laws
ALTHOUGH it has actually passed
none but minor laws, Congress
has served as the arena for many
long-drawn, widely publicized battles
for measures against discrimination.
These struggles have done much to
educate and arouse the public and to
unite all the organized groups seeking
corrective legislation. The number of
bills introduced is itself impressive.
In 1937-38 there were only 10 bills
dealing with minority problems; during
the next 10 years 170 such bills
were presented and in 1949-50 alone
72 bills were introduced.
The state legislatures have also
experienced this growth of interest in
the outlawing of discriminatory prac¬
tices, and many of them have enacted
effective laws. From the establishment
of the United States until 1953, the
states have enacted almost 400 anti¬
discrimination and anti-bias laws.
Two-fifths of these laws have been
passed since 1940. These statutes have
outlawed discrimination or segregation
in employment, places of public
accommodation, education, health care,
housing, insurance and loans, the
armed forces, voting, the professions,
or have sought to remove irregularities
in marriage laws, or have dealt with
group defamation, the rights and
status of aliens and the foreign born,
and mob violence.
Popular upsurge
UNDERLYING these government
activities has been an extraord¬
inary upsurge of popular feeling
for democratic equality as revealed in
the activities of a host of private
voluntary organizations, including busi¬
ness and religious groups, athletic
organizations, professional groups, etc.
Only a few years ago discrimination
became for the first time a subject
treated openly, frankly and extensively
in the movies, over the radio, and in
the mass circulation magazines.
Dozens of cities, in response to
demands by their citizens, established
special agencies to improve group
relations. The major leagues in pro¬
fessional baseball began in 1947 to hire
Negro players, and by now they are so
well accepted as to occasion little
comment. Since the 1940's, too,
religious, labour and . professional
groups have admitted to membership
all qualified persons irrespective of
race, colour, religion, or national
origin; these include national Church,
groups and local Churches of all
religions and denominations, trade
unions, and associations of doctors,
dentists, nurses, lawyers, teachers,
scholars, and students in all parts of
the country, including the South.
The upshot of all this government
and private activity is that the Negroes,
who have constituted by far the most
underprivileged large group in the
United States, have made great strides
towards achieving living conditions on
a par with other United States, groups.
These advances can be measured in
certain indices of welfare as reported
recently in a special study by the'
United States Bureau of Labor
Statistics. Two conclusions are drawn
from the facts presented in this official
study: "The first is that in' almost
every significant economic and social
characteristic that we can measure
including length of life, education,
employment, and income our Negro
citizens, as a whole, are less well off
than our white citizens. The second
is that in almost every characteristic
the differences between the two groups
have narrowed in recent years."
In terms of basic health, while the
death rate is still higher among
Negroes than whites, the difference in
these rates has declined markedly. In
1935, the Negro death rate was 17.3 per
1,000 of the population, the white rate
11.1 per 1,000. By 1949, the death rate
had declined to among Negroes 12.6
as the white rate dropped to 8.4, the
Negro decline being proportionately
greater.
In education, likewise, the sta¬
tistics for the same period re¬
vealed that the
gap between
whites and Ne¬
groes had been
considerably re¬
duced. In 1940,
Negroes at the
age of 25 had
completed an
average of 5.7
years of school;
in 1950 this fig¬
ure had risen to 7
years. In 1940,
whites had com¬
pleted 8.7 years of
school, and, in
1950, 9.7 years.
The Negroes' gain
was thus propor¬
tionately higher
than that of the
whites.
Progress in em¬
ployment can be
measured by the
degree to which
Negro workers
have been able to
leave ill-paid jobs
in agriculture for
skilled or un¬
skilled jobs in
industry. In 1940
more than 40 per
cent of all
Negro workers
were in agriculture; by 1952 this
number had declined to 19 per cent.
This decrease in the proportion of
Negroes in agriculture was more than
twice the decline among the Whites.
The total improvement in the economic
condition of the Negro may be gauged
from the fact that in 1939 the average
Negro worker's income was about $400
a year or less than 40 per cent of the
average wage of white workers. In
1950, the Negro worker earned an
average of $1,300 a yearor 52 per cent
of the white worker's average wage.
Still much to do
ALTHOUGH these changes, during
a relatively short period, are
evidence of significant progress,
no one would deny that much remains
to be done to improve group relations in
the United States and to ensure the
rights and privileges of all the in¬
habitants. The advances have taken
place under favourable economic con¬
ditions, they have not been uniform
and, in scattered urban areas both in
the North and South, they have been
accompanied by some illegal violence.
Nevertheless, the progress is per¬
ceptible and so is the will and deter¬
mination of the majority of the
American people to move forward
towards the realization of full equality
of rights and opportunity for all. And
as the United States has become in¬
creasingly subjected to world scrutiny,
the government and American citizens
have realized that the United States
minority problem is one which, for good
or ill, can seriously affect American
status abroad.
SLUM AREAS. Many Negroes are still confined, because
of housing segregation, to "black belts". Here in many
American cities they live in overcrowded, dilapidated struc¬
tures in slum areas. But many efforts are being made to
improve the lot of both city and country dwellers. Of
150,000 housing units recently built by the government,
50,000 were allotted to Negro families.
(Photo Magnum - Carlier-Ëresson )
