How Close
Are We ?
NUCLEAR
POWER IN
NDUSTRY
AUSTRALIA is consi¬
dering the development
of a nuclear power indus¬
try. For fuel she has
vast reserves of raw
material in the form of
uranium deposits. So far
her universities have limi¬
ted their research to
studies of the atomic
nuclei using such ma¬
chines as the Cockcroft-
Walton 1,250,000 volt
multiplier in the Austra¬
lian National University,
Canberra (left). Recent¬
ly, however, it was an¬
nounced that a £ I 2 mil¬
lion industrial nuclear
reactor is to be built
in South Australia, (Aus-
. tralian Official Photo).
It is now ten years since the prospect
of using atomic energy to develop
power for light, heat and the work
of the world began to intrigue scientists
and governments alike. In 1945, when
the world adapted once more to a
relatively peaceful life, it was hoped
that industrial atomic power would
become a reality within ten years.
This has not happened partly because
international tensions have continued
the policy of secrecy and partly because
the engineering problems have been
enormous. The great strides that have
been made in the use of nuclear
reactions and in the design of reactors
have been by-products of the large
expenditures for military purposes.
But in the past three or four years
attention has shifted to the study of
industrial power and to the economics
of the use of nuclear fuels. There has
not been time enough to provide
experience for a realistic forecast in
economic terms. There was, in fact, no
great hope until the American breeder
reactor in May 1953, first showed that,
common and cheap uranium and
thorium can be used as fuels. That
fact has greatly advanced practical
industrial power from the atom.
The development has gone farthest
in the United States because of that
country's active development of react¬
ors during the war and because of the
large economic resources it had
available after the war. Even there,
however, there is as yet no operating
atomic power reactor for industrial
purposes.
The U.S. has constructed more than
a score of major reactors, some for
the manufacture of plutonium and
uranium-235, some for the intensive
testing of materials that are to be
exposed to atomic rays, some to test
the principle of breeding and most of
them to test the feasibility of different
types of reactors, operating on different
fuels, with different intensity of
neutron bombardment, with different
methods of cooling and other mo¬
difications.
In one type, for instance, the fission¬
able uranium is dissolved in water and
the heat of fission causes the water to
boil and generate steam directly. In
another type the uranium is dissolved
in metallic bismuth. Such experiments
will continue, but they have already
produced actual designs for two full-
size power reactors.
The first of these has been installed
in a new type of submarine which
depends wholly on atomic energy for
its. motive power, and which was
launched on January 21, 1954. It
extracts from a small piece of atomic
fuel the equivalent of 460,000 gallons
of fuel oil or 3,000 tons of coal. Consi¬
derations of cost have not entered into
its construction because the advantages
of an atomic engine outweigh the cost.
The submarine can cruise for an
Indefinite period of time under water
because its engines need' no air. It
41

The world atomic power picture
does not need to return for refuelling
because the charge of atomic fuel will
propel the ship for any voyage. The
keel for a second atomic submarine
with improved engines has already
been laid.
The submarine demonstrates the
reality of atomic power without cost
figures. . But experience with its engine
for two years has now justified the
construction on the same basic design
(with enriched uranium as fuel and
with water under high pressure as
coolant) of a full-scale atomic power
plant near Pittsburgh at a cost of
30 million dollars which will produce
60,000 kilowatts of electricity enough
for a city of 60,000 to 100,000 population.
Its power will be fed directly into the
network near Pittsburgh.
Optimism in the U.S.A.
The cost of its power will probably
not be as low as that of power
made from coal, but the U.S.
Atomic Energy Commission will pay
five-sixth of the cost of the plant and
provide the uranium fuel so that the
Duquesne Light Co. of Pittsburgh will
buy the steam from the reactor econo¬
mically. This expenditure by the
government is considered justifiable in
order to gain experience in actual
commercial operation on a large scale
which will make possible the cons¬
truction as soon as possible of another
plant that should produce power as
cheaply as it can be made from coal.
Meanwhile, the American technical
world is fascinated by a variety of
atomic projects, with the electrical
industries taking the lead. Mr. Ralph
J. Cordiner, President of the gigantic
General Electric Company has urged
corporations and private business to
enter the field, and recently told the
National Association of Manufacturers:
ATOMIC AGE CLOCK bu.lt by the
National Bureau of Standards, Washing¬
ton, would require at least 3,000,000
years to lose or gain one second. Scien¬
tist on extreme left is holding a model
of the ammonia molecule whose absorp¬
tion of radio energy provides the inva¬
riant frequency on which clock is based.
"It is our optimistic estimate that by
1976, 50 % of the new electric power
facilities being installed will be atomic."
General Electric engineers have
recently calculated that while a coal-
burning electric plant costs about
$130 per kilowatt of electrical pro¬
ductive capacity, an atomic plant costs
from $195 to $215. This additional cost
is balanced by the fact that the atomic
fuel cost, including the processing of
the uranium and the disposal of
chemical wastes, is only about 0.1 cents
per kilowatt hour of . electricity pro¬
duced, while the coal cost for a plant of
similar size is about 0.35 cents. Thus
the saving in fuel makes up for the
additional cost of the atomic plant and
the total cost
of electricity |H|R^^^^_
from the atom B^.
is 0.67 to 0 68
cents a kilo¬
watt hour
compared with
0.69 cents for
that from
coal.
It is in such
an atmosphere
that the New
England Re¬
gional Atomic
Energy Com¬
mittee has
been organi¬
zed, covering
the six small
states in the
northeastern
corner of the
country, which
have neither
coal nor oil yet
are highly in¬
dustrialized.
Its purpose is to take the first oppor¬
tunity for adopting atomic energy for
the region. Similarly in the western
mountain state of Colorado a group of
four co-operatives engaged in rural
electrification have begun a campaign
to obtain the first atomic reactor for
a small electrical station.
The attractive calculations of costs
are based on large plants; small ones
will be more expensive to operate. Yet
many small plants are proposed for
special purposes. For instance, an able
physicist, Dr. Lyle B. Borst, of the
University of Utah, has . published
designs developed in co-operation with
five railroad and nine manufacturing
corporations, for an atom-powered
locomotive with 7,000 horse power and
a length of 160 feet. It would cost
$1,200,000 but its reactor, of the water
boiler type, would use only 11 pounds
of uranium in a year's operation.
In France, Mr. Louis Armand,
Director-General of the French Railway
System, has commented that it would
be wiser to use a reactor to provide
power directly to the electrified railroad
system. This is true where such a
system exists, as in France and Swit¬
zerland, but the great distances and
lack of electrification in other countries
make the nuclear locomotive a real
possibility.
For other isolated stations that
require power the U.S. Army has
already awarded a contract for the
design and construction of a 2,000
kilowatt nuclear-power, plant to cost
ELECTRIC BULB was lighted for the first time by
atomic energy at the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission's
testing station in December 1951. An atomic plant
powers the generator which supplies all the electricity
for the building in which it is housed. (Photo USIS).
about $2,000,000 which is to be so
constructed that none of its constituent
parts is too large or heavy to be
carried by airplane. A plant of that
size would be adequate to serve a
community of 2,000 persons and could
be carried intact to outlying military
posts, such as those in the Arctic, to
provide power, light and heat.
This is what has been called the
"package power reactor", referred to by
M. Jules Moch before the U.N. General
Assembly. (See page 13.). If it is
successful it may well be_a model for
the small reactors in many countries.
It could, for instance, be flown to desert
areas to serve pumps for irrigation
from underground streams, or to
coastal deserts
for the pro¬
duction of
fresh water
from the sea.
The interna¬
tional atomic
energy agency
will probably
stimulate such
uses.
The 220
pounds of ato¬
mic fuel that
the U.S. has
promised to
provide
through the
international
agency, plus
the 44 pounds
offered by the
British G o -
v er nment,
would be suf-
ficient to
provide fuel
for some 15
research reactors in different countries.
The U.S. Atomic Energy Commission
is continuing its expensive researches
into still newer types of reactors and
has authorized the construction of five
in addition to the score already in
operation. They are of two major
types, one of which uses water as the
coolant and the other liquid metal.
Among them are the "homogeneous"
reactor in which the fuel is dissolved
in a liquid that acts both as moderator
and as coolant and the "fast breeder"
reactor which is compact and operates
at high temperature. The investment
of many millions of dollars by the
government in a wide variety of ex¬
perimental reactors is expected within
a few years to result in a practicable,
reliable and economic design for in¬
dustrial reactors. -
The Chairman of the Atomic Energy
Commission, Admiral Louis S. Strauss
has recently said "Our children will
enjoy in their homes electrical energy
too cheap to meter". He has also said
that by a conservative estimate, only
five years from now 10 % of the new
American power plants will use atomic
energy instead of coal, oil or gas and
that by 1980 half of them will do so.
Such optimism is impressive because it
is made in a country where coal, oil
and natural gas are all plentiful and
cheap and where atomic fuels face
severe cost competition. One may
conclude that in countries where these
ordinary fuels are expensive or must
be transported over long distances the
atomic age cannot be far off.
42

Unpsco Courier Nr 12. 1954
POCKET REACTOR was built by the
North Carolina State College, U.S.A. to
train engineers in the use of atomic
energy. Reaction, obtained from ura¬
nium-235 contained in the cylinder,
starts when two of the rods in the
can are lifted by remote control.
Canadian atomic research and pro¬
duction have been closely related to
that of the United States for more
than ten years, especially in the pro¬
duction of uranium ores and the manu¬
facture of uranium. Aside from a
pilot model, the only Canadian reactor
is a large one at Chalk River, with an
energy-output of 30,000 kilowatts and
a neutron flow of 60 million million
neutrons per square centimeter. It
has probably been the world's most
powerful reactor using natural ura¬
nium, and produced large quantities of
highly active radio-isotopes for use in
commerce and research. It was in
operation for more than five years,
from 1947 to 1952 when it was taken
apart for repairs after an accident.
A second large reactor, now being
built and due for completion in 1955,
will cost more than $30,000,000. It will
be more "powerful than the first, will
use heavy water as a coolant and is
designed to permit nuclear engineering
-studies for a future power-producing
reactor. Three large Canadian electric
power companies and the Ontario
Hydro-Electric Commission are asso¬
ciated in the project, though it is
controlled by a crown corporation,
Atomic Energy of Canada, Ltd. This
is in the expectation that future ato¬
mic power generators should be in the
hands of the producers and distributors
of electric power.
Confidence in Britain
The development of atomic power is
more urgent in Britain than in
the U.S. or Canada because the
exhaustion of easily workable British
coal mines is already noticeable. As
a result the cost of coal is slowly
increasing and it is officially estimated
that there may be a deficit of twenty
million tons in the British coal supply
by 1965.
Work on atomic energy did not begin
in England until 1946, however, all
British efforts having been combined
with those of the U.S. and Canada in
North America during the war. That
year saw the beginning both of the
research station at Harwell under the
direction of Sir John Cockcroft and
the production division, with head-
. quarters at Risley, under Sir Christo¬
pher Hinton. The first research reac-
"tor was built at Harwell while a plant
for the manufacture of uranium from
Australian and African ores was built
at Springfields. Two reactors, side by
side, for the production of plutonium
from uranium were begun at Sellafield
on the Cumberland coast in 1947.
By May 1953, confidence in the pos¬
sibilities of power production was
sufficient to justify the start of a full-
scale industrial power, reactor at Calder
Hall, adjoining the Sellafield plant.- It
is now in construction and is expected
to be in operation in 1956. It is de¬
signed to produce 50,000 kilowatts of
power and has a distinctive cooling
system which utilizes carbon dioxide
under pressure to carry the heat to the
steam boilers.
It will probably be the world's first
large-scale power reactor to reach the
operating stage. No cost figures are
available but Sir Christopher Hinton
has stated that "a cost analysis does
not suggest that the price of electricity
generated from atomic energy will
make it uncompetitive" with electricity
from coal. And the British scientific
weekly, Nature, has- expressed the opi¬
nion that "by the time such a station
could be brought into operation, techni¬
cal and economic developments would
give nuclear power very considerable
economic advantages."
A breeder reactor has been in re¬
search operation at Harwell for some
time and the construction at Dounreay,
in Caithness, Scotland, of a large
breeder reactor, which should greatly
reduce costs, has been authorized. In
justifying the government plans, Sir
David Eccles, Minister of Works, em¬
phasized the need of training men
who would design, construct and ope¬
rate reactors not only for Britain and
the Commonwealth but for friendly
countries the world over.
PACKAGED POWER PLANT: An exhibit on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, pre¬
pared by the United States Government, has recently been on display at United Nations
Headquarters in New York. Taken from the exhibition is this model of a "package"
atomic power plant. Broken down into sections, it could be taken by air to a remote
site where regular fuels are unobtainable or too expensive to transport. The plant could
provide electricity for a mining community or pump water to arid zones, and a single
plane could carry enough atomic fuel to run it for several years. (U.N. photos.)
Progress in Russia
On July 2, 1954, Soviet News publish¬
ed a "Statement by the Council
of Ministers of the U.S.S.R."
which read :
"Work on the design and construc¬
tion of the first industrial power station
run on atomic energy, with a useful
capacity of 5,000 kilowatts, has been
successfully completed in the Soviet
Union, by the efforts of Soviet scientists
and engineers. On June 27th, 1954, an
atom-driven power station was put
into operation and generated electri¬
city for the use of industry and agri¬
culture in the neighbouring districts.
For the first time an industrial turbine
is working, not on coal or some other
fuel, but on atomic energy the product
of fission of the nucleus of the ura¬
nium atom. By putting the atom-
driven power station into operation, a
real step forward has been taken in
the utilization of atomic energy for
peaceful purposes."
Speaking to the "First Committee"
of the U.N. General Assembly on No¬
vember 12, 1954, the Soviet delegate,
the late Andrei Y. Vishinsky, repeated
this announcement and added:
"There are no obstacles in the Soviet
Union to the further successful and
rapid progress along this path of uti¬
lization of atomic energy for peaceful'
purposes and the implantation of these
methods throughout our economy...
The Soviet Union State, which has
broad facilities for the extensive pro-
43

IMPRESSIVE PROGRESS has been made during the past ten years in applying the forces of nuclear
fission to peaceful and constructive uses, thus opening up to our own future generations an ever-
expanding prospect of material betterment. After having been rendered radio-active, in nuclear
reactors (above, left), isotopes have been put to work on a thousand tasks for medicine, industry
and agriculture. Great strides have been made in the design of reactors and in the use of nuclear
reactions. More than a score of major reactors, such as the one at Brookhaven National Labo-
duction of atomic energy, is profoundly
interested in the utilization of this new
type of energy for peaceful purposes
and for the well-being of our people
because this kind of utilization of ato¬
mic energy, by countries which are
prepared broadly and extensively to
use it for peaceful ends, would open
wide, tremendous prospects of a vast
growth of productive forces, technolo¬
gical and cultural progress, and the
increased well-being of society."
The historic succession of disting¬
uished research physicists in France,
and the fact that France itself has
large uranium deposits and very large
deposits of thorium in Madagascar plus
its diminishing coal reserves, have all
been factors in the French atomic
energy programme. A small research
reactor was established at Chatillon, a
suburb of Paris in 1948. A second,
larger one at Saclay, near Paris, has
been in operation since 1952, using
pure metallic uranium in a moderating
bath of heavy water. It was designed
for an energy output of 1,000 kilowatts
but delivers more, and may be improv¬
ed to reach 2,000.
A pilot plant in the Rhone valley for
a reactor that will produce 50 to 100
grammes of plutonium per day has also
been planned. This is preliminary to
the construction, also in the Rhone
valley, of two large reactors that will
each generate between 50,000 and
100,000 kilowatts and will produce at
least 75 pounds of plutonium a year,
which will, in turn, permit the develop¬
ment of nuclear engines for marine
vessels. The official expectation is
that there may be industrial utilization
of atomic energy in France within four
to eight years, but that its use by cen¬
tral electric power stations is perhaps
still a dozen years away.
The approach of various nations to
the atomic energy problem varies with
their own needs and resources. Nor¬
way's is influenced by the fact that it
is the world's largest producer of heavy
water, which is made by the repeated
electrolysis of ordinary -water with the
use of very large quantities of electric
power from the Norwegian hydro-elec¬
tric installations. While heavy water
is an effective moderator for some
reactors its price is about $560 a pound,
or close to $1 a drop. A reduction in
the price is needed for larger-scale use,
and Switzerland, Israel, Italy, India
and New Zealand have all been consi¬
dering its production.
In 1951, Norway had under construc¬
tion a reactor to use its heavy water,
but it had no uranium. Meanwhile
Holland had several tons of uranium
on hand that had been farsightedly
purchased when uranium fission first
became a possibility. The two Govern¬
ments therefore organized the Nor¬
wegian-Dutch Joint Establishment for
Nuclear Energy Research at Kjeller,
Norway, under the direction of Dr.
Gunnar Randers. It is supported by
the two Governments through their
Research Councils and scientists of the
two countries work side by side. The
Norwegian firm, Norsk Hydro, which
produces the heavy water, supplied
about half the money for the construc¬
tion of the first reactor and has a
contract with the Norwegian Govern¬
ment for further work on the develop¬
ment of atomic energy. Both Dutch
and Norwegian industries are supply¬
ing funds and obtaining rights for fu¬
ture energy exploitation.
A 300 kilowatts reactor has been in
operation for almost three years for
the production of radio-isotopes and
for studying the feasibility of using
heavy water. Within a few years a
reactor using natural uranium with
heavy water as the moderator will be
built to produce steam at about 250
degrees centigrade and to give from
5,000 to 10,000 kilowatts of power.
Dr. Randers, speaking before the Eco¬
nomic Society of Norway recently,
stressed his opinion that without the
use of atomic energy as a source of
44

Unesco Courier. Nr 12. 	 1954
ratory, from which workers are shown removing "spent" uranium (above, right) have been built
in the United States. - But in the past four years, attention has shifted to the study of industrial power.
Here again, so much progress has been made that authorities in the United States have declared
that in twenty years time half the new electric power facilities then being installed will be atomic.
Scientists say this is only a beginning. They believe the use of atomic energy materials will increase
tenfold or more in the next few years. (Photos Edison Electric Institute and USIS.)
power, the world's population will by
the end of this century be faced with a
power deficiency that will lead to
stagnation or to a lowering of the
general standard of living. In England
Josiah Eccles of the British Electricity
Authority made a suggestion pertinent
to Norway that countries with surplus
hydro-electric power should use it to
concentrate and purify fissionable fuels
such as uranium for export to regions
with power shortages.
Sweden has been producing uranium
for some time and is now increasing its
production from the deposits of oil-
shale at Karnstorp which contain
lumps of kolm, a hydrocarbon that
contains as much as 3,000 grammes of
uranium per ton. Sweden has one
small reactor of 100 kilowatts capacity
which uses three to four tons of ura¬
nium. It is .built in Stockholm in a
special underground chamber hewn out
of bedrock. A 10,000 kilowatts reactor
is to be built by A.B. Atomenergi Co. of
which the Government owns 57% and
fifteen private firms own the remain¬
der. Officials do not believe that ato¬
mic energy will be competitive, with
water power in Sweden until all the
nation's hydro-electric sources have
been put to use, which will presumably
be in about twenty years.
Belgium has long been the world's
major producer of uranium from its
great Shinkolobwe mine in the Belgian
Congo. The uranium has been shipped
in large quantities to the United States
since 1944 under a ten years contract.
Negotiations on this question have been
going on between the Belgian and U.S.
Governments. Belgium wants to re¬
ceive technical information on the
peaceful uses of atomic energy and
nuclear material produced in American
plants that could be so used.
Belgium is now building an experi¬
mental reactor at Mol intended pri¬
marily to train personnel and secure
operating experience. It should be in
operation early in 1956, providing 2,000
kilowatts of power. This reactor is
being financed "without intervention of
the Treasury or of private industry, in
accordance with arrangements of an
international nature", said Pierre de
Ryckmans, Commissioner for Atomic
Energy. Presumably this refers to a
new agreement with the U.S. Atomic
Energy Commission.
Belgium has also signed an agree¬
ment with the Swiss Government
whereby small amounts of uranium
from Belgian ores will be supplied to
Switzerland along with the exchange
of information and experience in the
operation of reactors. The Swiss ex¬
pect to begin construction of a power
ZEPHYR, a fast reactor now operating
at the Harwell Research Centre, England,
is helping scientists to find out more
about the "breeding" process, by which
a reactor creates more atomic fuel than
it consumes. If this system can be deve¬
loped, nuclear energy electricity generat¬
ing systems should operate with smaller
fuel suppliesa major factor ¡n the
prospect of developing atomic power.
(Photo : Britich Atomic Energy Authority)

...Into Peaceful and Constructive Paths'
reactor at a cost of about $4,500,000
within a year. It will use natural
uranium and heavy water and will be
classified at 10,000 kilowatts. It is one
of the few that will be privately financ¬
ed and controlled, being built by three
Swiss electrical manufacturing corpo- '
rations. In Geneva, Switzerland also
is host to the large new research ins¬
tallation now being built by the Euro-
nean Centre for Nuclear Research.
This, however, while it will have the
world's most powerful synchro-cyclo¬
tron, will have no reactors nor- fission¬
able materials and has no direct
concern with the production and uses
of atomic energy.
Latin American prospects
All work on atomic energy was
banned in West Germany by the
Allies at the end of the war.
Nevertheless, the Max Planck Institute
of Göttingen has processed and dis¬
tributed radio-isotopes that are flown
in from Harwell in England. The
mining of uranium, with Allied per¬
mission, is now also under way in the
deposits in the Black Forest and the
Fichtel Mountains. Very recently four
major German industrial concerns
have formed a group with 12 others to
build an atomic reactor of 10,000 kilo¬
watts. It is expected to cost $5,000,000
and will operate under severe res¬
trictions intended as military safe¬
guards.
There are as yet no reactors in Latin
America, but a representative of the
U.S. Atomic Energy Commission has
reported on the basis of an extended
trip that uranium is as plentiful as lead
in much of Latin America's subsoil so
that some Latin America countries, ,
using their own uranium, can expect
to base their industrial revolution on
atomic power. Brazil, however, has at
Niteroi, across the bay from Rio de
Janeiro, a Centre of Physical Research
attached to the University of Brazil.
Its cyclotron has been operating for
some years. This development is an
outgrowth of a United Nations Technic¬
al Assistance mission to assist in the
installation of cosmic ray observatories
in Bolivia. One of the exrjerts, Dr. Ugo
Camerini, of Italy, remained in Brazil
to become chief of the Centre's de¬
partment of physics.
Recently these nuclear studies de¬
veloped into government approval for
the establishment of an uranium
treatment plant at Pocos de Caldas, a
spa in the state of Minas Gerais. Ac¬
cording to Admiral Alvaro Alberto,
President of the Brazilian National
Council for Scientific Research, work
will begin within three years on the
construction of a pilot reactor to use
nuclear fuel produced at Pocos de
Caldas. This is the first step toward a
later Brazilian programme for the
production of atomic power for indus¬
trial use.
There have also been reports in the
press that Argentina has developed an
atomic energy pilot plant with a nu¬
clear reactor at Huemul Island, but
this has not been officially confirmed.
One of the major problems of the in¬
ternational atomic energy agency will
be the assignment of priorities for
atomic power development. This will
involve large decisions of policy as to
need and successful prospects of de¬
velopment but one of the members of
the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission,
Mr. Thomas E. Murray, is already on
record as favouring a priority to Japan
which as yet has no nuclear power de¬
velopments. Speaking to a Convention
of the United Steel Workers of America,
one of the major labour unions,
Mr. Murray recommended that the
building of a nuclear power plant
in Japan should be high on the
agenda" of the American Govern¬
ment. He was speaking in Octo¬
ber prior to the discussion of the Uni¬
ted Nations Agency. He urged that
America should express its intentions
and must "give by action and not by
words alone clear and tangible proof of
our own determination to channel the
energy of the atom as soon as possi¬
ble into peaceful and constructive
paths".
India is rich in nuclear raw materials
in the enormous deposits of monazite
sand on the shores of Travancore.
These deposits contain at least a
million tons of thorium in a form that
is easily extracted, and widely scattered
minerals of uranium. The Government
is so conscious of the value of these
materials for India's future as an in¬
dustrial country that the export of
thorium and uranium ores, as well as
those of beryllium, has been sharply
restricted. A plant for the extraction
of both uranium and thorium from
monazite is in operation at Alwaye in
Travancore-Cochin State and a second
plant at Trombay, near Bombay, will
be in operation by May 1955.
Similarly, the Indian Government is
advancing the production of heavy
water at Bagkra Nangal where large
amounts of cheap power are available
and where five to six tons of heavy
water can be produced per year as a
by-product for the production of
250,000 tons of fertilizer. The construc¬
tion of an atomic reactor lies in the
future after the preliminary stages of
the production of uranium, thorium
and heavy water. Nevertheless, India
plans to have her first atomic reactor
in operation by 1958 and adequate
funds have been made available by the
Government to the Indian Atomic
Energy Commission.
India looks ahead
On November 26 and 27, a two-day
Conference on the Development of
Atomic Energy for Peaceful Pur¬
poses in India was held at New Delhi,
and attended by Prime Minister Nehru,
Dr. H.J. Bhabha and some hundred
scientists. Closing the Conference, the
Prime Minister stated that India has a
formal agreement with France which
has yielded good results in that young
Indians are being trained in France for
worK on atomic energy development in
India. There is also a limited agree¬
ment with the U.S. and informal
agreements with Norway and Sweden.
"It is beginning to be realized by
people all over", said the Prime Mi¬
nister, "that something rather basic in
experience has been happening
in connexion with all that has gone on
in recent years in regard to the de¬
velopment of atomic energy. It is
something which gives you some
glimpses... into all kinds of secret forces
of nature. But this tremendous power
suddenly opened out for human use-
can be used for good or evil... it there¬
fore becomes necessary for us to try to
understand it, to try to train our people
in it, and try not to lag behind in this
process."
Unesco's National Distributors from whom
the English edition of THE COURIER can be
obtained are listed below Other Unesco
Distributors are listed in the French and
Spanish editions of THE COURIER.
Australia : Oxford University Press, 346,
Little Collins Street, Melbourne.
Austria : Wilhelm Fnck Verlag, 27, Gra¬
ben, Vienna I.
Burma : Burma Educational Bookshop.
551-3 Merchant Street, P.O. Box 222,
Rangoon.
Canada : University of Toronto Press,
Toronto.
Ceylon : Lake House Bookshop, The Asso¬
ciated Newspapers of Ceylon, Ltd., P.O.
Box 244, Colombo J. Rs. 5.
Cyprus : M. E. Constantinides, P.O.B. 473,
Nicosia.
Denmark : Ejnar Munksgaard Ltd., 6 Nor-
regade, Copenhagen, K.
Egypt : La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9, Adly
Pasha Street, Cairo.
NATIONAL DISTRIBUTORS
Ethiopia : International Press Agency,
P.O B. 120, Add.s-Ababa.
Finland : Akateeminèn Kirjakauppa, 2 Kes-
kuskatu, Helsinki.
Formosa : The World Book Company Ltd.,
99, Chung King South Rd, Section I,
Taipeh.
France : Sales Division, Unesco, I 9, Avenue
Kléber, Pans- I 6e.
Germany : Unesco Vertrieb fur Deutsch¬
land, R. Oldenbourg, München.
Greece : Elefthéroudakis, Librairie Inter¬
nationale, Athens.
Hong Kong : Swindon Book Co., 25 Nathan
Road, Kowloon.
India : Orient Longmans Ltd., Bombay, Cal¬
cutta, Madras : sub-depots : Oxford Book
& Stationery Co., Scindia House, New
Delhi; Rajkamal Publications Ltd., Hima¬
laya House, Bombay 7. Rs. 4
Indonesia : G.C.T. van Dorp & Do. NV.,
Djalan Nusantara, 22, Djakarta.
Iraq : McKenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad.
Israel : Blumstein's Bookstores Ltd., 35,
Allenby Road, P O. Box 5 154. Tel-Aviv.
Jamaica : Sangster's Book Room, 99, Har¬
bour Street, Kingston; Knox Educational
Services, Spaldings.
Japan : Maruzen Co, Inc , 6 Tori-Nichome,
Nihonbashi, Tokyo.
Jordan : J I. Bahous and Co., Dar-ul-Kutub,
Salt Road, Amman.
Korea : Korein Nacional Commission for
Unesco, Ministry of Education, Seoul.
Liberia : Jacob Momolu Kamara, Gurley
and Front Streets, Monrovia.
Malayan Federation and Singapore :
Peter Chong and Co., P.O. Box 135,
Singapore.
Malta : Sapienza's Library, 26, Kmgsway,
Valletta.
Netherlands : N. V Martinus Nijhoff,
Lange Voorhout 9 ,The Hague.
New Zealand: Unesco Publications Centre
7 De Lacy Street, Dunedin, N. E. 2.
Nigeria : C M S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 174,
Lagos.
Norway : A/S Bokhjornec, Stortingsplass, 7t
Oslo.
Pakistan : Ferozsons Ltd., Karachi, Lahore,
Peshawar. Rs. 3.
Philippines : Philippine Education Co.,
Inc., 1 1 04 Castillejos, Quiapo, Manila. 3.00
Surinam : Radhakishun and Company Ltd.,
(Book Dept.), Watermolenstraat 36, Para¬
maribo.
Sweden : A.B C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hov-
bokhdnde', Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm 16.
Thailand : Suksapan Panit, Arkarn 9,
Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. 20 ticals.
Union of South Africa : Van Schaik's Book¬
store, Ltd., P.O. Box 724, Pretoria.
United Kingdom : H M. Stationery Office,
P.O. Box 5 69, London S.E.I.
U.S.A. : Unesco Publications Service, 475
5th Ave., New York 17, N.Y.
46
