THE AWAKENING CONTINENT
The average traveller leaves for Latin America convinced
by what he has read and heard that he will find one-
half of the population dancing the samba, the rumba,
the bamboco or whatever the local variation may be while
the other half sleeps under trees.
The average traveller is always disappointed.
A new wind is blowing through Latin Americathrough a
continent of many contrasts, with its mountain-tops under
perpetual snow and - sweating tropical lowlands, with its
great modern metropolises and its hinterland villages, with
its famous- writers, poets and thinkers and its more than
70,000,000 illiterates.
The phrase Latin America alone is a handy one, but it is
misleading. It tends to make an outsider place, let us say,
Colombia and Mexico within the same pigeonholes; and that
is as false as saying that Frenchmen and Yugoslavs are
exactly alike because they are continental Europeans. Latin
America's common language (with the exception of Brazil)
and common historical heritage are a tremendous advantage
today in modernizing a continent. But national differences
remain great; in the past, they were so great that it was
quite normal for a country to be in closer relations with
Europe or North America than with its own neighbours.
Our average traveller is bound to return home convinced
that Latin America stands poised on the brink of an eco¬
nomic revolution. The vagaries of world markets have
taken the easy profit out of one-crop economies. World
War II shut Latin America off from its traditional sources of
everything from type-writers to vacuum cleaners. Many a
country was, forced to choose between building its own
industries or do without and chose to build. In the Brazil
of fifty years ago, the rubber industry meant a naked Indian
tapping a tree somewhere in the Amazon for crude rubber to
be shipped immediately abroad. Modern Brazil makes
1,500,000 tyres a year. Colombia is now the fourth Latin
American country to produce its own iron and steel and it is
producing it on a site where ten years ago campesinos
ploughed the soil with oxen.
Latin America cannot be judged by the book standards of
"economic underdevelopment." The statisticians can prove
that production and standards of living are low and must be
raised, but their statistics cannot show_ one salient fact:
Latin America has, on its own soil, sizeable islands of modern
economies. The situation in many of these countries is that
of a colony, but with the "mother country" also placed within
the same borders.
In such a situation, technical assistance rendered by the
United Nations can make a tremendous impact on Latin
America. First there is the "blast furnace" of economic
potential which is merely waiting to be tapped. Secondly,
the "international expert" finds himself at home the moment
he steps off his airliner. A Mexican working in South Ame¬
rica or a Peruvian in Central America speaks the same
language and in many respects thinks the same way as the
people he is working with. There is the barrier of national
differences, true, but when it is overcome by men of goodwill
the results are often dazzling.
In Latin America, the United Nations and its agencies have
been able to undertake a wide range of missions (conducted
in many places by Latin Americans) to attack the immediate
and profound problems that hamper economic development.
Their work ranges from research in nuclear physics to
teaching adults to read and write. After a period of five
years, its fruits are worth a close examination.
In this issue, the Unesco Courier presents a few examples
of some of the results achieved. There are scores of others,
all of them exciting and fraught with significance. The
following pages are an attempt to help readers 'get a glimpse
of an old continent in new perspective.
JOSE DE BENITO.
