UNATIONS
RIDER WITH
AMESSAGE
Giant equestrian fig¬
ure in bronze, sym¬
bolic of Peace, stands
in gardens near U.N.
Assembly building.
It was the work of Ju¬
goslav sculptor, An¬
tun Augustincio, and
was given to U.N. by
Jugoslav Government.

SIXTY NATIONS ON 18 ACRES
ON an island by the Atlantic Ocean lies the
world's most unusual independent territory.
It covers only I 8 acres and has a population of
only 3,500 people. Every evening, the inhabitants put
on their hats and coats and spend the night elsewhere,
leaving a handful of guards to watch over it until
morning. No money is minted but the authorities
issue their own postage stamps and their radio
station broadcasts programmes in 25 languages. It
speaks five official languages and sixty national flags
fly in front of the white fence which separates it from
the rest of the island. But it also has its own flag:
a map of the world flanked by olive branches on a
pale blue background. The island, of course, is
Manhattan, in the heart of New York City, and the
territory the site of the United Nations
Permanent Headquartersthe nearest
thing to a world capital yet achieved by man.
3.1 IU LIIC
0
19

42nd Street and First Avenue
U.N. BUILDINGS shown here comprise, from
left to right: the General Assembly Building;
the Conference Area (along the East River) ;
the tall Secretariat building; and the Library.
In December 1946, few of the water¬
front properties facing New York's
busy East River were as unim¬
pressive as the section of cobblestoned
streets, lined with meat-packing hou¬
ses, breweries and run-down tenements,
bounded by 42nd Street, 48th Street
and First Avenue. And few would have
guessed that within nine months all
these buildings would be crashing down
under the hammers and bulldozers of
demolition gangs or that in less than
four years the staff of United Nations
Headquarters would be moving into
their 39-storey office building on the
spot previously occupied by slums and
warehouses.
The transformation was set in mo¬
tion through a dramatic offer
made by John D. Rockefeller, an
American philanthropist and financier,
to purchase the property as a perma¬
nent home for the United Nations. On
December 14, 1946 the U.N. General
Assembly meeting in temporary quar¬
ters at Flushing Meadows, on Long
Island, accepted the offer. Then New
York City bought and gave to the U.N.
the remaining land needed to round
out the Headquarters site as it exists
today. The City also undertook a
$30,000,000 improvement programme in
the immediate area, including the
construction of a tunnel to take First
Avenue traffic underneath what is
today the United Nations Plaza.
Set against the green of trees, grass
and gardens, the group of building
which make up U.N. Headquarters
today has little in common with the
scene it replaced. On the 18 acre site,
now international territory, and the
property of the United Nations, stand
the low-domed Assembly Building,
with its great meeting hall, the tall
glass and marble workshop of the Se¬
cretariat, the long rectangle on the
river side given over largely to confe¬
rence chambers, and the Library
building.
The Secretariat Building, tallest of
the group, consists of 39 storeys
rising 505 feet above street level
and going three storeys underground.
Its exterior facings are of aluminium,
glass and marble. A total of 2,000 tons
of Vermont marble was used to face
the windowles north and south ends of
the building. Fitted with blue-green
glass, each of its 5,400 aluminium
framed windows is specially made to
absorb the heat and reduce solar radia¬
tion. An air-conditioning system of
some 4,000 units allows individual
control of temperature in each room.
delegates area. The chamber of the
Trusteeship Council, designed by Finn
Juhl, of Denmark, combines colour and
fine woods to achieve a light, clean
harmonious effect. Walls are lined
with ash wood which acts as an acous¬
tic baffle. Arnstein Arneberg, of Nor¬
way, who designed the Security Council
Chamber, worked round a mural sym¬
bolizing future peace and freedom
painted by the Norwegian artist Per
Krohg. The walls are marble and the
doors are set in inlay wood.
Second largest building in the U.N.
Headquarters is the home of the
General Assembly, a marble and
limestone building whose low sweeping
lines stand in sharp contrast to the tall
Secretariat Building. The huge audi¬
torium provides seating for 750 dele¬
gates, 270 observers, 234 members of the
press and 800 members of the public.
DESTRUCTION,
RECONSTRUCTION
AND RESURRECTION
Huge mural twenty yards long and near¬
ly four yards high on mankind's struggle
for a lasting peace was painted in the
corridor outside the Trusteeship Council
chamber by the Dominican artist, José
Vela Zanetti. Mural begins with the
destruction of a family and ends with its
resurrection. Concentration camps, air
bombings and all the agony of modern
war are symbolized in the painting, in
centre of which a gigantic four-armed
figure (section shown here) is implanting
the emblem of the United Nations as
keystone in man's reconstruction of a
war-torn world. (UNATIONS)
TURBANED VISITOR from the Punjab, India,
seeks information. U.N. Information Section
is equipped to answer questions in the five
official languages of the U. N. and several others.
Council chambers and conference
rooms are housed in a long, low-
lying structure fronting along the
river. The main part of the building
is occupied by the chambers of the
Economic and Social Council, the
Trusteeship Council and the Security
Council. Each hall has exactly the
same dimensions and is completely
equipped with simultaneous interpre¬
ters' booths, as well as press, radio,
television and film booths.
Artists from three Scandinavian
countries Denmark, Norway and
Sweden employed their native
arts in the decoration of the three
Council chambers. In designing the
Economic and Social Council chamber,
Sven Markelius, of Sweden, achieved a
dramatic effect by contrasting sombre
colours in the public gallery with con¬
cealed lighting under a suspended
ceiling and a white marble floor in the
People from the world around come
in increasing numbers every day
to visit the U.N. Headquarters
buildings, unique in structure and
grouping. Nearly all visitors take ad¬
vantage of the guided tour, a service
run by the American Association for
the United Nations. The guides are
sixty-five young women, a third of
them born outside the United States.
Most are university graduates. Many
hold several degrees. Among them,
they speak seventeen languages fluent¬
ly. After careful training, they tell the
United Nations story in their own varied
individual ways. They are briefed daily
on current U.N. activities.
H
ere are answers to some of the
questions U.N. guides are most
frequently asked by visitors:
Fifteen miles of carpeting in strips
three feet wide are used throughout
the Headquarters.
i Twenty operators man (Cont'd on
the U.N. switchboard. page 24)
20

Unesco Courier. N° 10. 1935
PEACE,
PROSPERITY,
EQUALITY
The largest tapestry ever woven43 y2 by 28'/¿
feetnow hangs on the north wall of the dele¬
gate's entrance to the U.N. General Assembly
Building. Gift of the Belgian Government,
the tapestry depicts Peace, Prosperity and
Equality. In centre, the dove of peace approa¬
ches the fountain of goodwill. Views of the
chief cities of some member states line the
borders. Predominant colour among tapes¬
try's many hues ¡s green, universal symbol of
life and traditional colour of peace. Tapestry
was designed by Antwe.-p artist Peter Coifs
and woven under the direction of Gaspard de
Wit at the Royal Belgian Art Factory.
BROTHERHOOD
FREEDOM,
HUMANITY,
Arnstein Arneberg, of Norway, who designed
the Security Council Chamber worked around
this large mural symbolizing the promise of
future peace and individual freedom, painted
by the Norwegian artist, Per Krohg. From
the world of yesterday, painted in sombre
colours, a man and women (left) raise them¬
selves from the depths of despair. Right,
three prisoners are freed. Other panels
show equality depicted by the measuring out
of grain (left) and (right) the Important role of
science in the modern world.
21

Unesco Courier. N° 10. 1955
US1S
GOLDEN GATE suspension bridge, longest in the world, gracefully spans 4,200 feet
across bay at San Francisco, where U.N. was born I 945. City can be glimpsed beyond.
UNATIONS
PARIS WELCOMED U.N. when General Assembly Sessions were held there in
I 948 and 1951. Here in Hotel de Ville, City of Paris entertains delegates and officials.
UNATIONS
TEMPORARY HOME for the U.N. General Assembly in 1951 was a prefabricated building specially erected In the gardens
of the Palais de Chaillot in Paris. Deserted night scene contrasts sharply with daytime hustle and bustle of the Assembly.
SAN FRANCISCO
TO NEW YORK
VIA PARIS
UNATIONS
PERMANENT H. Q. is built on site in the heart of New York. Secretariat building
(right) rises 3 9 stories. Here work was in progress on General Assembly Building (centre).
FACING EAST RIVER, U.N. Secretariat Building (far right) adds a new element to New York's soaring
skyline. In foreground is mid-town Manhattan with Hudson River and the State of New Jersey in background.
UNATIONS
What was previously an area of run-down tenements and warehouses has been completely
transformed, with the new U. N. buildings set against the green of trees, grass and gardens.
22 23


42nd ST. AND FIRST AVENUE
(Continued from page 20)
From 100 to 200 calls for information
are received each day and passed
to the information section.
I There are one and a half miles of
elevator shaftways in the Headquar¬
ters and the elevators travel a total
of 250 miles in a working day.
) There are 2,300 typewriters with
keyboards for writing in 15 langua¬
ges: Arabic, Czech, Danish, English,
French, Greek, Hebrew, Icelandic,
Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portu¬
guese, Russian, Spanish, Turkish.
Many of the typewriters are tri¬
lingual, with keyboards which can be
used for typing English, French and
Spanish.
» U.N. radio programmes are broadcast
in 25 languages, some 850 press and
radio correspondents are accredited
to the U.N., more than half of them
from countries other than the U.S.A.
Also accredited are 100 photograph¬
ers, 75 representatives of newsreels
and 85 of television.
1 The United Nations costs citizens of
its Members States very little. The
ZEUS GREETS VISITORS ¡n lobby of
the Secretariat building. Presented by
the Greek Government, the U.N. Zeus,
below (chief god of Greek mythology)
is copy of a statue dating from 464 B.C.
now in the Athens Museum. Photos top
of page show, left: delicate Ballnese wood-
carving representing Peace, symbolized
by a Ballnese pedanda (priest) in solemn
meditation, presented to U.N. by the
Indonesion Government; right: Mankind
and Hope, a statue in teak wood carved by
a Danish sculptor, Henrike Starche, in
Trusteeship Council chamber. UNATIONS

Unesco Courier. N» 10. 1955
annual per capita cost to United
States nationals, for example, is just
a fraction over ten cents.
With more than 160,000 volumes
on its shelves, the United Na¬
tions Library provides a refe¬
rence centre for current world affairs
and contains complete data on political,
legal, social, economic and geographical
conditions in all nations of the world.
A pneumatic tube rapidly delivers
library materials to the Secretariat
Building where a conveyor belt trans¬
ports them to various floors.
In crowded Manhattan there is a
natural tendency to build on every
available square foot of land. The
U.N. site is a striking exception to this
rule. More than three quarters of its
area is devoted to lawns, landscaping
and gardens. Some 1,500 prize-winning
rose bushes, 175 flowering cherry trees
and a fine group of hawthorns, sweet
gum, pin oaks, sycamore and honey
locust trees have helped to transform
the site into a garden area.
Flowers and trees at the U.N. site
help to bring back a little of the
charm and fragrance that existed
on the East River shoreline three cen¬
turies ago. Turtle Bay, as it was
known in 1640, was fragrant with the
first tobacco crop grown by two English
settlers, George Holmes and Thomas
Hall. They established a plantation
and a residence, but it is recorded that
Hall, a restless individual, sold out to
his partner less than a year later for
"1,600 pounds of tobacco payable from
the crop which George shall make in
1641". The Turtle Bay Farm region
developed into a residential district in
the 19th century.
UN. Member states and many
private asociations and groups
have helped to beautify the
Headquarters. The circular fountain
in front of the Secretariat Building, for
example, is a gift from the children of
the United States and the Territories of
Alaska Hawaii, Puerto Rico and the
Virgin Islands. A unique feature is the
pattern formed on the bottom of the
pool by bands of crushed white marble
and black stones. The black pebbles
were given by Greece and were gather¬
ed by the women and children of
Rhodes from the island beaches. Other
nations have given paintings, tapestries
and statues. All the green carpets
came from France and all the grey
ones from Great Britain. A Japanese
pagoda with a bell cast from the bronze
coins of 60 countries was given by U.N.
Associations in Japan. Its base and
surrounding floor are faced with marble
from Israel. From Turkey to Australia
and from Ecuador to Iran, each of the
member nations has made its contri¬
bution.
No less than 12 auditoriums and
conference rooms are equipped
with the U.N.'s "'simultaneous
interpretation" system. By plugging
in earphones with which each of their
seats is equipped, and turning a dial in
front of them, delegates can hear a
speaker's words interpreted in any of
the U.N.'s five official languages»Eng¬
lish. French, Russian Spanish or
Chinese. Allowing all delegates to hear
at once, the system is a spectacular
time saver. The 66 interpreters who
come from 17 countries are not only
language specialists. To do their job
efficiently they must have a good
knowledge of the subject they are
interpreting.