The Unesco Courier. Nr 12. 1955
Tucked away in the towering Himalayas, the little
state of Sikkim boasts a hundred thousand souls.
A protectorate of India, and largely Tibetan in
character, it is situated to the east of Nepal. Its
rice fields terrace the mountainsides, each one guard¬
ed by its fluttering prayer banners (I) to ward
off the demons. In the hinterland of Sikkim the
Himalayan jungle with its population of monkeys,
leopards and bears, stretches up to a height of
9,000 feet. Here, in the shelter of enormous
ferns, grow orchids worth a king's ransom. Remote
on the mountain peaks lie the Buddhist monas¬
teries, where the secret soul of ancient Asia lives
on. On the 28th day of the Tibetan moon, the
last month of the Sikkim year, the Losungthe
Tibetan New Yearis celebrated. The ceremony
which lasts two days is designed to drive away the
demons of the old year and to welcome the good
spirits on the road of the months to come. The
deep tones of the ancient trumpets of the lamas (2)
mingle with the voices raised in prayer and thus add
rhythm to the sacred New Year dance, the Thiam.
The High Priest, the Lentshi-lama
brandishes a ritual bell and a
"thunderbolt" (3) to evoke the
forces which animate the Thiam.
Protected by a guard clothed in
red, a sacred symbol, the Si-Pa-Ro
presides over the dance. The Sl-
Pa-Ro is a plan of the universe
drawn geometrically with cosmic
symbols, in which each line and
each colour holds a divine message
which must be deciphered in order
to determine the augury for the
year to come (4).
(Copyrighc Bourguignon-Taret Expedition)
30

Sikkim warriors also take part in the ceremony.
They sing and dance the long epic poem of their
country's history. Their headdresses sway, their
sabres flash in the sun (5). Clothed in their
richest costumes the lamas trace innumerable
circles. They call up the demons and try to
subdue them (6). Once the evil spirits have been
lured into a circle, the warriors pounce upon
them and help the lamas to exterminate them.
On the evening of the second day there is peace
and silence. Assured that the good spirits are
satisfied, the lamas, still in dance formation (7),
withdraw to the Gumpa (temple). In the shadow
of a richly decorated statue of their deity. Guru
Rimpoche (9), they group themselves in fervent
prayer (8-10).
*^-W
31
