LANTERNS
GONGS AND
FIREWORKS
A Chinese philosopher
recalls his boyhood
by
Lin Yutang
Copyright Camera Press Ltd.
LIGHTED JOSS STICKS smoulder outside a temple in Penang (Malaya) as the Chinese inhabitants
celebrate their New Year. These sticks are collected and burned as incense before the ritual com¬
mences. Small boy (top, right) plants his own joss sticks under approving gaze of a stone lion.
MY memory goes back to those excit¬
ing, indelible childhood years. I
lived in an inland village near the
south-east coast of China. It was about
the turn of the century, the Manchu Em¬
press Dowager was still on her throne, and
customs had not yet changed.
As far back as I can remember, when
I was four or five, I felt New Year coming
weeks ahead, the way a western child would
feel the portentous arrival of the Christ¬
mas season. Not shopping and packages;
but my mother would grind rice fjour on
a home mill, to make nienkao, or New Year
pudding, made of rice flour, turnip and
dried shrimps. It was no small excitement
since this was done only once a year.
My sisters would assist my mother at the
small mill, consisting of two horizontal mill¬
stones about a foot and half across, the
upper stone turned by a wooden crank sus¬
pended from the ceiling. It was a very
tricky job, and full of fun. There was a
small hole in the upper stone, and while
one person turned the stone around, an¬
other had to drop rice and water with a
porcelain spoon expertly, at the exact mo¬
ment when the hole came around. Natu¬
rally I demanded to aim the rice at the
hole, too. I may or may not have broken
a few spoons.
The next thing I remember was fal¬
ling asleep trying to sit the Old Year out.
For it was the custom that the whole fami¬
ly should sit up after a sumptuous dinner,
in which besides fried clams, a special roll
made by mother, also only once- in a year,
invariably figured. It consisted of finely
chopped ingredients made into a paste and
wrapped around with a layer of peritoneal
fat from a pig. Red candles burned bright¬
ly on the centre table against the wall.
We would sing hymns and we would pray,
for we were Christians. My father, who
was a jolly man, would crack jokes and
everybody would be so happy, for we were
a family of many brothers and sisters.
Then my eyes would feel drowsy, and the
next thing I knew when I woke up was
the expectation of something akin to the
Christmas stocking. It was not
a stocking, but a cheap black (Cont'd
satin gown with a deep rose on ne*t
vest on top, which the younger P°Se/--
27

LANTERNS
GONGS AND
FIREWORKS
(Continued}
Erich Hartmann, copyright Magnum Photos
A DANCING LION BRINGS GOOD LUCK. Amid the noise and smoke
of exploding firecrackers, the traditional Lion Dance is performed in the streets
of San Francisco's Chinatown, where more than 30,000 Chinese live today.
Thousands of firecrackers are set off to drive away evil spirits. The lion, despite
its ferocious mask, is a symbol of good luck in the coming year. Above, the
lion dancer is aided by a boy who has taken the tail on his s.houlders. This
exuberant dance is a leading feature of the Chinese New Year celebrations.
children were allowed to wear only once
a year on the occasion of the New Year.
My father and my mother would be al¬
ready up at dawn, dressed, but sitting in
bed, waiting to receive the respects of their
children. Hurriedly my second sister would
assist me into my new gown, telling me
that all the others were ready, so that we
could all go in together and make our bow
to our parents. Then while the adults
would exchange New Year calls, we chil¬
dren would go out to set off firecrackers.
Once my eyes were hurt by a spark, and
a small white spot remained in one of
them, but disappeared in time.
The Old Chinese New Year, of the lunar
calendar, was the greatest festival of the
year for the Chinese people, compared
with which every other festival seemed to
have something less of the holiday spirit.
For five days, the entire nation dressed in
its best clothes, shut up shop, loafed, gam¬
bled, beat gongs, let off firecrackers, paid
calls and went to the theatre. It was the
great day of good luck, when everybody
looked forward to a better and more pros¬
perous new year, when everybody had the
pleasure of adding one year to his age and
was ready with an auspicious, luck-bring¬
ing word for his neighbours.
Stubborn Old New Year
The humblest maid had the right not
to be scolded on New Year's Day and
strangest of all, the hard-working
women of China loafed and cracked melon
seeds and refused to wash or cook a regu¬
lar meal or even handle a kitchen knife.
The justification for this idleness was that
to sweep the floor on New Year's Day was
to sweep away good luck, and to wash was
to wash away good luck. Red scrolls were
pasted on every door containing words like
Luck, Happiness, Peace, Prosperity, Spring.
For red was the colour of happiness.
And all around, in the home courtyards
and in the streets, there was the sound of
firecrackers, and the air was filled with the
smell of sulphur and narcissus sulphur
outdoors and the incredible subtle fragrance
of narcissus indoors. Fathers lost their dig¬
nity, grandfathers were more amiable
than ever, and children blew cheap bam¬
boo whistles, wore masks and played with
clay dolls. Country women, dressed in
their holiday best, would go three or four

miles on foot to watch a theatre, where
the village dandies indulged in what flirta¬
tions they dared. It was the day of eman¬
cipation for women, emancipation from the
daily drudgery of washing and cooking; if
the men felt hungry, they could fry nien-
kao, or make a bowl of noodles with prepar¬
ed sauce, or stuff themselves with cold
cuts of chicken.
Then the Republic came. The Republi¬
can Government of China officially abo¬
lished the lunar New Year, but the lunar
New Year was still with us, very much so
and refused to be abolished. It lodged
too deeply in the people's consciousness.
It was then about 1930, and I was in
Shanghai.
I am ultra-modern. No-one can accuse
me of being conservative. I am not only
for the Gregorian calendar, but am even
for the thirteen-month calendar, in which
all months have exactly four weeks or
twenty-eight days. In other words, I am
very scientific in my viewpoint and very
logical in my reasoning. It was this scien¬
tific pride which was badly wounded when
I found my celebration of the official New
Year a great failure, as anyone who pre¬
tended to celebrate it with any real feeling
must have found out for himself.
...I didn't want Old New Year. But the
Old New Year came. It came on February
the fourth.
My big Scientific Mind told me not to
keep the Old New Year, and I promised
him. -I'm not going to let you down," I
said, with more good will than self-confi¬
dence. For I heard rumblings of the Old
New Year's coming as far back as the be¬
ginning of January, when one morning I
was given for breakfast a bowl of lapacho,
or congee with lotus-seeds and dragon-
eyes, which sharply reminded me it was
the eighth day of the twelfth moon.
February 3 came. Still I said to myself,
"I'm not going to keep the Old New Year."
That morning, my wife told me to change
my underwear. I asked, "What for ?"
"Chouma is going to wash your underwear
today. She is not going to wash tomorrow,
nor the day after tomorrow, nor the day
after the day after tomorrow." Being hu¬
man, I could not refuse.
That was the beginning of my downfall.
After breakfast, my family was going to the
bank, for there was a mild sort of bank
panic, which came in spite of the fact that
by ministerial orders the Old New Year
didn't exist. "Y.T." my wife said, "we are
going to hire a car. You might come along
and have a hair-cut." I didn't care for the
hair-cut, but the car was a great tempta¬
tion. I never liked monkeying about in a
bank, but I liked a car. I thought I could
profitably go to the City Gods'. Temple and
see what I could get for the children.
I should not have gone to the City Gods'
Temple in the first place. Once there at
this time of the year, you know what would
happen. I found on my way home that I
had not only rotating lanterns and rabbit
lanterns and several packages of Chinese
toys with me, but some twigs of plum
blossom, besides.
What ! No turnip pudding
After coming home, I found that some¬
one from my native place had present¬
ed me with a pot of narcissus, the
narcissus which made my native place na¬
tionally famous and which reminded me
of New Year's Day in my childhood. I
could not shut my eyes without the entire
picture of my childhood coming back to me.
At lunch, the smell of the narcissus made
me think of the New Year rice-pudding,
made with turnips.
"This year, no one has sent us any turnip
pudding," I said sadly.
"It's because no one came from Amoy.
Otherwise, they would have sent it," said
my wife.
"I remember once I bought exactly the
same kind of pudding in a Cantonese shop
on Wuchang Road. I think I can still
find it."
"No, you can't", challenged my wife.
"Of course I can," I took up the chal¬
lenge.
By three o'clock in the afternoon I was
already in a bus on my way home from
North Szechuen Road with a big basket of
nienkao weighing two and a half pounds.
At five, we ate the fried nienkao, and with
the room filled with the subtle fragrance
of narcissus, I felt terribly like a sinner.
"I'm not going to celebrate New Year's
Eve," I said resolutely; "I'm going to the
movies tonight."
"How can you?" asked my wife. "We
have invited Mr. Ts... to dinner this even¬
ing." It all looked pretty bad.
At half-past-five, my youngest child
appeared in her new red dress.
"Who put on the new dress for her?" I
rebuked, visibly shaken, but still gallant.
"Huangma did," was the reply. Huangma
and Chouma were our maids.
By six o'clock, I found red candles burn¬
ing brightly on the mantelpiece, their lap¬
ping flames casting a satirical glow of
triumph at my Scientific Consciousness. My
Scientific Consciousness was, by the way,
already very vague and low and unreal.
"Who lighted the candles?" again I chal¬
lenged.
"Chouma did," was the reply.
"Who bought the candles?" I demanded.
"Why, you bought them yourself this
morning."
"Oh, did I?" It cannot have been my
Scientific Consciousness that did it. It must
have been the Other Consciousness.
I thought I must have looked a little ridi¬
culous, the ridiculousness coming less from
the recollection of what I did in the morn¬
ing than from the conflict of my head
and my heart at that moment. I was soon
startled out of this mental conflict by the
"bomb-bah" of fire crackers in my neigh¬
bourhood. One by one, those sounds sank
into my deep consciousness. They have a
way of shaking the Chinese heart that no
European knows. The challenge of my
neighbour on the east was soon taken up
by my neighbour on the west, until it grew
into a regular fusillade.
I was not going to be beaten by them.
Pulling out some money, I said to my boy:
"Ah-ching, take this and buy me some
heaven-and-earth firecrackers and some
rattle firecrackers, as loud as possible and
as big as possible. Remember, the bigger
and the louder the better."
So amidst the "bomb-bah" of firecrack¬
ers, I sat down to the New Year's Eve
dinner. And I felt very happy in spite of
myself.
Lin Yutang, Chinese philosopher and writer, Is
universally known for his books on Chinese life and
customs. Among some of the more famous are :
"The Importance of Living", "My Country and ' My
People" and the "Wisdom of China and India".
