..In Latin America, Unesco can mean a jeep
I slithering over muddy tracts and fording
I streams in Costa Rica's rainy season,
or a man on horseback riding up into the hill
country of Colombia. It can be a Catholic
brother writing a textbook or a scientist
studying the nutritive values of plants. It
can mean a mechanic installing a lathe or
a teacher introducing eight-year olds to the
printed word." This is what a Unesco cor¬
respondent, Daniel Behrman, found as he
watched Unesco's technical assistance experts
in action in seven Latin American countries
where they are often known simply as "Los
Úneseos." Mr. Behrman was sent on a special
Unesco mission to bring back a first-hand,
realistic report on the results of technical
assistance in Mexico, Guatemala, Costa Rica,
Colombia, Bolivia, Peru and Brazil. Here,
and in other lands of Latin America, the
combined efforts of teachers, broadcasters,
botanists, agriculturists and other experts
are revolutionizing the lives of countless
people today. In the articles that follow,
Daniel Behrman describes what he saw in
Guatemala, Colombia and Costa Rica. A full
account of his trip has appeared in "When the
Mountains Move," a pamphlet published
by Unesco. (Price: $0.75 ; 3/6 ; 175 fr.)
WHEN Don Pedro de Alvarado marched south from
Mexico into Guatemala in 1523 at the head of a
handful of conquistadores, he discovered a people of
weavers in the Mayan Highlands. They used stick-looms^
nothing more than a warp with one end tied around the
weaver's hips as he worked squatting on his heels, but then-
dyes and their designs were astonishing. Each of the Quiche
Indian villages on the plateau wove its own huepiles, blouses
for village women with a wealth of symbolic birds, animals,
human figures and geometric designs.
The Quichés were an adaptable people. When the Span¬
iards brought in the European foot loom, they had no
trouble operating it and duplicating it themselves. On these
new looms, the inhabitants of Quezaltenango, San Marcos,
San Pedro Sacatepéquez and other towns in the highlands,
continued to weave the ancient Mayan designs taught by
their elders.
GUIDING HANDS of skilled ceramics teacher aid those of
an apprentice in the Guatamala City Industrial Institute for
Boyscentre of an industrial education plan directed by govern¬
ment authorities and an international team. (Unesco photos.)
The stick-loom slowly became a curiosity. There was no
limit to the designs that a weaver could create with it, but
it was slow and unproductive. A Quiche woman using a
stick-loom needs almost two months to make a huepil which
she can sell on the old textile market at Quezaltenango for
25 quetzales (the quetzal is on par with the U.S. dollar) . She
takes her work with her wherever she goes, snatching a few
moments from her kitchen or from her fields to unroll the
loom and attach it to a tree.
The foot loom was a vast improvement, but the weavers
had to pay a penalty even for this timid step towards pro¬
ductivity. The fantastic designs of the Mayans, riots of reds
and yellows made with dyes whose secret is lost today, took
too much time to pick out. The weavers turned to sim¬
plified stylized patterns for the sake of production. Unfor¬
tunately, these simplified designs offered little that could not
be reproduced by machine. The goods of the highland
weavers vanished from the markets of the capital at Guate¬
mala City and Guatemala's oldest art began to die out. To
make matters worse, the gain in production had not offset
the loss in quality. A weaver still could produce only three
yards of cloth a day at 30 centavos ($.30) a yard. Whether
he used a food loom and sacrificed art to productivity, or
whether his wife stubbornly clung to her stick loom, the
Quiche weaver was caught in an economic vice.
Then, several years ago, a stranger came to Quezaltenango,
Guatemala's second largest city and the capital of its textile
country. He was Jean-Charles Hugoné a French scientist
and industrial engineer, and he had come into the highlands
as a member of a Unesco technical assistance mission work¬
ing with Guatemala on industrial education. Mr. Hugoné
had had more than 35 years of textile experience, including
a decade in Argentina.
The problem he found in the Mayan Highlands was
obvious : the weavers had to raise production enough to earn
their living and, at the same time, preserve Mayan designs,
their best stock in trade, from extinction. Mr. Hugoné had
had the germ of an inspiration one day in Guatemala City
when he and Dr. Ernest Cofino, director of the city's biggest
orphanage, were going over the institution's vocational
training classes. While the two men were taking inventory
of a storeroom, they saw the frames of an old Jacquard loom
rising out of the darkness.
16

Unesco Courier. Nr 2. 1955
The Jacquard was perfected in the early days of the 19th
Century by a Frenchman from Lyons, Joseph Marie Jacquard,
and it was one of the precursors of modern "thinking ma¬
chines". This invention is a loom attachment which works
the warp threads automatically to form a design while the
weaver merely throws his shuttle. Its principle is somewhat
that of the player piano the design is punched out on a
paper sheet which is then fed into the Jacquard. Anything
can be woven with a Jacquard portraits, landscapes or even,
as in the case of a museum piece in Lyons,, the last will of
King Louis XVI.
This seemed to be a way out for the highland weavers, but
there was one big stumbling block. A Jacquard can cost
from $500 to $1,000 and no craftsman working his family
loom in an adobe house at San Pedro Sacatépequez could
envisage such a capital investment.
At this point, Mr. Hugoné decided to become a bricoleur
an untranslatable French word for a poet of the machine
age, a man who can take a few lengths of baling wire, an
odd board and an old stove lid and convert them into a new
heating system for his home or an automatic gearbox for his
car. He sat down with a Guatemalan carpenter and, between
the two of them, they built a "national Jacquard" out of
wood at a cost of $75. When new weaving classes were
started by Dr. Cofino at the orphanage, the home-made
Jacquard was ready for use. As for the carpenter, he began\
to make Jacquards on his own and found ready buyers A
among weavers in Guatemala City.
Then Mr. Hugoné left for the highlands 120 miles west of
the capital. There, he embarked on a double life. At
Quezaltenango, he and the director of the city's pre-vocation-
al and industrial school, concentrated on training weavers to
work power looms in the big textile mills on the outskirts of
the city. But, three days a week, Mr. Hugoné was in San
Pedro Sacatépequez, 30 miles to the west, over a road climb¬
ing through the clouds. There, he worked with Raymundo
Sanchez, director of a spinning and weaving school, and
taught future craftsmen to follow their ancestral trades.
Quezaltenango needed good factory hands; San Pedro want¬
ed craftsmen and there was a potential market for the pro¬
ducts of both.
Within two years, the number of pupils at the school in
San Pedro has risen from 28 to 72. Students first learn then-
trade at the age of twelve. They start with a simple pattern
of wavy lines but, by their second year, they are already
working on Mayan designs. This, of course, could be learned
in the home of any of the 2,000 weavers of San Pedro, but
the course does not end with the looms. The school teaches
weavers cost accounting to help them run their one-man
businesses. It also teaches them the technique of transfer¬
ring their Mayan designs onto the paper "brain" of the Jac¬
quard. This machine in their shops will not prevent them
from maintaining their independence.
The weavers of San Pedro have strong ideas about inde¬
pendence, Mr. Sanchez told me. Even though they earn only
an average of 90 centavos a day as compared to $1.25 in
textile mills they prefer to work for themselves. It is his
hope that the home-made Jacquards will raise production to
5 yards of cloth per day, and, at the same time, open new
markets for their work. The town, by word-of-mouth, has
learned of the school's methods and local weavers have re¬
quested a night school. The Jacquard may turn out to be
the last link in the chain of Mayan designs going back to the
ideographs, or word pictures.
In the textile section of Quezaltenango's pre-vocational
school, a model factory is being developed with the help of
donations from mill owners. The school's electric loom is a
gift from one mill and it now has ten foot looms for instruc¬
tion purposes. In addition, there is a compact laboratory
for conducting precision tests of materials.
The school intends to introduce the descendants of the
Mayan weavers into the modern production line.
"We now train our own workers," the director of one of
the biggest mills in the Quezaltenango region, told me. "They
learn quickly, but they come to us without any experience
with machinery. It is the same process as learning how to
repair watches by yourself first, you have to break a few.
That is exactly what happens with our looms. Ten years
ago our workers were incapable of understanding the instruc¬
tions they were given," he 'explained. But a few years ago
the mill opened its own school for adult workers. "Today,"
said the director, "80 per cent of our workers are literate and,
in fact, we will only hire literate people. This is more than
just a question of production in one textile mill. It is the
economic growth of the country which is at stake."
