LAND HUNGER
ON THE TOP OF THE ANDES
by Alfred Metraux
THE fate of some 7,000,000 Andean Indians who live at alti¬
tudes which soon leave other men breathless and dizzy, is
today the deep concern of three Latin American republics
and the United Nations. At stake is the future economic develop¬
ment of Bolivia, Peru and Ecuador.
The Indian problem facing these three., countries is in many
ways identical since the region inhabited by the Quechuas and
the Aymarás forms a geographical, economic, social and cultural
unity. For this reason an effort to improve the living conditions
of the Indians is being made on an international basis.
For the past three years a vast international project of the
United Nations has been under way to help Bolivia, Peru and
Ecuador meet some of the most urgent problems facing the In¬
dians living in the Altiplano (high plateau). The Andean High¬
lands Project one of the biggest in the U.N.'s world programme
of technical assistance has been entrusted to the International
Labour Organization with UNESCO, the Food and Agriculture
Organization and the World Health Organization co-operating.
From the beginning it was obvious that the many problems of
the entire Indian population could not be attacked at the same
time. The problems had to be sifted out and given priorities.
Investigation showed that over-population, and as a result a seri¬
ous shortage of land, was the main cause of the stagnation of
Indian life.
The Bolivian Government for example has been carrying out an
important land reform programme in recent years. An answer bad
to be found to the question posed by thousands of Indians who
could not be granted land and who did not have the skills to
earn their living in industry. Bolivia looked eastward to the im
mense sub-tropical plains around Santa Cruz. A few years ago
these rich plains were almost inaccessible, but Santa Cruz is now
linked to Cochabamba (6,000 feet up in the Andes) by a new
road. This road may well open new horizons to Bolivia's economy
once people are brought into the almost deserted plains.
Bolivia's President Victor Paz Estenssoro has announced a plan
for settling this new untapped territory with Indians from the
highlands, miners who can no longer find work in the tin mines,
and even soldiers. By settling soldiers on state land Bolivia is fol¬
lowing the example of ancient Rome.
To carry out a plan of such scope, the difficulties of which
can easily be imagined, Bolivia needed outside help. Reception
centres for new arrivals, schools and dispensaries have to be set
up. The U.N. has been asked to supply technicians for such tasks
and equally important, to help train the technicians of the future.
At Pillapi, in Bolivia, a large estate has been transformed into
an experimental agricultural centre. Co-operatives are being orga¬
nized there to enable Indians to purchase livestock, seeds and
farm tools. A public health service has been set up and the
idea that Indians would oppose modern medical treatment has
proved completely false. Schools have been opened on the farms
and a permanent fundamental education centre is to be built.
The efforts of the Peruvian Government to open up the rich
subtropical Tambopata Valley on the eastern flanks of the Andes
are aimed at the same goal settlement of the Andean Indian
to give him a fair chance. In the following article. Dr. Alfred
Metraux, Unesco anthropologist who headed the first mission to
this region describes some of the problems and explains how the
opening up of new lands could transform the Indian's existence.

Unesco Courier. Nr 2. 1955
A DEAD WORLD
of rocks, glaciers and
sand seems to move
by under the eyes of
airline passengers fly¬
ing over the great
chain of the Andes.
But this seemingly
dead and desolate
land is inhabited by
men whose ancestors
resisted the over¬
whelming forces of
nature for thousands
of years. Here they
even built a great civi¬
lization. Today, how¬
ever, the men of the
mountains are look¬
ing for a new destiny.
(Photos Almasy and ILO)
The Indians who live in the
high Andes are a marked
people. Centuries of slavery,
misery and humiliation have crush¬
ed themand even their once fa¬
mous pride is gone. Today, their
problems are countless and any
improvement in their conditions
seems almost hopeless unless a
total transformation is brought
about in their way of life.
One of the greatest problems fac¬
ing the Indians today is the
snortage of fertile land and as a
result the migration of many fami¬
lies to the Eastern (Amazonian)
siue of the Andes.
After the slaughter carried out
by the Spanish Conquistadors, the
Indian population, which had di¬
minished to an alarming degree,
became stable ; then, during the
19th Century it began to rise ra¬
pidly. This fact amazes anyone
who has had any experience of
Indian living conditions. The An¬
dean Indians are reputed to be
among the most unhygienic peo¬
ples on earth ; unfortunately, this
is no great exaggeration. The mere
inventory of the diseases afflicting
them is enough to cause a shudder.
Yet not even the filth and a high
infant mortality rate has preven¬
ted their population growth from
keeping pace with that of other
groups in Latin America.
Demographic pressure however
has made "land-hunger" all the
more acute. They are hemmed into
lands which the white man left
them and their plots have been so
frequently divided and sub-divided
by inheritances that Indian farms
are now measured in so many
"furrows".
On lands farmed for thousands
of years and given no rest, yields
are rarely good. To
make matters worse, (Continued
farming is always a , on
risky business at high next page.)

LAND HUNGER' (Continued)
altitudes. A sleet storm or one night
of frost can wipe out a harvest. The
misery of the Indians would be unbear¬
able if they did not have an "escape
route" migration.
Last year, a sudden' night frost
destroyed all the crops sown on the
banks of Lake Titicaca (the highest
navigable lake in the world, 12,500 feet
above sea level). The following morn¬
ing, the Indians told us that many of
them were leaving for the coast.
What else could they do?
But even when the Indian leaves his
home in the mountains he is not much
better off. He heads for the cities on
the coast, hoping to And a job as a
labourer or a porter, or any other
unskilled work. Most of the Indians
speak no Spanish and all of them are
illiterate. They make their long trek
to the west on foot through one of the
most desolate lands in the world. The
lucky ones are those who have enough
money to pay for transport and cram
themselves and their families into open
trucks.
To the Indian, the city is a new and
hostile environment where he has to
look haphazardly for work. For days
and sometimes weeks he wanders
through the streets, sleeping on door¬
steps and living on chuno (dehydrated
potatoes) or the grain which he carries
in a sack. Even in Lima, the Peru¬
vian capital, thousands of Indians
cluster around open-air kitchens,
chewing coca leaves to stave off hun¬
ger, while they wait, dejected and im-
' BOWLER HAT' with turned-up leather brim worn by this old woman is the usual
headgear of Bolivian Indians who live In the upper valleys of the Andes. It was originally
inspired by the shape of the hats worn by the Spaniards in Colonial times. (Photo ILO.)
passive, until someone hires them for
a labouring. job.
The evolution of the Indians into a
rootless labouring class aroused the
concern of the Peruvian Government
which then considered the possibility
of re-settling these landless farmers
on the unoccupied eastern slopes of the
Andes. For this reason, Peruvian au¬
thorities asked for United Nations
technical assistance to aid in settling
the Tambopata Valley with Aymara
Indians from the overcrowded banks
of Lake Titicaca where population
density may reach 150 persons per
square mile.
This plan has created a good deal
of controversy in Peru and elsewhere.
It is an accepted belief almost a
dogma that life in the warm lowlands
is fatal to Andean Indians. Dr. Carlos
Monge a famous Peruvian physiologist,
has devoted a lifetime to proving that
the. lungs and other organs of Indians
living at an altitude of between 10,000
and 15,000 feet have been modified by
evolution and adapted to rarified air.
There were many good reasons to fear
that changing this environment might
prove disasterous to the health of the
Indians.
Spanish chroniclers of the 16th
Century tell us that the Incas who
once reigned over Bolivia, Peru and
Ecuador shared this belief. When
they deported entire Indian peoples
from one end of their empire to the
other, the Incas always tried to dupli¬
cate previous living conditions.
It is too early to say whether or not
this biological inability of the Indian
to adapt himself to life at sea-level is
as absolute as we have been told or
whether settlement on virgin land
along the branches of the Amazon is
really possible. The question is vitally
important for the future of these
peoples. The task assigned to the
LLAMA CONVOY CROSSING ONE OF THE HIGH ANDEAN
«SS3*' - -J

Unesco Courier. Nr 2. 1955
| *#-
WtW ¿M+m[ X;^74|
Hf\JkAj
^^L_ d"\
B^ttb nfc- ^H ^Jf
^^^ SA>
-
DANCE STEPS of Indians are an ancient
heritage. Here village men follow mono¬
tonous round of movements. (Photo Verger)
teWÄiftfl*;
BAREFOOT BALLET is suggested by group of Indians using same house building methods
( as their Inca ancestors. Men leaping into the air are pressing down the earth inside a
wooden framework to make walls waterproof, while others dig out more earth. (Photo ILO.)
first United Nations team in the An¬
dean Highlands was to make an on-
the-spot study of the Tambopata
Valley, which slopes away towards the
Amazon Basin and the Madre de Dios
Province, to determine if it could be
settled by the Aymarás at present
condemned to work on their tiny plots
of barren land.
As the crow flies, the Tambopata
Valley on the Bolivian border is a
next-door neighbour of the Andean
plateau. It is however separated by a
formidable barrier the chain of the
Andes which must be passed through
deep, narrow gorges where the sun sel¬
dom penetrates. Only Dante's Inferno,
as it was conceived by the great
illustrator Gustave Doré, can give an
idea of the landscape of the Sandia
Valley which leads to Tambopata. It
is a great crack in the earth running
from 5,000 to 10,000 feet deep. Along
one flank, there is a winding path
which zig-zags down towards a foam¬
ing torrent only to climb back up again
to dizzy heights. Raimondi, the fam¬
ous 19th century geographer, who
was an authority on bad roads, called
this one of the worst he had seen in all
Peru.
After an exhausting four-day march,
the traveller suddenly finds himself
face-to-face with the Tambopata
Valley. It is another world gentle
mountains, thick forests singing to the
tune of hundreds of brooks, prairies of
tall grass and a bluish ridge of peaks
deployed towards the great Amazon
plain.
One hundred years ago, this Andean
Arcadia was deserted when Sir Cle¬
ment Markham visited it to hunt for
the Cinchona plants (the source of
quinine). Today, between 4,000 and
5,000 Indians (no exact census has yet
been taken) have settled there to live
in relative prosperity from their coffee
and other tropical crops.
We visited these coffee plantations.
The bushes were sturdy and well cared
for. Everyone had enough to eat and
huts were larger and better built than
on the high plateaux. Without any
private or government aid, these
pioneers had conquered the forest.
They were Indians from the
villages of Moho and Coni- (Continued
ma beside Lake Titicaca. on
They had been born and next page.) .
PLATEAUX IS DRIVEN FROM BEHIND BY TWO INDIAN RIDERS. THESE "CAMELS" OF THE NEW WORLD ARE BRED AS BEASTS OF BURDEN AND FOR THEIR WOOL. (Photo Almasy)

'LAND HUNGER' (Continuel)
REED CANOES are woven by Indians of Lake Titicaca as there is no
wood thereabouts. These craft are sufficiently stable to resist the
terrible storms that often whip this 130-mile long lake more
than 12,500 feet above sea level into a fury. (Photo Almasy.)
MARKET DAY in Bolivian village of Chunumake centre of coca
production brings Indians with their produce to sell or barter.
Although Bolivia is in the torrid zone, these plateau villages have a
comparatively cold climate because of their height. (Photo Almasy.)
raised in the cold mountain air and
later they had worked the rocky soil
of the dry puna with their short hoes.
The contrast between their birthplaces
and the valley where we met them was
particularly striking.
Are these mountaineers a living de¬
nial of all the pessimistic theories
concerning the conservatism, the lack
of initiative and the physiological
inadaptability of the Andean Indians?
They are, but what really counts is how
these Highlanders have learned to
become excellent tropical farmers.
The Conima Indians told us proudly:
"We were the ones who opened up i.he
Yungas of Bolivia." This is not quite
the case, but it is true that thousands
of Conima Indians have settled in the
Yungas, the tropical valleys in the An¬
des behind La Paz, the Bolivian capital.
These warm lands produce an excellent
grade of coffee and their soil is among
the richest and the most fertile of all
Bolivia.
The pioneers of Tambopata had all
learned the lessons of the Yungas.
They had worked there as farmers and
as small land-owners until they were
forced to return to their native villages
by political disputes. There, they also
returned to their old misery, but they
were not discouraged. Carrying their
food supplies on their backs, they
crossed the Andes and, as soon as they
had found land similar to their old
holdings, they began to clear away the
NARROW ROADS,
only links between
fertile valleys of the
Eastern Andes, are
very often squeez¬
ed between sheer
rock walls and dizzy
precipices. Here, a
meeting with another
vehicle calls for intri¬
cate manoeuvring.
(Photo A. Metraux.)
8
jungle. Once they had planted maize
and sweet potatoes on burned-over
clearings, some of them returned to the
bi rren highlands while others worked
old gold placers abandoned by the
Spaniards. At harvest time, they
returned and found their fields blan¬
keted with maize. They had succeeded
in gaining a foothold in the valley and
now they were safe. Then they cleared
more land and started to grow coffee.
These pioneers became leaders of the
settlers and helped the Indians who
followed in their footsteps. Much of
their success must be credited to the
"ayni", the Aymarás' system of coope¬
rative aid to each other. The "ayni"
can mean a loan to a member of the
community faced by heavy expenses
for example, a funeral or a wedding.
It can also mean relatives or friends
getting together to sow or bring in a
harvest. Thanks to the help of the
"ayni", a new settler in Tambopata can
keep going until his first harvest. Lat¬
er, he repays the community.
The Indian settlers at TambopaTa
have not severed all links with their
native mountains. Every year, they
return for their village festival to
breathe "fresh air" and eat their tra¬
ditional food. They jealously cling to
the tiny plots which they have inherit¬
ed at home even though yields are
dubious.
Many of these settlers lead a double
life, economically speaking, at least.
During part of the year, they are tro¬
pical planters and, the rest of the time,
they are Andean peasants. They are
the backbone of the Indian element
settling virgin territories. Indian colo¬
nization has not always given good
results up until now because it has
been carried out without any help and
on a hit-or-miss basis. But it is true
that if the plan now under .considera¬
tion does bear fruit, its first result
will be to bring to the surface the la¬
tent energy, sobriety and courage of
the Andean Indian.

Unesco Courier. Nr 2. 1955
¿rPw
V*** ^ a. W._ *"* ">
r*4^
LUNAR LANDSCAPE in the Andes
has been scoured out by rain and wind.
Buried in these mountains are great
mineral riches which would have
remained inaccessible were it not for
the Indians. They alone are able to
work at great altitudes, unaffected by
the bjeak desolation. (Photo Almasy.)
\fr$- V
