How code-breaking techniques unravelled a lost Greek tongue
THE CASE OF
THE FOUR-
HANDLED JARS
" ' : . . ' ' '-#-yy-syA'-yy:^-;-
by
Darsie Gillie
Arecent discovery has made Greek
the only rival to Chinese as the
language with the longest written
record. Both languages can now be
traced back from their present modern
spoken forms, through successive chan¬
ges, to somewhere around 1400 B.C.,
that is to say for three thousand three
hundred and fifty years.
The history of writing goes back for
another fifteen hundred years in Egypt
and Mesopotamia, and probably in
India. But these earlier languages
have all long ago died out. No one
today speaks a language derived from
Egyptian. There are very ancient
Sumerian or Babylonian or ancient
compositions in Sanskrit, but these
were preserved for many centuries not
by writing but by a very accurate sys¬
tem of- memorising. At all events,
Sanskrit became a purely literary lan¬
guage more than two thousand years
ago.
There are big differences between
the oldest Chinese and the oldest
Greek documents. Chinese writing,
like Chinese speech, has had one con¬
tinuous history. The modern charac¬
ters are derived from the earliest, even
though there has been so much change
that only a few scholars can read the
latter. The earliest Greek documents
on the other hand are in a script that
has nothing to do with the alphabet
that the Greeks adapted from the
Phoenicians about 750 B.C. and con¬
tinue to use to this day. This "less
ancient" Greek alphabet was the pa¬
rent of the Cyrillic alphabet, used in
some modern Slav languages, and of
the Latin alphabet used throughout
western Europe, both the Americas,
much of Africa and part of Asia.
The documents on which the earlier
script had come to light are clay
tablets, found from 1886 onwards in
Crete, and after 1939 at Pylos on the
Greek mainland. Until their secret
was finally broken by an Englishman,
Michael Ventris, nobody knew in what
language they were written, or whether
the language was one to which we had
a key.
There are other differences between
the early Chinese and early Greek
documents. The early Chinese writ¬
ing is picture-writing and gives no clue
to pronunciation. The earliest Greek
is phonetic and expresses the sound of
the word though very inexactly. The
t=~m 43 MEN
-S- mi
à in
7 WOMEN
¡Ail 4 HORSES
^xn 1 CHARIOT
earliest Chinese documents are ques¬
tions inscribed on bone, so that the
gods may give an answer by cracking
the bone in one way or another when
it is placed in the fire. The earliest
Greek documents seem to be household
accounts though the household is
generally a palace and the resources
drawn on are those of a small kingdom.
When we hear of an ancient system
of writing being deciphered, most of us
think of the Rosetta stone with its
texts in Greek that was known and in
Egyptian that was not yet known. But
that is not the only way a script can
be deciphered. Just as any military
cipher can be broken in time, provided
the language is known, so any ancient
writing can with patience be made to
yield its secret provided the language
is closely enough related to another
known language. If the language is
unknown, then there is no hope unless
a document comes to light which gives
the text in both the unknown and a
known language as did the Rosetta
stone.
The excavations of Sir Arthur Evans
at Knossos in Crete toward the end of
the last century revealed a palace seve¬
ral times rebuilt and on the last occa¬
sion destroyed about 1400 B. C. In the
ruins were found tablets in three
scripts a hieroglyphic or picture writ¬
ing, a more sophisticated writing called
Minoan Linear A and, in much greater
quantities and connected with the last
palace, a third system called Minoan
Linear B. This was derived from the
second, as the second was from the
first. It was long supposed that all
IS

THE CASE OF
THE FOU R-
HANDLEO JARS
Royal kitchen
records from
Minoan Palace
1400 B.C.
Until three years ago oldest surviving
record of Greek language and earliest
readable European writing was inscrip¬
tion on a Dipylon vase from Athens
(750 B.C.). Older inscriptions found
were undecipherable until British expert
Michael Ventns, using wartime de-coding
techniques, broke secret of Minoan
script. Tablet (right) unearthed in 1952
proved his deciphering correct. It con¬
tains list of handled jars in royal kitchens
dating back to 1 400 B.C. Second and
third lines show vases with two, three,
four or no handles. Decipherment
would have been practically impossible
without small vertical stroke separating
each word. (Photo C.W. Biegen, drawn
inscriptions Ventns ; from "Archaeology")
t-ri-po-de, Ai-ge-us K-re-si-jos we-chei :
"Two tripods; Aigeus the Cretan ( Î) brings them:
2 TRIPODS."
QE-TO (P) :
"Wine-jars ( ?): 3 JARS." (Orquel-thos "tribute" ?)
tárimm c
di-pa-he me-zo-he t-n-o-we-he :
"Two larger cups with 3 handles: 2 CUPS."
three systems of writing represented
the language of the people who created
the so-called Minoan civilization of'
Crete ; that the palace had been des¬
troyed by the early Greeks from the
mainland who called themselves
Achaeans.
It is certain that the Achaeans first
learned from and then conquered the
Minoans, but it now appears that they
did it rather earlier than was first sup¬
posed. Already before the Minoan
Linear B script was deciphered some
archaeologists had pointed out resem¬
blances between the art in the last
palace of Knossos and the palaces of
the Achaeans on the mainland. Then
came the discovery of Professor Biegen
at Pylos in South Greece in 1939 of
600 "Minoan" tablets in an undoubtedly
Achaean palace. Perhaps the Linear B
tablets were in some early form of
Greek and might be read I
The tablets of Knossos had been
carefully scanned for years by scholars
with little result. It was apparent that
most of them were lists. Numerals
could be distinguished. They seemed
to be rather hurriedly written like the
day-to-day accounts of an office. There
were about 80 different symbols,
apart from little picture signs which
seemed to indicate the kind of objects
in a list; jars, men, chariots.
Eighty signs were too many for an
alphabet, that is a system of writing in
which each sound has a sign of its own,
but too few for one of the early compli¬
cated systems in which many whole
words have a picture sign to them¬
selves. It must therefore be a sylla¬
bary, that is a system of writing in
which each sign represents a syllable.
But with only 80 signs, it must have
been devised for a language in which
most syllables consisted of one conso¬
nant and one vowel, rather like Japa¬
nese, in which there are rarely two
PALACE OF KING MINOS AT KNOSSOS IN NORTHERN CRETE. A VAST BUILDING KNOWN AS "THE LABYRINTH" AND FABLED LAIR OF THE MINOTAUR. THE MONSTER OF
16

Unesco Courier Nr 3.4 1955
mm*AMM »
t-ri-pos, he-mei po-dei O-WO-WE (= ou holwei?) :
"One tripod; it is not sound (?) as regards one
foot: I TRIPOD."
i\nfw<z% T/w©w<WYfi
t-ri-pos, K-r'e-si-jos we-chei; a-pu-ke-ka-u-me- (nos) sk-ie-a (...) :
"One tripod; the Cretan (!) brings it; charred around the legs... (I TRIPOD)."
t.TfA.©TT2 V1
di-pas me-zo-he que-t-ro-wes : (for Mezon !)
"One larger cup with 4 handles: 1 CUP."
T'TO©T+6
di-pas me-w-jon que-t-ro-wes :
" One smaller cup with 3 handles: I CUP.':
tw. Airs
di-pas me-w-jon t-ri-j'o-wes :
"One smaller cup with 3 handles: CUP.'
hfmwi
di-pas me-w-jon a-no-wes :
"One smaller cup with no handle: I CUP."
consonants together. This did not
seem very like Greek, but an American
scholar, the late Alice Kober, showed
that there were changes in the termi¬
nations of words, as in Greek and other
Indo-European languages, which might
well correspond to masculine and femi¬
nine and to case-endings.
Finally, when all the tablets found
at Knossos and Pylos had at last been
published so that scholars could work
on them, Mr. Ventris applied the prin¬
ciples used to break ciphers during the
war and offered a hypothetical list of
values for the signs. Making allowan¬
ces for the fact that the Greek'of these
new texts was from five to seven
GREEK MYTHOLOGY SLAIN BY THESEUS. (Photos Viollec)
hundred years older than any that had
hitherto been read, the proposed solu¬
tion did seem to work. Might this be
chance ? Then in 1952 a tablet was
discovered at Pylos, which contained a
list of jars in the royal store rooms.
There were little pictures of jars
without handles, with two handles,
with three and with four. The words
beside them read, as deciphered by
Mr. Ventris, "with no ears", "with two
ears", "with three ears" and "with four
ears". There could be no more doubt
the right solution had been found.
Greek had changed a great deal bet¬
ween the time of the tablets of Knossos
(C. 1400 B.C.) and of Pylos (1200 B.C.)
and even the time of Homer (perhaps
750 B.C.), although the exacting rhy¬
thm in which the poems attributed to
him are composed had preserved many
old words. Secondly the Minoan B.
script must originally have been devis¬
ed for quite a different language. It
does not distinguish between P and B,
K and G, R and L. It cannot express
exactly any syllable which ends with a
consonant. Thus the words "pater"
meaning "father" and "pantes" mean¬
ing "all" are written by the same two
signs indicating "pa-te". You have to
know the subject matter to avoid
errors. That is why the little picture
signs had to be used.
Strangely enough, all that has sur¬
vived are bills, invoices, lists of persons
owing money or services, lists of cattle
and the like. The tablets were probab¬
ly of unbaked clay only kept until
final entries could be made on more
expensive material, vellum or papyrus.
The palaces where they were kept were
destroyed by fire. The "permanent"
records perished in the same flames
which baked and so made permanent
the rough notes of the bailiffs, tax col¬
lectors and merchants.
Have we lost in those flames the
works of earlier Homers ? That does
not seem probable. So ill-fitting a
script would be a very awkward instru¬
ment for writing down a poem or even
a prose-history. It was apparently
used chiefly by tax collectors and
accountants. When the Dorian Greeks
who had hitherto lived too far north
to feel the influence of Cretan civiliza¬
tion swept south and destroyed the
kingdoms of the Achaeans, the Minoan
Linear B script seems to have dis¬
appeared along with the Achaean tax
gatherers.
The records that have come down to
us are very limited in scope, but they
will provide a great deal of information
about the Greeks, whose warrior kings
besieged Troy. They show that the
names of Homer's heroes were common
in the days of which he sang. They
show that the gods of classical Greece
were already worshipped in the second
millennium B.C. They give a voice to
centuries of which we had found the
handiwork, but of which no words
remained to us.
Further, the deciphering of Minoan
B, may yet lead to an understanding of
the much rarer tablets in Minoan A ;
also to those in a kindred script of
about the same date now coming to
light in Cyprus. These still undeci-
phered Cypriot tablets do not look like
lists, but appear to contain texts of
some length. One is perhaps a letter.
But in what language ? That is ano¬
ther mystery and another story.
Da'Ste GILUE, Pans correspondent of the " Manchester
Guardian ", has been a foreign correspondent in Warsaw.
Berlin and Paris since 1926. He has specialized in report¬
ing on archaeology and in general on man's early history.
17
