TENTS AND HUTS
AND BRAND NEW
MODEL VILLAGES
When armed conflict broke out in Palestine seven
years ago, nearly 1,000,000 Arabs packed their
belongings and took refuge in the neighbouring
countries of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
Syria, Lebanon, Iraq and in the Gaza strip. But
local resources could not cope with all of them
and many found themselves shelterless in the
desert, living in caves or existing in holes they
had dug in the ground. Food, tents and medical
supplies were the first essentials and these were
rushed to the areas öf greatest need. Today the
problem of the Palestine Arab refugees is still
unsolved. But a great deal has been done to make
living conditions more bearable. Tented villages,

like the Fawwar Camp in Jordan (above), have in
many cases been replaced by huts like those at
Jebalia, in the Gaza coastal strip (below, right).
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency
(UNRWA) has also builtsome experimental villages.
Marj-na'ja (below, left) in western Jordan, houses
36 families. (UNRWA and UNESCO Photos)
:»;*;«-?> f..t

N THE DESERT
by Myrtle Winter
It is just over seven years ago that
nearly a million people locked the
doors of their homes, and taking
with them only the few clothes
they could carry and provisions to last
for a day or two set off on a journey
from which there has as yet been no
return.
Armed conflict had again come to
the Holy Land, and this time the
victims were 900,000 Arabs, for the
most part unarmed civilians who could
play no part in the fighting in which
they were suddenly enveloped.
That they would return to their
homes once the shooting was over,
none of them doubted for a minute-
it might be a matter of days, or even
weeks. Yet the cruel irony of fate
decreed it otherwise. For the solution
of the world's longest-standing prob¬
lem of displaced personswith the
arrival of hundreds of thousands of
European Jews on the shores of
Palestinewas to result in the creation
of another problem, the hitherto in¬
soluble problem of the Arab Refugees.
Wherever they went in the surround¬
ing countries of Syria, Lebanon, Jordan
and Iraq the refugees met with the
traditional Arab hospitality. But local
resources were not sufficient. There
were too many refugees. To the
Kingdom of Jordan alone came half a
million. Yet Jordan, before the trou¬
bles, itself had a population of only
700,000 and, in the Gaza coastal strip,
refugees outnumbered the original
inhabitants by nearly four to one.
Lessons on the sands
In the emergency it was above all a
question of saving lives. Food,
shelter and medical supplies were
rushed to the scene of greatest need by
the United Nations, with the assistance
of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, the League of Red Cross
Societies, and the American Friends
Service Committee, who were sup¬
ported by the host governments and
countless local organizations who came
forward to help.
While people were starving and
suffering from exposure, there was no
time or money to spare for non¬
essentials; consequently, to begin with,
Myrtle Winter is Chief of the Visual Aid and Photo¬
graphic Division, United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees.
there were no schools. But as the
weeks stretched into months and the
children roamed the streets in idleness,
it was not long before this problem too
had to be faced. Before there was
any hope of tackling it as a whole, in¬
dividual teachers, themselves refugees,
took the initiative into their own
hands. Unpaid and with no shelter
from the burning sun they gathered
little groups of children around them
in the open desert.
Flour and soap salaries
Many of the teachers had known
the children from before, for
whole villages took flight from
Palestine together and have clung
together in their exile. In a world
where everything was shattered,
these first make-shift classes brought
new hope and a purpose back
to life. The parents, the village elders
and the Mukhtars (village headmen)
took heart. Bearded sheikhs did their
share in giving religious instruction.
The younger generation would not
grow up in ignorance. In recognition
of their services the teachers were
allowed an extra bag of flour, a pound
of sugar or a few cakes of soap.
A number of classes were started by
the Red Cross and the other Voluntary
Agencies. The Y.M.C.A. opened a
school near Jericho, in the largest
camp in the Jordan Valley, which
remains to this day; the Quakers
supported several in the Gaza strip.
In other places the modest needs of
the first refugee schools were met by
selling the empty containers in which
the monthly rations reached the
camps gunny sacks, kerosene cans,
and containers of all shapes and sizes.
Here and there, a spare tent was made
available, so that the children could do
their lessons in the shade.
By the time that the Third Unesco
General Conference was held in Beirut
in 1948, thousands of boys and girls
were already receiving some form of
education as a result of these efforts,
and the delegates to the congress, many
of whom made it their business to
study the plight of children at first
hand, were so impressed with what
they saw that they gave a fresh
impetus to Unesco's efforts
to raise funds. As a (Cont'd on
result contributions came next page)

PACKED CLASSES During the past four or
five years, half a million children among these Arab
refugees have been saved from illiteracy and Ignorance.
This year, UNRWA will be responsible for the school¬
ing of about 160,000 children of elementary school
age and another 20,000 who attend secondary classes.
In these schools, packed classes of Arab children
(photos, right) follow their lessons with touch¬
ing eagerness. (UNRWA and UNESCO photos)
from far and wide and the first Unesco
contribution of $15,000 had reached
« 90,000 before the end of 1949. This
gift, which seemed to come as an ans¬
wer to so many prayers, at last gave
the teachers the chance to organize.
By May, 1950, when the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees was established by
the U.N. General Assembly to relieve
the Voluntary Agencies of the burden
they could no longer carry, there were
already 33,500 children in the schools.
By 1953 that number had been doubled,
and by 1955, including children re
ceiving grants-in-aid to study in
outside schools, it had been mult'nlied
nearly six-fold to reach a total of
170,000. The upward spiral of unrwa's
schools programme with technical
assistance from unesco is indeed
remarkable, but not so remarkable
when it is considered that of the entire
Arab refugee population, no less than
50 7c are children beneath the age
of 16nearly half a million children.
It is impossible for any one to
appreciate the significance of education
amongst the refugees unless he has
seen the conditions in which they live.
A pilgrim to the Holy Land who visits
the place of Baptism on the River
Jordan will pass one camp after
another on his way to the Mount of
Temptation, and should he climb it to
the summit, where a Greek monastery
commemorates the spot, he will see
below him stretching far into the
distance a mushroom growth of tents
and ramshackle mud huts the home
of 75,000 refugees. These men, women
and children outnumber the original
people who lived in the nearby town
of Jericho by more than seventy to one.
Why such a dense concentration?
In this valley 800 feet below sea level,
where heat lies shimmering in the air
and summer temperatures are the
highest recorded in the Near East,
what employment can there be for so
many people?
The answer is simple. The refugees
are concentrated in regions where
there is water. In the Jordan Valley
there are many springs. One of the
most abundant, Elisha's fountain,
provides the water for the large camp
which lies at the foot of the Mount of
Temptation, known by its Arab name
of "Ain-el-Sultan", or Sultan's Spring.
unrwa may distribute a monthly ration
with a minimum of 1,600 calories a day,
but without water the refugees would
die of thirst. In Jordan, water is
scarce and they cannot choose.
It is true that chances of work are
remote, although in years when there
are plentiful spring rains, seasonal
employment is obtainable for a good
many of the men folk at a very low
wage. If the present survey work
carried out by unrwa in conjunction
with the Jordan Government for a

Unesco Courier. N" 7. 1955
major irrigation scheme in the Jordan
and Yarmuk valleys is successful,
there would be opportunity for tens of
thousands of refugees and Jordanians
alike to find work in agriculture, not
to speak of the secondary economic
benefits which would create oppor¬
tunity in other fields. But today un¬
employment is the refugee's plague.
In Gaza the situation is worse, for
with 200,000 refugees amongst an
original population of only 80,000, who
themselves have lost the greater part
of their lands and trade, there is little
chance of even seasonal employment.
The Gaza strip, as it is called, which
is the only part of the coastal plain of
Palestine remaining in Arab hands, is
but 12 miles long and between three
and five miles wide, and more than half
is made up of sand dunes. Here, life
in the sense that everyone had lived it
before came to a sudden stop. Or¬
dinary economic concepts of money in
circulation and employment figures
have completely lost their meaning.
The refugees have little to do but line
up before unrwa's distribution centres
to receive their monthly ration of
flour, pulses (peas, beans, lentils), oils
and fats, sugar, rice, milk, soap and
kerosene.
The Gaza residents, without rations,
are, if anything, worse off than the
refugees, but they have nevertheless a
quantity of agricultural products which
they may barter for some otherwise
unobtainable commodity amongst re¬
fugee rations. Occasionally goods
change hands for a few coins and some
small payments may be made for
labour or services rendered. A man
may spend all day selling four
tomatoes, or finding a customer for a
a little sugar or an empty bottle.
In these circumstances the only
members of the . family who can live
anything approaching a normal life
are the children who go to school at
regular hours, who have something to
do which is worth doing and who can
have any sense of achievement. There is
never any problem of absenteeism, the
children are always punctual and do
their lessons with a gravity and
eagerness which can leave no visitor
unmoved. Education amongst girls
has progressed by leaps and bounds,
and if it is true that there are more
children in school today than there
would have been but for the exodus,
it must be borne in mind that' they
are cut off from the life of a productive
community and can no longer grow up
in the trade or tend the land of their
fathers as of old.
In present circumstances, the darker
grows the future the more desperately
do refugee fathers and mothers seek
education for their children. This is
true of all classes, including the
Bedouins. Education has become a
part of the struggle for survival.
No sooner is a new' school built toda>
and the last classes are moved out of
the tents than more children are
pressing on the doors, new teachers
are found somehow, and up go the
tents again. In Jordan alone this year
165 classrooms were built and next
year's programme provides for nearly
as many more.
Expansion has been so rapid that
there is always a scarcity of school-
books and equipment. One
school may have a wallmap (Cont'd on
but no football it is here next page)

that Unesco Gift Coupons have often
proved invaluable to fill the gap.
Nor does it finish with the children.
Everywhere in the world end of term
exams are no doubt much the same.
There are the same anxious faces; the
same last minute poring over notes.
But this year, in Gaza, there was a
difference. More than 300 adults, men
and women of all ages, joined the
children in sitting for the State Exams.
They were members of the unrwa-
unesco Fundamental Education Centres
whose enthusiasm made them insist on
being allowed to test
their new-found
knowledge by actually
taking the examina¬
tion. Results show
them to have been
amply justified, for
93 % of all adults
were successful.
The programme to
Introduce fundamental
education amongst the
Arab refugees, which
started in 1953 with the
help of a unesco ex¬
pert loaned to unrwa
has produced outstanding results every¬
where most of all in Gaza. The
schools have scarcely time to close after
the last child has packed up and gone
when it is time for them to open up
again, transformed into a kind of club.
In one room people will be reading
magazines, borrowing books from the
library, playing back-gammon or
dominoes, or writing their contribution
to the "Wall-Newspaper". Attached to
many centres are workshops where
members can learn carpentry, shoemak-
ing, tailoring and other crafts.
An allied development of unrwa's
Welfare Division has been the setting
up of embroidery centres, where
refugee girls have been trained to
adapt the traditional cross stitch
patterns of the Holy Land on modern
table linen and to turn out well cut
skirts and blouses. Skilfully developed
by a tireless marketing supervisor,
herself a refugee, sales of these goods
have increased so much that today in
the Gaza strip alone 700 women and
girls have full time employment.
Indeed rehabilitation in all its
aspects is the burning problem of
unrwa and the capital available for
this purpose is many times greater
than the funds available for relief. In
close co-operation with the Arab
governments, unrwa is exploring all
possible means of making the refugees
self-supporting. This may take the
form of 50 million dollars earmarked
for the Jordan Valley Development, or
a few hundred cash down to buy a
barber's chair, or a lathe to re¬
establish a refugee craftsman in his
former trade.
Here, as a result of water and soil
first modern vocational training centre
with the aid of experts from the In¬
ternational Labour Organization, two
years ago outside Jerusalem. Since
then the first trainees have all found
employment and a second centre has
been opened in Gaza, while in Lebanon
and Syria hundreds of scholarships
are given in different fields to refugees
to study in existing institutions.
In spite of these efforts it would be
misleading to suggest that a solution
had been found to the burning
problem of the Arab refugees. The
CLASSES FOR PARENTS
keep many of the refugee
schools open well into the
night. Since 1953, funda¬
mental education has been
developed with the aid of
a UNESCO expert loaned to
UNRWA. After the chil¬
dren go home, schools be¬
come "clubs" where in one
room people read or play
back-gammon and in another,
have lessons in English or
pore over their first Aratic
reader. (UNESCO photo)
surveys an agricultural co-operative
will spring up, there a factory will
receive a loan to buy new machinery
after undertaking to employ a quota
of refugee labour. To create employ¬
ment on one occasion unrwa actually
went into business itself by setting up
a large modern tent factory where
refugees are employed to manufacture
their own tents instead of importing
them from overseas.
Last but not least is the vocational
and professional training of the most
promising children who graduate from
the refugee schools, unrwa opened its
refugees cry out to be allowed to go
back to their homes a right ac¬
knowledged in early U.N. resolutions.
But political tension has run too high.
All that can be said in the meantime
is that unrwa is seeking every means
to restore to the refugees their eco¬
nomic independence, while at the same
time educating their children and
training their youth so that, whatever
the future may bring, the new
generation will not grow up in
ignorance, and will have a chance to
play its part in the rapid development
of the Middle East.
8'
