SCIENCE SAFARI
IN THE U.S.A.
Avast area of the United States is desert or semi-arid. Except
for a few rich valleys in the northwestern corner, the.
western third of that agriculturally rich country, measur¬
ing almost 2,000 miles from northwest to southeast and
1,000 miles eastward from the Pacific ocean, depends on irri¬
gation with waters from the high mountain ranges that run
through it. The irrigated lands are miraculously productive,
but irrigation can touch only a small fraction of the area. The
Americans Avant to do something about the land that cannot
be irrigated.
It was this that led the farmers and businessmen of the Rio
Grande valley in the states of Texas and New Mexico to organize
a three-day international conference at the old Spanish city
of Albuquerque in New Mexico, attended by 64 arid-land experts
from 26 nations and more than 400 American specialists. With
the aid of Unesco, the American Association for the Advance¬
ment of Science and the National Science Foundation, the
scientific sessions were held at the University of New Mexico
during the closing days of April this year.
But the most effective feature of their plan was a two-day,
600 mile autobus caravan for 95 of the experts, including
men from 20 other arid countries, who saw and studied
desert conditions and exchanged experiences and opinions face
to face. Never before has a desert been so expertly examined.
One of the scientists wrote afterwards : "It was a time for
relaxed exchange of ideas, for a birds-eye view of almost the
entire range of arid-land problems in the framework of the
lives and prosperity of the people of the area. It welded strong
friendships which crossed many national boundaries and
provided a common experience and backgreund for future
friendly co-operation between nations."
The expedition started from the city of Albuquerque on the
Rio Grande, which is not grand, but is a mere trickle of water,
and wound over a mountain pass into the undrained Estancia
Valley where pinto beans are grown in large quantity at the
cost of pumping irreplaceable ground water from far beneath
the surface. Then came an area of dry salt lakes that testify
to ample rain in former times. Then to higher mesas where
remains of ploughed fields and ruins of houses show how
recently the desert has advanced. The stone ruins of the
Spanish church at Gran Quivira show that the Spanish settlers
three hundred years ago also failed where the native Indians
had prosperously lived on the land for many centuries.
Still farther south came the barest desert of all, the "mal-
pai" or bad country formed by a flow of lava less than 1,000
years old that covers 127 square miles to an average depth
of 70 feet. Following this came the unique "White Sands" and
more and more desert. On the second day the caravan wound
north from the city of El Paso up the valley of the Rio Grande
through the irrigated farmlands and to the experimental desert
ranch of the State College of New Mexico. Before returning to
Albuquerque the expedition also examined the dam, lake and
irrigation system at Elephant Butte which has been in operation
since 1915 and shows what forty years can do in reducing the
effectiveness of a river dam.
The photographs on these pages tell the story. The scientists
do not look impressive or even scientific. And they did almost
nothing to improve this land that they saw at least, not yet.
But these are some of the men on whom the future of the arid
lands depends. Under the leadership of the Unesco Advisory
Committee on Arid Zone Research, and after this extended
intimate contact with each other, any benefit accomplished
for one arid land will swiftly be extended to all arid landsand
that means to one third of the earth's surface and to the'i
peoples of 37 nations or almost exactly half the member states
of Unesco.
in
| ill ul*|
ja*?**

Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
' WHITE SANDS'-WORLD'S
LARGEST GYPSUM DESERT
White Sands, New Mexico, whose snow-like glistening sand dune
formations cover 270 square miles, is the largest of the world's gypsum
deserts. Long ago, deposits of gypsum in surrounding mountains were
carried by rivers into a lake which once covered the entire area. As
the climate became arid, the lake evaporated and the gypsum separated
into crystals which the wind has piled into high dunes. (Photos I and 2)
Scientists from many countries visiting White Sands during a field trip
organized in conjunction with the International Arid Lands Meeting at
Albuquerque, New Mexico, take to the clean, steep dunes like boys.
(3) Dr. Albert H. Reid, of the U.S. Forest Service in the State of Colorado,
and Dr. Pedro Armillas (with beard) Professor of Archeology at National
School of Anthropology, Mexico City, inspect ruins of Spanish mission
church built at Gran Quivira in 1640. Spaniards abandoned it I 5 years
later because of hostile Indian raids and crop failures caused by lack of
water. (4) Scientists gaze across desert dam towards Elephant Butte
the remnant neck or conduit of an ancient volcano. The dam, on the
Rio Grande, is forty miles long and irrigates 160,000 acres of good
agricultural land. (Unesco Photos)
©
IS

SCIENCE SAFARI
(Continued)
Unesco Photos
'AT HOME' ON THE RANGE
In the wide, dry New Mexico valley called Jornada del Muerto (Journey
of Death) are the Experimental Range of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture and Experimental Ranch of the New Mexico State College
of Agriculture. During the past 20 years more than I 00 varieties
of grasses and other plants have been tested here. (I) Scientists
from many lands listen to Mr. K.A. Valentine (using voice amplifier)
of the Jordano Range, describing the results of 20 years of desert
research. (5) Valliolah Vaziradeh, of Iran's Dept. of Agriculture,
studies volcanic formation at Elephant Butte, across the dam on the
Rio Grande. (3) Dr. Jens Clausen, botanist from California makes notes
on conditions of plants while another scientist photographs the Jor¬
nada Range. (4) A single desert plant is interesting enough to dig up.
Scientists from Ethiopia, Mexico, Pakistan and U.S.A. examine plant
together. (2) Science caravan halts. During safari scientists stu¬
died strange formations and vegetation in the American Desert.
ÍS5B&} n r \\
s#
TF-
16
