BRAZIL'S POLYGON
WHERE EVERY
DROP COUNTS.
In the parched soil of
Brazil's arid north
eastern region a farm¬
er reaches water after
digging into the dried-
up bed of the River
Serido, near Parelhas.
Though important mi¬
neral deposits exist
'In plenty, water
is still the most
precious commodi¬
ty In this land of
drought and famine
OF DROUGHT
To a Brazilian, the word Nordeste
automatically evokes the spectre
of drought and famine which
. periodically afflict the great wastelands
in the northeastern part of his country.
This ill-fortune is all the more tragic
because, by the normal rules of geo¬
graphy, the Nordeste should have the
same damp, rainy climate as its
neighbour, the Amazon Basin. And,,
as if this grim climatic twist was not
itself a sufficient threat, another prob¬
lem overpopulation weighs heavily
on the area. The several million
inhabitants try vainly to make a living
from farming and stock-raising which
are always at the mercy of the weather.
These 300,000 square miles of parched
land cover some parts, or in some cases
the entire territories, of eight Brazilian
states, running from the north of
Bahia to the Piaui. They have been
termed "The Polygon of Drought" and
their unfortunate inhabitants are
generally referred to as Los Fla-
geUados (Those who scourge them¬
selves) because of the obstinacy with
which they cling to their lands despite
the hostile climate.
The geography and the problems of
this hard, austere region which has not
10
by
E. Aubert de la Rue
been able to keep step with the rest
of Brazil (except for the Amazon
Basin), have made it a curious and
picturesque land with many grandiose
aspects.
Not all of northeastern Brazil is so
badly off, however. Even though the
coastal zone of the state of Ceara
suffers from a shortage of moisture,
the shores on the east receive a fair
share of rain. Along this humid, pri¬
vileged fringe no more than 30 miles
in width, sugar cane is produced on a
large scale. Here, in a tropical green
setting, is Recife, the main city
of northeast Brazil and its principal
port, with its contrasts between archaic
old Brazil and the dynamic young
country of today.
But this smiling facade is misleading.
Behind it stretches the sertao, the
backlands where the rainfall is ex¬
tremely variable. Some parts of the
sertao are near desert while others, at
a higher altitude, receive a heavier
rainfall which serves mainly to water
the caatinga, an Indian -word which
the Brazilians use to describe the weird
vegetation so well adapted to this
hostile climate.
The caatinga consists mainly of
twisted dwarf trees, many of them
bristling with thorns, and surrounded
by a no-man's-land of cactus. Here
and there, barrigudas grotesque, pot¬
bellied trees lend a comic note to
the inhospitable brush. Lumbering
for construction and firewood has made
heavy inroads into the caatinga, to say
nothing of land clearing, frequent
forest fires and the ravages of goats.
Around towns, it has been reduced to-
a carpet of brush plants, each one more
thorny than its neighbour. When the
vaqueiros the close-mouthed cowboys
of the Nordeste drive their herds
into these pastures for grazing,
they dress in leather from head to foot
and the bellies of their agile horses are
protected by leather aprons.
These riders of the caatinga, in their ,
red outfits and their goatskin three-
cornered hats, have no easy life. Often,
they have to "harvest" the cactus
themselves and singe off its thorns
before they can feed their animals. To
provide for lean years, they actually

Unesco Courier. Nr 2. 1955
Hostile landscape
The hostile, unsmiling landscape of Brazil's
Polygon of Drought has served as a setting
and an inspiration for some of the country's
most powerful and realistic modern literature.
Novels have depicted the harsh, violent life
here. Perhaps the most famous book on this
region is "Revolt in the Backlands" (Os
Sertoes) by Euclides da Cunha. This tells the
story of the campaign waged by the Brazilian
authorities against the rebel leader Antonio
Conselheiro, whose partisans followed him
with fanatic devotion to the death. This is
the land of the coatingo, the weird, twisted
dwarf trees and dried-up scorched plains, such
as that in the Ceara region (left) bounded by
the Sierra da Uruburetama in the distance.
In, years of serious drought, sad processions
of retirantes (below) who have sold their
herds and abandoned their homes, cross these
burning wastes heading for kinder regions.
raise fields of non-spiny cactus which
serve as fodder for stock.
Other crops, too, can be raised in
this unsmiling land mainly maize,
manioc, cotton and sisal which can get
along in rocky soil and a hard climate.
Even though most of the year is dry,
river beds still keep enough humidity
to support some farming. Planted
with beans, sweet potatoes or squash,
they form winding green ribbons run¬
ning through the scorched backlands.
There is water all year round only
in the majestic Rio Sao Francisco,
which has its sources in the rainy
north. In the Polygon of Drought, it
hurtles over the Paulo Afonso Falls
which will soon become northeastern
Brazil's major supplier of electricity.
Throughout the region, rainwater
and flood waters are now being stored
painstakingly behind dams. The entire
country is studded with reservoirs,
large and small,' and, at many points,
they have made life much easier for
the Nordestinos who can now raise
crops on irrigated land.
When the rains come to the caatinga,
they cover this spiny
jungle with a miraculous ' on on
coating of tender leaves ne*1 P°Se)

BRAZIL'S POLYGON
OF DROUGHT
(Continued)
FLUVIAL
FRONTIER
between two Bra¬
zilian states, Ser-
gipe and Alagoas,
is the broad Sao
Francisco River.
Here, it nears the
sea, 1,800 miles
from its source.
almost overnight. This happens
usually between December and March
after seven or eight months of almost
total drought. -In only a matter of
days, the winter setting of the Polygon
(accompanied by temperatures of 105°
Fahrenheit, of course) is replaced by a
green landscape which has nothing of
the tropics about it. The coconut
groves around the villages and the
relentless heat of the sun are the only
reminders that the Equator is close.
The economy of northeastern Brazil
is handicapped more by the irregu¬
larity of this rainfall rather than by
its dearth. When the rains come, they
fall, in torrents which are greeted
joyfully by the Polygon's people. True,
they, spell a rich harvest for the imme¬
diate future... but they also wash away
huge quantities of arable topsoil.
In some years, the long-waited rains
never materialize. If this happens two
or three years running as * was the
case from 1951 to 1953then disaster
strikes. Herds are wiped out, entire
towns go hungry and the backlanders
from the Polygon set out for more
fortunate regions. Each one of these
droughts touches off a chaotic mass
exodus.
The Government has vainly tried to
channel this exodus into neighbouring
Maranhao which is thinly populated.
Instead, the flagellados flock down to
the booming south of Brazil. And the
miserable parade of retirantes, who
PART-TIME PROSPECTORS of northeastern Brazil are the garlmpelfos
who forsake farming during the dry season to uncover the mineral riches
of the soil. Already the region is producing more than 20 different mine¬
rals of economic importance. With primitive, home-made equipment
(top right), prospectors dig up deposits of tantalite and beryllium or search
for fluorine (left) and other minerals which bring good prices on the world
market. Group of ^arimpelrcs (bottom, right) have sold their minerals at
weekly market In Parelhas and now wait to be taken back home by truck.
12

Unesco Courier. N' 2. 1955
LOCAL INDUSTRIES make maximum use
of the few above-ground natural resources
offered by the " Polygon of Drought ". Pot¬
tery is a thriving craft and, as shown in photo
above, jars and pitchers are in great demand in
this land of thirst. Pitchers and bowls dis¬
played outside a potter's house in the Ceara
region (above, left) show the variety and
artistry of these products. Although Brazil's
chief tobacco growing area Is round Bahia, to
the south of the dry Nordeste, the plant is also
widely grown around Paraiba, in the Nordeste's
coastal region. Leaves, twisted Into thick rolls
(below, left), find a ready sale in the market at
Crato (below), In the neighbouring state of Ceara.
have sold their herds and abandoned
their homes, covers the tracks of the
backlands as it crawls south in jolting,
lurching truckloads into already over-
populated cities.
The arrival of these waves of fla-
gellados and their families, who flood
into the cities, raises all kinds of prob¬
lems, for many are unable to find
work. Some remain homesick for their
native caatinga and, when the rains
come to the Nordeste, they return home
i again but even poorer than the day
they left. Brazil's leaders believe, and
rightly so, that mining can help bolster
the economy of the Polygon. This
belief is not merely a wild hope: it is
based on the discovery of several rare
minerals in the region during the past
15 years. Although it has not been
thoroughly prospected, the Polygon is
already producing about twenty differ¬
ent minerals of economic importance.
This mining is carried on mainly by
garimpeiros, self-taught prospectors
who work on their own with primitive
equipment. Under these conditions it
is tough work and in the torrid climate
of the Nordeste, the miners often .have
to haul the water they need by mule-
back. But they persevere and their
doggedness often pays off. Each of
them hopes to have the same luck as
Vicente Paulo, a labourer who made a
strike, quite by accident, at Sao Vicente
in the state of Paraiba, in 1941. Thous¬
ands' of garimpeiros followed him and,
in a few years, pulled out five tons of
nuggets and gold dust. At present,
however, prospectors are concentrating
on beryllium, tungsten, .lithium and
other minerals which bring high prices
on the world market and which can
be worked relatively easily in surface
deposits.
Garimpeiro prospecting is seasonal
work and depends to a large extent on
the weather. If the rains come on
schedule, the prospectors stop harvest¬
ing minerals and work their farms. In
dry years, their ranks swell, for many
a farmer turns to mining to keep his
family alive. Unfortunately, their pri¬
mitive methods of working lead to a
sheer waste of minerals.
Prospecting in the Polygon, now a
local affair, should be extended to
cover the entire dry belt of northeast
Brazil and experienced engineers
should be sent on the spot to guide the
garimpeiros. In addition, these pro¬
spectors should be trained and given
proper equipment, and their efforts co¬
ordinated. Under such conditions, min¬
ing in the Nordeste, where there are
now only a few well-equipped mines,
would cease to be a mere '"picking" of
minerals. And it would enable this
land handicapped by its climate to pull
its weight in the economic life of Bra¬
zil a goal towards which the Bra¬
zilian Federal Government is now
turning its efforts.
Photos published on pages 10 to ID are copy¬
right by the author, Edgar Aubert de la Hue.
'J he drawing on page 11 is taken front Josué
de Castro's booh, "Geography of Hunger".
13

When a geologist
turns detective
Dr. Edgar Aubert de la Rue, a French geologist,
went to Brazil in 1953 after the Brazilian
Bank of Industrial Development had request¬
ed technical assistance from the United Nations.
His mission was to help pave the way for future
teams of geological prospectors in the northeast of
the country where a complete geological survey had
never been made.
During his career he has covered most of North
America, South America and Australasia, and be¬
fore arriving in Brazil he had been scientific adviser
to the French Government research station in the
Kerguelen Islands in the Antarctic. He spent his
first two months in Brazil . at Rio de Janeiro,
working with Dr. Paiva Leite, Director of the Na¬
tional Bank for Economic Development, and with
the Brazilian Department of Mineral Production to
collect known geological data on north-east Brazil.
Then he disappeared into the "Polygon of Drought",
travelling by jeep.
His work consisted of indicating likely deposits
for intensive prospection in the future. This meant
not only surveying on his own and taking photo¬
graphs he took some 2,000 during the year he spent
in Brazil but also following up clues left by the
local prospectors.
On a typical day, Dr. Aubert de la Rue began
work in the town of Arcoverde, an important road
junction in the centre of the State of Pernambuco.
He had already lost two days in Arcoverde, ironi¬
cally enough, because the dry Polygon was experienc¬
ing one of its torrential rainy seasons and roads
had been washed out. He had used this time to
visit the local prefect and to glean as much infor¬
mation as he could about the region's mining. The
prefect was helpful. He introduced the geologist to
the tailor of Arcoverde, the town's main mineral
dealer, and the tailor was very obliging. He offer¬
ed Dr. Aubert de la Rue samples of titanium,
asbestos, beryllium, mica and iron ore. But, when
the geologist asked where the samples came from,
the tailor only smiled politely.
Dr. Aubert de la Rue took the samples and
walked down to the market place. One farmer
recognized them. They came from the Municipe
(county) of Sertania, about 20 miles west on the
Petrolandia road.
The geologist made an early start. In the Poly¬
gon, there is no point looking at stones after
11 a.m. when the thermometer goes up to 105°
Fahrenheit in the shade if there is any shade.
Minerals are literally too hot to be touched.
When Dr. Aubert de la Rue reached the village
he was seeking, he struck up a conversation with a
cattle hand who seemed to know where the samples
came from. The vaqueiro tethered his horse and
climbed into the jeep. They struck out across
country navigating by landmarks as the jeep
picked its way through clumps of cactus so high
that ranchers in the region sheath their horses'
bellies with leather aprons.
Four miles away, they arrived at a farmhouse.
The farmer was hospitable and he offered to lead
them to his mine. In the mountains next to his
land, he showed them a hole 10 feet deep: the
family mine. Whenever the family needed cash, he,
his wife, and their seven children went out to the
mine and dug up a load of asbestos. Dr. Aubert de
la Rue marked the uncharted mine on his map and
continued to prowl around the region. In the muni¬
cipe, he came across a few samples of titanium
and some extremely favourable indications of the
presence of uranium.
The next day, he left Arcoverde and headed for
a new destination, making a 200-mile jump with his
jeep over the Polygon under the afternoon sun.
Then the same process began all over again. It
was to continue for 12,000 miles.
LARGEST RIVER in the Brazilian Nordeste is the Rio Sao Francisco photographed
trolina (on far bank) and Juazeiro. It is the only river in the region in which thert
SPINY BARRIER of cactus and dwarf trees, the only vegetation that
resists the climate of the Nordeste. After the December rains a
miraculous coating of leaves mantles the dusty soil in green.
14

POLYGON OF
DROUGHT (cont'd)
'' .>*:
here as it flows past two towns, Pe¬
ls a flow of water all the year round.
VERSATILE PALM with spiral trunk is put to many uses by the people of the backlands. Its leaves provide a
kind of wax, its trunk is used for house building and from its seeds the poorer people brew themselves a kind of coffee.
I x V " * A
LEATHERCLAD COWBOY, the Voqueiro, is a traditional figure
in the region. These riders of the caatinga protect themselves from the
raking thorns with leather outfits that cover their bodies and legs.
SUN-BAKED ROCKS lie around like handfuls of pebbles cast at
random by a giant. Within their shade a few spindly plants and
trees have taken root, finding enough moisture in the barren soil.
15
