'Los Úneseos'
0
PENSIVE FARMER
reflects on changes for
the better that have come
to his valley. Here, with
other Costa Rican farm¬
ers, he listens to speaker
at a community develop¬
ment meeting which de¬
cided to provide funds
and manpower for public
works. (Unesco photo.)
24

BOOM TOWN
on the
Pan-American
Highway
Unesco Courier. Nr 2. 1955
PEASANT ARTISTS of Costa
Rica decorate their oxcarts with
intricate traditional designs
painted in vivid colours. Pat¬
terns on wheels, like one shown
here, form a brilliant kaleidos¬
cope as the carts move along.
(Photo Dr. Esteban de Varona).
ON a road map of Central America,
the Pan-American Highway
stands out as the main artery
flowing through nearly the entire
length of the Republic of Costa Rica,
whose total area is only 20,000 square
miles.
The highway enters Costa Rica
from the north at the Nicaraguan
border, crosses the tropical northern
provinces, climbs up to the rich table¬
land surrounding San José, the capital,
and then winds through alpine scenery
until it reaches San Isidro del General,
its present southern terminal.
Before this last section of the road
was opened in 1948, it took three days
on horse-back, over the steep paths of
the Cordillera de Talamanca, to cover
the 85 miles separating San José
from San Isidro and the green Valle
El General. The people of the valley
lived isolated from their fellow-
countrymen, and in many regards
they " were abandoned. But the
highway has changed all that. Back
in 1948, San Isidro, "capital" of the
region, consisted merely of a few
farms and a- big weather-beaten
church with a strange Moorish
steeple painted bright-red. Today, it
is a prosperous little town with 5,000
inhabitants.
At all hours of the day, horsemen,
ox-carts, tractors, jeeps, trucks and
cars jam its unpaved streets. Frame
houses have sprouted up like the
coffee, maize and sugar-cane in the
rich soil of the valley.. There is a big
market under construction, a hand¬
some " new primary school for 700
children, an abundance of shops and
cafés, and even an agency hiring out
auxiliary-engined bicycles which lends
a strange European air to this boom
town in the heart of Central America.
Outside the town is one of the
busiest airports in Costa Rica. Single-
engined planes fly 30 scheduled
flights a day in and out of San Isidro,
mainly hauling crops, livestock and
passengers from outlying valley villa¬
ges to the terminal, of the highway.
In San Isidro, it is possible to sit down
to lunch and eat á plate of beans
grown by a farmer who still uses an
ox-drawn plough and transported by
air to a few hundred yards from your
restaurant table.
This is the key to the dilemma of
the Valle El General : it has developed
so fast that all phases of its develop¬
ment have not been able to maintain
the same furious pace. The soil of the
valley is rich, but there are not enough
roads over which to haul the produce
to market. Bridges are scarce and
those that do exist cannot take heavy
loads. Farmers are relatively well off
the per capita income of Costa Rica
is one of the highest in Central
America their crops have " grown
faster than new schools for their
children, pure water supplies for their
homes, electricity for their villages and
health services" for their families.
It was this contrasting picture of
prosperity and primitive conditions
which led the Government of Costa-
Rica, early in 1952, to select the Valle
El General as one of the two zones
for a pilot project in rural education
(the other being La Lucha, 30 miles
south east of San José). "Pilot pro¬
ject", in this case, meant an imagina¬
tive experiment in social education,
encompassing all the educational, eco-
'*nomic, sociological and health factors
that were hindering the progress of the
zones. To organize the experiment,
the Costa Rican authorities were
assisted by two members of an educa¬
tional mission sent into the country
in 1951 by Unesco under the United
Nations technical assistance pro¬
gramme : Adrian Cruz Gonzales," a
United States citizen from Puerto Rico,
and Max Minano Garcia, of Peru.
Their official titles were "specialist
in primary education" and "expert in
rural education". But the farmers of
the Valle El General simply refer to
them as "los Úneseos" and Mr. Cruz
enjoys telling the story of the day
when a farmer hailed him from a
nearby field. The man did not know
his name. He simply called out :
"Unesco!".
Working in the two zones, Mr. Cruz
and Mr. Minano have refused to make
any pedagogical or administrative
distinction between "primary educa¬
tion" and "community development".
They maintain, after nearly three
years of practice, that it is almost im¬
possible to separate the two; that rural
living standards cannot be raised
without improving village schools and,
conversely, that schools cannot be
improved without enlisting the whole¬
hearted help of the communities.
The results of this fundamental
education work are as varied as they
are unusual : a new steel bridge over
the Rio El General, schools, libraries,
sports grounds, agricultural centres,
water supply systems, roads, radio
installations for educational broadcasts,
health and hygiene campaigns... It is a
complex project, co-ordinated by a
network of thirteen pilot villages.
As far as teaching is concerned,
there are eleven adult education
centres among the thirteen pilot
villages, with a total of 300 pupils.
Their course leads to a primary school
diploma which has a good deal of im¬
portance in the valley. In one San
Isidro hotel, the owner has proudly
framed his own in the dining room.
i
Besides teaching reading and writ¬
ing, the centres
make life more (Continued
enjoyable in the on next page)
25

Boom Town
(Continued.)
valley, mainly through encouraging
football, volleyball and basketball
teams. In El General Viejo, the foot¬
ball fever has caught on to such an
extent that the village team takes the
field with its members wearing, across
their chest, the emblem "Club Unesco."
Villages have participated in cam¬
paigns to improve their schools, rais¬
ing money through lotteries and
bazaars. At Los Chiles, the school¬
master, 34-year-old Cerlindo Alvarado,
went even further. In April 1954, he
organized not only a bazaar but also a
bull-fighta dangerous sport in Costa
Rica... for the bullfighter! There is no
kill in a Costa Rican corrida. Instead
the toreros swarm into the ring and
try to ride the bull's back, to pull his
tail or to make dangerous passes with
their capes. At this particular fight,
Mr. Alvarado, village schoolmaster and
father of six children, acted as torero...
and he raised a total of 900 colons
(approximately 140 dollars) through
his efforts.
But there are many other things
to do besides fighting bulls. At Los
Chiles, Mr. Alvarado's day usually lasts
from seven in the morning until ten at
night, teaching children and adults.
In his spare time, he farms the school
lands and wields a hammer and saw as
he helps to build additional rooms for
his school-house, using lumber bought
with the proceeds of his bull-fighting.
Hand in hand with community de¬
velopment over the past two years has
come a reorganization of primary
education. Preliminary investigations
had disclosed that the weakest point
in the Costa Rican school system was
a shortage of trained teachers. But
materials were deficient as well. The
MIXED TRAFFIC uses main street of San Isidero del General, in Southern
Costa Rica. Recently constructed Pan-American highway has brought a boom
and prosperity to this little townand also problems. Community facilities
water supplies, roads and marketsare still lacking. (Unesco photo).
AMATEUR BULLFIGHTER is Cer¬
lindo Alvarado, a teacher who took to
the ring to raise money to build an
additional wing for his school. Here
he is putting in some practice on
a not-so-fierce steer. (Unesco photo).
average pupil, during his six years in
primary school, reads only seven or
eight books, learning most lessons by
heart.
In 1952, Mr. Cruz began to work
with his Costa Rican assistant Mr. Boli¬
var Moya on a plan to strengthen
these weak points. They started with
60 teachers and 1,800 children in the
two zones of the Valle El General and
La Lucha. The following year they
expanded their campaign to include 83
teachers and 2,200 children. Then, in
1954, a wave of enthusiasm swept the
district and their work was extended
to the entire province of Cartago, co¬
vering a total of 700 primary school
teachers and 20,000 pupils.
The foundation of their plan lay in
on-the-job training for teachers al¬
ready in service. In practice, this had
to be translated into an incessant
round of seminars, visits, meetings and
"teaching-by-correspondence".
Gradually the plan took shape.
A new curriculum was drawn up and«
submitted to teachers and school
inspectors for criticism. It took a
practical approach, adapting the teach¬
ing methods of the school to the re¬
alities of Costa Rican life. One example
under the old curriculum, pupils
learned how to do sums in dollars and
pounds before they were introduced to
the Costa Rican colon; in the new
system, they begin with weights and
measures used in Costa Rica.
At the same time schools have
expanded their facilities : playgrounds
have been built, books have been
bought for their libraries as well as
radio receiver sets for listening in to
educational programmes. The Mini¬
ster of Education made a special
visit to San Isidro. He was so im¬
pressed by the results achieved that it
was immediately decided to launch
two new fundamental education pro¬
jects in 1955, one in Turrialba and the
other in San Carlos.
The people of the Valle El General
are proud of their achievements.
These are mainly due to their own
drive and enthusiasm. Unesco's tech¬
nical assistance experts have merely
helped to release and to guide this
latent force for community develop¬
ment. Yet the- people of the valley
still pin the label "Unesco" on their
schools, their markets, their new
bridges and their football teams. The
internationalism of this little corner of
Costa Rica is amazing. In San Isidro's
new primary school, built by the Gov¬
ernment, each classroom bears the
name of a Latin American republic
and the assembly hall is called "Uni¬
ted Nations Room."
26
