NEW POWER ERA
FOR GREAT BRITAIN
In the next ten years Great Britain expects to have
twelve nuclear power stations in operation. These
will produce electricity equal to that obtained from
five to six million tons of coal a year. Below
first experimental station goes up at Calder Hall,
Cumberland. (I) One of twin concrete buildings
to house uranium piles. (2) Workmen prepare
one of 80 ft. high steam producing boilers. Each

of the two piles will have four boilers. (3) Inside
view of boiler. (4) Model of Calder Hall station.
Two reactors are placed at each side of central
building. Cooling towers are seen top, left.
British Atomic Energy Authority
It is usually said that the atomic age
began with the explosion at Hiro¬
shima on August 6, 1945. Perhaps
the major achievement of the United
Nations Conference on the Peaceful
Uses of Atomic Energy is that this date
has lost its importance and that the
opening of the Conference ten years la¬
ter, on August 8, 1955, was the real
birthday of the atomic age. On that
day, and in the two weeks of discussions
that followed, the atomic sciences
emerged from wartime secrecy to be
revealed as a great new benefit to hu¬
manity.
Above all, the Conference at Geneva
confirmed the words of President
Eisenhower of the United States to the
General Assembly of the United Na¬
tions on December 8, 1953: "If the fear¬
ful trend of atomic military build-up
can be reversed, this
greatest of destructive
forces can be developed
into a great boon for
the benefit of all man¬
kind... Peaceful power
from atomic energy is
no dream of the future.
That capability, already
proved, is here, today."
So it is. In four countries atomic
furnaces, or "reactors", are already at
work. At Geneva, the Soviet Union
showed photographs, detailed drawings
and a model of its atomic power plant
at Obrinskoye, about 60 miles south¬
west of Moscow which has been generat¬
ing 5,000 kilowatts of electricity for
neighbouring industry since June 27,
1954. The United States put on public
display an actual small reactor with a
steady production of 10 kilowatts of
power that was increased to 100 kilo¬
watts occasionally to show the eerie
blue glow of the pool of clear water
when the rays from the submerged
uranium core penetrate through it.
Canada and the United Kingdom also
showed models, photographs and ope¬
rating details of reactors that are now
in use and of large reactors that will
be producing power for industry in a
year or two. Atomic power on a true
commercial scale will be a reality in
! 1956 when the British power station at
1 Calder Hall in Cumberland goes Into
operation to produce 50,000 kilowatts of
I electricity. By 1965 the United King¬
dom expects to have a dozen in opera¬
tion and producing electricity, and
there will be at least half a dozen
more in Western Europe by then.
The prospects for commercial atomic
power are the brightest in Europe
because easily mined coal is becoming
exhausted and coal prices are already
so high that power from uranium will
probably be cheaper than that from
coal. Much the same is true for water
power. The easily accessible sites for
power dams have already been used
and future dams will be higher in the
mountains, more remote from the
industrial cities, and therefore more
expensive. After some ten years of
experience with atomic power plants,
it is probable that an increasing
number of new power stations will be
atomic.
The United States has more than a
by
Gerald Wendt
Unesco Courier. N° 10. 195S
score of reactors but they are all expe¬
rimental, built for testing new designs,
new methods of generating power and
new materials of construction. Some
radical new designs were reported at
Geneva, including one in which the
cooling water is allowed to boil and
form steam which automatically serves
to control the speed of the atomic
reaction and thus has built-in safety.
There is also a reactor which does not
use bars of metallic uranium as fuel
but instead has uranium in solution.
Another form is the "swimming pool"
type where a large pool of water moder¬
ates the neutron flow and at the same
time serves as coolant. The USA is not
in a hurry to select a type for large-
scale power production because, in
competition with cheap local coal, it is
not likely that electricity from the
atom can be any
cheaper. Several large
power stations are ne¬
vertheless now being
built or planned.
There were, however,
scientists from 73 na¬
tions at Geneva, most
of them not yet acti¬
vely engaged in atomic
power researches. And the non-indus¬
trialized countries, who stand to gain
most from the new source of power,
were the most interested in the facts
revealed in the Conference. In general
the underdeveloped countries are poor
in coal and other conventional fuels so
that atomic fuels offer an exciting new
hope of power for the needed industries.
If, as in India, coal is available, it Is re¬
mote from the centres of population and
is either expensive to transport or, in
some cases, cannot be transported in
mi lions of tons because the railway
system is inadequate. Since one ton of
uranium can give as much power as a
million tons of coal, but is easily trans¬
ported, it avoids this obstacle and can
create industries and wealth that will
later justify the expansion of railroad
construction.
Industry springs up
with nuclear power
Nevertheless atomic power will be
slow to develop in such countries
because it is not possible to build
a profitable small atomic reactor.
Building and operating a large one
requires highly trained personnel,
specialized machinery, and at least a
moderate industrial environment to use
the power. The first problem of the
underdeveloped countries in facing the
atomic age is therefore the establish¬
ment of specialized training schools
for atomic scientists and engineers and
of vocational training schools for the
skilled workmen that will be needed.
It is true that atomic power makes
industry possible where it was not
possible before. But this means not
merely entering the atomic age but also
entering the electrical age, the age of
steam and the age of industry and
modern commerce. For this reason
investment in scientific,
technical and . electrical (Cont'd on
engineering will need to next page)
37

" SWIMMING POOL "
WITH A BLUE GLOW
A leading attraction of the atomic
exhibition of the Geneva Atoms for
Peace Conference was a working reactor
from the U.S.A. Standing around the
pool of crystal clear water, faintly blue
and 21 feet deep, visitors could look
down with perfect safety to see the
eerie blue glow of the submerged
uranium core at the bottom. The
shield formed by the water protected
them from harmful radiations. Rods
which run down into water are the
control rods which start or stop the
chain reaction as required.
Union Carbide
THE ATOMIC
FUTURE TODAY
(Continued)
precede, or at least to accompany
investment in atomic reactors.
The second major subject at the
Geneva conference, aside from the pro¬
mise of atomic power, was the use in
medicine, agriculture and industry of
the radioactive materials that are
produced as by-products in the reactors
and are known as isotopes. There are
many types and they have many uses.
Some, with powerful penetrating rays,
are used in hospitals for the treatment
of cancer and other diseases, and in
industry to take the place of cumber¬
some and expensive x-ray machines
at a small fraction of the cost. Others,
with faint but lasting radiations, are
at work in research laboratories of at
least 46 countries and have become an
indispensable tool for research studies
in chemistry, medicine, biology and
agriculture.
An official of the United States
Atomic Energy Commission estimated
38
that American industry alone is already
saving 100 million dollars a year by the
use of improved processes and machi¬
nery that were developed from new
information supplied by the isotopes.
He estimated that in ten years the
saving would amount to 1,000 million
dollars. Even this figure includes only
savings to the producers and does not
take into account the savings to
consumers in reduced prices and im¬
proved quality of many products. The
atomic reactors produce isotopes in
large quantities so that they are already
available for shipment all over the
world. Thus researches of this type
can be carried on anywhere long before
an atomic reactor is operating locally.
Isotopes reveal the
mysteries of life
One of the first consequences of the
atomic age will be the stimulus to
research in almost all the sciences,
Farming will profit by breeding of new
varieties of plants, better adapted to
local conditions of climate or soil and
eventually to mechanization of the
farms. The food industry will profit by
the sterilization of meats, vegetables
and fruits which will preserve them
without the cost of canning or refri¬
geration. More food will be available
because plant diseases and the vermin
that now destroy enormous quantities
of food will themselves be eliminated
by the use of new powerful radiations.
The use of radioactive isotopes has
already clarified the mysterious series
of chemical reactions by which green
leaves manufacture food out of air and
sunshine and has thus opened the way
to the direct and artificial synthesis of
food.
Health will be improved also because
the processes of life and the physiology
of the human body are rapidly becom¬
ing understood. The fate of food
during digestion, the role of proteins in
nutrition, the reason for the failure of
the internal organs, the causes for the
onset of the weaknesses of old age all
these and many more are emerging
from mystery into science and the
result will be longer and healthier lives.
Another significant feature of the
Geneva Conference was that work in
all these directions was fully and freely
reported with no limitations of impos¬
ed secrecy. Under such conditions
advances made anywhere in the world
almost at once become the property of
all peoples. Geneva re-established the
international republic of science in

Unesco Courier. N° 10. 1955
which the conquests and discoveries,
the principles and ideas of man's
endless battle with nature are not
nationalist but are both done and used
without regard to political boundaries.
It was, however, a meeting of scien¬
tists talking to each other. It was
powerless to act or to make any plans
for the future. There was much talk
of holding another such international
meeting within two or three years.
There was speculation as to whether a
permanent international atomic energy
agency would be set up, as was proposed
by President Eisenhower in 1953, whose
task it would be to promote the use of
atomic power and to develop the
atomic sciences for the benefit of the
world. These questions were properly
left to the United Nations itself.
Cheap power can bring an
industrial revolution
Yet the Conference did much more
than merely call attention to the
peaceful uses of atomic energy.
It proved that the atomic age is here
now. It generated high hopes for the
coming of power and of industry to
countries that are now lacking in them.
More than this, it generated such
enthusiasm that the pace of develop¬
ment will be greatly accelerated. It
put into clear perspective the present
new prospects of a better standard of
living for at least half the human race.
It marked, in fact, a revolution in the
thinking of scientists and engineers.
Such a revolution cannot be faced
lightly. It will not be possible to ignore
for long, as the scientists had to, the
fact that the consequences to humanity
will be enormous in the years and de¬
cades to come. Plenty of cheap power
means large industrial production in
regions that are now unproductive
and import industrial goods. It
means radical alterations in the
pattern of world trade. It will increase
agricultural production too by making
mechanization possible. New cities
wiil be founded in areas where they are
now impossible, even per¬
haps in the deserts. Ancient (Cont'd on
cultures will be shaken by next page)
Wem®"
Official Soviet photos
SOVIET ATOMIC
POWER PLANT
At Geneva, the Soviet Union showed
photographs, drawings and model of Its
atomic power plant near Moscow. Since
1954 this plant has been generating
electricity for neighbouring Industry.
Photo, left, shows upper part of the
reactor In Soviet nuclear power plant
and (top photo) long tubes filled with
uranium the "fuel" used by the reactor.
39

THE ATOMIC
FUTURE TODAY
(Continued)
WEIRD HAND was projected as
shadow on screen along with
mathematical equations when U.S.
scientist, V. F. Welsskopf, read
scholarly paper on neutrons to
Geneva Atoms for Peace Conference.
Scientist's llt-up hand is seen draw¬
ing equations into epidiascope.
UNATIONS
the impact of urban conditions, higher
standards of living and especially by
the effect of the scientific of thought.
In the late eighteenth century the
invention of the steam engine brought
the industrial revolution to England
and Western Europe. The first results
were impressively bad in the develop¬
ment of city slums, the use of child
labour and the exploitation of workers.
Many decades were required to undo
these omissions and make industry a
blessing. This time the revolution can
be foreseen and the economic and so¬
cial readjustments can be guided to the
end that the new power of the atom
liberate man from his bonds, that cul¬
tural values be maintained and that
the machine do man's work without
making him a slave.
There is need for many an atomic
conference in the future to build on the
foundations laid by the scientists at
Geneva an edifice worthy of the scien-
WHO - Eric Schwab
STRIKING SUCCESS of radio-active isotopes in medical treatment was shown by Soviet exhibit
at Geneva. Photographs showed how skin blemishes, eczema and other skin diseases were cleared
by use of isotopes, which are among the most Important by-products of nuclear reactors.
40
tifie vision. There is need for new
principles and inventions in the field
of economics, finance, law and social
and international relations that are as
bold as those of Einstein, Rutherford,
Fermi and others in science. The phy¬
sical concepts of the universe cannot
be radically revised without some revi¬
sion of the human world also. Revision
is, in fact, now under way. But it
requires leadership on the international
plane equal to that shown by the
world's scientists at Geneva.
The promise of atomic power for the
well being of mankind is incalculable.
We are now on the threshold of a new
era for humanity. The next decade
will show whether or not statesmen
and scientists can grasp the great prize
that lies before them.
The immediate demand will be for
modernized education in the countries
that will participate in the atomic age.
Science will, more than ever, be the
fundamental fact of life in that age
and no country that merely superim¬
poses the work of foreign experts on
an unsympathetic culture can profit
by it. From the primary school up¬
wards not only the facts of science but
its outlook and habit of thought need
to be absorbed. The integration of
science with older and classical cul¬
tures is a primary necessity. Thus
Unesco's pioneer work for its member
states in the improvement and expan¬
sion of science teaching faces a larger
challenge than ever.
Dr. GERALD WENDT, American scientist and writer, is
the author of the special number of the Unesco
Courier devoted to "The Promise of Atomic Power"
(N°. 12, 1954-USA, March 195S) published in English,
French, Spanish, American, Japanese and Italian edi¬
tions. At the recent Atoms for Peace Conference at
Geneva, he was science consultant for the U.U. Radio.
