Bird-man of Toma tribe, French Guinea
taking part in rain-making dance.
Tlaloc, Aztec rain
god. Survival on
Mexican plateau
depended on the
powers in his eye
rings, his fangs
and volutes over
lips. (Photos Mu¬
sée de l'Homme,
Paris. Copyright)
Ceremonial- mask which is used by Australian
aborigine rain-maker. (Australian Embassy, Paris)

INVOKING THE RAIN GODS
The richest land in the world would be worth almost nothing and
people would starve if there were no rain or irrigation. Down
through the ages the necessity of rain and the fear of drought
have put rain gods and rain-making ceremonies prominently in
the religions and mythologies of most of the people of old. In
ancient Greece and Rome, Zeus or Jupiter wielding thunder and
lightning, was the god of rain and the earth's fertility. In many
parts of the world, snakes, serpents and dragons were closely
associated with rain and water generally. The Chinese dragon,
for example, represented water in all its forms and moods. It
was the life-giving rain and rivers without which the earth would
be barren, as well as the storm and the sea and the mysterious ebb
and flow of water. In India and elsewhere throughout East Asia,
the serpent-god Naga had an essentially similar role. The Greeks
considered the oak the tree of the gods and dipped an oak branch
in water to induce rain. The Romans cast ¡mages into the Tiber,
and the Teutons poured water over a naked girl. The Druids
went to sacred wells or springs in processions where they beat
upon the surface of the water or poured water over special stones.
The ancient Hebrews looked upon rain as a blessing bestowed by
God in return for their obedience to the Law. To the Aztecs,
in semi-arid Mexico, the rain god Tlaloc was one of the chief
divinities worshipped. Today, rain-making ceremonies and dances
still exist in different parts of the world. Primitive rain-makers
sprinkle water, use flashes of fire to indicate lightning, make smoke
clouds and use drums, clappers and rattles (probably to imitate
the sound of thunder or showering rain). Certain African tribes
have elaborate ceremonies lasting many days during which chick¬
ens, goats and other animals are sacrificed to invoke the gods.
Among the Pueblo Indians of the semi-desert southwest U.S.A.,
feathers are attached to prayer sticks and planted in shrines
at springs and irrigation ditches. The annual snake dance of the
Hopisand the Rain Dance of theZunis are both invocations for rain.
56

Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
57
