Farming our last frontier
by Charles Drummond
Specimen of plankton (top) as it comes from the depths of the sea. Left, plankton enlarged many times. All sea life depends on this mass
of minute drifting organisms. The name plankton is derived from the Greek word meaning "wandering". It is the staple food for fish,
and it is also edible by human beings. Right, an enlarged view of a tiny jellyfish only one and three quarter inches in diameter :
one of the myriad forms of sea life which go to make up plankton. (Photos National Geographic Society and Black Star-Rapho'
23

Bread from the sea
w
A marine algae named gelidium
cartilagineum from which isinglass, aform
of gelatin, is extracted. (USIS photo)
iTHiN the last dec¬
ade or two marine
biologists and bio¬
chemists have realized
that the possibilities of
producing the additional
food needed with ever-
increasing urgency to feed
the world's hungry mil¬
lions lie in the seas and
oceans. In other words,
man must now farm the
world's "last frontiers",
extensively, intensively.
To farm the seas suc¬
cessfully will be a gigantic
task calling for the closest
integration of the efforts
and achievements of all
branches of science in¬
volved, for although scien-
. tifie knowledge in oceano
graphy is advancing steadily, the science itself is a rela¬
tively young one, originating largely through the 69,000-mile
cruise of H.M.S. Challenger some 80 years ago. It was then
realised that the problems of how to utilize the products of
the seas, to exploit fully its vast riches in food and minerals,
could be solved only by the closest collaboration among the
sciences concerned.
The cessation of World War II and the knowledge that the
world's population is increasing at a rate which threatens to
outstrip the most promising advances of agricultural science
have focussed the attention of many nations on the urgency
of "farming the seas". A great deal of research and much
experimentation have been undertaken successfully by inde¬
pendent organizations, a work which is being steadily
intensified.
Great meadows for all nations
Clearly it is necessary to experiment first in order to
decide on ways and means of utilizing fully the seas'
resources. It is necessary not only to improve existing
fishing grounds but to find (and even create) new ones, not
only to encourage faster breeding but to pin-point those
kinds of fish which are most useful commercially, not only
to discover more ways of utilizing marine plants but to
invent methods of growing and harvesting them.
Despite the many obvious difficulties, especially those of
a financial nature, the idea of farming the seas possesses
several well-defined advantages. These may be summed up
thus:
A. The sea contains great quantities of nutrients which,
properly directed and supplemented where necessary, could
be made to increase (in the first instance) the growth of
planktonic life, and thus in turn stimulate the growth of
marine animal life.
B. In marine agriculture there can be no lack of water
such as besets terrestrial agriculture.
C. It is believed that marine plant diseases, where they
exist, can be more easily controlled in this environment.
D. The seas, comprising 71 per cent of the earth's surface,
are vast enough for all nations, including those which have
no seaboards of their own, to participate in marine agri¬
culture.
Space does not permit the detailing of the many research
expeditions and experiments conducted to probe the poten¬
tialities of farming the seas, but it can be mentioned that
outstanding work in these respects has been (and continues
to be) carried out by various organizations, including the
National Geographic Society, the Marine Laboratories of the
University of Miami, and the Agricultural and Mechanical
College of Texas, as well as by research departments of the
U.S. Department of Agriculture and government bodies of
other nations. Under the impetus of ever-growing need,
science, industry and government are teaming up as never
before to explore and exploit the seas' food reservoirs.
Marine research has long established that algae (comprising
the many varieties of seaweed) and both Zooplankton and
phytoplankton have definite food value. Professor D. W.
Hood, of the Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas,
in a note to the writer points out that "these plants, if
obtained in large quantities, may be useful for livestock feed,
human food, pharmaceuticals, drugs and other important
biochemicals." He relates how experiments with a fresh
water algae (chorella pyrenoidosa) grown under good condi¬
tions proved that this plant can be made to yield around
50 tons of dry material per acre surface per year, having a
composition of 55 per cent protein. Under similar conditions,
he argues, marine algae could be "farmed" with results
approaching this.
Seaweed, dried and ground fine
During the two world wars, the development of acute
food shortages in many countries brought about nu¬
merous experiments with seaweed, conducted both on
an official basis and individually. In France tests were made
on the use of seaweed gathered on the Atlantic coast, when
it was found that horses could eat as much as 3.3 lb. in a ra¬
tion totalling approximately 17 lb. per day. The French
peasants also made a satisfactory silage from seaweed
harvested along the coasts. An official of the Animal Nutri¬
tion Investigations Department of the Bureau of Animal
Industry (Beltsville, Maryland, U.S.A.) points out that even
in normal times the Laplanders as well as the inhabitants of
the Faroe and Orkney islands use seaweed as a cattle feed.
"The material", he writes, "is dried and then ground
into a fine meal for
Y,"*» ^ ,-'' i"4* mixing with various con¬
centrate feeds. Usually,
however, seaweed consti¬
tutes only one or two per¬
cent of the total mixture."
Most of the nutritional
studies into the uses and
value of seaweed have
focussed on the produc¬
tion of kelp (the slag or
ash obtained by burning
seaweed). Marketed as a
feed supplement, the value
of kelp resides largely in
its iodine content; but though both seaweed and kelp meal
have been proved to be valuable constituents of animal fod¬
der, especially in areas low in iodine, the overall possibilities
of utilizing seaweed directly as a food for domestic animals
are of a supplement-ary value only as far as present-day
research indicates.
The major possibilities of producing great quantities of
food from the seas lie largely in the potentialities of
"plankton", those vast "meadows" of minute living creatures,
both animal and plant, that live in the sea at varying depths,
covering many acres at a time.
Plankton, taken from the Greek word "planktos", means
"wandering", and is the name given by the German scientist
Hensen in 1887 to the swarms of microscopic organisms
which, at the mercy of the seas, drift aimlessly to and fro
with the currents. Plankton is of course also found in rivers
and lakes. Phytoplankton is the name given to plant
plankton. Because many members of animal or Zooplankton
depend directly on these tiny plants for food,
phytoplankton constitutes the basis of animal (Cont'd on
life in the sea. In turn, Zooplankton is eaten by PaBe )
3>
Phytoplankton under the microscope.
(Photo Fisheries Laboratory, Lowestoft)
24

Unesco Courier. N' 5. 1955
'Skyscraper' tombs
on the ocean floor
Analyzing the microscopic plants and animals of the ocean has become an Increasingly
important part of the science of oceanography and is being carried on In research
laboratories throughout the world. Here, at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography
in California, two working methods are shown. In the first, a plankton net is being
lowered into the sea. Composed of fine silk, this net is equipped with a meter for
measuring the amount of water filtered as it is towed through the sea. In the second,
the diver plunges to the ocean depths for treasure: not gold, but specimens of sand,
rocks and marine flora. The samples thus gathered from the ocean floor will be
analyzed in the laboratory to determine their scientific contribution to oceanic know¬
ledge. Enlarged I 5,000 times here are some of the results of the search. They are
unicellular Diatomesthe most important part of marine plankton, the staple diet of
the fish. They are found in vast quantities in the sea and when they die their shells
fall to the ocean bed where they form a kind of submarine cliff, often hundreds
of feet high. (Photos USIS and Helmcke-Krieger, Max-Planck Gesellschaft)
25

Bread
the
from
sea
(Continued)
fish and even by whales. Clearly,
these "floating pastures" are as
vital to marine life as grass is to
land animals. Yet these organisms
are so tiny that it is possible to see
only a few out of the 50,000 or so
found in a single pint glass of
plankton seawater!
It follows, therefore, that if me¬
thods can be devised to increase these pastures, to improve
their nutritional value and also to grow and harvest them
under controllable conditions, an immense food reservoir of
unlimited potentialities lies at hand for the benefit of all.
Scientific investigations have already established the
nutritional value of plankton. It has been proved moreover
that planktonic life is so adaptable that it can reproduce
vigorously in almost all kinds of water or climatic conditions.
This research, much of which has been carried out on
American research ships in the Gulf of Florida and elsewhere,
is however a long-term project with numerous implications.
For instance, it is being used tö tabulate the behaviour of
important ocean currents such as the Gulf Stream (which
we know affects the climate both of Europe and North
America and hence the food-growing potentialities of these
continents), to establish the locations of good feeding grounds
for commercial fisheries, to trace the life histories of
different forms of marine life, to find out how seasonal
changes and water origins affect planktonic productivity and
growth, and many other related aspects.
Plankton has already been put to practical use. At the
Microbiological Research
Institute in Trinidad, fat
is extracted which is
used in the manufacture
of margarine. During
the last war an attempt
to harvest plankton as
human food was made
off the west coast of
Scotland by an eminent
British scientist, but the
attempt did not succeed.
German scientists, how-
e v e r, succeeded i n
producing plankton arti¬
ficially and extracting
fat for use in animal
forage.
Major problem exer¬
cising scientific minds
engaged in planktonic
research is that of dev¬
eloping methods of grow¬
ing and harvesting algae
and plankton under fully controlled conditions.
It is a happy thought not only that research into the seas'
natural resources is being intensified, but that in the train
of advancing developments in the science of oceanography
will come other vital advantages, the most notable of which
will probably be the establishment of new fishing areas
adequately stocked by new planktonic productivity.
Retrieving a sediment trap from the
ocean bed. This instrument is used to
study beach formations. (USIS photo)
NEEDLE
IN A
PLANKTON
STACK
"Sorting out" a collection of
plankton in the marine re¬
search laboratory, Aberdeen,
Scotland. The sea's "float¬
ing pastures" of plankton are
as vital to marine life as
grass Is to livestock. Yet
these organisms are so tiny
that it is possible to see only
a few. out of the 50,000 or
so in a pint glass of plank¬
ton seawater. (COI photo)
26
