THE MYTH
ABOUT
THE TROPICS
by Dr. W.S.S. Ladell
Copyright Unesco Courier
By all scientific indications man is a
tropical animal. Physiological
tests have hitherto failed to show
that the black man is any more suited
to life in the heat than the white, yet
the myth that the Tropics are no place
for a white man and that sojourn
there saps the mental and physical
energy of men from temperate climates
still remains. In defiance of that myth,
however, Queensland has been success¬
fully settled and there are many
prosperous parts in the southern States
of America which would be rated as
"tropical" from their climate were they
anywhere else.
The term "tropical" has come to have
a psychological rather than a geogra¬
phical or climatic meaning; do people
complain more of Tropical Fatigue in
Rio de Janeiro than they do in
Bahrein? They ought to, if such a
thing existed, as Rio is within the
Tropics and Bahrein outside.
Man must sweat
Human laziness is responsible for
tnis myth. Man, like other ani¬
mals, produces heat as he lives
and the harder he works the more heat
he produces. In warm climates the
body's problem is to get rid of this
metabolic heat. To do so, the superfi-
2ial tissueswarm up to the internal tem¬
perature of the body and blood flows
into the skin so that it becomes flushed
and hot. This hot skin radiates heat
to cooler surroundings and cooler air
moving over the skin takes up heat
from it.
The heat loss by these two routes
is adequate at first, but it becomes more
difficult as the temperature rises until
at 88°F., only if a man is naked and
inactive can he get rid of his metabolic
heat; if it gets warmer his temperature
rises and the third mechanism for heat
loss, the evaporation of sweat, becomes
important. The sweat glands begin to
produce sweat and as this evaporates
from the skin it takes up the heat that
could not be got rid of by convection
and radiation.
Dr. LADELL, British physiologist, has devoted many
years of research to the influence of tropical environ¬
ment on the human body. He is now director of the
Hot Climate Physiological Research Unit, Lagos, Nige¬
ria. He is also Senior Medical Research Officer of the
British Colonial Research Service.
Anything impeding heat loss by these
two routes will reduce the temperature
at which the sweating mechanism
comes into play; for example, a poor
flow of air over the skin, or, of course,
clothing. Similarly an increase in the
total amount of heat to be lost will
necessitate sweating sooner; this extra
heat may be from working muscles
twice as much heat is produced when
strolling at two m.p.h. as when sitting
quietly or it may be acquired exter¬
nally, as by standing in the sun when
the heat gained from solar radiation
may be more than that produced by
walking at 4 m.p.h.
However, by suitable clothing, by
keeping out of the sun and in the
breeze, and by not putting up heat
production by working, a man can
usually avoid sweating, but for a
productive life in the Tropics a man
must be willing to sweat; in vast areas
of the world there is poor nutrition
caused in part at least by man's
temperamental unwillingness to do so.
The same physiologically induced
laziness leads to economic difficulties
and to dirt and disease and a vicious
circle is set up. It is dirt, disease and
malnutrition that kills in the Tropics,
not the climate.
Modern Adam in Eden
Man's cooling system involves two
distinct physiological functions.
The first concerns the heart and
the flow of blood through the skin
bringing the metabolic heat to the
surface, and the other the production
of sweat, the evaporation of which
removes heat.
Tests show that a temperate climate
man reacts badly to work in heat when
he is first tried out; the opening up of
blood vessels in the skin drains blood
from other parts so that his heart
begins to race and he may vomit or
faint: sweating is slow in starting and
not profuse. But with training the
body compensates for the extra blood
vessels to be filled by increasing the
amount of blood, so that those dangers
pass; then he begins to sweat sooner
and more freely, and thus becomes
"acclimatized to heat". Tests on tro-
58

Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
pical men, both in Asia and Africa,
have shown, surprisingly, that these
men react more like untrained tem¬
perate climate men than like "fully
acclimatized" individuals, and with
training they show the same changes.
This is because indigenous tropical
man rarely works hard in the heat; he
prefers to take life quietly, to move
slowly and take no exercise, and to
catnap frequently; he avoids sweating
and keeps his agricultural activities to
the minimum, living when possible as
Adam did in Eden. The immigrant to
the Tropics, however, who works hard
and plays hard becomes nearly com¬
pletely acclimatized, and thus we
have the paradox that he is better able
to work in the heat than the locally-
born.
But then all around him the immi¬
grant sees the indigenous man culti¬
vating inactivity, sleeping when he can
and avoiding hard physical work.
Surely, the immigrant asks himself, the
local inhabitant must know best; so he
too begins to work short hours, and to
take a long midday sleep from which
he arises confused rather than re¬
freshed to restart his broken day.
When a man sweats he loses water
which must be replaced. Physiologi¬
cally it is best to drink as one sweats,
but drinking when at work is often
frowned upon; so by evening men have
substantial water deficits. Pure water
is dull stuff, so the tendency is to make
good the deficiency with more in¬
teresting alcoholic drinks; compatriots
and friends gather together to exchange
news and gossip; nostalgia stimulates
more drinking; so insidiously an im¬
migrant community becomes mildly but
chronically alcoholic and thus develops
"Tropical Neurasthenia". Possibly the
best tropical settlers are the Moslems
who are forbidden by their religion to
touch alcohol. But prohibition is not
necessary, merely the recognition that
to drink water as one sweats is natural
and desirable, a sign not of weakness,
but of good sense.
WW6*Y
Improved living and working con¬
ditions, with or without air-condi¬
tioning, will help to reduce the heat
load, but the settler cannot avoid the
heat of the air. Sweat is only praise¬
worthy when it is the outcome of useful
effort; so tractors should be fitted with
canopies, and hats should be wide-
brimmed enough to shade the whole
body from the sun.
The way to productive life in the
Tropics is the same as anywhere else;
eschew sloth. A tropical community
must be prepared to work as hard as
it would do in a temperate climate and
not be frightened of the heat; by hard
work food production can be increased
and indigenous diseases eradicated.
Emulate the horse
Tropical men must be taught that
they are not like cattle, who
cannot sweat well and have to
rest for half the day to prevent being
overheated, even at the risk of starving
themselves: men are born with sweat
glands so that they may safely work in
the heat. The brunt of the day's work
must be done before taking a nap. Let
communities in these areas develop
into fully integrated societies, where
isolation and boredom are no longer
the lot of every man when his day's
work is done, and separation from wife
and family the rule rather than the
exception for the immigrant.
Recreation must be provided, so that
alcohol can revert to its correct role
from being a universal hobby to a
useful social lubricant. With a real
home life and the development of
cultural facilities the brain worker too
can play his part. But the key above
all is the willingness to sweat, and only
when much sweat has flowed will a
community be able to afford such
extravagant luxuries as improving its
local climate by air-conditioning.
Only horses sweat; gentlemen per¬
spire and ladies glow. There can never
be productive life in the Tropics until
humanity emulates the horse.
59
