WHERE CLEVER
DOLLS ARE BORN
Under guidance of theatre workshop head, A. Mendoza, students at CREFAL, Unesco fundamental education
centre in Mexico, develop skill in puppet-making (left). Right, Cuban fellowship holder examines extra-light
wood used for bodies while companion saws pieces as easily as any man. Carving can be done with penknife.
30

Unesco's most
popular teacher
by Gabriel Anzola Gomez
There is hardly a Tarascan Indian in Mexico's Lake Patzcuaro
region who can restrain from breaking into a broad grin
when the name Crefalito pops up in a conversation.
A howlingly funny, adventurous little glovepuppet, Crefalito is
well on his way to becoming a legendary figure of farce and good
sense for thousands of simple fishermen and farmers round
Patzcuaro. Yet only a few years ago he 'wasn't even born. His
sing-song Mexican accent was first heard when Alfredo Mendoza
Gutierrez set up a puppet section in the rural theatre workshop
he directs at Unesco's Regional Fundamental Education Centre for
Latin America. The Spanish initials for the Patzcuaro Centre are
CREFAL. Mendoza naturally christened his new puppet Crefalito.
Since then, Crefalito has been joined by a cohort of other comic
characters: Don Coyote, Indio Panza Rota (Indian Broken-Belly) ,
Charalito (Skinny Bones), Mechudo (Rufflehead) and many more
almost as popular. Their antics, scraps and scrapes are eagerly
followed by old and young Tarascans alike. The puppets have
slapstick family arguments (in local dialect), fancy folk dances,
drinking sprees, but in every play an educational point (such as
literacy, hygiene or commupity development) is skilfully and
subtly woven in. "We can get our message across and give them
amusing entertainment at the same time," Mendoza Gutierrez says.
All Latin American teacher-students enrolled at the theatre
workshop study every aspect of puppetry art: carving the wooden
figures, painting and dressing them, stage designing and writing
plays. They then learn to manipulate the dolls and go out into
the villages to put on their own shows. Similar training is offered
Arab students in Unesco's second regional education centre at Sirs-
el-Layyan, Egypt.
Hundreds of puppets made at Patzcuaro have left Mexico with
their teacher-student authors for other Latin-American countries
where they are being used once again both "to delight and to
teach."
31

CREFALITO (Cont'dj
The big bad
Don Coyote
Chief job of Unesco puppet workshop at Patzcuaro
is writing full-fledged scripts, both witty and educa¬
tional. Student-teachers at first make adaptations
of well-known tales, rapidly learn to write new
original comedies. Right, student-made puppets in
nterpretation of "Snow White and the Seven
Dwarfs." Colour film strip of play was also produced.
Below, two scenes from "Don Coyote va por lana"
(Don CoyoteThe Tables Turned), a comedy by
director of workshop about a big bad coyote who
gets into trouble trying to catch a rabbit and a pig.
Moral of home cleanliness is woven deftly into script.
32
