FISH IN MYTH
AND LEGEND
ILLUSTRATIONS
Since prehistoric times many of the
world's civilizations have sought to
identify their peoples with the
creatures of the sea, to deify them
and to endow them with strange super¬
natural powers. The fish has appeared
as a symbol in the religions, myths and
legends of mankind, and even as a
constellation of stars in the heavens.
Although man has always tracked and
pursued fish with the most ingenious of
weapons and devices, nevertheless the
simple fisherman has always retained a
sense of awe for the wonders of marine
life. The fish has been venerated as a
symbol of tenacity, vitality and fertility.
In Japan, the carp has long been a token
of courage and perseverance and every
year on May 5th, on the occasion of
the Ton-go-sek-ku (the Boy's Festival),
long bamboo poles are raised outside
every house with a son in the family.
On these poles are strung hollow carp
models made of gaily painted paper or
cloth one carp for each son.
by
Jean Marabini
A somewhat similar tradition exists in
the Caucasus. Here, according to an
ancient folklore tale, described by Rus¬
sia's great poet, Alexander Pushkin,
the young men offer pictures of goldfish
(a member of the carp family) to the girl
of their choice.
Legends and stories about the salmon
are to be found among practically all
peoples inhabiting northern latitudes
where the salmon abounds. The vitality,
strength and persistance of this fish is
proverbial. Hatched in fresh water,
they mature in the open sea and then
return to spawn in the very stream
where they were born. This king of fish
will sometimes travel 2,000 miles inland
to spawn. En route it will leap water¬
falls, cut through churning rapids and
wriggle across the shallows. Only death
can prevent it from reaching its goal,
and only death will be its reward when
it has reached it, as most
species of salmon die soon (Cont'd on
after spawning. next page)
27

FISH IN MYTH
AND LEGEND
(Continued)
The Laplanders, who believe in reincarnation, consider the
salmon to be the most noble form into which man can be
reborn. This belief has its reflection in a story told by an
old Lapp fisherman near Lake Inari in Northern Finland.
"Do you see this scar on my head?" he said, "One day I told
my son not to fish in the river, But Lapp boys are no
different from any other boys and he disobeyed me and went
fishing just the same. He speared a salmon, but it was a
strong fish and fought courageously. Though badly wounded
and covered with blood it finally got away. My son returned
in the evening empty-handed and found me lying by the
fire with a wound in my head. I showed him the fresh blood.
Did I not tell you not to go fishing today? Look what you
did when you harpooned me in the river."
Unlike the Lapps the Buddhists in China believed that it
is only evil people who are given fish form in their next
existence. The fish is one of the eight magic symbols of
Buddhism, and it is not without significance that the Chinese
dragon often takes the form of a carp. Many Asiatic
legends describe in various ways the story of the worthy
fisherman who was rewarded because he freed a fish which
was the incarnation of a god.
Similar tales have been told by the Slavs. The story of
the golden fish which rewards the fisherman who spares his
life may well have had the same origin as the Asiatic myths.
However, 2,000 years ago, long
before the introduction of
Buddhism to China these same
tales were being told in India,
and this would seem to indicate
the existence of a maritime civi¬
lization of some form in South
East Asia at the close of the
prehistoric era.
The underlying theme running
through these early myths was
the idea of the sea being a vast
reservoir out of which gods,
saints and kings drew their di¬
vine powers. These concepts were
probably initiated by peoples
whose lives were spent within
sight and sound of the sea, and
it is interesting to note that they
conflict with the later evolution
of religion in India and China,
where, for both the Hindus and
the Chinese, divine power and
authority did not come from the
sea but from the sky. Certain
scholars have concluded from
this that the Indian and Chinese
civilizations borrowed elements
of their culture from this maritime civilization. When
brought into contact with a different environment these
cultural beliefs were changed and transformed, thus the
fish became a dragon in China and a Hindu mythological
serpent god in India.
Another fascinating legend in Eastern Asia was that of
the fish princess, who always carried with her the scent of
the sea. As the story goes, a royal seed on a lotus leaf was
blown by chance into waters where a sacred fish was
swimming. The issue of this chance mating became the
fish princess who, like Cinderella, was held in a form of
slavery until, with her singular charm, she seduced a Prince
by whom she had some wondrous children.
As fish were a symbol of fertility it was quite natural to
portray them as being assexual. The tales of the sea sirens
came from the Far East to the Mediterranean where, as we
know, Ulysses had some encounters in the waters off the
north coast of Sicily, and thence northwards to follow the
shores of the Atlantic where the navigators of those days had
many stories to relate of the appearance of the sirens.
Greek mythology was full of sirens and mermaids, and
despite Christian and rationalist attacks on belief in such
creatures, their fame survived and the beliefs persisted.
They continued to sing their timeless songs in bewitching
voices, and the Nordic water nymphs and Hans Christian
Andersen's little mermaid are but further proofs of the
tenacity of these myths.
A primitive aboriginal myth from Australia, which has also
appeared in various different forms in peasant legends from
other lands, is that of the frog, the moon and the seas.
These Australian primitives imagined the moon as a form of
monstrous frog, and inside the body of the frog were the
seas of the world. The story goes that the frog one day
burst out in laughter when watching the antics of an eel, and
28

Unesco Courier. Nr 5. 1955
thus set free the oceans. It is significant to note, however,
the inter-connection in this story between the moon and
the sea. Perhaps these Australian aboriginals knew of the
relationship between tides and the moon. This frog myth
is also extant in the folklore of other countries, and it
is popularly believed that the frog has the power to reflect
itself in the face of the moon. Whether or not these stories
originated among the aborigines it is difficult to say, but
what is reasonably certain is that traces of the beliefs held
by the seafaring civilization which first inhabited South East
Asia have come to light in the Mediterranean basin and in
the Middle East.
The Philistines had a fish-god called Dagon, and the
Carthaginians worshipped the fish as a symbol of strength,
and had an image of a fish buried with them. The
Egyptians, Herodotus noted, regarded the eel as sacred. The
Chaldeans worshipped the fish-god Cannes which was
supposed to have imparted wisdom to the first men on earth.
Even today in western Syria the old Dagon cult of the
Philistines still lives on in the worship of certain fish which
no fishermen are allowed to catch. Although originating
from a different source it is of interest that the Jews are
still prohibited by their religion from eating fish which have
neither fins nor scales.
There have been, of course, many references to fish in the
Bible, sometimes in natural terms and sometimes in terms
of miracles. The Gospels tell us that the first Christians
were very often simple fishermen, and this in a way would
explain the importance given in the Bible to fish as a source
of food. In its Greek name the fish became an actual symbol
of Christ, as the letters of the Greek word ICTHUS furnished
the initial letters of the phrase "Jesus Christ the Son of God
Saved".
In the early Christian era the martyrs absorbed and
transformed the idea of the symbolism attached to fish and
fertility and made it part of their faith. Also among various
non-Christian peoples there could be seen a similar type of
transformation. In forming the capital letters of their
alphabets the fish appeared in written form. In the
Frankish cemetery at Marchepot in the Somme region of
France, there is a bronze plaque with a fish and dove in the
same group two Christian symbols joined together on a
pagan monument.
Both in past centuries and in modern times the fish has
exercized a considerable influence on everyday language. The
ancient Phoenicians called a hermit by the name of pike, as
this fish was reputed to be and still has the same
reputation today anti-social. Terms referring to fish have
a variety of meanings, but in the majority of countries these
are usually of a disparaging nature "As drunk as a fish"
would serve as a good example. In France an April Fool .
joke is called an "April Fish". In coastal areas, however,
fewer unfavourable words and references to fish are found,
and this can be readily explained by the fact that the
maritime peoples very often depend for their food and keep
on fish and they thus pay a form of tribute by flattering
references in their everyday language.
Whatever may be the final judgment on the facts relating
to the fish as man's first ancestor, there can be no doubt that
the fish has exercized a profound influence on civilization in
all its forms. The fish has provided the key to certain things
of the past, and it may be, as simple Celtic inhabitants
of Amlwch, Wales, believe, that it can also predict the future.
As H.G. Wells once said, "'when humanity has exhausted
itself in dreams and lust for power it may well be that the
only remaining sound on earth will be the murmur of the
sea lapping on deserted beaches." The fish will certainly
then have re-captured their kingdom for all eternity.
29
