Solar 'Factory' A JULES VERNE
SETTING IN THE PYRENEES
by Daniel Behrman
Behind the moats of a grim 17th Century fortress in
Southern France, a team of French scientists has
succeeded in turning the age-old dream of harnessing
the sun into an everyday economic reality.
At Mont-Louis, 5,250 feet high in the eastern Pyrenees near
the Spanish border, zirconia, which is used in lining furnaces,
and other refractory ' - " '
materials are being
produced by solar
energy at a cost 25 per
cent lower than that
of conventional electric
arc methods.
The "factory" con¬
sists of two giant mir¬
rors which step up the
sun's energy striking
the earth by no less
than 20,000 times to
create a temperature
of 3,000 degrees Centi¬
grade (iron melts at
1,539 degrees Centi¬
grade) at the mouth of
a solar furnace about
the size of a small wine
barrel.
This glimpse of the
future is the achieve¬
ment of Professor Felix
Trombe, director of the
Solar Energy Labora¬
tory at Mont - Louis,
and Marc Foex, its
assistant director. It
is the result of more
than twenty years of
research in high-tem¬
perature treatment of
metals and nine years
of experiments with
solar energy.
Recently, the Unesco
Courier sent this cor¬
respondent to Mont-
Louis. He expected to
find a Jules Verne set¬
ting and he was not
disappointed.
The fortress at Mont-Louis was built by the Marquis of
Vauban, Louis XIV's great military engineer in 1676, and it
has changed very little since then. You enter the solar
energy laboratory over a bridge crossing a moat. The great
wooden gates with their nail-studded flanks guarding the
bridge have not changed in 300 years either.
The Courier's correspondent asked a tall man in his late
forties, wearing rope-soled espadrilles and perched on top of
a framework of girders, where Monsieur le Professeur Trombe
could be found.
"I'll be right down," said the man on the girders, "You'll
have to excuse me we're making our plans as we go along."
Prof. Trombe led the way into his office and sat down at
a desk covered by great white vases which he used indiscrim¬
inately as ashtrays. I pointed to one. "Melted quartz from
the solar furnace", he explained, throwing a match into it.
FOCAL POINT of solar furnace at the Mont-Louis Solar Energy Laboratory, France.
Concentrated heat from sun rays in the centre of photo (they produce a temperature
of 5,500 degrees F.) was made visible by throwing a handful of powdered aluminium
at focal point of rays. Furnace is used for high temperature treatment of metals.
In his office, Prof. Trombe and his assistant director
explained how they turned to solar energy in 1946 as a way
of producing high temperatures for treating minerals.
"With solar energy," said Prof. Trombe, "you can keep
substances free from carbon or other impurities, for energy
can be produced independently of any chemical reaction."
. . This also enables the
metallurgist to control
the properties of the
atmosphere inside his
furnace to a high de¬
gree of precision.
They started on a
modest scale at the
Me u don Observatory
near Paris. The weath¬
er in the 1 1 e - d e -
France was not exactly
ideal for their experi¬
ments, and they had
only reflectors from
wartime anti-aircraft
searchlights for use as
parabolic mirrors. Still,
they could see they
were on the right
track.
In 1949, General Paul
Bergeron, director of
the French National
Defence Scientific Ac¬
tivities Committee, saw
their experiments and
agreed with them. He
offered them a new
site. Mont-Louis in the
sunny Cerdagne coun¬
try of the Pyrenees.
There are now 20
research workers at
Mont - Louis and 25
more in Prof. Trombe's
laboratory in Paris.
The work is financed
jointly by the French
National Defence and
especially by the
French National Cen¬
tre of Scientific Research and the Ministry of Education.
"We build our own apparatus", said Prof. Trombe. "Our
team believes in what we are doing."
The new site in the Cerdagne offered Prof. Trombe and
Mr. Foex the sunniest region in France, a "micro-climate"
only 300 square miles in area and protected by mountains
against the carcanet wind from the north and the damp
southwesterly gusts from the Atlantic.
At Mont-Louis, the solar energy laboratory can count on
200 sunny days a year at Meudon, it had 50. For solar
energy purposes, Prof. Trombe explained, the regions near
the Tropics of Cancer and Capricorn are ideal. Closer to the
Equator, there is too much moisture in the atmosphere.
The first major problem to be overcome in 1949 was one
of cost. To make a parabolic mirror only six
feet in diameter requires a lense costing (Cont'd on
1,500,000 francs ($4,200 or £1,500)... and the next page)
25

SOLAR 'FACTORY'
(Cont'd)	
LOW BUDGET MUCH INGENUITY
FORTRESS WALLS built
by Vauban, Louis XIV's
great military engineer, pro¬
vide 17th century setting
for a spectacular modern
research device. In the old
fort at Mont-Louis, in the
Pyrenees, flat mirror (right)
follows passage of sun across
the sky and reflects rays to
parabolic mirror (left), so
curved that it concentrates
all rays into the orifice of
the solar furnace (centre).
parabolic mirror now used at Mont-Louis is more than
30 feet in diameter!
Prof. Trombe and Mr. Foex solved the problem with a low
budget and a great deal of ingenuity. Their parabolic mirror
is the largest in the world, but it consists of nothing more
than 3,500 lozenge-shaped pieces of window glass. Each
piece of window glass is only 1/16" thick and is laterally
warped into the shape of the great parabolic lens by the
pressure of adjustable screws.
In operation, the solar furnace is a weird sight. A flat
mirror 426 square feet in area rises up next to one wall of the
fortress with a great piston behind it to control its
WAR SURPLUS
REFLECTOR
from anti-aircraft
searchlight was
enlisted by Prof.
Trombe to serve
as a parabolic
mirror in his early
tests and still does
duty at Mont-
Louis for small-
scale experiments.
Cylindrical solar
furnace shown
here is rotated by
an electric motor.
movements. This mirror, consisting in turn of 520 individual
mirrors, has the job of catching the sun at any angle and
sending its rays into the fixed parabolic mirror 80 feet away
which then focuses the rays into the orifice of the solar
furnace placed between the two mirrors, an orifice about as
big as the porthole of a small boat. All of this is done
automatically. One pane on the flat mirror sends the image
of the sun between photo-electric cells. As the sun moves, so
does the image, and photo-electric cells respond, sending an
order down to the pistons which move the flat mirror.
One of the laboratory's engineers started the machinery to
demonstrate how the flat mirror could be moved. It looked
like a great blind animal turning slowly as it worshipped the
sun. Up on the platform between the two mirrors, Prof.
Trombe led me quickly into the tiny shed housing the
furnace. The day was overcast, but I could still feel a breath
of heat from the mirror. "You have to be careful here," he
said, "that mirror once burned the overcoat of a very impor¬
tant visitor."
The furnace stood in the axis of the parabolic mirror. At
a touch of a switch, it began to spin rapidly. In operation,
explained Prof. Trombe, centrifugal force pushes the mineral
under treatment against the jcylindrical wall of the furnace
and forms the "vases'" which I had seen on his desk.
First, a refractory material such as zirconia is produced in
the furnace to form a crucible which can then be used for
making metals, again of pure quality.
The present solar energy plant at Mont-Louis has a power
rating of 75 kilowatts (the equivalent electric furnace would
require a dynamo with a 100 h.p. motor). Prof. Trombe
told the Unesco Courier that plans are now well advanced
for a 1,000-kilowatt solar energy plant (the equivalent of a
1,300 h.p. generator).
A site has not yet been chosen definitely for this new
plant, but it will consist of a parabolic mirror measuring
26

115 ft. by 165 ft. with an area of 1,793 square yards. With
this new mirror, Prof. Trombe hopes to drive down the cost of
producing refractory materials to one-half that of the elec¬
tric furnace. Even with the present mirror, the plant at
Mont-Louis would pay for itself within five years if it did
nothing but produce refractory materials.
"Of course, we don't," said Prof. Trombe, "We are a
research laboratory, not a factory. Still, running the furnace
commercially only 30 days a year, we produce two tons of
refractory material and, since it's extremely pure, we have
no trouble finding buyers for it."
What of the future? "Solar energy will develop according
to the world's needs and the problems raised by existing
methods of producing energy," said Prof. Trombe.
At Mont-Louis, as elsewhere, experiments are also being
conducted in the heating of buildings by the sun and, not
at all paradoxically, in refrigeration (the use of solar energy
in the refrigeration cycle to replace electricity or a gas flame
as a source of energy has been demonstrated over and over
again and a house in the Sahara air-conditioned by the sun
is not by any means as fantastic as it sounds).
Prof. Trombe firmly believes that in producing high
temperatures for certain metallurgical work, solar energy is
now the most economical source available. The great
stumbling block lies in converting it into motive power.
"As soon as we try to use the sun to heat a boiler, we
are up against the fact that the steam engine is the most
inefficient of all power plants", he said, "It only converts into
energy about five per cent of the calories you put into it.
Under such conditions, it cannot compete with the Diesel
engine as a small power plant for isolated regions."
Prof. Trombe told the Courier, however, that he does see
a possibility of using the sun to drive efficient turbine power
plants of at least 100 h.p. to generate electricity.
"I do not think there is any problem in producing power
after sundown", he declared. "Heat can be stored by certain
materials and, at midnight, we have measured a temperature
of 1,000 degrees Centigrade in our own small furnace. There
is no reason why a solar plant could not supply power during
Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
the peak hours of the evening although you would need an
auxiliary engine, of course, for days when the sun doesn't
shine at all. The economics of solar energy depend on the
availability of other sources of energy."
As I left Mont-Louis, Prof. Trombe and Mr. Foex showed
me another source which has been definitely supplanted.
Less than 20 yards from the high-temperature furnace and
the world's largest parabolic mirror, a door led into a dank
hall where a wooden wheel 15 feet high rose up in the dark¬
ness.
"This is the 'Convicts Well'," said Prof. Trombe, "It worked
in the same way as a squirrel cage only with a man inside
to draw up water from a secret well."
SUN CATCHER, a mirror 40 feet
across and composed of 520 individual
mirrors, rises up next to one wall of
the fortress. It is mounted on a pivot
so that it can do its job of catching the
sun at any angle. Sun's rays, acting on
photo-electric cells, send orders " to
the great piston which controls mirror's
movement. (All photos these pages court¬
esy Solar Energy Laboratory, Mont-Louis)
