ALL-NIGHT PLAYS are performed In Indonesian Wayang-Golek Theatre (above and below, left), by rod puppetsone of five different
types of Wayang-puppets found in Java and Bali. Good and refined characters have long, thin features, evil puppets have huge bulbous
noses and fat bodies. Men have privileged places and watch actual puppets; women sit behind screen and see puppets as shadow show.
Plays begin after sundownand long, complicated plots are acted out until morning. (Photos ATP Museum and P. Lessing)
?
im
m
1
,f p
SHADOW SHOWS are today performed with
puppets all over China and In other Asian 'countries.
Above, two Chinese figures tinted In rich, translucent
colours. Below, two Siamese puppets from a Bang¬
kok theatre. (Photos Musée de l'Homme, Paris)
36

Unesco Courier Nr 3-4 1955
TRAVELLING PUPPETEER of China in 18th century
carried his theatre on his head and manipulated the puppets
from beneath a curtain. (Jacques Chesnais Collection.)


ASIAN PUPPETRY
A VANISHING ART
by Roshan Dhunjibhoy
It has been said that puppetry is universal and as old as civiliza¬
tion itself. Nowhere is this more true than in Asia where the
origins of the puppet play are buried deep in the mists of
antiquity. Writing one thousand years before the birth of Christ
the Chinese chronicler, Let-Tse tells us how the puppets of that
epoch were made and how the puppet plays were performed.
In the East where the present lives side-by-side with the past,
the stories of the puppet plays have been handed down from genera¬
tion to generation and thus many old legends and traditions have
been kept alive. In the seventh century A.D. the shadow theatre
in Java was already a well-established art form and this early tra¬
dition can still be seen today in the "Wayang puppet plays. In
Asian eyes the puppet is not simply a doll-like figure portraying a
story ; it is a living ancestral symbol and an intrinsic part of each
country's religious life. The puppet drama remains to this day in
Asia as a true Peoples' Theatre, presenting in vivid form and colour
old folklore and legends in a manner easily understood by all.
Although it has never been definitely established whether puppets
first originated in China or India the early Indian Sanskrit writers
ascribe their origin to Parvati, the consort of the God Shiva.
According to thé legend she made an ingenious doll which she
refused to show to her husband for fear of the evil power the figure
might possess. So she took it away secretly to a mountain and hid
it. Shiva, however, could not resist the temptation of seeing this
figure and followed his wife. Eventually he found the doll and was so
struck with its beauty and grace that he gave it life and power of
movement and sent it down to the world of men.
Tales from the epic Ramayana
WHETHER or not this charming tale is true it is certain that
there are many and varied allusions to puppets and animated
figures in the legends of Indian literature. In the puppet plays
performed today in South and North India the whole cavalcade of
Indian history and mythology marches past in an endless procession
of amazing scenes. Episodes taken from the great Hindu classics,
the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, are the classic themes for
South Indian showmen. For generations puppet dramas of this na¬
ture have been enacted before village audiences throughout India.
Today, however, the Indian peasants have increasingly been brought
under the spell of the cinema and ancient arts are losing their hold
on the people.
This is also true of Ceylon where the puppet theatre is now confined
to a single coastal town in the south of the island. Ceylon most pro¬
bably inherited her puppet art from India and references to methods
of manipulating puppets are found in ancient literary works written
in the days of the island's kings. Although there is no record of a
continued tradition, or even patronage, puppetry in Ceylon still exists
in its primitive form and the reason for its survival most probably lies
in its traditional significance and folk connexions.
In Java and Bali the development of the art of puppetry has been
complex. There are no fewer than five different types of Wayang-
puppets, each with its own individual method of colouring, carving
and dressing the figures. The Wayang Poerwa, one of the five types,
was originally used as a rite to communicate with the dead. The
puppeteer (the Dalang) was believed to possess occult powers which
enabled him to entice the spirits of the dead into his
puppets. Although much of this religious significance Cont d on
has been lost, these plays are usually performed on page 42.
Roshan DHUNjIBHOY of Pakistan became interested in puppetry while on a dancing and theatre tour in the
United Stales several years ago. She helped organize puppet shows for children in Boston and then turned
her attention to puppetry in India and the Far East.
37

THIRTY YEARS TO MASTER
THE ART OF ' BUNRAKU '
Centuries of life-time devotion and painstaking study by generations of
artists have gone Into the development of Bunraku, Japan's unique
form of puppetry. What makes Bunraku really different is that the
puppets are two-thirds life-size and are manipulated on a stage in full
view of the audience. It takes three persons to manipulate a Bunraku
puppet: the chief puppeteer garbed in an ancient ceremonial robe works
the head and the right arm, and two assistants, one to work the left arm and
the other, the feet. The assistants, whose presence on the stage Is supposed
to be unnoticed, are clad in black robes and hoods which signify "noth¬
ingness." Once the Bunraku play has started, the audience is no longer
conscious that the puppeteers exist. It sees only the graceful or forceful
"actors" whose every gesture is perfectly timed to the accompaniment of
samisen music and the jorurl singers reciting the theme of the play and
speaking the lines. Japanese consider that perfection comes after 30 years
of training and experience. Japan's most celebrated puppeteer, Bungoro
Yoshida (above) has spent more than 70 years in the world of puppets.
He is renowned for his skilful manipulation of female figures. A complete
language of gesture and movement Is used to express emotion. The master
puppeteer (below, right) is making the woman puppet convey her grief by
using a handkerchief, one end in the mouth, the other In the right hand.
One assistant moves the left hand while another suggests the movement of
the legsa woman puppet having none. (Photos Iwanami Films, Tokyo)

Unesco Courier. Nr 3-4. 1955
^1P»
Wy
Wa
/^J^jjiBf
W 4'/A9 .¡É
B * ' '
39

A look into the
puppet chamber
of Bunraku
The first thing that strikes the visitor to
the puppet chamber of a Bunraku Theatre
is the disharmony In the features of the
puppets, the eyes, eye-brows and mouths
being wholly out of proportion, and even the
left and right features being dissimilar.
These proud Samurai, venerable old men,
shifty villains, lovely young women and
droll jesters are not simply dolls to be admired.
They are actors and in each of them the
character and personality of the person to
be played is personified in the puppet's facial
make-up. Some faces, painted dark red (evil
characters), are quite grotesque. A close look
at a female puppet which appears so lovely
on the stage reveals that its face has the quality
of white porcelain, with not a trace of life¬
like colouring. Frigid eyes and mouth reveal
little that is human. The reason is that exag¬
geration is an important trait of the puppet
which otherwise would lose much of its
dramatic effectiveness at a distance. And it is
amazing to observe how, from a distance, the
expressions of a Bunraku puppet can be dis¬
cerned on an oversized stage. Puppet heads
which have been handed down from long ago
have the name of the maker Inscribed on the
central stick. Prior to each performance a
puppet is carefully prepared with Its wig
smoothed down, or its hair put up in such a
way as to suit its role. Uncanny and grotesque
as they may appear off the stage, the puppets
immediately become graceful and lively figures
as they are handled by Bunraku master
puppeteers. (Photos Iwanaml Films, Tokyo)
m
-til
40

Unesco Courier Nr 3-4. 1955
41

Asian puppetrya fast disappearing art
(Continued from page 37)
occasions such as marriages and in connexion with cere¬
monies to celebrate pregnancy or circumcision. On such
occasions the puppeteer is accorded almost the same respect
as a priest.
The Wayang puppets influenced other theatrical arts,
especially the dance which adopted many of the same move¬
ments. The plays are usually performed after sundown with
the men sitting in the privileged positions behind the
puppeteer so that they can watch the actual manipulation of
the puppets. On the stage itself there is a large transparent
white cloth with a symbolic red border stretched much in the
fashion of a home cinema screen. Behind this stands the
puppeteer with a finely-fashioned oil lamp hanging above his
head. In front of the screen the women sit and watch the
spectacle as a shadow play.
It commences with a long prelude by a Javanese orchestra,
but before the last sounds of the gong have died away the
puppeteer brings on his puppets made from buffalo hide and
decorated and painted in symbolic colours. They are divided
into two groups the good and refined with long thin
features and bowed heads, as a sign of humility, and the evil
puppets with huge bulbous noses, fat bodies and heads held
high in pride. The complicated plots, many drawn from the
Hindu epic, the Mahabharata, familiar to the Javanese, take
an entire night to perform. Despite their length the audience
listens fascinated.
As long ago as a thousand years before the birth of Christ
puppets were as popular in China as the cinema is today. It
is said of the Chinese Emperor, Muh, that on one occasion
he called in a famous puppet showman, Yen Sze, to entertain
him and his many wives. The puppeteer, elated at being
invited to exhibit at the Royal Palace, went happily to work
and made a wonderful set of puppets which could open their
lips, move their hands and roll their eyes at the audience.
But during the performance the puppets appeared so life¬
like that the Emperor imagined them to be flirting with his
wives. He ordered the puppeteer's head chopped off on the
spot. The showman begged for his life and to prove his
innocence tore his puppets into shreds. The Emperor, realiz¬
ing that he had been made jealous by mere coloured scraps
of paper, relented and granted him his life.
Perhaps not all puppets are as realistic as those of Yen Sze,
but the measure of Chinese artistry is shown by the fact that
today shadow plays are performed all over China. The
tradition of the puppet theatre has been preserved intact and
to old folk tales and legends have been added adaptations
of Chinese plays and translations of foreign works.
The making of shadow puppets in China is a special craft.
The figures, cut by scissors, are individually styled. Open¬
work and embroideries are indicated by delicate traceries.
Tinted in rich translucent colours the puppets have a decora¬
tive appeal which fascinates the audience. The travelling
puppeteer is his own theatre as he carries his stage on his
head and manipulates the puppets from underneath his
voluminous robe. In the 1939-1945 war the Chinese puppet
theatre was used as an effective method of anti-Japanese
propa'ganda^a good indication of the profound influence of
puppetry on the modern Chinese peasant.
Kabuki actors out-classed
The Chinese taught the art of making puppets to the
Japanese and although the growth of puppetry in
Japan was comparatively recent, by the mid-eighteenth
century the Japanese puppet theatre had become the most
lavish in the world. Through the rivalry of two puppet
companies, drama reached such heights that it outshone
the traditional Japanese Kabuki. Human actors watched
the puppets to learn the niceties of acting: the revolving
stage was introduced in the puppet theatre ; the greatest
Japanese playwright of his day, Chikamatsu, found greater
freedom in writing plays for inanimate actors. This was
by reason of the fact that the oriental drama had kept to,
its ritualistic and stylized character with the result that the
puppets became more human than the humans.
Following this apex of Japanese puppetry a decline set in
and it was not until 1871 that a puppet company in Osaka
brought new life to tlie art. From Osaka the new form of
puppetry spread to Kyoto and thence throughout the length
and breadth of the country. The name of this Osaka
company, Bunraku, has since become synonymous with the
classical puppet theatre.
Bunkaru puppetry is actually a puppet play co-ordinated
with ballad singing the musical instrument used being the
Japanese samisen, a three-stringed instrument which was
brought to Japan from the Ryukyu Islands at the beginning
of the Tokugawa era. The puppets and the recital are one
as the figures move in harmony with the recitation and a
form of musical drama is thus produced. Perfect harmony
and synchronization are required and even the slightest de¬
viation will disorganize the movements of the puppet.
The puppets, which are almost two-thirds life size and
weigh about thirty pounds, are beautifully dressed. They
are manipulated from behind by puppeteers who make no
'attempt to conceal themselves from the public. The principal
puppeis are each manipulated by three men one for ine
head and right arm, one for the left arm and a third for
the feet who co-ordinate their movements with the lilting
rhythm of the samisen and the moves of the puppet's head.
Burmese Kings portrayed
Foreigners, witnessing a Bunraku performance, are invari¬
ably impressed with the harmony of the performance
and are curious to know how three men moving one
puppet can read each others minds so perfectly. This
harmony is achieved only by assiduous practice. It has long
been an established rule among Japanese puppeteers that it
takes ten years to handle the feet properly, ten more years
to control the left hand and another ten to control the
central movements.
Thirty years spent in perfecting the art of puppet mani¬
pulation is something which could be found nowhere else but
in Japan. It should not be imagined, however, that the
puppeteers are the most important part of the Bunraku per¬
formance: the singers and the samisen players must also
co-ordinate exactly in observing the traditional rhythmic
pattern which is maintained by all participants throughout
the entire performance.
The puppets themselves are extremely complicated in
construction. One figure may have as many as five different
kinds of string controls. The faces are carefully painted and
the wigs and garments prepared with infinite care. After
each performance the puppet's clothes are taken off and
stored away. As witness of the importance of puppet per¬
sonalities it is of some significance that the script-writer of
a Japanese puppet play will commence his work with the
existing puppets in his mind's eye. The theme of the puppet
plays has always remained the same the triumph of justice
and the struggle of good against evil.
In contrast with the high moral tone of the Japanese
puppet plays the Burmese puppeteer gives his performance
with the primary purpose of entertaining his audience, and
many of his puppets are lively laughable figures of fun.
However, in common with Japan music plays its part on the
Burmese puppet stage. The Burmese puppeteer shows a
fight between a dragon and a peasant. The dragon is killed
and then quickly resuscitated since for the Burmese to show
the taking of life would be an impropriety. Genial-looking
puppet giants are brought on to dance, and animal puppets
perform intricate figures each having its own signature tune.
The true Burmese puppet play, however, is more often
than not concerned with events in the lives of the former
Burmese Kings. These semi-divine Kings did not, appar¬
ently, object to stage representation of themselves provided
that every detail shown of the court dress, manners and
customs was accurate. This custom is still followed today.
Puppetry in Burma now is a declining art and the spirit of
the puppet theatre is largely kept alive here, as in India and
Ceylon, by the itinerant puppeteer wandering from village to
village and fair to fair, playing to those audiences who still
remain out of touch with the cinema particularly true in
Burma where the cinema has not spread to the same degree
as in other Asian countries. These simple yet dedicated
artists have most probably been given the secrets of their
calling by their fathers as the art of the puppeteer tends to
run in families.
Asia still has its puppet theatre but the art of puppetry
is fast disappearing in face of the ever-increasing advance of
the travelling cinema and the radio. If this fascinating link
with the past is not to be lost entirely, urgent steps will have
to be taken. A new renaissance is certainly needed if this
Peoples' Theatre of the East is to continue to function, as it
has for centuries past, bringing art into the everyday lives of
the ordinary people.
42
