A LONG ROAD FROM THE PLOUGH
by Elina Almasy
The scene is a poverty-stricken landscape somewhere in
the Carinthian mountains. In a barren-looking field
six women are at work. Summer is ending and the
time has come for ploughing. Three ploughs are turning
over the heavy soil and yoked to each is an ox and a woman.
This scene, pictured in an engraving dated 1872, gives some
idea of the lot of a European peasant woman a little over 89
years ago. It seems hardly believable and one's first reaction
is to wonder how men could have been such tyrants. But the
fault did not lie so much with the men as with the social and
economic conditions of the period. The peasant in 1872 had
in all probability no alternative but to yoke his wife alongside
hLs ox, as he himself was probably labouring for his master.
Communities still exist where women do the hard manual
labour while the men busy themselves with housework.
Strangely enough this is usually found amongst peoples who
give their womenfolk a leading role in the social hierarchy, in
the same way as in tribes where men are the leaders, there
has always been the tendency to treat domestic work with
contempt. The same idea was found in matriarchal commu¬
nities where the women banished men to the kitchen.
In families living off the land it was not, in general, so
much the tyranny of man which turned women into some¬
thing not much better than a beast of burden, but the gene¬
ral poverty. However, with technical progress and the intro¬
duction of rational agricultural methods, the life of the pea¬
sant women was greatly improved in practically all countries
of the world, and in general, independently of women's eman¬
cipation in the legal and political fields. This favourable
evolution is still going on.
During the past century when women began to seek ad¬
vantages from the social revolution and the new economic
opportunities opened up by increasing industrialization, the
problem of women's education immediately came to the fore.
This led to a struggle in which women demanded the right
of equal educational opportunities. In many countries it be¬
came a bitter struggle. To protect themselves from female
competition men resorted to some insidious methods. Pub¬
lic demand led to women being allowed to follow certain
trades and professions, but at the same time they were denied
the training to fit them for these callings. They were told,
for example, that the schools were full up. '
Medical schools open door first
The whole question of women's education is still far from
settled today. Throughout the world there are still
more female illiterates than male. In Russia the illi¬
teracy figure for women is three times that of the figure for
men. This year in the primary schools of India there are
16 million boys but scarcely 5 million girls. In Indonesia
such a shortage of schools exists that all secondary schools
have been closed to girls.
In the universities, the medical schools were usually the
first to admit women students. The U.S.A. had its first
woman doctor, Elizabeth Blackwell, in 1849. The University
of Cambridge opened its doors to women students in 1869 and
in 1870 women were given the right to study medicine at the
University of Paris. However, the other faculties at Paris
were slower to follow the example and in 1900 there was not
a single woman student studying law. Today, 25 % of all law
students in France are women.
Although much progress has been made some professions
are still closed to women. In the U.S.A. and Great Britain,
they are not allowed to work in the mines or in forestry.
France and Great Britain do not allow women to own
money changing offices or stockbrokers businesses. In Paris
Elina ALMASY, Norwegian sociologist was formerly head of research at the Oslo
Institute of Social Research. Articles on this page and page 28 are taken from a
sludy she completed last year, on women's progress in the world today.
women were not allowed on the floor of the Stock Exchange
until 1952. The Scottish Presbyterian Church allows women
to become preachers but its English counterpart does not.
The increasing share which women have obtained in
general economic affairs has led to significant changes in
day-to-day family life. In some countries women form a
large percentage of the total population at work in industry,
agriculture and commerce. Yugoslavia holds the record with
49%, followed by Rumania with 46%. France occupies
seventh place with 38%. In terms of the percentage of
women workers from the total female population Yugoslavia
again holds the world record with 57%.
At the other end of the scale, women in the Latin Ameri¬
can countries play only a very small part in the professions,
trade and industry. Out of 100 Mexican women only five are
employed. In Cuba the percentage scarcely reaches seven,
and in Honduras 7.5% However, in Colombia, by contrast,
47% of the women are doing active work.
Husband can veto bank account
Of all branches of industry, textiles employ the highest
proportion of women workers. In the U.S.A., the figure
is 77% and in Switzerland 65%. The Government of
the U.S.S.R. has ta;ken many measures to increase the role of
women in the economic life of the nation. It has also en¬
couraged women to take up scientific work. No fewer than
578 women have been awarded the Stalin Prize, among them
the eminent biologist Olga Lapechinskaja. From the millions
of factory workers 2,000 have been made "Heroines of Soviet
Labour", a title which carries a number of social privileges.
The legitimate claim for equal pay for equal work has now
been met in some countries, but many countries still do not
adhere to the international convention on this question.
It is interesting to compare the respective incomes earned
by men and women in the U.S.A. Among women, 48% earn
less than $1,000 a year; 36% earn between $1,000 and $2,000;
13% from $2,000 to $3,000, and only 3% have a salary of more
than $3,000. For the men 26% fall in the $3,000 plus
category; 29% earn between $2,000 and $3,000; 25% between
$1,000 and $2,000, and only 20% earn less than $1,000.
In France there are almost as many women heads of
businesses as there are men. However, a married woman in
France does not have the right to open a personal banking
account without the written consent of her husband, except
when a contract has been signed before marriage establishing
a division of property. As regards the management of
finances, women are still, as they were at the start of the
century, under the control of men in most countries.
Actually most governments today have not only given
working women equal rights equivalent salaries, possibilities
of promotion, etc.with men, but they have taken special
measures to ensure that women will not suffer any physical
harm from their work. In France, for example, women are
not obliged to work at night, and working hours are arranged
so that women can have 11 consecutive hours of rest during
the 24. In the U.S.A. women cannot be made to work
overtime, nor are they allowed to drive lorries of more than
five tons in weight. -
In most countries there are regulations obliging employers
to provide chairs for women workers so that they can rest
during the fixed breaks in the working day. There is an
international convention which has laid down rules regarding
the treatment of women workers who are expecting children.
They have the right to a special holiday, receive free medical
care and to be paid a salary wage bonus. After the birth of
her child, when the women worker resumes her duties, her
working hours must be arranged so that she can feed and
attend to her child in the best possible conditions.
A long road has indeed travelled since the days when
peasant women helped oxen to pull a plough.
15
