ROCKET ATTACK. With a flash and a "woosh", (right)
a rocket soars up to " discharge " a thundercloud before storm
conditions become violent enough to produce damaging floods
or hail. Drawing above depicts hail-bearing cloud being
attacked by rockets In which silver Iodide is mixed with explo¬
sive. Iodide crystals start formation of many tiny water droplets
which fall as rain. (Photos National Anti-Hail Centre, Paris).

Mans dream down the ages
RAIN MADE
TO ORDER'

RAIN MADE
TO ORDER' (Continued^
MM CWCMi«..
STATIC COttrCTIOM »
miUMrM
General Electric Company, USA.
SCIENCE WAY UP
IN THE CLOUDS
Experiments in the possibilities of rain-miking are
today going on in many parts of the world. Radar to
measure water content of clouds and aircraft for
"seeding" them are playing important roles in such
experiments. Above, nose of an American aircraft
used in rain-making research bristles with a multi¬
tude of scientific instruments for measuring atmos¬
pheric conditions. Right, radar antenna scans the
skies in Australia. Next page, cumulus clouds bet¬
ween 25,000 and 27,000 feet high were "seeded"
with dry ice in Australian experiments. Thirteen /
minutes after operation, cloud in centre billowed up
some 5,000 feet and rain began to fall from its base.
Much expensive effort has in recent years been put in
attempts to induce rainfall. The experiments have
received wide publicity because of the enormous value
that a successful method would have, not only in the arid
and semi-arid lands of the earth, but also elsewhere when
a temporary drought threatens agricultural production. It
has been estimated, for instance, that an increase of only
ten percent in the annual rainfall on the wheat-producing
areas of the western United States would increase the value
of the land itself by one half. Even in Norway the cost of
the one-month drought last July has been put at about
fifty million dollars.
In spite of the many experiments, some of them specta¬
cular, no completely successful method of rain-making has
yet been perfected. Droughts are still inevitable and the
arid lands are still arid. This means that it is impossible
today to use any method that is absolutely certain to give
results. On the other hand the experiments are in many
cases encouraging. The World Meteorological Organization
at Geneva, one of the Specialized Agencies of the United
Nations, has called the results '"inconclusive" but in a 1953
preliminary report recommended that "new scientifically
designed and rigorously checked experiments be undertaken
in all regions where there is a possibility of success".
Several limitations on the hopes for rain-making are well
established. In the first place, a cloud is needed and no
man can make a cloud. Indeed there are many types of
thin and hazy clouds which cannot possibly produce rain,
either naturally or artificially. Unfortunately such clouds
or a burning clear sky are characteristic of the deserts so
52
that where rain is most needed there is generally least hope
of creating it.
In the second place, experiments which have seemed suc¬
cessful have usually been done with the towering and bulging
"cumulus" clouds, that are characteristic of thunder-storms,
and with some other types of clouds that are natural pro¬
ducers of rain. Thus the chief effort has been to coax the
rain from such clouds over an area where rain is needed
and where the land-owners are willing to pay the cost,
instead of allowing the clouds to drift farther and shed
their rain elsewhere. Thunder clouds have also been
attacked in order to start the rainfall earlier than normal
and before storm conditions become violent enough to pro¬
duce either floods or hail.
These are some examples of what are at present considered
the most promising conditions for success in rain-making.
They have little relation to areas where rain seldom falls.
The report of the World Meteorological Organization, based
on a critical study of results in five areas of the earth, uses
these words: "The most favourable meteorological condi¬
tions for the artificial inducement of precipitation are to be
sought in regions and during seasons where natural preci¬
pitation is most likely."
The methods used for inducing rainfall are based on two
theories of the natural formation of rain. The first applies
in general to the temperate and high latitudes of the world.
Here the beginning of the natural rain-making process in
the cloud is the creation of minute ice crystals in the cold
upper part of the cloud extending above the freezing level.
In some circumstances there may be insufficient ice crystals

Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
(CS I.R.O. photos )
present, and in such cases an artificial introduction of ice
crystals into the cloud may be a means of inducing rain¬
fall. Many experiments on the artificial inducement of rain
have therefore been aimed at producing ice crystals in select¬
ed clouds.
One well-known method has been to "seed" the clouds
with a very cold substance, commonly called dry ice, which
is in fact the solid or frozen form of carbon dioxide. The
particles of dry ice fall through the cloud and leave a wake
of very cold air behind them in which ice crystals form
spontaneously. Another method has been to introduce
minute crystals of silver iodide into the cloud. These
resemble ice crystals in shape and structure and under some
conditions have an effect similar to that of ice crystals.
Silver iodide may be released as a smoke from generators
on the ground or carried in airplanes.
The second theory of natural rainfall applies in general
though not exclusively to tropical regions where the upper
parts of the clouds do not reach freezing temperature. Here
the rain-making process is started when some of the
droplets in the cloud are so much larger than the bulk of
the cloud droplets that they move differently in the cloud
and so collide with the smaller ones. In this way they
become bigger until they are eventually large enough to fall
out as rain. Thus experiments have been conducted with
a view to introducing water droplets into the cloud that are
larger than the bulk of the cloud droplets. This has been
done by spraying into the clouds either water or very small
hygroscopic (water-absorbing) particles, such as salt
crystals, which at once form droplets of water.
Interesting results have been reported from Pakistan. In
the Northwest Frontier Province near the Khyber Pass,
between August 25 and 31 in 1953, jeeps from the Pakistan
Air Force sprayed salt solution over the roads leading from
the city of Mardan. The expectation was that wind would
carry the salt particles from the ground thousands of feet
into the air where they would cause drops to form in
moisture-bearing clouds. In this case scattered observers
reported that the areas around Mardan had a 2-inch
rainfall following this experiment.
In September of the same year, tests were also made in
Pakistan in which the salt solution was sprayed directly
into the clouds. Four of the Ave flights were unsuccessful,
but in the fifth the plane left a wake of showers falling
thirty or forty minutes after it had sprayed each cloud.
On the basis of these and similar experiments cloud-
seeding by air does not seem economically practical in an
area as large as West Pakistan but the use of salt on the
ground offers considerable promise. What Pakistan's
meteorologists hope to do is to tap some of the clouds that
blow over Western Pakistan during the monsoon season by
using the hygroscopic action of salt in such areas as
Baluchistan and the Northwest Frontier Province where
there are very few hygroscopic nuclei naturally present in
the air.
In a new series of experiments in 1954 another and
inexpensive method for salting the sky was used in the
Punjab. The method made use of small hand
blowers like those used by silversmiths in the (Com don
Pakistani bazaars. These generators were set next page)
53

RAIN MADE
TO ORDER (Continued)
up at Lahore and Jauharabad and used salt that
had been ground to a fine powder in a local mill.
This powder was blown into the air from the ground at a
rate of about a pound a minute. Eight tons of salt were
thus wafted upwards in the course of 39 days and at a total
cost of about $1,000. Rain gauges scattered over an area of
1,500 square miles showed that this area received at least
fifty percent more rain than did the adjoining regions.
(For a detailed report on Unesco experiments in Pakistan,
see page 48.)
Radar measures growing rain drops
In the Union of South Africa clouds at a temperature
below freezing were seeded with dry ice and observation
of the cloud by means of radar showed some formation
of rain drops but there was no measurement of rain that
actually fell. The evidence was that seeding with dry ice did
at least stimulate precipitation at an earlier stage than would
otherwise have occurred. There were also experiments in
British East Africa during the rainy season from January
to April of 1952 in which silver iodide was carried into the
cloud by a balloon and was scattered in the cloud by means
of small gun-powder explosions. Rain gauges on the ground
showed a slight increase in rainfall. Similar experiments
were done with hygroscopic particles. In both cases the
evidence was that more rain fell at some distance downwind
from the point of release, but that there was a reduction in
the rainfall directly beneath the point where the chemical
was released into the cloud.
In India both dry ice and silver iodide were used for
seeding cold clouds and water drops were sprayed
into the clouds that were above the freezing point. These
experiments were made during the monsoon season when
rain occurs naturally so that the results were difficult to
evaluate.
In South America numerous experiments were made.
Over the Sierras of Cordoba and San Luis in the Argentine
dry ice was scattered within a cloud at a temperature of
10"F, but there was no proof that rain fell. Similarly,
experiments in Peru were done on cumulus clouds but it
was impossible to tell whether the rain that fell was natural
or artificial.
In Australian experiments under the direction of Dr. E.G.
Bowen of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organization, the evidence was better. By seeding
a "suitable cloud", rainfall was certainly obtained, the
amount varying from 1 mm at the edge of the shower area
to approximately 13 mm (1/2-inch) at the centre.
Seeding clouds with silver iodide
In North America one well-known rain-making operation
has been carried out by Dr. Irving Langmuir in New
Mexico. He used a silver iodide ground-based generator
and carried out regular weekly seedings, using about 1,000
grammes of silver iodide per week over a long period. A
large number of other experiments have been made and one
careful study of the results indicates a significant increase
in rainfall of about 10% above normal. Thus the tendency
has become to seek relatively small increases in rainfall
rather than to produce rain where there is none.
The report of the World Meteorological Organization is
critical of nearly all past experiments, on the basis that
they lacked an adequate method of measuring accurately
the amount of rain produced and of distinguishing it from
natural rainfall. WMO therefore recommends that in
future experiments precise methods of measuring the
rainfall must be developed. Especially, every operation on
a cloud should be considered primarily as a scientific
experiment which will lead to an understanding of the
basic factors of rainfall and the mechanism by which rain
can be induced rather than as a practical operation to
produce rainfall then and there on the land below.
Such scientific experiments are now being planned or
begun in certain countries and there is hope that more
definite results on this very important subject will soon be
forthcoming.
54

Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
AIRBORNE
LABORATORIES
Since 1946, Australian scientists
have been carrying out important
research into rain-making, combining
detailed studies in the laboratory
with airborne work in the clouds.
Photos on these pages show some of
this work being carried out by the
Radiophysics Division of the Austra¬
lian Commonwealth Scientific and
Industrial Research Organization.
(I) Scientists in aircraft flying through
cloud watch instrument recording
cloud's water content on moving
paper. Impulses are transmitted from
another instrument (2) on the front
of the aircraft's wing. This houses a
continuously-moving paper tape
drawn past a narrow slit. Radar
equipment (3) in aircraft is also used
for observing cloud behaviour.
Twelve-feet high cloud chamber
(6) simulates in laboratory the actual
conditions obtaining in clouds. Fan
in wooden chimney creates a regular
updraught of air in the glass chamber
into which water is sprayed. Droplets
rise gently on the airstream, colliding
and combining. Record of their beha¬
viour (4) is taken by a moving camera.
In patterns shown here, two droplets
which have combined, at left, are
beginning to fa H towards bottom of
the cloud. During airborne operation,
stream of salt particles (5) to "seed"
clouds is seen falling from aircraft.
55
