name is
Punch
by Genevieve Sigisbert
I hate to boast but everybody knows me. I'm an institution
like Father Christmas, summer vacation at the seaside
or a good cup of tea. Every now and again the rumour
may go round that I'm on my way out but you pay no mind,
I'll still be in business, alive and kicking when you're all
gone.
Kings and princes give me a good laugh. Can any of them
trace their ancestors back more than a paltry thousand
years ? Look at me, I've got a history that stretches three
thousand years behind me.
Yes I know, the chronicles say I first began to thump,
thwack and thqueak in Naples towards the end of the 16th
century. But chronicles be hanged! I was an up-and-going
concern long before your serious-minded, grim-jawed chro¬
niclers began to take any real notice of me.
I'm as old as Homer's Greek warrior Thersites, "squinting,
bandy, misshapen and deformed, with long pointed head
and a strand or two of hair"; as old as the hunch-backed
figures in those ancient Egyptian tombs. And who knows,
maybe I'm even older than that, perhaps as old as creation
itself and the first wry cry of mockery and revolt that hit
the world.
Of one thing you can be sure. That saucy buffoon, Maccus,
who had the ancient Romans howling with laughter in his
Atellan farces, was a great-great grandpappy of mine. He
had my features, a long beaked nose, a humped back and
a protuberant belly, and was a gay dog, witty, insolent and
ferocious who ran all sorts of risks to satisfy his appetites.
There was that other fellow too, Buceo, a sort of hanger-
on of Maccus's, a braggart, a coward and a flatterer. I have
something of each of them in me.
Where did my name come from? The historians are still
puzzling their brains over that one and some pretty far¬
fetched explanations have been put forward. But it is gene¬
rally agreed now that my name has something to do with
the word pulcino, a chicken (my beak, walk and chirping
voice do resemble a bird's, I'll admit). My barnyard squawks
earned me the latin name Pullus Gallinaceus. Pulcino
became Pulcinella in Italy, Polichinelle in France, Punchi¬
nello and then just plain Punch in England.
My voice, by the way, comes from a curious little metal
whistle called "schwazzle" or "'squeaker" which goes back
to the ancient Greeks who first used it for their string ma¬
rionettes. When my master holds the schwazzle in his
44
mouth and doesn't make the mistake of swallowing it it
gives me my earsplitting falsetto.
During the night of the Middle Ages, by which I mean the
obscurity in which we lived during the vogue for mystery
plays, I led a lusty but undistinguished life in the market
place. Then came the Êenaissance in Italy. A popular
drama of stock characters grew up, some of them grotesquely
padded the Commedia dell'arte.
Each of the characters spoke a different dialect; Pantaloon
was a Venetian, the Doctor hailed from Bologna, and I
became a Neapolitan. I was no longer hunch-backed but
stood as straight as anyone, wearing a loose white smock
held in by a leather belt, from which hung a money-bag and
a wooden sword, loosely gathered trousers, a black half-
mask with a beak nose and long mustachios and a beard,
a white scull-cap and an enormous grey hat with the brim
turned up on each side to form an over-sized peak.
I was a boaster, conceited, cowardly, greedy, shameless
and profligate, a real child of Naples, and Naples took me
to its heart. It cracked me up to the skies, gave me a
theatre, and created special plays for me in which I could
disport myself as I pleased. Wooden puppet or flesh-and-
blood, Naples rushed to see me, crowding in, from the king
to the basest of the lazzaroni. And it went on for ages. I
might lose my beard and grow wrinkled, change my hat
for a sugar-loaf cap, and grow a wart on my nose, but Naples
was still true to me and adored me. It was prouder of me
than of Virgil's tomb!
In the meantime, having become a star, I began to travel.
In 1653 I arrived in France. The welcome I received was
not very enthusiastic; the audiences thought me crude, and
gave me the cold shoulder. You will find me only in a few
of Lulli's and Campra's ballets, in an interlude of Moliere's
"Le Malade imaginaire" and in plays where strolling players
appear on the scene. And I should have led an obscure
exile's life indeed had I not found at fairs, in the little
puppet theatres, the success denied me on the stage proper.
As a marionette, I suddenly imbibed a Gallic with and
became a hunch-back again. Certain French scholars have
explained that I am a caricature, if not of Henry IV, at
least of the Gascon officers who paraded around their master
at Saint Germain or the old Louvre; that the hump on my
back is the eternal symbol of raillery and that on my chest
is the soldier's breast-plate fashionable at the time; that
my cocked hat is the one worn by gallants of the day; that

Unesco Courier. Nr 3-4 1955
OLD VENICE street scene of Pulcmella in I 8th century engraving (J. Ches- master. Right, Pulcinella in Roman park today, backstage and public's
nais Collection, Paris). Punch has climbed out of booth to argue with his view. (Photos Museum of Popular Arts and Traditions, Paris; Atinelli)
COMMEDIA DELL'ARTE THEATRE WHICH SAW BIRTH OF PUNCH IN ITALY SHOWN IN MINIATURE AT VENICE PUPPET THEATRE OF 1800 (PHOTO ATINELLI)
IP* V ^ ¿jßM
M
~T
45

Mr. PUNCH (Continued)
Koàï
Mnff
^HH
vm Ki .
m 'i^H
KL ' Jl
my jovial bold and amorous humour is modelled on King
Henry's; and in short, that I am, from head to foot, a spon¬
taneous product of the French imagination.
Others, more cautious, agree that I hailed from Italy but
became identified with the typical mercenary soldier of the
French religious wars, a swashbuckler, a pillager. My bom¬
bast, my ruffianly insolence and my showy garb were suggest¬
ed by the absurd ostentation the Castilian nobles affected
at Court when peace had been restored.
At all events, now that I was a Parisian, I had to strip
myself of clownishness, gluttony, cowardice, base vanity and
brutish sensuality. Though still rather... Rabelaisian, I
grew brisk, lively, gay and witty. In 1649, in the hands of
Jean Brioché on the left bank of the Seine, by the Pont-
Neuf, I came out boldly on the side of the Fronde against
Mazarin; in 1686, just after the revocation of the Edict of
Nantes, with François Brioché at the Château-Gaillard, I
made sport of the discomfiture of the Huguenots.
But my real battlefield and happy hunting ground were
the great Fairs of Paris, the Foire Saint-Germain and the
Foire Saint-Laurent, where, for more than a hundred years,
I played to full houses and I don't mean wooden benches
in the open but proper theatres with pit and boxes and bal¬
cony making game, more or less with impunity, of every¬
body and everything. I was not content with my repertory
of often rather unsavoury short plays but provided a run¬
ning commentary on major and minor contemporary events,
from the occasion when Madame de Saint-Sulpice's panniers
caught afire to Law's Mississippi Scheme.
Above all, I flung myself heart and soul into the "Hundred
Years War" then raging between the privileged players the
Opera and the French and Italian Players and the stroll¬
ing players. My little wooden body could snap its fingers
at edicts and penalties, so, in 1722, Lesage and other authors
gave to me the plays. they had intended for the Opéra-
Comique.
French oil painting of 1670 showing
French and Italian farce actors at Comédie-
Française. First farceur at left is Molière.
I'm the eleventh Pulcinella Napolitano
(cut). (Photo A.T.P. Museum, Paris)

Unesco Courier. Nr 3-4. 1955
And what a success they were! All Paris flocked to see
them. We played, from ten o'clock one morning to two
o'clock the next. I found I liked singing and dancing;
painted and bedizened, tricked out with red and green and
yellow, I parodied one by one all the successes of our rivals;
Destouches and Voltaire had no terrors for me, and I was,
in turn, Apollo, Cupid, Anadis and Alcide.
Alas, with the eighteenth century, the Golden Age of the
puppet theatre came to an end. The Foire Saint-Germain
and the Foire Saint-Laurent faded away, and the fair on
the Boulevard du Temple became the rage. There was no
room for me there except in a few pantomimes not made
to my -measure, and I preferred to retire to the world of
children. I who loved no one, wanted to be loved. And
they loved my bright motley, my cocked hat, my hooked
nose, my nutcracker chin and my squeaky voice. I beat
my wife, my creditors and the policeman, and they clapped;
I was a creature of instinct, like them, and we were friends
even though that upstart Guignol was a very much milder
version of my character.
During the Revolution, in 1793, when Paris was the scene
of bloodshed at the Carousel and the Champ de Mars, my
plays ended, fittingly, with my death at the guillotine.
And speaking of revolutions, it was not I but Mr. Payne
Collier who said that the Revolution of 1688 brought about
two memorable events: the accession of the House of Orange
and my own arrival in England. In point of fact, it seems
that I came not from Holland in the train of William III,
but from France in the train of the Stuarts. At first I was
a string marionette and only at the end of the 18th century
did I become the glove-puppet Punch.
I was a little over-awed at the beginning but still put on
a gay, rowdy, boastful and rakish air, though there was no
real harm in me. I gave light relief with my buffooneries
to the puppet plays based on the Bible, as Sir John Spendall
and the Old Vice had done and continued to do. But I
soon put them in the shade and, in London as in Paris,
became the king of the marionettes. Addison and Steele
had something to do with it. Thanks to the articles in the
Tatler, Powell, who I must admit was a very clever puppeteer,
and I became famous. When we settled in London in 1710,
Steele went so far as to say that we outshone the new Ita¬
lian Opera and that I, Punch, was as popular with the fair
sex as the famous singer Nicolini.
The following year, when we had established ourselves in
Covent Garden, we had such a success they used to call us
"cathedral emptiers", and our friend Addison said that
Punch's Theatre, was the place in all London where you
were n ost likely to meet a violent death. I had the honour
of appearing in Swift's verse and Hogarth's engravings.
All this success not unnaturally went to my head. I sat
on the lap of the Queen of Sheba, sent the King of Spain
about his business, attacked Saint George with his foot on
the dragon, and made the most unsuitable jokes in the
middle of the most pathetic scenes. And the more impudent
I was, the more mocking, the more overbearing, irascible,
rough and violent, the more the spectators loved it. It was
really their fault that I became a rogue.
By the end of the eighteenth century, the script makes
me a sort of Henry VIII, a Blue Beard, a "Don Juan of the
people"; I intrigue, beat my wife and her relations, throw
my child out of the window, roam about the world and win
all women's hearts, save three. I slay fathers and brothers,
hang the hangman and kill the devil.
And in the Tragical Comedy of Punch and Judy, published
by Payne Collier in 1828, I am a combination of corpulent,
sensual Falstaff and cold, inhuman Richard Crookback. I
knock senseless the dog, the neighbour, my baby, my wife,
the doctor, the servant, the policeman, the sergeant, the
hangman and the devil, and I laugh. And everybody else
laughs with me. No doubt, the merciless severity of the old
customs made people kindly disposed towards those who fell
into the clutches of the law, but there was a difference bet¬
ween that and applauding my crimes and urging me on to
commit more.
I believe that after all I personified one aspect of the
English character presence of mind, strength of character,
self control. I might be a bad husband and a bad father
but the English appreciated the stout-hearted mockery with
which I met the sentence of death, the ruse I devised to
take the hangman prisoner in my place, and my courageous
struggle with the devil. This struggle with the devil was
a great thing. In the old moralities, the Old Vice stood up
boldly to the demon but was finally carried off to Hell; I
killed him, so that we had something like the duel of Satan
and Sin in Milton. And this out-deviller of the devil which
Byron, smiling, finds akin to himself, this persevering and
resourceful spirit which triumphs always and in everything
was the kind of hero the English wanted.
I might say that, in Germany, I am called Hanswurst, in
Austria, Kasperle, in Holland, Hans Pickelharing and Jan-
Klaassen, in Spain, Don Cristobal Pulchinela, in Russia,
Petrouchka and, in Turkey, Karagoz. It would not be liter¬
ally true, and yet there would be something in it.
At the end of* the 15th century the buffoon in the German
puppet plays was Hanswurst (John Sausage). His part was
that of Polichinelle or Harlequin, and the character was
similar, but his behaviour was quite different.
His two outstanding features were gluttony
particularly excessive fondness for the
(Cont'd on
next page)
47

A stonemason named Kara»«/
Karagöz, the famous puppet character of Turkey,
who looks strangely like Popeye, is now only a memory
in the minds of old men. Puppets came to Persia and
the Byzantine Empire from India. Their spread .was
quickened by their association with the Muslim faith.
Karagöz moved from Turkey along the shores of North
Africa to Macedonia and from there to Greece.
The plays revolve around the
personality of one man, a stone¬
mason named Karagöz. It is
believed that this man really
did exist and was employed,
together with a companion cal¬
led Hacivad, to build a mosque
for the Turkish Sultan. How¬
ever, so the tale relates, the two
masons were apparently great
talkers and the other workers
in the mosque would gather
round and listen to them.
Work was brought to a stand¬
still and the Sultan hearing of
this ordered the two executed.
After the sentence had been
carried out the Sultan regretted
his hasty action as he too had
enjoyed listening to their con¬
versation. To distract his mas¬
ter the Vizier made two puppets,
Karagöz and Hacivad, and with
these he enacted the conversa¬
tions of the two friends for the
Sultan's pleasure.
Although the story
may be apocryphal
there could be no
question of the popula¬
rity of Karagöz, who
was presented as a ra¬
ther crude rough and
ready person. His op¬
posite number, Hacivad,
was a would-be aes¬
thete who spoke Per¬
sian and Arabic and
had some knowledge of
music and literature.
The scenes of the plays
were laid in Turkey .
and typical local cha¬
racters such as the
seductive dancing girl,
the village simpleton
Beberuhi, the opium
addict, the local Don
Juan and foreigners
from Greece, Albania
and the Levant all played their parts. However, the
real charm of the plays lay in the dialogues between
the two principal characters. These would often sati¬
rize day to day events, old literary classics and human
nature itself. Although ribald in tone the plays
usually contained a simple moral based rather on
common sense than on any strict ethical code. The
Karagöz puppet plays can no longer be seen in Turkey
but still flourish today in North Africa and Greece.
MR. PUNCH (cont'd)
national dish to which he owes his name and stupidity.
He was so successful that he was gradually introduced into
all the plays in the repertory.
The monotony of his character is therefore offset by the
variety of his adventures; he is constantly struggling with
bears, apes, snakes and dragons; he rides a flying horse
and has an encounter with Death. He bears the head of
Cyrus and, as a night watchman, sounds the last hour of
Faust. With his materialism, his vulgarity and his cowardice,
he is the living antithesis to the fearless, distinguished,
metaphysically minded masters he serves. But he has the
pedestrian common sense that they disdain and that is why,
unlike Don Juan, he is saved and unlike Faust, gets the
better of the Devil. Driven off the stage in the eighteenth
century by the ascendency of French taste in the theatre,
condemned and outlawed, he yet survived, or rather his place
was taken by Kasperle.
Kasperle is the Austrian member of the family, from
Vienna. Though foolish and credulous, he is less crude and
unmannerly. He is a young peasant who combines simple
mindedness with a certain native wit, and arouses laughter
by his artless reflections and improbable schemes.
In Holland, Hanswurst was supplanted by Hans Pickel-
haring (John Salted Herring) and later by Jan-Klaassen
(John Nicholas), who inherited the boisterousness and cheer¬
ful roguery of France's Polichinelle and England's Punch.
In Spain, although most of the puppeteers were foreigners,
and although the Italians had a great influence on the art,
the subjects and characters are entirely Spanish. Only the
strong personality of Pulcinella made a place for himself
under the name of Don Cristobal Pulchinela. But in spite of
the dignity of naturalization, he kept company for the most
part with performing monkeys and blind men.
Little is known about Petrouchka, the Russian buffoon. He
has quite possibly been influenced by Germany, Italy and
France, but there is not much sign of it. He is impetuous,
48
shameless, pugnacious and slightly fatalistic in character.
Lastly, Karagöz, the national hero of the Turks, lewd,
shameless, an inveterate maker of puns and outrageous jokes,
is surely the character through whom an oppressed people
critized an oppressive government, and those who lived
under constraint gave free rein to their imagination.
And what is it that gives us all, despite our clear-cut and
distinct national features, an undeniable family likeness
Punch, Polichinelle and all the others, my ancestors, my des-
cendents, my brothers or distant cousins?
Though bearing the stamp of different national characters
and tastes, we are the incarnations of a single popular tra¬
dition; we represent revolt, the revolt of instinct against the
prohibitions of law and morality, of simplicity against the
complexities of civilization, of common sense against follies
and stupidities and vices, of the love of justice whatever its
shortcomings and
of freedom against
serfdom and slavery.
One of the most
recent works I have
inspired, Stravins¬
ky's Pulcinella, is not
the least eloquent in
this respectPunch,
though slain, comes
to life again, with a
double, and raises a
whole crop of little
Punchinellos, sym¬
bolizing my ubiquity
and my immortality-
Mr. Punch christens a
magazine in July 1841.
First Punch " cover
drawn by A.S. Henning
(A. T. P. Museum, Paris).

Unesco Courier. Nr 3-4 1955
49
