Old device in new garb
HARNESSING POWER
FROM DESERT WINDS
For centuries nomadic peoples have
led a precarious existence in
deserts, or semi-deserts. They
wander about with their herds of sheep
and goats and sometimes camels
following the occurrence of spasmodic
rains which bring forth a thin cover of
grasses and other plants for pasture.
This crop is quickly consumed and the
animals browse on the foliage of such
shrubs as manage to thrive on the
treeless plains. This mode of life is
indeed free and independent but it is
hazardous. If the rains fail the ani¬
mals, and perhaps also their owners,
die of starvation unless they are lucky
in getting away quickly enough to
better-watered lands.
Although it is a method of using the
by
E. W. Golding
sparse "agricultural resources" of the
desert, nomadism is a sure way to keep
it as desert. Vegetation never gets a
chance to become established so as to
provide shade and to retain the
random rain which, on a bare surface,
so rapidly runs away, with disastrous
effects in erosion. In addition to this
excessive grazing, the inhabitants
themselves make conditions worse by
cutting shrubs to provide fuel for their
fires for cooking and warmth at
night when the desert is cold.
To transform such desert lands into
areas which can support a population
in more security and, later, to contri¬
bute something towards the food supply
for the rest of the world for desert
soils are often fertile if they are
adequately watered much work will
be needed. Man can sometimes exist
without toil but he cannot improve his
lot without it. Even though he works
hard, however, he cannot, unaided by
mechanical power, bring about much
significant improvement.
In more temperate agricultural
countries, mechanization has been the
key to development; high productivity
demands machines to assist
men to make the best and (Cont'd on
fullest use of their own next page)
MUSCLE POWER V. A MODERATE BREEZE : In eastern countries camels or bullocks are used to lift water from wells. In raising some
600 or 700 gallons an hour from a depth of 30 to 40 feet, these animals exert only a small fraction of a horsepower. Windmills of even crude or old-
fashioned design like those at Aden shown above can easily do same work driven by moderate breezes which blow in these areas. (Photos E. W. Golding)
17

Old device
in new garb
(Continued)
efforts. Life is inevitably harder in
the under-developed countries and
the help of machine power is even
more needed' power for water pump¬
ing, for cultivation, for corn-grinding
and food preparation, for lighting,
heating, refrigeration and for other
domestic and agricultural purposes.
Whence can this power come?
It could, of course, be imported, but
only at great cost. Electrical trans¬
mission from a distant power station
to supply a scattered population, is
likely to be matched in cost by that of
transporting oil for local diesel-driven
power stations. Maybe in the future,
though how distant no-one can say
with any certainly, relatively small
"packaged" nuclear power plants will
become available at an economic price
but even the smallest of these will
almost certainly be too large for use by
isolated communities. In any case, are
we to wait for many years before
attempting to develop these areas in
which water! the prime necessity*
quite often lies at no great depth in
the ground needing only some form of
power to pump it to the surface for
irrigation?
Search for power
The question naturally arises "Are
there any local sources of energy
which could be used instead of
attempting to bring in energy from
outside the area?" Often there are.
Abundant sunshine is a feature of
many desert areas and this can
be used for water heating, for the
distillation of saline waters, for
cooking and perhaps, later, for power
when the problem of building solar
engines at an economic price has been
solved. The fact that bright sunshine
in the desert supplies energy at the
rate of about one horse power for every
square yard certainly makes the idea
attractive.
The wind often blows strongly
enough to be used to produce power by
means of some form of windmill.
Very commonly during the daytime
there is a breeze of 15 miles an hour
(or even more) and we can easily
calculate, for example, that at that
speed the wind has a power of 20 horse
power passing through a vertical area,
10 yards square, which could be swept
by the revolving blades of a windmill.
Not all of this power in the wind can
be captured by the machine but if only
one tenth of it were extracted it would
be a very useful amount of power.
Aerodynamics helped
In eastern countries one frequently
sees water being lifted from wells
by a camel or a pair of bullocks
but, in raising some 600 or 700 gallons
Mr. Edward W>. GOLDING is head of the rural elec¬
trification and wind power department of Britain's
Electrical Research Association, London. He was res¬
ponsible for setting up the first British wind-powered
generating plant in the Orkney Islands. In 195/ he
went to Israel under Unesco's technical assistance pro¬
gramme to advise the government on the possibilities
of exploiting the country's wind resources. In 1954
he initiated a wind power survey m Haiti for the
World Meteorological Organization.
an hour from a depth of 30 or 40 feet
the animals are exerting, on the aver¬
age, a small fraction of a horse power.
A windmill of even a very crude design
could easily cope with this duty when
driven by the moderate breezes which
blow for several hours a day here.
During the last few years, encourag¬
ed by the rapid advances made during
the war in our knowledge of aerodyna¬
mics, several countries have been giv¬
ing much attention to the possibilities
of wind power and national committees
have been set up in England, France,
Denmark, India, Israel, Holland and
Spain. Present ideas go much beyond
the simple water-pumping windmills
and rather in the direction of generat-
ing electric power, on a significant
scale, from wind-driven generators.
These will probably take a somewhat
similar form to that of the small two-
bladed windmills used to charge an
electric battery for electric lighting in
country houses, but they will be much
larger.
The power in the wind is proportional
to the cube of the wind speed so that
if this is doubled the power is increased
eight times. It is thus very important
to choose the site for a wind power
plant very carefully. Hill-top sites are
best because of their good exposure
and, even if the main purpose is water
pumping, it may be well to instal the
machine on a nearby hill, and to
transmit the power to the pump elec¬
trically rather than to build it close to
the well where the wind speed may be
much lower. Any surplus electric
18-

Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
power from the machine can then be
used for other domestic or agricultural
purposes.
In general, the present wind power
researches aim at two main scales of
use. The first is large scale, with
wind-driven generators feeding their
output of electrical energy directly into
supply networks and so saving fuel
which would otherwise have to be
burnt in the power station to generate
this energy. Wherever there are ex¬
tensive electric power networks and
there is sufficient wind or high en¬
ough fuel costs to make their use
economic, these large machines could
play an important rôle.
For the desert areas with scattered
power domestic purposes; pump all the
water for domestic use and, besides,
could drive several water pumps, for
irrigation, each equivalent to the
efforts of a bullock team.
To give some figures, a suitably
designed and well-sited 10 kW windmill
could give an annual output of 15,000
to 20,000 units of electrical energy, each
unit of which is capable of pumping
about 5,000 gallons of water from a
depth of 50 feet. As for energy costs,
wind power compares favourably with
that from oil engines (which may cost
3d. to 4d. per unit for fuel alone in a
remote area) unless the wind speed is
very low. Usually, however, it has not
to compete with oil engines but with
Ingenious combined use of sun and wind
power provides salt in the Tripoli region of
the Lebanon. Wind energy harnessed"" by
simple windmills lifts sea water to evaporating
basins (sometimes several yards above sea
leyel) where solar energy completes the
operation, evaporating the water in each
basin in about two weeks. Modern windmills
(shown in column on left) reflect improved
knowledge in aero-dynamics applied to wind
energy research by many countries in search
of increased power supplies. (I) Two types
of German built windmills. (2) German
machine used for research in Britain. Gene¬
rator, located at top of supporting mast,
is driven by three-bladed propeller. Placed
at favourable sites, two or three machines
of this capacity could provide enough elec¬
tricity for a community of between 30 and
40 families. (3) French type wind-driven
generator. Blades of propeller are hollow.
In rotating they draw up air from bottom
of supporting tube, through air turbine at
its base, the air finally passing out of the
blade tip. Turbine drives electric generator.
X t
populations, the second scale, employ¬
ing machines from about 10 to 100
kilowatts in capacity, is likely to be
more applicable. Here there are no
widespread networks and wind power
must be used either alone or preferably
assisted by solar radiation to fulfil the
people's needs. It will be wise to use
these two sources of energy for pur¬
poses for which each is best suited, e.g.
the wind to produce motive power and
the sun to provide heat for water heat¬
ing and distillation and for cooking.
At least two wind power plants of
about 10 kW capacity are already
available and it is interesting to consid¬
er what amenities two or three of these
machines, installed on a favourable
site, could provide for a community of,
say, 30 or 40 families. They could, for
example, supply all the power needed
for lighting, fans, radio and small-
(I) Offlee Général des Eoliennts, Paris.
Í2. 3) Photos British Llectrical and Allied Industries
Research Asscciation.
WÊÊtKKKm
bullock power, and a team of 4 bullocks,
with 2 men working them, can raise,
in an hour, less than half the 5,000
gallons of water just mentioned. The
bullocks are expensive to buy; they
have a working life of only 5 or 6 years
and each consumes some 10 to 15 tons
of fodder a year.
It seems obvious, therefore, that the.
local resources of wind and sunshine
should be exploited. Three main re¬
quirements must be met in exploiting
them. Suitable machines must be built
at a low enough cost. They must be
installed at good sites to give maximum
outputs, and their operation must be
planned to make the fullest possible
use of this output.
Whether it be from wind power or
from solar radiation, the power supply
is not continuously available and to
store energy is expensive. Thus we
must arrange to use it as and when it
comes. Loads such as water pumping
or water heating, which have inherent
storage, must be used, keeping the
storage by electric batteries to a mi¬
nimum.
Wind, sun and animals
Machines are being developed by
engineering manufacturers in
several countries but their de¬
signs must be based on adequate data
from local observations. Sometimes
it may be possible for crude windmills,
sufficiently useful to serve as a start
in development, to be made from local
materials with, perhaps, reed or
bamboo mats for sails.
There is an urgent need for me¬
teorological data from these areas,
but it must be obtained in suitable
form for selected sites. We need
information on wind speeds throughout
the year, on the duration of calm
spells, on the daily occurrence of wind
and on sand storms and other local
conditions. Often a place with a low
average wind speed will be found to
have quite usable winds for some hours
in the daytime followed by calm
periods at night.
" A very important question which
calls for study and for trials under
practical conditions, is that of combin¬
ing the power resources' wind, sun
and animal power/ to fulfil all the
needs without storing the energy in
batteriestexcept perhaps a little for
electric lighting. Many purposes such
as irrigation pumping, and corn-grind¬
ing, can be served at any time but
power for lighting and heating is
needed at night while cooking must be
done by day.
Heat stored in blocks
There are many possibilities to be
considered as, for example, the
storage of heat in solid blocks, in
liquids or in melted crystals which give
up their latent heat upon solidifying
again; some agricultural loads can easi¬
ly be met as power becomes available,
while (if one dare mention it with re¬
ference to a desert area where it is so
important to conserve vegetable mat¬
ter) there is sometimes a little waste
material which could be used as fuel
for the small portable steam engines
which have been developed in Great
Britain. These engines can provide a
small amount of power to fill up the
gaps when there is neither wind nor
sunshine.
One can conclude that the energy
resources are often available to provide
for the needs of remote communities
capable of developing desert or semi-
desert areas. Suitable machines are
being built but what is now especially
needed is intelligent siting and instal¬
lation of these machines, and careful
planning for their combined use, with
guidance for the users until they grow
accustomed to the new ideas which are
involved.
19
