FLIGHT TO
GAZA
In 1948, refugees from Pa¬
lestine fled to the narrow
strip of coast, some 25 miles
long by three miles wide,
around the city of Gaza, thus
increasing its population from
90,000 to nearly 300,000.
The refugees were concen¬
trated ¡n nine camps made
up mostly of tents which
were eventually replaced
by cement brick buildings.
Gaza Beach Camp (right)
whose four-room houses are
built of cement bricks and
tiles makes a sharp contrast
with houses in the ancient
city of Gaza, left. (Photos :
UNRWA and UNESCO)

TAKE AWAY OUR RATIONS
BUT GIVE US SCHOOLS
by Felix Walter
Half a million children among the Arab refugees from
Palestine have been saved during the past four or five
years from illiteracy and almost total ignorance, as well
as from the despair that ignorance breeds. These early
emergency years are over and now an educational system
devised for the children of the refugees has been set up and
is in working order. This system might almost be described
as a "'Ministry of Education", though it is difficult to conceive
of a ministry that has heavy responsibilities without a shred
of real power and that performs its international task within
the framework of four different nations each with its own
educational system.
Certainly there are a number of genuine ministries of edu¬
cation in the world today which cater to the needs of fewer
pupils and dispose of smaller budgets. During the coming
school year this make-believe ""Ministry" or, to give it its real
name, the Education and Training Division of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency (unrwa) will be responsible
for the schooling of about 160,000 children of elementary
Felix Walter is Deputy Chief of the Educational and Training Division, United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees.
school age and of approximately 20,000 who will attend
secondary classes.
In addition it will provide education at the university level
for some 350 students and up-to-date vocational training for
about twice that number. It will be given about five million
dollars to do this job and will be expected to spend every cent
to the best advantage, for this money comes from the pockets
of the taxpayers of the United Nations.
The education of the Arab refugees has become a very large-
scale enterprise. Indeed nowhere in the world today is an
international organization embarked on an educational
project that approaches this particular one in scope and
magnitude. The United Nations have in fact been forced by
the Middle Eastern emergency to go in for school-mastering
on a mass scale, which is certainly something they never
contemplated in 1948 when the refugees first poured across
the borders of Palestine.
How is the job done? Technical guidance at the top comes
from a handful of educators who, when they are not trav¬
elling back and forth across the Arab countries
where the refugees live, do their administrative (Cont'd on
duties at the Unrwa Headquarters in Beirut. P°Se ,4)
liif*. .* ' t<L . 'J ...<ff"Ä nrr
BAKING BREAD in the Mia-Mla Camp near
Sidon, Lebanon, where over 3,000 refugees live
in tents or barracks. Bread is baked over the
fire on an iron shape which is called a "sage".
REFUGEE TRADERS in the camps deal in
anything from empty bottles, beads and bolts to
a handful of sugar. Here, ordinary economic
concepts have completely lost their meaning.
COLLECTING FIREWOOD, in the Yarmuk.
When the Yarmuk-Jordan Valley dam is built,
this now desolate land, may support more
than 150,000 refugees. (UNRWA photos)

GIVE US SCHOOLS
Good bill of health
Since the days of the first emergency in Palestine, when
nearly a million human beings were living on the verge
of starvation, the preservation of health and the preven¬
tion of disease among the refugees has been a major
activity of the U.N. and its Specialized Agencies. The
spread of infectious diseases had to be prevented, clean
water supplies provided and decent sanitary conditions
created In the camps. Malaria, to which many newcomers
to the Jordan Valley fell victim, had also to be combatted.
As a result of health programmes, no major epidemics
have broken out and health conditions in general have
improved. UNRWA maintains more than 80 clinics
which receive an average of half a million visits a month.
Photos, from left to right, show: Women's ward in
the Gaza T.B. clinic; youngsters waiting their turn at a
clean water supply point in one of the camps; a visitor
(not very reassured) to one of the mobile clinics which
sets out daily from the town of Tyre to call at mountain
villages ¡n Southern- Lebanon. (UNRWA photos)
10

Unesco Courier. N" 7. 1955
m
i
à Milk and a hot meal
Palestine Arab refugees being helped by UNRWA receive
food rations which provide a diet of approximately
1,500 calories dally in summer and slightly more In
winter. In many cases the refugees manage to supple¬
ment their rations by finding at least part-time or sea¬
sonal employment, but where this is impossible supple¬
mentary feeding centres play an important part in allev¬
iating hardship. A daily hot meal is served to refugees
certified as suffering from under-nourishment by their
UNRWA doctor. In addition to the monthly ration, a
daily cup of milk is given (left) to all children up to the
age of 15 and to expectant and nursing mothers. At
regular intervals surveys are carried out by World
Health Organization or Food and Agriculture Organiza¬
tion specialists to watch over the general trend of refugee
health. Simple education in nutrition and health is
given at the centres and also by social workers (adjoin¬
ing) who take an active part in village community
development projects. (UNRWA and UNESCO photos)
- A*
ii

GIVE US SCWiDOLS^<<>
\
V \
NEEDLEWOMEN. Embroi¬
dery centre (above) created by
UNRWA in I 950 includes train¬
ing in weaving, tailoring and
sewing. It has been so successful
that branches have been devel¬
oped in six camps. Altogether it
occupies six hundred refugees
from six to 30 years of age, and its
products are sold locally and in
other Arab states. Self help of
this kind has brought new life
to many thousand hands. Aim
of such programmes has been
to fight the demoralizing effects
of years of camp life, ration lines
and unemployment with self
help instead of relief. Left, a
six -year old refugee girl learns
to embroider. (UNRWA photos)
12

Unesco Courier. N" 7. 1955
SHOEMAKERS : Shoe-
making is one of the oc¬
cupational skills in which
training is given in camp
fundamental education
centres. At first, refu¬
gees learned to make
shoes for their own use,
then for each other. Then
as the centre began to be¬
come known, orders came
from outside the camp.
(UNRWA photo)
SKILLED WORKERS: In co-operation with the Egyptian Govern¬
ment, a modern vocational training centre (photo left) has been set
up by UNRWA for Arab refugees in the Gaza coastal strip. At
present, over 170 boys are following specialized training courses
lasting two years in electricity, woodwork, fitting, blacksmithing
and sheet metal work. The centre has completely modern equip¬
ment and possesses a football ground and an Olympic track. Above
students are taking the electric welding course. (UNRWA photos)
13

GIVE US
SCHOOLS
A teacher is worth
his weight in gold )*jtifcil
(Continued from page 9)
Their present head is a Dutch educator who has been all
his life a student of Arabic and the ways of Islam and who
was for some years Minister of Education in Indonesia. He is
assisted on the purely educational side by a Canadian deputy,
by a Jordanian Educational Consultant who was twice
Minister of Education in his own country and by a Consul¬
tant for Fundamental Education who is a Moslem from India.
On the vocational training side his advisers are a Scottish
deputy and an Anglo-Irish consultant. Two educational
assistants, one an Arab and one an Armenian (whom fate
has made a double refugee!) complete the Headquarters staff
which though small does at least include two real Ex-Minis¬
ters of Education.
Most of this Headquarters staff is either recruited by
Unesco or seconded from the personnel of that organization,
for it is Unesco's responsibility to provide both technicians
and technical guidance. On the other hand, the money that
pays for the area staffs, including a corps of teachers over
2,600 strong, and the money that pays for school buildings
and for school supplies comes from Unrwa funds.
This small Headquarters staff is fully occupied with the
formulation of policy, with the compilation of statistical data,
with wrestling with budget officials. as is the lot of educa¬
tion officers everywhere and with liaison with international
organizations and with the educational systems of what are
called "the host countries". At the next level, that is to say
in each of the four host countries, the elaborate educational
machine is watched over by a field education officer.
One of these officials supervises, from the Unrwa sub-
headquarters on Mount Scopus in Arab Jerusalem, the school
system which caters to the children of the close on half a
million refugees in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. His
sector includes the sprawling camp schools of the lower
Jordan Valley, where summer heat is so intense that the
school year has to be cut short in May. It includes also the
trim new stone buildings the Agency has erected beside the
rock-bound refugee camps of Samaria and Judea as well as
the crowded classes packed tightly into rented buildings in
Amman and the Old City of Jerusalem.
Inspectors on horseback
His colleague in Gaza has a much more compact school
system to administer but it is a populous one too with
the children of nearly a quarter of a million refugees.
Finally, in Beirut and Damascus respectively, two other Field
Education Officers cater to the children of the two hundred
thousand refugees which Lebanon and Syria shelter between
them. There are fewer big camps here and inspecting schools
in the remote hill-country villages, in Syria particularly, may
often entail a long trip by Land Rover or on horseback.
In each host country care is taken to adhere closely but not
slavishly to the local curriculum. This entails the use of the
same text-books as are used in the local government schools.
Such a policy makes it easy for pupils attending Unrwa-
Unesco schools to sit for Government examinations and has
the further merit of lessening the gap between refugee and
local population. .
Visitors to the area often ask where all the teachers come
from. The answer is that the refugees were lucky in one
thing, namely that they came from a country which enjoyed
a relatively high standard of education. It was natural
therefore that in the long, straggling columns that fled north
and east and south in the summer of 1948, there should have
been a high proportion of school inspectors and headmasters
and teachers of every grade as Well as farmers and artisans
and the semi-nomad Bedouins.
These teachers from Old Palestine still play an important
part in the Unrwa-Unesco educational system, though their
number is being increasingly diluted by younger teachers who
never saw service in the schools of Mandatory Palestine and
whose only training has been acquired in the hard school of
experience and in brief summer refresher courses.
The Arab refugee teachers have done a heroic task, often
working under the most unfavourable conditions for long
hours and low pay. Even the new and improved scale which
is about to be introduced will only provide a minimum
monthly salary of about $45 a month with a maximum rising
to about three times that amount. The fact is that food and
14
PLANTING TREES to anchor moving sand dunes is a job in which children
can help. Here, youngsters in one of the refugee camps join rest of
population in executing one phase of the battle against encroaching sands.
onelter and medical care had first claims on available funds.
Mention of the gallant corps of Unrwa-Unesco teachers
leads directly to another question that is often asked. What
is the level and quality of the education that is imparted to
the children of the Arab refugees?
Now the quality of teaching depends directly on the quality
of the teachers themselves, and if some of these are now
rather old-fashioned and out-of-date and others largely raw
and untrained that quality is not going to be of the highest
order. But the correct answer to the question of quality
probably is that Unrwa-Unesco education is not nearly as
good as those responsible for it would like it to be and not
nearly as bad as some detractors make out.
It can certainly stand comparison with the kind of educa¬
tion that the largely underdeveloped host countries are able
to afford, though these countries are constantly straining to
improve their standards.
Still it would be folly for those responsible to the United
Nations and to the conscience of the world to rest on these
dubious laurels. The improvement of methods of teaching
and of the general quality of education is the foremost goal
of the five-year plan for education on which the Agency is
now embarking. Ways must be found of humanizing the
educational process, of rendering it less solemn and less
static, of substituting the careful development of the indivi¬
dual intelligence for the excessive reliance on memory and
AN ACCIDENT? No! Just a scene from a play written, produced and
acted by young men in one of the refugee centres. Over 30,000 persons
make regular use of the welfare centres now set up. (UNRWA photos)

Unesco Courier. N° 7. 1955
TENT MAKING is now an industry run on modern lines at the Ghor
Nimrin factory near Jericho, where over 1,000 tents are produced each
month. This factory has become the sole supplier of tents to UNRWA.
memorizing. The teaching of the Arabic mother tongue must
be streamlined so that it is made even more effective while ¡
using up fewer of the- precious hours of the syllabus than it
does at present. Foreign languages, mathematics, the natur¬
al sciences, history, geography, can be taught much better.
As a first step in a much needed reform two experimental
teacher training centres, staffed by a selected group of inter¬
national experts, will open their doors this autumn, one in
Jerusalem for men teachers and one in Nabius for women.
These will be followed a year hence by full scale teacher
training centres in all or a majority of the host countries.
From these training centres in the next few years will
come not only a stream of teachers to fill the gaps in the
Unrwa-Unesco schools and to raise the level of the teaching
there, but also sizable quantities of teachers for export.
A good teacher is worth his weight in gold anywhere in the
Arabic-speaking region that stretches from Libya to the
Persian Gulf and from the Taurus Mountains to the Red Sea
and beyond. Some of the oil-rich, education-hungry Arab
lands put a high premium on their services and the trek of
Palestinian teachers to Kuwait, Qater, Bahrein and Saudi-
Arabia is not a new phenomenon.
Even more ambitious than the teacher training programme
are the plans for the development of vocational
and agricultural training. Modern vocational (Cont'd on
training centres are costly to build and costlier next page)
CIGARETTE PRODUCTION shot up at this Jordan factory after it
received loans from the Jordan Development Bank (80% UNRWA financed)
in return for giving increased employment to refugees. (UNRWA photos)
NEW GAME for an Arab refugee. This Bedouin is learning to play ping-
pong at one of the fundamental education centres. In 23 welfare centres
recreational programmes are organized for adult and child refugees.
FREE TIME poses a problemhow to break the monotony and drabness
of camp life ? UNRWA's Welfare Division answers it by providing sports
facilities, libraries and club rooms. Here, boys play a game of dominoes.
15

GIVE US
SCHOOLS
(Continued)
SINAI PROJECT
one of UNRWA's
exploration and de¬
velopment activities
involved a topogra¬
phical survey of
230,000 acres, from
which 50,000 were
selected for irrigation
by Nile water syphon¬
ed beneath the Suez
Canal. Left, engin¬
eers study course of
future irrigation chan¬
nel. In background
is the Suez Canal.
(UNRWA photo)
to equip but they provide the
obvious and sensible alternative
to the over-developed thirst for
secondary education of the purely
academic type which is so pre¬
valent throughout the Middle
East. They are also the best
gamble for genuine rehabilitation in a region rapidly becom¬
ing industrialized.
The existing vocational training centres at Kalandia near
Jerusalem and at Gaza are likely to be supplemented within
the next twelve months by new centres in Lebanon and
possibly in Syria as well. In addition, a first agricultural
training centre is now being built in Gaza and others should
follow it in the Jordan Valley, where very special agricultural
conditions prevail, and again in Lebanon and Syria.
These agricultural training centres will not endeavour to
produce agronomists on the university level but rather agri¬
cultural leaders for present, and future communities. The
graduates of both these types of centre,.the skilled tradesmen
as well as the agriculturalists, have, like their colleagues the
teachers, a high and constant export value. Money invested
in them will be money well spent.
Some day, somehow, the politicians will have to sit down
and solve the problem of the Arab refugees from Palestine.
This is not the concern of educators and they can be thankful
that it is not. It is their particular task to equip the rising
generation to face life in the modern world, whether that life
is destined to be lived within or without the borders of their
former homeland.
There are really few sights more inspiring than a packed
class of black-eyed Arab school children almost literally
exploding in their eagerness to answer a question. Just as
touching is the faith of the parents in their schools and in
education generally. On more than one occasion, when they
feared a curtailment of the programme, protesters among the
refugees have used the slogan "take away our rations but
give us the schools we need for our children". The astonish¬
ing thing is that the people who coined this slogan and who
use it really mean it.
NEW FARM-
LANDS opened up
by using the waters
of the Yarmuk and
the Jordan is another
UNRWA project.
Irrigation from these
( sources should enable
between 1 00,000 and
I 50,000 more people
to gain a livelihood in
this area. Here, flow
water is measured at
the Maqarin dam site
on the Yarmuk river.
(UNRWA photo)
MAGNA CUM IAUDE STUDENTS
FROM ARAB REFUGEE TENTS
In 1951 a small number of Arab refugee students
enrolled in two or three of the better-known
universities of the Middle East were able to
continue their studies with Unesco aid. When
unrwa assumed financial responsibility for refugee
students in 1953, it was decided to make free uni¬
versity study available to the deserving few on a
percentage basis. It was calculated that five
percent of the pupils graduating from unrwa-
unesco elementary schools could reasonably hope
to receive a secondary education and that a further
five percent of these should be given an opportunity
of going on to the university.
Last year some three hundred students were
enrolled in the universities of Egypt, Syria and
Lebanon as wards of the United Nations and next
year this figure is likely to rise to about three
hundred and fifty.
An unrwa scholarship candidate must not only
have an above-average school record and continue
to get above-average marks throughout his uni¬
versity career, he must also be someone who seems
likely to attain real distinction in his chosen
profession, and who will, in effect, be a future
leader and mainstay in the whole community of
Palestinian Arabs.
Many Middle East universities, particularly in
Egypt, remit all fees for students who consistently
get very high marks. So every year unrwa Uni¬
versity Scholarships Project funds receive an un-
budgeted windfall of fees which its more disting¬
uished students do not have to pay.
Selection also includes a very necessary means
test. Funds provided by many nations for the
rehabilitation of the Arab refugees from Palestine
cannot in fairness be used to support a student at
the university if that student's family can possibly
find the money. All scholarship candidates must
therefore De rationed refugees, and most of them
come from the refugee camps where the economic
level is little if anything above total indigence.
.There is one further fence to jump before, a
candidate for an unrwa scholarship is finally
selected. He or she must choose studies which are
likely to lead to useful and remunerative employ¬
ment after graduation. Agriculture, Commerce,
Public Administration, Medicine, Dentistry, En¬
gineering .in all its branches, and, in the case of
future teachers, the Arts and Sciences these are
courses of study that are likely to be approved.
Once chosen, a refugee scholarship holder is
transported free of charge to the university that
has been selected, if necessary in the blue and white
United Nations plane that usually carries -unrwa
officials to and fro on their missions. His fees are
paid, he receives the text-books and instruments he
requires and an adequate, though spartan, allowance
for board and lodging and other incidentals. This
is, in fact, more than some of the countries in this
area give their government-sponsored scholarship
students.
This summer the first substantial number of
unrwa aided Arab refugee scholarship holders
graduated from universities in the Middle East.
They come from the state-supported institutions in
Cairo, Alexandria and Damascus, or from the French
or American foundations in Egypt and Lebanon.
These young men and women no longer sit in tents
in grim refugee camps. They are alert and
confident. They have mastered a calling and stand
on the threshold of their professional careers. In
the jargon of the relief specialists, they have been
"rehabilitated" and will now be privileged to serve
their fellow Arabs not only in the lands where their
Palestinian brethren have taken refuge but
throughout the Middle East.
16
