Schopenhauer's definition of wo¬
man as a creature with a good
head of hair but very little
brain has probably made its author
known to more people than all the
rest of his philosophy put together.
It is still remembered whereas
Schopenhauer's philosophy is half
forgotten and women have long
since cut off much of their hair.
In all countries and down the
centuries men have been unsparing
in their mordant opinions on the
mothers of the human race. Soc¬
rates in ancient Greece, described
woman as the source of all evil.
"Her love", he said "is more to be
feared than the hatred of man".
And at just about the same period
the Buddhists were even more
categorical. "Woman is a creature
who looks like an angel, but who is
a devil at heart", they declared.
Now what was to be done with
such a fundamentally bad nature except
try to subdue it? As the innocent
victims of these furies, men were well
placed for the task they made and
enforced the laws. So down the years
they wrote books, drew up laws and
found ways of keeping women in a
continuing state of mental childishness.
To convince women that this was
right was another matter. So men set
down their arguments in books on
education, and even a glance at these
reveals such a wealth of unflattering
remarks on womankind that it is
difficult to know which to choose. A
typical one taken from Orma Daigaku,
a famous Japanese book on education
written in the 17th century, proclaims
"such is the stupidity of woman that

FIVE-STAR FIGURES
FROM THE PAST
Little-known artists from East and West
by Gabrielle Cabrini
'Les feuilles', a work by Seraphine de Senlis, a French
charwoman turned painter. Her paintings are now
prized possessions of art galleries all over the world.
she should be continually on guard
against herself".
Women, however, were just as intent
on escaping from this state of affairs
as men were in maintaining it. As soon
as tradition no longer systematically
excluded them from civic, political and
artistic life, they showed their capaci¬
ties as rulers (the queens and woman
regents in Europe during the 16th cen¬
tury provide striking proof of this),
writers and talented artists. Let us
single out a few women from different
continents who as writers and artists
won honoured places in these fields of
human achievement.
There is hardly any need to mention
the Greek poetess, Sappho, whose
genius has already been so much ex¬
tolled. Such was her fame that her
odes, translated into the language of
the Pharaohs, have been unearthed by
archaeologists in Egypt. Swin¬
burne described her as the
greatest poet in the absolute
sense of that term.
Less well known is Ts'ai Yen
who lived in China at the end
of the Hun dynasty, a period
which shone so brilliantly dur¬
ing the' last centuries before
the Christian era. Her father,
Ts'ai Yong, a high official,
brought her up amid all the
material and spiritual refine¬
ments of that period. She
was widowed at a very early
age, and then her life was
completely disrupted at the
end of the Second Century A.D.
by the invasion of the Huns,
who under the command of
Attila, were to threaten the
total destruction of Roman
civilization.
The Huns dragged her away
with them beyond the Great
Wall built for the defence of
the Empire. For twelve years
she was a slave, but during her
captivity she wrote one of the
most celebrated and moving
works in Chinese poetry:
"Eighteen measures sung to
Gabrielle CABRINI is a French writer
and philologist and was formerly attached
to the Cultural Affairs Department of the
French Foreign Ministry. She has written
several books, including La Résurrection des
Morts.
the sound of the Hun's trumpet". In
it she captures the wild desolation of
the barbarian camps, where every¬
thing was strange and foreign to this
refined and captive woman: "I no lon¬
ger have anyone in the world except
these unbridled hordes who force me
to follow them to the ends of the
earth. The road back is barred to me
by mountain peaks crowned with
clouds. There is only the swirling sand
whipped up by the desert -wind."
Nothing could calm Ts'ai Yen's des¬
pair. Everything about her masters
irritated her ; their savagery, their
tents, their chariots, their endless
herds, their food. Her hope had one
lodestar: the huge Wall behind which
lay the world that had once been hers.
They gave her a husband: a warrior
Hun. She bore him two children,
whom she nurtured and loved, for
though they were the children of a
barbarian, they were nevertheless of
her own flesh and blood; but there was
no peace in her heart.
Nor can my soul forget
Eventually the Emperor's envoys
ransomed her; the war was over;
Ts'ai Yen could return to her own
people. But then arose a conflict in
her soul that was never to be stilled:
On the one side, China; on the other,
the children her children.
After being torn with anguish by the
memory of her native land, she was
now tortured by the thought of her
children with the barbarians. "My
children and myself at opposite ends of
the world! Like the setting sun and
the rising moon, watching each other
from afar, and never drawing near to
one another". Her mother's heart
never again found peace, "for", she
said, "no river returns to its source, nor
can my soul forget".
Whereas Ts'ai Yen's life was convulsed
by war and its tragic effects, Murasaki-
no-Shikibu, author of that masterpiece
of classical Japanese literature, Genji
Monogatar (The Story of Prince Genji),
lived at the close of one of the most
brilliant and civilized cen-
turies in the cultural his- ' ont
tory of Japan. This period, next P°Se)
39

FIVE-STAR FIGURES
(Continued)
deeply influenced by Chinese and
Korean culture, but already steeped in
a specifically Japanese atmosphere, was
known as the Heian era, and saw the
birth of Kyoto, "The city of peace".
It was about the year 1004 that
Murasaki-no-Shikibu, widow of a high
official of the Court and lady-in-wait¬
ing to the Empress, finished writing her
long novel, which, in fifty-four chapters
(the complete English translation runs
to six large volumes), describes the life
of two generations: that of Prince
Genji, an imaginary character, and
that of his son Kaoru. Although, dur¬
ing those times, many women writers
were famed in Japan, and still are,
Murasaki is outstanding because she
started a new fashion by substituting
for the legendary tale with its marvels,
a romantic-realist novel, which reflect¬
ed the life of that epoch.
Like the characters of Proust, to
which those of the Japanese writer's
great novel have often been compared,
all her personages are imaginary, but
they are so true to life that a whole
civilization is reflected in them, and
they remain an inexhaustible source for
the study of an ultra-civilized society
on the verge of decline.
It is significant that the first two
great psychological novels of Japan and
of the West alike, should have been
written by women: Murasaki's The
Story of Prince Genji and Mme de La
Fayette's The Princess of Cleves. The
first inaugurated, in an admirable
literary style, the long psychological
tale; the second created the concisely
written psychological novel, in which
there is not a superfluous word. Ma¬
dame de La Fayette, also lived in the
centre of a refined and cultured world,
where women were not excluded from
the intellectual pursuits of men. She
was the friend of the philosophers,
poets and scientists of her age and
lady-in-waiting to Louis XIV's sister-
in-law.
The candid princess
She wrote a book which was, and still
is, a perfect example of the style
she created. The story is a simple
one: the young and beautiful Princess
of Cleves respects but does not love her
husband; she loves, and is loved by, the
Prince of Nemours. Out of loyalty, she
tells her husband, thereby destroying
his peace of mind for ever. Three cent¬
uries have passed since The Princess of
Cleves was written; and the moralists
still cannot agree whether the princess
should or should not have told her
husband...
In the same century, while Mme de
La Fayette was launching the psycholo¬
gical novel upon the Western World,
there lived in New Spain in Mexico
one of the most extraordinary figures,
not only of Latin America but of the
intellectual history of any age: Sister
Juana Inés de la Cruz.
Born in 1651, when the Spanish Em¬
pire revived by the New World, was
passing through its most brilliant
period, Sister Juana, even from the age
of four, burned with the desire to learn.
The range of her knowledge she was
musician, poetess and mathematician'
soon astonished and almost alarmed
her friends, her teachers, and the
scientists. She was familiar with every
branch of study. She read, wrote, car¬
ried out scientific research and compos¬
ed poems which gave her a unique
place not only in the literature of the
colonial period but in the history of
literature in general.
But the world could not satisfy her
longing for the absolute; she entered a
convent, still consumed by her thirst
for knowledge. Then, one day, she sold
her library of four thousand volumes
and her jewels, gave the proceeds away
as alms, and spent the rest of her life
caring for the victims of disease. She
died at the age of forty-four, from a
plague contracted at the sick-bed, just
when Spanish Mexico was entering
upon its decline.
There are so many other illustrious
women about whom one could speak
for whenever women have lived in an
atmosphere favourable to the develop¬
ment of intellectual talents, they have
produced great works. Perhaps the
best proof of this rule is offered by one
of the exceptions to it in this case a
woman painter.
Séraphine Louis, known as Séraphine
de Senlis, was a charwoman. She was
born in 1864, in the French village of
Assy, and as a girl minded cattle.
When still very young, she came to
Senlis, the small, austere town in the
Ile-de-France, whose name she was
later to be given. Séraphine spent her
time washing dishes, sweeping and
polishing floors. At the end of the
XlXth century life was far from easy
for those who worked as hired labour.
Séraphine lived a wretched existence.
One day, she began to paint. She, who
had never held anything but a broom
in her hands, handled the paint-brush
with ease.
The charwoman-painter
She painted flowers, fruit extraord¬
inary flowers and fruit. By a
process which she kept secret, she
mixed her colours in such a way as to
give them a richness and brilliance
which astound those who today visit
modern art museums where her works
are hung. Her neighbours, fellow-
workers and employers made fun of
her, but she shut herself in her room
and painted.
One day she decided to do nothing
but paint, come what might. A Ger¬
man art critic, Wilhelm Uhde, who
organized the first exhibition of Le
Douanier Rousseau, discovered her,
helped her and provided her with
paints. Séraphine, although now an
old woman, overcame with what
amounted almost to a frenzy, the
obstacles created by her ignorance.
But one day her mind gave way. She
was finally placed in an asylum at
Clermont-Ferrand, where she died four
years later (in 1934), destitute and
forgotten by the world. Today, art
galleries in all parts of the world are
proud to possess a "Séraphine dé
Senlis".
