32

Unesco Courier. N" 10. 1955
U. N. STAMPS
FROM MANY
LANDS
Over forty countries
have issued special com¬
memorative stamps in
honour of the U.N. or
its Agencies. On these
pages a selection of some
of these are published.
Upper left-hand corner
shows the latest stamp
issued by U.N. itself to
commemorate I Oth an¬
niversary of its creation.
33

We the peoples of the United Nations
(Continued)

Unesco Courier. N" 10. 1955
POSTMARKED UNITED
NATIONS. NEW YORK'
In 1951, stamps for world-wide circulation were produced
for the first time by an organization of nations whose
aims and ideas for world peace and security are expressed
in the Charter of the United Nations. Prior to this, the right
to issue stamps had been restricted to governments, though
it is true that some international organizations had arranged
with their host governments to use national stamps on which
they had been identified in the design or with a surcharge.
The stamps issued on United Nations Day, 1951 by the newly
set up United Nations Postal Administration sought to stress
the international personality of the U.N. and to serve as
miniature posters displaying its aims and activities on mil¬
lions of letters and packets sent from headquarters and cir¬
culating around the world. Since then, millions of stamp col¬
lectors of all ages and nationalities have added these stamps to
their collection and have become familiar with the work of
the U.N. and its Specialized Agencies. The stamps have be¬
come an important source of revenue to the U.N. over
$1,300,000 gross in just under three years. Their educational
value has been acknowledged and a group known as United
Nations Stamps Clubs exists which publishes its own bulletin,
"The Globe Trotter". Nowadays when general stamp collect¬
ing has become too costly a hobby, collectors have to specialize
on a few countries or perhaps a single continent. Many have
begun to collect stamps, envelopes and postal cancellations
linked with the U.N. such as the special commemorative
stamps issued by different countries in honour of the Orga¬
nization and its Specialized Agencies. By the end of 1952
more than 40 countries had issued such stamps.
35
