Strange tales from
the puppet world
Puppets were once as famous and
popular in the Western world as Mickey
Mouse is today. In Greece "string-
pullers" jogged along the roads to
entertain the populations of Athens,
Sparta and Thebes offering real mario¬
nette shows. Xenophon, in the 5th
century B.C., tells the story of a Syra-
cusan who earned his living at Athens
with puppet shows, and relates how the
man was called in to divert the guests
at a famous banquet given by the great
statesman Callias. At one period a
puppeteer was permitted to play at the
Theatre of Dionysius where the greai
tragedies of Euripedes had formerly
been staged. Antioch, King of Syria,
had a puppet theatre in his palace and
even manipulated the dolls himself.
What's the difference between a ma¬
rionette and a puppet? In English,
puppet is a much older word, coming
from the Latin pupa for "doll" or
"girl" or "little creature". It's been
spelled poupette, poppit and -poppet.
Shakespeare speaks of it many times,
and as the story goes, he may have
written "A Midsummer Night's Dream"
and "Julius Caesar" with puppets in
mind. In his day a puppet show was
called a motion. Today the general
word for animated figures is puppet,
which may be operated from below,
from the plane of action, or from above,
with sticks, rods, strings or wires.
Puppeteers refer to hand (or glove)
puppets, finger puppets, rod puppets, or
string puppets. There are other types
such as the shadow plays, the lever-
operated Japanese puppets and "'jigging
puppets", a popular street entertain¬
ment for centuries in which a string
passed horizontally through the breast
of one or two figures to the performer's
knee. Marionette is the preferred word
today for string or wire puppets, and is
a relative newcomer to English.
Legend has it that in the early days
of the Renaissance the name mario¬
nette was affectionately given to the
little articulated Images of the Virgin
Mary. The word is of Italian-French
origin, and a mariolette was a "little
little Mary". The early Christians used
the dolls to teach the new religion.
.Later in mystery, miracle and passion
plays jointed figures of madonnas,
saints, angels and demons were used in
church festivals. The church banned
the practice in a 16th century edict.
H It is a matter of opinion whether
these religious figures used during the
Middle Ages and also up to compara
tively modern times could justly be
called true puppets. The same is true
of today's Giant Figures of animal effi¬
gies, inflated rubber figures in human
shape and awe-inspiring dragons car¬
ried in street processions.
In Europe the puppet theatre is re¬
garded as part of the folk art and tra¬
dition of each country and is respected
as such. Up to the end of the 19th
century, the travelling puppet theatres
were regular visitors to country fairs
and remote villages throughout western
Europe. Their performances were
usually crude and sometimes vulgar
but they carried the drama to places
where even the strolling players never
ventured. Puppet shows were essen¬
tially the drama of the people and
preserved, often for centuries, age-old
dramatic types and popular legends.
In the past, puppet showmen were
usually simple, unlettered men who
earned a meagre livelihood enacting
what their fathers had taught them.
The chivalric romances, for example,
have been enacted from medieval times
on as puppet plays in Sicily, southern
Italy, northern France and Belgium.
The noble paladins of the Crusades,
Charlemagne, Roland, the four sons of
These airy plastic marionette toys are
from a kit (above) designed by American
art teacher Mildred Osgood especially
for children. Puppet (adjoining photo)
is a weatherman giving instruction to
dancing flowers. His ears, eyelids,
eyebrows and mouth move. Today a
great puppet revival is sweeping Amer¬
ica and England with help of schools and
TV. Puppets are being shown, talked
and written about as never before.
(Courtesy Craft Horizons, USA.)
50

Unesco Courier. Nr 3-4 1955
TOY KNIGHTS IN ARMOUR. Seven centuries separate medieval marionettes (left) in 12th century illuminated manuscript (now
destroyed) of Strasbourg Library from I 9th century Sicilian puppet. (Photos ATP Museum Paris; Sicilian Ethnographic Museum-G. Pitre.)
Aymon and many others have battled
incessantly in their richly decorated
suits of armour, their flowery plumed
helmets and their capes of brightly-
coloured fabrics. Most of these puppets
are both heavy and large (three to five
feet tall) and are operated by two iron
rods attached to the head or to the
wooden shoulder piece as well as
strings. They must be strong and
durable to carry their elaborate armour
and heavy swords. Until recently they
could also be seen in New York when
"Orlando Furioso" was presented in
Sicilian dialect with some 400 puppets
each weighing nearly 100 pounds. The
medieval knights fought so hard that
the floor boards of the stage had to be
renewed every two weeks. They per¬
formed for two hours or more every
night and the complete cycle of the
play lasted 13 months!
Bible stories were an important
feature of puppet theatres in France
for many years, in the pre-Revolution
days of Paris and especially in Aix-en-
Provence, Marseille, Nice and Besançon
during the last two centuries. At
Christmas time the little theatres
showed the rising Star of Bethlehem,
the journey of the Three Wise Men and
the Nativity. No one minded when the
Wise Men arrived by rail or a salvo of
cannon shots greeted the birth of Jesus.
Similar crib plays are still enacted in
Poland today, and were the first type
of puppetry to be shown in England.
Puppets were so popular in England
in Shakespeare's day that it is said that
actors protested against them for
taking customers away from the regu¬
lar theatres. When the English Parlia¬
ment closed the regular theatres in
1642, at the start of the Civil War,
puppet shows had their heyday. They
fell heir to the wealth of plays that had
been barred from the stage, and some
of the former actors began speaking
their lines under the direction of
puppet masters.
Charles the Second of England ap¬
pears to have been a keen puppet fan.
Samuel Pepys also noted that the
King's mistress, Lady Castlemaine,
created a traffic block and attracted a
large crowd when she visited the pup¬
pet theatre. Oliver Goldsmith, so
Boswell says, almost broke a leg once
trying to prove, he could jump over a
broomstick as gracefully as a puppet.
At certain periods the puppet has
been admired for its mechanism rather
than for its dramatic qualities. Its
SCHOOL PUPPETRY is a rapidly developing subject In schools around the globe. It has been widely adopted for its educational value
and as a means of creative expression. Right, children put on a puppet show at Unesco's education centre in Cha-Choeng-Sao Thailand.
Left, youngsters in a New York elementary school give a performance with simple class-made rod puppets. (Unesco photos)
51

DEATH THE FIDDLER plays for Lady in
White two ghostly Dutch puppet characters.
£AA
ABDULAY THE SUDANESE, a leading per¬
sonality in the puppet shows of the French Sudan.




Strange tales from
the puppet world
(Continued)
movements were regarded as a sort of
conjuring trick and the secret of its
construction was jealously guarded.
This aspect of puppetry was probably
first highly developed by the Italians
in the Fantoccini of the late 18th cen¬
tury. It was advanced by the English
showman, Thomas Holden and is fur¬
ther developed today in several coun¬
tries especially Italy and Britain.
Among the favourite tricks are the
"dissecting skeleton" whose bones gra¬
dually float apart and dance separately
all over the stage and then reunite, and
a figure whose arms, legs, head and
trunk fly apart, each becoming a sepa¬
rate puppet.
Hernando Cortez had a puppeteer
along with him when he set off in 1524
from Mexico City for Honduras in
search of gold. The chronicler of his
expedition, Bernai Diaz del Castillo,
noted in his diary that Cortez had
"five players on the oboe, sackbut and
THE MAGIC FLUTE, Mozart's opera presen¬
ted by Salzburg Marionette Theatre, Austria.
52
dulcimer, and an acrobat and another
who did sleight-of-hand and worked
puppets." According to the same chro¬
nicler, the Aztec Indians of Mexico
understood conjuring and working pup¬
pets, ("saben jugar de mano y hazer
titeres"). American Indians in the
Southwest United States and Northwest
Pacific coast of Canada produced reli¬
gious puppets before the arrival of
white men. Puppets have also been
found in the Pacific Islands of Hawaii
and in Easter Island.
Charles Dickens who was interested
in everything having to do with the
theatre failed to see a puppet show in
America during a visit. Arriving in
New York in 1842, he wrote: "But how
quiet the streets are!... Are there no
Punches, Fantoccini?... No, not one."
He apparently didn't look hard enough.
Punch had arrived in Philadelphia
exactly 100 years before.
During the Manchu Dynasty in
China, high-born women were not per¬
mitted to go out to the theatre. Sha
dow figures were brought to homes
and courtyards for these women, but
ordinary folk saw the heroic legends
and historical tales performed in rural
market places and country fairs. To
this day, the centre of the art of
shadow figures is not in the large cities
but in the little country districts and
small towns. So common is the affec¬
tion for shadows in China that modern
motion pictures are called "electric
shadows".
In Mexico, the Ministry of Educa¬
tion has a puppetry programme for
mass education of the people. In
March 1945 the Ministry launched its
campaign to stamp out illiteracy and
called in two of the nation's most
famous puppeteers, Roberto Lago and
Lola Cueto. They built a special thea¬
tre mounted on a lorry and travelled
to public squares and parks in towns
and villages. During one tour through
the state of Oaxaca, the puppets played
to more than 10,000 people. A special
puppet celebration was given in the
village of Soledad de Etla when it
was first to reach 100 per cent literacy.
A survey conducted on puppetry in
American schools and colleges in 1941
revealed that 35 institutions offered
accredited courses and many had been
doing so for ten years or more. Great¬
est number was given in art depart¬
ments; some appeared in education,
English, foreign language and speech
departments. Puppetry was found to
be faring better in colleges than in ele¬
mentary schools since it was treated
as a subject to be studied not only for
itself but as an enrichment of other
courses.
In the old French and English fairs
puppets were used as advertising de
vices. Spectacular shows have been
presented in modern times at interna¬
tional expositions. At the New York
World's Fair in 1939, puppets told the
story of refrigeration in a series of
dramatic episodes from prehistoric
times when man dragged his meat into
cool caves to preserve it to modern
electric refrigerators. One of Ameri¬
ca's greatest puppeteers, Remo Búfano,
told the story of pharmacy with his
huge marionettes in a trjly specta¬
cular show-

Unesco Courier. Nr 3-4. 1955
SILK WEAVER FROM LYONS
In I790's, Laurent Mourguet, silk weaver
from Lyons, created new world of puppets
with Guignol who become most famous
hero after Punch. Prankish Guignol (right
with Gendarme) was soon joined by wife,
Madelon, Gnafron the winebibber (above)
and host of local peasant characters (below).
Today Guignol Is common French word
for Punch shows. (Photo ATP Museum).
PEASANT FROM PICARDY
If Lyons gave all France Guignol other
regions created their own provincial
puppets which have remained famous.
Amiens produced the peasant buffoon
Lafleur (below) who spoke in strong
Picardy dialect, Lille in the north, created
Long Nez (Long Nose), above, and a host
of other rascals. (Photos ATP Museum.)
53

Brazil's mamolengo
One of Brazil's most colourful puppeteers was an old vendor of natural
flower oils at Pernambuco fairs. Nicknamed "Cheiroso" (the perfumed
one) he delighted audiences until his death recently with his one-man
shows In the public squares and sometimes in schools and private homes.
Above, he puts on quick "mamolengo" or puppet show for group of
children friends. Left, some of his carved finger puppets. Puppetry
has developed widely ¡n Brazil in past ten years under impetus of Brazil's
Pestalozzi Society, Olga Obry and others. Portuguese and Brazilian
plays based on country's rich folklore and music are aimed at adult
public in Rio and other large cities. (Photos copyright Verger-Adep)
A FEW BOOKS ON PUPPETRY
A large literature on puppetry exists today in many
languages. For a bibliography, see Grace G. Ransome,
Puppets and Shadows, A Bibliography (1931). The
history of puppets was written by Charles Magnin in
1852 : Histoires des marionnettes en Europe. Helen H.
Joseph's A Book of Marionettes (1931) is a good general
history in English. Other general books worth con¬
sulting: Cyril Beaumont's pictorial survey Puppets and
the Puppet Stage (1938) ; Puppetry, the official yearbook
since 1930 of The Puppeteers of America; Marjorie
Batchelder The Puppet Theatre Handbook (1947) ; Paul
McPharlin The Puppet Theatre in America - A History
(1949) ; Philip J. Stead Mr. Punch (1950) ; Puppetry in
the Curriculum, a manual for elementary and secon¬
dary schools, published by New York City Board of Edu¬
cation as No. 1 of its Curriculum Bulletin. 1947-48 Series.
RETIRED
ACTO RS
Liège, in Belgium,
is a famous centre
for puppet plays.
Romances of chi¬
valry are still per¬
formed there with
Charlemagne as
their central figure.
Left, head of a
Liège historical pup¬
pet. Right, old pup¬
pets five Tchant-
chès and a Variasse
their stage days
ended, are conserv¬
ed in the Museum
of Walloon Folklore
at Liège. (Jacques
Chesnais Collection
and Musée de la
Vie Wallonne.)
54

Unesco Courier. Nr 3-4 1955
BALLET OF
THE SPRITES
Delightful cabaret glove-
puppets of Compagnie
des Marottes . gather in
flower-pot cluster during
Paris spectacle. Other
French puppeteers like
Yves Joly, Maurice Tem¬
poral, and the Arc-en-
Ciel group have today
become famous for their
intelligent, witty work.
(Photo Marinier.)
55
