CUSTOM
VERSUS
THE LAW
r ry-1 ORTY-FOUR women students of
H Jokakou University were ad-
A monished by the head of the
university for having had their hair
permanently waved." This minor news
item which appeared in a Japanese
newspaper is surprising for two rea¬
sons: Japan is one of the countries
where the fight for women's rights has
28
met with the least resistance; the uni¬
versity in question was one of the first
to open its doors to women back in
1906.
The exact reason for the rebuke is
of less importance than the incident
itself, for here is one more proof that
the customs of society evolve more
slowly than the minds of lawmakers.
The great spiritual and moral malaise
which afflicts much of mankind owes
a great deal to the fact that our moral
conceptions and sentiments are still
anchored in the past and have little
in common with our own times. Cus¬
toms have not kept pace with the
changes imposed by technical progress.
A Japanese professor who tells his
women students about the most recent
discoveries in biology, and explains
the various organic functions of the
human body, is shocked because these
young women come to lectures with
their hair permanently waved. It would
not have been allowed "in his time".
He drives a car, travels by plane and
breathes the air of the 1950s but "his
time" dates back some 30 years.
How many others are there just like
him? The member of parliament who,
in the morning supports a new di¬
vorce law granting greater rights to
women, may be outraged in the after¬
noon when he learns that his son loves
and wants to marry a divorced woman.
Civil Codes and laws may give a
woman the right to do many things,
but if she actually does them she may
find herself criticized and condemned.
She must always be on her guard
against the pitfalls opened by the gap
which exists today between customs
and rights.
The ethical principles which govern
the social behaviour of almost all peo¬
ples are nearly always religious in
origin. That is why religion has always
played an important role in family
organization and has determined the
place of the wife. The family, as the
basic unit of society, was established
on the principle of monogamy. For far
too long it has been asserted incorrect¬
ly that human beings are polygamous
by nature. Recent studies by anthro¬
pologists have shown quite clearly that
the reverse is true.
Queen with 400 'husbands'
Polygamy only appeared at .an
advanced stage of social evolu¬
tion. In patriarchial communi¬
ties where polygamy is practised, a
man has the right to several wives,
just as, in a matriarchy where polyan¬
dry is customary, it is the woman who
can have a harem. Kahena, Queen of
a Berber tribe in the Atlas Mountains,
who resisted Islam and the Arab in¬
vaders, had 400 "husbands". In Ruan-
da-Urundi in the Belgian Congo, there
is a tribe whose female chief has a
harem of something like 200 men. And
in the ancient world of the Middle
East there were peoples whose customs
required several brothers to marry the
same woman. Jealousy seems to be
one of the fruits of civilization.
Because the family is itself a commu¬
nity it must have a head. Should this
be the husband or the wife? As the
question is not one of rights but rather
of conventions, it cannot be settled by
law. Such conventions may have an
internal family character and be quite
independent of customs. Although in
past times the support of the family
depended entirely on the efforts of the
husband, and the wife concerned her¬
self solely with household tasks, the
man did not always demand the rights
of family head within his own home.

Unesco Courier. N' 11. 1955
Crown Copyright Reserved Copyright S. Matsubari
In China, until the Kuomintang
came to power, women had practically
no legal rights but they took the ini¬
tiative in the private affairs of their
family. They decided how the chil¬
dren should be educated, what callings
their sons should follow and even whom
they should marry. In Asia and in
Africa some tribes consider women as
guardians of the line of family descent
which, therefore, takes the woman's
name, not the husband's.
Despite her emancipation a woman
fills different roles from a man both
in the community and the family.
Equality of rights ought not to lead to
the foolish idea that women should
live and behave like men. While en¬
joying the same rights men and women
have their own places in life and are
faced with different jobs and respon¬
sibilities.
Sometimes society itself encourages
a woman to develop an absurd idea
about her role in life. Look how many
people there are who quite wrongly
think that the work done by a woman
in her home is of less value than that
done by her husband in an office or
a factory. A woman who looks after
her home properly and brings up her
children to be honest, law-abiding citi¬
zens has just as much reason to be
proud as a skilled surgeon who success¬
fully carries out a difficult operation.
But it would be just as wrong to
consider sewing on buttons or darning
stockings as the ideal role for a woman.
This brings to mind the case of the
husband in the United States whose
wife decided that she wished to conti¬
nue her education at a university. He
forbade his wife to attend the univer¬
sity lectures and told her to spend more
time mending his shirts and socks. The
wife finally took her case to court
which recognized her right to follow
any studies she wished and ordered her
husband to pay for this education.
The nationality of married women is
one of the problems with which legis¬
lators are working at present. Should
the woman who marries a foreigner
have the right to retain her own nation¬
ality or should she be obliged to adopt
that of her husband?
There are two main points of view
on this question. The first is based on
the principle of legal equality between
the sexes. If a woman is recognized as
being the equal of a man in all ques¬
tions of rights, she can hardly be forc¬
ed to renounce her nationality simply
Decause she marries a foreigner. This
principle has been accepted by most
countries.
Are men really unhappy ?
The second argument takes as its
basis the need for family unity.
Those who support it claim that
the moral and spiritual unity of the
family is threatened if the parents and
children are not of the same nation¬
ality. Complications may arise not only
through purely administrative ques¬
tions, but also because of political
events which may divide the members
of the family. India and Egypt are
two countries which support this prin¬
ciple and believe that in all cases a
woman should adopt her husband's
nationality.
The laws which govern this question
vary widely from country to country,
and an international convention bring¬
ing some order into the matter would
be of great benefit. For several years
prior to the Second World War. the
League of Nations tried to draw up
such a convention. Several countries
have since revised their laws, but there
are so many complications involved
that jurists working on the problem
find themselves in a maze of par¬
agraphs with fine shades of meaning.
Today the United Nations is working on
the question and a draft convention is
now before the General Assembly.
But even in law the equality of the
two sexes can never be complete. A
woman's physical capacities must be
taken into account. Sometimes she
obtains advantages from them. For
example, in thirty-three countries the
legal minimum age for marriage is
lower for women than for men. In
nine States of the U.S.A. girls reach
their majority at the age of 18, but
young men do so only at 21.
In sport a woman's abilities are go¬
verned by her physical capacities. It
is interesting to compare the relative
athletic records achieved by men and
women. The fastest woman sprinter in
the world is Mrs. Blankers-Koen of
Holland, who ran 100 metres in 11,5
seconds; the male record is 10.2 se¬
conds. A Russian woman, Mrs Pletnova
ran 800 metres in two minutes eight
and a half seconds; the German male
record holder took 25 seconds less to
run the same distance. The record
high jump for a woman is 172 centime¬
tres; the male record is 211 centimetres.
In swimming, the best time for 100 me¬
tres achieved by a man is nine seconds
less than the woman's record. Few,
if any, women have distinguished
themselves behind the wheel of a rac¬
ing car, although there are many who
have become world-famous pilots.
But are men really more unhappy
because their womenfolk have come
out of the home in order to add their
energies to those forces which deter¬
mine the progress of the world? Cer¬
tainly not!
29
