^jVtvtv
Ve\v
Vtv
ie
ttv*
t\°
tv^
\
^a
tve
\\vet
\)
bV
$r»9l
\tfe
G*
0ac
or the past six years a unique project, the Inter¬
national Youth library, (Internationale Jugend-Biblio-
tek) in Munich, Germany, has been actively furthering
international understanding among children and young
people through their books. Founded as a model
library for children and as an international centre for
all persons interested in youth literature, it has now
collected some 24,000 books from 39 countries. In
January 1954 it was made an Associated Project of
Unesco in recognition of the pioneering work it has
done for international youth literature and education.
w
hen you walk through the ruins of Kaulbachstrasse,
Munich, a stone's throw from the university, you will see, as
everywhere in Germany's bombed cities, a sight most touch¬
ing to those unaccustom'ed to ruins: A slender birch-tree
or a sappy lilac bush perched high upon a crumbling wall or
a heap of rubble. It seems a miracle that they should take
root and a mystery how they are nourished. But there they
are, and they thrive.
Nearly six years ago, when the International Youth Library
was set up in a little villa in one of the backyards of this
street, it was no less adventurous than those lonely trees or
bushes. Of all countries, Germany seemed to be the most
barren soil for such a project. But a journalist from London
and a true friend of youth, Mrs. Jella Lepman, did not think
so, and time justified her optimism.
"Children whose world has been destroyed, are just as
hungry for food of the mind as for bread," she said in a
speech at the International Congress on Books for Young
People, held in Zurich two years ago.
The International Youth Library grew a little haphazardly
at first, but for that very reason it had and has retained a
charm so often absent from many state-run institutions for
youth. The 200 to 300 children who walk in every afternoon
seem to look on the library as their home. There are no
entrance cards or fees. They move about freely among the
shelves stocked with 24,000 children's books from 39 countries.
Most of them are gifts from publishers all over the world,
from America or Turkey, Indonesia, India or Denmark.
Dr. Brigitte GNAUCK. journalist and author, is a member of the Secretariat of the German
National Commission for Unesco in Cologne.
12
When Mrs. Lepman asked publishers to send her free copies
of their new publications the response was generous though
not all the material that came in was really valuable, and
some was even worthless. Little by little, however,
Mrs. Lepman's small staff one administrator, four librarians
and one assistanthave sorted the books, putting aside the
inferior ones, and arranging the rest on shelves according to
the countries they come from. Every year the best are
displayed around Christmas time, in an exhibition which is
visited by authors, publishers, parents, and people interested
in juvenile literature from many places.
But the final judges are the youngsters themselves. When¬
ever they return a book, they are asked to put down their
opinion about it. And then there are the "Book Reviewers'
Groups" for youngsters between 9 and 17, who, under the
guidance of a psychologist or a librarian, read books fre¬
quently those by foreign authors and discuss and review
them. And they love it.
Mrs. Lepman's main object, of course, was to acquaint the
children with literature from abroad. Did she attain her
goal? It must be admitted that the language barrier still
is a serious difficulty. The smaller children certainly take
the attractive French, English, Italian or "still more foreign"
(Chinese, Indonesian) picture books from their shelves and
gaze at the illustrations. But they don't understand the text.
One of the library's future tasks, with an enlarged staff,
might be to make tests with at least some of these books by
adding typed or mimeographed translations. Otherwise the
diversity of languages remains forbidding.
However, there is a great variety of translated books. (Up
to 25% of Germany's yearly juvenile book (C ,.
production are translations). How do the ^ il\
youngsters react to them? 'iage '

Unesco Courier. Nr 3-4. 1955
* The fish I had for lunch '
Children have thrown themselves heart and soul into varied
activities that flourish In the friendly atmosphere of the Munich
Youth Library. Domain of the painters is an attic-studio, but
in fine weather easels are moved into the garden. Exhibitions
of these children's work have gone round the world and some of
their self-portraits were included In Unesco's publication,
"Art and Education". One of these (below) illustrates why a
child's concrete and imaginative mode of thought is rarely
accessible to adult understanding. When a teacher asked the
six-year old author of this painting if she was supposed to be
carrying a basket, she replied: "Of course not, that's the fish I
had for lunch." (Photos copyright Hans Schurer and Ikki Lúdeke,
Munich. Drawing taken from "Art and Education")
13

Munich Weather vane
(Continued)
It is quite apparent that, as a whole, German youth is more
serious-minded than non-German children who visit the
library. "Truthful" is the highest attribute German children
can give to a book. This applies not only to the older ones,
but even the 8 to 9-year-olds. In the written reviews
"too sentimental" is a much repeated comment, or "... a
valuable book, because of its high moral interest".
For instance, the majority deem "Alice in Wonderland" or
P.L. Travers' "Mary Poppins", the flying nursemaid who
drops from the sky, "too confusing and fantastic". Adven¬
ture books are in high demand, if they describe something
"one might do oneself". For the same reason most "Uto¬
pian" ones are condemned with a smile as: "Too improbable".
Of the foreign authors clear favourites besides the old
classics like Swift or Defoe are: Hemingway ("The Old Man
and the Sea"), Kipling, Pearl Buck, Lawson, Thurber, CS.
Forester, Catherine Pinkerton, St. Exupéry, Guareschi, Heyer¬
dahl, Selma Lagerlöf, Hamsun, Monroe Leaf ("Ferdinand, the
Bull") and, naturally, Felix Salten ("Bambi").
Findings of this sort are being collected and tabulated more
and more and put at the disposal of
interested writers, illustrators, publish¬
ers. Mrs. Lepman's institute tries to
become a sort of clearing house for
youth literature by collecting informa¬
tion from all over the world. She
began by sending out questionnaires
on youth book production, children's
libraries etc., to 24 countries, 21 of
which have replied so far. And she
hopes to extend this inquiry to all
member states of Unesco.
Due to her stimulation, an Interna¬
tional Board on Books for Young
People was founded, uniting for the
first time, publishers, librarians, writers
and educators. It held its first inter¬
national meeting last year in Zurich
Unaware of this growing clearing
house and research work, for which
they are the happy "guinea pigs", the
children enthusiastically embark upon
the many more delightful activities
that have sprung up like wild saplings
in the friendly atmosphere of the house.
The attic is the domain of Mr. Steidle,
a gifted young painter and art educator,
and his youthful artists. Exhibitions
of their work have gone around the
world, and some of their self-portraits
were included in Unesco's publication,
"Art and Education".
There are the language classes
English and French, so far taught
from picture books; there are lectures by authors of youth
books, who often have a hard time coping with the mer¬
ciless criticism of their young audience.
And once a month the easels are moved out of the attic
and the "United Nations" moves in. Sixty-eight children,
aged from 12 to 17, find it fun to sacrifice their free Saturday
afternoons to listen to 10-minute speeches, in which the
youthful delegates give what an adult would often think a
highly technical description of "their"' country. The
favourite countries, mostly far-off ones, are represented by
two or three delegates.
The youngsters take their assembly very seriously and ask
questions that might well embarrass a teacher. Yet most
delegates can provide the answers, as they are excellently
informed. Before they make their speech, they ransack
library shelves for material. And without being aware of it,
they become acquainted with many countries they never
thought of before and, at the same time, with the forms of
international parliamentary life. Adults, by the way, are
not admitted to the sessions. "We want to keep this strictly
a youth affair," says Dieter Dederichs, the president, aged 16.
The whole library is strictly a youth affair. Its refreshing,
youthful atmosphere in itself is international. For, as
Mrs. Lepman says, "The child still possesses the whole globe.
Only the grown-ups are fenced in, or think they are."
14
Junior U.N.
Once a' month under
their I 6-years-old chair¬
man, some seventy young
people meet together fcr
a " Junior U.N. Assem¬
bly " (above) at which
delegates give well docu¬
mented reports on coun¬
tries they have chosen to
represent. No less seri¬
ous despite the smiles
Is the work of the book
reviewing group (left).
Discussions between the
young critics are some¬
times broadcast by Mu¬
nich Radio. Final judges
of the books are, after
all, the children (below)
who throng the library.
(Photos copyright Hans
Schürer and Inge Lceffler)
