ART REVIVAL
for Ecuador's Indians
by Lilo Linke
Creative Indian art in Ecuador was supposed to
have ceased with the Spanish conquest, after
which Indian artisans and craftsmen chiefly
worked under European guidance on magnificent
baroque churches like " La Compañía " (right)
In Quito. Today, helped by a special art education
centre, Indian artists are once more showing
the traditional talents and skills of their ancestors.
The people of Quito's most elegant district have got used
to the sight of groups of Indians walking into a large
modern house as if it were their home. "'That crazy
artist Jan Schreuder is giving them their painting lesson",
they remark.
Jan Schreuder is neither crazy nor does he pretend to
teach the Indians how to paint. All he does is to provide
encouragement and the material facilities so that the
Indians may follow their own inspiration.
Until recently, Indian art in Ecuador was considered to be
something of the past. Creativeness was supposed to have
come to an end with the Spanish conquest, about four
hundred years ago. The only thing generally admitted was
that the Indians had shown amazing ability as artisans
working under Spanish guidance. Stone cutters and wood
carvers above all had transformed the many colonial
churches into admirable examples of Spanish baroque art.
Thanks to these buildings, Quito is today the delight of
tourists from all over the world.
Among the many foreigners who established themselves
in Ecuador during recent decades were several artists. They
were enthralled by the grandeur of the Andean landscape
and the picturesque costumes and customs of the natives.
Using the Indians at first simply as models, they gradually
arrived at a deeper appreciation of their personality and
capacities.
Already a number of Ecuadorian anthropologists and
similar experts had worked on behalf of the Indians. They
were now joined by Jan Schreuder and other artists in an
endeavour to provide an outlet for Indian creativeness.
Jan Schreuder, a Dutchman by birth, first came to Ecuador
fifteen years ago. For many years, he painted on his own,
then, in 1952, he opened a centre of art education for
children and adults (Centro Ecuatoriano de Arte) in the
capital. The very building which he designed for it indica-
30
ted his intentions. Its windows frame part of the town and
the ever-green mountains behind it, with here and there a
glimpse of eternal snow. The entire second floor is occupied
by a huge studio which is also a museum of Indian art and
folklore from various Latin American countries.
For all foreigners who arrive in Quito with an interest in
the colourful aspects of native Andean culture, a visit to Jan
Schreuder's studio has therefore become one of the highlights
of their stay. They will find small clay figures excavated
on the coast and more than a thousand years old, as well
as pottery-cows baked only recently in some primitive kiln
. in a lonely Andean village ; ancient jewellery and modern
"mates", the gourds which Peruvian Indians decorate with
whirling processions of figures that tell the story of some
historic event or of a native fiesta ; textiles from Guatemala
and Peru, and masks from Mexico.
4 Rondador ' and ' Pingullo ' music
They will hear records of Indian music played on the
traditional instruments, the "rondador" (pipes of Pan),
the drum and the little flute known as '"pingullo".
But, more exciting, they will see the Indians of today
painting at the easel or bent over the long table busy at
some intricate design.
Matilde, for instance, is a little girl of twelve. She belongs
to the tribe of Otavalo Indians, famous for its weaving. Two
years ago, Matilde came to Quito with her whole family
because Jan Schreuder had offered to help her father
improve his weaving technique. One day, while they were
all visiting Jan's studio, she timidly picked up a brush and
was so thrilled by the splashes of colour she could produce
with it that Jan allowed her to come regularly and paint.
She always brings her little brother Segundo, now ten, and
her little sister Luchita.

Unesco Courier. N" 6. 1955
Like fine embroidery
Reflowering of Indian art has
been largely stimulated in Ecua¬
dor by a Dutchman, Jan Schreu¬
der, seen with Otavalo Indians
(left). He has helped them adapt
traditional art and handicrafts
to modern needs. Right, pupils
painting in Schreuder's studio.
Above, lino cuts of people and
animals made bySalasaca Indians.
(Photos Jan Schreuder)
What did these children want to express ? Matilde's first
painting was a group of Indians with their animals, in vivid
colours against the background of Imbabura, their sacred
mountain. Her work, like that of the other Indians, is
constantly concerned with their agricultural life : ploughing
the fields, planting the seeds, harvest and fiestas.
Among the other Indians who come regularly to Jan's
studio are two Salasaca youths of 19 and 21. The Salasaca
Indians come from an arid region some 80 miles south of
the capital. Unlike the Otavalo Indians, they are still
opposed to contact with the whites. Catholic and Protestant
missionaries have been working among them, trying to break
down the barriers, but of equal importance have been the
efforts of such people as Jan Schreuder to make the
Salasacas renounce their hostility.
The Otavaleño men dress in large blue ponchos that cover
the whole figure, and wear their smooth black hair in a
thick braid plaited at the nape. The Salasacas wear black
ponchos not much wider than a towel, and cut their hair
page-boy fashion.
Their style of painting is strongly influenced by the
embroidery a combination of cross and chain stitches
which has always been a pastime of the Salasaca men. They
handle the brush as delicately as if it were a needle and
obtain with gouache and water-colours a similar effect to
that produced by their yarns. Their motifs are scenes from
their own life, but one of the characteristics of their art is
the apparently unconnected juxtaposition of people and
animals.
The artistic expressions of all Indians are particularly
valuable since they offer the white man a chance to get to
know the inner life of an otherwise extremely reserved and
even hostile people. No verbal intimacy has ever been
established. Now the paintings can serve as a vital link in
human communications.
But Jan Schreuder has done more. At first under the
auspices of the Ecuadorian Institute of Anthropology and
Geography and of late under those of the International
Labour Office, one of the specialized organizations of the
United Nations, he has been teaching a group of Indians to
improve their weaving techniques and to make use of tra¬
ditional patterns for purposes of decoration.
The idea originated from Schreuder's experiences in
Guatemala where native handicrafts not only added the
colourful touch necessary to attract foreign tourists, but
also provided the Indians with an important source of
income. Guatemaltecan textiles have found their way even
beyond the western hemisphere. Jan Schreuder wanted to
guide the Ecuadorian Indians along the same lines not by
copying anything foreign, but by giving free play to native
creativeness and native patterns of Ecuador.
Traditional arts for modern living
So far, a great variety of wall-hangings, table covers and
mats, napkins and other textiles have been woven on
improved looms. At the same time the women learned
to perfect the handspun yarn by better methods of cleaning
and dyeing the raw wool and by the use of the spinning
wheel, not hitherto known among the Salasacas.
Thus, far from attempting to make the Indians renounce
their traditional ways, Jan Schreuder has insisted on their
purposely adapting traditional art and handicrafts to
modern living.
A further value derives from the fact that each object is
hand-produced. Do we not all try to escape the soul-killing
machine and encourage creativeness wherever we find it?
And who is more creative than the Indian, whose work starts
already with the careful selection of the raw materials he
himself produces, and who puts into every object he manu¬
factures a whole world of imagination?
31
