HYDROPONICS
Farmers grow food
crops without soil
by J. W. E. H. Sholto Douglas
(USIS)
Every large city of the globe including New York, London, Paris, Calcutta, Buenos Aires, Rome and
Tokyo, could now be made completely self-supporting in vegetables by the large-scale adoption of
hydroponics, a new science which enables people to grow food simply without the use of soil. Hydro¬
ponics is still believed by many to be a complicated, expensive business, but new simplified methods
evolved by scientists in recent years have now made it extremely economical. Tomatoes, rice, potatoes,
maize, peas, lettuce, French beans, and a host of other vegetables have not only been grown successfully
by hydroponics but yields are sometimes four times as high as those obtained by conventional methods
in soil. Photo above right, shows American pomologist (fruit tree expert) growing apple trees in large
pots filled with sterile sand to which nutrient elements are added. Above, hydroponicum in Japan.
42
Ever sinc£..the publication in 1798
of Malt.hus' Essay on Population,
there have been periodical warn¬
ings that in time mankind would face
starvation, owing to the number of the
world's inhabitants outgrowing the
available food supplies. Fortunately,
this grim prediction has not yet come
to pass. True, the possibility still
remains, but the immense advances
made in agricultural science, and the
consequent increased production, seem
to have staved off disaster. at any
rate for the time being. Nevertheless,
nothing would be more ill-advised than
an attitude of complacency. Although
food surpluses may arise in some areas,
there can be actual famine in others.
The general food problem is as far
Mr Sholto Douglas, Bristish agronomist, has been
responsible since 1946 for the development of soilless
cultivation at the West Bengal Agricultural Institute
and the experimental stations at Darjeeling and Cal¬
cutta. Originator of the Bengal methods of hydro¬
ponics, he is the author of a book on the Bengal
system. ->

Unesco Courier. Nr Í-9. 1955
m r Ï
H^l^tr* LIM f% t'''
0 -|. ^ . »j A- ^ fc ¿J.
Ba
from being solved as ever, and it is
likely to remain so until new methods
of producing food in the areas where it
is most needed are introduced on a
large scale.
One of the most promising of the
new methods is soilless cultivation. It
is not generally realized that a way of
cultivating food crops without using
any soil at all has been evolved. Also
known as hydroponics a word derived
from the Greek, meaning "water-work¬
ing", as opposed to geoponics or agric¬
ulture, meaning "care of the earth"
this growing of plants without soil has
now become a practical proposition.
Many successful installations are flour¬
ishing in various parts of the world,
in all kinds of climatic conditions.
By divorcing food production from
the soil, hydroponics enables countries
lacking fertile farmland to grow all
the crops they need to nourish their
people. It is no exaggeration to say
that the introduction of soilless culti
vation on a large scale can provide the
solution to the problem of local hunger.
Excellent crops can be grown without
soil, at low cost and with a minimum
of trouble, in places where convention¬
al methods of agriculture are impos¬
sible. By bringing cheap and nourish¬
ing foodstuffs within the reach of all,
hydroponics offers something of real
value to humanity.
Hydroponics is the art and science of
growing plants without soil by feeding
them on chemical solutions. Crops
can be raised in the absence of organic
matter simply by giving them in arti¬
ficial form the nutrients which they
usually draw from the earth through
their roots. The basic principles of
soilless culture are not new. In fact,
for nearly a century workers have been
producing plants for physiological
experiments in their laboratories by
the use of similar methods, but until a
few years ago nobody had thought of
adapting or applying such ideas to
Copyright International News Photo
practical or commercial food production.
Indeed, the sole object of water
culture experiments was to enable the
farmer to make better use of his soil.
Then, suddenly, amazing results were
obtained by Californian researchers
who managed to raise crops without
any soil at all, by growing them out of
doors in nutrient solutions or inert
media moistened by cultural infusion.
This was the beginning of a new and
successful method of crop growing.
The study of crop nutrition began
thousands of years ago, long before the
time of Aristotle. Ancient history
recounts that various experiments were
undertaken by Theophrastus (372-287
B.C.), while several writings of Dios-
corides on botany and its allied sub¬
jects, dating from the first century A.D.,
are still in existence. The earliest
scientific approach to the question, how¬
ever, was that of F. Wood¬
ward (1699), who worked in (Cont'd on
England with water cultures next P°B*)
43

HYDROPONICS
(Continued) Vision of tomorrow: rooftop farmers
to see whether it was the water or the
solid particles of soil that nourished the
plants. At the time, it was commonly
believed that "'for nourishment of
vegetables the water is almost all in
all". Van Helmont had grown a
willow for five years in an earthen
vessel containing 200 pounds of soil to
which nothing had been added except
rain water or distilled water, and had
produced a tree weighing 169 pounds at
an expenditure of only 2 ounces of soil.
ornato vines
25 feet high
But Woodward has recorded his
disagreement with the current
ideas. He wrote that "earth and
not water is the matter that constitutes
vegetables". His conclusion was based
upon experiments in which he grew
spearmint in glasses containing water
from various sources, methodically
recording the initial and final weights
of the plants and the total amount of
the liquid consumed. He observed that
the addition of an ounce and a half of
garden soil to the water increased the
"terrestial matter" and consequently
the growth of the plants.
Handicapped as they were by lack
of equipment, investigators of those
times could make little progress. But
modern chemistry, built up during the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
subsequently revolutionized scientific
research. The experiments of Sir
Humphrey Davy, inventor of the
safety-lamp, had evolved a method of
effecting chemical decomposition by
means of an electric current. Several
of the elements which go to make up
matter were brought to light, and it
was now possible for chemists to split
up a compound into its constituent
parts.
By 1842, a list of nine elements known
to be essential to plant growth had been
made out, and the discoveries of the
German workers, Sacha and Knopp, in
the years 1859-65, resulted in the
development of a technique of soilless
culture in the laboratory. The addi¬
tion of a chemical to water was found
to produce a nutrient solution which
would support plant life, so that by
1920 the laboratory preparation of
water culture had been standardized
and the methods of conducting trials
were well established.
Until 1928, however, the phrase
"crops without soil" was virtually
unknown. The value of the discoveries
had not been realized. In that year,
Robbins, working at the New Jersey
Experiment Station, suggested that
sand culture had possibilities for
research and commercial work in
horticulture. This was followed by a
similar announcement from Biekart
and Connors, of the same institution.
At Ohio State University, Laurie issued
an account of thé trials carried out
there with washed -¿sand in greenhouse
culture.
A further step was taken in 1929
when Professor W. F. Gericke, of the
University of California, succeeded in
growing tomato vines 25 feet in height.
Even the most incredulous critics were
impressed. A new factor had suddenly
appeared and was making itself felt in
the world of practical and scientific
agriculture. Such a novel technique
was bound to attract attention. The
American press hailed it as one of the
most colossal inventions of the century,
reporting -. with magnificent abandon
. that farmlands had become relics of
'the past.. Many extravagant and ir¬
responsible claims were made for the
new science, which could not at that
time be justified.
Although hydroponics had broken
laboratory bounds and in one stride
entered the world of practical horti¬
culture, it was still an involved and
complicated technique. Because of
this, and the fact that the different
functions of the various parts of the
necessary apparatus were imperfectly
understood, early sensational publicity
threatened to destroy its future. Un¬
scrupulous adventurers attempted to
"cash in" on the discovery by selling
useless equipment at fantastic prices to
the ignorant or the credulous. Fortu¬
nately, experienced research workers
and scientific institutions continued to
give hydroponics considerable thought
and attention.
Despite the excellent reports of its
efficacy as a means of crop production,
hydroponics had not spread among the
general public. This was mainly due
to the elaborate apparatus and equip¬
ment required for the operation of the
methods advocated up to quite recently.
Planting in rock
cinders and sand
The world war of 1939-1945 resulted
in a spread of hydroponic cul¬
tivation to many different areas,
and a general realization of the im¬
mense possibilities of soilless growth
began to dawn upon agronomists every¬
where. In 1946 research studies were
commenced at the Government of
Bengal's experimental station at Ka-
limpong, in India, with the object of
introducing a simple and practicable
technique, suitable for popular use.
In 1948 it was possible to announce
the development of the Bengal system
of hydroponics, which incorporated
substantial modifications of all previ¬
ous practice. The plants could be
grown in troughs built from any suit¬
able material, and filled with a mixture
of five parts of rock chips, leached
cinders, gravel, or broken bricks, of
five-eighths to one-quarter inch grade,
and two parts of sand. Substitutes, "
such as peat, could also be employed.
The nutrients are applied dry, at
regular intervals, in stipulated ratio to.
the area of the bed surface, either as
fertilizer grade chemicals, or as syn¬
thetic resins. Packeted powdered
compounds or tablets can be utilized.
After application, the salts have to be
watered in with a light, spray of water,
if there is no rain.
No elaborate equipment is required
for a hydroponicum of this kind, and
extensive use may be made of local
indigenous materials. Simple rules
must be followed by the grower, but if
these are carefully adhered to, -anyone
can use the method without special
knowledge or training. The Bengal
system of hydroponics, adapted and
modified for different climatic zones
and conditions, is today rapidly spread¬
ing throughout the world and becoming
very popular on account of its com¬
parative simplicity, economy, and its
easy installation.
Greenstuff in
any odd corner
WB
Today hydroponics is an established
branch of agronomical science.
Progress has been rapid, and the
results obtained during the past five
n years in various countries, including
the work conducted in Bengal, have
proved it to be thoroughly practical and
have some very definite advantages
over normal soil culture. The two chief
merits of hydroponics are, first, much
higher crop yields, and second, the
fact that it can be used in places
where ordinary agriculture or garden¬
ing is impossible.
Not only is it a profitable undertak¬
ing, but it enables people living in
crowded cities to grow fresh vegetables
in window boxes or on house roofs.
Town residents and workers in indus¬
trial settlements often have verandahs,
backyards or pavements of which they
can generally make little use. By
means of hydroponics all such odd
corners can be made to yield a regular
and abundant supply of greenstuff.
Other possibilities are factory roofs or
disused roads. Not only town dwellers,
but also country residents, can profit
from soilless culture. Deserts, rocky
and stony ground in mountainous dis¬
tricts, or barren and sterile areas can
be made productive at relatively low
cost. It is no exaggeration to say
that hydroponics can mean as much
to the landless worker
as the abolition of Slav- (Contdon
ery did in the past. page 46)
44

Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
BOON TO WORLD'S
VAST ARID LANDS
Millions of tons of nourishing foods could be grown in hydroponicums. Not only could immense barren
lands be made productive but crops might also be raised in sterile and arid regions such as the Sahara
Desert, the wastes of Arabia or Central Asia, the rocky highlands of Japan or the underdeveloped terri¬
tories of Australia, Canada and Patagonia. Left, on Tokyo hydroponic farm some of crops are started in
S-acre green-house, one of largest in world. Right, US Department of Agriculture agronomist cultivates
experimental soybeans at Beltsville, Maryland horticultural station. (Photo USIS)
LETTUCE Si TOMATO
GRAVEL SAND
The U.S.A. is the original home of hydroponics. Here it has been developed more than in any other count¬
ry. Many techniques are used but very often they are too complicated for the general public. But where
equipment can be afforded results have been excellent. A large part of the tomato crop of California, for
example, is raised by hydroponics. U.S. Army and Air Force now have Hydroponics Branches to provide fresh
vegetables to overseas personnel. Left,- Air Force man inspects tomato crop in Hawaii; right, workers
grow lettuce on Army Hydroponics Farm at Iwojima in Pacific. (Photo USIS)
45

HYDROPONICS
(Continued)
MODEL 'FIELD' of gravel in
concrete basins is planted by
Japanese women at U.S. Army
Hydroponics installation, Chofu,
Japan. American hydroponic farm¬
ing in Japan started with 16 five-
acre units devoted to vegetable
growing. (USIS Photo )
Apart from the advantages already
mentioned, there are others, in parti¬
cular quick growth combined with
relative freedom from soil diseases, and
very consistent crops, the quality of the
produce being excellent. There is also
a considerable reduction in growing
area, weeds are practically non¬
existent, while standard methods and
automatic operation mean less labour,
less cost and no hard manual work.
As many plants can be raised out of
season, better control of crops naturally
results; moreover there is no dirt and
no smell. Waterlogging never occurs,
owing to good drainage.
Nor does the use of hydroponics alter
the taste of a crop in any way. In
fact, the piquant savour of soilless-
cultured produce cannot be found any¬
where else in agriculture. There is no
other distinction between a chemically
grown plant and a naturally raised one
in point of flavour, nor have analyses
shown any vitamin content differences.
The real development of soilless
cultivation began when, having broken
laboratory bounds, it was taken up by
government departments and commer¬
cial organizations. The first great
achievement came when Pan-American
Airways decided to establish a hydro-
ponicum on distant and barren Wake
Island in the middle of the Pacific
Ocean, in order to provide the passen¬
gers and crews of the airliners with
regular supplies of fresh vegetables.
In 1945 the British Air Ministry took
steps to commence soilless culture at
the desert air base of Habbaniyah in
Iraq, and at the arid island of Bahrein
in the Persian Gulf.
Some of the most successful installa¬
tions have been those at military bases,
notably in British Guiana, Iwojima and
Ascension Island. American headquar¬
ters in Japan started with 16 five-acre
units devoted to vegetable growing,
while various oil companies in the West
Indies operating on barren or isolated
islands, especially off the Venezuelan
coast at Aruba and Curacao, have
found soilless culture invaluable for
46
BETTER RESULTS FROM HYDROPONICS
Table shows some yields obtained by hydroponics as compared with those obtained by conven¬
tional methods in soil. Other successful crops grown in hydroponicums include: peas, broad beans,
onions, cabbage, oats, soya beans, cucumber, brinjal or egg-plants, squash or vegetable marrow,
wheat, turnip, carrot, flax, great millet, millet, black beans or dal, gram or chickpea, radish,
scarlet runner beans, chillies or peppers, sponge gourd, bitter gourd, pumpkin, sugar-cane.
Crop Best agricultural yields Hydroponic yields
Tomato 12 lb per plant (U.S.A.)
11 lb per plant (U.K.)
10 lb per plant (India)
Rice Average per acre: 5-50 tons
900 lb per acre (India)
3,000 lb per acre (Italy, Japan)
Potatoes 30 tons per acre (California)
12-15 tons per acre (U.K.)
9 tons per acre (Bengal)
Maize 2,000 lb of grain per acre (North Bengal)
Lettuce 9,000 lb per acre (North Bengal)
Beetroot 9,000 ib per acre (North Bengal ; Calcutta
Exptl., Sectors)
French beans 210 Ib from 1,000 sq. ft trough (var.
Dwarf, Canadian Wonder, North Bengal)
Cauliflowers 10,000-15,000 Ib per acre (Bengal)
Lady's fingers 5,000-8,000 Ib per acre (Bengal)
27.4 Ib per plant (var. Sutton's Majestic,
University of California)
16.4 Ib per plant (var. Stonor's M.P.,
Jealott's Hill Research Station, England)
22.5 Ib per plant (var. Best of All, Hydro¬
ponic Research, India)
Average per acre: 150-200 tons
5,000 lb per acre (broadcast)
9,000 Ib per acre (transplanted, West
Bengal)
65 tons per acre (Dr W. F. Gericke,
California)
70 tons per acre (Agricultural Station,
Kalimpong, India)
6,000 Ib of grain per acre (Bengal)
21,000 Ib per acre (Hydroponic Research
India)
20,000 Ib per acre (Calcutta Exptl. Sectors)
588 Ib from 1,000 sq. ft trough (var. Dwarf,
Canadian Wonder, Hydroponic Research,
India)
32,000 Ib per acre (Bengal)
19,000 Ib per acre (Bengal)
CELERY GROW¬
ING at Montebello,
California. In this
hydroponics garden,
celery seedlings are
grown in sand and
sub-irrigated with a
nutrient solution.
Here and In several
other states of the
U. S. A. extensive
commercial hydropo¬
nicums have been set
up. (USIS Photo)

Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
ensuring that their employees get a
regular ration of greenstuff.
In the continental United States
itself there are extensive commercial
hydroponicums, especially in Illinois,
Ohio, California, Indiana and Florida.
New Yorkers are taking increasingly to
skyscraper gardening. Russia, France,
Canada, South Africa and Germany
are among other countries where
hydroponics has received attention.
The English carnation growing indus¬
try has partly switched over from soil
to soilless methods.
It is also of interest to note that a
primitive form of hydroponics has been
carried on in Kashmir for centuries.
Visitors to that state will have observed
light frameworks of branches, covered
with rotting vegetation, floating on the
numerous lakes. Excellent crops are
raised by the local peasantry from
these rafts which provide both water
and nutrients to the growing plants.
The simplified Bengal methods are ra¬
pidly spreading in Southern Asia, the
adjacent areas, and South and East
Africa. Australia and New Zealand
have also expressed great interest in
these new techniques.
Wastelands could bloom
In fact, soilless cultivation, conducted
according to the new simplified
methods, can make all the large
cities of the globe, such as New York,
London, Paris, Calcutta, Buenos Aires,
Rome and Tokyo, self-supporting in all
vegetables, thus leaving the available
fertile country farmlands free to
concentrate on cereal production.
Millions of tons of nourishing foodstuffs
could be grown in hydroponicums. Not
only could immense barren lands be
made productive, but crops might also
be raised in sterile and arid regions,
such as the Sahara Desert, the wastes
of Arabia or Central Asia, the "bad¬
lands" of the Middle West of America,
the rocky highlands of Japan, or the
undeveloped territories of Australia,
Canada, and Patagonia.
It is not claimed that hydroponics
should replace agriculture, but it has
been proved beyond doubt that waste
land, rocks, even house-tops and back-
verandahsranywhere that sufficient
sunshine and water are available can
be made to bloom and bear at little
cost in money and trouble.
Where water is scarce it will be better
conserved by running the available
supply into controlled hydroponic beds
than by dissipating it recklessly over
the earth, as is done in ordinary irri¬
gation, and so losing over half in eva¬
poration.
To sum up: hydroponics has already
reached the stage where it is a practical
proposition; it is profitable in almost
any conditions; and it is invaluable as
a means of food production in countries
or areas which have not enough fertile
soil to feed their population.
The above article is a condensed version of a long
study which originally appeared in Unesco's quarterly
scientific review "Impact of Science on Society", Vol
VI, No 1, March 1955. Copies of "Impact" are
available from Unesco National Distributors at $. 50;
2/6 and 725 francs a single issue; annual subscription
$ 1.75; 9/6; 450 francs.
Copyright STEEP -Jean Guglielmi
T NEVER RAINS BUT IT POURS
Contrary to popular belief rain is not completely unknown In the great deserts of the
world. When desert rains do come, they often descend in brief but torrential downpours.
Rainfall in the desert is so undependable though that permanent streams cannot exist.
(Rivers like the Nile that flow through deserts obtain their water from sources beyond
the desert area.) But here and there among the most forbidding of desert wastelands an
occasional green oasis flourishes. Water usually comes from underground streams which
seep to the surface and permit vegetation and trees to bloom. Photo, above, was taken in
Algerian oasis after flash storm flooded the area. Arab inhabitants quickly took to make¬
shift rafts. Another aspect of the desert countenance is shown in photo, below, of the
ancient oasis city of^Palmyra in Syria with its carefully tended palm groves. In walled
enclosures (foreground) are young palms protected from the searing desert winds.
WHO photo
a» wt&Stel/i
47
