CONQUEST OF THE DESERT
Science accepts the challenge
Unicef Photo. Copyright Hulton Press Ltd., Picture Post.
OLD WATERHOLES, dug deeper by each generation, form oases in the drought-stricken north eastern hump of Brazil. Here, at Campiña Grande, men
and women wait for water in the coolness of the earth. (For an article on Brazil's " Polygon of Drought ", see Unesco Courier N° 2, I 955). (Unicef Photo)
6

Arid lands, wherever they may be located, especially if
they are hot, are characterized by intense blue skies
by day, immense distances in a shimmering atmos¬
phere, sparse vegetation and still sparser animal and human
population, with a limited and erratic rainfall of less than
ten inches in a good year. Yet we recall that great civili¬
zations were developed in arid areas crossed by great rivers,
the Tigris-Euphrates, the Indus and the Nile.
How big is the challenge so far as area goes? It is difficult
to get precise figures but it is generally believed that the
total land surface of the earth is of the order of twenty-five
thousand million acres and of this at present about two
thousand five hundred million, or ten percent, are under
some form of cultivation. But it is also estimated that
about six thousand four hundred million acres are arid, in
other words about one quarter of the
total land surface of the earth. That
is to say the arid area is just over two
and a half times as large as the pre¬
sently cultivated area.
The end of the First World War saw
the end of large scale settlement in,
and development of, new lands by
pioneering individuals in whom the
spirit of adventure or the desire for
a freer life was strong. Came the
Second World War with a startling
realization of the precarious way in
which most nations lived, a way
fraught with all the explosive possi¬
bilities of further bitter struggles
between peoples.
Today we know that Malthus was
just ahead of his time and we have
to ask ourselves whether adequate
food requirements of the people can
be provided from present sources with
Unesce Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
which used to be fertile in ancient times, and are now out of
use. I refer to the millions of acres in the valleys of the
Tigris-Euphrates, the Indus-Chenab and the Nile, in the dry
north of Ceylon where still are to be seen the remains of
ancient irrigation channels and reservoirs.
It is estimated that in Latin America over twelve million
acres are susceptible of development, and an area bigger
than Egypt's productive land is said to be available in the
middle Niger. The re-establishment of these ancient areas
and the development of new areas require the joint efforts of
research institutions, of governments and the instrumenta¬
lities of the United Nations such as the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO), the World Health Organization (WHO),
the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), etc., and not
forgetting the international financial authorities.
by B. T. Dickson
all the technological experience avail¬
able to us. We suggest that two
possibilities arise, one a reduction in
the rate of growth of the population
of the world and the other an increase
in production of foodstuffs not only
just to feed people on a minimal diet
but on a diet nearer to the optimal.
With the control of the rate of popu¬
lation growth we arid zone people have
little or nothing to do. We do say,
however with regard to the second,
that it is possible to increase world
food supplies by increasing production
from present areas and by bringing
into production more land at present uneconomically used.
By applying technological knowledge to the fullest extent
in what are at present underproducing areas a great in¬
crease in food production by individual growers is possible.
India, for example, possesses irrigation works on a great scale
and nowhere else in the world is so large a population de¬
pendent on irrigation for food supplies and yet it is estimat¬
ed that less than ten per cent of the run-off of her rivers is
utilized.
When we come to consider the possibilities in arid lands it
is recognized that the efforts of individual growers can play
but a small part in the development of new areas of pro¬
duction or the re-establishment of production in great areas
Dr. B.T. DICKSON, British-born Australian botanist, is one of the leading world autho¬
rities on plant adaptation and biology of arid lands. He ¡oined the Commonwealth
Scientific and Industrial Research Organization in Australia, in 1929. and became
the head of its Division of Plant Industry. The above article is a slightly
condensed version of a paper entitled. "The Challenge of Arid Land Research and
Development For the Benefit of Mankind" presented on the symposium of the Interna¬
tional Arid Lands Meetings in Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA, under the sponsorship
of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. It will be published
in unabridged form by the Association as part of the volume of proceedings.
ERODING WINDS ride unbridled across the barren desert flats. This tree whose roots search
vainly for soil food and moisture stands on an island, the original height of the surrounding land. Tree
roots have protected the soil under them from erosion by wind. (USIS Photo.)
Let us now look at some of the problems with which those
charged with arid land development have to deal. I propose
to list them under the following heads water, soils, plants,
animals and man, and give what must obviously be a very
sketchy outline of some of the salient features of each and
then come to a conclusion.
Water is placed first for obvious reasons and adequate
information about the water resources of a region is essential
to a safe usage of that water for full development in food
production, domestic use and industry. In the desert one
conserves every drop of water for the maintenance of life,
in great urban centres we turn a tap and water flows, but
sometimes restrictions are placed on turning those taps. In
other lands the fresh water from great mountain ranges
flows several thousand miles to the sea and constitutes a
fresh water delta of tremendous size in the ocean.
Whence comes the supply, great or small? The answer is
rainfall and this is the beginning of what is called the
hydrologie cycle. Some of the rain soaks into the ground,
some runs off in streams, some is evaporated and
some transpired by vegetation. That which is ' ont on
evaporated or transpired by plants, like stream next page)

CONQUEST OF
THE DESERT (co«ti«u«)
waters, may travel great distances, but ultimately it again
falls somewhere as rain, snow, hail, fog or dew.
In tropical areas rainfall may actually be beyond the
capacity of man to use, as with the Amazon, but in arid and
semi-arid areas rainfall is low and every effort must be made
to conserve usage to the best ends. This applies even when
an arid area is using imported precipitation as in Egypt,
where the Nile valley is dependent in the main for its supply
of water on the rainfall in the Abyssinian highlands.
One of the first problems in the hydrological cycle of arid
areas is that of accurately measuring precipitation, because
rainfall is low anyway. It can be very local and extremely
sporadic, this erratic distribution, both geographically and in
time, making for considerable discrepancies in accurate
measurement.
It is well known that advanced civilizations formerly
occupied what are today arid regions. Excavations show the
remains of reservoirs, canals, fortifications, and human
habitations, presuming an intensive and extensive cultivation
by a large population. Such is the case in India, Pakistan,
North Africa, the Near East, and even in the desolate region
of Lob Nor in Central Asia there are remains of oasis towns
and irrigation works. The disappearance of these civiliza¬
tions may have been brought about by severe climatic
changes or by the doings of man not for the benefit of
mankind.
M. Jean Tixeront, of Tunisia, in asking whether it is
possible to forecast weather over long periods, points out that
we haven't yet sufficient reliable records, but states that in
Tunisia they use one of nature's records In the growth rings
of trees and one of , man's in archaeological studies. The
meteorological service of Tunisia studied the climate of Ain
Draham from 1736 to 1955 by examining the growth rings of
an oak tree. The inference drawn was that from 1736 to
1790 there was significantly more rain than later and this
seems to be confirmed from historical documents which refer
to abundant crops in the eighteenth century.
Tixeront considers that a study of the ruins of Arab and
Roman irrigation works, of historical texts, of the continuity
of cultivation methods and the cultivated plant species
indicates that the climate is stable and has not become
decidedly drier. Similarly it was reported at the Unesco Arid
Land conference in Jerusalem in 1953 that all the historic,
botanical and archaeological evidence pointed to little change
in climate during the last eighty years or so in Israel and
India.
Tixeront points out that droughts do occur and we ought
to become aware of their statistical probability and makes a
plea that we study all the climatic factors which may lead
to the development of drought periods, as conversely to flood
times.
In practice, in Tunisia information from historical and
archaeological sources has been used to good effect. The
planting of olive trees at the same spacing as used by the
Romans in dry farming is successful today. So, too, wells,
cisterns and irrigation channels of Roman origin give a guide
to modern siting and use.
In semi-arid and arid areas transpiration and evaporation
(or to put them together as Dr. C. W. Thornthwaite does
under the term évapotranspiration) constitute the major
factor in the recirculation of rainfall into the air, but it is
Extremely and.
Photo J. Swarbnck
EMBLEM OF ARIZONA in the U.S.A. ¡s the Saguaro or monument
cactus. These giant plants bear edible crimson fruit which were dried
and ground into flour by the Indians. Cactuses shown here, dwarfing
visitors to Saguaro National Monument, Arizona, are about 200 years old.
notably difficult to measure satisfactorily because of differ¬
ences in plant cover. It is becoming clearly evident that in
some instances an increase in crops or pastures or tree cover
may severely tax the capacity of ground water supplies and
in general a balance has to be struck between the needs of
crops and the water supply.
Experiments in South Africa indicate that only about
three percent of rainfall goes lower than the root zone of
veldt grasses. Phreatophytes, or plants which grow their
roots down to the water table like alfalfa, are notable for
their efficient transpiration; indeed I have on occasion
recommended the use of alfalfa to drain waterlogged
orchards in irrigated country. Worthless phreatophytes may
waste millions of acre feet of water in an arid country.
In order to assess the water requirements of an area,
wherever it may be, some way of measuring evaporation and
transpiration must be used, yet strange though it may seem
we have not yet achieved exactitude even in reading evapo¬
ration pans. Dr. Thornthwaite, who has devoted his scienti¬
fic life to the study of climate, has proposed a method oí
estimating the water need of a region so that it is possible,
8

Arid.
knowing the rainfall and the évapotranspiration, to deter¬
mine how much additional water, if any, is needed by way of
irrigation.
Latterly, specially designed soil tanks four square metres
in area and seventy centimetres deep, in which plants can be
grown under field conditions, have been set up in a number
of places, each tank being surrounded by a large buffer area
to ensure greater accuracy in results, but not enough are yet
in use to give the range of variation from one area to
another. Meantime Thornthwaite and his colleagues have
come to the conclusion that the computation of potential
évapotranspiration for any place can be done from data on
air temperature and latitude alone. With this it is possible
to determine the water needs of an area and as it were keep
accounts whereby the most economical use may be made of
irrigation water.
Having briefly referred to rainfall, using that as a general
term, we may naturally turn to what happens to the rainfall
apart from évapotranspiration. Some infiltrates the soil and
Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
Luxor to about 70 miles north of Cairo. According to
Mohamed El Sayed Ayoub, one-time Inspector-General for
Nile Control, the mean width of the stream is 10 kilometres,
the strata of sand and gravel in which it flows ranges from
100 metres to 300 metres in depth, with a water storage capa¬
city of nearly 500,000 million cubic metres, and the water
takes nearly 100 years to arrive at the head of the delta.
Each year 1,400 million cubic metres is planned to be used on
25,000 acres of a new irrigation project, about another
1,000 million cubic metres are used by plants and nearly 4,000
million cubic metres flow into the delta unused.
The great aquifer under the Nile and the Nile itself receive
their water from distant sources, but were they to rely, on
local rainfall for the infiltration and stream flow they would
be dry each year for six months.
I would like at this stage to tell you briefly the story of
another great arid area which is being reclaimed, the recla¬
mation of which illustrates regional organization of the order
of the U.S. Tennessee Valley Authority. I refer to the Thai
desert area in western Pakistan.
It consists of a triangular area
of nearly five million acres with
a base of 65 miles along the Salt
Range to the north, and a length
of about 175 miles to the apex at
the south, and is in the Punjab
between the Indus, Jhelum and
the Chunab. Tradition, support¬
ed by geological evidence, has it
that the Indus formerly flowed
down the middle and deposited
huge quantities of sand and silt
and later changed its course to
the west. The superficial sand
dunes arise from fine material
blown from coastal and desert re¬
gions of Sind and Rajasthan.
6, 4 0 0, 0 0 0
ACRES OF
UN FARM ED
LANDS
Semi-arid.
One quarter of the earth's
land surface is desert or
semi-desert. This repre¬
sents 6,400,000 acres of
unproductive land receiv¬
ing an average of less
than 10 inches of rainfall
per year. From adjoining
map It can be seen that
many of the world's deserts
have long fringes border¬
ing the sea-coasts. Unesco
is at present completing a
special study of these
coastal deserts (which
total 18,500 miles in
length) as they offer more
immediate possibilities of
reclamation once the large-
scale distillation of sea
water becomes a practical
reality. Map published
here is based on special
maps prepared for Unesco
by Peveril Meigs of the
Arid Zone Commission
of the International Geo¬
graphical Union.
The vegetation consists of low
brush and scant grass, on which
camels browse. There are no in¬
dications of early occupation,
such as are found in other parts,
prior to the 14th century, when a
few tanks of about an acre each
were constructed by the Emperor
Sher Shah Sun.
other layers and goes underground where it may be stored or
move slowly in suitable layers gradually towards the sea.
The most generally used method of determining infiltration
is to examine the data of the use and fall of water in wells,
although today radio-active isotopes are available to make
evident the movement of water through permeable strata.
There are in the United States of America about seven
thousand observation wells, and approximately five percent
of these have automatic recording equipment.
The examination of an area for underground water in the
first place calls for geological knowledge and the use of
geologists to make the survey with or without the aid of geo¬
physics. By this means exact records would be kept of all
the wells or bores put down, the strata through which they
went down, the quality and quantity of the water, and so on.
Such a survey would enable estimates to be made of the total
volume of the underground supply, of its area and depth in
a confined source, or of its flow if unconfined, and the region
of flow in the aquifer.
Below the Nile there is an underground river (aquifer)
about 560 miles long reaching from about 80 miles south of
The question of developing the
Thai area was first considered in
1870, but nothing was done until
1901 when a Colonization Bill au¬
thorized the construction of a ca¬
nal to the Shamlat area. However
nothing was done until 1936 when
the distribution of the waters of
the Indus and its great tributa¬
ries was considered. Work on a
Thai project was begun in 1939
but held up because of the war,
and channels were filled up with sand when in 1947 the flood
of refugees from India moved into Pakistan. Of these 250,000
are being settled in the Thai.
In August 1949, the Thai Development Authority (T.D.A.)
was established, to be responsible for the full development
of an area of 834,500 acres, with an area of 638,000 acres to
be developed by private enterprise with the assistance of the
Authority.
It was believed that the agricultural development of the
area and the establishment of villages and small towns
throughout the area needed the balance of industrial deve¬
lopment, and so today there are sugar mills, cotton textile
mills, a woollen mill and a cement factory in the area. Some
640 villages have been established, each with forty or fifty
houses on a total of 100 acres, with a green belt all round
each village and a timber area of 50 acres alongside. Each
settler is allowed 15 acres of land at not more than a mile
and a half from his village, to cultivate satiifactorily.
The authority of the T.D.A. originally covered
the million and a half acres commandable by (Cont'd on
canal for irrigation, but in 1953 a wider scheme next page)

CONQUEST OF THE
DESERT (Cont'd)
Fresh water from the se
was examined for parts of the three and a half million
acres not commanded by canals. In certain belts masonry
wells have for years been used to supply water for small
holdings. The aquifer consists of sand layers with a water
table at 40 to 60 feet in ample quantity, and so a tube
well scheme has been initiated. How successful this will
be remains to be seen because percolation is heavy and
evaporation with summer temperatures up to 120° F. is high,
but it is hoped that each well can irrigate 150 acres. Early
last year Australia supplied tube wells to the T.D.A. under
the Colombo Plan.
Before leaving this very sketchy description of a brave
project I think it is safe to prophesy that in perhaps a decade
there will be need to study a salt problem in parts of the
Thai, and FAO is already at work in Pakistan on this problem
"in the Indus valley.
Mediterranean - Dead Sea Canal ?
In arid and semi-arid areas where the need for recharging
the underground water is acute there are often long
periods of no rain, interspersed with short bursts of storm
rains with extremely rapid run-off, carrying astonishing
quantities of surface material of sizes ranging from silt part¬
icles to boulders. These storm waters are gone in a relatively
short time, as you know, and the problem is how to make
good use of what are sometimes quite large supplies, by
spreading and slowing down the rush of waters, by the use of
dams and tanks, by selection of the site for percolation, and
so on.
I referred a moment ago to the possible development of
salty conditions in some of the irrigated land under the
T.D.A. Rainfall is relatively free from salts and where
rainfall is adequate for agricultural production excess soluble
salts in the soil are leached away in the drainage water, but
where rainfall is low leaching is reduced and salt accu¬
mulation can occur. All irrigation waters contain salts dis¬
solved from rocks and soils through which the water moves.
Some years ago Scofield studied irrigated areas in the
southwest United States and described the salt balance as
the relation between the amount of salts being delivered in
irrigation water and the amount removed from area in drain¬
age waters. This concept backed by suitable methods for
its application may be valuable in preventing salting and
in remedying existing salt conditions.
Dr. H. E. Hayward, of the U.S. Salinity Laboratory at River¬
side, has prepared a most comprehensive review for Unesco
of research on plant growth under saline conditions. In it
he refers to the classification of saline and alkali soils, the
quality of waters for irrigation, the physiological bases in
plants for salt and alkali tolerance, the effects on plant
growth and on seed germination and then succintly reviews
the position in Australia, India and Pakistan, South and Cen¬
tral America and North America.
As human, animal and plant bodies are so largely made up
of water it is little wonder that the ability of man to live is
dependent on having plenty of good water. I referred earlier
to the relationship between population and food supply. The
same sort of relationship obtains between population and
water supply. It is little wonder then that men's minds turn
to those seemingly inexhaustible supplies of water, the seas
and oceans, and wish it were economically feasible to desalt
sea water in immense quantities.
On one occasion a sincere good wisher asked me whether
it would be possible to construct a canal from the Mediter¬
ranean through the Negev desert to the Dead Sea using
desalted sea water for irrigating the desert and raising the
level of the Dead Sea waters with the drainage. Well, the
answer is that success in producing large quantities of fresh
water economically from salt water is not just around the
corner. There is no magic wand, but research is going on in
many parts and there is little doubt that the day will come
when in some arid areas it will be possible to provide desalt¬
ed water at lower cost than, for example, water transmitted
over great distances.
Dr. Everett Howe, of the University of California, prepared
for Unesco an excellent summary of research on the utiliza¬
tion of saline water and Sheppard Powell, a member of the
Advisory Group to the U.S. Secretary of the Interior, has
reported on the Saline Water Conversion Programme. This
programme was established by the Congress of the United
States under Public Law 448 and the research projects financ¬
ed by grants in aid under this enactment are already highly
productive, especially in assessing the merits and costs of
producing fresh water from saline supplies. The Saline
Water Programme is due to end July 1957, but I am sure we
hope that it may be extended beyond that date.
I now come to a consideration of that which forms the base
on which food production on the scale for world needs takes
placel the soil. It is not proposed to go into any detail
about arid soils. Suffice it to recall a few characteristics
such as their low content of organic matter and so of nitro¬
gen, the fact that they are more usually alkaline than acid
and so may develop permeability problems with irrigation,
and their sometimes rather high content of soluble salts.
Despite these characteristics, with suitable fertilizer treat¬
ments crop yields under irrigation can be remarkably high
and large scale prosperous communities may be established,
as witness the position in the U.S.A. and in Australia.
There is little evidence of any marked climate change for
the worse since man used or misused the Iand for living. The
effectiveness of the rainfall has however been seriously reduc¬
ed by man's over-use of plough, the axe and the grazing
animal, particularly the goat. Marginal areas have become
man-made desert areas and it is in this sense that the desert
is advancing. In any attempt to re-establish marginal areas
for better production and living conditions it is necessary to
survey and map the existing plant cover, whether natural
or cultivated, and land use, as is being done, and/or plan¬
ned, by F.A.O. working with national authorities.
The main task is to attempt the regeneration of a better
plant cover and to do this while the population is engaged
in gaining a living from the area. It is essential to have as
guides in this work enclosed or protected areas which are
ungrazed, in order to study such natural regeneration as may
occur and indeed sometimes the results may be startling.
One thing we cannot do, and that is go over from one area
in one part of the world and at once begin to apply proce¬
dures elsewhere in the expectation that they will be success¬
ful. Much experimentation is needed in selecting suitable
plants, in getting them seeded, germinated and growing in
these very old environments.
Land of imported plants
It is dangerous to disturb the land surface more than ne¬
cessary even with good intent because of the possibility of
soil removal or seedling scarification by the sand-loaded
winds which blow in the hot season. I have seen this in
the Thai desert of Pakistan where we are making trials
with a number of plants. It seems to me that the provision
of some shelter from these searing winds is essential and this
can begin round nursery areas and in strips suitably placed
across the prevailing winds. The limitless horizons of the
desert are very interesting to write about but they are no
good for proper land care.
Now, I come from a land where it has been necessary to
introduce and establish every kind of plant food which
you can think of for man and his animals, with the exception
of the native grasses and top feed dry climate trees like the
mulga (an Acacia). We have successfully introduced every
kind of fruit and vegetable which can be grown anywhere
and we are still testing many grasses and legumes. The
same is true of the U.S.A., where I think trial introductions
from all over the world total more than 65,000.
Oustanding with us has been the success of subterranean
clover, which has meant millions to sheep men in southern
Australia. Phalaris tuberosa and rye grasses t
(Lolium spp.) in the south, Censhrus spp. in the (Cont d on
west and Rodhes grass in Queensland are other PaSe ,2)
10

Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
¡*PU
'*-
'THE THIRSTY LAND
SHALL BECOME
SPRINGS OF WATER'
Large-scale research and development work to
make the barren desert lands blossom in the
Negev region of southern Israel has been vigor¬
ously pushed ahead for the past several years.
A pipe line (above) crossing the entire Negev
is being constructed to bring water from the
north to the parched lands of the south. Scien¬
tists (left and below) prospect for underground
water sources by studying rock and soil struc¬
ture. Extreme left, research worker expe¬
riments on water needs of plants at Hebrew
University laboratory, Jerusalem. In 1952 an
international symposium of arid land scientists
was held in Jerusalem under Unesco's auspices
to examine the latest findings of desert research
in different parts of the world. (Unesco Photos)
fc*r
1 1

CONQUEST OF
THE DESERT
(Cont'd)
....
Copynghc Rapho, Pans
MODERN WATER
DIVINER
Underground water survey is
made near Rabat, Morocco,
(above, left) by gravimetric
method. Instrument records
variations in gravity and re¬
veals subsoil structure. Above,
right, irrigation canal ' brings
water to Moroccan date groves.
illustrations. But the U.S.A. and Australia use alfalfa, called
by Australians lucerne, the American name being nearer the
Arabic which means the good plant. I refer to this to illus¬
trate the possibilities of plant exploration for grasses and
legumes particularly in old arid areas. There is much yet to
be done in this field.
It is obviously necessary to learn what are the physiological
factors which enable desert and near-desert plants to sur¬
vive long periods with limited water supply under conditions
of excessive insolation, very high day temperatures and low
night temperatures.
Colonel Omar Draz, Director of the Desert Range Develop¬
ment Project in Egypt, has referred to the need for a tho¬
rough understanding of the ecological, genetic and physiolo¬
gical bases which will enable the selection of plants and ani¬
mals most suited to arid conditions, and has drawn atten¬
tion to the importance in animals of heat tolerance and heat
dissipation, about which much is still to be learned. He has
stressed the idea that it is shortsighted to look down on
local breeds which have become adapted to the conditions of
living in the environment.
Whatever research work is done in any or all of the fields
we have so far considered, the end result should be for the
benefit of man and it is appropriate therefore to think at this
stage about man himself, his well-being and living conditions.
One striking feature of man in the desert is his nomadism,
12
Belin, Morocco.
and while it may always be that some movement of flocks
must occur to and from grazing areas it does not follow that
the shepherds remain nomads. It is unnecessary to do more
than remind you how very different the lives of men, women
and children are under nomadic conditions from those which
you enjoy in a dry climate. Any changes in modes of living
must mean great social adjustments for those people.
W. S. S. Ladell, Director of the Hot Climate Physiological
Research Unit in Nigeria, dealing with the influence of envi¬
ronment in arid regions, points out the wide range in tem¬
perature which man has to live under, as for example at
Basra where the mean monthly minimum varies from freez¬
ing to 83 °F and the mean monthly maximum from 67 °F to
109 °F. Under these conditions there is also little cloud, and
scanty vegetative cover so that the ground radiates heat,
and dust-laden air radiates still more heat. With wind in
addition, water loss from the body may proceed faster than
physiologically desirable.
Ladell refers to heat acclimatization, by which is meant
the physiological changes resulting in an improvement in
work following exposure in a hot environment and consi¬
ders that man can live under conditions more severe than
occur in the hottest parts of the world. Protection from
direct solar radiation is desirable in the form of a light
broad-brimmed hat, or on a tractor a canopy over the driv¬
ing seat (1).
Good housing is essential cool by day and such as to give
adequate protection at night; and in this respect the thick-
walled, small-windowed, pise houses of the Near East, Pakis¬
tan and India are types.
Desert dwellers may suffer from prickly heat and from
malnutrition and vitamin A deficiency which leads to slow
healing of wounds.
(¡) For an article by Dr. W.S.S. Ladell on the Myth of the Tropics, See page 58.

Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
USIS Phocos.
Water is the essence of life and it seems a pity that because
of religious beliefs or tradition desert dwellers do not take
to the use of galvanised iron tanks to store roof water.
We who live in comfort find it hard to realize what life is
like without electricity or gas, without water in pipes, without
refrigeration and radios, air conditioning in buildings, good
roads and fast cars and so forth. But many thousands live
where hydro-electric power is not available nor where fossil
fuels like coal and oil can be used. So we turn to such sour¬
ces pf power as wind and sun.
Successful wind-driven generators up to 70 kW capacity
are functioning in the United Kingdom; and much thought is
being given to automatic regulation in variable winds in
order to make the fullest use of wind power. It is most
important to choose the right site for a windmill.
The use for wind power to pump water either directly or
through the use of electricity should result in saving bullock
power and thereby acreage for human food.
Solar energy has already been put to work for cooking and
heating water and we saw demonstrations of equipment in
action at New Delhi, India, last November. The problem is
to reduce cost to within the means of the average Indian.
Here in California hot water heaters have been installed on
the roof with insulated hot water storage tanks.
Considerable thought and experimentation is being devot¬
ed to the possibility of developing a solar engine. Dr. Abbott
of the Smithsonian Institution has long pioneered in this
field.
In any scientific work it is first essential to survey the
field. In this case it is a survey of the fields, and so it is a
highly complex operation calling for teamwork of the highest
order. I do not decry individual effort, indeed some of the
Dry lands in the United States
have become miraculously
productive thanks to large-
scale irrigation programmes.
Photos show landscapes now
marked by curving channels,
contour ploughing and terrac¬
ing to prevent soil erosion.
greatest contributions to knowledge have been made by the
Newtons and Einsteins. But in the title of the address allot¬
ted to me "The Challenge of Arid Land Research and Deve¬
lopment for the Benefit of Mankind" it is impossible to avoid
the inference that here we must have team work, and that
team work should be between individuals, between univer¬
sities and research institution and between peoplesin
other words between United Nations Organizations.
Particularly does it seem appropriate that we who belong
to those sections of mankind that enjoy the highest stan¬
dards of living should see a plain duty to help in every way
possible to benefit the less well-off sections of mankind.
I often think how wasteful it is that the billions of money
used in defending part of mankind against possible aggres¬
sion by another part of mankind could not be spent in
research work of this sort for the benefit of mankind. Ima¬
gine our young folk being called up for service and electing
to serve for a period in one of the fields we have been discus¬
sing during these meetings. But that is Utopian.
It seemed to me that the title of this address required me
to be a sort of missioner, and if I have succeeded in confirm¬
ing you in a determination to support in every way you can
the efforts of scientists, the work of institutions and above
all the great work being done in Unesco, fao, who and so on,
I am amply rewarded.
13
