1955 : BIG YEAR OF DECISION FOR TV
by Henry Cassirer
The spread of television throughout the world has been
phenomenal. Today there are some 60 "television
countries". Of these no fewer than 38 are operating
regular or experimental television services, and another
20 are planning to introduce them, or taking practical steps
toward that end.
Television can carry
a visual image across
the North American
continent and can
bring programmes
from London to Rome
or from Copenhagen
to Paris. The viewer
can be "on the spot"
for an event taking
place hundreds of mi¬
les away. In Morocco
and the Philippines,
in Japan and the
Soviet Union, on the
American continent
from Alaska in the.
far north to Argen¬
tina in the south,
television is opening
up new fields.
In what directions
is this enormous ex¬
pansion of television
leading? A survey
made by Unesco in
February 1955 (1)
shows that the power
of attraction intrinsic
in TV is so great that
sooner or later every
modern State con¬
templates its intro-
d u c t i o n. Although
obstacles may exist,
such as lack of eco¬
nomic resources, in¬
dustrial under-deve-
1 o p m e n t, mountain
ranges, vast distances
and dispersed popula¬
tions, nevertheless the
slogan "we must have
television ! " can be
heard from the Chi¬
lean Andes to the
deserts of Iraq, and
from the mountains
of Yugoslavia to the
plains of India. If
in Costa Rica or
Egypt, or in Portugal
or Australia, television may not yet be here today, present
plans indicate that it will certainly come tomorrow.
Television is part and parcel of the modern world and those
who still believe that they can close their eyes to it are liable
to find themselves overtaken by developments. They may
ignore television but it is sure that television will not ignore
their countries. This is not to say that television must ne¬
cessarily be welcomed. Its influence can be beneficial and it
can be the reverse. The pertinent question in most coun¬
tries today is not whether to have television, but to what
purpose and to what extent. The issue is, therefore: on
what lines will television develop and what will be its impact.
Closer examination of today's world television picture
suggests that 1955 will be the "year of television" for many
countries hitherto on the fringe of its development. To use
a military term for a
medium which can
vitally contribute to
peace, the "'infra¬
structure", that is
the network of trans¬
mitters and relay
systems, has made
great strides during
1954.
In Europe, the
number of stations
increased from 25 in
1953 to 76 in January
1955, while for the
first time eight Euro¬
pean countries (2)
were joined by tem¬
porary relay facilities
which are now gra¬
dually being turned
into permanent links.
The German Federal
Republic is covered by
a network from Ham¬
burg to Munich; Ita¬
ly's television extends
from the northern
frontier to south of
Rome at present, and
it will cover the entire
country, including
Sardinia and Sicily,
by the end of 1956;
France, which for
years had been mark¬
ing time with trans¬
mitters at Paris and
Lille, now has its
entire eastern region
covered, from Metz
through Strasbourg
and Lyons right
down to Marseilles in
the south. Many
smaller countries are
similarly caught up
in the race to expand
the scope of televi¬
sion by building new
transmitters and
relay links.
The result of this
expansion is reflected
in the sale and production of television receivers. Monthly
production in Germany was four times as large at the end of
1954 as at the beginning; in Italy, the advance of television
is no longer marked in tens but in hundreds of thousands of
receivers. This development, of course, falls far short of the
United States or the United Kingdom, with their 35 million
and 4 million receivers respectively. But the important point
is that in many countries, where in 1954 it was still regarded
as a questionable novelty, television has "caught on" in 1955,
and is now ready to go forward in '"snowballing dimensions"
within the limitations of national powers of production and
consumption.
(Photo N.K.H.. Tokyo)
(1) "Television, a world survey, supplement 1955". Unesco publication. Price :
Î.50; 3./; 750 Fr fr.
(2) Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Switzerland and
the United Kingdom.
In 1954 receivers in Canada exceeded
the million mark, and it thus became
the third country to reach this figure
(Continued on
next page.)
27

1955 : TV YEAR
OF DECISION
(Continued)
after the United States and Great Britain. In 1955 a fourth
countrythe Soviet Union will be added to this list accord¬
ing to present plans for receiver output.
This year will also be significant in another way as it will
bring to an end the monopoly of non-commercial television
in Europe, and of commercial television in the United States.
The first commercial European television station went on the
air in 1954 in the Saar, quickly followed by stations in Monte-
Carlo and Luxembourg. This commercial development will
reach its apex in September 1955 with the inauguration of
telecasting by the Independent Television Authority in
England. In the United States educational television has to
struggle against great financial, political and organizational
odds. Nevertheless there are today already 14 educational
stations on the air serving a potential audience of 20 million
people, and many more are under construction.
The stakes in the future of television are so high that
questions of ownership and organization have given rise to
bitter controversy. Television was the subject of some of
the most animated sessions in the British and French par¬
liaments. It has led to rivalry between Swiss cities and in
Belgium between regions. Educational television is a poli¬
tical factor in Washington and in every state of the Union.
Practically every other country touched by television has
had its share of conflict.
Why all this heat? Because the pattern which is adopted
today will undoubtedly shape the future. Far-sighted men
are aware that a control on stations today may mean a hold
on the eye of the public tomorrow, and that the purposes of
television programmes which are now better developed will
determine the character of telecasting for a long time to
AROUND THE WORLD, television is finding its way into the homes of
all classes of people, helped by a decrease in the price of sets and the
availability of credit purchase facilities. Often replacing other forms of
distraction for those with moderate means, it has also changed the
skyline in hundreds of cities. (Photo taken by Henry Cassirer in Lens, France)
28
ASIA'S leading TV
country is Japan
where over 33,000
receivers were func¬
tioning towards the
end of 1 954. Japan
has both public and
private TV stations.
Here.achildren's pro¬
gramme is rehearsed
in Tokyo studios of
the Japanese Broad¬
casting Corporation.
come. A race is on, and it is open to question how the sup¬
porters of educational and cultural television will fare.
If television programming is examined, the first impression
gained is that television- can accomplish everything! from
spectacular variety shows in the United States, priced at
over $100,000, to simple but effective telecasts for school
children in Japan; from full length drama in the United
Kingdom to instructional broadcasts to French farmers;
from classical ballet in the Soviet Union to songs and folk¬
lore in Venezuela.
Uncanny power of pursuasion
There can be no doubt that the social and cultural condi¬
tions in each nation impress themselves upon its televi¬
sion system. In the United States a competitive eco¬
nomic system and the federal state structure have contri¬
buted to the rise of hundreds of television stations, with
different patterns of programmes and of ownership, which
give viewers in many cities a choice between more than seven
different stations.
In the Soviet Union, where not only television but all
entertainment media are functions of the state, it can bring
to the viewer the latest films, theatre and opera performan¬
ces, or any public sports event, without regard to legal or
contractual restrictions. In Germany, television faithfully
reflects the federal structure of the Federal Republic. ' Here,
programmes are originated from a greater number of places
than in any other country in the world.

Unesco Courier. N" 6. 1955
EUROPE'S contri¬
bution to use of TV
as a link between
nations began in 1952
when programmes
were first exchanged.
Last year, eight coun¬
tries used relay
networks to transmit
programmes giving a
picture of each coun¬
try. Left, base of
link aerials near Do¬
ver, England part
of this network. (BBC
Copyright photo.)
In France and Britain, on the other hand, television
expresses the centralization of much of the cultural life in
the capitals, though the provinces constantly seek to assert
themselves. While television is mass education in Colombia,
it's mainly middle class entertainment in Mexico. There Is
no rigid and immutable structure and it can and must be
adapted to national needs and traditions.
With due regard to national differences and the efforts
made to enhance educational programming, it remains true
to say that television is being developed primarily as a source
of mass entertainment. There is no doubt that this will
always remain a fruitful field as much of this entertainment
can make a cultural contribution and bring joy and relaxa¬
tion to working people caught in the monotony of modern
life. But there is more to television than mere entertain¬
ment. Its use for education of children and of adults alike,
its power to make knowledge of science or geography, his¬
tory or economics visually accessible to the many. Here is a
field for fruitful exploitation and development.
Television is taking root today in countries where illiteracy
and utter poverty, ignorance of healthy living and of modern
methods of production, are widespread among large sections
of the people. Advertisers have long realized television's
uncanny power of persuasion and demonstration. Cannot
these same powers serve fundamental education and change
our entire approach to the problem of informing people in
less developed countries on ways to improve their conditions
of life? This is a subject, rich in promise, to which Unesco is
now giving particular attention. Here is a challenge for
constructive forces to bring their influence to bear upon the
future shape of television.
Another trend which has shown significant advance in
1954, is the use of television as a link between all nations.
International co-operation .between stations, by relay, film,
or adaptation of programmes, is gradually becoming normal
practice. In Europe, individual countries frequently find
themselves unable to cope with the vast demand for pro¬
grammes, because television devours money, talent and faci¬
lities. Through international exchange by direct relay, these
countries increase their resources - and enrich their pro¬
grammes* Film telecasts flow out from the United States or
reach viewers there from foreign countries.
Danger of standardized ideas
Herein lies both danger and opportunity. The danger is
that this most centralized and costly of all communi¬
cation media will further subject national and regional
cultures to the standardization of ideas and tastes of a few
world production centres. The opportunity lies in the possi¬
bility of hearing and seeing on television the people of ano¬
ther nation and another culture. Here television may serve
peace by narrowing the gap between man's public life, whose
fate is in the hands of world-wide forces, and the circle of
his personal experience, which is confined to the narrow
range of the individual. World Television in 1955 stands
at the threshold.
29
