CHINESE OPERA
by Bafwant Gargi

CHINESE
OPERA
(Continued)
Mosaic
of music, acrobatics
and complex ballet
IN 1 954, some fifty thousand people attended the
performances given in Paris during the International
Theatre Festival. Twelve countries took part and
Parisians heard Norwegian, Serbo-Croat, German and
Italian spoken in their theatres. This year's festival
brought twenty-eight foreign companies to Paris as well
as thousands of people from all over Europe who flocked
to see the performances which were given in half a
dozen languages. The triumph of the 1955 Festival was
further proof of the power of the theatre whose reality
embraces and transcends language. Nowhere was this
more evident than in the performance of the Peking
Opera. In the following article, Balwant Gargi relates
the history and traditions of this classical Chinese
Opera, whose mime, dancing and music were among
the high points of the Paris Festival.
¿¿rW^ Ravel to China if you want wisdom" is an old
I Arab saying. Explorers and travellers from
Marco Polo's times down to our own have
journeyed to this mysterious land to discover this
truth. For centuries it was the dragons, the
enigmatic characters and ideographic script, the
grotesque masks and costumes of their theatre, the
strange and fantastic in Chinese art which fascinat¬
ed the Western mind. The depth and subtlety, the
shimmer and transparent richness of the art lay
hidden. Some Western critics and interpreters
cultivated the idea that Chinese art was occult and
unknowable.
This myth of unknowability broke down when
thousands poured into the Sarah Bernhardt Theatre
during the recent presentation of Chinese Opera at
the International Theatre Festival in Paris. The
Opera drew people from all over Europe. Some flew
from London to witness the spectacle.
The classical Chinese Opera differs from the
Occidental in many ways. Eastern music is not
polyphonic in form. In Chinese music, as in Indian,
strength and charm lie in subtle nuances and
variations.on the same melody. It creates a mood, a
feeling.
It has not acquired the intricate design of Western
harmony nor the pyramidal symphonic form with
motifs embroidered, expanded and interwoven with
many melodies, which tells a story and describes
scenes. Eastern music does not have a descriptive
language. It weaves a mosaic of sound within a
shorter range; it is more intense than elastic, disci¬
plined by its form.
Dance, on the other hand, in both India and China
has a highly evolved language of gesture which can
convey anything and everything. It is so perfect in
mime that an expert in Kathakali dance (one of the
four principal classical dance schools in India) can
deliver even a highly political speech, so the Gurus
(Hindu spiritual teachers )say.
This intense development of mime in the Oriental
dance sprang perhaps from the lack of descriptive
quality in its music. Stylized dance gestures which
describe songs must be exact and perfect. Dance,
both classical and folk, has always been accompanied
by vocal songs and percussion instruments. A song
is a running commentary unfolding a story which is
enacted in dance. Music and dance have walked
hand in hand and given and taken much from each
other.
In Occidental opera and theatre, the recent trends
to experiment in mixing songs and poetry with real¬
istic acting (in the manner of Berthold Brecht) and
combining action and mime in operas (as in the
Berlin Komike Opera) owe much to the Chinese.
Chinese opera in its rudimentary form is over two
thousand years old. In the eighth century small
comic and satirical pieces on political personages
and social life were knit together with songs. In the
next four or five hundred years a fuller and more
complete operatic form became crystallized. Born
in Peking, the seat of ancient kings and courts
around which all the arts flourished, the Chinese
opera assimilated the best traditions of theatre,
music, modes of singing, mime and dance. In the
19th century, artists like Tcheng Tchang-keng and
Tan Sing-pei, and in our own times Mei Lang-fan
and Tchou Sing-fan, by their brilliant performances
have carried forward and contributed to the tra¬
dition.
Chinese opera is a synthesis of dance, music and
mime. :t reveals the effect of concentration and
stylizatiijn in gesture, retaining always the essentials
of realism. The accompaniment by percussion in¬
struments underlines and reinforces the rhythm of
the movements.
In the Western theatre realistic sets and decor have
taken the form of naturalistic photographic realism
whose parallel we find in 19th century painting.
Chinese theatre does away with most of the decor.
The Indian folk theatre and the classical Chinese
theatre and opera do not strive to give an illusion of
reality. They break the "illusion of reality" and
create, in turn, a world of their own. The Chinese
opera player like the Kathakali dancer in India
through pure gesture creates palaces, chariots,
horses, rivers, forests, streets, boats, cars,
light and darkness everything required (Cont d on
as the setting for his own actions. next page)
18
19


CHINESE
OPERA
(Continued)
Rehearsals lasted twenty centuries
Masks and costumes are designed to express
particular characters. Different colours signify
different people! Style of beard, cut of moustache,
colour, angle of the eye, curves and lines of make¬
up and dress, have meaning. The flapping and
fluttering of long open double sleeves, which
unsophisticated audiences in the West may ignore
as the natural flourish of the costume, is in fact a
highly skilled manipulation by the actor. The
dropping of the sleeve, the backward and forward
toss, the ripple and tremor, circling and billow, all
denote a change of mood. These conventions and
their symbolic significance are known to all
Chinese audiences as opera has been a popular
medium since its inception.
In the Chinese Opera I saw in Paris at the Sarah
Bernhardt Theatre the performance was not one
continuous operatic drama but a series of cameos
ranging from pure mime and dance to pure music
including even a performance, on ancient Chinese
instruments.
The first episode was "The Meeting of the Three",
an adaptation of a popular 14th century romance.
A famous general, having fled enemies who had
slandered and menaced him, is staying at an inn.
A young knight and the innkeeper, both would-be
protectors of the general, are unknown to each
other and suspect each other.
At night the innkeeper steals into the knight's
room to take away his sword. In imagined pitch
darkness the knight and the innkeeper, straining
their eyes to pierce the gloom, search and grope for
each other with drawn swords. In this atmosphere
of fear and suspicion a ferocious duel begins.
Sabres slash the air and the perilous triple jumps
of the duellers, their hairbreadth
escape are full of danger, suspense and (Cont'd on
comedy. As they flash their swords page 2 7)
20

CHINESE
OPERA
(Cont'd from
page 20)
and miraculously miss each other every
time, the adversaries pant like two
blood-thirsty leopards, first making you
gasp and in the next moment roar
with laughter.
The laughter is released not from
comic facial contortions but springs out
of impossible situations, fantastic pos¬
tures and the superb orchestration of
the actors who perform a breathtaking
and precise acrobatic ballet.
The choreography which makes one's
head spin in its complex patterns has
been evolved through hundreds of years
of tradition and training, has been
worked by ancient masters, perfected
and matured through the ages. The
performances do not seem to have
been rehearsed in theatre halls at
scheduled times but through centuries,
through generations.
I do not know any theatre which
requires less knowledge of the spoken
word than the Chinese opera. In
"The River" we vividly see the old
boatman tie his boat to the bank, walk
through the mud and help the young
girl to embark. The wobbling of the
boat and the swaying of the girl as the
boatman rows her across the deep
waters seem absolutely real.
Product of time's crucible
IN the butterfly dance the acrobatic
feats of the players form a pattern
of colours and singing lines of
human limbs. Women and men in
bright costumes jump and somersault
and look like butterflies skimming and
kissing each other in the air. In its
presentation this piece is nearer to the
Western concept of ballet.
The simplification of form in Chinese
opera does not arise out of a primitive
or naive folk quality but from a highly
evolved technique, the product of
centuries of strenuous search. This art
simmered and bubbled in the crucible
of time and in the process all super¬
fluity has been shed. Its simplicity has
the conscious master's hand behind it,
the craftsmanship of the super-painter
who with a few strokes of his brush
sketches a human figure, a scene of
battle or a running horse.
In the creation of new opera China
has borrowed much from the West.
"The White Haired Girl" and "The
Butterflies" and the more recent operas
are a blend of Western realism with
native traditions, using harmonic music
patterns and symphonic orchestration
as a background to solo music.
China has much to offer Western
opera which today seems to be at a
stalemate so far as form is concerned.
This exchange of cultures is a unique
phenomena of our times when coun¬
tries like the members of one family
come together with their different
languages, songs, costumes and dances.
They have much to give and take from
each other and thereby enrich world
culture which is a heritage of all
humanity. (Photos Pic, Paris.)
Balwant Cargl is an Indian writer who has devoted
many years to a study of classical and folk drama
in India and the Far Cast.
