The paradox of coastal Peru
A DESERT STEEPED IN FOG
by
Gonzalo
de Reparaz
60
All photos by the author
An Arid Zone Research
Institute is being set up
in Peru with Unesco aid
to mobilize all the
resources of science and
engineering to wrest
production from 1,300
miles of barren coastal
regions flanked by craggy
mountain terrain tow¬
ering above them.

The coastal region of Peru a thirteen hundred mile-long
strip of territory enclosed between the Cordillera and
the sea is one of the most extraordinary arid zones of
the world. Quite recent upheavals have given it its present
form, and these upheavals are still going on. The average
number of earthquakes per year in Lima is about two hun¬
dred, but most of them are felt and recorded by the seismo¬
graphs alone. They merely demonstrate that the earth's
crust is still unstable in these regions, and has not yet
completed its evolution.
This narrow strip of land along the whole length of the
Peruvian coast is traversed by some forty water-courses',
which are the source of its wealth. These water-courses have
a common characteristic in most of the coastal area: cutting
through the mountains in deep valleys or canyons, they
spread out in the narrow coastal plain and supply water to
irrigated zones of varying extent.
Seen from the air, they form a long, narrow, well-defined
ribbon of water, sometimes edged with cultivated land, rising
Peru plans to tap rivers like the Ocona (above) which flow out of the Andes, so as to extend the cultivated lands which
today form oases in the dry, coastal belt. Centuries ago the Indians brought water here in hundreds of miles of canals.
up over each bank and spreading out into the plain. But the
river is not the only source of water. There is also subter¬
ranean water, known to the Indians long before the arrival of
the Spaniards.
Archaeologists have found the remains of a complex agri¬
cultural civilization which provided the soil for the growth
and blossoming of a great culture. The works of its artists,
on the one hand, and of its hydraulic engineers on the other,
show the full extent of the skill of the Indians.. Their en¬
gineers overcame immense difficulties to construct hundreds
of miles of canals, thus providing water for the arid land of
the coastal belt.
. protessor DE REPARAZ is a Portuguese Geographer and Cartographer who has
oevoted many years to the study of climatology and the economic geography of
Latin-America and the Iberian peninsula. He is chief of the Unesco Technical
Assistance mission to Peru and author of many works on Latin-American and Ibe¬
rian geography, climatology and economics, as well as on the art, history, litera¬
ture, etc.. of these countries.
Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
These canals took their water from fifty or more miles
up-stream, in the heart of the Cordillera of the Andes. Some
of them are still in use. Others have fallen into disuse and
their abandonment meant the abandonment of formerly
cultivated land.
But this civilization in Peru is not as dead as one might
think, for the people of the river oases of the Peruvian coast
have never ceased to cultivate their land just as their obscure
and distant ancestors laboured before them.
Today, these river oases constitute one of the country's
greatest sources of wealth. Though only three per cent of
the arid coastal belt is cultivated (about one and a quarter
million acres) the output is amazing. These tiny oases
produce goods (cotton, sugar, rice) which in 1953 represented
fifty-one per cent of Peru's total exports.
Cotton has earned the name of "'white gold" in Peru, and
each acre of wheat yields more than one and a half tons per
annum, in the province of Arequipa. But there are not
enough acres under
cultivation, and it is
imperative to exploit
the coastal belt to the
maximum by extending
its oases and making
use of semi-arid land
with the help of the
new techniques for the
utilization of arid and
semi-arid soils.
In the development
of the coastal belt the
subterranean water re¬
sources, once used by
the Indians, are of vi¬
tal importance. In
Southern Peru planta¬
tions have sprung up
like mushrooms in the
last three years and
where all was sand and
desert, the waters of
the subsoil have en¬
abled many acres of
land to be planted with
cotton. At Los Castil¬
los, near lea, four hun¬
dred wells have been
sunk in the last ten
years. Further studies
of these underground
water supplies are need¬
ed so that their possi¬
bilities can be fully ex¬
ploited. An engineer '
from the Peruvian Mi¬
nistry of Agriculture
recently returned from
India and California
where, with a Unesco
grant, he made a study
of methods of location
and utilization of subterranean water supplies.
How can water exist beneath the apparently arid surface
of Peru's coastal strip ? Some is produced by the infiltration
of rivers that come down from the Andes, and some by the
heavy fogs, typical of a part of this coast, which condense
and seep into the soil.
The Peruvian coast, although so uniform in appearance,
has very varied weather conditions. In the North, the ex¬
treme dryness of the atmosphere contrasts with the humi¬
dity of the sub-soil, and causes vast areas to be covered with
steppe-land vegetation. Further to the South, particularly
in the central coastal region around Lima, clouds hide the
sun for several months of the year, and create the paradox
of an arid land, with little rain, where the atmosphere is
perpetually saturated with moisture. Still further South, the
picture again changes completely. Here the sun
reigns supreme and the dryness of the atmosphere (Cont'd on
reaches a maximum. The "white city" of Arequipa, next page)
61

A desert steeped in fog (Continued)
at the foot of its three extinct, snow-capped volcanoes is
the capital of this land of the sun.
In each of these three different regions men are struggling
with widely contrasting conditions. Solutions to the
problems of the jNbrth are likely to be simpler. The diversion
of water from the rivers near the frontier of Ecuador offers
great possibilities. The Quiroz was recently diverted to
supply the river oasis of Piura, which had always been short
of water. In the first year increased cotton production had
covered the cost of the construction of the canal, a result
which must be unique in the worlcV Further South, the
Chancay, the Santa and other rivers also present tremendous
possibilities. A few years ago, more than twelve thousand
feet up in the Cordil¬
lera, the waters of 	
several lagoons which
formerly fed the Ama¬
zon basin, were diverted
to the Rio San Juan.
The same thing is now
to be done for the lea,
a tremendous under-
taking which will
enable the oasis to be
extended and pro¬
duction to be increased.
But this work is not
yet being carried out
on a scale calculated
to meet the increased
needs of the country,
and so vast schemes
are being worked out.
The people of Are¬
quipa, for example, are
tackling the problems
presented by Nature
with daring, courage
and energy, and their
problems are much
greater than those of
the North or even of
the centre. Arequipa
is seriously over¬
crowded and feels the
constant pressure of an
increasing population,
while people from the
overpopulated Andes
plateau (the Puno re¬
gion and the Peruvian
shores of Lake Titi¬
caca) continue to pour
in.
Recently I flew over
the pampas of La Joya,
Sihuas and Majes,
which are the hope of
the "'white city" of
Arequipa, and which
cover many hundreds
of thousands of acres
to the north of it. Today these vast pampas are deserts but
they can be placed under cultivation as soon as water can be
brought to them from the Sihuas and Majes rivers. Beyond
them is the immense Majes Canyon, deeper than the Colo¬
rado Canyon, at certain places reaching a depth of nearly
two miles. Here, at the bottom of this wild uninhabited
gorge, flows South Peru's largest water-course. And it is
here that Peru must capture the water that one day will
supply the people of Arequipa, by means of a hundred miles
or so of channels cut through one of the most rugged regions
in the world.
The aridity of these areas of Peru is largely caused by the
Humboldt current, a cold current which flows northward up
the coast, and also by the cold sea water which rises to the
surface from a great depth along the coast of Peru. Their
40 MILLION SEA BIRDS
1
Forty million sea birds swarm on the shore of tiny islands fringing the
coast of Peru. Their droppings (guano), richest nitrogenous fertilizer known,
once covered islands to depth of 40 to 150 feet. Stripped away in I 9 th
century, government today protects guano, still one of Peru's richest sources
of wealth and vital to prosperity of its coastal farmers.
-V 'AM
effect is to make the climate of this sub-tropical region
colder than it would otherwise be and to cause aridity. It
is not a desert, however, for most of the soil along the coast
would yield excellent returns if its thirst were quenched with
a little water. Much can be done to transform a considerable
part of this arid zone into a productive region.
The exceptionally cold coastal waters are also the reason
for the amazing wealth of sea-life in the Pacific off the coast
of Peru. Few seas are as rich as these and the best
evidence of their abundant fish is the vast number of guano
birds living on the islets strung out along the coast. It is the
incredible though not inexhaustible richness of these
waters, that satisfies the voracious appetite of the thirty or
forty million birds
(their number varies
from year to year)
which swarm on these
islands and produce
the valuable fertilizer
known as guano.
These tiny islands
are the most densely
populated in the
world in terms of
guano birds, guanayes,
Diqueros, ana alcatraces
or pelicans. Sometimes
their swarming num¬
bers may reach eighty
thousand to the acre.
Thus, thanks to the
wealth of the ocean,
almost three hundred
thousand tons of guano
have been obtained
from these islands
each year by the Com¬
pañía Administradora
de Guano. Today, as at
the time of the ancient
Indian civilizations,
guano is one of the
basic elements of agri¬
cultural prosperity in
the coastal region of
Peru, and is indispen¬
sable for the survival
of the oases in this
areas.
The productive
output of the coastal
belt is today only a
fraction of what it
might be if modern
techniques for -the
utilization of arid areas
were employed. Today
we are entering upon
an era of geographical
planning, and many
river basin develop¬
ment projects, creating
power for industry and
supplying water for agriculture, have shown that whole areas
can be completely transformed in this way. There are pro¬
bably few places in which geographical planning could hope
for better results than in the arid regions of Peru.
There are many problems to be solved, and much research
is needed. Geographical, climatic and hydrological surveys
will have to be undertaken and a thorough study made of the
different soils and their characteristics, of the subterranean
water resources and of wind as a source of power before
plans can be drawn up.
As a first step to carrying out such projects, Unesco has
agreed to help the Peruvian Government to set up an Arid
Zone Research Institute, thus providing the means of co¬
ordinating all branches of arid zone research in this part
of the world.
m
62
