THE VANISHING VEIL
A challenge to the old order
by A. H. Hourani
Most Arabs are Moslems, and for
over a thousand years their
social life has been governed
by the Law of Islam. Therefore, if we
wish to know what the Lie of Arab
women was, and to some extent still
is, we must first of all ask what Islamic
law says it ought to be.
Islam allows polygamy : those who
know nothing else about Islam know
this, although they may not be aware
of the limits placed upon polygamy a
man may have no more than four
wives, and only on condition that he
treats all of them justly. Islam allows
easy divorce too, and in practice it has
always been much easier for men to
divorce their wives than for women to
divorce their husbands. But on the
other hand married women are given
the right to own property and to be
maintained if they are divorced; and
women have the right to inherit,
although within limits a sister re¬
ceives only half as much as her brother
from their father's estate.
Law is not the only force which
moulds society; the Arab community
has been influenced too by social
customs which are not Moslem in
origin, although they have been
widespread in Moslem countries. By
tradition Moslem women are secluded:
hidden in the harem when at home,
behind the veil when they go out.
But seclusion existed in the Middle
Two years ago Egyptian "suffra¬
gettes" went on hunger strike
in Cairo for ten days (upper
photo) to draw the Govern¬
ment's attention to their de¬
mands for women's rights. Lea¬
der of this Egyptian women's
movement is Miss Dorria Shafik
(being interviewed by journa¬
lists below). The Government
is considering these demands.
^ -U- "'*. '
East before Islam arose. From the
time of the ancient Kings of Persia,
Eastern rulers have withdrawn them¬
selves and their womenfolk from the
public gaze, to emphasize the majesty
of Kingship. Moslem Caliphs and
Sultans adopted this habit, and what
the rulers did their subjects copied,
particularly the richer population of
the towns. Perhaps there is something
in Islamic conceptions which helped
the spread of this custom; but it is not
essentially nor exclusively Moslem, and
until recently Christian women as well
as Moslems wore the veil in the streets
of Arab towns.
This custom of seclusion, however,
was always held in check by othet
traditions. Social customs among the
Bedouin of the desert are freer than
those of the towns; and in the country¬
side economic necessity made the
woman the companion of her husband's
labour in the fields. Even in the towns
there were women who broke through
the barriers of custom and played a
part in literary, religious and even
political life. In thirteenth century
Egypt there was a Queen, Shajar ad-
Durr, who kept her husband and the
country in subjection for seven years.
She was an exception, and virtually
the only woman to have her name
inscribed on Islamic coins. It is only
In the last two generations lr ,.
that the traditional idea of ' ,
women's status has been x paSe/
35

THE VANISHING VEIL
(Continued)
Tradition requires that Moslem women go
veiled in public as in picture on right taken
in Kabul, Afghanistan. But they are also eager
to learn and to open their eyes to the world
around. Photo above was taken in Bombay
City Social Education Centre, partially
equipped with aid of Unesco Gift Coupons.
challenged on a large scale. It was
indeed only about fifty years ago that a
writer in Arabic gave the first full
statement on the need and reasons for
a change. He was an Egyptian, Qasim
Amin, who wrote two famous books,
"'The New Woman" and "The Libera¬
tion of Woman". In them he argued
that a gradual and careful change in
the status of women was not contrary
to the principles of Islam.
His ideas met with great opposition
at the time, but in the last fifty years
much of what he suggested has been
carried out, at least in the more
advanced Arab countries Egypt, Syria,
Jordan, Lebanon and Iraq. Even in
countries where the process of social
change has begun more recently, like
the Sudan, it has already influenced
the position of women. It is only in
the countries of the Arabian Peninsula,
Saudi Arabia and Yemen, that the old
order still persists unaltered.
First of all, there has been a change
in the legal position of women. No
Arab State has followed the example
of Turkey and abolished the jurisdiction
of Moslem law in such personal matters
as marriage and divorce; but in some,
36
and notably in Egypt, the law has been
given a new interpretation so as to
bring it more into line with modern
conceptions. For example, two Egyp¬
tian laws, of 1920 and 1929, have made
divorce less difficult, and have given
women the right to obtain a divorce if
their husbands ill-treat them, desert
them or fail to maintain them.
Again, the modern labour codes, like
the Egyptian law of 1933 and the
Lebanese of 1946, contain special regu¬
lations limiting the hours and laying
down the conditions of women's work.
Syria was the first Arab State to give
women the right to vote in elections;
her example has so far been followed
by Lebanon alone, but in Egypt there
is a strong feminist movement, with
Dorria Shafik as its glamorous leader,
and it seems only a matter of time
before women get the vote.
Here once again we should remember
that law is not the whole of life, nor
always its faithful reflection. If we
look beyond law to the life of the Arab
countries as it is actually lived, we
shall find a greater change. Perhaps
the most important sign of it is the
spread of women's education. The
pioneers here were the missionaries,
Catholic and Protestant, who opened
the first schools for girls a century ago.
In the last thirty years modern govern¬
ments in the Arab States have set up
their own systems of schools, for girls
as well as boys. In Egypt, girls account
for 35% of the school-population;
and as the Unesco Courier has re¬
cently told us, in the Arab refugee
schools run by Unesco and UNRWA,
48% of the pupils are girls.
In some Arab countries schools of
every type and at all levels are open
to girls; and in those of the highest
level, the colleges and universities, they-
study side-by-side with men. Un¬
obtrusively, without much publicity,
the Egyptian State Universities, the
French and American Universities in
Beirut, the Syrian University of Da¬
mascus, the higher colleges in Baghdad
have opened their doors to girls.
The Director of the Higher Teachers'
Training college in Baghdad once
explained how this was done. "We
knew", he said, "that to make an
official decision and announce it
publicly would arouse opposition. So
we simply went round to a number of

Unesco Courier. N' 11. 1955
*
men whose social position and respec¬
tability were beyond question, and
asked them to send their daughters to
our college. They agreed; their
daughters came to our school, no
announcement was made and there
was no opposition".
As the numbers of educated women
increase, the opportunities for them
to work must be enlarged. Before 1914
they could do little but adopt
the honourable profession of school
teacher. In the 1920's and 1930's
however, girls began to enter offices
as typists and secretaries, and nursing
became respectable for girls of good
family. More recently still they have
begun to find their way into all the
liberal professions.
This spread of education has meant
a change in social life. Educated
women will not accept seclusion, and
educated men want their wives to be
companions. In all except the most
backward regions polygamy has
practically disappeared, and the veil is
rapidly going. It is said that the first
great Egyptian feminist, Huda Sharawi,
solemnly cast her veil into the Medi
terranean as she returned to Egypt in
1923 from a feminist congress in Rome;
her symbolic action was quickly
followed by her fellow-countrywomen,
and within a generation the veil had
disappeared in Egypt except for the
lower middle-class, the most conser¬
vative of all classes. In most other
Arab countries the process took longer
to begin, but developed rapidly.
It would be wrong to talk about
woman's rights without asking what
they have done with them once they
have acquired them. In the Arab
world as elsewhere, women feminists
have demanded freedom not for their
own sake alone, but to be able to play
a part in the life of their peoples. In
the vast changes of the Arab countries
today, women play their full part.
Visitors to Baghdad will know the
beautiful building of the Red Crescent
orphanage, created and maintained by
a group of energetic Iraqi ladies; and
in Egypt the hospitals and social insti¬
tutions of the Mubarrat Muhammad
Ali bear witness to the sense of respon¬
sibility and organizing ability of the
modern Egyptian women. The student
Eric Schwab, Un ited Nations
of Arabic literature and journalism
will know such names as those of
Malak Hifni Nasif, May Ziadeh and
Julia Dimishqiya.
Even in public life, the absence of
the vote has not prevented women
from taking part in the national
movement. Although women do not
yet sit as deputies, they have created
their own public organizations and held
their own conferences, like the Arab
Women's Conference held in Cairo at
the beginning of 1945.
Most important of all, a succession
of distinguished women, beginning
with the famous Princess Nazli of
Egypt, has given political life an am¬
enity which it needs, and which only
women could give; the salon, where
politicians and men of letters and
foreign visitors can meet and talk over
the great issues of the day in an easy,
civilized atmosphere.
A. H. HOURANI, lecturer in the modern history of
the Near and Middle East, at Oxford University, was
formerly Reader at the American University at Bey¬
routh. His books include: ''Western decline in the
Middle Cast", and "Minorities in the Arab World".
27
