DISEASE KNOWS NO FRONTIERS
Man's first concept of disease was
that it was a punishment of
the gods. This attitude is still
found among primitive peoples and
traces of it can be detected even in
our own sub-conscious minds.
The Greeks made the first great
step forward in this as in so many
other fields when Hippocrates and"
his followers began to consider dis¬
eases as natural phenomena which "
could and should be studied like any
other occurrence in nature. The very
title of his most famous work, "Airs,
Waters and Places" shows his rational
and scientific approach.
It was then quickly realized that a
large group of diseases, which we now
call epidemic, infectious or conta¬
gious, could be spread from person
to person, community to community
and country to country.
We know, for instance, that the
man who introduced the Black Death
(bubonic plague) into England in
1348, landed at Weymouth, then called
Melcombe Regis, and we know the
farm where he spent the first night
on his way to London and infected
his first contact. We also know the
name of the Negro who is supposed
to have introduced smallpox into
Mexico in 1520, thus being respon¬
sible for perhaps three and a half
million deaths.
The next step was for communities
to attempt to isolate themselves from
infection or to isolate the infected
area, by various means such as
establishing cordons sanitaires and
preventing all ingress or egress.
This policy failed even with the most
barbarous penalties such as "break¬
ing the head of a man who attempts
to escape, as an example to his
neighbours".
'A box of old cloathes'
Even under medieval conditions,
complete isolation was a practi¬
cal impossibility, though one
striking exception occurred when the
village of Eyam, in Derbyshire, Eng¬
land, infected with plague from a
"box of old cloathes" which arrived
from London on September 3, 1665,
voluntarily isolated itself for thirteen
months, by which time 259 out of
the 350 or so inhabitants had died.
In the fourteenth century, the
Republic of Venice, often infected
with plague from its trade with the
Levant, conceived the idea of holding
the crews, passengers and goods of
ships coming from infected countries,
in isolation for a limited period, to
cover' as we should now say the
incubation period of anyone infected
and to allow disinfection of goods by
exposure to sunlight or other means.
This period was arbitrarily fixed at
forty days said to be derived from
the time Jesus spent in the wilderness
and hence these measures came to
be called "quarantine" from the Ita¬
lian quaranta, i. e. forty.
30
by Dr. Neville M. Goodman
This idea caught on, and similar
systems of quarantine were adopted
by the ports of most maritime coun-
. tries over the next three centuries or
so; the introduction of infection was
thus sometimes prevented and at
least it showed that the authorities
were taking action.
But by the nineteenth century,
with the great expansion of trade and
travel made possible by the steam¬
ship and railway, these quarantine
systems had become an intolerable
nuisance. They varied from port to
port and were arbitrary, vexatious
and often cruel; they obstructed
travel and trade; they were very
costly; and they gave limitless oppor¬
tunity for bribery and corruption.
78 miles in 4 months
An excellent example of folies
quarantainaires was the case
of the Matteo Bruzzo, an Italian
ship with 200 passengers which left
Genoa for Montevideo on September
30, 1884. Cholera broke out on board
on arrival at Montevideo and the
ship was refused pratique there and
at Rio. It returned to Italy and
performed its quarantine at the island
of Pianosa near Elba. The ship
finally put in at Leghorn and the
passengers disembarked, having taken
nearly four months to travel from
Genoa to Leghorn, a distance of
78 miles.
Eventually the representatives of
twelve European countries met in
Paris in 1851 to try to bring about
some order and uniformity in qua¬
rantine measures, and from this con¬
ference the whole modern apparatus
of preventing the spread of disease
across frontiers indeed all interna¬
tional co-operation in the field of
health may be said to have sprung.
For the next seventy years in fact,
international health was quarantine.
It took, however, another ten inter¬
national Sanitary Conferences spread
over fifty years before the first effec¬
tive convention was signed in 1903.
This dealt with cholera, plague and
yellow ïever, to which were added
in later conventions, smallpox and
typhus together sometimes known
as the "quarantinable diseases" or
"Big Five". (In 1952, louseborne re¬
lapsing fever was added to the qua¬
rantinable diseases.)
The next step was the creation of
international bodies to settle disputes,
prepare new conventions in the light
of advances in medical knowledge
and, above all, to receive and transit
information of outbreaks of disease,
since early and accurate information
is essential to effective quarantine.
These were the Pan American
Sanitary Bureau (Washington 1902)
and the International Office of Public
Health (Paris 1907). Later the Health
Organization of the League of
Nations (Geneva 1923) and, during
the last war, unrra also helped.
Finally, about 1948, all these bodies
and their work were absorbed into
and taken over by the World Health
Organization, which is today the
only international authority on qua¬
rantine matters.
The actual work of "quarantine"
is carried out by the central and
local health authorities and the sea
and airport authorities of each
country. International traffic by
land is seldom the subject of health
measure: control is too difficult and
results are hardly worth while.
This is done under governmental
regulations which must conform to
the international codes, conventions
or regulations to which the country
Collecting and distribution centre of
epidemiological information.
WHO HQ Geneva.
Other centres.
Wireless stations transmitting WHO
bulletins.
Daily world-wide bullletins issu¬
ed by WHO, Geneva.
Weekly bulletins of the Singa¬
pore Epidemiological Intelligence
Station.
Weekly bulletin of the Alexan¬
dria Regional Office.A
is signatory. The code in operation
since 1952, accepted by some 90
countries, is contained in the Inter¬
national Sanitary Regulations.
The role of who is twofold: on the
one hand to draw up, interpret,
administer and, when necessary,
amend the International Sanitary
Regulations, which it does through a
Technical Committee on Interna¬
tional Quarantine (Chairman, Dr.
M. T. Morgan, United Kingdom); and
on the other to receive, collate and
distribute information on the occur¬
rence of these pestilential diseases.
This is done by the who staff at its
headquarters in Geneva and in three
main sub-centres, at Singapore,
Alexandria and Washington.
Some 7,000 reports are sent in each
year by national health administra¬
tions of 170 countries and territories,
and the information thus received is

broadcast daily in English and
French from Radio Nations at Geneva
and the other centres: by arrange¬
ment with other stations, these mes¬
sages are rebroadcast over a wide
area. This is supplemented by tele¬
grams and a printed bulletin, the
Weekly Epidemiological Record. It
should be mentioned that who's Epi¬
demiological Information Service is
not limited to the six major pestilen¬
tial diseases, and in a montly Epide¬
miological and -Vital Statistics Report
the occurrence and trends of other
infectious diseases such as poliomye¬
litis, influenza, diphtheria and scarlet
fever are reported and analysed. In
addition, other cognate work is un¬
dertaken, such as revising the Inter¬
national Certificates of Vaccination,
and de-ratting certificates for ships.
Annual reports /aré also collated
on the health condition of the Mecca
Pilgrimagealways a potential source
of danger, since up to half a million
pilgrims coming from every part of
the Old World are crowded annually
for a few weeks into the Holy Places
water, that plague was spread by
fleas of the black rat and yellow
fever by a particular mosquito; and
when, later, effective control mea¬
sures, using modern insecticides and
immunizing inoculations had been
developed against these diseases,
agreement could be reached on more
rational measures.
Instead of shutting up people in
isolation for arbitrary periods if
they were suspected of coming from
infected places, today the emphasis
is on getting their co-operation and
warning them (and their doctors) if
they fall ill after arrival of the possi¬
bility that they may be suffering
from one of these diseases.
Thus, the passengers on a ship
coming to London from Calcutta,
where smallpox is prevalent, without
any suspicious cases having occurred
during the voyage would not normally
be subject to any restrictions. But
if a case of smallpox occurred on
board, vaccination would be offered
on arrival if that had not already
Information on epidemic diseases is continuously collected from all parts of the world by the
World Health Organization headquarters in Geneva, and re-transmitted to all health authori¬
ties. Map shows the radio-telegraphic network that makes this service possible.
in Saudi Arabia. This made the Pil¬
grimage a frequent source of world¬
wide epidemics of cholera in the
nineteenth century.
Thus who is enabled to keep its
finger on the epidemic pulse of the
world and to keep its member coun¬
tries informed of the patient's condi¬
tion. By reducing the international
spread of disease and, on the other
hand, by preventing excessive or
hysterical restrictions on health
grounds, who is favourably affecting
the lives and health of all of us.
Finally, something may be said of
the trends and tendencies of quaran¬
tine practice today. Originally, qua¬
rantine measures were arbitrary and
empirical, since little was known
about tlie way these diseases spread.
Once it was established that, for
instance, cholera occurred primarily
from the excreta! contamination of
been done and everyone would be
put under "surveillance" i. e. notified
to the Medical Officer of Health of
their destinations and told to see him.
When the risk is less, and formal
"surveillance" is not considered
necessary, perhaps, for example, if
the case had been discovered at the
beginning of the voyage and no other
cases had occurred, passengers might
only be given a yellow warning card,
urging them to call in a doctor at
once if they fell sick and to show him
the card which would alert him to
the possibility of smallpox.
Another factor in modifying qua¬
rantine practice has been the intro¬
duction of air travel whereby a man
may arrive from a distant country
well within the incubation period of
the diseases prevalent in the country
of departure.
To examine him on arrival would
The Unesco Courier. April 1956
be fruitless, since the signs and
symptoms of disease would not yet
have appeared. To isolate him until
the incubation period was over would
be intolerable and would stultify the
whole purpose of air travel. But,
according to circumstances and the
diseases in question, he can be immu¬
nized sufficiently long before his
departure to prevent him starting
an epidemic in the country of arrival.
Thus "quarantine" measures have
become steadily more rational and
less restrictive, and the well-immuniz¬
ed traveller has little to fear. The
ultimate aim, of course is to abolish
the need for any restriction, by
stamping out these diseases them¬
selves in the areas in which they are
endemic. This is a long-term policy
though given the money, effort and
co-operation of the countries concern¬
ed, it could be done.
To sum up, governments began to
co-operate in health matters about
100 years ago, not from idealistic mo¬
tives but because hard-headed busi¬
ness men and officials decided that
agreement must be reached with the
doctors on the maximum measures
which could be applied everywhere to
keep epidemic diseases from spread¬
ing from one country to another, and
that these measures must be accept¬
ed in every country.
'Wens and excrescences'
That it took more than 50 years
to achieve this was due to lack
of definite knowledge on how
these diseases were spread, as well as
to international political rivalries.
Once agreement had been reached, it
was necessary to create international
bodies to oversee the working of the
conventions embodying the agree¬
ments, and the creation of the World
Health Organization permitted for
the first time a single world-wide in¬
ternational authority to become res¬
ponsible over this whole field.
Advances in medicine and in com¬
munications have allowed the original
conception of quarantine as a kind of
sanitary police and prison system to
be modified in the direction of
greater freedom combined with great¬
er safety, based on the co-operation
of the public though the powers are
still there should they be needed.
The philosophy written into the
International Sanitary Regulations
now in force is to give the maximum
security against the importation of
these diseases with the minimum in¬
terference with world traffic. The
success achieved in the first three
years of application of the Interna¬
tional Sanitary Regulations augurs
well for the future.
To have been associated with this
work, as with other accomplishments
in the international health field,
brings appreciation of the words
written by John Donne 300 years ago:
"To be no part of any Body is as to
be nothing. For the greatest Persons
are but great wens and excrescences
except they be so incorporated into
the body of the world that they con¬
tribute something to the sustentation
of the whole."
This article originally appeared in an
unabridged form in Unilever's magazine
"Progress".
31
