THE UPROOTED
40,000,000 refugees:
a staggering world problem
by James Douglas
THE OLD ONES. For the
elderly refugees (above) there is
little possibility of emigration and
a new start in life because of their
age. But other opportunities exist
for them and sometimes they have
to make difficult decisions. "Togo
or not to go?" is a problem clearly
reflected in the expressions of these
old people. Valuable work on
behalf of aged refugees has been
done by the large voluntary agen¬
cies, both national and international.
Church groups of all denominations
have come forward with funds,
active, devoted workers and moral
support in the cause of the refugees.
Here, with his back to the camera,
(on right) is one such worker, Father
Braun of the French voluntary
agency, the Little Sisters of the
Poor, talking to some of "the old
ones" in an Austrian refugee camp.

The Unesco Courier. N1* 1. 1956
an's inhumanity to man", said Burns,
W / "makes countless thousands mourn" and
l\ /I this is a fact as old as history itself.
i w What else can explain the presence
today of 30 to 40 million men, women
and children scattered throughout many
lands in camps and settlements far from their own
homes and families in short the world's refugees.
This is a pressing problem which our generation is
attempting to solve. These men and women have faced
up to a future which at best is a question mark and at
worst a miserable existence eked out by charity. They are
people who have had the courage of their convictions and
who have found, each in his or her own way, freedom
of speech, of religion and of political convictions. They
have a right to new jobs, new homes and a new way of
life, and also, in their new-found freedom, to some of the
rights and dignities for which they made a sacrifice.
Just after the announ¬
cement of the Nobel Peace
Prize award to the Office
of the U.N. High Commis¬
sioner for Refugees, (see
page 4) a unesco courier
special correspondent was
given an exclusive inter¬
view by the U.N. High
Commissioner, Dr. van
Heuven Goedhart, in Ge¬
neva. Asked how he saw
the position of the refugee
today, and what he
thought of the possibili¬
ties for the future, Dr.
van Heuven Goedhart had
this to say:
"'The refugee is not a
man to be pitied but one
to be admired. He has had
the courage to abandon
his home, and sometimes
his family, for something
in which he believes
freedom. He is an exam¬
ple to every one of us.
Refugees have been called
'forgotten people' but I
want them to be --iorgot-
ten' in an entirely diffe¬
rent way as ordinary citi¬
zens . living together with
their families and having
permanent jobs. It is my
first concern to see that
the refugees are really
'forgotten.' in this way.
* "There are today some
seventy thousand refugees
living in 200 official
camps in Europe without
any regular work. Within
' three years these camps
will be closed, and the
projects and plans for my
office in 1956 are a means to achieve this end."
Although, as the High Commissioner remarked, emer¬
gency aid and relief supplies still have their uses, the
important question today is to find permanent solutions.
This is an immense problem one which has been des¬
cribed as the largest single human issue of our time.
In 1945 the crux of the refugee problem lay in Europe
with Germany as a nerve centre. Since then events have
created refugees by the million in Asia and the Near and
. Middle East. The partition of India, wars in China and
Korea the creation of the State of Israel, the partition of
Indo-China have all led to the displacement from their
homes of millions of people. The refugee problem in 1956
is one that is world-wide in scope. It is a tragic fact that
the vast majority of these refugees, some of whom are
known in technical parlance as "national refugees", are
not by international definition refugees at all, however
displaced, homeless and destitute they may be. They do
not benefit from international aid and protection and
have to rely in the main on the assistance given to them
by their own governments and by voluntary and other
relief agencies.
Falling within this class are the 11 million refugees
'OLIVER TWIST' LOOK on the
far better than any words the hun
who have arrived in Western Germany (and who are
at present arriving at the rate of approximately 1,000 a
day the majority being young men and women under 25).
Then there are some 670,000 Chinese refugees now
living in Hong Kong who as yet have not been placed
directly under international protection; the two million on
Formosa; and the 12 million which India and Pakistan are
trying to absorb. Korea's homeless amount to almost
five million, and quite recently the figure for refugees in
South Viet Nam came to nearly one million including
soldiers and their families.
These are just a 'few of many examples which show
that the world refugee problem has assumed a size and
complexity which might well baffle any international
agency, no matter how large. But, however the term
refugee is defined, the problem is one demanding interna¬
tional action. As M. Jacques Vernant states in his
book on "The Refugee in the Post-War World" : "It is by
attempting to harmonize
the sometimes conflicting
interests of the countries
of first asylum and those
of permanent resettle¬
ment; by acting, if not as
referee, at least as coun¬
sellor to those states and
to the refugees them¬
selves; by promoting In
every possible way the
gradual assimilation of
the unemployed refugees
and their integration in
more prosperous coun¬
tries; by smoothing the
process which normally
ends in naturalization it
is in these ways that the
international authority
set up for this purpose
can best do its work."
If we put on one side for
a moment the millions of
so-called "national" refu¬
gees, we are still faced
with a refugee problem.
The remainder numbering
about one million in Eur¬
ope and several thous¬
ands in the Middle and
Far East are refugees by
definition and so fall
within the mandate of
the Office of the U.N.
High Commissioner for
Refugees. These refugees
do receive international
protection and are the
concern of the High Com¬
missioner's Office. Falling
into another category are
the 900,000 Palestinian
Arab refugees who are
fed, clothed, trained and
educated through the
work done by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
and unesco (see the unesco courier n" 7 1955; U.S. Oc¬
tober 1955, for full details of what u. n. and unesco are
doing).
Again in a somewhat different category are the Spanish
Republican refugees in France who now number about
150,000, the majority of whom have French work permits
and are in regular employment.
As the U.N. High Commissioner has said, it is a sobering
and distressing thought that in 1956, eleven years a-fter
the end of the Second World War, there are still between
100,000 and 120,000 refugees living in government-main¬
tained and unofficial camps in Austria, Germany, Greece
and Italy. Some people have been living in tents, shacks
and barracks for ten years, and none have regular work.
These people are the crux of the European refugee
problem. Why are they still there after the immense
efforts made to solve this very problem by various interna¬
tional agencies since the end of the war? Some by reason
of ill-health or lack of skill cannot be re¬
settled overseas, some cannot find regular work (Cont'd on
in the vicinity of the camp and so never next page)
have enough money to establish themselves
1 1
ATP
pinched face of this little girl reveals
ger and misery she has lived through.

THE UPROOTED (Continued)
ENDLESS WAITING. For these refugees in
Germany, life for years past has been a succession of
endless queues. Again and again they have lined up
for interviews, food and clothing, medical examin¬
ations and for a dozen other reasons. At selection
centre (right) relief and pleasure show on faces of
those chosen for emigration. Below, others wait
to complete applications to emigrate to Canada,
England, North Africa, Venezuela or Brazil.
IRO
elsewhere, and some through years of inactivity and
disappointment have given up hope and are incapable of
struggling to improve their situation.
If we still keep within our limited definition of the word
refugee it is instructive to examine the situation today
in some countries oí Europe and the Far East. In Austria
there are 160,000 refugees of whom some 32.000 live in
80 official camps maintained by the Austrian Government
and a further 30,000 in unofficial camps. Many thousands
are Volksdeutsche who have been found regular employ¬
ment and can now if they choose become Austrian citi¬
zens.
The total of refugees in Austria who have no regular
work comes to approximately 40,000. Foreign refugees in
Germany now number 220,000 of which 30,000 are living in
official camps maintained by the Federal German Govern¬
ment. The inflow rate for non-German refugees is about
100 a month.
Greece has around 14,000 refugees of whom 2,700 are
living in camps and refugee centres. In October 1955
there were still 1,500 refugees in the Trieste camps and
other camps in Italy housed a further 3,000.
The overall picture for Europe is that of 350,000 refugees
who, in refugee terminology "have not been assimilated".
This polite phrase disguises the fact that these men and
women do not have regular work, have little money and
are often dependent on international charity. In camps,
towns and villages they are living in conditions which
sometimes border on destitution. They are today still
unable to resume the kind of life they once knew in their
homelandsi a life which has become now a rapidly fading
memory' taking some of them back fifteen years or more. .
Among them are found 15,000 sick and disabled and
another 15,000 children who were born "'refugees". Many
of these people, and particularly those in the camps, are
affected by the blight of enforced idleness. They have in
many cases reached the lowest point of human existence
where they are dependent on charity for anything that
is not strictly a necessity, and for a great many things
of an emergency nature which are.
Turning to the Middle East, there are still 9,000 refu¬
gees scattered throughout Egypt, Syria, Iraq and the Le¬
banon, who rely primarily on international aid. In China,
14,000 European refugees are living in Shanghai, Harbin
and Tientsin. Some 6,000 of these already have visas for
other countries but through political difficulties the rate
of egress is painfully slow. Some of the more needy cases
rely entirely on international help for their immediate
needs.
Minor miracles are routine
This thumbnail outline of the world refugee problem
in very generalized terms is disheartening and
depressing. But after painting the picture in its
gloomiest colours it is now only fair to turn the page and
examine what constructive work is being accomplished in
finding new jobs and new homes for the mdlions who
have sacrificed their all. Fortunately men of goodwill are
at work on this problem and are accomplishing some
minor miracles.
The chief U.N. Agency at work on the refugee problem
is the Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
(unhcr) brought into existence by the General Assem¬
bly of the United Nations in 1950. This Office now has
a mandate from the Assembly which runs until the end
of 1958. It has 14 branch or sub-offices located through¬
out Europe, the Middle and Far East and in the Ame¬
ricas, but although the work accomplished by the High
Commissioner's Office is world-wide in scope, it is
limited in a sense to three main types oí aid: 1. Inter¬
national protection for refugees; 2. Promoting perma¬
nent solutions; 3. Administering emergency aid.
Money for operational work comes from the U.N. Re¬
fugee Fund which is entirely dependent on the generosity
of governments, voluntary organizations and private do¬
nors. To work effectively, the High Commissioner's Office
has to maintain close relations with inter-governmental
and voluntary agencies concerned with the refugee pro¬
blem. Thanks to this, much of the practical work of
resettling and integrating refugees has been successful.
The action might be summed up as follows. The High
Commissioner's Office (unhcr), promotes the solutions
for refugees and negotiates with the governments while
the inter-governmental and voluntary agencies do most
of the work on the spot. It is they, in the main, who
move the refugees to new homes, pay for their passages,
12

The Unesco Courier. Nr 1. 1956
pre-select them for possible immigration and see that
they have the means to travel. This of course is a gene¬
ralization but gives an idea of the type of co-operative
partnership which exists and without which few posi¬
tive results could be reached.
Without in any way detracting from the essential work
carried out by unhcr the efforts made on behalf of the
refugees by religious organizations in all parts of the
world must be stressed. The Lutheran World Federa¬
tion, the National Catholic Welfare Conference, the
American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee Inc., the
World Council of Churches, the ymca, the Friends'
Service Council and the American Friends' Service
Committee and others all play important roles. There
are many thousands of people today living in new lands
with new prospects before them who would still be
refugees had they not been aided by these organizations.
Vital work has also been done by the Inter-Govern¬
mental Committee for European Migration which,
although it is primarily concerned with migration,
nevertheless works in close harmony with unhcr in
helping to resettle refugees. Between 1952 and mid-
1955 this Committee resettled no fewer than 131,000
IRO
refugees of which 76,600 were refugees falling directly
within the mandate oí the High Commissioner. In terms
of migrants and refugees the Committee in the same
period resettled a total of 383,000no mean achievement.
In other spheres the work of the League of Red Cross
Societies, the Council of Europe, the United States
Escapee Programme, the International Labour Organi¬
zation, the Organization for European Economic Co¬
operation and the U.N. Commissions concerned with
specific problems in Korea and Palestine should not be
overlooked. Many other smaller national organizations
both of a governmental and voluntary nature also per-
valuable work in the refugee field. The problem
is world-wide in scope and world-wide action is being
taken to meet it.
' Magna Carta ' for the refugee
Here then are some of the international and national
agencies. In what ways are refugees provided
with new opportunities through their help? This
has become a complex subject, and the layman who
thinks that resettling the refugee in another country is
the only answer would be completely wrong.
First of all, the refugee must be in a position to benefit
from international protection and such protection lies
within the competency of unhcr. A refugee cannot get
help 'from his consul, he has no passport or travel
documents. He is far worse off than other aliens who
are protected by their governments when they are
abroad, unhcr, therefore, tries to safeguard the
refugee's rights by promoting international agreements
with governments.
The most important of these is the Convention on the
Status of the Refugee, drawn up in 1951 and already
ratified by 15 countries. Under this Convention the
country to which the refugee goes is obliged to issue him
with travel and identity documents. The Convention also
contains many other clauses which are designed to
safeguard the refugee's rights.
Once the refugee is accepted in a country a place must
be found for him in the community. Mention has been
made earlier in this article of permanent solutions.
These can be simply classified as: repatriation to his
own country; emigration and resettlement in another
country and integration by means of a regular job in the
country to which he had, fled.
No emigration after forty-five
Under the permanent solutions category there are
many difficulties with which to contend. A refugee
may be too old to emigrates the age limit is 45; he
may be offered repatriation but for political or other
reasons may not wish to accept it; he may be medically
unfit or he may lack any useful skills. All these points
have to be carefully examined by the field worker who
is trying to find the best solution.
Integration of the refugee in the country in which he is
living has recently become of increasing importance.
Various projects now being implemented by unhcr and
the voluntary agencies fall in this category. Ic ,.
They include: housing settlements vocational C-0"* a on
training, loans and credit facilities for set-
next
ting up 'small business and, most important P°Se-)
RISEN FROM THE ASHES. Riziani, a destroyed
and abandoned Greek village, now lives again.
New houses have been built on the ruins and are
occupied by resettled refugees. With their own
homes to live in and their own land to till the refugees
have set to work, helped by the Greek Government
which built 40 houses and provided livestock, food
and seeds. Refugee family (upper, left) stores its
first corn crop around the bed. In refugee centres
others put their skills to use (lower photos). The
6 1-year old painter has been waiting in a Trieste camp
for years for a chance to emigrate. Dressmaker has
managed to live since I 950 by doing hand-embroidery.
13

THE UPROOTED
(Continued)
EUROPE'S CAMPS MUST GO!
of all, establishment in regular work either in towns or in
the country. No fewer than 118 different aid projects of
this nature have been, or are being put into operation by
unhr under its Refugee Fund programme.
Under this programme between May and November 1955,
6,000 refugees in Europe, the Near, Middle and Far East,
received assistance. Houses for 287 families are now
under construction and work on 306 will start shortly.
Vocational training has been given to 435 refugees and
scholarships to 120. Help and advice on jobs has been
aiforded to more than a thousand and a like number will
profit from loans and credits. All this work falls directly
or indirectly within the integration category and although
these numbers may not appear vast in terms of the total
number of refugees, there can be no doubt that what has
been accomplished in a little more than six months is a
worthwhile achievement.
Many significant results are also being achieved in re¬
settling refugees in countries overseas. In an eight-
month period in 1955- some 7,000 refugees were resettled
overseas irom camps in Germany and Austria, 266 from
Migration Committee has meant that the total now in
the Trieste camps only numbers 1,500. On January, 1953
there were 5,000.
Much valuable work has also been done for those
refugees who, by reason of ill-health, cannot be resettled
or found regular work. The Scandinavian countries have
been particularly generous in accepting a number of these
cases. A six-man Norwegian selection team has just
completed visits to camps in Munich, Trieste and Naples.
They selected 75 refugee families for settlement in
Norway, many of whom were suffering from tuberculosis.
Once in Norway they will have the benefit of specialized
medical care and attention. Denmark has also accepted a
number of severely handicapped refugees who have been
living in penury in Shanghai for years past.
Apart from the efforts made to integrate or resettle
those refugees living in the European refugee camps there
has been a recent development in attempts to alleviate the
torpor and frustration of camp existence. This scheme,
known as Camp Adoption, has achieved some useful
results. As the High Commissioner for Refugees said in
THE WANDERING KALMUKS. One
of the most remarkable Odysseys any group
of refugees has ever experienced is that of
the Kalmuks who in the 17th century fled
westward from their homes in the Chinese
province of Sinkiang to settle in the
lower Volga region. Though conquered
by the Russians towards the end of the
18th century they continued to live as a
community until the Revolution of 1917
when they lost some of their numbers in
migrations to Bulgaria, Yugoslavia and
Czechoslovakia. In the Second World
War they formed special cavalry units tb
fight against the Nazi invaders, but when
the Kalmuk territory was over-run, many
Kalmuks were deported to work in Ger¬
many. It was here that the remnants of
the group once made up of tens of thou¬
sands were re-united, though at the end
of the war they numbered less than 800
men, women and children. Today, a
small group of the Kalmuk community
lives in Ingolstadt Refugee Camp, Bavaria.
Above, a priest stands by an altar in a
temple set up in a camp barrack room.
UNATIONS.
Greece and 345 from Shanghai. The majority of these
refugees went to the United States but large numbers also
went to Australia and Canada. These impressive refugee
movements were carried out as a joint operation between
unhcr and the Committee for European Migration.
Among the voluntary agencies, the World Council of
. Churches reports that more than 1,000 refugees were
moved to new homes during the month of October 1955.
Remedies for boredom and frustration
Perhaps one of the most impressive resettlement
campaigns was that carried out in the Trieste refugee
camps. In a twelve-month period between October
1954 and October 1955, 2,403 refugees were resettled, the
majority going to Australia, the United States and Chile.
This considerable effort on the part of the voluntary
agencies working in collaboration with unhcr and the
14
his report to the tenth (1955) session of the U.N. General
Assembly, "The improved morale and living conditions in a
number of camps in Austria, Germany and Greece today
bear tribute to what can be achieved by generous and
resourceiul action undertaken by local communities in
other countries."
No fewer than 42 refugees camps have so far been
adopted by groups and communities in the United
Kingdom. In the Netherlands the movement is spreading
and in Denmark public-spirited citizens have already
adopted two camps and are considering adopting four
more. A camp at Augustdorf, Germany is being helped
under the Unesco Gift Coupon Plan. Here a school for
over 100 Latvian children Will shortly be receiving text¬
books, physics and chemistry teaching apparatus and
school furniture bought with coupons donated by people
in Denmark and the Netherlands.
Camp adoption has meant that refugee craitsmen now
have tools with which to work, gardeners have been

The Unesco Courier. Nr 1. 1956
UNREF BARE EXISTENCE of people living in an unofficial barracks camp for refugees in Austria, is symbolized by small
boy slaking his thirst at a tapsole water supply in the barracks. Soon many refugees will move into new housing
projects similar to one above being completed near Salzburg. Similar projects exist in Germany.
supplied with seeds and tools, women have been given
sewing machines and children have received toys. Camp
adoption has meant that 38 refugee children in a Greek
camp, who were in a tubercular or pre-tubercular condi¬
tion, were able to go to Switzerland for four months and
receive medical attention free of charge from the Swiss
Red Cross Society.
These measures are of course of an emergency relief
nature but their importance ior the well-being of the
refugee camp inmates is considerable.
These in broad outline are some of the positive steps
which are now being taken to solve the refugee problem,
but as the figures quoted show, much still remains to be
done. The prime necessity for any solution lies in the
dissolution of the camps. Until these disappear there can
be no permanent solution.
No dreamboats for a land of plenty
The mere promise of resettlement overseas is not by
itself sufficient as it has been found that refugees
will cease doing constructive work if they are under
the impression that all they have to do is to wait for a boat
which will transport them to a magic land of opportunity
where gold will automatically fall into their laps. It is
not enough to create economic opportunities for refugees
without the adequate social advice they need to profit
from the opportunities made available. Every step has to
be taken with the utmost care if permanent solutions
which really are permanent are to mean anything.
To achieve any results at all money is needed, and
whether this money goes to the U.N. Refugee Fund, to the
voluntary agencies or to any of the other bodies working
in the refugee field, it is always put to the best possible
use. In a humanitarian crisis of this kind people are
generous. A magnificent response was made by the
people of the Netherlands to an appeal for funds launched
by the U.N. High Commissioner. They spontaneously
decided to give one hour of their wages to the refugees
with the result that one million dollars was contributed.
This campaign was conducted on a purely voluntary basis.
Everyone participated from members of the Dutch Royal
Household to the workers in the factories and on the
farms. Money 'for the U.N. Refugee Fund has also, of
course, come from governments. In mid-November, 1955,
the total amounted to 1,624,482 dollars, but in the words
of the U.N. High Commissioner, "So far the response... has
been disappointing."
If funds are forthcoming there is litle doubt that
within the next few years the refugee camps in Europe
will be dissolved, and thereby one of the most tragic
legacies of the aftermath of the Second World War will
have been removed. The refugee picture at the beginning
of 1956 is still grim and depressing. It is a challenge
which can only be met and conquered by determined and
co-ordinated international action.
LEFT BEHIND. The case of handicapped refugees has recently been
given special attention by the U.N. High Commissioner's Office. Some
European countries, notably the Scandinavian states, have shown
their willingness to accept physically handicapped refugees.
15
