r-rODAY we hear a great deal about)"international co-operation". What
does it really mean ? Who does
the co-operating ? The answer is Minis-
ters, officials, technicians. We can-
not assume that all the peoples are
consciously co-operating. Often they
are not even aware of the agreement
drawn up on their behalf in the cause
of peace and signed in their name.
The aeroplane... the radio and TV
set... the nuclear reactor. The modern
world is often summed up in these three
marvels. It is a world which laughs
at oceans and mountain ranges, which
is alive with a perpetual flow of ideas,
images and discoveries, and which is on
the threshold of enjoying fabulous riches
wrested from the very heart of matter.
This picture is not false one-it is
merely premature. A splendid machine
may swallow up 1, 000 miles in little
more than two hours, but they may be
1, 000 miles of unexplored jungles.
Hertzian waves flash at even greater
speed across even greater stretches
where no one can receive them. Power
lines stretch over villages still living in
neglect and pylons carrying the mod-
ern power grid are planted in fields
still cultivated by the hoe.
Industrial civilization has girdled the
24
globe so quickly that it has left immense
zones untouched.
In 1951, UNESCO's Director-General
Jaime Torres-Bodet wrote :"We all
remember with horror the concentration
camps, but it appears we do not realize
that more than 1, 200 million human
beings, men and women, still live in
the implacable, invisible prison of ignor-
ance. We distribute the text of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and I am amazed that we dare call it
universal when we know there is not
one man out of every two who is able
even to read it."
No dreams of magazines
or election posters
A T that time, a rather ambitiousphrase was born : the crusade
against ignorance. It meant that
there was general acceptance for the
fact that no longer could forgotten
peoples remain exiled from what we
call progress. The crusade took the
form of literacy campaigns and then
more thorough efforts summed up as
"fundamental education".
Within a few years, these early efforts
produced undeniable results. Certain
countries in Latin America and southern
Asia saw their illiteracy rates drop from
60 to 40 per cent and even lower. In
the Near East, evening classes for adults
sprang up faster than schools, although
schools were being built at a furious
rate-in Syria, for example, where the
government opened 350 in five years.
But no one claimed that ignorance
could be conquered by teaching the al-
phabet and the multiplication table. If
hundreds of millions of men suffered
because of ignorance, it was not because
they were dreaming of arithmetic,
magazines or election posters. They
were suffering from hunger or filth or
sickness-or ail of these at once-and
they were suffering from humiliation.
Under such conditions, fundamental
education was defined as a concerted
attack on precise obstacles whose con-
tinued existence could not be suffered.
These obstacles bore the names of rou-
tine, inertia and isolation. It was not
enough to teach individuals or even pri-
vileged groups : this form of education
had to reach entire villages, and districts.
It quickly became obvious that in
raising the living standards of a rural
village-whether in India or Africa or
Peru-each step led to another. The
pioneers of fundamental education
learned that what we call poverty is not

a superficial misfortune growing out of
a single, clear-cut cause to be eliminated
once and for all. Rather, it is a complex
ma/. e of causes almost impossible to
attack one by one.
Farming, livestock raising, hygiene,
cooking, child-care and-according to
the region-weaving, building, pottery
or metalworking : all these must be
taught at the same time as reading and
writing. All these and self-confidence.
Who could take on such a task ? School-
teachers ? Priests ? Village Mayors ? If
they could be trained in this new form of
education, yes, but the methods had yet
to be perfected. Leaders must be trained
so that their teaching and experience
could radiate to every province and
village in their own countries. In other
words, an entirely new type of teacher-
training school had to be devised. These
new schools became known as regional
and national fundamental education
training centres.
The first battle-
vanquish fatalism
TN 1951, the first UNESCO internation-al fundamental education centre was
opened at Patzcuaro, Mexico. A
reporter asked the director of the centre,
Lucas Ortiz, to outline its objectives.
"We intend to show students how to en-
courage the improvement of life in rural
areas through the four cardinal points of
fundamental education", he declared.
"First, man must protect his health.
Secondly, he must make the best use
of the natural resources surrounding
him. Thirdly, he has the right to a
dignified home life, both materially and
spiritually. Fourthly, he has the right
to enjoy leisure and he must be given
the opportunity to do so."The reporter
interrupted :"But what about teaching
him to read and write ?"Mr. Ortiz
answered :"As far as we are concerned,
it is no use teaching a man to read and
write unless you can convince him it
will help solve the problems of his daily
life. We teach literacy when we teach
health, home economics or agriculture."
These were the questions studied by
Patzcuaro's trainees-men and women
from 16 Latin American countries-and
it was in these spheres that they did
practical work in villages surrounding
the centre.
A second centre, destined to serve the
Arab world, was opened in 1953 at
Sirs-el-Layyan in Egypt. In the same
spirit as their predecessors in Latin
America, the students came to Sirs-el-
Layyan. Teachers, social workers, agri-
cultural engineers, nurses and adult
education specialists from Egypt, Iraq,
Jordan. Lebanon, Syria, Saudi Arabia
and the Yemen learned how to put their
sp'ciatixed knowledge to work.
In Egypt ; lS in ! \lcxico, they worked
in"pilot villages". Of course the 1ll ; ljor
task of the trainees at the two centres
was not to bring progress to the
Tdrascans of Patzcuaro or the felldhs of
the Niie Doha. But the students ljuickly
reati/. ed that this"laboratory work"had
to succeed. H they failed during their
two years of study, how could they hope
to succeed later ?
They did not fail. They learned that
the secret of fundamental education lay
in developing a spirit of co-operation
with the people to be educated. They
did not come with handouts nor did
they establish charitable institutions.
Instead, they learned their job and they
acquired a priceless store of practical
experience. This experience taught them
a lesson : the first step to be taken in
helping thé under-privileged of any
country is to free them from fatalism.
People become resigned to misery
because they believe it to be their fate.
They must be taught that misery is not
the work of fate, that sickness, interest
rates, hunger, and infant mortality are
not simply afflictions of destiny.
The Uncsco Courier
National fundamental education cen-
tres in Haiti, in traq. in Thailand, in
Ceylon and in I. iberia have reached the
same conclusion. In lLJ54, a Sirs-ci-
Layyan trainee supplied this answer to
a questionnaire :"Fundamental educa-
tion is not merefy a reform movement
aimed at combating poverty, ignorance
and disease through certain techniques.
It is a revolutionary movement which
sets out to transform the mentality of
scientifically and economically under-
developed peoples. It sets out to
stimulate them to an awareness of their
needs and to give them the will to raise
their standards of hving through their
own resources. It does this by guiding
them and by showing them how to make
use of their forgotten resources and
their hidden strength."
Organizers, educators, leaders of social
progress-a) I of them must be recruited
to head a mass movement. This was the
task laid down for the two international
centres. At present, 228 of them have
been trained at Patzcuaro and 91 at
Sirs-el-Layyan. Thousands are needed.
Some dav, there will be thousands.
CREFAL-UNESCO
TWO OUT OF THREE PEOPLE in the world today are undernourished. One person out of
two in our atomic age is unable to read and write. This is the grim result of a vicious circle of ill-
health, poverty and ignorance. To break this circle and to raise living standards, education is
required-not only in the 3 R's, but also in agriculture, hygiene, home economics, handicrafts
and livestock breeding. This new form of education which has been called"fundamental education"
is desperately short of teachers. In co-operation with other U. N. Specialized Agencies, Unesco
has created regional centres to train leaders in fundamental education who, in turn, train others
when they return to their own countries. At CREFAL (Regional Fundamental Education Centre
for Latin America) at Patzcuaro, Mexico, one of the local Tarascan Indians (opposite page) grapples
with arithmetic problems. Above, an Egyptian girl comes for medicine to the social welfare service
of ASFEC (Arab States Fundamental Education Centre) at Sirs-el-Layyan, Egypt. (See pages 28-29)
25
