THE TERROR OF PLAGUE
IN THE MIDDLE ACES
«¿flu *t'.
fen
Dr. Georges
B a r r a u d
***.** -*<*
ARMIES OF THE
PAST were often de¬
cisively defeated by
plague. Here, King
Louis IX of France
(St. Louis) is shown
during his ill-fated
campaign In Egypt
(I 249-50) helping to
bury more than
1, 000 French sol¬
diers struck down by
a plague epidemic.
(In this engraving,
French soldiers are
anachronistically de¬
picted in 17th cen¬
tury garb). St. Louis
himself died from the
plague after arriving
in Carthage In 1270.
Bibliothèque Nationale,
Paris.
For four centuries the West lived in terror of great
plague epidemics. The first and certainly the most
devastating struck Europe in the 14th century. It
took the form of a pneumonic plague, attacking the lungs
and causing hemorrhages under the skin which made its
victims turn black. From this hallucinating sight came
the name "Black Death".
In less than three years from 1348 to 1350, the "Black
Death" killed 25 million people in Europe and some
75 million throughout the world estimated at half the
population of the globe at that time. From then on the
plague was an ever-present menace in Europe although
its ravages progressively decreased, except for serious '
outbreaks in Milan in 1628, in Lyons in 1638, the "Great
Plague" of London in 1665 and that of Marseilles in 1720.
In Italy, epidemics had occurred as early as 980 A.D. in
the Este States and in particular at Modena in 1006 and
1065; they reappeared only in 1311, when not merely the
whole Italian peninsula but France, Spain and Germany
were seriously affected.
At that time, all diseases were ascribed mainly to astro¬
logical causea to the influence of constellations regarded
as benign or hostile and unfavourable. Some people,
however, also blamed malignant vapours which rose from
stagnant water after heavy rain followed by a heat wave.
The pestilential miasmas came, it was said, from the
bowels of the earth ; and the proliferation of insects as
well as rats was regarded not without reason as an evil
omen foreshadowing plague. Thus in 1120 we find the
Bishop of Lyons actually going so far as to excommunicate
all the insects in his Diocese ! In like fashion, we also
find the authorities of Autun, Mâcon, Lyons and
Troyes subsequently issuing edicts condemning (Cont'd on
rats, caterpillars, slugs, and even weevils, next page)
Finally, if we are to believe the account of
i"Ä
It .~¿ ^Ä^OI
n^'M
MmWimW ^Mhfe^M^^I
aKIl m
HHIr¿<ÉSmmm MÊL Ummmmi
Institut Pasteur, Paris.
"GARB FOR DOCTORS and other persons who visit plague victims.
The mask and eye-pieces are of glass and the long nose is filled with
perfumes" reads the 17th century description of costume (left) designed
by the personal physician to Louis XIII of France. Masks and robes worn
by modern doctors to protect themselves from Infection still retain
something of the nightmarish aspect of their ancient counterparts.
15

PLAGUE
(Cont'd; 'Heralded by comets, shooting stars and floods'
the historian, de Thou, an actual "'trial" of rats opened
at Beaune, in 1530. The rodents were formally charged
and were even defended by a lawyer. Needless to say,
the accused never appeared in court.
During the second half of the 13th century, the first
treatises on plague and how to deal with it appeared.
Pierre de Dumouzy, a doctor at Rheims, who wrote the
first of these, spoke, even at this early date, of germ-
carriers "'who can transmit infectious germs, even though
they themselves may not be ill... Such are those who have
eaten garlic and no longer smell the odour with which
they infect others."
Dumouzy advised against physical exercise, baths and
massage in times of plague, and advocated light nourish¬
ment, prepared' dry with vinegar. He completely banned
the eating of fruit. He recommended drinking light, clear
wine, thinned with water that had flowed over pebbles,
been boiled or even been distilled in a silver or glass still.
Aromatic disinfectants were essential ; incense, aloes and
myrrh were to be burnt in the rooms ; and doctors and
priests approaching the plague-stricken had to be careful
to carry camphor and a ball of amber in their hands.
Moderation in all things was to be the rule, and chastity
a safeguard against contagion. Above all, the patient
must keep up his spirits and follow a reconstituting re¬
gime, living a joyful and care-free existence. This medical
advice, which on the whole is not so out of date as mignt
seem, was far superior to the prescriptions ordering bleed¬
ings and purges or the taking of theriac or treacle those
classic but highly complex remedies of yore.
It was only two centuries afterwards that anti-plague
pharmaceutical preparations, as picturesque as they were
absurd, made their first appearance. But the fact is that
plague was regarded essentially as a manifestation of
God's wrath, a supernatural scourge designed to punish
man for his sins and crimes. As La Fontaine wrote in the
17th century it was:
"Un mal qui répand la terreur,
"Mal que le Ciel en sa fureur
"Inventa pour punir les crimes de la Terre" (1).
Arrows shot in the air
Thus, in a treatise published in 1629 Jean Fabre of
Toulouse, wrote: "It is sent of God; the angels often
receive God's commandment to distil the same poi¬
son. The demons too; witches and magicians, also may,
by Divine permission and with the aid of the demons
whom they serve, become in truth instruments of the
plague."
Since the plague was considered of Divine origin, it was
natural that it should be heralded by "comets, shooting
stars, earthquakes and floods", and other strange pheno¬
mena which, according to Fabre again, were "the real
precursors and foreshadowers of the plague."
It was equally logical to invoke against it the inter¬
cession of the Saints. Between the 7th and the 12th cen¬
turies, protection was usually sought from St. Sebastian,
the martyr of the arrows, since arrows were regarded as
capable of spreading the plague. From the 13th century
onwards, however, St. Sebastian was gradually replaced
by St. Roch, who had himself contracted the plague in
Italy. Always represented pointing at his bubo, (or pla¬
gue boil) he was the great "healer" of plague in the 15th
and 16th centuries.
The great epidemic of "Black Death", thought to have
originated in Mongolia in 1346, had been prepared and
facilitated by a series of atmospheric disturbances, fa¬
mines and particularly floods, which are believed to have
taken 400,000 lives. In less than a year the great plague
is said to have claimed as many as thirteen million vic¬
tims in Northern China alone. It spread to the West by
way of Baghdad, Syria and Constantinople, where it raged
for several months.
"The disease was incurable," wrote the Emperor Can-
tacuzene. "'Neither mode of living nor bodily strength
was proof against it. Strong and weak were struck down
alike; and death spared those tended at great cost no
more than those who were bereft of help... Saddest of
all was the way the plague sapped its victims of courage.
At the first symptoms, they lost all hope, took to their
beds and shut themselves off, as it were, from the world.
This moral prostration made them rapidly worse and
speeded the hour of their death: No words can be found
to describe this disease. All that can be said is that it
had nothing in common with the ills by which man is
ordinarily afflicted, and it was a punishment sent by God."
By way of Greece the scourge passed to the Mediterran¬
ean islands, in which two-thirds of the population were
struck down. In Italy, even more victims were claimed;
100,000 died in Florence, and as many in Venice ; at Bo¬
logna and Ferrara there were 2,000 deaths each day. The
epidemic swept across the Balearic Islands into Spain,
and across Switzerland into Austria and Germany, where'
it brought death to 1,250,000 people, including some
125,000 Franciscan monks.
Processions of flagellants
In France it made its first appearance in a Carmelite
monastery at Avignon, and within a few months it
carried off 150,000 persons. Having decimated Prov¬
ence, it ravaged Paris, the Eastern provinces, and parti¬
cularly Burgundy, where the following grim couplet was
composed:
"En mil trois cent quarte huit
"De cent ne demeurait que huit." (2)
England's turn came next: In London 100,000 persons
died. Then, Norway, Denmark, Iceland and even Green¬
land were decimated. All in all, it is said that the "Black
Death" of the 14th century carried off between 30 and 40
million people in Europe alone.
As an attempt to overcome this epidemic and appease
the Divine wrath, a wave of frightened mysticism swept
over Christendom. In many countries, processions of
flagellants were to be seen throughout the land, half-
naked, intoning religious hymns, and chastising them¬
selves with whips to which crosses of iron were attached.
Finally the various kings, and even the Pope, forbade
these people to enter their realms, for they engaged in
every sort of pillage.
It was commonly believed that wells and fountains had
been poisoned and popular anger was aroused against the
Jews who were held responsible for these disasters. The
Jews were hounded everywhere and large numbers were
burned alive, especially in the German-speaking countries.
To put an end to these horrible massacres, Pope Clement
VI issued two Bulls declaring the Jews innocent. But
despite this it was only in Poland that the Jews Anally
could find refuge, with King Casimir the Great, who gave
asylum to whole Jewish colonies.
Fig & pistachio poultices
When the great plague epidemic broke out in Avignon
in 1348, the physician-surgeon Guy de Chauliac
began to treat tumors by "ripening" them with
fig and pistachio poultices and then lancing them with
a hot knife.
Large quantities of incense and camomile leaves were
burnt in public squares and in houses, and rooms were li¬
berally washed with rosewater and vinegar. Doctors
began to wear long loose clothing and long gloves, protect¬
ing their nose with a sponge soaked in vinegar containing
clove and cinnamon powder.
But it was especially in Italy that the most effective
public health measures were developed. In 1374, people
and merchandise either infected, or even suspected of
infection, were forbidden to enter Venice. Patients were
isolated in special places outside the towns and
the declaration of plague cases became compul- (Cont'd on
sory. In 1377 the Republic of Ragusa initiated page 20)
the first system of quarantine. All suspected
(1) A malady that spreads terror, a malady which Heaven in its
fury invented to punish the crimes of the Earth.
(2) In thirteen hundred forty eight, of one hundred remained but
eight.
16

PLAGUE
(Cont'd from
page 16)
FORTY DAYS IN
THE LAZARET
cases were isolated for thirty, and later forty days in
sunny and well-aired "lazarets".
Marseilles followed this example in 1383 and Venice
drew up a whole series of model health regulations. By
1438 Venice had appointed health directors who controlled
the cleanliness of the water supply. In 1485 the city de¬
signated a special magistrate for public health who was
endowed with wide powers and duties.
In 1418, during the Hundred Years' War, the plague re¬
appeared in Paris and "'in less than five weeks killed off
more than 50,000 persons". At the end of the 15th cen¬
tury the discovery of the New World extended European
medical knowledge. Doctors now faced new diseases, such
as syphilis and yellow fever which caused terrible havoc
among the Spaniards, along with plague and typhus.
During the siege of Milan, in 1522, the French army
commanded by Admiral Bonnivet was attacked by a for¬
midable epidemic of plague which is said to have claimed
between 40,000 and 50,000 victims.
In Rome, in 1527, "there was no street that was not
heaped with plague-victims, dead or dying, and people
imploring Death to put an end to their sufferings." To¬
wards the, end of July 1528, the French army encamped
before Naples, was decimated by an epidemic (probably
typhus) which in less than a month reduced it as a
fighting force from 25,000 to less than 100. This was the
end of the proud army of Francis I which, as the King's
historiographer, Martin du Bellay, wrote, "had dominated
Italy, the Romagna and the Kingdom of Naples".
In the following century, the plague broke out once
more, this time among the armies of the Thirty Years'
War, causing 18,000 deaths -at Nuremberg in 1634. At
Stuttgart, typhus and the plague held sway for five years,
from 1634 to 1639 ; while at Augsburg, a town of 10,000
inhabitants, 30,000 died between 1625 and 1628.
The whole of Germany was scourged alternately by
typhus and the plague, spread by rats and fostered by
famine, for "the crops in the fields had been entirely
eaten up by mice." These disasters drove the people to
outright acts of cannibalism ; and attempts to conjure
them away led to a wave of religious fervour. Vows were
made and processions and pilgrimages took place espe¬
cially to Oberammergau, where in 1634 the plague carried
off 84 out of 400 inhabitants. This period saw the be¬
ginning of the "Passion Plays" which are now performed
every ten years in this little village of the Bavarian Alps.
A few years later, in 1657, a Jesuit priest named Atha-
nasius Kirche, announced . that the epidemic of plague
Plague "seasons" in different parts of the world
circles indicate the number of months ranging
then raging in Rome was caused by worms so small and
elusive that they could not be perceived by the senses.
When viewed under the microscope, he said, they resembl¬
ed objects no larger than atoms. He noted that he had
found these small worms in the blood of plague-victims
and in the pus of buboes, and that they multiplied in
the system exceedingly rapidly.
This forerunner of microbiology believed that the
worms were carried by the air, clothing and other objects
with which the sick had been in contact, and even in fact
by animals. These prophetic views which preceded Pas¬
teur's theories by two centuries naturally strengthened
the belief that plague was contagious.
In the early middle
ages Christians called
on St. Sebastian to
protect them from
the plague, which
they regarded as a
form of divine pun¬
ishment. From the
1 3th century on¬
wards they appealed
to St. Roch who had
himself contracted
the plague in Italy.
These statuettes from
a Paris church depict
St. Roch snowing his
plague boll to a doc¬
tor garbed In a hood
and lobe to protect
him ygainst infection.
Institut Pasteur, Paris.
Carnavalesque costume
and a disinfecting beak
Treatment of the disease was mainly governed at the
time by an aphorism which had been jokingly baptiz¬
ed "the electuary of the three adverbs" cito, longe,
tarde that is, "early to leave, far away to finish, late to
return." The doctors who braved contagion had adopted
a special costume, designed in Paris in 1619, comprising a
long smockfrock of oiled and waxed cloth together with
oiled and waxed taffeta gloves. Louis XIII's doctor im¬
proved upon the costume to an almost carnivalesque
degree with a leather shirt and breeches of leather, high
riding-boots, a full-length coat and gauntlets. The head
was completely encased in a leather headpiece with glass
protectors for the eyes, while the nose was protected by
a sort of large beak filled with disinfectants to inhale.
In France, the first special hospital for the plague-
stricken was instituted in 1474 at Lyons. Paris, where
68,000 victims had died at the Hôtel-Dieu hospital during
the single epidemic of 1562, established a plague-hospital
only at the beginning of the 17th century.
When a terrible epidemic broke out in Lyons in 1628, a
health bureau went into operation and was remarkably
successful in checking the scourge. From the outset, one
20

The Unesco Courier. April 1956
are shown on this map. Shaded sections within the
from one to twelve when cases of plague occur.
hospital equipped with only 200 beds for contagious cases,
accommodated 4,000 patients by crowding four or five
persons into a single bed.
The declaration of all suspect cases was made compul¬
sory, "health passports" called bullettes were issued, and
any failure to observe the draconian regulations set up
was punished by death. Organized "disinfection teams"
worked methodically, fumigating houses and buildings
with sulphur, and subjecting all persons released from
quarantine to drastic antiseptic cleansing. As a result,
the epidemic was throttled in less than six months.
A century later the plague reappeared in Marseilles
where unlike Lyons, no health bureau existed. The epi¬
demic devastated the city, raging for years at a cost of
40,000 lives. Many inhabitants fled to Lyons and these
plague-spreaders gave the Lyons health bureau another
opportunity to prove its worth. Its director, named Goif-
fon, mobilized his health forces, applied all the prophy¬
lactic measures that a century of .tests and experiments
had perfected and saved his city from disaster.
From then on the advantages of disinfection and
"deratting" needed no more proving. Although, at the
end of the 18th century, the plague levied a heavy tribute
on the French Army in Egypt and decimated Napoleon's
troops at Jaffa, its ravages were more or less confined at
that time to Eastern Europe and Asia Minor ; and hence¬
forth it did not range beyond Asia and Africa. It was
only at the end of the first World War that a slight
epidemic struck in the suburbs of Paris but was imme¬
diately checked. Of the 137 cases observed only 4 % or
so died. Three centuries earlier the plague would have
carried off millions of people.
Thus, sanitary measures applied swiftly and methodic¬
ally to patients as well as to rats and fleas, have succeeded
in ridding Europe at least from this terrible scourge which
as La Fontaine put it in Louis XIV's time "was able to
enrich Acheron in a day."
The above article is taken from Clio en Epidaure by Dr. G.
Barraud, a book devoted to medicine and humanism in ancient
times, by permission of the publishers, Editions Sipuco, Paris.
'PLAGUE SPOTS'
AROUND THE WORLD
DURING the Great Plague of London in
1665 a chronicler of the time wrote
with grim humour : "Mr. Garancières
saith the Plague is the easiest disease in the
world to cure, and soe said Mr. Stoakes, the
Apothecary... but hee is dead since."
A modern medical writer was recently able
to state, "We have vanquished plague as an
epidemic scourge." But the same writer went
on to warn: "The reservoir of the disease
remains because it is not in man himself,
and to expect its eradication is Utopian."
This is exactly what Pasteur foresaw in 1881
when he said: "Plague is a virulent disease
endemic to certain countries. In all these
places its virus must exist and is ready to
become active immediately suitable condi¬
tions of climate, poverty or famine appear."
In the past half century plague has killed
more than twelve and a half million people
(according to Dr. R. Pollitzer, author of a
World Health Organization monograph on the
disease). Half these victims died between
1898 and 1908, and a further quarter in the
next ten years. After a temporary increase
during the war years (1939-1946) the death
rate has again dropped.
Until 1912 it was believed that plague was
essentially a disease transmitted to man by
the domestic rat (through fleas). Today we
know that there are also enormous reservoirs
of the disease among some 200 species of
wild rodents. These exist in areas of Central
and Western Asia, a vast territory of South
Africa and some parts of Latin America.
One of the world's great areas of wild
rodent plague is in a huge territory
covering some 15 states in the western
part of the United States. Here ground squir¬
rels and prairie dogs form the main reservoirs
of infection. But there have been practically
no cases of human plague in the region since
1924 for these wild rodents live far from
human dwellings and their fleas fortunately
do not bite men.
The danger however lies in the wild
rodents or their fleas coming in contact with
the common house rat which would set off
a chain reaction of infection threatening
human beings. U.S. health authorities are
aware of this danger and along with whole¬
sale wild rodent extermination have created
safety zones with rodent-free belts around
human settlements.
Scientists have discovered in recent years
that seasons, climate and temperature also
play an important role in accelerating or
reducing the spread of infection. The death
rate of flea-infected rats has been found to
be high when temperature and air humidity
are moderately high. When such a favourable
climatic period ends, instances of rat plague
become few and far between and human
plague ceases until suitable climatic conditions
once more, usher in a new plague season.
Map shows world's plague areas between
1900-1952. Shading in circles indicates length
of plague season sometimes all year round.
Map copyright 1952, The American Geographical Society The
Geographical Review, Vol. 42. N- 4, 19 52.
21
