The power of words
by Cyril Bibby
No one who has ever seen a white man's lip curl as
he spits out the word "nigger" or who has felt the
deep contempt in a Negro's voice as he refers to
"while trash", can have any doubt about the emotional
content of such terms. True, when the English child
learns the nursery rhyme about the "Ten Little Nigger
Boys" who sat down to dine, the word "nigger1" is used
in a warm, friendly way; but words have an emotive
power for the recipient as well as for the dispenser, and
many Negroes rise in resentment at what they imagine to
be racial prejudice. Similarly, although the word, "Ne¬
gress" may be used in its simple descriptive sense, with¬
out any offensive intent, it may nevertheless carry
objectionable connotations of the days when plantation
owners took female slaves as concubines.
To take another example, the words "Jew" and
"Jewess" are in essence simply classiflcatory terms, no
more objectionable than "author"
and "authoress"; yet, so sensitive to
possibilities of antisemitic prejudice
have some individuals become, they
will circumlocute about "a man (or
a woman) of the Hebrew faith" to
avoid the risk of giving offence.
Just as, in poetry, certain words
have not only a surface insignifi¬
cance, but also a rich emotional
content which gives them layer
upon layer of meaning, so many
words relating to race have complex
associations which introduce thick
incrustations of prejudice. And, if
the child is to learn to use his
native language really well, he must
become fully aware of this complex
quality of words.
Take (he adjectives "black",
"brown", "yellow", and "white".
Applied to paints or fabrics, they
are simple descriptive words im¬
plying nothing beyond the facts of
colour difference.
How should a teacher deal with race
relations in the classroom? How can
an atmosphere of freedom and tole¬
rance which will stop children from
developing racial prejudices be created?
Unesco recently asked sociologists and
educators from different countries to
discuss these problems and to suggest
ways of fostering education in race and
inter-group relations. To help teachers
and to enlist their aid in its campaign
against racial discrimination, Unesco is
to publish two handbooks giving facts
about race and suggesting ways these can
be introduced into history, geography,
biology, religion and other subjects. In
this article, Dr. Cyril Bibby of the Univer¬
sity of London Institute of Education,
author of one of the Unesco handbooks,
points out how, when they are used in a
certain way, words can breed misunder¬
standing and hostility in racial matters.
to be deep down in the semantic structure of the
language. This is why, by many people, a "pure" Negro
or a "pure" European or a '"pure" Indian are regarded
with equal respect, but a person of "mixed blood" is
viewed with something approaching loathing. For the
phrase "mixed blood" carries with it not only the emo¬
tive implications of "mixed" but also the extremely
powerful surcharging of the word "blood".
One speaks of one's child as being "of my own blood";
there is the common saying "blood is thicker than water";
the closest ties of comradeship are those between "blood
brothers'"; there are the metaphors of "blue blood",
"'plebeian blood" and "new blood"; an orator may arouse
high passion by talk of '"British blood" or "Russian blood"
or "American blood". Blood is the very life-stream and
its mythology is rich and varied. Similarly, the words
"half-caste" (with its implication on the one hand of
something less-than-complete and
on the other hand of something to
be ranked in a scale of social value)
and '"mulatto" (with its foreign-
sounding form, in its first syllabic
faintly reminiscent of the hybrid
progeny of the horse and ass, and
in its ending evoking memories of
the sinister stiletto) often carry con¬
notations far more complex than is
usually recognized.
While it is primarily for the bio¬
logy teacher to provide children
with the basic factual knowledge
about genes, it is essentially the task
of the teacher of language to
sharpen his pupils' awareness of
the ways in which words may carry
complex intimations of meaning.
But use them in the phrases
"black race", "brown race", '"yel¬
low race", and "white race" and
how subtly the adjectives imply grades of merit
and demerit ! Usually unrecognized on the conscious
level, but often a potent catalyst of emotion, "white" now
becomes set apart from the other three colour adjectives,
and carries with it an idea of basic cleanness which
"black*" and "brown" and "yellow" do not share. Then
there is white as the symbol of purity and virginity, and
there is white as "not-coloured" while black and brown
and yellow are "coloured". This last implication,
indeed, commonly becomes quite explicit, as when "co¬
loured" is used as a synonym or euphemism for "Negro".
This complex emotional content of the word "white"
would become apparent to children of European origin
if, for a period, they and their teacher deliberately used
the rather more appropriate adjective "pink" in class¬
room discussion of ethnic differences. The sense of
superiority which comes to many people when they think
of themselves as white rather than brown disappears
when they think of themselves as pink, and the thrill of
horror which is aroused in some by the idea of inter¬
marriage between black and white does not arise in the
same way at the thought of the mingling of black and
pink.
This word "mingling", too is richly emotive in the
context of race. "Mingling", or "mixture", is often
expressive of adulteration or impurity: there is the
dishonest dairyman mixing water with his milk, there is
the appalling consequence of sewage becoming mingled
with drinking water. Not in any conscious or verbalized
way do these ideas normally arise; they are more likely
To recognize the existence of ir¬
rational feelings is often the first
step to liberating oneself from them,
and the teacher can contribute a
good deal to the emotional eman¬
cipation of his pupils by helping
them to understand how it is that
certain words and phrases come to
arouse feelings of this kind.
It is, however, not only in the language or literature
lesson that opportunities arise to help children to cope
with the complex emotional content of words. The bio¬
logy lesson, for example, may present a suitable occasion
to isolate the proper meaning of "pure-bred", as a gene¬
tically descriptive term, from the implication of virtue and
superiority, which often attach to the term. In almost any
subject of the curriculum, the enormous emotive power of
the word "blood" may make itself felt, and care can be
taken that this power does not, as it may very easily do,
carry over into the children's attitudes to race relations.
So with the very word "race!" itself. Passing into
general usage in its present sense after Buffon gave it the
seal of his approval in 1749, the word had earlier been
used in the sense of "the human race", and in the sense of
the posterity of a person, as in the phrase "the race of
Abraham". And, subtly still today, the word carries with
it something of this complex connotation, so that on the
one hand the members of another "race" are not quite
human and on the other hand they are not quite of one's
own kith-and-kin. And, as a result, many a man who is
well aware of the scientific facts about race is nevertheless
unable to cast off completely his irrational feelings about
it. He is, indeed, in much the same position as was
Madame de Staël, who is reported to have said: "I do not
believe in ghosts, but I am afraid of them". We must
help children to pass beyond the stage of abandoning fal¬
lacious beliefs, and to progress into the stage of getting
rid also of irrational fears.
24
