Polynesian navigators :
CHAMPION EXPLORERS
OF THE VAST PACIFIC
by Edwin Grant Burrows
First inhabitants of the mid-Pacific islands were the Polynesians the world's most daring deep-
sea voyagers and explorers. They found and populated every habitable island in the vast expanse
bounded by Hawaii on the north. New Zealand on the south, Easter Island on the east, and
Tonga and Samoa on the west. The word Polynesia means "many islands" those which form
triangle shown on map (right). Dotted lines crossing to South America show route by which
Polynesians are thought to have-travelled from Marquesas to Peru. Above, 18th century engrav¬
ing from "The Voyages of Captain Cook", showing a Tongan ship equipped with lateen sail.
¡scr*
w^r
CHINA
<k PHILIPPINtS
MICRONESIA
H* . »* C A ft' Ö--.t -V H E
x>
Astronomy is the most ancient of the sciences, and still
the most accurate in its predictions. Applied astrono¬
my has been vital to man for thousands of years:
for landsmen in agriculture, giving them foreknowledge of
seed-time and harvest; and for mariners in navigation,
showing where to point the prows of their ships so as to
make a landfall. Of all the peoples who have found their
way about the earth with the aid of this kind of applied
astronomy, the Polynesians have the best claim to be called
world champions.
To us of European tradition that seems a bold statement.
How about Columbus? How about the earlier Vikings, Moors,
Phoenicians ? There is no wish here to dim their glory ;
they have earned it all. Yet Columbus had the compass and
a forerunner of the sextant ; besides, he sailed centuries
later than the explorers famed in Polynesian legend. As for
Vikings, Moors, even Phoenicians with their fabled circum¬
navigation of Africa/ all their feats were coastwise sailing
compared with the Polynesian ventures through the widest
of oceans.
There is still some doubt as to when Polynesians first
landed on the islands where European explorers, pushing
out into the Pacific at least a thousand years later, found
them established. Some doubt, too, as to where they started,
and what route they followed. At present the most likely
answer seems to be that they did not all come at once, but
at various times, and along more than one sea-lane.
The question as to the general direction of their shoving-
As an ethnologist. Professor Burrows has studied native cultures in Polynesia
and Micronesia and is the author of many articles and monographs, including
"Songs of Uvea and Futuna", "Hawaiian Americans", and "Western Polynesia".
He is now Associate Professor of Ethnology at the University of Connecticut.
18
off place has seemed easier to answer. It must have been
mainly one region, for they are, broadly speaking, one
people ; from Hawaii in the north to New Zealand in the
south, and from Easter Island in the east to little islands,
scattered among larger ones of different population, in the
west. The usual answer has been that they came from the
west ; that is, from the direction of south-east Asia.
But now comes Thor Heyerdahl, who with his intrepid
crew sailed the raft "'Kon Tiki" from Peru to Polynesian
Raroia. That voyage, which he recounted in a memorable
tale that will surely hold its place among stories of men
against the sea, was only part of an enormous piece of re¬
search into Polynesian origins. His answer to the question
"'Whence the Polynesians?" is given in the title of a volume
of more than 800 large pages, published in 1952: "'American
Indians in the Pacific."
To sift the evidence for his claim that the Polynesians
came from America would take at least 800 pages more.
Failing that, it may be worth while to list impressions left
on a student of Polynesia by a re-perusal of the work:
(1) No one can examine this monumental treatise without
admiring the industry, determination and ingenuity that
went into it.
(2) The data are presented, not in the manner of a judge
or dispassionate scientist displaying the facts to let them
lead where they may, but in that of an advocate, using all
his powers to put his case in the best light and belittle that
of his adversaries. (Admittedly the adversaries have often
done the same.)
(3) Throughout the discussion, the possibilities of local
development and of convergence, whereby devices of dif¬
ferent origin come to look alike, are either overlooked or
lightly dismissed; as if human beings could never invent

The Unesco Courier
«J*;
irHfeaiMi.
/ '&*X%ÁMAWAII
a.^00^ i # x.
.MARSHALL" \
A >*" Vi'
\
\
:*:-.G.ILBERT
>
\
\
\
^V%
< s
ion* \:
>* \ *¡tefcu. /
/I*
\
\7\!
TOÑ'QÁREVA %
a .,v¿'->¿;;&v.. N/ Ç&VB .--i^'
» fijiv*/ * Íi».i5>^:*:,.
\
\
'5: MARQUESAS	\
\
«$».	*
/ ^ÍTtONOA COO,^*; ' ¥'
/ ' RAROTONQ^t
,;ï,#' I-
St
RAPA
'';*%*M
7r vMANOAREVA
PITCAI Rti ^W**M*'H«IS»Jt»!foHW N
easter" j
avííí Ar rue toutro*
Map and photo taken from "Polynesians, Explorers of the Pacific" by
J. E. Weckler, Jr., published by Smithsonian Institution, Washington
anything more than once. (But demonstrably they often have.)
(4) Despite many dubious details, the cumulative evidence
of early contact between Polynesia and South America is
convincing ; and it may well have been more important than
most Oceanists have been willing to admit.
(5) The preponderance of evidence still indicates that the
Polynesians and their culture came originally from the vi¬
cinity of south-east Asia.
(6) The claim of early influence on Polynesia from north¬
western North America is unconvincing.
(7) Finally, research of this sort is a perfectly respectable
occupation. Yet to an anthropologist who has abandoned
an archaeological point of view for sociological and psycho¬
logical interests, it is deplorable to see good time and brains
wasted on problems that concern only the remote past and
can never be settled beyond doubt ; and this when many
timeless problems and urgent present ones, are crying for
solution.
One such problem lies before us, involving the past indeed,
but leading into the timeless question of man's adaptation to
his environment. Not when and whence did the Polynesians
come, but how did they manage? It is beyond dispute that
they made at least two voyages of some two thousand sea-
miles with perhaps only one stop-over; made them, returned,
and repeated them. These voyages were from the Society
Islands,, evidently a centre of dispersal for Polynesian cul¬
ture, to Hawaii, perhaps by way of the Marquesas; and from
the Society Islands to New Zealand, in all probability by way
of Rarotonga in the Cook group.
What puts these voyages past dispute? First, the fact that
the first Europeans to land at Hawaii and New Zealandin
both cases under the British Captain James Cook found
them already populated. Second, the fact that both had
traditions of ancestral voyages from islands the New Zealand
Maoris called Hawaiki and Tawhiti, the Hawaiians Hawai'i
and Kahiki. Third, the matter was investigated in the islands
of those names in the Society group: Hawai'i (the ancient
name ; now Raiatea) and Tahiti (Tawhiti, Kahiki). Sure
enough, they had corresponding traditions of the same voya¬
ges with the same leaders ; and genealogies in all the island
groups checked back fairly well to ancestors credited with
manning pioneering canoes. Fourth, comparison of cul¬
tures of three island groups confirms the close relations.
How did they do it? Unfortunately, that question is easier
to ask than to answer. Great overseas voyages had ceased
long before Captain Cook appeared, though he did learn
something about native navigation. And by the time the
matter was investigated more thoroughly, still more had
been forgotten.
Some have offered highly speculative answers. No less an
authority than Admiral Hugh Rodman, U.S. Navy, thought
one out from a huge gourd preserved in the Bishop Museum
at Honolulu. The smaller end has been cut off, leaving the
top of the gourd open. A row of small holes runs all the
way around just below the upper rim. Hawaiian tradition
credited this gourd or calabash with supernatural powers
concerned with navigation.
In an article entitled "The Sacred Calabash," published
in the Proceedings of the U.S. Naval Institute (1928), Admiral
Rodman suggested that the ancient navigators had filled the
gourd with water and used the holes below the rim, in con¬
nexion with the level of the water, to obtain a true horizon
to fix their position and plot their course.
Unfortunately, Admiral Rodman did not
know enough of the tradition. Mrs. Lahiláhi next page)
Webb, a Hawaiian woman of chiefly lineage
19

SEA-GOING CANOES of many types were built by Polynesians. Above, an engraving made from descriptions brought back from South Seas by one
of Captain Cook's expeditions in I 8th century. Similar canoes with double hulls and vertical sails are still used today in central and eastern Polynesia.
Photo taken from "Polynesians, Explorers of the Pacific"
who had been a retainer of Queen Liliuokalani in
her youth, and who spent her elder years as a hostess and
guide at the museum, said that she had known of this
calabash most of her life. The holes below the rim were
for lashings, to hold on a lid, which she remembered but
which had since disappeared. The calabash was used to
hold, not water, but wind all the winds. By opening the
lid a little and intoning the right chant, an expert could
call forth whichever wind he needed. Moreover, Mrs Webb
added, she knew the chant. But some unauthorized per¬
son had taken off the lid; so all the winds escaped; and
that is why the weather is now uncontrollable.
Quite recently the hints to be found in old chants, early
European accounts and surviving myths and traditions,
have been assembled and analyzed by the astronomer
Maud Makemson in her book "'The Morning Star Rises :
an Account of Polynesian Astronomy" (New Haven, 1941).
Whatever can be made out of the scraps available, she
has set down. In some respects, one fears, she has set
down more than can be made out with all certainty. Yet
several points are beyond doubt.
In pre-European times the Polynesians had a consider¬
able knowledge of the heavenly bodies and their move¬
ments, varying in some details from one island group to
another, yet consistent in the main. They had a calendar
based on the annual northward and southward motions
of the sun. The year was divided into months, each
subdivided into "nights of the moon," from the moonless
night through all the waxing and waning until another
dark of the moon. The moons were distinguished from
each other by the rising of specified constellations.
The astronomic lore of which the above is an outline
was treasured especially by navigators, who exchanged
information on guiding stars, landmarks, currents, and
winds with their colleagues in whatever islands they
visited, in the season of variable winds, a navigator could
sail out for a day or several days, steering by a given
star ; then, if he sighted no land, return when the wind
shifted. It is evidently by some such method that the
Polynesians gradually explored the Pacific.
Some voyagers, exceptionally bold or else desperate be¬
cause of some trouble at home, set off on longer sorties
into unknown seas. Others, storm-driven, made long
voyages unintentionally. Of such pioneers, voluntary or
not, many doubtless never found land ; and of those who
did, not a few never found their way home again. Yet,
through the generations and centuries, enough voyages
were successfully completed and retraced to build up a
body of sailing directions which at last, during the great
age of navigation, made most of the Polynesian Islands
accessible to each other.
As to the particular long voyages chosen as examples,
Dr. Makemson concludes, by combining astronomy and
mythology, that the pilots steered from the Society Islands
'FROM ACROSS THE SEA'. At time
of discovery of America, the Mantas Indians,
living on what is today coast of Ecuador,
used rafts of balsa wood with vertical sails
like those of Polynesians. Legends of the
Mantas Indians told of landing on their
coast by "men who came from across the
sea". The first Spaniard to see a giant
balsa raft carrying 50 tons of goods in
the 16th century was Bartolomé Ruiz.
From afar he took it for a Spanish caravel.
Right, the first engraving of a balsa raft
by a Milanese traveller, Girolamo Benzoni,
in his book "Dell'historia del Mondo
Nuovo", published in Venice in 1 527.
20

Polynesian
navigators
(Continued)
BIG SHIPS built by Polynesians
carried large numbers of men, women
and children, with supplies of food
and water, on long ocean voyages.
They were commonly 60 to 80 feet
long and sometimes over 100 feet.
To build their ships, Polynesians had
only simple stone and shell cutting
tools and no nails. Their huge
canoes were sewn together with
coconut husk fibre. Right, one of
the last large hulls made in the ancient
Polynesian fashion, ribless and with
its planks sewn together with fibre.
Photo by K. P. Emery, Bishop Museum
to the Marquesas during the months June to August
(months of shifting winds in those latitudes) by following
Spica as morning star, and continued on the same course
until they reached the latitude of Hawaii, which they
recognized by the appearance of Aldebaran just over the
sea. Thereafter, she finds, they turned sharply westward
and ran before the trade wind, following an evening star,
probably Venus, until they saw on the clouds at night the
glow of an active volcano in Hawaii.
From the Society Islands to Rarotonga the most likely
guiding star is Antares or Fomalhaut, "or by steering a
few degrees south of the sun or Venus on the western
horizon when near the December solstice." From Raro¬
tonga to New Zealand, one tradition says "Venus by night,
the sun by day." Another names Antares. Dr. Makemson
finds that both would lead too far west. This problem
remains unsolved. Yet there is no question about the fact
that Polynesians, steering by the stars, did repeatedly find
their way to New Zealand.
Much clearer information is obtainable from Micro¬
nesia. In the western Carolines the old lore of navigation
is still remembered and, at least in some more remote
atolls, still used. The writer had the good fortune to
spend several days taking sailing directions from the
leading navigator of one of these atolls. Sitting with a
compass between us (for Ifaluk, as the navigator was
called, had worked on British and American ships, too),
we worked out a celestial chart with 32 stars on it, going
all round the compass, and names of islands to which
they would lead.
Most spectacular of Micronesian aids to navigation were
"stick maps," known only to the Marshall Islanders, but
made and used by them up to the first decade or so of
the 20th century. These consisted of strips of coconut
leaflet midrib lashed together in a rigid frame, with both
straight and curved lines, and small white shells repre¬
senting islands. They were of three main kinds: -one
used as a teaching davice ; another an outline of the
whole Marshall group or a large part of it ; the third rep¬
resenting in more detail a few nearby islands and seas.
Only one source, and that not of the best, says that
guiding stars were shown on the map. More likely, un¬
less in some exceptional case, they were memorized sep¬
arately. Distances and directions were not accurate
enough to steer by ; indeed it would have been a disgrace
for a navigator to consult such a map while at sea. They
were used to refresh memory while planning a voyage.
These details from Micronesia suggest some of the re¬
sources possibly included in the now forgotten navigation
lore of the ancient Polynesians. Whatever its shortcom¬
ings, it served to bring the first settlers to islands widely
spread in the Pacific, which their descendants still occupy.
21
