MODERN
'FLYING
DUTCHMEN'
by
Louise de Béa
The polyglot seagoing fraternity
manning . the world's merchant
navies today numbers thousands
of refugee seamen in its ranks. Some
were once regular crew members on
ships of their native countries who
sought freedom by "'jumping ship"
while in a foreign port. Others found
countries willing to give them refuge,
but after a spell in a refugee camp
they preferred to return to sea.
Most are men without countries and
without identities and thus condemned
to lives which recall the ancient story
of the Flying Dutchman who was
doomed to sail the seas eternally. But
this legendary captain was allowed to
return to port from time to time to
search for a maid whose love could
release him from his fate, whereas
these are refugee seamen whose world
ends at the bottom of a ship's gang¬
plank. Without identity papers they
can never set foot ashore.
These men are prisoners on board
ship and there are plenty of case
records of refugees who have sailed
round the world for three or four years
without ever being able to land.
Two years ago the Netherlands
authorities, acting for the Office of the
U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees,
made a survey of refugee seamen serv¬
ing on ships docking in Dutch ports.
This brought to light some startling
facts. Out of 550 refugee seamen only
220 had papers allowing them to return
to the countries where their ships were
registered. A further 124 were entitled
to return to some other country, and
59 had documents which had either
expired or were not valid for return to
the issuing country. The remaining
147 had no valid documents at all they
were men who, officially, did not exist.
These men thus still lack the protec¬
tion prescribed by Article 11 of the
Convention on the Status of Refugees (11
16

adopted by an international confe¬
rence in 1951.
In September 1955, an eight-nation
conference at The Hague recommended
that refugee seamen should receive
international protection under the
Status of Refugees Convention and
that they should be allowed to serve on
ships of any nationality and be allowed
to go ashore without let or hindrance.
The recommendations will be put into
concrete form by a second conference
due to meet early this year.
The tragic human aspect of the
problem is brought home by the follow¬
ing case, typical of many others with
which the U.N. High Commissioner's
Office has had to deal. The seaman
concerned arrived in Genoa in 1949, but
his ship left again before the question
of his documents was settled. Just
over'a year later he disembarked again
at Genoa and since he did not have
any papers he was put in prison. Then
he was transferred from one refugee
camp to another and his efforts to
emigrate failed on health grounds.
He left Italy illegally for Austria
where he was arrested and expelled to
Germany. He was ordered to leave
Germany and embarked on a British
ship in August 1952. Disembarking at
a Belgian port he was put in prison and
then expelled to Germany. In 1953 he
was allowed to embark on an Italian
ship and the Italian authorities agreed
to issue a travel document. It was
difficult to contact him as he was
sailing from port to port. Finally he
was found at -Port Said, but before his
travel papers could be prepared his
ship had sailed again. Since then all
trace of this man has been lost.
Norway, one of the world's great
maritime powert, has been one of the
first countries to implement the re¬
commendation regarding seamen in the
Convention on the Status of Refugees.
As a first step it has provided all re¬
fugee seamen serving in Norwegian
ships with a special record of service.
In 1953, the Norwegian Government
also agreed to accept 50 refugee seamen
for service in the merchant marine on
the understahding that they would be
given internationally-recognized travel
documents and residence rights in Nor¬
way.
If other governments were to follow
the Norwegian example this would go
a long way towards solving the
problem. But what is still required is
a general internationally-adhered-to
issue of travel documents to refugee
seamen which give them the right to
go ashore.
Ui "In the case oí refugees regularly serving as
crew members on board a ship flying the flag of a
Contracting State, that State shall give sympathetic
consideration to their establishment on its territory
and the issue of travel documents to them or tem¬
porary admission to Its territory particularly with a
view to facilitating their establishment in another
country."
17
