The three E's of the modern museum:
EDUCATE, ENTERTAIN, ENRICH
by Molly Harrison
Museums, as we know them, have their origins in
a combination of love and self-interest. The wealthy
traveller of earlier centuries who established the
nucleus of our modern collections loved .beautiful and
unusual objects and he was fortunate in being able to pur¬
chase the things he liked and wanted. His taste was per¬
sonal, he indulged it to the full and his influence is still
felt in many of our European museums today.
The wealthy personal collection is, however, less and less
a possibility in our modern world and economic and poli¬
tical developments are steadily altering the nature, the
financial support and, in many cases, the purpose of mu¬
seum collections. Increasingly they are being taken over
by public bodies and maintained and developed from pub¬
lic funds. Public money implies support and public use:
it is perhaps timely that we take a new look at museums
for many of them are, in the fullest sense, ours.
What are they? Temples of the Muses to the fifth
century Greeks, but they have travelled far since then.
Their facades, encrusted with doric and ionic, seem to
hanker longingly for the past, but the atmosphere inside
sometimes lacks much that the Greeks thought important
in life.
Museums show things. That may seem to the layman
an easy, innocuous and almost automatic thing to do, but
the showing of things is fraught with problems, many of
which divide the museum profession with an acerbity
undreamed of by laymen. We museum directors and cura¬
tors are on the whole an enthusiastic and devoted band
for surely no one would dream of undertaking such work
unless he enjoyed it. We represent many different points
of view but for all of us the problems are great and they
increase. What are they ?
Firstly, museum material is fascinating material and
much of it is unique. Most modern men and women
cannot, or do not want to fit such things into their daily
living and so there is perpetually the danger of an em¬
barras de choix, the risk that museums may acquire too
much and far more than their founders or the architects
of their buildings originally conceived of. The problem
therefore arises of what do we do with it how much do we
show? Collecting is a habit of mind as well as of body
and of purse and it is almost an occupational disease,
which museum officials tend to acquire in the same way
as hairdressers fall to fibrositis, miners to silicosis and
tennis champions to damaged elbows.
We differ considerably in our ways of warding off our
incipient collecting mania. It is a recent problem ; an
earlier generation of museum officials felt it essential to
show everything and their collections were nothing more
than an assembly of curiosities. Of recent years the
cobwebs have largely been swept away in most museums
and the back tooth of an Indian elephant is no longer
shown alongside a piece of Mexican embroidery, a Fabergé
clock and the horns of a reindeer from Finnish Lapland.
We try to display things around some intelligible theme
and to avoid the mistake of failing to show anything be¬
cause we show too much. Some fear that this trend has
almost gone too far and that two important elements in
enjoyable museum visiting wonder and delight may
well be lost if our objects are too coldly displayed and
carefully segregated. As in most spheres, balance, and
proportion are difficult to achieve but as always they
are vitally important.
Again, enthusiasm for their collections causes many
museum people to think of an ideal museum as being a
large building, imposing and arresting, as befits the im¬
portance of what it contains. Others think . differently
and fear that potential visitors may feel dwarfed and iso¬
lated in great halls. It may be that a number of small
museums, in place of one large one, would be more invit¬
ing to the public, who would tend to visit them in a more
relaxed and receptive frame of mind. Of course there is
no final answer to this problem of size in museums, for
individual, regional and national characteristics and op¬
portunities differ so greatly ; so thought remains divided
and practice varied.
A more knotty problem and one around which fur flies
thick arises from the fact that most museum material
is valuable and irreplaceable. It must, of
course, be assembled and cared for with
the greatest skill ; acquisition and con¬
servation are the primary responsibilities
of museums, for unless the exhibits are
there and in good condition there is no
Cont'd
next page

A MODERN MUSEUM
(Continued) The Muses would almost feel at home
museum. A collection, however, is not an end in itself
r.nd unless the objects are seen and enjoyed by people
there is no worthwhile museum. So a second problem
hits us, far more difficult than that of how much we
shall showto whom do we show?
We have to choose, to select, for no museum can be all
things to all men. That which is significant and delight¬
ful to a university professor, a research scholar or an ad¬
vanced student will not mean anything at all to Hans
Schmidt, John Brown or Pierre François or their wives,
daughters and sons. We are compelled to decide our par¬
ticular function, but the decision is rarely a personal one,
for the nature of our exhibits, the extent of our collection,
the locality in which we work and the structure of the
society in which we live all these and other factors de¬
termine to a considerable extent to whom we show our
exhibits and to what purpose.
Increasingly it is being realised in the museum world
that museums are not an end in themselves, that though
our work may be entirely with things it is only justifiable
if in the end we are working for people. For their enligh¬
tenment, enjoyment, understanding, development, educa¬
tion it matters little that our words vary. Our differen¬
ces here are perhaps largely a question of pace: some wish
to hasten the fostering of truly popular interest in mu¬
seum material, believing that the modern world has sore
need of what museums stand for and that there is no
time to lose. Others, more cautious perhaps or more spe¬
cialist, seeing clearly the dangers of attempting to make
objects of supreme quality too readily accessible to persons
as yet ignorant of them, tend to look askance at populari¬
zation. There is room for many differences of emphasis
but we are all imbued with a similar belief that museums
are vitally important institutions, essential to our time.
Museum material is, however, often difficult material
and much professional discussion centres around the
problem of how to make it understandable. Technical
matters impinge here what kind of show case? Do we
have to have them at all ? How do we light our objects
so that they can be seen to best advantage, by night as
well as by day ? What style, size and detail of label is
best ? What publications do we issue ? and why ? What
ventilation, what heating system, what hours of opening
can best serve the interests both of the valuable object and
of the valuable visitor ?
These are perennial matters, debated in season and out
whenever museum officials meet together, matters which
are certainly never capable of final solution. That tall,
indeterminate young man and his girl-friend, that solid
bourgeois and his family, all spending an hour of their
spare time in their local museum, would be astonished if
they could know how much thought, effort, argument and
trouble have gone towards helping them to understand, as
well as to enjoy, what they are seeing. Showing our exhi¬
bits is more involved than they might think.
Are they keeping pace
with a changing world ?
Anew trend in museum thinking has made rapid
strides in recent years, a trend which fits well into
the pattern of thought of the post-war years: much
museum material is international, the product, with varia¬
tions, of all mankind and belonging to all mankind.
Museum material is, therefore, potentially a unifying
force and many ways have been tried of incorporating,
even among purely local or national material, an impli¬
cation affecting the unity of mankind.
Unesco, through its Museums and Monuments Division
has done much to foster international co-operation bet¬
ween museums, and the International Council of Mu¬
seums, a professional, non-governmental body, was found¬
ed to further the same ends. In the critical condition of
the modern world we cannot afford to neglect any media,
any techniques, which can help men to speak to one an¬
other and to interpret their thoughts across barriers of
nationality, race or creed.
Museums are definitely on the up and up. There is
new thought afoot, renewed professional activity and in¬
creased public response yet no one in his senses could
possibly be content.
The world is changing and museums are changing with
it but are they keeping pace? Do more people in the
world appreciate things of beauty and worth than, say,
a century ago? Do people make more good things than
they did? Most people have more leisure than in the past
do they spend it in more fulfilling ways? Are imagi¬
nations as vivid, is perception as acute, are tastes as per¬
sonal and is thought as individual as it was? Are more
people happier, leading richer lives, than was the case
when the objects now displayed in our museums were a
part of daily life, made, used and misused by ordinary men
and women ?
There seems to be little cause for complacency. Museums
do, indeed, interpret life, but they do not always do so
with a clear voice and their message is not always wel¬
come. One senses sometimes an atmosphere of disappoint¬
ment, disillusion, frustration. Why? Of course the fault
lies, as it always does, on both sides. There is no perfect
museum, just as there is no perfect visitor. Can one, in
general terms, list their respective inadequacies, as each
appears to the other ?
Curators look and listen
Exhibits go a-journeying
To many visitors many museums still seem to be too
big, too full, too grand, too rich. Museums often
expect too much in understanding, in appreciation,
in physical staminai and so they fail in many cases to
become a part of everyday life. They seem too special¬
ized, often too erudite and it is difficult for the man in
the street to see the connexion between one display and
another. Their basis seems to be too exclusively in the
past, they seem not to relate the objects they cherish and
display to what that tall young man does in his working
hours, or that solid bourgeois' equally solid wife uses in
her kitchen.
To many museum officials, on the other hand, the ordi¬
nary visitor often seems profoundly stupid. He is either
inert, using nothing of the self that goes so keenly next
day to a football match or a cinema ; or he is greedy,
trying to see too much in too short a time. Being of the
twentieth century, he "has no time to stand and stare,"
and often rushes past things which would speak to him
vividly if he would but pause and really look at them. He
is superficial, because he is often too lazy to think. Feeling,
too, often seems difficult to him ; his channels of appre¬
ciation have been blocked, his senses atrophied and his
enthusiasms dulled by much that happens to him outside
and he cannot relax enough to find renewal.
So the scene is variegated hopeful at one moment,
frustrating at another, enthusiastic here discouraging
there... but no one can doubt that things are on the move,
that the museum world is alive and, in places, almost
kicking. Directors and curators are no longer the hermits
they once tended to be, they are often out of their build¬
ings talking, listening, lookingas much as they are in
them and this is a symbol of increasing museum influence
among the community.
Exhibits, too, even very precious ones, are taken out of
their cases and sent a-journeying to an extent which
would have seemed the height of folly a generation ago.
National museums lend to provincial ones and to one an¬
other, many museums lend things to schools, to churches,
even to shops. And in some places "shop things"
everyday objects made and used by everyday men and
womengo into the museum and take their place along¬
side venerated objects from previous centuries. There is
a va-et-vient which spells health and vitality and growth
museum is gradually and painfully becoming a
cultural community centre, a place where interests start
suddenly to life for some and find their delighted fulfil¬
ment for othersan indispensable element in the whole
rich pattern of modern life. The Greeks and their Muses
would almost feel at home.
MOLLY HARRISON has been Curator of the Geffrye Museum, London
since 1941. She previously taught in schools in Great Britain and from 1953 to
1955 she was a member of the Council of the Museums Association. Molly
Harrison has written many articles and reviews on art and museography.
Her publications include "Museum Adventure", "Picture Source Books for
Social History" and "Learning Out of School".
