VIEWPOINT ON
BUDDHIST ART
by Grégoire Frumkin
Many comments have reached us following
the publication of the June issue on "Twenty-
five centuries of Buddhist art and culture"
(U.S. August). Amongst the points raised,
perhaps the most interesting are those of M.
Grégoire Frumkin, a Swiss scholar from Ge¬
neva, whose views on the Greek, Roman
and Indian influence in Buddhist art clarify
the differences which still exist amongst
art historians on this controversial subject.
Our readers, we feel sure, will find
Mr. Frumkin's remarks highly stimulating.
Afghanistan has been called "the crossroads of civi¬
lization". Its role in spreading Buddhist art has
also made it a crossroads of conflicting interpreta¬
tions or theories and of preconceived ideas at times
tainted by nationalistic bias. In the controversies which
have raged, one school has exalted the role of Greece and
Rome, others that of India.
The issue may seem clearer if we attempt to distinguish
between the following points: on the one hand the origin
of Buddhism, the role of Buddhism and the dissemination
of Buddhism; and on the other hand the origin of
Buddhist art, the origin of images of Buddha, and the
spread of Buddhist art.
There can be no denying the Indian origin of Buddhism.
Emerging in India in the 6th century B.C., it vanished
from that land by the end of the 12th century under the
impact of Islam and the prolific growth of Hinduism.
Its essence, however, still survives in the concept of spi¬
rituality through poverty, in the respect shown for human
and animal life, and in the idea of non-violence, all of
which have endured through the ages to find their 20th
century expression in the teachings of Gandhi.
The Western reader should
remember that the moral pre¬
cepts of Buddha (c. 560-480 B.C.
which made him a contempo¬
rary of Confucius, Lao-Tse, the
Hebrew prophets of the Baby¬
lonian captivity, Pythagoras,
Heraclitus and Solon), were
to become the heritage of a
large part of humanity. Earlier,
by five centuries, than the Ser¬
mon on the Mount, his medita¬
tions on the existence, origins
and removal of suffering, led to
the glorification of pity, of
charity towards others and of
universal brotherhood. Asia's
history shows how often Bud¬
dhism had a beneficent in¬
fluence on the mentality of
barbaric peoples. Bound up
as they are not to say enslav¬
ed by material progress, West¬
erners cannot hope to under¬
stand Ihe Asian peoples without
a knowledge of their spiritual,
material and political history.
Buddhism took root chiefly in
the 3rd century B.C., under the
Indian king Asoka of the
Maurya dynasty. How many
Westerners have heard of this missionary-king who put
the moral teachings of Buddhism into practice? Once a
bloodthirsty and belligerent warrior, Asoka became an
apostle of charity and peace under the influence of
Buddhism. Because of Buddha and Asoka, the world's
debt to India is great.
Under Asoka's reign, Buddhism began to spread
throughout Asia, especially across what are now Pakistan
and Afghanistan, reaching Turkestan and China some
centuries later. A short historical outline will give a
better idea of the way in which this peaceful penetration
took place.
After a first Persian invasion under Darius I (521-486
B.C.), Northern India was again invaded, during the
second half of the 4th century B.C., by the armies of
Alexander the Great ; for the first time, Hellenism, which
had already taken root in Asia Minor, came in contact
with India. Alexander's empire stretched from Greece and
Egypt across Syria, Mesopotamia and Afghanistan to
Western India ; its southern limits were the Persian Gulf
and the Arabian Sea and, to the North, it was bordered
by the Caspian Sea and by Scythia. Alexander, who had
. become very orientalized, never
had any direct influence in
Hellenizing his vast empire,
although its very existence was
to encourage the spread of
Hellenism throughout Asia for
centuries.
Among Alexander's notable
successors was Seleucos, whose
empire stretched from Syria to
what is now Pakistan. In the
North, it included Transoxiana,
the country on the far side of
the River Oxus (now Soviet
Turkestan). It was a Hellenic
state in a mainly Iranian coun¬
try. India, however, became in¬
dependent in 306 B.C. under
Chandragupta (Sandrakottos in
Greek), grandfather of the
Buddhist king Asoka, although
it remained in close contact
with the Greco-Persian empire
of the Seleucid dynasty.
TWO CIVILIZATIONS,
once met in Afghanistan,
which at one time decorate
and plaster medallion of
discovered during excavati
Photos Musée Guimet, Paris
Indian and Greco-Roman,
Ivory plaques (top of page)
d some nobleman's furniture,
Greco-Roman style were
ons at Begram, near Kabul.
At that time,
national atmos¬
phere" prevailed
in all this vast
region, with cul¬
tural and eco¬
nomic exchanges
an "inter-
Cont'd
next page
27

VIEWPOINT
(Continued) _
GRECO-ROMAN OR INDIAN ?
taking place between India, Persia, Parthla, Syria, and
Mesopotamia, and also with the vast territories of Central
Asia and Siberia. The influence of Greek and, later, of
Roman civilization was very much in evidence.
Towards 250 B.C., Bactria, which included the territo¬
ries between the Hindu Kush and the Oxus (and even
beyond), attained independence under Hellenic kings and
generals. The coins found there Greek, barbarian, Sas-
sanid, Hindu, Buddhist and, finally, Moslem, provide a
fragmentary but impressive glimpse of the history of the
West in Asia:, the tribulations of a centre of Hellenism,
cut off from the West and stretching as far as India.
During the first half of the 2nd century B.C., the Bac-
trian Greeks dislodged the Indians and established them¬
selves in north-west India. Towards the middle of this
century, one of their rulers (one of the Greco-Indian
basileis-maharajahs) named Menandros (Milinda to the"
Indians), was converted to Buddhism. Menandros suc¬
ceeded in extending the borders of his kingdom as far as
the Ganges, thus achieving the dream of Alexander.
In Bactria itself, the Greeks were supplanted about
130 B.C. by the Scythians or Parthians, who quickly
became assimilated. They were driven out in their turn,
however, by the Kushana, a tribe of Chinese origin, about
the beginning of the Christian era. The Kushana also
became assimilated and Hellenized. Officially they em¬
braced Buddhism, but the old religions continued to be
practised simultaneously with the new. In the 2nd cen¬
tury A.D., under their great king, the "basileus-basileôn"
Kanishka, whose empire stretched from the Aral Sea to
the Erythrean Sea, including a large part of India, came
a flowering of the arts within a framework of Indian,
Greco-Roman, Iranian and Chinese cultural elements.
Buddhist art certainly sprang from Indian roots, and
spread with the Buddhist religion. During the first centu¬
ries of its existence, however, any image of Buddha was
forbidden. Thus the impressive monuments of Sanchi,
that masterpiece of Buddhist art of the 1st century A.D.,
do not include a single image of Buddha, who was then
represented by such symbols as an empty throne, a para¬
sol, and a saddled, riderless horse. Buddhist art had
developed in the 2nd and 1st centuries B.C., especially in
Gandhara, a Hellenized region between the Oxus and
the Indus (straddling what are now Afghanistan and
Pakistan), and, above all, in the Kabul River valley and
the Peshawar area as far as the borders of Taxila. Des¬
pite the absence of the image of Buddha, Indian art, like
that of Gandhara at the time already showed a strong
Hellenic influence.
The Greeks called him " Boddo "
A coin of the Kushan king Kanishka shows an impor¬
tant change in the evolution of Buddhist art an
image of Buddha with the inscription "BODDO" in
Greek characters. This is one of the oldest, if not the
oldest image of Buddha which has come down to us. The
Kushan period marks the flowering of what is known as
"Greco-Buddhist" or Buddhist "Greco-Roman" art or
sometimes as "Gandhara art" a stage in artistic deve¬
lopment which has been revealed through a host of
statues and reliefs showing Buddha in the guise of Apollo.
Gandhara was a religious and commercial crossroads
which explains the remarkable discovery made at Begram,
Kanishka's summer capital (some 40 miles north of
Kabul). Hundreds of coins, and also a whole store of
classic works of Greco-Roman Buddhist, Indian, Roman
and Chinese art were uncovered here. Greek medallions
showing Dionysius, satyrs and maenads were found side
by side with Chinese lacquer objects, Greco-Roman
bronzes and glassware, and sculptured ivories of undoubt¬
edly Indian origin.
While the Gandhara Buddhist art was developing in the
1st and 2nd centuries A.D., an impressive flowering of art
was seen in the Indian town of Mathura, between Delhi
and Agra. Images of Buddha dating from this time have .
also been found here, this time a typically Indian Buddha,
not the Greco-Roman one of Gandhara. And this has
led to the problem so hotly debated by art historians;
did the image of Buddha first appear in the Hellenic
territoriesGandhara. or Bactria or at Mathura? Did
the Apollonian Buddha become Indianized on reaching
Mathura, or did the Indian Buddha become Hellenized
on reaching the Hellenic provinces? An alternative possi¬
bility is that the image of Buddha was created indepen¬
dently and simultaneously in the two places.
The last of the theories was advanced in the unesco
courier in which it was asserted that the artists of Ma¬
thura took as their model, not the Apollonian Buddha of
the Gandhara, but statues of the primitive genii of the
ancient, pre-Buddhist cults (the unesco courier, June
1956, p. 14). This rather obscure theory, which seems to
link the Mathura Buddha with the pre-Aryan (Mohenjo-
Daro) civilization of the Indus valley has by no means
been proved scientifically. Similarly, doubt may be
expressed about the interesting discovery made at Had-da,
Afghanistan, in 1926, of what are probably later figures.
Are they Greek, Greco-Roman or, as the unesco courier
states (p. 49), Roman?
The discussion seems sometimes to be based on a spirit
of "nationalization" a nationalization of what took place
2,000 years ago. However, if looked at, as here, in terms
of the cultural exchanges which occurred in these areas,
such questions lose something of their sting.
The/ deified men and humanized gods
Without, therefore, attaching more importance to the
question than it deserves, we think it likely that
the first statues of Buddha were fashioned by
Greco-Roman artists (leaving aside the question as to
whether this happened in Gandhara or in Bactria).
A kind of taboo appears to have prevented the Indians
from fashioning images of Buddha for about 500 years.
Similar cases are to be found, incidentally, in Persian
Mazdeism, Judaism, primitive Christianity and Islam. As
Buddha, who did not consider himself of divine nature,
stressed his teaching and not his person, an impersonal,
spiritual art was more in accordance with Buddhism than
an image of its founder.
Anthropomorphism was, on the other hand, familiar to
the Greco-Romans, who deified men and humanized
their gods. There are many examples of borrowings and
of "'nationalization" in the matter of images of gods:
statues of the goddess Astarte have a resemblance to Ar¬
temis ; to the Greeks, Jehovah was a god like Zeus, and
the Sassanid Persians represented Apollo in Persian cos¬
tume. Finally, the first statues of Jesus have some ana¬
logy with the prototype of Buddha. Although spiritual
values may have suffered in this transition from symbo¬
lism to representational art, Buddhist religious and Bud¬
dhist secular art were thereby enabled to flourish.
For Westerners, imbued with classical culture, ancient
art and thought had their fountain-head in Greece, law
being the child of Rome. Greece was more familiar to
them than India the furthest point reached by Alexan¬
der's Western armies. Central Asia? Lying beyond "outer"
Iran, it seemed to them too far-off. "Near East", "Middle
East" both terms illustrate European ethnocentricity.
In fact, the civilizations which contributed to the deve¬
lopment and dissemination of Buddhist art were many.
Gandhara, especially was an intermediary between the
Near and Far East, between Occident and Orient.
The famous Buddhist monastery of Bamiyan in the
Hindu Kush range, where Buddhist thought was allied to
Greco-Roman, Sassanid Persian and Indian art, was an
important stopping-place on the road from India to
China. As numerous archaeological remains still show, all
the tribes living between "outer" Iran and the steppes of
Turkestan on the one hand, and China on the other, came
under the influence of Buddhism. This was the meeting
place of currents of civilization coming from the four
points of the compass.
Some civilizations are better-known to us than others.
Thanks to the efforts of Soviet archaeologists, our know¬
ledge of the cultural past of territories beyond the Amu-
Darya is rapidly increasing, though much still remains to
be discovered. Little by little, the importance of local cul¬
tures associated with Greco-Roman contributions is being
brought to light. Chinese archaeology has most certainly
some interesting surprises in store for us. In this work,
Indian, Soviet or Chinese chauvinism would be as regret¬
table as any European-centred prejudice.
28
