A LITTLE BLACK GNAT
Threatens 19 million people with blindness
A tiny black fly (above, left) threatens something like I 9 million people in large areas of Africa and Latin America with a
disease called onchocerciasis (pronounced on'-ko-ser-ky'asis). When this gnat bites a human being, tiny parasitic worms enter
the human body. They first cause painful lumps, then invade the tissue of the eyes, bringing total blindness. In the
Chad, (French Equatorial Africa) insecticides are sprayed by helicopter (above, right) over gnat-infested areas. Disease
is already so widespread that tragic replicas of Breughel's painting "The blind leading the blind" are often seen (below).
Mater

BLACK GNAT
	 (Continued) 	
in the Valley of the Blind'
Through an Irishman's pluck and
perseverance a province of.
Kenya, Britain's East African
colony, has been rid of its most
dreaded scourge the tiny flies which
brought blindness to thousands of
middle-aged African men and women.
The scientist who solved one of the
most intriguing medical problems
which had defied scientists for over
30 years is genial, burly James Patrick
McMahon, a 50-year-old Kenya
Medical Department entomologist
who le'ft Dublin for army service in
1922, and came to Kenya in 1929 to
join the Medical Service.
Insects fascinate Mr. McMahon and
in Myanza Province, the vast col¬
lection of African tribal lands fring¬
ing Lake Victoria, he found them in
numbers and variety to exceed his
most cherished expectations. And,
in particular, one tiny species of fly,
known as Simulium Neavei, caught
his attention. The fiy carried the
microscopic worm which causes the
disease called river blindness.
When the fly bites human beings
it transmits the worms which
multiply under the skin, working
their way towards the eyes. If the
disease is not halted, by middle age
they destroy the eye tissues and bring
total blindness.
Finding the adult fly was easy
enough. In some areas there were
concentrations of thousands in every
glade. But to kill it, science
had to know where and how it spent
the larva and pupa stages.
River blindness onchocerciasis to
medical workers is confined in
Kenya to the hilly regions of Nyanza
Province. The highlands are inter¬
sected by hundreds of mountain
streams. Where there was running
water the concentration of fly was
strongest and the incidence of blind¬
ness among African villagers most
prevalent.
Medical men baffled
For this first attempt to solve a
problem which had baffled
dozens of medical workers, Mc¬
Mahon chose an area dubbed "The
Valley of the Blind", where one out
of every six tribesmen had lost his
sight, and 90 per cent of the- popu¬
lation in some places was infected.
World War II put an end to the work,
but McMahon resumed it in 1946, by
then convinced that the fly somehow
bred in rivers.
He therefore tried "dosing" rivers
with a DDT solution. It worked, and
subsequent tests in the "Valley of the
Blind" showed that the fly had been
eradicated from that district. The
riddle of the fly's life cycle remained
unsolved, but McMahon now had an
effective weapon against his enemy,
and he was quick to use it.
The main river blindness area was
in uie norchern districts of Nyanza.
Mr. McMahon began an 18-month
survey to determine the exact area of
infection before the work of fly eli-
10
by Anthony Lavers
mination began. It covered an area
of 6,000 square miles and narrowed
the infection focus down to 1,000
square miles.
Steep mountain valleys, dense for¬
ests and thick bush were the survey's
main obstacles. The teams had to
hack 400 miles of trails through the
forests and strip the bush from the
banks of hundreds of streams and
brooks, most of them unmapped.
Snakes were as common as pigeons in
London's Trafalgar Square, and en¬
counters with buffalo Africa's most
dangerous big gamewere part of the
daily routine. But the greatest dan¬
ger lay in getting lost in dense jungle.
This happened several times, cul¬
minating with the disappearance of
an African worker who tried to make
a short cut back to camp. He died
Copyright Camera Press.
HUNTER AND HUNTED : Mr. J. P.
McMahon, the man who solved the river
blindness problem in Kenya, examines a crab
bearing the larvae of the black gnat which
carries the blinding disease.
of shock and exhaustion and his
body was discovered two days later.
When the survey was complete, each
team had walked some 3,000 miles
through some of Africa's toughest
country.
Dosing the streams in the affected
area was followed with partial
success in 1947. In the meantime
McMahon continued his search for
the larvae's habitat. Nearly all spe¬
cies of fish, crabs and insects found
in the North Nyanza rivers were
examined. Streams were dammed
and diverted. At one stage McMahon
considered hiring a diver's suit to
explore the river beds personally.
Then came encouragement. An¬
other Kenya scientist, Dr. V. D. Van
Someren, found the larva of a fly si¬
milar to Simulium Neavei attached to
a mayfly nymph. He told McMahon
of his discovery, and the indomitable
Irishman again plunged quite liter¬
ally into the search.
He returned to the southern high¬
lands and searched every square foot
of a river running through a badly
infected area. The fact that he ran
a grave risk of contracting a disease
for which there is no cure did not
deter him. He and his African assist¬
ants spent weeks waist-deep in water
and once more the results were nil.
Other entomologists might well
have pigeonholed the river blindness
problem as just another African
medical mystery. But McMahon and
his team simply moved' downstream
to another and bigger river. And
there they met success.
Into the crab's hideout
Wading through the shallows,
the team pulled out hundreds
of crabs of a hitherto unexa¬
mined species. Nearly all of them
carried both larvae and pupae of
Simulium Neavei, McMahon knew he
had slammed the door on the river
blindness ghoul which haunted
thousands of African homes.
Soon the Nyanza medical authori¬
ties launched the final drive to
exterminate Simulium Neavei. When
the last of North Nyanza's 170-odd
rivers had been given their last dos¬
age of DDT mixture last year, the
experts felt reasonably certain that
river blindness will never again
afflict this peaceful and fertile corner
of Kenya.
More than one and a quarter tons
of pure DDT were used in treating
each of the rivers and tributaries at
fortnightly intervals over a three-
month period. The whole project,
including the preliminary survey
work and mapping, had kept Mr. Mc¬
Mahon and his team of four Euro¬
pean and 40 African helpers working
fulltime for four years.
The dosing programme has been
overwhelmingly successful. Eight
years ago an area was treated where
36 per cent of the children below the
age of six were found to be infected
with river blindness. In 1953 a medi¬
cal survey showed that not a single
child in a similar age group had con¬
tracted the disease.
James McMahon is now turning his
talents to other medical problems. The
elimination of malaria and other
tropical ills have still to be achieved.
But the Government of Kenya did
not forget his victory, and the 1955
New Year's Honours List announced
the award of the Order of the British
Empire to Mr. J. P. McMahon, senior
entomologist, Nyanza 'Province, for a
"discovery of very great importance
to science and medicine." His pioneer
work in solving the fly's life cycle
problem, the citation added, was
"carried out at considerable risk of
infecting himself."

The Unesco Courier. April 1956
DESERTED VILLAGE In French Equatorial Africa (left) is one of
many abandoned by people who lived in an area heavily infested by
the black gnats whose bites cause a blinding disease. Many of the
Match.
middle-aged inhabitants were already blind. Here and in other
large areas of Africa, a blind man being led by a youngster whose eyes
have not yet been affected by the disease is a common sight (right).
DISEASE OF DIRTY HANDS. One of the oldest known diseases
and still one of the most widespread is trachoma. If left untreated
trachoma causes blindness. It flourishes where elementary hygiene
does not exist and has thus been called "the disease of dirty hands".
WHO and UNICEF
It is spread by flies in countries where flies are so numerous that
people become indifferent (left). Anti-trachoma campaigns are
carried out with aid from WHO and UNICEF. Right, "nurses" of school
health committee apply anti-biotlc ointment at Sanafir, Egypt.
I I
