TV : GIANT IN SEVEN LEAGUE BOOTS
Every day some 255 million
copies of daily news¬
papers, 257 million radio re¬
ceivers and 44 million television
sets bring news and informa¬
tion to the peoples of the
world. Over 130,000 permanent
cinemas and mobile units pro¬
vide them with entertainment.
These facts emerge from a
264-page UNESCO report,
"World Communications", (1)
which gives the latest informa¬
tion on press, radio, film and
television facilities throughout
the globe. The report also
highlights developments
in these media during the past
five years.
A striking development in
this period has been a sharp
increase in the world total of
radio receivers which for the
first time exceeded the num¬
ber of copies of daily news¬
papers. World press circulation
rose by 14% while radio receiv¬
ers increased by 41%.
Some other striking facts re¬
vealed: Europeans buy 38% of
world's daily papers, Americans
24%, while Africans, Asians and
South Americans together com¬
mand barely 24%; North Amer¬
ica possesses 50% of the world's
receiving sets while Africa, Asia
and South America together
own only 11%. Radio's most
significant advances, how¬
ever, have been made in Latin
America, China, various Afri¬
can territories and the Pacific
islands. TV is being operated
regularly in 34 countries and in
Latin America is expanding
more rapidly than either the
press or the radio.
The UNESCO report high¬
lights the fact that communi¬
cation facilities are unequally
shared by continents and coun¬
tries and points out that coun¬
tries wishing to develop their
news enterprises may now re¬
ceive technical aid from the
U.N. and its Specialized Agen¬
cies.
On the following pages, The
UNESCO COURIER presents
some of the more salient feat¬
ures of the developments in
press, radio, film and TV,
throughout the world during
the past five years. .
(I) Published May, I956. Price: $8; 42/-
2,000 Fr. frs.
According to Unesco's latest survey
of world television three con¬
tinents today remain relatively
untouched by the TV screen: Africa
with only two stations, both in Moroc¬
co; Asia where only Japan and the
Philippines o'ffer regular telecasts;
and Oceania where only Hawaii has
TV. But television is expanding so
fast nowadays, Unesco's report adds,
that it is extremely hard to keep track
of all changing developments.
The latest count obtained by the
Unesco Courier shows that TV is
operating on a regular basis in 34
countries, is being developed in 12
others and is in the planning stages
in some 19 more.
The "Big Four" of television were
listed six years ago by Unesco as the
U.S., U.K., U.S.S.R. and France. To¬
day Canada has jumped to third
place with two million receivers, a
good distance behind the United
States with 38 million or 80 % of the
world's sets, and the United Kingdom
with five and a half million. The So¬
viet Union, which was expected to
reach the million mark by the end of
1955 is now fourth. The "million¬
aires" are well ahead of France which
has been unable to keep the same
pace. With its 350,000 declared private
sets (plus a probable 80,000 unregister¬
ed) it is now fifth just one small
step ahead of the German Federal
Republic's 300,000 sets (plus another
probable 80,000 undeclared). French
TV, though, with its 40 hours a week
offers the most complete selection of
programmes on the Continent.
Surprising changes are being made
in the structure of television. Inter¬
national programme co-operation is
promising to become a regular feature
of the industry. The establishment
of an exchange relay network known
as "Eurovision" is breaking down na¬
tional barriers. It groups eight coun¬
tries Belgium, Denmark, France,
German Federal Republic, Nether¬
lands, Italy, Switzerland and the Uni¬
ted Kingdom and first went on the
air in 1954 to telecast the world foot¬
ball championship matches from
Switzerland.
I transmitter in regular operation
I transmitter in experimental operati
= 50,000 receivers
= 500.000 receivers
Countries with regular
television service
Pictographs published on pages 14 to 21 were produced by the Netherlands Statistical
Foundation and taken from Unesco's publication "World Communications". Pictograph
14

Today each of the eight countries
can receive programmes broadcast by
the others.
International relays are not limit¬
ed to Europe. American pro¬
grammes are regularly linked with
Canadian stations, and in 1954 the
first public broadcast via "stratovi¬
sion" (a transmitter located in an
aircraft) successfully relayed the
American baseball world series from
Miami, Florida, to Cuba. The plane
flew in a 10-mile dameter circle about
9,000 feet above the sea some 50 miles
off the coast of Cuba, and reception
was reported excellent.
Direct TV links between Europe and
the U.S. by over-the-horizon micro¬
wave transmission have now been cal¬
led "feasible in a matter of a few
years". The international exchange
of kinescope or TV film programmes
is also being considered. The U.S. has
been offering kinescopes to stations in
Latin America for the past two years
and more recently to European and
Japanese stations.
TV's biggest boom is still going on
in the United States where it has
changed the daily life of the Ameri¬
can people. TV's growth there has
been unparalleled from 8 million sets
in 1950 to a phenomenal 38 million
early in 1956. Well over 565 stations
are on the air and in major cities
such as New York, viewers can choose
from seven different programmes at
almost any hour of the day or night.
A coast-to-coast network of colour
TV is now planned.
In the U.S., Canada, and the United
Kingdom, TV is rapidly encroaching
on the place' previously held by sound
radio. Moreover, the impact of edu¬
cational TV is only beginning to be
felt. Brazil, Colombia, France, Japan,
the U.S.S.R., the U.S. and certain
other countries are telecasting re¬
gular educational programmes for
schools and adults. "Teaching by
sound and image promises revolution¬
ary changes in the field of educa¬
tion", the Unesco report states.
Curiously, while in the United Sta¬
tes 19 non-commercial educational
stations have gone on the air with a
potential audience of 20 million peo¬
ple, and a "pay-as-you-view" system
replacing commercial sponsorships is
being discussed, commercial television
has come to Europe to the Saar, Mo¬
naco, Luxembourg and the United
Kingdom (in September 1955 under a
government-established Independent
Television Authority).
Television in the United States has
made its influence strongly felt on
the countries of Latin America. Cu¬
ba, with its nine transmitters, 200,000
receivers and 100 hours of programmes
above has been slightly modified by "The Unesco Courier" so as to include some
of the latest developments that have taken place in the world-wide growth of television.
The Unesco Courier
per week, heads the list. Brazil is the
number one TV country of South
America with 6 transmitters and
150,000 sets in 1954. Mexico has no
fewer than nine stations and over
100,000 receivers. A closed-circuit
colour TV service operates at the Uni¬
versity Medical School. In all Latin
America, TV is expanding now more
rapidly than either press or radio.
Japan's dramatic advance
Television has made one of its
most dramatic advances in
Japan where no regular broad¬
cast existed before 1953. Today five
stations are in operation and while
the number of receivers now total
some 250,000 there is a considerable
amount of public TV viewing for
which 200 large screen sets are used.
When 29 new stations now planned
are completed they will serve 65%
of Japan's households. Since the
end of 1955, Thailand has gone
beyond the experimental stage and is
giving regular programmes. Turkey
is transmitting closed-circuit experi¬
mental programmes. India and Iraq
are planning TV services.
The Soviet Union, one of the first
countries to telecast first-run films
regularly, has developed its TV
services rapidly during the past two
years. The U.S.S.R. already has ma¬
jor stations at Moscow, Leningrad and
Kiev, and six smaller ones at Gorki,
Kharkov, Odessa Stalingrad, Sver¬
dlovsk and Tomsk. Others are under
construction at Baku, Minsk, Mur¬
mansk and Riga. One Moscow trans¬
mitter regularly telecasts experimen¬
tal programmes in colour. Use of a
new natural colour process has been
announced in recent months. Soviet
programmes include many education¬
al and cultural telecasts, film shows
for schools and special children's
programmes. Many sets are located
in clubs, and social centres. Pro¬
grammes on film are exchanged
within the Soviet Union and with
other countries of Eastern Europe.
97% coverage for Britain
In Western Europe the number of
television stations has risen in the
past two years from 25 to 76.
Italy, which started from scratch in
1954, now has eleven transmitters cov¬
ering most of north and central Italy,
and about 225,000 receivers. Plans
call for complete coverage of Italy in¬
cluding Sicily and Sardinia by the end
of this year (66 new transmitters
planned). The United Kingdom now
has a national TV service of 14
transmitters available to 84% of the
population. When 77 medium and
low-power transmitters are added,
U.K. coverage will be 977o.
Of the 19 countries which are today
operating regular or experimental TV
services in Europe, almost all have
plans for the rapid extension of their
coverage. The German Federal Repub¬
lic has six broadcasting organiza¬
tions operating 24 transmitters, but 16
new transmitters are under construc¬
tion. The German Democratic Repub¬
lic plans to add four new stations to
the existing eight. France has 16
stations covering its northern, eastern,
central and southern areas ; 13
transmitters are operating and 18
more are planned.
15

DAILY PRESS RUN:
255 MILLION COPIES
Despite growing competition from radio, newsreels and
TV, more people still turn to newspapers for their
daily news. Circulation has increased 14% in the
past five years, Unesco's latest survey of the world's press
shows. Every day some 255 million copies of newspapers
are sold. In the U.S.A. the regular daily press now has
a circulation exceeding 55 million as against 54 million in
1951; in Japan 34.5 million (28 million in 1951); while in
the U.S.S.R., the combined circulation of dailies and week¬
lies is estimated at 44 million as against 34 million in
1951. In some countries, rising production costs have led
to press mergers or forced weaker, papers out of existence.
France, for example, lost 32 dailies and Japan seven be¬
tween 1951 and 1954.
Europe, the Unesco report says, buys the most news¬
papers (38%) followed by North America (24%) while
Africa, Asia and South America together account for
barely 24%... The British are still the world's most avid
newspaper readers with Sweden, Luxembourg, Iceland,
Australia and Japan following in that order (see table
on next page).
One of the most rapid circulation growths in recent
years has been scored by Japan. In 1952 there were 186
dailies with a 30 million circulation. Today there are 179
dailies but circulation has jumped by four and a half
million. Circulation per 1,000 persons is more than dou¬
ble that of any other Asian country, and is now higher
than the United States level. Even the smaller newspapers
now have circulations exceeding 850,000.
Simplified script
starts a revolution
Perhaps the most significant increases in the past
five years have been made in the economically
under-developed countries, where greater oppor¬
tunities for education, the growth of new schools, adult
and fundamental education campaigns have .spurred the
demand for more newspapers. In Africa, newspapers
have spread into jungle villages where total illiteracy
prevailed only a few years ago. Air and radio communi¬
cation now enables papers published in towns which
previously had little or no contact with the outside world
to receive feature material and photographs regularly.
Some examples of African progress: Gold Coast now has
11 dailies (total circulation 75,000) plus nine weeklies and
a local news agency ; Madagascar has seven dailies and
27 weeklies, nearly all published in Malagasy ; little
Reunion Island in the Indian Ocean has eight dailies
and weeklies and circulation has doubled in the past
four years. Even Swaziland has two weeklies, while the
remote island of St. Helena can boast a roneoed news
bulletin.
Even more important has been the development of the
vernacular press in Africa. Many district newspapers
circulating in villages appear in local languages. Tangan¬
yika has dailies and Uganda weeklies in three vernacu¬
lars. The Bantus of the Union of South Africa now have
a chain of 23 publications.
In Latin America, Argentina remains the country where
daily newspapers are most readily available. Most Argen¬
tine towns of any size have their own daily and can draw
on three national agencies for local news. Brazil and
Venezuela are typical of the rapid growth of the press
in South America. In 1952 Brazil had 230 dailies, a year
later it had 254 and circulation was skyrocketing. In
Venezuela circulation rose as much as 20% between 1952
and 1954.
A similar trend is noted in Asia, particularly in Japan,
India, Indonesia and continental China. On the China
mainland 776 dailies appear in a multiplicity of editions;
many large national dailies publish provincial editions in
a simple vocabulary. Though newspaper reading has been
stimulated by efforts of the Chinese postal administration
to promote circulation, wall newspapers are stilt a major
source for news in rural areas. They are seen in every
street and hamlet, sometimes printed on paper but often
no more than chalked information on a blackboard pro¬
tected from the rain by a canopy.
The recent introduction of a new simplified script is
revolutionizing publishing in China and is expected to
I copy of a daily newspaper per I 00 people
have far-reaching effects in increased readership. The
official New China News Agency now has teletype equip¬
ment capable off transmitting news in this script. New
photo-composing equipment to replace laborious hand
type-setting is also foreseen.
India and Pakistan face problems similar to those of
many other Asian countries. Their press must combat
a low literacy rate and difficulties of distribution to large
rural areas. In India, although circulations remain small,
there has been a remarkable growth in numbers of papers,
particularly country weeklies and magazines in towns of
less than 100,000 persons, spurred by India's rural liter¬
acy drive. Burma is an exception to the general Asian
trend. Some 32 dailies are published but many sizeable
towns still lack a newspaper of any type. Burma's largest
daily in Rangoon has a circulation ox only 13,000 yet
Burma's population exceeds 19 million and has a rela¬
tively high literacy rate for Asia of 50%.
The press of the U.S.S.R. has several unusual charac¬
teristics. Each of the 16 republics has its own official
language, and newspapers are issued in 119 different ton¬
gues. There is only one truly national daily, the Commu-
16

The Urjsco Courier
nist Party organ Pravda, printed in Moscow and 12 other
cities with a-circulation of some four million. About 75%
of all dailies and weeklies are published outside Moscow.
The nation's dailies and weeklies now total 7,800 with a
combined circulation of 44 million, an increase of 11 mil¬
lion since 1951. Advertising is now allowed but is limited
mostly to. announcements of available consumer goods.
Although no newspapers are privately owned, periodicals
are not always government run. Trade unions, co-opera¬
tives, sports clubs, youth organizations, collective, farms
and factory groups all issue their own newspapers.
In Eastern Europe, newspaper publication and distri¬
bution follows a uniform pattern. Communist Party-
dailies in Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland
enjoy the greatest circulation, sometimes three or four
times higher than their nearest competitors.
In Western Europe only four tiny countries lack a daily
newspaper: Andorra, Liechtenstein, San Marino and
Monaco. With some exceptions expansion has been slow
in most European countries. Belgium and Sweden have
increased circulation by nearly a million since 1951. The
German Federal Republic now has 671 dailies with a total
circulation of about 16 million with the birth of 48 new
dailies and the addition of 3 million readers since 1952.
In France, both total circulation and number of dailies
have declined in the past five years. There are now
132 dailies as compared to 164 in 1951 a drop of 32.
Circulation has fallen only slightly10,280,000 compared
with 10,606,000. France's weekly and periodical press is
unique in that the turnover of new publications is as high
as 1,000 a year. In recent years births have exceeded
deaths and there are now 7,365 weeklies and periodicals
as against 4,075 in 1951. Part of this increase is accounted
for by the phenomenal rise of women's magazines and the
popularity of illustrated weeklies. As in the U.K. and
U.S.A. some of the women's magazines have individual
circulations of over one million.
The British people are the world's greatest newspaper
readers. Some 610 copies of dailies are sold for every
1,000 persons the highest recorded rate. The United
Kingdom also has the newspapers with the world's lar¬
gest circulations. Two dailies sell over four million copies
each and one Sunday newspaper over eight million. The
BBC's weekly "'Radio Times" also has an eight million
circulation. Britain's concentration of population and
highly developed distribution of "national" papers (all
but one are produced in London) largely accounts for
the high circulation. There are 137 dailies with a total
circulation amounting to 31 million, and 11 national
Sunday newspapers with 30 million circulation.
The United States has more newspapers, reviews, maga¬
zines and periodicals than any other country in the
world and no country can match its prolixity of news
distribution. Information through the printed word is'
always readily available to everyone throughout the
48 States of the Union, and the U.S. press has developed
into a unique instrument of mass communication. Its
1,786 daily newspapers had a total circulation of over
55 million in 1954; 95 foreign-language dailies appear;
and there are 545 Sunday papers with nearly 50 million
circulation, and 8,892 weeklies with over 25 million.
Sunday 'heavyweight' :
360 pages, 2 inches thick
Un papers are also physically the largest with
^ dailies running from 20 to 40 pages, Sunday
*-' editions to as many as 100. One Sunday paper
weighs almost four pounds, has 360 pages and is just under
two inches thick. With 7% of the world's population, the
U.S. in fact absorbs nearly 60% of the world's newsprint
output. In only one respect does the U.S. fall behind
other countries in the number of copies of daily news¬
papers per 1,000 inhabitants. The U.S. figure of 344 is
lower than that for the U.K., Sweden and eight other
countries.
Canada maintains its position as the world's largest
producer and exporter of newsprint. In Mexico, literacy
campaigns have had significant results for the press.
Over 160 dailies now exist and provincial papers exert
considerable influence. In Australia, where half of the
total population lives in Sydney and Melbourne, dailies
in these cities claim over half of, the country's circu¬
lation. Australia now has 20 foreign-language papers
reflecting the influx of European migrants.
The Pacific islands, Unescoís latest survey reveals,
depend for their news more on radio and cinema than on
the press. Many have only one weekly or monthly news
sheet. American Samoa has seven cinemas as against
one monthly newspaper ; the New Hebrides has three
cinemas and no newspaper. Only Hawaii, Guam, Fiji and
French Oceania have dailies of general interest.

HALF THE WORLD IS ILLITERATE...

LACKS RADIOS. CINEMAS, DAILIES


More than 10 dailies

adio re- "il Less jhia | 0 dailies EEE
re than per |0 p

more than 5

0 people

Sr L
vers and mo r
2 cinema sea people

1 00 people

For millions of the world’s citizens the resources of ideas, news and entertainment can be
tapped through the daily newspaper, a turn of the radio or TV dial, a visit to the neighbourhood
cinema. For millions more, however, these facilities are lacking and men are cheated of a
rich heritage. The maps on these pages focus attention on the fact that areas where literacy
is low correspond closely with those regions of the world where poverty of communication
facilities deprives people of the opportunity to be fully informed. The Universal Declaration
of Human Rights contains a clear statement of the right of the individual to receive informa-
tion and be fully informed. Enjoyment of that right requires as a first step that technical

Less than 10 dailies Coss: than Lic aa HA Less than 10 dailies
nd less than 5 radio 8% Ee Sahil i and less than 2 cinema

00 SERS Der rae Reape seats per |00 people

facilities shall exist for receiving information. The Economic and Social Council of the United
Nations called on governments in 1954 to encourage the development of domestic informa-
tion enterprises, and the same year the U.N. General Assembly authorized the Specialized
Agencies and the U.N. itself to grant technical assistance for this purpose. In December 1954
Unesco's General Conference also authorized the provision of aid for developing commu-
nication services and set aside a substantial sum for sending expert missions at governments’
requests during 1955 and 1956. Unesco, as one of its primary obligations, is thus working
with the United Nations to help people everywhere to enjoy the right to information.

1514009 03soun ayy


BRITISH ARE WORLD'S MOST AVID CINEMA GOERS
U.S.A. 354 -Japan 302- India 25? - Hong Kong 200 - Italy 140 - U.K. 138- German Fed. Rep. 108- France 100 - Mexico 99 - Philippines 80 - Egypt 49 -
Pakistan 47 - Spain 44 - Turkey 40 - Argentina 39 - U.S.S.R. 38 - Sweden 33 - Austria 24 - Czechoslovakia 25 - Finland 24 - Singapore 23 - Greece 20.
MR RADIO LISTENER HAS 257 MILLION SETS
l Ha Ha Ha Ha Ha
ED a Isla 1SJ a ISJa
Isla |i?la IttI Isla
5?
Ha Ha Ha Ha Ha
T^ '^rX '^» ~^r\ ^r\
CsJ KJa BUja ED¿ IttIl
ËSIa tSJa lSMn EDa H¿ la »SI a ftlh ÜtJ Isla
Ha Ha Ha Ha Ha Ha Ha Ha Ha Ha
~^r\ "^^ -4n ^ft ^^ '^í "^» -^^ ^^ ^^
HaHiHaHaHa ^
"^^ ~^T\ ^rT ^^
Ha
I radio receiver per I 00 people
20

The Unesco Courier
One person out of ten in the. world goes to the cinema on an
average of once a week, Unesco's most recent survey of
the film industry reveals. Anglo-Saxon countries seem to
be most bitten by the cinema "bug". The British are the
world's No. 1 cinema goers with 25 films per inhabitant
per year and a total annual attendance of 1,290 million in 1954.
New Zealand is second with 18 films per person each year.
Australia is third with 16. Americans now watch TV screens
instead and go to the '"movies" only 15 times a year (once in
3 weeks).
Since 1946 television has caused 6,000 cinemas to close down
in the U.S. There are now 19,000 cinemas of which 4,000 are
'where the spectator's motor car is his cinema seat.
(Britain has 4,500 cinemas with a seating capacity of over
4 million). Seating capacity in the United States is now
10 million. The annual attendance figure of over 2,000 million,
however, is still not equalled in any other country.
Cinemas have increased in number in many countries of the
Caribbean area. Panama now has 60, the Dominican Republic
70, and Mexico 2,062. Most South American countries also
report increases in the number of commercial cinemas and a
wider use of mobile units in rural areas. Mobile units are also
being increasingly used in Africa (no cinemas exist in British
Togoland or British Somaliland; only one in Bechuanaland, British
Cameroons, Sao Tome and Principe). The Union of South
Africa and Egypt have the most cinema houses. A few countries
of Africa have been producing newsreels and other information
films in recent years though Africa is still the continent most
dependent on the rest of the world for its newsreels.
The world's greatest producer and distributor of films continues
to be United States. It leads in newsreel production (800 a year)
and ' with the exception of certain European countries and con¬
tinental China, most countries depend on the U.S. for at least
70% of all feature films exhibited. Some 350 features are
produced in U.S. studios annually and enjoy world-wide
distribution and publicity. Mexico is the second largest producer
in the Americas with Argentina a good distance behind it.
Canada, Brazil, Guatemala, Jamaica and Puerto Rico have a
limited output.
In Asia, feature film production is booming. With 302 features
only some 50 less than U.S. output Japan has now jumped
to second place ahead of India. Japanese and Indian films are
now regularly exported to other Asian countries and to Europe.
The Far East has also witnessed the sudden rise of the Hong Kong
film industry, now the fourth largest in the world. It owes its
growth to the great demand for films in Chinese which seven
Hong Kong companies are now producing at amazing speeds.
Thailand, Pakistan, the Philippines, Turkey and continental China
also have a fair amount of feature production.
Alongside the rising production of films an increasing number
of new cinemas are now to be found in Asia. Japan now has
3,750 and India 2,000. In continental China the present total of
800 cinemas is increasing as a network of theatres is being built,
and cinema attendance is up at least 30%.
Like the New Zealanders and Australians, the Pacific islanders
are avid cinema goers especially in remote island groups where
up until a few years ago the cinema was a rarity. Fiji for
example now has 30 and Guam 16.
European film production now represents a large proportion of
the world total (see pictograph). Greece has doubled output in
the past two years. Norway now produces 10 features annually.
In the U.S.S.R. all features produced are automatically shown on
television. Numerous newsreels are made in Europe, most
countries either producing their own or making local editions of
world newsreel issues from France, U.S.S.R., United Kingdom and
the U.S.A.
Documentary, educational, scientific and instructional films have
spread throughout the globe and today most film-producing
countries contribute a quota of them. Increased production has
gone hand-in-hand with an increase in distribution and exhibition,
particularly in the non-commercial field. A good example is
Canada, where 150 to 200 documentaries are produced annually
by the National Film Board, dubbed in 5 languages and exported
all over the world. With the aid of mobile units, educational and
documentary films now reach millions previously untouched by
the cinema, especially in Africa, and in many parts of Asia and
Latin America.
The following are ä few of the highlights and sidelights of
radio in the world today as gleaned from Unesco's newest
survey, "World Communications".
Press Lags Behind. For the first time, there are now
more radio sets in the world (257 million) than copies of
daily newspapers sold (255 million). A good half are in 50 million
American homes where almost one out of every two families now
owns two sets or more. The U.S.S.R. has 20 million sets ; the
U.K.' 14 million; Japan over 11 million; and France nearly
nine million.
Atmospherics gone. Some 25 countries (mostly in Western
Europe) now broadcast by frequency modulation (FM) thus
eliminating atmospheric disturbances as well as assuring high
quality reception. Leaders are U.S.A. (652 transmitters), German
Federal Republic (118), Canada (34), Italy (20), Finland (17),
Austria (10). FM is a godsend to Finland and Austria, both
plagued by persistent interference on the medium-wave channels
assigned to them in recent years. Austria plans a network of FM
as well as more powerful standard transmitters to improve
reception since almost half its population cannot receive any
Austrian programme satisfactorily at night. South Africa is in
a high atmospheric radio noise area, disastrous for reception.
Authorities are considering switching to short wave.
Saucepan. A cheap, sturdy and simply-operated battery set
called '"saucepan" receiver is becoming increasingly popular in
most U.K. territories in Africa. Local authorities offer them to
village chiefs and bigwigs. One of the major developments in
recent years has been the expansion of radio in the economically
under-developed areas of Africa, South America and Asia.
Wire hookups. A system of providing programmes by wire
hookups with receivers or loudspeakers is widespread in the Soviet
Union, Eastern Europe, Continental China and other countries.
All Soviet towns of over 50,000 inhabitants now have a wired
system. A million wired receivers were installed in 1953 alone
in collective farms previously without radio facilities. Poland's
3,700 relay centres transmit to 1,300,000 wired receivers and
loudspeakers. In Rumania 38% of the 830,000 sets are wired.
Foreign languages. Some 500 stations broadcast in 30 lang¬
uages to listeners inside the United States. In the U.S.S.R.
programmes for Soviet listeners are broadcast in 70 languages.
Radio Pakistan offers 90 programme hours a day in 17 languages.
One of All India Radio's major headaches is serving listeners
speaking 16 major languages and 125 dialects. The BBC
broadcasts in 43 languages in addition to English, Gaelic and
Welsh. The Gold Coast transmits in vernaculars called Ewe, Ga,
Twi, Fanti, Hausi, and Dagbani. A Mexican station now
broadcasts in Náhuatl, the language of the Aztec Indians.
Broadcasts from Rhodesia in 6 local languages cover Central Africa.
Hucksters. Commercial advertising takes up 50% of total
broadcast time of private stations in Uruguay; 40% in the
Dominican Republic; 30% in Costa Rica; 28% in Cuba (limited
by decree, but only to stations with national coverage); 25% in
El Salvador (80% of programmes are recorded music). Per¬
centages are high for private stations in many countries.
In class & home. All the major European countries conduct
both school and general educational programmes. Non¬
commercial stations in Latin America and stations in Africa and
Asia feature educational programmes prominently. In the U.S.
a '"tape" network set up by the National Association of
Educational Broadcasters groups over half of the 150 non¬
commercial educational stations run by colleges, universities and
public institutions. Commercial networks also provide educational
programmes. About 75% of all Australian schools take school
broadcasts. In Czech schools 80% do. Canada has radio sets
in 10,000 schools, and its "National Farm Radio Forum" and
similar group listening and discussion programmes are popular.
Listening to school broadcasts at home is assigned as
"homework" by teachers in the Saar. Norway beams short wave
educational programmes specially to its vast merchant fleet plying
the Seven Seas. News and cultural programmes take up over
50% of total radio time in Japan. Over 45% of France's total
broadcast time is devoted to music. In Russia it is given 60%.
Outdoor listening reached a new high in the United States
with 37 million radios installed in automobiles. In 1953 the U.S.
manufactured 13,400,000 receivers, including 5 million motor
car sets, 2 million clock-radios and 1.5 million portable sets. A
religious mission in Ethiopia periodically hires Radio Adis Ababa
to transmit religious songs and stories.
21
