250, 000, 000 CHILDREN
WITHOUT SCHOOLS
fox every ten children in the
world, five (i. e. over 250, 000, 000)
have no schools, four complete
only a few years of elementary school-
ing and only one has an opportunity
for secondary or higher education,
according to the World Survey of Edu-
cation, published by UNESCO in 1955.
The world's most formidable task in
education and the goal of both
national and international efforts is
therefore free schooling for all
children. UNEsco, aiming to give real
significance to the right to education
proclaimed in the Universal Declar-
ation of Human Rights, has under-
taken three main tasks : improving
education through the exchange of
information, extending education, and
promoting education for international
understanding.
UNEsco has sent educational mis-
sions to survey resources in many
Member States and to suggest how
these might best be used to lay the
foundations of modern school sys-
tems. Afghanistan, Burma, Korea,
Libya, the Philippines and Thailand
are just a few of the countries aided
by UNEsco in this way.
After a UNESCO mission had studied
Thailand's educational system, for
example, the government launched a
ten year plan to improve all aspects
of education. In Chao Choeng Sao
some 70 miles from Bangkok, UNESCO
specialists working with their Thai
counterparts (each adviser works
alongside a Thai teacher) helped to
set up a school system in miniature,
ranging from kindergarten classes to
teacher training colleges. Techniques
proved successful by this experiment
(now four years old) are being extend-
ed to other parts of the country.
In 1955 alone, UNEsco, answering
requests from 22 countries and terri-
tories, sent to each of them teams of
experts in the development of element-
ary education. UNEsco has convened
regional conferences at which teachers
and school administrators have ex-
changed experiences and discussed
common prcf-Jlems. It has published
monographs on primary education in
six countries and studies on the pro-
longation of schooling and the
employment of child labour.
Problem of the year
tf T is estimated that 55% of all
t persons over ten years of age have
never been to school. Pending the
full development of school education
an emergency measure is needed for
these people-estimated at more than
one thousand million-so that they
may begin to help themselves to a
better life.
For the past five years UNESCO has
given high priority to fundamental
education, so called because it aims to
26
give the minimum knowledge needed
by illiterate people to begin to improve
their health, food supply and family
life. (See pages 24-25)
Each year UNESCO sponsors with the
International Bureau of Education an
international conference to discuss
major educational problems. In 1955,
for example, the conference discussed
the financing of public education.
The previous year, discussions had
centered on the teacher shortage and
ways in which teaching can be made
more attractive, as a profession. For
these meetings countries prepare
reports on progress made over the
past year so it is possible for the first
time to have a world-wide picture of
educational developments and needs.
As others see them
UNESCO organized regional confe-
t t rences for educators to discuss
problems common to their own
area : Southeast Asian countries
have concentrated on the introduc-
tion of free and compulsory educa-
tion ; Middle East discussions have
focused on means of introducing
technical education.
The kind of education which can
lead to better international under-
standing aims at developing both a
national civic sense and a sense of
international responsibility. But
"international understanding"cannot
be tacked on to conventional school
programmes. As it has to be an
integral part of an education adapted
to a new situation UNESCO has re-
viewed problems of curricula, methods
and materials and has suggested
solutions. UNESCO seminars and publi-
cations, particularly on the teaching
of history and geography have led
educators and publishers in many
countries to analyse their textbooks
and to invite neighbouring countries
to comment on ways in which they
may feel they have been misrep-
resented. On UNESCO's invitation, 23
Western countries have taken a look
at their textbooks to see how much
is being taught about Asia. Eastern
countries are to make similar studies
of their textbooks about the West.
In U. N. rehabilitation programmes
the need for emergency education is
great. Schools and adult education
classes may offer the first semblance
of normal life in refugee camps or
temporary homes. UNESCO has help-
ed to rebuild education in Greece,
Palestine and Korea. Outstanding
example was aid in education of
Arab refugees, some 160, 000 of whose
children are enrolled in primary
schools and 20, 000 in secondary
schools set up by UNEsco and the
United Nations Relief and Works
Agency (UNWRA). (See THE UNESCO
COURIER, N"7, 1955 ; U. S Oct.)

The UneMO Courier
27

PATZCUARO
The Regional Fundamental Education
Centre for Latin America (CREFAL)
was opened by Unesco in 1951 at Patz-
cuaro, Mexico, because the two dozen
or so villages scattered around the
shores of Lake Patzcuaro and on islands
in the lake represented a faithful reflection
of problems confronting Latin America.
More than half the population of Latin
America-that is, 70, 000, 000 human
beings-face these problems of ignor-
ance and poverty. Several courses
of trainees from practically all countries
of Latin America have already graduated
from CREFAL and are now instructing
people in their own countries in ways
of improving standards of living. in
1955, 125 trainees-45 of them women-
from 18 countries studied at CREFAL
and 54 of them graduated in October.
This year the centre has received about
the same number of trainees. Photos,
from feft to right, illustrate three of the
subjects taught at CREFAL-adutt edu-
cation, public health, and improvement
of working and economic conditions.
CREFAL and UNESCO
28

The Unesco Courier
StRS-EL-LAYYAN
The Nile Delta of Egypt, most densely-
populated region on the face of the
earth, offers an ideal testing ground for
fundamental education. Within a radius
of a few miies one can visit and study
a hamlet, a small city and five or six vil-
lages of different sizes. Some may be re-
latively prosperous, others are poverty-
stricken. Some are peopled by small
farmers, others by day labourers and by
landless workers. That is why the
Arab States Fundamental Education
Centre (ASFEC) was created by Unesco
in 1952 at Sirs-el-Layyan in the Menoufia
district of the Nile Delta. Trainees
studying there (they numbered 120 at
the beginning of 1956) will later carry
fundamental education to the Arab
lands of the Middle East. At Sirs-el-
Layyan, however, they already have a
replica of the same kind of peasant
society found, with many variations,
in their own countries and throughout
the Arab world. Photos show (from
ieft to right) a general view of Mana-
wallah, one of the centre's"laboratory"
villages ; irrigation work in the fields ;
and an examination of livestock being
made by the centre's veterinarians.
ASFEC and UNESCO
29
