OUT OF BOUNDS TO VISITORS
Reinach and Ethnographical Museum, Neuchatel
The busy world behind the exhibits
A museum is like a theatre with a revolving stage, each exhibition
hall representing a different scene and decor. And behind the scenes
of the tremendous "show" put on by a large, modern museum there
is an industrious little city whose laboratories, store-rooms, offices,
workshops and other services sometimes cover nearly as much floor
space as the exhibition halls "out front". Here, in an area which is
"out of bounds" to visitors, technicians, scientists, artists, craftsmen and
others study, classify, plan and prepare (or repair) the exhibits. The
public has little or no Idea how much effort and skill goes into the
creation of an exhibition like that put on recently by the Neuchatel
Ethnographical Museum, In Switzerland, under the title "Brazilian
Arts". For the "Bumba-meu-boï" dance scene (upper photo) hundreds
of hours went into the moulding and painting of the manikins (lower
photos) and the preparation of the colourful costumes they wear.
13

Out of bounds to visitors (Continued)
There is an art gallery at the Louvre In Paris (I) which visitors never enter. It is the store
room where the Museum keeps its reserve of paintings, classified and hung on huge, mobile frames.
Paintings in foreground are by Dutch artists. Although the Louvre covers 49 acres, it is still not big
enough to display all its vast collection. Another part of the Museum not open to the general public
comprises five rooms housing magnificent collection of over 75,000 drawings. Collection was founded
in time of Louis XIV when Colbert obtained thousands of drawings. Scholars or students armed with
magnifying glasses (2) are able to Inspect these drawings, thirty-five thousand of which are by Italian masters.
Masterpieces are made to order In a long, curving workshop (3) in Paris, where craftsmen carry out an
unusual museum activitythe reproduction by plaster casting of statues and reliefs exhibited in France's
national museums. Most of the castings produced, ranging from life-sized versions of the Victory of
Samothrace to busts of Napoleon Bonaparte, are purchased by schools, universitiesand artists. Photos
show (4) gelatine mould being filled with liquid plaster (5) original sculpture of the head of Sapho
(on right) with a plaster reproduction and (6) a series of Greek warriors. Larger castings are first
made In several pieces, as in case of this classical statue of a discus thrower (7) and then assembled.
Photo story copyright Louise de Béa
í "
!^^^^^^B
L/ il
¡ i
n
I J?
ÜBT -fc^
mV Vfl ^1
i fi
B** ~~~""*
^ 1--= --
14

OUT OF BOUNDS TO VISITORS (Continued)
HOW TO BUILD A DINOSAUR. Gorgosaurus, one of the largest
and most vicious dinosaurs and king of beasts some 75 million years
ago, went on display recently at the Chicago Natural History Museum
together with Lambeosaurus, his victim, also a large dinosaur but
vegetarian in habits and probably a gentler creature. Museum palaeon¬
tologists worked for 1 8 months to prepare the fossil skeletons of
Chicago Natural History Museum
these two giants as an exhibit showing "Gorgo" looking down upon
the dead Lambeosaurus. Gorgosaurus, whose skeleton was excavated
near Edmonton, Canada, is 26 feet long, has a head rising to a height
of I 5 feet and in life is believed to have weighed about six tons. Inset,
a specially built steel construction for Gorgosaurus skeleton which
eliminates the need for vertical supports and also maintains balance.
16

The Unesco Courier
PALAEONTOLOGISTS* PUZZLE at the Chicago Natural History
Museum consisted of seven large crates containing giant dinosaur
skeleton. The skull alone weighed 205 pounds and was 42 inches long.
PEEK PREVIEW for young museum visitors of Gorgosaurus tower¬
ing over wall behind which the striking exhibit is being prepared
Skeleton was museum's most important acquisition in recent years
GORGOSAURUS : TERRIFYING
OVERLORD OF BEASTS SOME
75 MILLION YEARS AGO
WELDER AT WORK putting into place metal discs which separate
vertebrae of Gorgosaurus. Only seven skeletons of this kind of dinosaur
have ever been found. Museum reconstruction was an arduous task.
DUCK-BILLED DINOSAUR, the Lambeosaurus, whose skeleton
was found in Canada in 1922. Museum stored it in plaster for years,
awaiting a suitable installation. Months were needed to remove plaster.
Photos Chicago Natural History Museum
MODERN MAMMOTHS, famous fighting African elephants mounted
by late explorer-sculptor, Carl Akeley, whose technique gave strikingly
realistic effect, now have new neighbours the dinosaurs (in rear).
17
