GOOD NEIGHBOURS 'DOWN UNDER'
Welcoming New Australians to the Island-Continent
B
f
k. i
l mt\\f^X^k
Jr^^" ^j j't~¿
fj
i
B
Jl
V * ltfÉ
^ . . ^H
V ,'- ^H
\'- k^m\
m^m^r^f V
W* ".Vf
t'W^
	 KILOMETRES
	 a 3QO toa ' h
1^	
MILES H
by
H. B. M.
Murphy
ETWEEN 1947 and 1950 Australia admitted
155,000 European refugees taken from camps in Germany,
Italy and Austria. From the Australian point of view the
purpose of this migration was to increase the manpower
available both for defence and for the newly-developed
industries. The great majority of the refugees were under
contract to do unskilled labour for a period of two years,
and fitness for such labour was the prime criterion in
their selection. After the two years they were to be free
Australian Official Photos
to take what employment they pleased except where
some statutory obstacle existed, as with the professions
and to apply for citizenship in the normal way, although
it was expected to take five years for such citizenship to
be completed. Australian public opinion was strongly
in favour of encouraging the newcomers to apply for
citizenship, and strongly against permitting them to form
their own communities. lnthefollowingarticle,Mr. H.B.M.
Murphy discusses some refugee resettlement problems.
Australia with nearly 3,000,000
square miles of territory has
room and to spare for the
Continent of Europe (drawn to
the same scale in map, above).
For its ever-growing industries
and vast wheat and sheep-
farming lands Australia needs
more workers. Many European
refugees have thus found new
homes there under mass immi¬
gration programmes. This flow
was halted in I 95 I, but started
again after the Australian
Government decided to increase
the total immigration target for
1 954-55 to 115,000. Left,
party of over 800 refugees from
camps in Germany are welcomed
on arrival at Melbourne, by Aus¬
tralian Minister of Immigration.
21

GOOD NEIGHBOURS
(Continued)
By the time that I
visited Australia at
the end of 1950 the
recruitment
of immigrants from re¬
fugee camps was almost
at an end and the recruitment of Dutch, German and
Italian labour was beginning to take its place. On the
other hand relatively few of the refugees had finished
their two years' contract; and hence the subject of
refugee immigrants was not much in the public eye. I
travelled on a immigrant ship, and followed the same
shipload through until the majority had been found work,
but my main observations were made on people who had
been from 6 to 18 months in the country.
On arrival in Australia the initial reaction of the immi¬
grant was usually good. This was to be expected from
the type of letter one had seen sent home to Europe, and
officials confirmed my own impression. In general, there
was a conscious willingness to start working, to mix with
Australians rather than with fellow refugees and a feeling
of satisfaction at their impressions of the standard of
living, the employment position, and the appearance of
the country. Very few of the refugees refuse the type of
work first offered them, and in my experience more are
prepared to grab the first job they can get rather than
wait and choose between two or three possibilities, as is
usually permitted.
Most workers went into unskilled labour, as had been
forecast in their contract, and about half of them into
the various branches of public constructional work, a fact
which had been less accurately forecast and which was
not so much part of the Government's plan. The demand
for foreign workers had been mainly in the heavy indus¬
tries and in the countryside, but trade union opposition
and the unsuitability of the refugee for lonely country
life forced a diversion of this labour to the more essential
of the secondary services, a development which was
economically not very sound, since the country's primary
production might not have been enough to carry this
after the boom in wool was over.
However, such considerations did not worry the
individual D.P.who saw no reason to regret having escaped
work which he was not well trained to undertake, being
usually too little or too well educated for it. Roads, rail¬
roads, waterworks, gasworks and hospital service are all
characterized by the relatively large amount of unskilled
labour which they can use labour where no great amount
of manual aptitude, such as is required in ironworks or
mines, is demanded and hence the refugee was usually
fairly content in such employment, not feeling that the
work was beyond him.
A shovel for the surgeon
The Government's declared policy on the use of the
immigrant's previously acquired skills was to take
as much advantage as possible of these, despite
the fact that the individual was contracted irrespective
of them it would seem to be the sensible road to fol¬
low. The application o-f this policy, however, was very
patchy. I came across many instances of it being com¬
plied with, of diplomas (science) being scrutinized and
accepted, of draughtsmen being taken from the labour
squad into the office, etc.
But I also heard of many instances where it seemed
to be forgotten or in some cases disregarded, untrained
men being sent to a shoe factory while cobblers in the
same camp were refused, builders found doing other work
at a time when the labour exchange denied having a free
builder on their books, a throat surgeon who hoped to
resume his career being allotted to roadmaking while
another physician who asked to be put into some other
occupation was being sent against her will to act as camp
doctor. Thus whether an immigrant was able to follow
his prior occupation was largely a matter of luck and the
personality of the employment officer.
The penniless state of all refugees (those who brought
some savings with them soon spent them there on making
their life more bearable) and the difficulty of finding and
paying for reasonable accommodation out of current earn¬
ings meant that those who were able to do so very soon
started looking for supplementary means of income from
which to accumulate a little capital.
Hence most immigrants were keen on overtime work and
to have their wives working, and a remarkable number
of them managed, against all labour custom, to take two
jobs àt once, dashing from a day shift in controlled
employment to a night shift elsewhere, taking weekend
employment or running their own allotments. This natur¬
ally often resulted in neither job being done properly,
but at that time of full employment the State gained
by such industriousness, however much union and work¬
ing class objections to the practice made its officials
disapprove. Later, however, these supplementary jobs
made trouble' with the employment officers, who could
not understand why a man should object to being moved
from one job to a similar one in another location and
so believed it was only stubbornness when the refugee
resisted such a move.
Too scared to go on strike
Thus, redirected labour was usually found both by
employment officers and by supervisors to be less
satisfactory than raw labour sent direct 'from the
reception camps or left in the same area, although this
cause for unsatisfactory work did not seem to be as widely
realized as it should have been and was often not taken
into account in opinions given me on the working qualities
of the refugee.
Apart from this type of problem, the incidence of
unsatisfactory behaviour among the refugees was quite
low, and they mostly seemed too afraid of being sent back
to Europe to take part in even as safe an activity as an
Australian-organized union protest or strike. The truly
anti-social individual, such as one meets in any commun¬
ity and such as were apparently much in evidence among
ex-concentration camp refugees, were presumably present
but did not seem to be .giving much trouble.
Australianization of the refugee started in Europe from
the moment he was provisionally selected. In the resettle¬
ment camps, at sea and again in the reception camps in
Australia, he was taught English mixed with Australian
history and social customs under a unified and specially
adapted scheme which continues to be widely available to
him, though no longer compulsory, wherever he may find
himself later. These courses struck me as being intellig¬
ently devised and energetically undertaken, lacking only
that training for democracy which after spending so long
under autocratic rule refugees so urgently required, but
which is difficult to put into an official syllabus because
of the political interpretations involved.
The programme would seem to complement the initial
conscious desire of most refugees to forget their past and
to become Australian as soon as possible, and it deserved
to succeed. Yet at the time of my visit all sources agreed
that the progress in learning English was slow, compared
with expectations, that the attendance at classes after all
.facilities had been made available was exceedingly poor,
and that contact between the immigrants and Australians
was very slight. It would seem a clear illustration, on
both sides, of the frustration of conscious intentions by
unconscious motivations. Only three of the 30 to 40
refugees with whom I spoke, the great majority of whom
had been in the country more than a year, had satis¬
factory private contacts, as evidenced by having an
Australian home where they felt confident of a real wel¬
come. And this was the case although my selection was
not a true cross-section but was rather biased on the side
of intelligence and stability.
Since there is no sponsorship system for the majority
of refugee immigrants to Australia and hence no
individual with whom they can feel personally linked,
nearly all have to depend for their free-time contacts
with Australian life on the communal efforts of State,
church and voluntary organizations, or on an extension
of contacts in work The State does very little directly
beyond the educational programme mentioned above. It
runs a newspaper for immigrants, a newspaper for societies
and individuals interested in helping the immigrant, and
has produced two propaganda films; but none of these
seems to reach the wide public, and hence although there
was some effort to educate the refugees to understand
Australian habits, little was done to explain the refugee to
the Australian beyond saying what nice people they are.
More specific welfare services for the refugee however,
are avoided as part of a deliberate policy
which, while giving him most of the privileges (Cont'd on
of an Australian and thus perhaps helping him page 2S)
22

The Unesco Courier. Nr 1. 1956
GOOD NEIGHBOURS
(Continued from page 22) NEWCOMERS IN A QUANDARY
to feel himself as one, gives him no services which would
permit him to feel himself as something special or would
allow Australian electors to grumble about unnecessary
expense.
Locally, the commandants of camps have sometimes
organized entertainments and clubs to which both new¬
comers and nearby residents are invited, thus incidentally
enriching the usually poor social life of the nearest small
town, but that is the most direct approach made.
Blame for lack of contact must not be laid too
thoughtlessly on the local voluntary organizations. They
were doing as much as they would do for any Australian-
born person moving into their area, probably more. It is
true that a different approach, one that the isolated
Australian had ¡never had a chance to learn, was needed
in such cases, but it was also true that the refugee
immigrant too often made no adequate attempts at contact
from his side. I was given story after story of functions
being arranged for them and the newcomers not appear¬
ing; of working conditions being softened for them and
yet being rejected or abused; of sulkiness, quarrelling and
other forms of misbehaviour, both at organized gatherings
and in private contacts.
The refugee immigrant saw the problem differently.
Such organized assimilation and get-together activities as
we have mentioned should have been needed only for the
more bashful among them. In most countries of Europe
they could so they thought have adjusted themselves
easily enough to the local population, no matter how little
they knew of the language. But in Australia, so the story
went, there was no social life to get into, nor any true
friendliness on individual contact.
The common picture was that the refugee would join
the local sports club, go drinking, attend dances and
functions, and in general be moderately welcome.
Certainly, few of them experienced anything like real
host'lity. But after a couple of invitations to home, to
drink, to play tennis, duty seemed to have been fulfilled
on the Australian's part, and although relations might
remain perfectly cordial there was no deepening of the
contact or extension through it to other contacts.
There is some truth in both points of view, and some¬
thing left out by them both as well. The general culture
' o'f Australian society is more distant from that of Europe
or America than is commonly recognized. A discussion
of it is outside the scope of this article, since we are here
concerned with the refugee side of assimilation, not the
other. Briefly, however, it may be said that the pioneer
tradition had engendered a belief in self-sufficiency and
a scorn for those social functions which attempt to do
for the individual what he should be capable of doing for
himself. Hence the social life of Australian towns is
remarkably simple. To that extent the refugees' complaint
is true social life of the complexity found in central
Europe does not exist.
Not prepared for pioneering
But it is also almost certainly true that if the refugees
had found a society of the complexity and richness
of Europe, they would still have had difficulties in
adjusting and would still have shown abnormalities
in their behaviour. The self-sufficiency which Aus¬
tralian culture believed in was just the state of mind
which the refugee, rootless and emotionally shaken by past
events, could least attain to. The self-sufficiency of the
pioneer is. based on the principle that the individual can
control his relations with his environment, and Australian
history in post-pioneer days has never met a situation
which really challenged that ; but the whole existence of
the refugee is an epitome of the contrary theory, namely,
that the individual is a toy in the grip, of uncontrollable
forces. Hence the newcomer needed not only emotional
strength to become more self-sufficient, but also had to
assume implicitly for the foundations of Australian
culture were never explicit for him a philosophy which
their whole recent life belied.
Faced with this quandary the natural tendency was to
resist assimilation, or at the least to make no positive
efforts towards it. Occasionally this resistance showed
itself as a hostility or even (in 1953) in a demand to be
sent back to Europe, bad though that was recognized to
be. More commonly the wish to co-operate was there,
but the will to do it was frustrated by unconscious or
unrecognized forces. I remember one young Yugoslav
couple, both working, both making reasonable money,
living . privately with an old, ex-Yugoslav, Australian.
They wanted to learn English; their old landlord was
strongly encouraging them to do so; and there was an
English class two streets away. And yet they never went
to it. Their personal contacts were not too bad since
they had, in their landlord, one good friend; but learning
English meant accepting the change of life and the
change of personality which their resettlement both
offered and demanded. In their talk with me it was clear
that this change was being resisted.
Leadership taken by extremists
In my own experience such a feeling was to be 'found
less commonly at that time than at the time of reset¬
tlement, but it undoubtedly appears in the majority
of refugees at some time or another and when it does it
is a major factor in his appearance or behavioui . In
Australia there can be little doubt that while the refugee
immigrants were adjusting themselves quite rap.dly to
their new economic conditions they were, at the time of
my visit, resisting quite strongly those aspects of the assi¬
milation programme which appeared to them to threaten
their original integrity
In relieving the strains which assimilation was imposing
at that time, the societies run by the refugees themselves
could only give limited help. In the first place, they
were anything but united. All the traditional trends of
European politics seemed to have their counterparts in
the groups and organizations which the exiles had
developed. In the second place the Government's declared
intention of promoting assimilation and preventing parti¬
cularism made it difficult for them to operate and tended
to restrain anyone but the extremists from seeking leader¬
ship among them.
The situation in Australia, then, whereby refugee
immigrants are found to be adjusting more rapidly to the
economic than to the social environment, is not an unex¬
pected or unusual one. The thing that gives it
significance in the present context is the declared policy
of the Australian Government and people to press for
assimilation within one generation and to obstruct any
attempts which might be made to form local colonies of
immigrants speaking the same language.
The difficulties which the refugees were having in
accepting the change of personality which goes with
assimilation, and in making local contacts, could be easily
handled and hence would be of little importance if they
were allowed to form their own communities, as in some
other countries. (As it was, they remained largely in their
own communities in camps, but every effort was made
to ensure that no community spirit or sense of permanence
was developed.) The psychological effect of the present
policy, however, appears to be making the refugee feel
even more isolated than he had felt before resettlement,
and it was not linking him to any group whose ethics he
could be expected to adopt.
Economic rewards were sufficient, and probably will still
be even in a time of recession, but emotional rewards for
conforming behaviour did seem to be inadequate, and in
consequence it appeared possible at the time of my visit
that much personal or social breakdown was liable to
occur among these people in the near future.
This article has been taken from a recently-published Unesco
study in the Population and Culture series entitled "Flight and
Resettlement" (Price: 8 3.50; 19/6; 950 fr.). Mr. Murphy's
observations are based on a visit made to Australia at the end
of 1950 and should not, therefore, be taken to indicate that
conditions have in no way changed since that time. The New
Australian movement and various vocational training schemes
have, without doubt, helped considerably to integrate the refugee
immigrant in the Australian community. However, many of
the social adjustment problems mentioned are still unsolved-.
25
