IN building up its new educational system during the last
century, India copied the universities of the V/est,
especially the newer universities of Britain. India's
universities have multiplied and new ones are still being
founded. Critics of education have pointed out their
obvious faults. Nevertheless they have served the nation.
From them have come the political leaders who won India's
freedom, the administrators who conduct the country's
affairs in a modern way, and some of the businessmen
who are transforming it economically.
During the same time India developed one eminent
institution which v/as quite distinct from all these others,
and which, though also borrowing from the West, is
particularly Indian. This is Visva-Bharati, known more
familiarly as Santiniketan, or the Abode of Peace.
Santiniketan, which is not far from Calcutta, was created
by the Tagores, that remarkable mercantile family of
Bengal in which for more than a century great wealth and
great artistic and intellectual eminence have gone side by
side. The school at Santiniketan which was to grow into
the university of today was founded in 1863 by the father
of Rabindranath the poet. But it was Rabindranath
himself who created it as it has existed in our day.

By its very nature Santiniketan is a criticism of the
orthodox Indian universities. It is a protest against their
size, against their soullessness, against the ugliness of many
of their buildings, against the gradual falling away from
the old invaluable Indian tradition of the devoted
relationship of pupil and teacher. Rabindranath Tagore
regarded education as an art, and also he thought that
education proceeds best through art and through religion
as understood by the poet and the artist.
The guiding principle of Santiniketan is described in a
celebrated pronouncement by Rabindranath. "The
highest education", he wrote, "is that which does
not merely give us information but makes our life in
harmony with all existence... Let us have access to the
life that goes beyond death and rises above all circum-
22

stances, let us find our God, let us live for that ultimate
truth which emancipates us from the bondage of the dust
and gives us the wealth, not of things but of inner light,
not of power but of love."
At Santiniketan, all the subjects which were taught in
the Western-style universities could be studied but the
method of study was to be Indian, or at least Indian as
interpreted by Rabindranath Tagore. The lecture room
and the examination hall did not dominate; instead the
teacher taught the pupil through a personal relation. The
imagination was cultivated as well as criticism. And in
addition many subjects not taught in the Western-style
universities were offered at Santiniketan, among them
Indian dancing and music and contemporary Indian poetry.
The result, it was claimed, was a better balanced per¬
sonality. Those educated at Santiniketan felt themselves
nurtured in an Indian
tradition through a live,
developing tradition, not
an ossified one and they
did not suffer the same
sense of cultural expatria¬
tion as did some of the
graduates of Allahabad or
Madras or Bombay.
Reading Tagore on
education it is impossible
not to be reminded again
and again of Plato ; and
walking through Santini¬
ketan it is easy to feel that
one is visiting an academy
not of the modern world
but of Periclean, Athens.
In Santiniketan there is the
same mixture of humanism
and theism as in Plato ;
there is the combined
worship of beauty and
exactness of thought. The
dominant impressions
which the visitor brings
away are of an elegance
alike of spirit and of exter¬
nals, of simplicity, of
decent and graceful leisure,
and of abundant youth,
but youth which is any¬
thing but raw or callow.
Some visitors have of
course felt that such an institution was too precious for
the strenuous and earthy contemporary India, with all its
urgent problems of social and economic reform. Perhaps
in its earlier days the criticism was partly fair. Even
Gandhi was inclined to share the doubt. But Santiniketan
has moved with the times and has been adaptable. That
is a sign of its strength. Rabindranath Tagore, who had
resided continuously in the institution during his declining
years and who, with his magnificent head, dress, and
manner of speech and movement, was in those days one
of the most impressive sights which India could offer died
during the war.
Soon after India became independent, Santiniketan was
reorganized. It has been incorporated as a statutory full-
fledged university, with a much wider curriculum, offering
courses to meet the needs of the new India. But em¬
phatically it has not lost its special nature, or become a
replica of other universities. It has preserved its auto¬
nomy, its traditions, its spirit, and its special customs,
its insistence on the living personal relation of teachers
Saruinikecan University
TEACHER AND FRIENDS: Education at Santiniketan is not
based on the principle that a university is a hierarchy, but on
the view that student and teacher should live in relations of
companionship and common dedication to their ideals. Lecture
room and examination hall do not dominate in this university.
The Unesco Courier
and pupils, its cultivation of the harmonious corporate life.
Today Santiniketan is at once school, university, research
institution, and international centre. The school is co¬
educational; boys and girls live in separate hotels but share
the same class-rooms, kitchens and playgrounds. In the
university, nearly all the ordinary subjects may be studied;
but, following a tradition established by Rabindranath,
students are encouraged to combine "light-bearing"
subjects those inviting study for their own sake with
"fruit-bearing ones" those which have practical use¬
fulness. "Fruit-bearing" is very much in the centre of
the research programme of the institution. At the
neighbouring centre Sriniketan, some of the most stimulat¬
ing work in modern India has been done on the sociology
of peasant life and on methods of rural education. The
man or woman who obtains part of his education in the
College of Music and
Dance is urged in due
course to move over to
Sriniketan and study his
countrymen working at
their humbler tasks.
Because of its inter¬
national reputation, San¬
tiniketan soon attracted
scholars from the outside
world. It became, and
has remained, one of the
most cosmopolitan places
in Asia. This has been
reflected in journals and
annals which are pub¬
lished by the institution.
What can Santiniketan
give to India, and to the
world, in the corning
decades? Perhaps it will
serve best by continuing
to proclaim the same
principles as in the past
especially the principle
that a university is not a
hierarchy, and that student
and teacher should live
not in relations of sub¬
ordination but of com¬
panionship and common
dedication to their ideals.
If Santiniketan continues
steadfast to this, it wi 1 do
much. But nohealthy institution stands still. Santiniketan
will inevitably grow and change. One of its most interesting
ventures at the moment is the systematic training of
teachers intended for the villages. More will probably
be heard of this in the future; it is a development which
would certainly have delighted Rabindranath Tagore's
friend, Mahatma Gandhi.
In the twentieth century world of volcanic upheavals,
Santiniketan has remained true to its name. It is an abode
of peace. Its Chancellor, Jawaharlal Nehru, has declared
the resolve of his Government that everything shall be done
to enable it to grow and prosper according to its own
nature. "I have Santiniketan very much in my mind",
he said recently, "and feel that it is our national duty which
Rabindranath Tagore entrusted to all of us to make it
possible for this institution to prosper." Scholars outside
India share Mr. Nehru's feeling, and some may be inclined
to add that the responsibility for Santiniketan's welfare has
now become a world-wide one which they would have
great pride in undertaking.
23
