Victims of poverty, disease and ignorance
TWO PEOPLE OUT OF THREE
- w F one man lives in opulence and his brother in misery,
if some nations display their wealth while others can
only reveal their poverty, it becomes difficult to talk
of their intellectual and moral solidarity.
UNESCO set out from its earliest days to fight for
equality. Without preaching a Utopian levelling of all
differences, it maintained that all peoples have equal
rights, and that their cultures, their traditions and their
ambitions (despite varying degrees of achievement) are
all equally worthy of respect.
When the United Nations launched its programme of
technical assistance to"underdeveloped countries"in
1950, UNESCO took its share, and was able to put its
struggle for equality of opportunity on a practical footing.
No one rode forth to join this battle with rosy optimism.
In 1950, UNESCO stated the problem in brutally frank
terms, nor is there need to change these terms today :
"Two-thirds of humanity live in the underdeveloped
regions of Africa, Asia and Latin America. Two out of
three men must live on less than $100---occasionally less
than $60-per year. Their diet never exceeds the bare
minimum required to stave off starvation. Their life
expectancy is 40 years-in certain countries, 27 years.
Infant mortality rates run as high as 36 per cent..."Yes,
two-thirds of humanity.
The United Nations technical assistance programme set
as its goal the raising of living standards, the increase of
employment and the improvement of social and economic
conditions which are the prerequisite of progress and de-
velopment. UNESCO took particular interest in two essen-
tial aspects of these conditions for progress : it set out to
prove the value of education and scientific research to
economic development and to show how aid in these fields
may shatter the vicious circle of ignorance and poverty.
Over five years, the sum of $10, 600, 000 has been allocat-
ed to UNESCO technical assistance. More than 450 fellow-
ships have been awarded to young men and women so
that they may become teachers, engineers and scientists
in their own countries. They are the replacements who
must take over from the UNESCO"experts"at the end of
a technical assistance mission.
In the beginning of 1956, there were some 300 of these
experts working in 51 countries. Their work was as varied
as the needs-all urgent-of the governments they were
assisting. A list of these jobs would provide a detailed
picture of the educational needs of nations which must
build both primary schools and universities.
From master weavers and chemists
to psychologists and glassblowers
*r OR this programme, UNESCO has recruited school-
teachers and physicists master weavers and chem-
ests, librarians and radio engineers, psychologists
and glassblowers. In Monrovia, or Baghdad or Damascus,
UNESCO means science professors. In Colombia, it means
aid to rural schools taught by radio. In Brazil or Turkey
Or Pakistan, it means geologists. At Calcutta, UNESCO has
carried its message to engineering students. At Min-
neriya in the wet zone of Ceylon, it has worked among
illiterate farmers. In Iran, it has specialized in technical
education to train men for agriculture and industry. In
Thailand, it has helped in the reform of primary edu-
cation. This diversity of burgeoning activity is merely an
expression of the almost unlimited forms which technical
assistance must take to adapt itself to the practical
requirements of'''economic and social development."
But, at the root of all these missions, there is one com-
mon characteristic : their human value. They succeed
only through close collaboration and friendship. In 1952,
the author of a booklet describing UNESCO technical
20
assistance missions in four countries of South-east Asia
wrote :"Viewed from outside, UNESCO's technical assis-
tance programme is a complicated mechanism of budgets,
projects and agreements couched in legal language. But,
viewed at first hand, it becomes a simple story of men
shedding coats and protocol to do jobs."These jobs all
involve teaching at a human level without any trace of
condescending charity or mere display of knowledge.
In recent years, the"typical technical assistance
expert"has made his appearance and the portrait of this
international specialist can now be sketched quite
accurately. At first, he is truly foreign-and must adapt
himself to ways of living, working and thinking for which
his previous experience as a teacher or a scientist have
not in the least prepared him. But this stage does not
last long : within a few months, he is no more an outsider
and his assistance and advice are not foreign. He uses
his knowledge to solve the problems of his hosts and these
problems soon become as clearly-defined in his own eyes
as those of his own country.
Men on missions who try to
work themselves out of a job
TALE to him and he will tell you of local difficulties
and resources as though he were talking of his own
city or country. His mission may call for him to
demonstrate new methods or to teach a new technique
but, in every case, it is only part of a much bigger picture.
The adventure of social and economic progress in any
underdeveloped country always begins before the arrival
of an outside expert and it always continues after he
leaves. In other words, he must literally work himself out
of a job. His contribution can be measured only in terms
of those he trains to make his own presence unnecessary.
UNESCO authorities have always emphasized that this
assistance does not seek to bring about any magic trans-
formations but rather to stimulate work already begun by
various nations. Even with this limited goal, they admit
that the programme will remain insufficient to meet
world needs for years to come. In addition, therefore, to
its share in the United Nations technical assistance
programme, UNESCO set up in 1955 its own system of
"direct aid to Member states."This aid is not quite the
same : instead of giving absolute priority to economic
development, it stresses social and cultural factors. There
is another difference : while a large share of this pro-
gramme is set aside for underdeveloped regions, it is
available to all UNESCO Member States without exception.
By November 1, 1955, UNESCO had decided to send out
approximately 100 specialists under its direct aid pro-
gramme and to award 80 fellowships.
But, at just about this time, the man who had been
directing UNESCO's technical assistance efforts for five
years warned that, despite these efforts,'''many needs
remain unfulfilled."He wrote :"One should look at tech-
nical assistance without any complacency, in spite of the
considerable results already achieved, and work on the
assumption that it has only covered a small part of the
way to go."
In the face of the vast and urgent needs of two-thirds
of the world, it may well appear that the efforts of this
handful of experts have been dispersed. But there is
another aspect of technical assistance and, from its very
beginning, it has produced another result which, while
difficult to define, is full of promise. The same writer
who refused to judge technical assistance with compla-
cency declared :"If the tasks performed up to date have
encouraged and reinforced the ideal of international co-
operation, that fact alone is sufficient to rank them very
high in that scale of values upon which the future of
mankind depends."

i rw Unl'\ ( () Ccur Hr
YUGOSLAVIA :"Globemaker"is working at Zagreb centre which
produces urgently needed school equipment. Unesco has sent many
teachers and technicians to assist Yugoslavia in executing its
long-term educational re-organization and development programme.
NICARAGUA : People m farming communities
will benefit from national pilot proJcct 111 funda-
dental education staffed by Unesco-trained reachers.
LJ'. r'd Ui'.
AFGHANISTAN : Mans more schools are needed to give the country a workable system
of compuhory education. Government has approved Unesco mission plan for educational
reform, and vocational training--vital for country's future economic development-has started.
LEBANON : Psychological test for pupil in labo-
ratory set up by expert on Unesco mission which
aids government revision of educational system.

'Am bassadors'
.
In
shirtsleeves
October 16 :"A British geology techni-
cian, Mr. E. O. Rowland, whose speciality is
the reduction of pieces of rock to the
thickness of cigarette paper, is arriving in
Pakistan this month on a UNEsco mission.
At Lahore he will instruct laboratory
workers in the technique of'thin-section
cutting of rocks'to make microscopic slides
for use in petroleum geology."
October 8 :"Mrs. Anine Rud, a Dan-
ish librarian and a pioneer in Denmark's
system of using children's libraries as an
aid to classroom work, arrives in Indonesia
this month, on a UNESCO mission. In
Jakarta, she will help to develop children's
and school libraries."
September 26 :"Educators from Bel-
gium, France, the Netherlands and Swit-
zerland have been sent by UNESCO to take
part in Yugoslavia's long-term programme
of educational re-organization and expan-
sion. The educators will lecture and lead
seminars in Belgrade, Zagreb and other
cities. UNESCO will send 11 educators to
Yugoslavia this year. Last year, more than
50 Yugoslav, educators received UNESCO
fellO'wships."
September 14 :"An adviser on English
teaching has arrived in Laos on a UNESCO
mission... September 6 : A former professor
of Palermo University has been sent by
UNESCO to the Engineering School of the
Syrian University at Aleppo... September 6 :
A Swiss expert in home economics is now
working in Kabul with Afghan educators...
September 4 : A Swedish electronics research
engineer has been sent by UNESCO to the
University of Calcutta... August 28 : A Dutch
expert is helping to create a geology
museum in Syria...
These facts taken from recent UNESCO
press releases tell something of the world-
wide programme under which more than
200 educators and scientists ("men and
women who shed coats and protocol to do
their jobs") are carrying out 106 technical
assistance projects at the request of the
governments of 47 countries. UNESCO's
share in the U. N. world programme of
technical assistance for economic develop-
ment, has amounted to $17, 500, 000 since the
programme began. Even so, supply has not
yet caught up with demand : since the
programme was launched five years ago
392 requests for aid have come to UNESCO
from 57 countries.
So far, 544 experts have, been sent on
UNEsco assignments 339 of which have been
completed. to date. UNESCO has awarded
nearly 700 fellowships so that its missions
could eventually be replaced by nationals
of the countries in which the missions were
working. Although technical assistance
stresses a sharing of skills rather than
massive economic aid, equipment must
sometimes be supplied. This year, for
example UNEsco is distributing some
$1, 400, 000 worth of equipment.
COLOMBIA : Textbooks and pos-
ters for classrooms without tea-
chers are devised by Brother
Fulgencio (left) and Brother Idi-
nael assigned by Unesco to work
with Radio Sutatenza's school-of-
the-air, now reaching hundreds
of thousands of isolated pupils.
SYRIA : How to read the mean-
ing of fossil imprints left in rocks
ages ago is discussed at the Syrian
University in Damascus by a
university student and Professor
Raymoon Raven, Dutch geologist
and member of Unesco's technical
assistance team teaching in Syria.
BURMA : Use of the theatre as
a vivid way of bringing home
lessons to Youngsters is one of
the techniques stressed at a
teacher-training centre in Ran-
goon where Unesco has sent a
team of educators to work with
Burma's educational authorities.

The Unesco Courier
23
UNhbLU photos
INDIA : Production-line-in-miniature has been
set up for trai. 1 i ng pu rposes by a Unesco
engineer at the Indian Institute of Technology.
LIBERIA : From all corners of the globe,
Unesco missions have brought science teachers
into new University of Liberia at Monrovia.
LAOS : Age-old traditions of craftsmanship
ripen into modern skills at Savannakhet's
vocational school where Unesco mission works.
GOLD COAST : Book hunger of new lite-
rates is being met by a"vernacular literature
bureau"operated with Unesco mission's aid.
