READERSAMINUTE.il HOURS EVERY
I BUSIEST
PUBLIC LIBRARY
'
:&*<
£fc
by Frank M. Gardner
hen the Government of India and UNESCO opened
an experimental public library In Delhi just over four
years ago pessimists pointed out that' most of the city's
population was illiterate. Nevertheless at the end of
the first year 2,300 readers a day were visiting the
library, and for 78 per cent of them this was their first
visit to a public library. Today the library has over
60,000 books in English, Urdu and Hindi and serves
70,000 people a month. As Asia's busiest and most
modern public libraryopen 1 1 hours a day, and every
day of the weekit recently served as headquarters and
"laboratory" for a UNESCO seminar on the develop¬
ment of public libraries in Asia directed by Mr. Frank,
M. Gardner, author of the accompanying article. Mr.
Gardner who is Borough Librarian of Luton in the
United Kingdom spent eight months in Delhi in 1951
and 1952 as UNESCO consultant to the Indian Government
and helped to set up the library which today has a staff
of 47 directed by Mr. Des Raj Kalia, a UNESCO-trained
Indian librarian. Its present services include a Children's
Department, Reference Section, Lending Library and a
Social Education and Extension Service. Photos on these
pages show (from left to right): an assistant librarian
bringing new books to the Delhi Library, the Library
building opposite the Delhi Railway Station, library users
keeping up to date with the news in the reading room.

Somewhere in Asia a young man is on his way to the
public library. He appears to be under thirty, he is
probably unmarried, and he is either a student or a
clerical worker of some kind. The library is some distance
from his home, and he has to make a special journey to
get there, since it is not on his regular route to office or
university, but he goes fairly regularly, and has been a
member for quite a long time. When he gets to the
library he will spend a little time reading, probably a
newspaper, or perhaps one of the reference works, be-fore
he changes his book, which he prefers to read at home.
He is allowed only one book he would like more but the
library has not yet a large enough stock to permit this.
Though he can read English and possibly Urdu, he
usually prefers a book in his native language, Hindi if he
can find one. He probably chooses a
novel by an author he knows, most
likely a love story or a story of
modern India. He is not greatly
concerned about the newness of the
book it is the contents that interest
him. If he wants a non-fiction book
he takes it because of its general in¬
terest rather than as a source of in¬
formation for use in an examination
or a college assignment. He would
probably prefer a biography, but
there aren't enough in Hindi, so he
may take out a book of plays or
poetry, of which there are plenty.
This is not. any particular young
man. It is a composite picture of the
typical reader at the Delhi Public
Library in India as shown by a survey
recently undertaken by Unesco of the
use and reading habits of the
members. The survey is an appraisal
of what the Library has achieved in
its five years of existence, the nature
of its problems in the past, and what
its problems are likely to be in the
future. This is the first survey to be
undertaken "for a public library in
Asia, and the results are not only of
vital, interest to library development
in Asia, but also tell a fascinating
story of social habits which sometimes
diverge from and sometimes parallel social habits in
other countries.
The story is told by the people themselves, through
answers given to 1,300 questionnaires by groups of users
and non-users of the Library. It is itself a commentary
on social habits for whereas in the West the questionnaire
has become an object of some suspicion, in Delhi,
according to the Delhi School of Social Work which
undertook the distribution and recording of the ques¬
tionnaires, the utmost- co-operation was achieved in
obtaining answers to the 40 or so questions put to each
person.
One startling fact that immediately emerges is that the
The Unesco Courier. February 1956
membership of the library is almost exclusively male, only
6 % of the readers being women, and only 14 % over
thirty years old. Though the Library has not been
successful in attracting the female sex, it has been a great
draw for children, for 29 % of the members are children
under 16 an encouraging sign for the future. Even
though women are shy about coming to the Library, they
possibly induce the menfolk to come on their behalf, as
over a third of readers report that their books are used
by other members of the family. Even the old-fashioned,
though pleasant habit of reading aloud survives, for 10 %
of people questioned say they read aloud to their families.
Eleven percent of readers are university students a
high figure, but not as high as was feared by those who
thought that a public library in Asia was likely to be
swamped by students seeking additional textbooks.
Nearly all the readers have at least a primary education,
and most have a secondary education.
What do these young people come to read at the library?
What languages do they read in? What subjects do they
prefer? Primarily they do not come to read in the library
at all. Like Western readers, they prefer to read their
books at home, and though the library has reading rooms
for newspapers and periodicals, and a growing reference
section, its main business is lending books over a million
in the last four years. Of members questioned, 90 %
gave the reading of books as their first preference, and
nearly 90 % prefer to read them at home, which may
surprise those who have thought that the demand for
public libraries in Asia could be satisfied by newspaper
reading rooms, and that home conditions might limit the
value of lending libraries.
The purposes oí reading are wide, and not easily defined.
But of 220 readers questioned, only 17 said they used the
public library for college or school assignments, and
another 17 to prepare for examinations. Eighty-four
people said they read for general interest, 49 to increase
general knowledge. Ten had the laudable ambition of
getting a better job, and 35 wanted to improve their
reading ability. It would be hard to find a better all-
round justification of public library objectives than is
contained in these statements.
About half the readers prefer fiction, about a quarter
non-fiction, and the others have no preference. Romance
is an important -factor, since love stories come first in
fiction favour (possibly the women at home exerting in¬
fluence here!), next come stories about modern India,
crime and detective stories, and stories about historical
India. Political novels and psychological novels are
among the least liked, as also, curiously enough are love
stories. Apparently the romantic novel is both actively
liked and actively disliked.
In non-fiction, the greatest preference is
for biography (chosen nearly twice as often
as any other subject) then -follow literature,
(Cont'd on
page 7)

ASIA'S BUSIEST LIBRARY (Cont'd)
NO RESISTING THE MAGIC LURE
Children seem to be drawn into the Delhi public library as if by the legendary Pied Piper. Around 30%
of members are under 16 years of age an encouraging sign for the future. Hundreds of children visit
the library every day attracted by a special reading room where they can enjoy simple games and suitable
books. Library received toys and games (above, left) through Unesco's Voluntary International Assis¬
tance Division. As there is a shortage of books in Hindi and Urdu, English words in young girl's book
(above, right) have been transcribed by hand under the original text. But older children are only too
glad to show off their knowledge of English by explaining the texts to their younger companions (right).
A rapt audience (below) assembles for the- "Story Hour" in the children's room at the Library.
UNESCO photos.

40»/o OF VILLAGERS, BO'/i OF
TOWNSFOLK CHOOSE FICTION
The Unesco Courier. February 1956
(Continued from
page 5)
politics, and self-improvement. The
most disliked subjects, according to
replies given by readers, are politics,
psychology and technology.
When the enquiry was extended beyond the Central
Library to other service points that have been established,
some further interesting facts came out. The Mobile
Library service covers parts of Delhi and also extends
into rural areas. One would naturally expect the villages
to have a simpler outlook on reading, but in fact, it
emerges quite definitely that the taste of the villager is
more solid than that of the -urban reader. In the urban
area, 80 % of the books loaned are fiction, but when the
library goes to the villages, carrying the same stock, only
40 % of the books issued are fiction. The village reader
prefers biography, religion and literature.
Deposit stations have been established by the Library
in Social Education Centres, and here again the pattern
of readers and their choices vary from those who use the
Central Library and the Mobile Library. : Readers at
deposit stations include more older people and more
women, 21 % of the readers being female. The standard
of education is also lower, which is what one would
expect, since the social education centres are specifically
for the less-educated
classes.
But if these readers
are less-educated, they
are much more vocal
about possible improve¬
ments in the library
service than readers at
the Central Library.
Whereas very few read-,
ers there have any
complaint, 73 readers
questioned at deposit
stations voiced 161
complaints. Nearly all
want more books, some
want simpler books,
some want more books
in Hindi, others more
books in English, some
want more variety,
others more books by
modern writers. They
are all united, however,
on one thing they
want more books.
And here lies one of
the major expansion
problems of the Delhi
Public Library. In five
years, it has accumu¬
lated a stock of over
60,000 books. Only,
half of these are in
Hindi, whereas nearly
two-thirds of the libra¬
ry's use is in this lan¬
guage and the demand
is increasing all the
time. But the books are simply not available and even
those that exist wear out faster than they can be replaced.
The life oî a book in Hindi averages, as shown by this
inquiry, about 16 loans before it is worn out, as against
between fifty and a hundred loans in a Western library.
Thus the Delhi Library is being defeated by its own
success. The fact that nearly 50 % of its readers travel
a mile or more to use it, that the unbearably hot summer
of Delhi makes no difference at all to library use, shows
the eagerness of the readers. But speed of expansion is
dictated by the availability of books -for purchase, and the
facilities for maintaining and increasing a" usable
bookstock.
There are, of course, other problems too, shown, up by
the survey, problems that must be solved before the public
UNESCO photos.
EAGER READERS: Children are among the most enthusiastic rural readers
and crowd eagerly around the "bookmobile" to see what new "treasures" it
carries on Its shelves this time. Little girl (top of page) can't wait to get home but
starts to read her book on the steps of the mobile library visiting her village.
library is a
completely in¬
tegrated part
of community
life. Not near¬
ly enough
women, older
people (only
2,5 % are over
45), and above
all, not nearly
enough newly-
literates or less
educated peo¬
ple use the fa¬
cilities offered
by the library.
The children at school, the students, the educated
professional classes have seized the opportunity to profit
by the facilities of a modern public library, but the others
have not come forward, perhaps because the books avail¬
able are too difficult, perhaps because they, are overawed
by the atmosphere of a large library, perhaps because
they have no leisure to go to the library, or facilities to
read in comfort. Even the many extension activities of
the library lectures,
film shows, discussion
groups which it was
thought would attract
and hold the less edu¬
cated, are used almost
entirely by the better
educated of the library
members.
In bringing out these
facts the survey pre¬
sents a challenge and
a line of policy for the
future that will un¬
doubtedly be taken up.
The problems are
those of circumstances
and ones not easily
overcome. But once
realized, they can be
met, for not only does
the report show up
clearly and unmistak-
, ably what are the pro-
' blems, it also offers a
line of approach. By
placing its branches in
fundamental educa¬
tion centres, with the
backing of a central
library organization
and trained staff, a
public library can fur¬
ther its own purposes
and those of social
education. In its first
Ave years the library
has achieved a great
deal. Now that this objective report has been compiled,
it can extend its horizons and can advance towards
further goals.
But it should not be thought that the better-educated
in Asia can fend for themselves in their reading needs.
They are the people who can benefit immediately from
public libraries, and here the Delhi Public Library's
success is unqualified.
One of the most startling facts brought out by the
survey is that 26 % of the Library's 20,000 readers did not
read at all before joining the library, and 60 % have no
books whatever at home. More than anything else, the
need for more public library services in Asia is shown by
these two facts.

ASIA'S BUSIEST LIBRARY (Cont'd)
SMALL FRY CRITICS compare notes on the books they have just
drawn from the mobile library which has made its regular visit.
YOUNG FRUIT SELLER settles down for a quiet read while he waits
for customers to come along. Children are among the most avid readers.
SELF-IMPROVEMENT BOOKS are among
first four non-fiction choices of readers at the
Delhi public library. Greatest preference is
for biography (chosen nearly twice as often
as any other subject). .'Mother (right) reads
a book in Hindi on child care while a craftsman
(above) consults a work which will help him
improve his technical knowledge and skill.
8
