WITCH DOGTORS
AND PSYCHOANALYSIS
by Claude Lévi-Strauss
Most of us regard psychoanalysis as a
revolutionary discovery of twen¬
tieth-century civilization and place
it on the same footing as genetics
or the theory of relativity. Others, prob¬
ably more conscious of the abuses of
psychoanalysis than of the real lessons it
has to teach us, still look upon it as one
of the absurdities of modern man. In
both cases, we overlook the fact that
psychoanalysis has simply rediscovered
and expressed in new terms an approach
to mental illness which probably dates
back to the earliest days of mankind and
which the . so-called primitive peoples
have always used, often with a skill that
amazes our foremost practitioners.
A few years ago, Swedish ethnologists
recorded and published a long healing
ritual used among the Cuna Indians of
Panama in cases of difficult childbirth.
In the ritual, the tribe's witch-doctor or
shaman stands before the suffering
mother and begins a chant-recitation,
explaining that her ailment is due to
the temporary absence of the soul which
controls procreation. The Cuna Indians
believe in the existence of a multitude
of souls, each of which has charge of
some particular function of life. In this
particular case, the soul has been kid¬
napped and has been carried away to
the other world by some evil spirits.
In quest of a
captive spirit
The witch-doctor tells the expectant
mother than he is setting out on a
supernatural quest for the lost
spirit. With a rare luxury of detail he
describes the obstacles he meets and the
enemies he has to face, how he over¬
comes them by force or guile before
reaching the prison of the captive soul.
Then he releases the soul and induces
it to resume control of the suffering
body lying at his side.
This cure (we have no reason to sup¬
pose it is not successful at least in certain
cases) is interesting for a number of
reasons. Firstly, it is purely psycho-
Professor Lévi-Strauss is director of research
in religious science at the Ecole Pratique des Hau¬
tes Etudes, and Secretary-General of the Inter¬
national Council of Social Science in Paris. He
was formerly Deputy Director of the Musée de
l'Homme in Paris and was recently elected as
member of the Royal Academy oj the Netherlands.
His latest book Tristes Tropiques (Sud Tropics) has
had a notable success in France.
8
logical; no drugs are used nor is the body
of the patient touched. The witch¬
doctor simply recites or chants, relying
on speech alone to effect his cure. Sec¬
ondly, two people must participate in
the treatment doctor and patient al¬
though, as we shall see in a moment,
this does not mean that other members
of the community may not be present.
Cures conducted
in public session
Of the two persons, the witch-doctor,
whose powers are recognized by
the whole tribe, embodies social
authority and order, while the other
the patient sufl'srs from what we
should call a physiological disorder, but
which the Indians attribute to an advan¬
tage gained by the spirit world over the
human world. Since these two worlds
should normally be allied, and since the
spirit world is of the same nature as the
souls possessed by the individual, the
problem as the Indians see it, really
stems from a sociological disturbance
caused by the ambition, ill-will or re¬
sentment of the spirits that is by both
psychological and social factors.
In describing the causes of the ailment
and recounting his adventures in the
other world, the witch-doctor conjures
up for his listeners familiar pictures
drawn from the beliefs and myths which
are the common heritage of the whole
community. Since the cures are con¬
ducted in public, the adolescents of the
tribe witness them and thus gain a
detailed knowledge of the tribe's beliefs.
Several of the characteristics described
are strangely reminiscent of psychoana¬
lytical treatment. Here too, illness is
considered of psychological origin and
the treatment applied is exclusively psy¬
chological. Because of symptoms which
he is unable to control, or more simply
because he is suffering from mental
stress, the patient feels cut off from the
community and calls in the doctor
whose authority is recognized by the
group, to help him to regain his place
in society. The- treatment seeks to
induce the patient to describe events
buried in his subconscious mind but
which, despite the passage of time, still
govern his feelings and attitude to life.
Now there are events or . , ,
stories that have their (Cont d on


PSYCHOANALYSIS
(Cont'd from page 8)
TRIBAL VERSION OF
PSYCHIATRIST'S COUCH
that the very recollection of them has
been lost, yet, better than more recent
events, they permit us to understand the
nature of things occurring today. These
stories are what sociologists call
"myths", and it would be difficult to
give a better definition of the word.
The main difference between the
medicine man's treatment (as in the
example of the pregnant mother above)
and treatment by psychoanalysis is that
in the first case it is the doctor who
docs the talking while in the second it
is the patient. A good psychoanalyst
we know, says hardly a word during
most of the treatment; his role is to
offer the patient a stimulus (one might
almost say provocation) which the pre¬
sence of another person provides, so
that the patient can vent all his pent-up
aggressive emotions on this anonymous
"other person".
Ready-made myth
calmed mother
IN both cases the creation of a myth
is part of the treatment. The differ¬
ence is that with the Cuna the myth
is ready-made, familiar to everyone and
perpetuated by tradition, the witch¬
doctor merely adapting it to each indi¬
vidual case.
In the childbirth case, for example, the
witch-doctor translates the myth into
terms that are meaningful to the
mother. This permits her to name,
then understand and perhaps thereby
dominate the anxieties which until then
she had been totally incapable of
expressing in any form.
In psychoanalysis, however, the
patient elaborates his own myth. When
we stop to think about it the difference
is not so great since psychoanalysis
reduces the causes of psychological
disorders to a very small number of
possible situations from which the
patient can choose, but do little more.
All of them deal with the patient's
earliest experiences in life and his rela¬
tions with his family as a child. Here
too, a state of release is reached when
the anxieties which the patient could not
express or dared not admit are at last
translated into terms of a myth which
fits his particular story.
To reassure psychoanalysts and their
followers, let me make it clear at once
that, in using the word "'myth", I am
in no way implying that the story in
question is either untrue or invented.
Many myths are based on real occur¬
rences but as I have already indicated,
what makes a myth depends not so
much on how accurately it reflects the
original story or event but its capacity
to give meaning to the present.
10
Thus it is not surprising to discover
that skilled psychologists who have
visited primitive societies to carry out
enquiries with the most up-to-date
methods of investigation, have found
themselves to be on a footing of equa-
.lity with the medicine man, and in some
cases have even acknowledged the latter's
superiority.
This was the experience of Dr. Kilton
Stewart, an American psychologist who
has given us a delightful account of it
in his book, Pygmies and Dream Giants
(New York, 1954). He had set off for
the interior of the Philippines to study
the mental make-up of the extremely
primitive pygmy tribes called Negritos.
His methods closely resembled those of
psychoanalysis. The witch-doctors not
only allowed him to do as he wished,
but immediately accepted him as one of
them; in fact, regarding themselves as
specialists with a thorough knowledge
of the techniques employed, they
insisted on helping him in his studies.
Dr. Stewart considers that in certain
respects their psychotherapy is even
ahead of ours.
I have already mentioned that the
treatment administered by the shaman is
given in public. Thus, all the members
of the community gradually acquire the
belief that any disorders from which
they themselves may eventually suffer
can be treated by the same methods they
have so often seen used. Furthermore,
since they know all the stages of the
treatment in advance, they are all ready
and willing to take part in it punctuating
it with words of encouragement, helping
the patient to marshal his memories, and
displaying an infectious enthusiasm as
the patient recovers from his disorder.
Negrito therapists
probe into the past
As Dr. Stewart observes in this
connexion, this takes, us beyond
psychoanalysis to one of its most
recent developments, namely, group
psychotherapy. One of its most familiar
forms is the psychodrama in which sever¬
al members of the group impersonate
the characters in the patient's myth in
order to assist him to see them more
clearly and thus bring the tragedy to an
end. This is possible only if the patient's
myth. itself is social in character. Other
individuals can play a part in it because
it is their own myth too, or to put it
another way, because the critical situa¬
tions in which individuals are liable to
find themselves in our society are broad¬
ly speaking, the same for all.
We thus see how deceptive it is to
think that the forgotten events which
psychoanalysis helps the patient to bring
back to mind, are something private and
personal. Even that difference between
psychoanalysis and shamanistic treat¬
ment, thus disappears.
"As in Paris and in Vienna", writes
Dr. Stewart, "the Negrito therapists were
helping the patient to contact patterns
, and incidents from a long-forgotten past,
painful incidents buried deep in the
early time layers of the accumulated
experience which made up the per¬
sonality."
Turn mental disorder
into creative talent
In one respect, at least, the primitive
system seems to be more daring and
more efficacious than our own. Dr.
Stewart describes an experience which
he might have had anywhere in the
world, among any of the peoples we like
to call primitives. When he was about to
rouse a patient from the waking dream
in which he was giving a haphazard
account of incidents in his past life
conflict with his father transposed into
the myth-form of a visit to the country
of the dead his Negrito colleagues
stopped him. To be definitely cured,
they said, the spirit of the sickness must
bestow a gift on its victim in the form
of a new drum beat, a dance or a
song. According to tribal theory, it is
not enough to remove the social infe¬
riority attributable to the illness: it must
be transformed into a positive advan¬
tage, a social superiority comparable with
that which we see in the creative artist.
This connexion between an abnormal
psychological balance and creative art
is not of course unknown in our
own theories. We have treated many
geniuses, such as Gérard de Nerval, Van
Gogh and others, as psychotics. At best,
we are sometimes prepared to pardon
certain follies because they are commit¬
ted by great artists. But even the poor
Negritos in the jungles of Bataan are
far ahead of us in this respect, for
they have realized that one means of
remedying a mental disorder, harmful
both to the individual suffering from it
and to the community which needs the
healthy co-operation of all, is to trans¬
form it into a work of art. This is a
method seldom used among us, though
it is to it that we owe the work of such
artists as Utrillo.
We have much to learn, therefore,
from primitive psychiatry. Still in
advance of our own psychiatry in many
respects, how far ahead it must have
been not so long ago (traditions die so
hard with us) when we knew no other
means of treating mental patients than
to put then in chains and starve them .
