A warning against
THE MEDITERRANEAN BASIN.
DEODORIZED
HISTORY
by D. W. Brogan
In the second week of January, 1956, the Historical
Association of Great Britain celebrated its fiftieth
anniversary. It celebrated it in two ways, by discuss¬
ing problems of research, teaching and what the French
call "vulgarisation" and by discussing the impact of history,
that is, of historical teaching and writing on society.
That in turn led to a discussion of the always topical,
always important question of the
treatment of history in schools; its
dangers and its possibilities.
The problem can be briefly stated. P\ F\ j\ P\ P|
One phenomenon of the nineteenth ~~_
and twentieth centuries has been the
rise of nationalism. The immense
growth of nationalist feeling and
spread of nationalist doctrine may
not have been the sole cause of the
great wars from which the world is
still suffering, but nationalism is
certainly one of the causes; its growth
one of the present dangers. It is
also a fact that nationalism, however
deep an emotion, however legitimate
a doctrine, has been aided in its
progress (if that is the word) by the
concurrent spread of general literacy,
by the creation of systems of educa¬
tion which had for one of their
primary objects, the teaching of a
national version of history, either of
the history of a nation or of the
history of the world.
So remote and
so innocuous
DISAPPEARING ACT.
Until recently, indeed, until after
the first world war, the idea
that there could be any other kind of history
teaching in schools would have seemed scandalous. The
object of history teaching was just to provide a factual
basis for nationalist feeling, to give to the boys and girls
brought into the state school system a body of organized
knowledge of the past of their nation and of its relations
with the outside world, not a vague, neutral, merely
academic body of knowledge, but a concrete "useful"
nationalist view of the nation and the world.
All educational systems aimed at this ; all achieved a
20
CHARLES MARTEL.
great deal of success in their aim. It would not be too
much to say that, before 1914, if it had been found that
French and German boys had been given the same picture
of a Franco-German controversy, it would have been felt,
on both sides of the Rhine, that the teachers had failed
miserably in their manifest duty. The object of history-
teaching was not to teach neutral views but to reinforce
natural, i.e. national, feeling.
Of course, some of this nationalist
teaching was remote and so inno¬
cuous. At school in Scotland during
the first war, I was taught a great
deal about the wickedness of King
Edward I of England and about the
absurdity of his claims to be overlord
of Scotland. But King Edward I died
in 1307 and such teaching did not
seriously distort the mind, although
it may have wasted school time. It
was very different when German
schoolboys were told more than once
of the burning of the castle of Hei¬
delberg by the French, and French
schoolboys of the burning of the
castle of Saint-Cloud by the Germans.
'Burning' questions
of the war of 1812
These were, if not recent events,
living in artificially fostered me¬
mories. An American schoolboy,
told of the burning of the White
House, but not of the burning of the
parliament building of Upper Canada
in what is now Toronto, was likely to
be at cross purposes with a Canadian
who had received a different version
of the war of 1812. (An English schoolboy would be under
another disadvantage ; he would not know of either.)
It would be easy to multiply examples of such artificially
fostered historical memories and historial disputes. Some¬
times, the disputes were not entirely artificial. If there
was a certain amount of historical bickering between
the scholars of the Netherlands and of Belgium
after the first war, there was also a genuine controversy
over the regime of the Scheldt.
But, for the most part, historical argument was

Tbç Unesco Courier. March 1956
directed to backing up not only a specific national
position, but a general national position, too often to
stiffening the national morale against a permanent and
dangerous enemy. (It is not often noticed that the nation¬
alist preoccupation with "teaching the young how to
shoot" was an unconscious tribute to the natural good
sense and good temper of the young. It was felt, as it is
sung in the musical comedy South Pacific, "'they've got
to be taught").
If only the books
had been switched
It would be wrong to say that there had been no
improvement in history teaching or history textbooks
before 1914. True, it often took the form of finding
better scholarly reasons for telling the old story, but the
very idea that scholarship had
claims and usefulness in such a task
was, on the whole, a gain. But
some of the gain was superficial. If
French textbooks were less nation¬
alist, that was part of an internal
change in French politics, not
necessarily a gain for pure scholar¬
ship. If the official northern legend
of the origins and conduct of the
American Civil War was contra¬
dicted and, to some degree exploded
by southern historians and that
revision given currency in southern
textbooks, that was only a tactical
gain if the northern pupils still read
only the northern version, the
southern pupils only the southern.
If nations or sections could have simply changed text¬
books, that would have been different and better. As it
was the boast that "nous avons changé tout cela" was
empty. The details might have been altered but the
spirit was the same. History was a weapon, not a tool.
The ideas are commonplaces today, but we must remember
that they have only recently become commonplaces and
that they are far from being commonplaces universally
accepted in many parts of the world, especially in the
new school systems of the nations that have recently
come to independent status. It is, therefore, worthwhile
repeating that to think of history, not as a tool for the
understanding of our human situation, but as a weapon
to be forged for a war that, hot or cold, it is assumed
will always go on, is to risk creating a public opinion like
that of Europe in 1914 and, to some extent, in 1939.
The most simple solution to the problem and one that
has some merits is to secure that the common textbooks
NAPOLEON OUTSIDE MOSCOW,
in school use are not only written in
a spirit of objective scholarship, but
that they are controlled by an out¬
side body of scholars. This, in prac¬
tice, means that the textbooks of
nations which are supposed to have
a hereditary enemy, are to be revised
in the light of criticisms made by
scholars and educationists of the he¬
reditary enemy who, in turn, submit
the textbooks of their nation, to si¬
milar criticism.
As far as this goes, it is probably
useful. But not only does it not go -
far enough; it may be dangerous in damocles.
a way that is neglected. Ths first
danger of not going far enough, I
shall deal with later. The second
. o < calls for brief comment. If the
main fault of textbooks is harping
on old national controversies, giving
the idea that international relations
consists of war and the material and
spiritual preparation for war, it is
not enough to take up a series of
problems (for example the origins of
the war of 1870) and try to get
agreement on the question.
First of all, it may not be possible
to get agreement on the solution of
the problem. There may, Indeed,
be no solution at all.
We may never know what Bis¬
marck had in mind in 1870, as apart from what he said
he had in mind in 1890 and after. Frenchmen may natu¬
rally be less ready to give him the benefit of the doubt
than Germans or may be more so If they detest Napo¬
leon III more than they do Bismarck!
Winding up with
dull, dry history
But much more serious is the implication that, if you
clear up these controversies, you have got very far.
For this, in turn, may lead to dull history, to a neu¬
tral least-common-denominator history that is hardly
worth teaching and it may, which is more serious, rein¬
force the view that history is conflict, controversy, that,
indeed, there is much to be said on both sides, but that all
that matters is the result. That can lead inno¬
cently to worship of what William James called
"the bitch Goddess success". The old, pugna¬
cious, partisan history is no worse than that.
(Cont'd
on next
page)
21

Deodorizing history
(Continued)
But the danger of not going far enough is greater.
Many, perhaps most of the most fruitful problems of his¬
tory are not problems of national conflict at all. They
may be success stories or stories of great efforts that, as
far as we can see, failed. But they are not national suc¬
cess stories or national failures either.
How much ink and temper has been
wasted in discussing whether Charle¬
magne was a Frenchman or a Ger¬
man, a question he could not have
understood had it been put to him in
the manner of a modern question¬
naire! How much more fruitful is a
discussion of the reasons for the
limited success of Charlemagne's
great experiment, how much more
fruitful the pursuit of understanding
than either the scoring of nationalist
points or laborious explanations of
national misunderstandings.
Wholesome but
just not good
If we want good history textbooks
and we should (it is one of our
greatest needs) let us think of
them positively. One of the greatest
problems of world society is created
by the belief, common in Asia and
Africa, that the West cares nothing
for their sentiments. How much
more useful than rewriting the story
of English rule in India in an
apologetic fashion would it be for
English school textbooks to ignore the
short period of English rule and
make India before the European in¬
vasions an historical theme of the first magnitude.
The deodorized history of some propagandists has one
weakness, it may have no faults but it has few merits. It
is boring and the young cannot learn if they are bored.
We must have legends. Why not change legends? Don't
tell the Swiss children
about William Tell, let
them learn about the Cid
or the Forty-Seven Ro-
nin. It will be less bor¬
ing. (Even I got tir¬
ed of the wickedness of
Edward I and the hero¬
ism of Wallace, the
fourth or fifth time I
was told about it.)
Anything is better
than indifférence to the
variety, dignity, interest
of the stories of other
peoples.
Let the French hear
BECOMING A KNIGHT.
MACHIAVELLI AND FRIEND.
about Florence Nightingale, the North Americans about
Bolivar or even of the Russian pioneers in Siberia. For
I harbour, and have always harboured, a dangerous
thought about some of the most touted reforms of nation¬
alist history teaching.
The textbooks that well-meaning reformers would like
to produce have one great weakness; they would be
unreadable. As the bogus prize poem said of Nebuchad¬
nezzar:
Sighed as he chewed the unaccustomed food,
It may be wholesome out it is not
good.
The beginning of wisdom will be
when we take to our hearts the
heroes of other people, not when
we write off heroism.
And there is one further advantage
in emphasizing the positive.
Make sure Marc
Antony was wrong
Heroes and heroic deeds last;
fortunately hereditary enemies
don't. If you spend your time
removing awkward passages from
narratives of past controversies, you
may find yourself without an au¬
dience; the young may not care.
Your work will be innocent
but useless. Fortunately it is not
true that:
The evil that men do lives after
them,
The good is oft interred with their
bones.
It is our job to make sure that
Mark Antony was wrong.
CAESAR AND CLEOPATRA.
IT ALL STARTED WITH EUROPA The drawings published
on pages 20 to 23 were made by Campbell Grant and are repro¬
duced from a wild and humorous romp through European
history written by Richard Armour with the title "It All Started
with Europa". The book dedicated to "history students and
history teachers who for generations have made each other
equally unhappy," deliberately sets out to present a humorously
unreliable account of European history, misremembering and
dismembering almost everything, from cavemen to 20th century
dictators. No historical era is omitted, no fact accurately pres¬
ented. In his unabashed distortions, the author acknowledges
that he has "made no use whatever of the works of Thucyd-
ides, Tacitus, Gibbon, and Arnold J. Toynbee," and cautions
that any resemblance between his book and the work of
any other historian, living or dead, "is highly unlikely."
DRAWINGS BY CAMPBELL GRANT FROM "IT ALL STARTED WITH
EUROPA," BY RICHARD ARMOUR, PUBLISHED BY McGRAW-HILL
BOOK CO., INC. COPYRIGHT I9S5 BY RICHARD ARMOUR.
22

The Unesco Couric'r. March 1956
CHARLES DARWIN AND A LOWER ANIMAL
23
