European explorers who opened up Americas in 1 6th century found that Indians were skilled metal workers, having used gold to make
ornaments and to decorate religious objects and weapons for some 2,000 years. First engravings depicting exploitation of gold in New
World appeared in 1590. They were published by Theodorus de Bry, German engraver and publisher. De Bry visited London, where he met

Pre-Columbian
America
Civilizations
of gold
and copper
by Paul Rivet
It is sometimes said that when
America was discovered, the
people were still living in the
Neolithic or polished stone age. This
is only partially true, for many of the
native peoples Were in fact familiar
with the use of metals, though the
regions in which metals were known
did not form a single group.
Among the different divisions into
which they can be placed, the first
was North America. The Indians liv¬
ing there used copper from the Great
Lakes area and possibly also from
Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee,
Connecticut, New Jersey, Arizona,
New Mexico, Nova Scotia and even
Mexico and Cuba. This copper was
cold-hammered and, sometimes, re¬
heated and then hammered again.
The second large area of metal
working covered the whole of Central
Professor Paul Rivet, former Director ol the
Musée de l'Homme, Paris, has devoted more than
hall a century to the study of the ancient peoples
of the Americas and the Indian civilizations of
today. His many works include Recherches
Anthropologiques sur la Basse-Californie, Ethno¬
graphie Ancienne de l'Equateur and L'Orfèvrerie
Précolombienne. He is President oj the French
iXational Commission for Unesco.
America, Colombia, the West Indies
and the southern tip of Florida, the
Guianas, Venezuela and, in general,
all the land north of the Amazon and
all the territories constituting the old
Inca Empire. This region was not a
single unit but a complex group of
different components.
Gold and copper were generally
used throughout the area, so that,
from what we know today, it is im¬
possible to say where these metals
were first discovered and how the
idea of using them spread throughout
the region. There may well have
been two centres of discovery, one in
Peru and the other in the hinterland
of the Guianas. Gold was undoubted¬
ly used before copper, since it makes
its appearance on the Peruvian coast
in early Nazca times (dated by the use
of the carbon 14 radio-isotope as
2,211±200 years ago), and in the
northern Cordillera of Peru at the
beginning of the roughly contempor¬
ary Chavin civilization, while copper,
which was unknown in Proto-Nazca
and Chavin times, was not introduced
into Peruvian metallurgy until the
advent of the Tiahuanaco civilization

The Unesco Courier
famous geographer Richard Hakluyt with whose assistance he collected material for finely illustrated collection of voyages and travels, Coltec-
tiones Peregrinationum in ¡ndiam Orientalium et Indiam Occidentalium. Two of de Bry's engravings, above, show: Left, party of Dutchmen landing
on Caribbean island, probably Curaçao. Right, caravan of gold-laden llamas (the "camels ' of the Incas) crossing Andes under Spanish guard.
about the fourth century of our era.
Throughout the north-eastern area
(the West Indies, Florida, the Guianas,
Venezuela and the territories north of
the Amazon), in Colombia, in the
northern and maritime provinces of
Ecuador, and on the Peruvian coast,
copper was only rarely used for mak¬
ing tools and did not appear on a
large scale except in combination with
native gold, while in the specifically
Inca area it was principally used,
either in the pure state or alloyed
with tin, for utilitarian purposes.
The working of gold and a gold-
copper alloy known as tumbaga was
most highly developed in Colombia,
the Isthmus of Panama and Costa
Rica. There are good reasons for
believing, however, that tumbaga was
discovered not in Colombia but much
further east, in the hinterland of the
Guianas, among the Arawak and
Carib tribes of the region, who called
it guanin and karakoli respectively.
These tribes, or one of them, must
have introduced the alloy into the
West Indies, Florida, and Colombia.
The Colombian goldsmiths develop¬
ed many new techniques, including a
special colouring process, used on
alloys of copper and gold to imitate
gilding, gold plating, autogenous
welding, soldering, and casting by the
waste wax process. These improved
methods of metal working spread
northwards through the Isthmus of
Panama to Costa Rica and southwards
to the northern part of the inter-
Andean valley and the coastal pro¬
vinces of Ecuador and Peru. On the
Peruvian seaboard, tumbaga appears
in the Early Chimu period (2,823 ±500
years ago) autogenous welding and
soldering in the Middle Chimu period,
and the special metal colouring pro¬
cess in the Late Chimu period
(1,838±190 years ago).
The Incas did not master the prin¬
ciples of tumbaga working until after
their conquest of the coastal regions,
which, according to Philip Ainsworth
Means, took place in the first half of
the fourteenth century in the south
and in the second half of the fifteenth
century in the north.
Silver working was developed, in
the main, on the Peruvian seaboard,
where it first appeared in the Para¬
cas period (2,257 ±200 years ago).
Thence it was introduced into the
high mountain regions, and reached
Ecuador during the Inca conquest.
The use of bronze was certainly
discovered in the high mountain re¬
gions of Peru and Bolivia. The alloy
of copper and tin was unknown on
the Peruvian coast until the Late
Chimu period. There is no doubt
that it was' chiefly due to the Incas
that the use of bronze spread through
all the provinces in their Empire, and
with it spread the knowledge of
metallurgy acquired from the Peru¬
vian coastal population (the use of
tumbaga, derived from Colombia, and
the use of silver, developed locally).
The Inca Empire, as it existed at the
time of the discovery of the Americas,
was thus a clearly defined metallur¬
gical region, in which the contribu¬
tions of Colombia, the high mountain
regions of Peru and Bolivia, and the
Peruvian seaboard were combined.
The use of lead was introduced into
Peruvian metallurgy at a very late
stage, in Inca times, but
we do not know whether
it first appeared on the
the coast or in the moun-
(Cont'd on
next page)
23

Pre-Columbian
America (com-d)
tain area. It is even possible that it
was first used in Mexico and then
spread to Peru, by way of the sea
communications between these two
countries.
In time, the expanding sphere of
influence of the Colombian peoples
overlapped with that of the Incas, so
that in certain areas the two combin¬
ed; in this way mixed industries,
showing some of the characteristics
found in both the zones already des¬
cribed, grew up in Ecuador and on
the coast of Peru. While bronze,
silver and its alloys, and lead were
entirely unknown in Colombia, and
while the craftsmen in the high
mountain areas of Peru and Bolivia
were unfamiliar with tumbaga and
the characteristic techniques associat¬
ed -with that alloy, all these metals
and alloys were used in Ecuador and.
on the Peruvian seaboard.
Once this is established, a compari¬
son of the metallurgy of the Peruvian
coast and that of Mexico reveals
extraordinary similarities, not to say
complete identity, between them. It
is clear, moreover, that at the time of
the discovery metals were still not
employed on a large scale in Mexico,
and we know that their use was a
recent innovation. At Monte Alban,
metals do not appear until about the
eleventh century, and then only in
small quantities. On the other hand,
despite the lack of roots in the past,
the period at Monte Alban, corres¬
ponding to the beginning of the
sixteenth century, shows evidence of
the use of remarkably complex me-
Courtesy Société des Americanistes, Paris
HUMAN BELLOWS. When Sir Walter Raleigh, the English navigator and explorer, reached
Guiana in I 595 at the head of an expedition In search of the fabled city of El Dorado, he was the
first white man to see the Indians making a gold-coppe- alloy. "The Indians", he wrote "used a
great earthen potte with holes round about it and when they had mingled the gold and copper
together they fastened canes to the holes, and so with the breath of men they increased the fire
till the metell ran, and then they cast it Into moulds of stone and clay and so make the plates and
images." Sir Walter described this in his fascinating narrative "The Discoverie of Guiana".
tallurgical techniques and a remark¬
ably wide range of metals.
The fact that the art of metal
working in Mexico has exactly the
same characteristics as on the Peru¬
vian seaboard and that, though
Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
EMPEROR'S RANSOM. Atahualpa, last of the Inca Emperors, was taken prisoner by the
Spaniards who offered to release him if he would fill his prison with gold (22 feet by I 6) "to the
height of a man with his arms upraised." In this engraving by Theodorus de Bry, the Inca people
are seen here bringing gold ornaments and vessels with which to pay their emperor's ransom.
comparatively new and by no means
widespread, it shows a remarkable
perfection and variety in technique,
for which there is no evidence of
gradual local development, strongly
suggests that the metal working in¬
dustry was introduced into Mexico as
a fully developed craft equipped with
all the necessary technical resources,
and that it came from the Peruvian
coast. We now have proof that there
was trade by sea between Peru and
Central America in pre-Columbian
times. The craft used were balsas or
rafts, of which the old writers have
left us descriptions and drawings.
As a last note in this brief sketch
of pre-Columbian metal work, it may
be mentioned that platinum nuggets
were used in a limited area the
northern coastal strip of Ecuador and
the adjacent coastal regions of Co¬
lombia. There is evidence that the
Indians of Esmeraldas could form a
kind of homogeneous mixture of gold
and platinum, although, with the
techniques they used, neither it nor
pure platinum could be melted down.
It is impossible, in such a short
article, to describe all the techniques
used by the Indian craftsmen melt¬
ing down and casting, the metal
colouring process, plating, welding,
wire-drawing, embossing and repoussé
(chasing and work in relief done from
the underside of metal) etc. The
wealth of technical skills they com¬
manded is yet further evidence of the
fertile imagination of the pre-Colum¬
bian Indian, for although R. Heine-
Geldern has attempted to show that
American metallurgy is derived from
that of South Asia, I still believe that
the industry was indigenous and that
no outside influences affected its
development.
24
