
The Unesco Courier
Malinaothe village
of peaceful people
Manuel Rodriguez, a Filipino artist,
with a light touch and a natural gift for
illustrative drawing, portrays "The
Village of Malinao" the village of
peaceful people. His drawing (bottom
of this page) Is a succession of
simple scenes typical of village life
in his country the market place, the
pounding of rice, the flower vendors,
the village huts, the slow-footed cara¬
bao, and the roast pig on the day of
the feast. It has been engraved as a
continuous frieze on the handsome,
1 0-inch diameter decorated bowl (oppo¬
site page). Manuel Rodriguez' work
has a touch of journalism and of hu¬
mour and he is at his best when depict¬
ing the simple life of his own country.
A unique form of co-operation between artists
of the East and craftsmen of the West .has
produced a remarkable collection of works
of art in engraved crystal. Asian artists prepared the
drawings; American designers captured the mood of the
drawings in the crystal forms, and American draftsmen
interpreted the drawing in engraving the crystal.
In all, 36 pieces were prepared and executed by an Am¬
erican producer of fine crystal (1) which conceived the
collection as a contribution to the art of glass. "Asian
Artists in Crystal" has been on exhibition in the National
Gallery of Art, Washington, and the Metropolitan Museum
of Art, New York, this year. Now it is touring the coun¬
tries in the Far and Near East, from which the drawings
were obtained, under U.S. Government sponsorship.
In 1954 and 1955, Karl Kup, Curator of Prints and of
the Spencer Collection at the New York Public Library,
visited 16 countries to seek out and work with artists
whose style and manner would lend themselves to glass
engraving. Writing of the Asian artists he says: "Their
paintings, their drawings and their sculpture quite natu¬
rally follow established cycles of subject matter : their
manner of rendering is indigenous, almost intuitive. In
Korea, symbolism still attracts contemporary painters ;
(1) Steuben Glass Inc., New York.
in China mood, thought and poetry are more important
than subject matter; in the Philippines there are traces
of Western influence; in Viet-Nam and Indonesia, a strong
leaning toward colourful themes of folklore. The themes
of Angkor Wat, the textile patterns of Central Java and
the Festival of Hindu Bali: all these I found in drawings
of contemporary men and women of Southeast Asia.
"Later, as I proceeded toward Thailand, Burma, India
and Ceylon, I found religion, Buddhist and Hindu, to be
the mainspring of inspiration. There were exceptions, of
course. In Pakistan, Turkey and Egypt one sensed the
artists' nearness to Western conceptions and expressions."
The merit of the original drawing lies with the indivi¬
dual artist, but the masterful craftsmanship of the glass
blower and the glass engraver must be apparent if uni¬
formity of excellence is to be attained. A successful colla¬
boration would be impossible without the guiding hand
and spirit of the glass designer who interprets the artist's
drawing and designs the glass form which will result in
a lovely and integrated whole. In this collection the
designers have tried to capture the mood of the original
drawing and to evoke religious, racial and geographic
influences.
On the following pages The Unesco Courier presents
some of the outstanding works of "Asian Artists in Crys¬
tal". (All photos courtesy Steuben Glass Inc.)

ASIAN ARTISTS (Continuée/;
The floating
village
In Viet-Nam, a heavily
populated land studded
with rivers and rivulets,
generations of families
are born, raised and die
on the covered sampans, /
or dinhs anchored like «
floating villages off the
stilted wooden walks to some fertile shore. In the boats, ingenious
builders have incorporated rooms for the ancestral shrine, for the
family elders, for the kitchen. Nguyen-van-Long, designer of "The
Floating Village" which has been engraved on a crystal vase, is a
drawing teacher at a Saigon Fine Arts School. He is an admirer of
the French impressionists whose style has influenced his own work.
Nang Fa, Siamese angel
Bhima, an uncouth warrior and powerful
magician, is a hero from the Indonesian shadow
plays in which flat, cowhide puppets act tales
from the great Hindu epics, the Ramayana and
the Mahabharata. In the adventures of Bhima,
a tale of feud between two princely houses,
the strength of the righteous and their ulti¬
mate victory is so great that rivers stand still,
the sun pales and mountains tremble. Here
is Bhima's epic battle with a deadly snake.
Raden Basoeki Abdullah, the artist, (Raden
means "prince") though inspired by such
Western painters as Rembrandt and Ve¬
lasquez, also draws richly on the folk-
. lore and imagination of both Java and Bali.

The Unesco Courier

ASIAN ARTISTS (Continue^
Aft*.*«
L->
$
l*1^
¥?
~i
The fabulous unicorn
Fabulous beast of great strength, the unicorn made its
first pictorial appearance into the world in the ancient
civilization of the Indus Valley, in the Pakistan of today.
Sheikh Ahmed, a Pakistani artist and director of art in the
Department of Public Relations of the Government of the
Punjab, chose it as the subject for his contribution to
"Asian Artists in Crystal". He based his drawing on a
seal dating from the third millenium B.C. found in an an¬
cient Indus Valley city. Sheikh Ahmed, a trained automobile
and aircraft engineer, gave up a technical career for art.
Sniffing the breezes
"Sniffing the breezes" or Shemm-en-neseem, is an age-old
custom in Egypt on the first day of Khamaseen in the Spring
when the air is balmy and fragrant. People ride or walk
to the country to take the air, and Spring, a beautiful time
on the banks of the Nile, is the time for lovers. Hamed
Abdalla, one of Egypt's most modern painters, whose draw¬
ing has been engraved on rectangular crystal blocks,
9 l/2-inches high, is self taught. He says: "like the orien¬
tal and folkloristic artist and unlike the occidental, I paint
nature as I see it with my mind, not as it 'looks' to the eye."
r*%
?y?{MK x
risaä

The Unesco Courier
Balinese funeral
a joyous occasion
Balinese funerals are occasions for joy rather than sorrow. The
soul travels to Indra's heaven where life is as beautiful as in Bali,
as the saying goes, but without illness and without worry. So there
is reason to celebrate. Food is prepared, palm leaf offerings made,
and the funeral tower holding the body is decorated with the fan¬
ciest of coloured papers. Young men vie with one another to carry
the burden and as the flame touches the body, the orchestra strikes
a jubilant tune. Made Djate, a Balinese artist, has conveyed the
spirit of joyfulness in his drawing now engraved on a 19-inch high
vase with ornamental cover. Quite early in life Made Djate became
an apprentice in the art of making Wayang puppets for the tradi¬
tional shadow plays of Indonesia. (See "The Unesco Courier",
3-4, I 955; U.S. June). Today he draws from the daily life of Bali.

ASIAN ARTISTS (Continued)
Zl It
Tray of delights
Fruit, cakes and other delights are heaped around the elaborate
and indispensable coffee urn in "The Turkish Tray", a humorous,
semi-abstract rendition of a Turkish folk art motif. Now gracing
an elliptical form with ornamental stopper, it was engraved from
a drawing by versatile Turkish artist, Bedri Rahmi Eyuboglu, who
is professor at the Academy of Fine Arts in Istanbul. Bedri Rahmi,
as he calls himself, works in his studio over designs for textiles,
murals, ceramicsand in his spare time paints to his heart's content.
With his wife, Eren, an accomplished painter in her own right,
and others, he founded the "New Group" of Turkish painters.
Burmese royalty
Traditionally an object of veneration and a symbol of strength and
royalty, the elephant of Burma is an ancient theme for Burmese
designers and illustrators. In U Ohn Lwin's drawing for a covered
urn with ornamental finial, a member of the royal family of Burma
is seen riding a handsomely caparisoned elephant under an umbrella
held by a servant, while the oozie or driver sits in front. U Ohn
Lwin who studied art by himself, believes that water colour is the
truest Burmese style of art expression. No experimenter with
what the West calls "modern" art, he prefers tradition, to
record the life of his people and to be understood by them.
10

The Unesco Courier
The lone bamboo
"To learn to draw a bamboo, take a branch and cast its shadow on
a white wall on a moonlight night", wrote Küo Hai, the Chinese
landscape painter, almost a thousand years ago. Here, Ma Shou-
Hua, a distinguished Chinese administrator who turned to painting
for recreation and self-expression, has made a poetic interpretation
of the ancient Chinese theme, "The Lone Bamboo in All Its Grace¬
fulness". The bamboo is this artist's favourite subject. He has
observed its gracefulness in rain and shine, in wind and calm. He
has painted bamboo in groups and in groves; as a single tree, a
branch, a leaf. His works have been seen all over the world.
The eternal Eve
The design for "Eve", says the Egyptian artist, AI Hussein Fawzi,
springs from an ancient legend in which the eternal Eve pierces
with an arrow the heart of her beloved, flying above in the guise
of a hawk. In his illustration of this tragic tale, the delicately
modelled form of the woman, bow in hand, sits brooding beside
her victim in the light of the setting sun. Above, a flock of hawks
wings its way into the dusk. After graduation from the Cairo
Academy of Fine Arts and studies in Paris, AI Hussein Fawzi return¬
ed to Egypt in 1932 to become instructor of engraving at the Aca¬
demy of Fine Arts. His work is best known for its illustrative quality.

ASIAN ARTISTS (Continued)
Visvantara the unselfish-
The unselfishness of the Bodhisattva Visvantara in giving away his
wife is described in one of the Jataka stories, a series of charming
folk tales of the Buddha's deeds of charity and benevolence to all
creatures in his previous existences. (See "The Unesco Courier",
"Twenty-five centuries of Buddhist Art and Culture", June 1956;
U.S., August). Here, it is depicted by one of Asia's great artists,
George Keyt, a Sinhalese painter, poet and translator of his country's
classical literature. His murals on the life of Buddha in the Gotami
Vihara Temple near Colombo have been called "perhaps the
most outstanding contemporary expressions of Sinhalese painting."
Bodhisattva: a future Buddha
Engraved upon a crystal stele, this Bodhisattva is as graceful and
slender as its bronze prototype which was cast in the seventh century
and is still standing in the Horyuji Temple in Nara, Japan. The
Bodhisattva, a future Buddha on his way to enlightenment, has been
subtly drawn by Kiyoshi Saito, Japan's foremost contemporary
printmaker, who has emphasized the mysticism and gentleness of
the holy man's' meditation. Saito wandered among the temples of
Nara, sketching and drawing and then transposed his drawing of the
Bodhisattva upon wood, cut the block and pulled the print. He
used the grain of the wood to suggest the statue's age and fragility
1
12

The Unesco Courier
Gopis in the grove
Jamini Roy of India is a master in the realm of Asian art who,
since I 921, has devoted himself to the study of Hindu thought
and Bengal folk art. Here, he has illustrated one of the
stories of the Hindu god Krishna. The playful and capricious
Krishna had promised to dance with the gopis (milkmaids) of
Vrindavana, but on the night of the festival Krishna was
not to be found and though the gopis searched everywhere
the promised meeting was never fulfilled. (Jamini Roy has
given two works to the United Nations Children's Fund to
reproduce this year on its greetings cards. See page 32)
Fleet-footed gazelles
Running gazelles, woven into a continuous band of design,
form the motif chosen by Alfred Baccache of Syria for engrav¬
ing on crystal. His theme is one that is familiar to travellers
on the more remote highways of Syria who may sometimes
glimpse herds of the small, fleet animals. Here, flowing,
horizontal lines convey the fugitive grace of the animals in
flight. The charm of "Gazelles" is enhanced by its simplicity.
Although Alfred Baccache had no formal training in
the fine arts, he took to painting and sculpture so successfully
that he quickly made a name for himself in many countries.
13

ASIAN ARTISTS (Continued)
JlM
A.,:;Mî?s. - .*^j \
(
m^Srá ' n*à\LmW
Jfluiâï» a1-1*1*-111- |:"' KlBl
l^v*? ' 3Eî.f-?A -v ' ^"»^M
fr > ' < ~&IS>V&¿' $.- : :<m *
**vln*^j§]0fità*> *'-ÀL.%^&\h
riitijor^. j^ffb^jnl
W ! f^- #h fM
W?GPm^-£v$i&ïï\im\\
wÈWWiî* A^mU''HÍU'M
^,#r:,,-**v -ÜpÜlta
Festival of Krishna and Radha
On festival days pilgrims from all parts of India flock to Matura
on the Jumna River, birthplace of the Hindu god Krishna
and scene of many stories about him and his beloved Radha.
Here, where the melody of the young Krishna's flute, plaintive
and tantalizing, was once heard across the fields, the people
honour him with dances, performances and processions.
This joyful occasion has been depicted by Rama Maharana,
who belongs to the caste of traditional painters of temple
murals. This artist, who lives near the sacred Indian city
of Puri, paints on canvas of hand-loomed sari cloth,
impregnated with tamarind seed paste and surfaced with chalk.
Harana in Manila
Anyone having a sweetheart in Manila may "harana", that is,
serenade the lady of his choice. Accompanied by a band of
musicians and an enthusiastic host of friends and accomplices,
the young man leads the serenade just as the sun is falling
into Manila Bay. The gay, romantic scene, drawn by Arturo
Rogerio Luz, a young Filipino artist, in a simple, semi-abstract,
angular style, has been engraved on a dome-shaped, I 1-inch
high stele. Arturo Luz says of his painting: "It is my desire
to combine the oriental and occidental elements that make
up the life around me, to find what makes that life unique,
and then to express it simply, in paint, line or watercolour."
14
