The unwanted travellers
The march of civilization, with ever
*- faster travel by ships and
aircraft, has also helped the disease-
carrying insects to colonize new ter¬
ritories and launch fresh epidemics.
To stamp out the intruders often
takes years of tedious struggle.
npHERE is one kind of aircraft pas-
senger, which does not appear in
the passenger lists and often escapes
the sanitary control authorities.
These are insects which may lodge
in the cabin of the aircraft or in the
luggage hold or be taken in on the
clothes of passengers or even on
flowers which may be presented to
them. Most often they are mosqui¬
toes, flies, fleas, lice, sometimes ticks,
beetles, cockroaches, Colorado beetles,
and still others whose presence is
always disagreeable but may also be
dangerous for man, livestock and
agriculture.
np he behaviour of insects in aircraft
in flight has been closely observ¬
ed. Altitude, changes in air pressure
and temperature during long flights
do not permanently affect the insects.
They live in aircraft for as long as
they can exist without nourishment;
that is, of course, if they cannot find
what they need in the aircraft itself.
Certain insects have been known to
lay their eggs on the outside of
aircraft on the wings, the fuselage,
the rudder and even on the propellers!
These eggs were found to be still
there at the end of the journey:
neither the wind nor the altitude nor
yet changes in temperature had
affected their capacity for survival.
On one single plane thousands of
larvae emerged from the eggs and
swarmed over the surface of the air¬
craft. Strict surveillance of aircraft
and airports is absolutely essential.
Tr was undoubtedly on board a fast
boat that the malaria-carrying
mosquito, Anopheles gambiae, cross¬
ed from West Africa to Brazil in 1930.
This mosquito is particularly danger¬
ous since it is essentially "domestic",
prefers biting human beings, and
breeds easily near human habitations.
In 1931, a campaign was organized at
Natal (Brazil), which was the point
of entry of Anopheles gambiae, and !
as a result the mosquito was cleared
from that port. However, it found
terrain favourable to its development
in the interior of the states of Rio
Grande do Norte and of Cesra. The
ASIA'S FIRST
PENICILLIN FACTORY
Penicillin, a vital arm In the battles against
disease and epidemics, is still missing or is in
short supply on many of the fronts where the
world war for health is being waged. Peni¬
cillin production, however, is now being in¬
creased through aid given by the U.N., the
World Health Organization (WHO) and the
U.N. Children's Fund (UNICEF). Asia's first
penicillin factory, set up with help from these
organizations at Pimpri, near Poona, India,
has increased its production to 1,000 pounds
per month, since it began to operate in
March 1955. Thirteen Indians have so far
been trained abroad and have now become
the key staff at the plant. Technical Assistance
funds were used to provide international
result was a murderous epidemic of
malaria lasting up to 1938 when a
special control service was organized
in that region of north-east Brazil.
Thanks to its efficient organization
and abundant resources it was able
to eliminate these mosquitoes from
Brazil in about two years.
A nopheles gambiae inhabits the
whole of tropical Africa and it
periodically invades certain temperate
zones and spreads malaria there. In
1942, for example, probably as a result
of military movements, these mos¬
quitoes invaded Upper Egypt and the
number of cases of malaria in 1942-
1943 was estimated at 140,000. Ener¬
getic extermination measures under¬
taken in 1944 led to the complete
disappearance of the species by
February 1945. Such examples of
eradication of a species of mosquito,
personnel to guide the project, supervise,
the construction and erection and develop
the operating techniques. Above, a locally-
trained technician makes a biological test in
laboratory of potency of the penicillin pro¬
duced. WHO and UNICEF also recently
joined hands with the Government of Yugo¬
slavia in modernizing and expanding the only
penicillin processing plant in this country.
Left, girls bottling penicillin in a sealed,
sterilized glass cabinet at the Zemun plant
near Belgrade, Yugoslavia.
UNATIONS
carried out on a large scale and at
great cost, effectively demonstrate
what may be the consequences of the
accidental introduction of an insect
carrier of disease.
npHE regular deratting of ships, and
the rational use of insecticides on
board ship and aircraft, or for pas¬
sengers and their luggage, have prov¬
ed to be effective in preventing any
epidemic of pestilential disease in the
past 25 years.
This is the aim of the World Health
Organization International Sanitary
Regulations which, on the basis of
up-to-date epidemiological and other
information, lay down the preventive
measures which should be taken,
while at the same time reducing to
the strict minimum any inconve¬
nience or delay caused to interna¬
tional passengers or goods traffic.
32
