II RED U C I N G..
CONFLICTSU IS
TENSIONS ANS
PREJUD ! CE
32
the International Social Science Bulletin, has been a link
between scientists all over the world, providing a forum
for the discussion of important topics.
*
UNESCO has promoted social science teaching and thetraining of experts in all its branches capable of
, studying social problems objectively and providing
public authorities with a sound diagnosis. It has sent
missions to establish, reorganize or develop teaching at
the university level in many countries. Its investigations
have covered the teaching of the social sciences as a
whole, and some of the first reports it obtained, covering
30 countries and published under the title of.'Contempor-
ary Political Science,"constitute the most extensive and
useful directory in this field today.
Instead of attempting to carry out large-scale research
itself, UNESCO has facilitated research at the international
level, and has collected from organizations and individual
research workers information which it has synthesized..'I .. L-. 'I J........'I'I
- WN the social sciences-the sciences concerned withpeuple and their relationships to each other as groups
and individuals-UNESCO has been trying to organize
international co-operation between relatively new
branches of study in which there are not always enough
specialists to cope with the work waiting to be done.
It has given an important place to the social sciences
principally because their development offers one of the
best ways of promoting mutual understanding between
individuals and nations, of counteracting the evils caused
by ignorance and of finding the causes of tensions and
removing them. It has therefore tried to provide the
organizations and the tools needed by these sciences and
to bring them to analyse and find rational solutions for
some urgent modern problems.
*
BECAuSE most of the social sciences are of recent origin
there has been only little international exchange of
information in this field. Until ten years ago, there
and distributed. It has used
the social sciences to analyse
the causes of tensions that
exist between individuals,
groups and nations. In this
way it has been able to help
several Member States : Stud-
ies in India on tensions
existing between different
religious communities ; a re-
search programme on ten-
sions in the new State of
Israel, and an investigation
of tensions among German
and Japanese youth.
*
UNESCO has used the re-
source of the social
sciences in seeking ways
to smooth difficultés en-
countered by the United
Nations and other interna-
tional organizations in the
course of their rapid growth.
It has enlisted the aid of
historians, jurists, political
scientists, sociologists and
other specialists, to investi-
gate, among other questions.
the present effectiveness of
a number of international
co-operation programmes.
was not a single international
organization covering the
activities of sociologists or
psychologists. UNESCO had
therefore to intervene more
directly in this field than in
many others so as to fill the
many gaps that existed in
the ranks of international
associations, in the now of
information on research and
in the standardization of
technical terms.
*
RINCE 1946 UNEsco has beenresponsible for setting
up international profes-
sional organizations in the
following social sciences :
economics, political scien-
ce, sociology, legal science,
scientific psychology and
statistics. To aid collective
efforts of specialists in dif-
ferent disciplines, special
committees for the distri-
bution and exchange of
information have been set
up with UNESCO's aid.
*
Té establishment under
) UNESCO's auspices of the International Social Science
Council in 1953 created a central co-ordinating
mechanism for all branches of social science, parallel to
the International Council of Scientinc Unions, the co-
ordinating body for all branches of pure science.
*
mach year UNESCO supports the work of the professional
asocial science organizations through grants-in-aid
which make possible conferences, symposia and other
meetings and the publication of their results. In their
turn, the organizations co-ordinate research programmes
among their members and stimulate professional associa-
tions in countries where they need strengthening.
*
UNESCO'S Field Science Co-operation Offices in Cairo,
) J New Delhi, Jakarta and Montevideo have pro-
gressively extended their work to the social sciences
and have added specialists in these disciplines to their
staffs. UNESCO set up a special clearing house for in-
formation in Paris to collect documentation on social
science problems and to keep a register of social science
experts throughout the world. To aid research workers it
has published bibliographical directories and bulletins of
abstracts, aided by an International Committee for So-
cial Science Documentation. Its quarterly publication,
In some countries tensions are liable to be created by
industrialization and the shift of populations from rural
areas. UNESCO considers that by using the knowledge and
methods of the social sciences governments can do much
to improve the conditions under which people adjust
themselves to changes brought about by modern science
and techniques of today. It has surveyed situations of
this kind and has reported on the conditions under which
the impact of social and technical changes can be reduc-
ed and tensions minimised. Since 1953, an International
Research Centre concerned with these questions has been
working in Paris under the International Social Science
Council. UNESCO has also investigated social aspects of
land reform, and population and migration problems.
*
r-r-tHE social sciences can be used to promote human! rights. UNESCO has so employed them in relation to
race problems, for race prejudice, with the discrimin-
atory measures which result from it, is one of the main
obstacles to the implementation of human rights. The
pseudo-scientific justifications for racial discrimination
were denounced in the Race Declaration published in 1950
by an international group of sociologists, anthropologists
and geneticists. Since then three series of UNESCO
pamphlets-The Race Question and Modern Science, The
Race Question and Modern Thought, and Race and
Society-have helped to spread rational concepts about
racial equality.

POST-WAR JAPANESE YOUTH and its changing attitudes were studied by Japanese social
scientists aided by Unesco in 1951 in one of a series of studies of national behaviour patterns and
the formation of social attitudes. Results, published in"Without the Chrysanthemum and the
Sword", gave a revealing picture of the outlook and ideas of a generation of young people in whose
country the old order had undergone a complete upheaval. Other Unesco research teams have
studied group tensions poisoning relations between different communities in India and problems
concerning the successful assimilation of the thousands of immigrants in the State of tsrae).
Copyright Magnum
33
The Unesco Courier
