46
Above, scale model of Unesco
Headquarters site, showing
Secretariat Building (top), Con-
ference Building with its con-
certina-like roof and the vast,
paved piazza with an"island"
of grass. Below, architect's
sketch of main building reveals
its supporting concrete co-
lumns. Right, the view of a
structure taken in July 1956.
Modelas and photos R. Szczesnowicz

The Unesco Courier
UNESCO, whose Paris headquarters for the past tenyearns has been a hotel near the Arc de Triomphe,
swill soon have a new permanent home on a seven
and a half acre site near the Eiffel Tower, on the left
bank of the Seine.
Comprising two buildings of striking design in a setting
of gardens, trees and patios, the new headquarters is an
architectural innovation for postwar Paris. The larger
of the two buildings, a seven-storey. Y-shaped struc-
ture, 90 feet high, is for the UNESCO staff. It is support-
ed on"stilts"so that it appears to be suspended in the
air, and its reinforced concrete frame is enclosed by
50, 000 square feet of glass in some 950 windows.
Thanks to the Y form, each of the 600 offices overlooks
Paris. The ceiling of each is sound-proofed and slopes
up gradually until it meets a large window. The building
also houses staff meeting rooms, a medical centre, restau-
rant, cafeteria and bar for delegates and stuff. Three
systems of heating-hot water radiators, radiant heat
and temperature-controlled forced ventilation-will be
used to meet the needs of different areas.
In the basement are five radio and television studios,
workshops, a cinema, central heating equipment, a
telephone switchboard with 100 outside and 1, 300 internal
lines, emergency electricity plant and storerooms. Work-
shops where UNEsco documents and publications are print-
ed cover a total surface of 21, 500 square feet.
Standing in the curve of one arm of the main buiding
is the low trapezoidal structure grouping conference halls
and services. The largest of its main halls seats about
700 people, including members of the public. Each hall
is fitted with the latest equipment for simultaneous
interpretation in the four official languages of UNESCO.
The H. Q. was designed by an international team of
architects-Bernard Zehrfuss of France, Pier Nervi of
Italy and Marcel Breuer of the United States-aided by
an advisory committee of five famous architects : Lucio
Costa (Brazil) ; Walter Gropius (U. S. A.) ; Charles Le Cor-
busier (France) ; Sven Markelius (Sweden) ; and Ernesto
Rogers Italy). Chief Engineer in charge of building
operations on the site is the American engineer and
architect, Eugene H. Callison.
The designers were required to complete,
the vacant half of the semi-circular Place
de Fontenoy laid out by the 18th century °"
architect, Jacques-Ange Gabriel, creator p g
47

New Unesco H. Q.
(Continued)
of the Paris Military College and the
Petit Trianon at Versailles. They were
also restricted to a height of seven
storeys. Working under these limita-
tions, they designed a building in the
form of a Y, whose curved prongs form
three unbroken facade, one of which
completes Gabriel's plan for the Place de
Fontenoy.
For the decoration of the new H. Q.,
UNESCO's Director-General is advised by
a committee of art specialists. So far,
six internationally-known artists have
agreed to execute works. Pablo Picasso,
for example, is to produce a mural
covering 1, 100 square feet in the
Conference Building. A monumental
sculpture for the main piazza will be
made by Henry Moore of Great Britain.
France's Jean Arp will do a bas-relief or
some other decorative work on the outer
wall of the library, Alexander Calder of
the U. S. A. will design a mobile for the
garden, Spain's Joan Miro will execute a
ceramic mural, forty feet by six feet, and
Isamu Noguchi (Japan) will arrange the
decoration of the delegates'patio and a
20th-century garden based on traditional
Japanese gardens. A number of UNESCO's
Member States particularly reputed for
their achievements in interior decorat-
ing have been asked to carry out the
decoration of six committee rooms, the
library and the press room.
Floor surfaces of the two buildings add
up to over seven acres, but only one-
eighth of the total H. Q. site is occupied
by buildings, leaving room for gardens,
patios and parking space for cars. Cost
of construction and equipment being
carried out by firms from six countries
is covered by an interest-free loan from
the French Government.
Ground was broken on the new site
(leased to UNESCO by the French Govern-
ment for 99 years at a symbolic annual
rent of approximately two dollars and
eighty cents) in April 1955 and struc-
tural work on both buildings was com-
pleted in July 1956. The installation of
services and the interior decorating are
due to be finished by the autumn of
1957, when the UNESCO staff will move
to the new H. Q. from its present tem-
porary quarters.
When completed, UNESCO's Head-
quarters will undoubtedly become one of
the show places of Paris,"embodying",
as Dr. Luther Evans, UNESCO's Director-
General, has put it, ;"as far as architec-
tural design can, the inheritance of our
past and the hope of our future."
UNESCO
Above, air view of Unesco H. Q. site and Paris Military College
Below, location in Paris of Unesco site. Woods, indicated by
dots, are Bois de Boulogne (left) and Bois de Vincennes. New
Unesco H. Q. extends axis of three famous Paris landmarks-the
Palais de Chaillot, (not shown it diagram, bottom of page), the
Eiffel Tower and the Military College. Dome rising above Unesco
buildings is the Invalides, where Napoleon was buried in 1840.
48

The Unesco Courier
Model and photo R. Szczesnowicz
MAXIMUM AIR AND UGHTare assured for offices by design
of main Unesco building. Lifts, services and passages are in a
central core ; all offices look out over Paris. Model shows it as
it will appear when completed. At centre is main entrance.
UNESCO
MASSIVE YET GRACEFUL trapezoidal concrete pillar is one
of supports for Conference Building roof. The wooden forms
into which the concrete was poured have left their marks on the
supports-so that they become a planned decorative element.
49
