THE SICILIAN CARRETTO
by Lucio Attinelli
24

Photos Copyright Attinelli
3R
On a return visit to Sicily recently,
after a long absence, I found myself
looking at everything on the island
with a new eye. Things which had
once been so much a part of my
everyday life that I hardly noticed them now
struck me with astonishment.
Among them was a vehicle which in any
other place would hardly attract a second
glance the cart of the peasant farmer. But
in Sicily the farm cart, the carretto, adorned
with beautiful paintings and carved decora¬
tions would make any visitor stand and
stare.
With its brilliant colours and rich carvings
it suggests an object fit for festivities and
religious occasions in the countryside. These
carts however, are used day in day out by the
Sicilian carritteri (carters) for the lowliest
tasks carrying fruit and vegetables, trans¬
porting pottery and building materials and
even manure.
For such humble work the cart has
obviously no need of the rich and very
expensive decorations which embellish it.
Colourful, lively and extraordinarily forceful
in their simplicity the decorations, are the
SYMPHONY IN COLOUR
composed of carvings, paint¬
ings and ornamental designs
covers entire surface of the
"carretto" giving it the appear¬
ance of a vehicle reserved for
ceremonies and processions.
But these festive-looking carts
are used for everyday trans¬
port along the twisting stony
roads of the Sicilian mountains.
expression of a genuine folk art for. which the
cart itself is simply a convenient canvas.
Designed to be pulled by a single horse, the
Sicilian cart differs little in construction from
other carts, apart from its exceptionally large
wheels (about 55 inches in diameter).
The unusual size of the wheels is dictated
by the character of Sicilian roads which twist
and turn along the coastline or. up steep
mountain slopes. Often stony and almost
impracticable, the roads were once the links
between the main towns on the island. Even
today there are paths that only the carretto
can safely take, adapted as it is to any type of
ground by its particularly strong construction.
The carretto consists of the cascia or body,
resting on the fusu or. axle-tree, which is
strong enough to stand up to anything. The
vehicle is easy to manoeuvre and can take any
turning or even swing right round in its own
length. Each cart is unique, made specially
to order according to the needs and tastes of
the purchaser.
The carts are built by a small team of spe¬
cialized craftsmen: the master carradore, who
selects and works the wood; the firraru, or
smith, who makes the metal parts, working
them with real artistry in designs of rabischi
The Unesco Courier
(arabesques) in which an Arab influence is to
be seen; and the master-painter, who decor¬
ates the panels and signs the finished work.
Little is known about the origins of the
carretto or whether it was exactly the same,
in olden times, as it is today. Writers may
deliberately have said nothing about it because
they looked on it as a product of folk art and
of only minor interest.
According to the Sicilian historian, G. Pitre,
however, there is a document at the Univer¬
sity of Palermo, approved by King Frederick II
in 1330, which contains a description of a
carretto of the period which is similar in
many respects to the vehicle of today.
A French traveller, Elisée Reclus, writing
an account of Sicily in 1865, referred to the
carretto and said it might almost be regarded
as a work of art, when compared with French
carts. A few years later, in 1881, the muni¬
cipal authorities at Palermo were officially
invited to send a carretto to the Milan Trade
Fair as an example of Sicilian craftsmanship.
This made such an impression that Sicilian
cart builders received orders from as far afield
as America.
The most interesting thing about the
carretto is its de¬
coration an ex¬
traordinary prof¬
usion of carvings,
paintings and or¬
namental designs
covering the en¬
tire surface of the
vehicle with a
symphony of co¬
lour- The paint¬
ing and carving is
done by crafts¬
men who have
never studied
drawing or de¬
sign; their art is
thus untutored
but entirely spon¬
taneous and free
from the shackles
of convention.
Very often, the anonymous craftsman who
does the unsigned carving is the master
woodworker, or carradore, who, to lighten the
vehicle, rapidly chisels designs in high or low
relief, and though the artisan does not set out
to produce a work of art the result is remark¬
able, and unexpectedly expressive.
There is a strong resemblance between the
style of these carvings and the distinctive type
of architecture which reached its apogee in
Sicily about the twelfth century. This style
is a fusion of apparently incompatible archi¬
tectural formsByzantine (585 to 826 A.D.) ;
Arab (826 to 1060) and finally Norman,
brought in with the conquest of Sicily by
Roger de Hauteville in 1089. The style finally
came to be known as "Arabo-Norman" or
"Siculo-Norman."
The panels of the carretto are adorned with
paintings about whose origins little is known,
except that they go back far into the past.
The style of the pictures and the manner of
their painting are simple and direct. The
artists seek to produce their effects without
worrying too much about pers¬
pective, but the details of their
paintings are always extremely
precise.
The paints used are in bright,
Copyright Attinelli
Cont'd
next page
25

Sicilian
'carretto'
(Continued)
BY WINGED HORSE TO THE
MOON: Heroic legends and tales of
chivalry provide many subjects for
decorative designs on Sicilian carts.
Right, Astolfo, a character from the
epic "Orlando Furioso", written by the
Italian poet, Ludovico Ariosto and
published in 1516. Painting (right)
illustrates episode in which Astolfo flies
to the moon on his winged horse.
Below, subjects Tor wheel decorations
include fruit, flowers, signs of the Zo¬
diac and one of the knights of Roland.
contrasting tones. The primary colours red, blue
and yellow nearly always predominate and the effect
of the whole decoration is one of striking vividness
and beauty.
The source from which the subjects of the pictures
are drawn is another surprise. The main themes are
the heroic legends of Charlemagne's knights and the
tales of chivalry, in particular, the Chanson de
Roland, the Paladins of France, the Knights of the
Round Table and other epics of the Middle Ages.
The Sicilian people are so attached to these legends
that even today some streets and certain places in the
vicinity of Palermo still bear names taken straight
from the tales of chivalry. Here, a headland is nam¬
ed after Roland, there both a mountain and a river
bear the name of Oliver; elsewhere a castle and a
village are called "Montauban"; in Palermo itself
Ass?=sora:o Turismo. Palermo
Copyright Rico
there are streets named after. "Argante" and "Guer-
rin," and there is also a "Court of the Paladins."
That the tales of chivalry are so well and widely
known in Sicily probably owes something to the
wandering Sicilian troubadours, the Cantastorie whose
tradition is still alive, especially in the villages of the
interior. To enhance the tales they told, the trouba¬
dours illustrated these legends with crude paintings
depicting the principal characters and scenes in a
kaleidoscopic profusion of bright colours.
The paintings on the carretto inevitably suggest a
connexion with these illustrations, and it is likely that
the Sicilian peasants, enamoured as they were of the
tales of chivalry, liked to have them reproduced on the
panels of their carts which were part of the very
fabric of their lives.
This form of folk art, the techniques and secrets of
which are handed down from father to son, is still as
vital and as fresh as ever- A recent dramatic event
has given proof of this, for lately carts have even been
produced with paintings showing scenes from the life
and adventures of Sicily's bandit, Salvatore Giuliano !
Music of bronze axles
tuned to peasant songs
Strange as it may seem, the Sicilian carretto also
provides an unexpected example of the islanders'
pervading love of... music. The axle bearings are
not made of iron or steel but are cast in a grade of
bronze ordinarily used for bells. Although they are
thus more expensive and do not last as long as other
bearings, the Sicilian farmer prefers them since the
turning wheels produce a pleasant metallic sound
which provides an accompaniment to their nostalgic
songs. The songs, too, are evidence of the tenacity of
Sicilian tradition, for they are directly derived from
the funeral elegies or "plan" of the ancient Provençal
troubadours.
Today the motor car has almost "honked" the
carretto out of existence. But the cart itself is only
one aspect of the artistic temperament of the Sicilian
people. Their folk art remains a moving force, rich
in energy and vitality which will surely find outlets in
other forms we may little foresee today.
26
