origin in so distant a past Pai>e '"'
'POSSESSION' DANCES:
A TREATMENT FOR
MENTAL ILLNESS
Up until a short time ago "posses¬
sion cult" dancers were gener¬
ally considered fanatics indulg¬
ing in horrible excesses under a spell
brought on by frenzied collective
dancing. It is only in the last ten
years that scientists have begun to
take a closer look at the dances, par¬
ticularly in the light of our know¬
ledge of psychology and psycho¬
analysis, to see if they had a deeper
meaning than met the eye. After a
number of pioneer studies carried
out in Brazil and Haiti, investigators

The Unesco Courier
propounded the theory that the
possession dances were release mech¬
anisms or saiety valves designed to
enable the members of a group to
express the subconscious desires or
tendencies normally denied them in
their daily life.
Now a leading French psychiatrist,
Dr. Charles Pidoux, who has recently
returned from two expeditions to
Africa where he carried out a. series
of careful investigations into the
matter, has come forward with a new
interpretation. The possession rites
practised in the Niger and certain
parts of Africa, he concludes, are
techniques of very ancient origin
which constitute real psychotherapy
applied to mental disorders which are
attributed to the influence of tradi¬
tional "spirits" of the jungle.
In the Niger, he explains, river and
jungle spirits (called folley) are
considered the descendants of Adam
and Eve just as human beings are,
except that they are deprived of bod¬
ies. But though invisible, they are
alive and must borrow the body of
a person to manifest themselves.
The person chosen becomes the
spirit's "'horse", that is, the spirit
"climbs on his shoulders" and "'pos¬
sesses" him.
When a man or woman shows signs
of mental instability or behaviour
oddities, it means that one of the
spirits wishes to possess his body.
The individual visits a zima (priest
and doctor combined) who, after
initiation and conditioning lasting
sometimes as long as a year,
identifies the particular spirit and
prepares the new "horse" for the
dance ritual. As a result of the
possession dance the individual is
cured of his disorders and is enabl¬
ed to resume a normal life.
Photos on this page show several
"horses" in a possession dance film¬
ed in Africa. The men are unskilled
labourers at Accra (Gold Coast) who
originally came from the Niger. In
the Hauka sect to which they were
admitted after showing signs of psy¬
chotic disorders, the initiation lasts
a year. But after being "possessed"
they are cured at least for a long
period, but need to attend the cere¬
monies of the sect every Sunday.
"Independently of their religious
value and significance", writes Dr. Pi¬
doux, "these possession rites are a
rich field for studying a type of
psychotherapy in which a precise
knowledge of diagnosis, pathology
and therapeutic action are applied
with a rigour comparable to our mod¬
ern psychiatric treatment. It cannot
be denied that the mastery displayed
is most exceptional in a domain
where our own definite knowledge is
so much more recent."
