COVER PHOTO
Giant statues with deep-set eyes and
forbidding expressions dot the bare
slopes of Easter Island. For nearly two
centuries an aura of mystery has sur¬
rounded the island and its statues, but
the real mystery of this "speck in the
Pacific" does not lie in the monuments
carved in stone. See story page 14.
A. Metraux, copyright Bishop Museum, Honolulu.
By one of those contradictions which the human mind
readily accepts, peoples described as "primitives" or
as "savages" are often hailed for their remarkable
scientific knowledge. They are said to possess secret
formulae which are far more effective than anything
used by modern chemists or doctors. Those who despise
primitive peoples yet speak with awe and admiration of
their almost supernatural knowledge, often display an
exaggerated naivety and credulity, but they are actually
closer to the truth than others who deny that primitive
peoples possess any science worth knowing about.
The Indians of South America may not have any "mir¬
acle drugs/' but it was they who discovered the qualities
of chinchona bark, of coca leaves and of the lianas from
which they make curare. The conquest of the tropics by
the white race would have been impossible without qui¬
nine ; the role of cocaine in modern surgery is known to
all. As for curare, an extraordinary poison which acts on
the nervous system, this is being put to ever greater uses
in neurology.
These three discoveries are indicated merely as examples
of our debt to the so-called primitive peoples, but the list
could be greatly extended if we considered other fields and
other parts of the world. It was also the "savages" of
the Amazon who revealed to the world the wonderful qua¬
lities of rubber and who first made practical use of them.
For long the methods used to transform latex from the
Hevea tree into rubber Were those of the Indians. Let
no one say that these were accidental discoveries and not
the result of scientific enquiries. To extract curare from
strychnos toxijera called for many long experiments and
lor qualities inherent in the true scientist : a keen sense
of observation, patience and the urge to experiment.
Is it necessary to remind those who, when speaking of
the Indians or of the peoples of Oceania, refer to them
as "savages" that these same men succeeded in mastering
their environment and that they possess an empirical
science in agriculture which agronomists are quick to
praise and to draw inspiration from.
Biologists have not always admitted the debt they owe
to "primitive" peoples who have made available to them
observations of the greatest precision and accuracy. It
is of course natural for a man who lives by fishing and
hunting to know the habits of his quarry down to the last
detail. Yet if in this respect "primitives" are valued
aides for the scientist it is also true that their ideas
on the development of living things are just as fantastic
as those of the naturalists of antiquity and even those of
the Renaissance. But their credulity and naivety are no
greater than those shown by the ancient Roman natura¬
list, Pliny the Elder.
This issue of The Unesco Courier devoted in part to
aspects of "science among primitive peoples" may in a
small way serve to remind those concerned with the edu¬
cation of "primitives" that they are not dealing with
backward or ignorant minds and that those to whom they
are today bringing the rudiments of Western science are
themselves capable of teaching lessons in many fields.
Let us remember too that the death of the "primitive"
civilizations which so many people advocate in the name
of progress, will also see the vanishing of much knowledge
that is not without significance for our own civilization.
Alfred METRAUX
'UNËSC<3>
^CHIVtV
