NO 'HOCUS POCUS' IN
THE MEDICINE MAN
by Erwin H. Ackerknecht
The activities of the primitive medi¬
cine man are brushed away by the
average individual as "hocus po-
cus". This, of course, they are not.
They are actually magico-religious rituals
which always and in all places must
appear grotesque to those who do not
believe in the premises of such a ritual.
They are based on the idea that dis¬
ease is in most cases not produced by
natural forces, as it has been accepted
by us for the last two and a half thou¬
sand years, but by such supernatural
agencies as spirits, gods, ghosts and sor¬
cerers. These forces have been provok¬
ed by the patient or one of the members
of his family through actions contrary to
the moral code of the tribe. The super-
naturals will attack by injecting myste¬
riously disease-producing magic substan¬
ces or spirits, or by abducting the soul
of the patient.
It is quite logical that our methods
of diagnosis, based on observation of the
patient, could not reveal such super¬
natural causes, and that the primitive
diagnostician therefore has to rely on
the supernaturalistic techniques of divi¬
nation by trance, dreams, crystal-gazing,
bone-throwing, etc. It is equally logical
that therapeutics have to consist primari¬
ly of rites to force out spirits, placate
ghosts and gods, and hunt up displaced
souls. Such aims are best achieved by
incantations, spells and prayers, accom¬
panied by singing and dancing.
Effective psychotherapy
Ir is obvious that from the biological
point of view which is ours in the
case of disease such practices are
absurd and devoid of meaning. This
does not mean that they are devoid of
any meaning. They are, for instance,
quite meaningful from the psychological
and psychotherapeutic point of view. As
this aspect of primitive medicine is the
Dr. Ackerknecht is Professor and Chairman of
the Department ot History of Medicine at the
University ot Wisconsin, U.S.A. Previously he
vas a Research Fellow at Johns Hopkins
University, New York (1941-1944) and Assistant
Curator, American Museum ol National History
(1945-1946). He ¡s currently engaged in research
on medical pathology, including the psycho-
pathology of primitives.
subject of a special article in this issue
(see page 8), I can be quite short on it
here. Suffice it to say that the two main
mechanisms of our own psychotherapy,
suggestion and confession, are used ex¬
tensively. By the very fact that disease
is made meaningful in terms of the
world view of the afflicted and that the
medicine man now substitutes for the
patient in fighting evil powers, anxiety
is dispersed, faith is established, energies
are mobilized and psychological, and
therefore physiological, relief is obtain¬
ed. It is beyond any doubt that many
of the undeniable successes of primitive
medicine men (like those of modern
doctors) are due to unconscious but
effective psychotherapy.
This season's 'miracle drug'
IN addition, the magico-religious ritual
of the medicine man contains at
closer scrutiny numerous elements
which will account for success beyond
psychotherapeutic factors. In the course
of such rituals, whether they take place
in the African bush, the South American
forest, or among the Navaho of arid
Arizona, magic potions are imbibed,
which very often contain highly effective
drugs, and magic manipulations and puri¬
fication rites are performed, which cor¬
respond largely to our own physio¬
therapy.
It so happens that the "miracle drug"
of this season, serpasil, so beneficial in
high blood pressure and mental disease,
is not a synthetic drug, like some of its
predecessors (the arsenicals, or the sulfa-
drugs), but is derived from a plant,
Rauwolfia serpentina, which, for de¬
cades, medical missionaries in Africa
had vainly pointed out to western phar¬
macologists as a very effective drug of
primitives.
Serpasil is only one of many drugs of
primitive origin which play an important
role in our present-day pharmacopoeia.
We mention here only such dramatically
effective specifics as strophantine, the
heart drug; emetine, used in amoebic
dysentery; and Picrotoxine, the stimulator
of respiration in barbiturate poisoning.
Cocaine and- quinine once came from
Peru. It would be useless to enumerate
here all the effective emetics, purgatifs,
expectorants, and diuretics known to be
used by primitives.
It is quite obvious that besides useless
substances, as they occur in all phar¬
macopoeias, even in our own, primitive
pharmacopoeias contain a surprising
percentage of effective drugs in spite of
the magic ideas which govern their use.
The Spanish conquerors of the 16th
century were sufficiently impressed by
the drug lore of the Indians to organize
research in this field. Modern science
has stood aloof from such studies among
the "superstitious heathen" for at least
a century. But lately, pharmaceutical
industry has been sufficiently impressed
by the potentialities of such studies to
spend a considerable amount of money
for research on primitive drugs. We
have no doubt that from those studies
will come forth further evidence of the
amazing and surprising knowledge- of
effective drugs possessed by primitive
peoples. How they acquired this know¬
ledge (they do not use our inductive
methods, and would in any case have
had a very hard time to do so) is
another problem, which so far has not
been solved, and whose discussion is
outside of the limits of this article.
Sweatbaths and drycupping
Drugs are not the only effective
therapeutic agents primitives use.
During their rituals, physical
agents of known value like baths of all
sorts (including sweatbaths), massage,
sucking (or drycupping) are frequently
and successfully applied. Except for
sucking which we have given up, we
still practise them all.
Primitives are less active in the field
of surgery than they are in drug treat¬
ment or physiotherapy. This is partly
due to irrational attitudes, especially
fear of mutilation, which is used by
them rather for punishment or ritual
than for treatment. But this is also due
to technological backward¬
ness which till a hundred (Cont'd on
years ago made even the page 71
practice of the Western

The Unesco Courier
CURARE: DEADLY KILLER TURNED HEALER
Among the many drugs and compounds known to primitive peoples and which modern
science has found dramatically effective in medicine and surgery, one of the strangest is
curare. Preparation of this deadly poison is still a closely guarded secret of primitive
tribes at opposite ends of the earthAmazon Basin and Borneo. Both Indians in South
America and Dyaks in Borneo use blow-pipes for hunting, though the velocity of the darts
they fire Is not sufficient to inflict fatal wounds. For many years these people have known
that a dart smeared with curare paralyzes its victim and brings rapid death to any animal
or bird it strikes. The knowjedge that curare blocks nerve impulses and produces muscle
relaxation has been put to use by modern medicine and surgery. The curare though has
first to be refined and its dosage carefully controlled. Some of its specific uses: to produce
muscular relaxation during surgical operations, to eliminate muscle pull in treatment of
fractures and dislocations; to relieve spastic paralysis and to prevent convulsions
being caused during electro-shock treatment sometimes given to mental patients.
Photos on this page and overleaf illustrate the use of curare In Borneo where Dyaks still manu¬
facture and use blow-plpes to shoot death-dealing darts at jungle game. (1) Between the leaves
of a giant jungle fern, a hunter spots a monkey. (2) A short, sharp puff and the dart shoots out so
swiftly that it cannot be followed in flight. (Cont'd on next page) Photos copyright A Martin

CROSS-LEGGED on platform, Dyaks take turns piercing tree
trunk, which takes about five days. With metal spike held in
wooden handle they strike base of trunk with slow up-and-down
movement. As they hollow out centre, they pause now and then
to make sure trunk has not moved from vertical position. When
finished, blow-pipe will be about 8 feet long, roughly diameter of a
horizontal vaulting bar and will be pierced by hole 1/5 th of an inch
across. With blade attached it becomes a spear. South American
blow-pipe (sarbacan) consists of two parts held by bark strips.
^?&t**
CURARE (Continued
tfó&fe r* .& ¿**y* ''ml' * ~* *ÜTj »'-
All photos copyright A. Martin
'COAT OF MAIL' worn by this old Dyak is a jacket of vegetable
fibres which serves as protection against poisoned darts. In Borneo,
as in South America, the preparation of curare is the privilege of
certain tribes. Witch doctors alone know the secret of its compo¬
sition. They surround it with mystery and perform intricate magic
rites as they mix an amazing number of ingredients. After simmer¬
ing for two days it is shaped into sticks which are then used for
barter with other tribes. To make it malleable, the huntsman
has to moisten it and then pound it with small wooden pestle.

PRECISION of blow-pipe is largely due
to skill and care with which Dyaks pierce
a tree trunk to make the tube. They
first build a platform about I I feet from
the ground, then with an ingenious system
of horizontal bars, they set up above the
platform a roughly squared tree trunk.
This will become the blow-pipe. Here,
two men put in place long iron spike
. which is to pierce tube of blow-pipe.
IN BORNEO, two different kinds of
curare are used"tadjum" on small darts
like knitting needles for birds, and "¡pu"
on darts with two barbs for bigger game.
As many as 20 ingredients are used to
make curare, but basis of "¡pu" is the sap
of the tree "antaria toxicaría", and for
"tadjum", the sap from the "tadjum" tree
and juice of "kaba" bark are used. Left,
a Dyak collects sap from "tadjum" tree.

No 'hocus pocus'
The Unesco Courier
(Cont'd from
page 4)
surgeon consist primarily of wound and
fracture treatment. "Active" surgery,
which to us today is the essence of sur¬
gery, is a quite recent phenomenon even
in the West, appearing on a large
scale only after the invention of anes¬
thesia, asepsis and the localistic ap¬
proach in pathology. It is thus not
surprising that primitive surgery is
usually limited to lancing of boils,
blood-letting and what seems quite ef¬
fective wound and fracture treatment.
Caesarian operations
Occasionally primitives have in¬
vented quite clever devices like
the closing up of wounds with the
mandibles of large ants whose head is
broken off (Somalis, Brazilian Indians).
In a few regions surgery has developed
farther. The East African Masáis
amputate hopelessly fractured limbs and
enucleate eyes. From the same region,
drainage of empyema (pus resulting
from pleurisy) by cauterisation of the
thorax, excision of neckglands, removal
of uterine polyps, and suturing of the
intestine are reported. The Ellice
Islanders in Polynesia use shark teeth
to remove fatty tumours, the elephan¬
tiasis scrotum, tuberculous glands and
old ulcers.
The most baffling aspect of primitive
surgery is the successful performance of
. two operations, greatly dreaded by
Western surgeons up to the end of the
last century: Caesarian section and
trepanation. The former is reported
again from East Africa, the latter from
African regions, most of Oceania,
and the Americas, especially Peru.
In the field of obstetrics we must
admit that the more or less sitting
position during childbirth, adopted in
most primitive tribes, is considerably
more physiological than that customary
with us. Certain Eskimos and Bantus
have invented, independently, incubators
for premature babies, a technique
developed in the West only in the second
half of the 19th century.
Smallpox inoculations
It is the "superstitious" (that is magi¬
co-religious) fear of witchcraft
which makes many primitives hide
their excrements. Objectively such
actions, however they may be rationali¬
zed, are of considerable preventive value.
The same holds good of circumcision,
certain food taboos, taboos against early
intercourse after childbirth, fumigation,
ritual bathing, or isolation of infectious
diseases. Inoculation against snakebite
is practised by certain South American
and African natives, inoculation against
smallpox only by the latter. The South
American Yuracare, Guato and Me-
setene manufacture mosquito nets from
bark cloth, which should objectively be
of prophylactic value in mosquito-borne
diseases.
As we have seen, medicine in primitive
society is part of religion; it belongs to
the sphere of the sacred. Primitive
religion does not interpret nature on its
own terms, but as if man's relations with
nature were another set of personal
relations. Disease-producing influences
are not seen impersonally like our
bacteria or glands; spirits and gods act
like punishing parents, sorcerers like
aggressive siblings. These explanations
reflect the fact that, psychologically
speaking, man, an animal with an un¬
usually prolonged infancy, is first and
foremost impressed directly not by
nature, but by his social relations on
which his survival primarily depends,
and which he symbolizes thus in religion.
Disease in sacred terms
That medicine in primitive society is
couched in religious terms, symbo¬
lizing society, has an unexpected
and important consequence: medicine
and disease acquire social meanings and
social functions which they do not
possess in our society. The social
meaning of primitive medicine is easy to
spell out: Be peaceful, and disease will
spare you or go away.
Disease becomes the most important
sanction against asocial behaviour; fear
of disease and the .witch-smelling
medicine man play the role which the
fear of courts, policemen, newspapers,
teachers, priests or soldiers play in our
society. The fact that medicine is such
an important pillar of the social edifice
is perhaps the most influential of all the
reasons we have given in this analysis
of why primitives remain attached to
their medicine and their religion.
To the extent that medicine leaves
the sphere of the sacred and becomes
secularized, that disease is interpreted in
naturalistic, not supernaturalistic terms,
it loses its social meaning and its social
control function. Those who want to
bring Western medicine to people who
still regard disease in sacred terms, can
often be more successful in adapting
their practices to such sacred notions.
But, as Kipling said, this is another story.
