LEO TOLSTOY
IS STILL AT
HOME TO HIS
VISITORS
Among the Soviet Union's thousand or so museums there
are none more "alive" or more carefully looked after
than the one in Tolstoy's house at Yasnaya Polyana,
some sixty miles south of Moscow on the Kursk road. To
reach it from Moscow, the visitor follows the motor highway
which passes through forests filled with "dachas", or villas,
through whose open gates he may catch a glimpse of Russian
families at home, some preparing food and others in the
garden, often planting sunflowers.
The road passes through many vil¬
lages where in summer the peasants play
cards on benches beneath the shade of
the poplars which let drop a fine dust of
pollen known locally as "summer snow".
At this time of year, hammocks are
slung between the trees and campers'
tents are pitched on the grass. T.V.
aerials contrast . strangely with the
"isbas," the gay, carved wooden huts
whose style is exactly as it was half a
century ago, and on whose roofs they
are mounted.
Beyond Tula and its lake, which look
just as they were described in the older
editions of Baedeker, is Yasnaya Polyana
and the Tolstoy Museum in what was
once Count Leo Nicolaievitch Tolstoy's
estate and park. The trees were planted
200 years ago and the houses built by
Tolstoy's grandfather, who appears in the
writer's work as Prince Volkonsky are
about 150 years old.
The deserted forest glade, the old
tennis court, the orangery, the pond
covered with water-lilies and lentisks just
as it was when the Tolstoy family bathed
in it, and the "nightingale walk" where today, too, the birds
sing in their thousands all combine to produce a feeling that
time has stood still here and that the life of half a century ago
continues.
"The Soviets have an unrivalled gift for bringing the past
to life and glorifying it when they wish", said a foreign diplo¬
mat in Moscow, recently. The secret of this success is
perhaps best explained by Alexander Ivanovitch Popovkin,
the curator of the Tolstoy Museum, an elderly man who
reminds one of "Anatoli", a character in "War and Peace".
"'To bring a museum to life", he says, "calls for great
reverence, affection, and attention to detail." Popovkin
Leo Tolstoy in the park
of his estate two years
before his death in 1910.
28

The Unesco Courier
has devoted himself to his own task so single-mindedly
that he appears to have forgotten everything outside it.
Though he knows everything that has been written, the
world over, about his hero, his own world seems to stop
short at the bounds of the Tolstoy estate, which he manages
in the manner of some stewards of bygone days.
The same attitude is widely found among curators in the
Soviet Union, whether at the Lenin, Chekhov or Dostoievski
museums, at the Hermitage in Leningrad, or at the museums
of Erivan in Armenia, Tiflis in Georgia, at Kiev, at Odessa
or in other places. Everywhere curators seem to have the
same devotion to an individual, the same worship, not so
much of history, as of a personal representative of national
culture.
The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics is a country where
the cult of the museum is akin to a religion, in which the
past seems to be incorporated in the present, and the whole
combined in the purpose of preparing the future. This is no
exaggeration. In small villages of the Ukraine, for exam¬
ple, peasants can be seen queueing up on Sundays to visit
their local museum and ignoring the cinema. In 1942 the
peasants of Peterhof, near Leningrad, preferred to die rather
than to tell Goering's treasure hunters where they had
buried the statue of Catherine the Great in the park of the
Tsars' summer palace.
A clock marks the death hour
When visiting that park last year, one traveller was struck
by the emotion which some former émigrés, returning
as tourists to the U.S.S.R., betrayed at the sight of the
palace and gardens, which had been reconstructed exactly as
Peter the Great himself had planned them. On the spot
where, less than ten years previously, a bloody battle had been
fought, everything was now once more what it had been in
the past. Peter's city Leningrad and its museums, which
had suffered so cruelly during the war, had been rebuilt, lov¬
ingly and faithfully as had the churches of Nizhni Nov¬
gorod, Kazan and Vitebsk.
Reverence for the past and an attention to detail are every¬
where in evidence in Tolstoy's house where the hands of
the clock still point to five minutes past six the time, in the
morning, when Tolstoy died, At the top of the wooden
staircase, which Turgeniev and Gorki climbed so often be¬
hind Sophia Ivanova, the writer's wife, are the living rooms.
Tolstoy's bedroom has been left exactly as It was on the day of his
death. Hundreds of thousands of Russians have visited it since then.
Soviet Information Service photos
In this room, furnished with almost monastic austerity, Tolstoy wrote
his two greatest works, "Anna Karenina" and "War and Peace".
There is the table set, with the bell to summon the servants.
Among the pictures is a portrait of Tolstoy's eldest daughter,
Tatiana, who died in Italy in 1950.
In Countess Tolstoy's boudoir and in the writer's study,
nothing has been touched since November 17, 1910 when
Leo Tolstoy put out his candle one night, after laying his
pen on a sheet of paper and placing a marker at page 54 of
"The Brothers Karamazov". So many other personal ob¬
jects are here a little ivory abacus, the black leather divan
on which Tolstoy was born and which stood behind him in
the room where he worked, the dictaphone presented to him
by Edison, and a piece of Siberian stone, given him by a
group of workers after he had been excommunicated as a re¬
sult of the "Resurrection" scandal. "'Nothing will arrest thy
fame" were the prophetic words which the workers had had
engraved on this stone.
The emotional effect of the objects in Tolstoy's bedroom
seems even greater. On the night table, a half consumed
bottle of Vichy water; under the pillow, a used notebook; and
again a snuffed out candle. At the foot of the .bed is a
cushion, embroidered by his sister, a nun who, after unkind
treatment at the hands of her brother, made a point on her
return to the convent of sending him this dedication in lace:
"From one of the 700 'idiots' of our Congregation."
Invaded by a felt-shod crowd
IN the wardrobe, are clothes which illustrate one of those
paradoxes that marked the path through life of this com¬
plicated man. Under the peasant clothes he affected, he
wore shirts made for him by the English firm of Shanks and
Co. in Moscow, and his pyjamas came from the shop called
the "Carnaval de Venise".
The library, with its 25,000 volumes; the desk of the sec¬
retary, who is still alive; the portrait of Tarpán, Tolstoy's
favourite horse; the room like a monk's cell in which he
wrote "Anna Karenina" visitors pass from one personal
souvenir to another and reach at last the nightingale-filled
garden where Sophia Ivanova bred adders and exterminated
cats. She died in 1919.
On every opening day, the Tolstoy Museum is silently in¬
vaded by a felt-shod crowd. "'They make no noise at all
and they never damage anything," says the curator, "although
they have been coming in hundreds of thousands, and ever
since Tolstoy's death in 1910."
And yet in this House of old Russia, all these living people
with the wonder written on their faces, seem far less real
than the presence of Leo Tolstoy himself.
29
