AT TINOS
The Unesco Courier. Nr 1. 1956
Copyright Ernst Haas, Magnum
F
OR the past five or six years
125 refugees of Greek stock from
Eastern Europe have been living in the
refugee centre on the Greek Island
of Tinos. Soon they will all have been
resettled elsewhere with homes and
jobs thanks to the special Nobel
Peace Prize Project which has just
been announced by the Office of the
U.N. High Commissioner for Refu¬
gees. The Nobel prize money
about $35,000 recently awarded
to the Refugee Office will be used
to close down this isolated centre.
For the refugees this will indeed
seem a miracle The island of Tinos,
however, is celebrated for another,
very different, miracle. Every year
thousands of pilgrims come to pray
for good health before the Holy
Ikon, discovered on the island In 1 822.
Above, a Greek priest mounts Cathe¬
dral steps with aged and crippled
pilgrims. Left, all eyes are turned
towards the Holy Ikon The story on
the following pages by a chance visi¬
tor to Tinos conveys something of
the former despair and hopeless¬
ness felt by the island refugees.

MIRACLE
AT TINOS
(Continued)
REFUGEE RATIONS
Soup, bread, an onion
and a handful of olives.
A daily living allowance
equivalent to 20 U.S.
cents is also provided.
.¡km
:
V / 1**b|
ip¿frnWrnZ^** ^0uWS
UÂdM
j^^r
UNREF
JL ihey all want to go to America, all 200 of them.
They have been here now seven years. They haven't got
anything to do and we can't do anything with them."
"Who are 'they'?" asked Ronald Doyle, an American
photographer who had just arrived on the Greek island
of Tinos.
The owner of the Hotel Poseidon made a movement
with his chin towards the house on the other side of the
street.
"In that building refugees. God help them. We
haven't enough work for our own people on this island,
let alone for these foreigners."
After he had unpacked his bags and washed his hands,
Ronald walked on to the balcony and looked out. On the
other side of the street he saw the boy who had helped
him to carry his bags up from the port leaning against a
wall, obviously waiting for him to appear. He gave
another look at the harbour then went inside, picked up
his photographic equipment, gave a quick glance at the
prospectus about Tinos and left the hotel.
The boy joined him without a word and Ronald gave
him his 'flashgun to carry as if it had been agreed
between them.
They walked up the long cobbled road, arrived in
front of the cathedral, climbed the steps
and went in. It was dark inside and they
had to wait until their eyes got used to
the gloom.
Suddenly Ronald noticed a girl in
prayer. She looked very attractive with
her dark hair, wide eyes and soft curving
lips. She was poorly dressed, but there
was an air of dignity about her that
impressed him.
As she left, Ronald followed her. He
was wondering whether he might take
some photographs of her to illustrate life
on the island, but when he reached the
exit he saw her run swiftly down the hill
and disappear into a busy street.
As they returned to the hotel, the young
boy, whose name he had discovered was
Peter, took Ronald by the hand.
"Please, mister, you see my 'father and
mother ?"
Ronald smiled his agreement. He felt
the boy wanted his earnings to be given
to his parents. They turned into the
backyard of the refugee centre. It was
mealtime. Men, women and children,
carrying tin plates and bowls with thin
soup, some onions, olives and bread,
crossed from the central kitchen to the
kitchen to the main building.
The photographer gave a closer look
at the food. It didn't seem much to
live on.
The boy and the man climbed the stairs to the second
floor and walked down a long corridor. The boy opened
a door: a man of about 50 was standing near the table,
ready to go out with bowls and plates. The mother was
busy with a baby of a 'few months old in a little cot near
the door. A girl of about seven was looking out of the
window. Everybody turned to stare at the visitor.
The boy spoke in a Slav language. The man put down
his bowls and plates and came forward with outstretched
hands.
"Mr. America, welcome," he said. "I am Vladimir Papa-
poudos." He offered a chair but Ronald shook his head.
"I am sorry, I cannot stay", he explained. "'I am expect¬
ing a telephone call at the hotel."
At that moment the door was flung open and a man
aged about 35 burst in. He had long black hair that
needed cutting, and a stubbly beard. His shirt was
collarless and there were stains on his coat. He gripped
Ronald by his tie and started shouting furiously in a mix¬
ture of languages. Ronald thought he heard him say
"espion, espion" but everyone was talking at once, and
Peter's 'father and mother were tugging at the man. The
stranger suddenly sat down and put his head in his hands.
"He thought you were secret agent because you photo¬
graph his sister," explained Mr. Papapoudos. "He afraid
for his parents, but we explain you American ; it is all
right now." "My friend Sternen," he added, "speaks no
English. He speaks French. He is our doctor."
You won't make the headlines
At this moment the door opened and Mrs. Papapoudos
came in carrying food from the central kitchen.
Father Papapoudos insisted that Ronald should eat
with them, but he shook his head.
"I must go now," he said. "They are telephoning me
from Athens."
On one of the staircases Ronald saw a notice board with
old, torn announcements from the International Refugee
Organization, and a little type-written letter flapping in
the wind saying : "The Representative of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees will call on the
27th of this month." It was typed in three languages :
English, French and Greek.
The following day as Ronald came down to breakfast
he saw Mr. Papapoudos with three men standing in the
hotel hall. They greeted him. One was the President
of the Refugees' Association and the others were members
of the Committee. The President spoke good English. He
explained that everybody in the centre had been very
excited when they heard that an American journalist had
"' -fc

come to Tinos to take photographs. Young Peter had told
them that the American was working for a big paper and
now everyone was hoping that he would publish articles
about them in the American press so something would
be done to help them.
Ronald felt embarrassed. He invited the men to have
breakfast with him and while they ate, he tried to
explain to them that he had come to Tinos on a special
mission for a tourist and geographical paper. Even if
he took photographs of the refugees he wasn't certain
that any newspaper would print them.
"You see," he said, "the papers only buy a story when
it is about a disaster."
"But isn't this a disaster?" asked the President. "We
have been seven years on this island and unless somebody
takes us away we must die here. We haven't even enough
money to go and look for work in Athens!"
Ronald did not know what to answer. He allowed him¬
self to be guided round the island by the four men. Out-
DOUBT AND DESPAIR, here so clearly written on the faces of these refugees has now
been effaced. For over six years they have longed for a real home and a chance to work.
They were called the "forgetten men of Tinos," but soon they will be leaving the island where
they have waited so long. Some will be resettled overseas, some will find sanctuary in
homes for old people, but all will leave the island and years of isolation behind them.
side the town one of the two members of the Committee
took up a handful of earth.
"I was a farmer once," he said, "and I would love to go
back to the land, but here, on this island, there is no land
free. If there were, several of our families could make
a living out of it."
When the group passed the fishing boats in the
harbour, another man broke the silence. "Now and then I
am allowed to go out with them," he said, "in the tourist
season when there are people who will buy our fish.
Mind, if I had my own nets and could hire my own boat I
think I could make a living."
"Why don't you?" asked Ronald.
"Where could I get the money?" retorted the refugee.
"Couldn't you raise a loan?"
The men laughed without mirth. "Without security?"
they asked. "You don't know the banks."
As they returned they saw Sternen. By him sat the girl
Ronald had seen in the cathedral.
The President who, by this time, had talked himself
into a state of excitement, gripped Sternen by the arm
The Unesco Courier. Nr 1. 1956
and said "We are all useless here, cut off from the world."
He pointed. "Look at him a doctor, a surgeon. He may
not work. He may not go away. Look at his sister. She
has TB. They thought they would be going to America
once but now that is out of the question too..."
"Why?" asked Ronald.
"Because that is the way of the world" said the Presi¬
dent. "If you are not healthy or if you are too old, you
cannot go. All of us want to live in America or Canada
or anywhere, but all we can get is promises and nothing
ever happens."
"But is there no one who will help you?" asked Ronald.
"Surely there must be. What about this Representative of
the United Nations High Commissioner?"
"He takes notes and makes plans," said the leader, "but
he has no money, and what can you do when you haven't
any money?"
"How do you live, then?" asked Ronald.
Father Papapoudos, who had kept silent all this while,
now spoke. "We get food from the Government," he said.
"They pay for light and fuel and the
High Commissioner also gives us some¬
thing." He turned out his pockets. "But
we never have a penny in our pocket, we
can never buy a cigarette, we can never
buy a glass of wine. And we must always
wear the old clothes that people send us."
Woman without a future
The faces of the men looked tense,
even threatening.
"Is there nothing you can do to
help yourselves?" asked Ronald.
"There is something we do," said the
President. "Better come along." They
walked through the streets of the old
town and stopped near the Cathedral
where a woman sat selling embroidered
table runners and carved model ships.
"It pays for the milk for the babies and
our old people, but we haven't got enough
thread or material to make a business out
of it," said the President.
In the middle of the street, he suddenly
turned round. "Will you help us now?"
he asked.
"Let's go to the Centre," said Ronald
With great, hurried steps the President
led the group back down the street to the
refugee centre.
They went and sat in the room occupied
by Katia and her brother, Sternen. "You
see," Ronald explained to them, "with
photographs, it is like with a film. You
have got to take the story of a few people.
By telling their story, the public is made
to feel that the needs are not only those
of a few but of many." Turning to Katia,
he said, "I will tell your story and I will
photograph it to make the people see It
happening to you as if it were happening to themselves."
The girl nodded her head.
"What do you want me to do?" she asked.
"I want you to re-enact your life here since you came
to Tinos."
"That was years ago," said Katia. "We came here a few
weeks after we arrived in Greece. We were told that this
was the only place where there was still room left. Even
so, we found the refugee centre packed and we had to
share a room with another family.
"The first week we came here we met Mrs. Korianovi, a
social worker from a voluntary agency, to whom we gave
all our particulars. I was a student; Sternen was a doctor.
I spoke fluent English; he spoke fluent French. We were
willing to do any work as long as we could remain
together. We filled in forms and we waited.
"I thought I would use the waiting time to give English
lessons to the children in the camp, but even
the grown-ups came, all of them hoping that (Cont'd on
one day they would be able to leave. next page)
UNREF

MIRACLE
AT TINOS
(Continued)
'Post Office' says the sign on the
wall of this whitewashed building
in Tinos in reality the "provi¬
sional" camp where 125 refugees
have lived crowded together for
years. Their hopes of leaving it
will now be realized thanks to the
money from the Nobel Peace Prize.
J J
"There was Mr. Zamanov, his wife and his mother.
Mr. Zamanov's mother was too old for emigration and he
didn't want to leave her behind, but he had never told her
that this was the reason, and old Mrs. Zamanov came to
listen to me and to try to speak English. She spoke lightly
of 'when we are in America' and I think it hurt me most to
see that old woman speaking about a future everyone knew
she didn't have.
"There was also Miss Domnavico who couldn't emigrate
because she was an unmarried mother. There was Profes¬
sor Zuliakus who couldn't go anywhere because no country
seemed to need a philosopher; and there was Pravdec
who was a plumber who didn't know why no country
wanted him. They were good students and yet, as time
went by, I began to wonder... what use was I to them,
teaching a language in which they could say 'I want to
go to a new country', when no country seemed to want
them.
Damning X-Ray shadow
ffjT was about two years after we came to Tinos that,
-I one day, Mrs. Korianovi called us into her office.
She seemed excited and very happy. A doctor in
Chicago had agreed to sponsor us. The American Consul
was working on our papers and soon we would hear from
him. Indeed, a few weeks later we were called to Athens
for an interview. We signed the papers and then went
to see a doctor for a final medical check-up.
"I'll never forget that day. We had been waiting for
the X-ray picture. We went to see the doctor in high
spirits. The doctor asked me to sit down and pointed
to a light shadow on the negative on the viewer. 'I am
afraid I have rather bad news for you' he said. 'Do you
see this? It's a patch on the lung.' It wasn't active TB,
he told me-nothing, in fact, that couldn't be put right
with rest and good food but it was sufficient to prevent
the visa being given. Stemen and I were heartbroken. I
told Stemen to go to America alone but he wouldn't do it
and I felt very badly about it. We even quarrelled, but
Stemen wouldn't budge. I think that is what hurts me
most. Because of me, there is no future for Stemen."
The next day was the 27th of the month the day when
the U.N representative was due to visit the Island. In
the morning, as Ronald was crossing the quay he saw
the President boarding a boat and talking to a group of
men. The group landed. The leader held up his hands.
"You all know the Representative of the United Nations
High Commissioner," he said. "He wants to say a few
words."
The representative stepped forward.
"This time I have come with a Selection Mission from
two European countries," he said. "The High Commis¬
sioner has made an appeal to close the camps, and a fund
has now been established with which we hope to help
many of you. We are trying to place as many of you as
we can in other countries. To start on our work, will all
of you come for an interview this afternoon?"
"We shall proceed by alphabetical order" said the Presi¬
dent. "Everyone should go back to the camp and get his
papers.1"
The refugees lined up outside the hotel formed a pathe¬
tic picture, each man and women clutching some papers
in their hands. Tense expressions were on their faces,
and few words were spoken. The President acted as
doorman and ushered one family in after the other.
Ronald watched them for a moment and then became
aware that neither Katia nor Stemen was there.
Ronald walked across the street into the empty build¬
ing, along the corridor, looking into each empty room
with its poor contents. Finally, he found the brother
and sister in their room. Katia was standing near the
window looking out. Stemen was lying on his bed
smoking one of the cigarettes Ronald had given him.
"What are you doing here?" asked Ronald. "Why
aren't you downstairs?"
Katia turned round. She looked at him for a long time.
"You know I have TB."
Stemen went on smoking. He didn't say anything.
"That is no reason," said Ronald. "You should go
downstairs and meet these men. What have you got to
lose?"
Katia shook her head.
"I have filled in enough forms!" she said.
"But don't you understand?" shouted Ronald. "If you
won't go Stemen won't go, and if he doesn't go, you will
both lose your chance of ever leaving this damned spot.
You have no right to be so selfish."
UNREF
REFUGEE STUDENT was a young girl when she arrived in Tinos. As
she copies the maps of the Americas, her mind is already far from the

The Unesco Courier. N' 1. 1956
Stemen got up and looked at him.
"Va-t'en get out!"
'Va-t'en" he said.
But Katia ran forward and held Stemen by his arm.
She looked at Ronald. "You are right/' she said, "We
should go down".
It was now the turn of Katia and Stemen.
"I want you to understand" said the Representative of
the High Commissioner, "that we are trying to help you,
that even if we cannot help you this time we may perhaps
be able to do something later on. These two gentlemen"
he pointed to the two men sitting on either side of him
"are from the Ministries of Labour of two different
countries, and the gentleman on your left is a doctor. We
want to find out whether there is a chance for you to start
life here in Greece or whether we should concentrate on
getting you to another country. From your flies we've seen
that Miss Staminova needs hospital treatment. We will
try to arrange it for her either here in Greece or abroad.
What I want you to do now is to answer truthfully the
questions these gentlemen are going to put to you. Is that
understood?" Both Stemen and Katia nodded.
In the evening Katia and Stemen were both in their
room. Stemen sat on the bed. Katia had her elbows on
the table. They didn't speak. There was a knock. The
door opened and two men came in with smiles on their
faces. One, who had been introduced to them as the
doctor, called a friendly "Hello, doctor" to Stemen and
went to stand in front of the table. He looked at Katia
and took a little St Christopher medal from his pocket
which he placed before her.
"This is what we give to travellers in our country", he
said, "before they set out on their journey. May it bring
you good luck on your trip."
Tears of happiness filled Katia's eyes as she looked at
this symbol of a new future.
John Defrates
island. For pious Greeks, Tinos is an island of pilgrimage. They visit
it to pray before its Holy Ikon for relief from sickness and infirmity.
