The Unesco Courier
Burma
Courtesy A. Vigier.
COLOSSAL STATUES OF BUDDHA
in Burma are usually covered with white
plaster which is then painted or entirely
gilded over with real gold leaf. Time
has washed away the plaster which once
covered the llth century Phandawgyer
Buddha of Pagan (bottom, left), leaving an
extraordinary figure full of power and
grandeur. The two disemboweled sta¬
tues (left and below) are typical of the
state of most of the Buddhist statues in the
ruined temples of Pagan. Centuries ago,
plunderers and vandals smashed open the
chest and abdomen of every statue they
found in search of gold treasures or relics
often sealed there by Buddhist benefactors.
Photos Copyright J. Lavaud.
29

BURMA (Continued)
30

PAGAN
Forest of stupas
OF all the great centres of Buddhism in Asia, few can boast a more Impressive
concentration of monuments than the ancient holy city of Pagan (accent last
syllable). For eight miles along the Irrawaddy River, in central Burma, and for
two miles inland, a forest of pagodas and stupas of every size and shape extends into
the horizon. Some stand out glistening white against their red-brown weather-
beaten neighbours like medieval cathedrals in a fantastic landscape. About them rise
round towers, bulbous mushrooms, slender pinnacles, bell-shaped pyramids, knob¬
like domes and pumpkin pagodas. (Photos here show general views of the former
holy city). Pagan was a teeming capital of Burma a thousand years ago. It was built
by King Anawrahta in the llth century and once had no fewer than 4,000 pagodas.
It remained one of the great royal and religious cities of Asia until it was reduced by
the armies of Kublai Khan in I 287.
Burma is greatly indebted to India for Its religion, its philosophy and its art.
Buddhism reached Burma in force from India about I 057 A.D. though Buddhist colonies
had appeared in Burma much earlier. Today It is virtually a one-religion country:
out of I 9 million people, I 5,200,000 (80%) are practising Buddhists. Every Burmese
lad spends a period of his boyhood in a monastery, shaves his head and wears the
saffron robe as a novice. (The same colour robe is also worn in Ceylon and Thailand.)
Most boys remain only a few months, a few become monks (pongyi) for life. Thus in
every Burmese village are found golden-spired monasteries and pagodas. It is amazing
how many pagodas jut out of every part of the Burmese countryside. No hill is too
steep or rocky to prevent one from being erected.
Greatest of Burma's pagodas, and Holy of Holies to the Buddhist world, is the superb¬
ly beautiful Shwe Dagon in Rangoon (see photo on map page I I). It is the most
universally visited of Asia's Buddhist shrines, its peculiar sanctity being due to the fact
that it contains several original relics of Gautama including four hairs from the head
of the Buddha. Built on the highest point of land in Rangoon, the Shwe Dagon is
visible fora distance of 20 miles or more, brilliantly lit by floodlights at night, dazzling
in the sun by day. Its spire is covered with pure gold which is renewed each generation
by public subscription. Actually, though, its regilding goes on perpetually. Almost
daily the devout climb its sides with little handfuls of gold leaf which they fasten on
some part of its vast surface, thus adding their bit to its grandeur.
Photos copyright J. Lavaud.

BURMA (Cont'd)
Courtesy A. Vigier.
Each of these gleaming white shrines is a stupa containing a marble slab
engraved on back and front with a chapter from the Buddhist Scripture
Bltaghat. Hundreds of these airy stupas are part of the Ku-thu-daw
32
Pagoda, the "Royal-Merit House" built in the 19th century just outside
the palace city of Mandalay. It is one of the most compact and tastefully
adorned of Burmese pagodas and has beautifully carved gilt gates.

The Unesco Courier
Copyright J. Lavaud.
GARBED IN WHITE & CAPPED IN GOLD. Glittering in the
afternoon sky, Ananda pagoda is the most famous and best preserved of
the temples of Pagan. It is considered one of the wonders of Burma's
former holy capital. Completed in the llth century, its form may have
been inspired by the great cave temples of India, accounts of which were
brought to Burma by a group of Indian Buddhist monks from Orissa.
Outside the temple are 1,500 plaques depicting Buddha's previous lives.
The centre is a solid mass of brickwork with narrow galleries between
the core and the outer walls. The dim light that filters into these
galleries gives the effect of a deep natural grotto. Recesses In the
galleries hold deep red and gold covered figures portraying the life of
Buddha. One of these (below left) shows Buddha's mother Maya who
died one week after his birth. Most of the temples of Pagan were cover¬
ed with elaborate frescoes, the earliest of which recall the masterpieces
of Ajanta in India. Many of the temples were also decorated with
delicate wooden sculptures such as the painted wooden torch bearer
(below right) now at Pagan Museum. Centre photo is a beautiful exam¬
ple of wood carving found in the Shwe Gyaung pagoda, Mandalay.
Copyright J. Lavaud., Courtesy A. Vigier. Courtesy A. Vigier.
33
