'No one has the right to
despise a fellow creature'
by G. P. Malalasekera
If we contemplate the vastness of cosmic space and
the seemingly endless number of worlds of which
the human worlds form a very small part, the prob¬
lems of race would appear in a different light and seem
very trifling indeed. One is reminded of a comparison
the Buddha made when he rebuked a section of his
monks who felt superior to the rest in that they had
more fame and gain than the others. He likens them
to worms, who born in dung, bred in dung, and living
on dung, feel superior to other worms who are not so
privileged in this respect.
Whatever the picture we may get from a cosmic
perspective of humanity crawling" over the surface of the
earth and trying to eke out an existence on it, humility
is one of the lessons we have to learn from it. "'King¬
ship on earth is a beggarly existence, in comparison with
the joys of the heavenly worlds." The span of life of
mortal men is insignificantly small in comparison with
cosmic time and may be compared in its duration to a
line drawn on the earth.
Although human life appears insignificant from a
cosmic standpoint, yet it is constantly pointed out in the
Buddhist texts as being of tremendous worth, as man
has within him the capacity of gaining the highest
knowledge or of attaining a moral pre-eminence which
can make him worthy of becoming a "ruler of a world-
system". This is not possible for those in lower-than-
human states of existence whose actions are instinctual
and too pre-occupied with securing elementary needs;
nor is it possible for those in the higher worlds who are
too distracted by the joys of the present for serious
contemplation to be possible.
All beings are potential Buddhas
When the Buddha was asked whether he was man
or god, he answered that he was neither since he
was the Buddha. The heights that man can
attain in the matter of his intellectual, moral and spi¬
ritual attainments are so great that those who have
attained them are as different from ordinary men as
men are from animals. Yet such men are not mere
freaks nor have they been specially favoured by any
divine agency. They have attained such heights by their
dint of effort directed towards developing their intellec¬
tual, moral and spiritual nature extending over many
lives. And what has been achieved by one or a few is
within the capacity of all to achieve.
As the Mahayana texts put it, it is not only men but
all sentient beings down to the very lowest who are
potential Buddhas in that a Buddha nature (Buddha-
bhàva) is present within them. If only for this reason,
no one has a right to despise a fellow creature since all
are subject to the same laws of existence, have ultimately
the same nature and the same potentialities though they
Professor Malalasekera is Dean of the Faculty of Oriental Studies and
Professor of Pali and Buddhist Civilization at the University of Ceylon.
He is Preside it o) the World Fellowship of Buddhists and of the All Ceylon
Buddhist Congress. His publications include: "The Pali Literature of Ceylon"
(A Royal Asiatic Society Prize publication) and other works. The above
article is taken fiom a study written especially for Unesco as part of the
series "The Race Question and Modern Thought". The volume will be
entitled "Buddhism and the Race Question",
34
POLONNARUVA, ancient capital of the Kingdom of Ceylon, is today
only a village, but the remains of its former palaces, temples and shrines
tell of one of the most glorious periods in the island's history. Polon-
naruva owes much of its architectural grandeur to two 12th century
monarchs, Parakramabahu I and King Nissanka-Malla, his successor,
who adorned the city with splendid buildings and laid out parks and
are in varying stages of growth or development arid their
rates of growth may differ from time to time.
At the human level the lessons that man can learn by
realizing his position in the universe are not only that he
needs to be humble but also that he need not despair,
since he has the power to understand the world and
overcome it and cease to be a mere mechanism within
it. Both these lessons, the realization of our common
plight as well as the potentialities within each of us,
teach us but one moral namely that it is everyone's
duty to help his fellow beings and that no one has any
right or valid grounds to despise another.
Although all sentient beings are often treated as one
community in Buddhism, a special emphasis is placed on
the worth and dignity of human existence in view of the
opportunities and potentialities that man possesses for

The Unesco Courier
self-development. Pointed attention is also made to the
unity of mankind where a comparison is made and a
distinction drawn between human beings and the animal
and plant kingdoms.
It is argued on biological grounds that unlike the
plant' and animal kingdoms where differences of species
are noticeable, mankind is one species, a view which
accords most remarkably with the findings of modern
biological science. Not only is this view in disagreement
with the scientific pretensions of the biologists of the
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, who tried to
classify men into different races which could be graded
like species of animals into the higher and lower, but it
cuts the ground beneath the very foundations of any
racist doctrine which would divide human beings into
more or less isolated groups and argue that their varying
human characteristics are in their entirety genetically
determined. It is also interesting to note that this
passage occurs in a polemic against the pretensions of
the Brahmanic caste theory and incidentally shows by
implication how the Brahmins were claiming superiority
for themselves on genetical grounds.
Copyright Cartier-Bresson-Magnui.
ornamental gardens. Photos show, Left: a decorative motif on a stone
pillar standing amid the ruins of the Temple of the Tooth, at Polon-
naruva, with a finely draped statue of Buddha looking silently on.
Right: one of a pair of cobra kings in human form (frequently found in
Buddhist art) guarding the Vatadage Temple, which contains the most
complete collection of ancient relics and religious statuary of Ceylon.
"We have a controversy regarding (the distinction of)
birth, O Gotama!", we read in the Sutta Nipata.
"Bharadvaja says, one is a Brahman by birth, and I
say by deeds; know this, O thou clearly-seeing!
"We are both unable to convince each other, (there¬
fore) we have come to ask thee (who art) celebrated as
perfectly enlightened."
"I will explain to you, O Vasettha", so said Bhagavat,
"in due order the exact distinction of living beings accord¬
ing to species, for their species are manifold.
"'Know ye the grass and the trees, although they do not
exhibit (it), the marks that constitute species are for
them, and (their) species are manifold.
"Then know ye the worms, and the moths, and the
different sorts of ants... also the four-footed (animals),
small and great, ... also the serpents, the long-backed
snakes... also the fish which range in the water... also the
birds that are borne along on wings and move through
the air.
"As in these species the marks that constitute species
are abundant, so in men the marks that constitute spe¬
cies are not abundant.
'"Difference there is in beings endowed with bodies,
but amongst men this is not the case, the difference
amongst men is nominal (only).
"For whoever amongst men lives by cow-keeping, he
is a husbandman, not a Brahman. And whoever amongst
men lives by archery, he is a soldier, not a Brahman.
"And I do not call one a Brahman on account of his
birth or of his origin from a (particular) mother..."
What is apparent from the above is that according to
the Buddha there are no distinguishing characteristics of
genus and species among men unlike the case of
grasses, trees, worms, moths, fishes, beasts, birds, etc.,
and as Chalmers says: "'Herein, Gotama was in accord
with the conclusion of modern biologists that 'the
Anthropidae are represented by the single genus and
species, Man' a conclusion which was the more remark¬
able inasmuch as the accident of colour did not mislead
Gotama."
Caste-consciousness came from colour
The Buddha goes on to show, that the apparent di¬
visions between men are not due to basic biological
factors but that they are "conventional classifica¬
tions." The distinctions made in respect of the differen¬
ces in skin colour, hair-form, the shape of the head or the
shape of the nose etc. are not absolute categories. One
is almost reminded of the statement of the scientists that
"the concept of race is unanimously regarded by anthropo¬
logists as a classificatory device..."
It would thus appear that Buddhism is in accord with
the findings of the modern biologists who exploded the
doctrines of racism and would urge the biological unity
of mankind in support of the concept of a common
humanity.
In spite of the fact that the above passage brings out
the Buddhist attitude to the problem of race, it is not
possible to say that Early Buddhism was confronted with
a racial problem as such. Such a problem was, no doubt,
there in Rigvedic society where the race-conscious Aryan
who spoke derisively of the dark-skinned and noseless
aborigines treated the latter as an inferior race. But by
the time of the rise of Buddhism this race-consciousness
had given place to a caste-consciousness and it was the
Brahmin in particular and the "'higher" castes in general
who were probably derived largely from Aryan stock who
claimed superiority by virtue of the fairness of their skin
colour. It was claimed by the Brahmins to be one of the
hereditary characteristics of a Brahmin that
he was "handsome", fair, endowed with an (Cont'd on
excellent complexion and of the fairest colour page ¡g\
by virtue of which he claimed superiority over
BEJEWELLED WOMEN,
right and top of opposite
page, are among oldest and
best preserved of Ceylon's
wall paintings (5th century)
in the palace-fortress on the
summit of a tremendous
rock at Sigurya. In all there
are 21 female figures depict¬
ed rising from the clouds, and
hence all cut off at waist.
35

'No one has a right' (&».« from page 35;
those members of the human family, who have dark complexions.
The use of the word "Aryan" in the sense of '"noble" and
"spiritual" and "non-Aryan" in the sense of "ignoble" and "im¬
moral" is an eloquent testimony of how Buddhism ignored racial
claims and distinctions. Thus "Aryan quest" means "'spiritual
quest" which is defined as "the quest of one who being subject
to birth, decay and death realizes the evil consequences thereof
and seeks the immortal and secure haven of Nirvana". The
"Aryan haven" means the "spiritual haven" which is "'the state
of being free from lust, hatred and delusion".
There is, however, a philosophical theory of "racism" held by
some of the religious teachers in the Buddha's time which is
mentioned and criticized in the Buddhist texts. It is associated
with two teachers both of whom denied free will to man. One
was Purana Kassapa who denied man's capacity for moral action
in virtue of the fact that he had no free will. The other was
Makkhali Gosala who denied both free will and causation and
argued that beings were miraculously saved or doomed. They
argued that human beings belonged to one or another of six
species or specific types in virtue of which they had certain genetic
constitutions, physical traits and habits and psychological natures
which they were incapable of altering by their own will or effort.
The six types were designated by six colours. They were the black
species, the blue species, the red species, the yellow species, the
white species, and the pure white species.
Whether these colours denoted a difference in their physical
complexions is of course not clear but that they were genetically
different physical cum psychological types is what is implied by
the classification. To the black species belonged the butchers,
fowlers, hunters, fishermen, dacoits and executioners and all those
who adopt a cruel mode of living. They were, incidentally, treated
among the lowest castes and their complexion was on the whole
the darkest.
The other five specific types differed in virtue of their degree of
wickedness or saintliness which it was not in their power to alter.
The pure white species were reckoned to be the perfect saints
though their saintliness was considered to be natural to them as
much as their physical constitutions and was in no way achieved
by any effort or will on their part.
Arguing from the reality of free will and the capacity that man
has within himself of becoming either moral or immoral or even
happy or unhappy by transforming himself or degenerating morally
as the case may be, the Buddha denies that there are such fixed
human types genetically determined. There are no men who are
intrinsically good or evil by nature and must necessarily remain so,
for the evil can turn out to be good and the good degenerate into
the evil.
It would be seen that the emphasis is not on what a man is
born with but what he does with himself, since man, irrespective
of his physical constitution and psychological nature at birth, can,
given the opportunity and effort, change for better or worse.
