
Gautama the Buddha
Teacher of infinite compassion
by Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan
Vice-President of the Republic of India
IN Gautama the Buddha we have a master mind from the
East second to none so far as the influence on the
thought and life of the human race is concerned, and
sacred as the founder of a religious tradition whose hold
is hardly less wide and deep than any other. He was born
in the year 563 B.C., the son of Suddhodana, at Kapilavastu
on the Nepalese border one hundred miles north of
Benares. The spot was afterwards marked by the emperor
Asoka with a column which
is still standing. His own
name was Siddhartha, Gau¬
tama being his family name.
His mother died seven days
after his birth, and Suddho-
dana's second wife, Mahapra-
japati, brought up the baby.
In due course Gautama mar¬
ried his cousin Yasodhara
and had a son Rahula. Gau¬
tama was of a religious tem¬
perament and found the
pleasures and ambitions of
the world unsatisfying. The
ideal of the mendicant life
attracted him and we hear
frequently in his discourses of
the "highest goal of the holy
life for the sake of which
clansmen leave their homes
and go forth into homeless-
ness". The efforts of his
father to turn his mind to
secular interests failed, and at the age of twenty-nine he
left his home, put on the ascetic's garb, and became a wan¬
dering seeker of truth. This was the great renunciation.
Determined to attain illumination by the practice of
asceticism, he withdrew with five disciples to Uruvela, "a
pleasant spot and a beautiful forest", soothing to the senses
and stimulating to the mind. He started a series of severe
fasts, practised exercises of meditation, and inflicted on
himself terrible austerities. Weakness of body brought
lassitude of spirit. Though often during this period he
found himself at death's door, he got no glimpse into the
riddle of Ufe.
He therefore decided that asceticism was not the way to
enlightenment and tried to think out another way to it.
He remembered how once in his youth he had an
experience of mystic contemplation, and now tried to
pursue that line. It was then that he found the answer.
In the last watch of the night "'ignorance was destroyed,
Sir Sarvepalli RADHAKRISHNAN, one of the greatest thinkers of mod¬
ern Asia, has done much to explain the philosophy and religions of the
orient to the western world. Among his many works: " Indian Philosophy" ,
"East and West in Religion", "Eastern Religions and Western Thoughts" ,
"Religion and Society", an English translation of Dhammapada and "Gau¬
tama the Buddha".
SACRED STUPAS AND GIANT
STATUES. After the Buddha's
death and cremation, his ashes were
divided into eight parts and
enshrined in eight great stupas, or
pagodas (the number 8 corresponds
to the Noble Eightfold Path of
Buddhism and The Wheel of the
Law with Its eight spokes). Later,
thousands of these domeortower-
like shrines to house sacred relics
of the Buddha or his disciples were
built in cities and in the countryside
throughout the Buddhist world.
Upper photo shows ancient Ruwa-
weli Stupa, at Anuradhapura, Ceylon,
restored in the I 9th century. Giant
statues, below, depict the Reclining
Buddha (46 feet long) at the
moment of his death, and beside
him his favourite disciple, Ananda
(23 feet high). These colossal
1 2th century statues were cut from
solid rock at Polonnaruva, Ceylon.
knowledge had arisen... as I sat there, earnest, strenuous,
resolute". Gautama had attained bodhi or illumination
and becomes the Budhha, the Enlightened One.
Buddha started on his ministry after much hesitation.
He not merely preached, which is easy, but lived the kind
of life which he taught men should live. He adopted a
mendicant missionary's life with all its dangers of poverty,
unpopularity, and opposition.
In the deer park near the modern Sarnath "where
ascetics were allowed to dwell and animals might not be
killed", he preached his first sermon. Disciples began to
flock to him. At the end of three months there were sixty.
He said to them one day: "'Go now and wander for the
gain of many, for the welfare of many, out of compassion
for the world, for the good, for the gain and for the
welfare of gods and men. Let not two of you go the same
way. Preach .the doctrine which is glorious in the
beginning, glorious in the middle and glorious in the end,
in the spirit and in the letter: proclaim a consummate,
perfect and pure life of holiness." The
Buddha himself travelled far and wide for (Cont'd on
forty-five years and gathered many followers, next page)
Courtesy A. Vigier
THE BIRTH BENEATH THE TREE: The birth of Buddha as
depicted in an Nth century relief from Ananda Temple, Pagan, in
Burma. Maya, Mother of the Buddha holds a branch of the Sala tree
while the infant is seen emerging from above her right side. This
richly gilded relief has a contrasting background of deep red terracotta.

GAUTAMA THE BUDDHA
(Cont'd} Test by logic and life
In view of the variety of counsel he advised his disciples
to test by logic and life the different programmes submitted
to them and not to accept anything out of regard for their
authors. He did not make an exception of himself. He
says: "Accept not what you hear by report, accept not
tradition: do not hastily conclude that it must be so. Do
not accept a statement on the ground that it is found in our
books, nor on the supposition that this is acceptable, nor
because it is the saying of your teacher."
With a touching solicitude he begs his followers not to
be hampered in their thought by the prestige of his name.
" Such faith have I, Lord",
said Sariputta (one of his
closest disciples) "that me-
thinks there never has
been nor will be nor is now
any other greater or wiser
than the Blessed One".
"Of course, Sariputta",
is the reply, "you have
known all the Buddhas of
the past?" "No, Lord."
"Well then you know
those of the future?" "No,
Lord." "Then at least you
know me and have pene¬
trated my mind thorough¬
ly?" "'Not even that,
Lord." "'Then why, Sa¬
riputta, are your words so
grand and bold?"
There is nothing esoteric
about Buddha's teaching.
"O disciples, there are
three to whom secrecy
belongs and not openness.
Who are they? Secrecy be¬
longs to women, not
openness; secrecy belongs
to priestly wisdom, not
openness; secrecy belongs
to false doctrine, not open¬
ness... The doctrines and
the rules proclaimed by
the perfect Buddha shine
before all the world and
not in secret."
There is little of what
we call dogma in the Buddha's teaching. With a breadth of
view rare in that age and not common in ours he refuses to
stifle criticism. Intolerance seemed to him the greatest
enemy of religion. Once he entered a public hall at Am-
balatthika and found some of his disciples talking of a
Brahmin who had just been accusing Gautama of impiety
and finding fault with the order of mendicants he had
founded. "Brethren", said Gautama, "if others speak
against my religion, or against the Order, there is no reason
why you should be angry, discontented or displeased with
them. If you are so, you will not only bring yourselves
into danger of spiritual loss, but you will not be able to
judge whether what they say is correct or not correct" a
most enlightened sentiment, even after 2,500 years of ener¬
getic enlightenment.
He denounced unfair criticism of other creeds. "It is",
he said, "'as a man who looks up and spits at heaven; the
6
THE GREAT DEPARTURE of the future Buddha from the palace
of his father, King Suddhodana. As Prince Siddhartha, he left his wife
and child and renounced a life of ease and plenty, setting forth on his
search for enlightenment. This major event is depicted here on a
fragment of an 1 Ith century fresco from Chortchuk, Central Asia.
spittle does not soil the heaven, but comes back and defiles
his own person."
There was never an occasion when the Buddha flamed
forth in anger, never an incident when an unkind word
escaped his lips. He had vast tolerance for his kind. He
thought of the world as ignorant rather than wicked, as
unsatisfactory rather than rebellious. He met opposition
with calm and confidence. There was no nervous irri¬
tability or fierce anger about him. His conduct was the
perfect expression of courtesy and good feeling with a
spice of irony in it.
On one of his rounds
he was repulsed by a
householder with words
of abuse. He replied:
"Friend, if a householdei
sets food before a beggar,
but the beggar refuses to
accept the food, to whom
does the food then be¬
long?" The man replied:
"Why, to the householder
of course."
The Buddha said:
"Then, if I refuse to ac¬
cept your abuse and ill
will, it returns to you, does
it not? But I must go
away the poorer because I
have lost a friend." Con¬
version by compulsion was
unknown to him. Prac¬
tice, not belief, is the
foundation of his system.
After many years of toil
and travel, the Buddha
died at the age of 80 in a
village in Utar Pradesh.
The message of the
Buddha was not only for
his age but for all time.
The impermanence of the
world, its sorrow and suf¬
fering provoked his reli¬
gious quest. When he
met the old man bowed
down with years, the dead
man being carried to the
cremation ground and the man stricken with a foul disease
as also the holy man who carried himself with great dignity
and detachment, he was distressed by the first three sights
and attracted by the serenity of the ascetic. Buddha felt
the threat of nothingness, of non-being which one expe¬
riences when one looks upon the passing world of birth and
death, of disease and old age. The question is whether we
can acquire strength and courage, whether we can discover
the centre of freedom in ourselves which will save us from
the insecurity of time, from the body of this death. Buddha
gives us the answer, " By deepening our awareness and by
changing ourselves". The way to change the world is to
change the nature of man.
This change of nature is not automatic: The
seed becomes a plant, the puppy becomes a (Cont'd on
dog, but the human being has to develop his pages;
potentiality consciously and deliberately. The
Skeel

The Unesco Courier
LIFE OF POVERTY. This re¬
markable 2nd century tablet also
from Amaravati depicts the Eleva¬
tion of the Buddha's Begging Bowl.
As a religious mendicant the Buddha
carried an alms bowl and never
refused what was offered him for
his daily food. Today a life of
poverty is essential for a Buddhist
monk whose belongings include
only his robe, an alms bowl, a
needle, a string of beads to count
while meditating, a razor to shave
his head, and a filter to strain
insects from his drinking water lest
he inflict suffering on living beings.
Amaravati sculptures are often
marked by frenzied body move
ments as is seen in photo, left
Photos Govt. Museum. Madras
THE TALE OF THE MAD
ELEPHANT is recalled in this
medallion made between 2nd and
3rd century A.D., from Amaravati
in Andhra Province, southern India.
The legend associated with this
incident relates: "Now Devadatta,
a kinsman of the Exalted One, was
filled with a jealous fury and tried
to murder the Blessed One, for
when the Buddha was in Rajagriha
he caused an elephant to be mad¬
dened with intoxicating liquor and
sent him across the path of the
Buddha. The great beast, running
amok, saw the Blessed One ap¬
proach and was overcome by his
calm power and knelt before him."
Kneeling elephant is seen at right.

GAUTAMA THE BUDDHA (Cont'd
Noble eightfold path to perfection
Buddha asks us to find the teacher within ourselves and
attain enlightenment. He asks us to develop strength of
spirit through meditation and moral discipline. He asks
us to abstain from injury to living beings, to refrain from
taking other people's possessions, to develop chastity of
body and mind, to refrain from telling lies and to avoid
intoxicants. He does not merely say, "Thou shalt not
kill". He says, "thou shalt remove the inward attitudes
towards other beings, of anger, of resentment, of exploi¬
tation, of the lust of the heart." His morality was not
one of outward conformity but of inward cleansing.
The text of his first sermon has come down to us.
There is no reason to doubt that it contains the words and
the ideas of the Buddha. Its teaching is quite simple.
Honolulu Academy of Arts
YEARS OF ASCETICISM, fasting and terrible austerities often brought Buddha to death's
door. During six years he underwent many fasts such as are hard for a man to endure and resisted
the attempts of King Mara, a demon, to tempt him away from his purpose. But he still got no
glimpse of the riddle of life and he decided that this was not the way to gain enlightenment. He
therefore broke his fast. This I 6th century statuette of The Penitent Buddha is from Fukien, China.
8
After observing that those who wish to lead a religious life
should avoid the two extremes of self-indulgence and self-
mortification and follow the middle way, he enunciates the
four truths about sorrow, the cause of sorrow, the removal
of sorrow, and the way leading to it.
For the removal of ignorance a strict morality is
essential. Simple goodness in spirit and deed is the basis
of his religion. The noble eightfold path represents a
ladder of perfection. Right views, right aspirations, right
speech, right action, right living, right effort, right mind¬
fulness, right contemplation. The eightfold path is more
than a code of morality. It is a way of life.
The Budhha gave a workable system for monks and lay
people. He laid down five moral rules binding on all
people, which are: refraining from
taking what is not given, from wrong¬
ful indulgence in the passions, from
lying and from intoxicants. It is not
abstention from work that he de¬
manded. A Jain layman asked him
if he taught the doctrine of inaction,
and the Buddha replied: "How
might one rightly say of me that the
ascetic Gautama holds the principle
of inaction? I proclaim the non-
doing of evil conduct of body, speech
and thought. I proclaim the non-
doing of various kinds of wicked and
evil things... I proclaim the doing
of good conduct of the body, speech
and thought. I proclaim the doing
of various kinds of good things."
In the Buddha's scheme of ethics,
the spirit of love was more important
than good works. "All good works
whatever are not worth one-sixteenth
part of love which sets free the heart.
Love which sets free the heart com¬
prises them. It shines, gives light
and radiance." "As a mother, at
the risk of her life watches over her
only child, so let every one cultivate
a boundless love towards all beings."
Respect for animal life is an in¬
tegral part of morality. A good
Buddhist does not kill animals for
pleasure or eat flesh. They are his
humble brethren and not lower
creatures over whom he has domi¬
nion by divine right. He does
not speak of sin but only of ignor¬
ance and foolishness which could
be cured by enlightenment and sym¬
pathy. When the individual over¬
comes ignorance, breaks the pow¬
er of his own deeds to drag him
back into expiation, ceases to desire
and to regret and attains enlighten¬
ment, he passes into the world of
being as distinct from that of exist¬
ence, being which is free from form
and formlessness, from pain and de¬
light, though that state is not human¬
ly conceivable. It is deliverance,
freedom from rebirth, Nirvana.

The Unesco Courier
Honolulu Academy of Arts, Hawaii
At the age of 29 Gautama left his house, his young wife, his newly-born child and his parents. He wandered for
six years in search of Wisdom and Truth, accepting the teachings of well-known ascetics and practising self-mortifi¬
cation including starvation, without finding the answer. One day he found a beautiful place on the bank of a river
under a large tree not far from the town of Gaya and there he sat in meditation, determined to arrive at the truth.
While plunged in his thoughts he was tempted by the Demon Mara and his hordes. Despite the temptations he
remained calm and steadfast, plunged in meditation. It was then that he attained Supreme Wisdom or Enlighten¬
ment. He then rose and proceeded to Benares where he first undertook to spread his message. Photo shows a
Bodisattva (Gautama before he became the Buddha) meditating underthe Bodhitree. (Lung-Men, China 6th century)
