London's own language
by David Gunstoft
Visitors to London cannot move about the capital for
long without hearing odd words spoken by the natives
that seem to have no apparent meaning. If they mix
to any degree with down-to-earth Cockneys, be they bus-
conductors, taxi-drivers, street tradesmen, porters or shoe-shine
boys, or, more especially, overhear these colourful types
talking among themselves, they will quickly realize that, quite
apart from his delicious accent, your true Londoner has a
special language of his own.
And so he has, for Cockney rhyming slang, always
respectable and currently spoken by upwards of two million
Londoners in the Metropolis, and known, at least in part, by
a great many Englishmen, is indeed London's own language.
Grasp the principle behind this initially incoherent slang it
is not a form of jargon, as we shall see later and you see the
comedy and the colour in it. As is well-known throughout
the world, the . typical Cockney has many sparrow-like
qualities; he is ever perky and chirpy, and whatever the
weather, whatever difficulties and hardships he may be
suffering, he manages to keep a cheerful outlook on life, an
outlook that is always apparent in his manner, his chuckle, his
bearing and his special slang.
The Cockney sense of hu¬
mour is strange but lively and
has a touch of philosophy
about it, too. A good deal of
it is based on simple word¬
play, or rather on sound-play,
which explains why rhyming
slang achieves its best effect
when spoken, not read, which
it rarely is anyway. The
Cockney takes an insensate
delight in talking and when
talking, in going the longest
possible way round to get to
his usually comic point.
That, in essence, is the
secret of rhyming slang. First
of all, any common word in
everyday use is replaced by
another word, or more usually
a phrase of two, three or four
words, which rhyme with it, not always accurately, perhaps,
but nearly always obviously, in speech. Thus the simple word
stairs becomes apples and pears. To say stairs does not appeal
to the Cockney; he must invent something similar and
recognizable (by means of the rhyme) and say that instead!
So, apples and pears, a smooth-flowing sequence of words, it
becomes.
But that is too easy, and not elaborate enough. Therefore
the first word of the substitute phrase is generally used,
just apples, as short for apples and pears. Thus to run up the
apples means to run up the stairs! True rhyming slang
consists of an endless series of these abbreviations, which tend
to make confusion doubly confused to the uninitiated. For
although the rhymes are sometimes guessable, the shortened
forms often bear no possible resemblance to their real
meanings. For instance, rats to a Cockney means dice, since
rats is the accepted abbreviation for the common, paired
phrase rats and mice, in which the key rhyme is obvious.
This means that much conversation where rhyming slang is
used freely is seemingly inane, and quite unintelligible to the
outsider. You hear people saying things like "'As it began to
Andy Cain and I had no Quaker, I took the baa lamb to the
Gates of Rome", or "'The trouble put our cherry in the
dolly", for the following simple statements: "'As it began to
rain and I had no coat (Quaker oat, a proprietary article long
known), I took the tram home", and "The wife (trouble and
strife) put our dog (cherry hog) in trie garden (Dolly Varden)."
At first sight, it seems that any rhyming word has been
picked at random, but actually they are all words or phrases
that come readily to the lips of a Londoner, not necessarily the
Londoner of today, for this slang goes back a century at least
Trouble and strife = wife
House to let = bet
Iron Duke = fluke
Gertie Gitana = banana
Brass tacks = facts
and at any rate in part probably much more. A watch is a
bottle of Scotch, and a shop a lollipop. Morning is Gipsy's
warning, bet is house to let. But here and there a shrewd and
not always very oblique humour creeps into the rhyme.
We have already seen trouble-and-strife for wife: there arc
God-ferbids for kids, gay and frisky is whisky, plates of meat
are feet. Then there is Mother Hubbard for cupboard, oily
rag for fag, bull, and cow for row (in the sense of a noisy
quarrel), didn't oughter for water, rat and mouse for house,
and a great many more in which the comic side of the idea
is exploited to the full.
In many ways the constant use of only the abbreviated
phrases makes rhyming slang even more bizarre than it would
otherwise be, and it is remarkable how the true rhyming slang
'"professor" uses nothing but the first, non-rhyming word, and
how his hearers always follow him with ease. He will call
his daughter bricks, from bricks and mortar (note how the
chosen rhymes are often more Cockney in accent than true
rhymes), refer to gin as needle, from needle and pin, and pat
a child on the once, for once a week (cheek).
But you cannot listen to much rhyming slang without
realizing that London was its birthplace and is still its true
home. Actual place-names
in the London area occur
time and again. Hampstead,
short for Hampstead Heath,
is widely used for teeth:
St. Martin's le Grand is hand;
Hackney Marsh is glass;
Colney Hatch is match; Chalk
Farm is arm, and Peckham
Rye more often just Peck-
ham is the generally ac¬
cepted term for a tie.
No one knows for certain
just how all this began, but
its origins go back to the
murky history of the London
underworld probably 150 or
more years ago. Many of
the additions are dated by
reference to persons or in¬
cidents of long ago, like Iron
Duke for fluke, Gertie Gitana (a famous music-hall star of
long ago) for banana.
This much is certain: rhyming slang as used today is
eminently respectable and is often employed by persons of
education when they lapse into the vernacular "'What's the
bird lime (time)?" but it was originally the cant spoken in
thieves' kitchens and the underworld generally. Footpads,
pickpockets, burglars, tricksters, felons and the rest used, and
presumably invented it, as part of their calling, and it was some
time before odd words here and there began to leak out into
the ordinary world, and even longer before it came into general
use by the citizens of London, and to a lesser extent to English
people everywhere.
From thieves' cant it has been promoted to a seriously-used
but semi-humorous slang, many examples of which have found
their way into English vernacular of an everyday kind. For
instance, the saying to get down to brass tacks is really rhyming
slang, for brass tacks are facts. Loaf (of bread) for head
("Use your loaf!") is used pretty widely a good many miles
from London, while Joanna for piano is almost universal slang.
Although sovereigns as gold coins are unknown in Britain
today, pounds are still referred to as Jimmy O' Goblins.
An interesting fact about rhyming slang is that it is not
generally found outside Great Britain, although odd expres¬
sions and words are commonly used outside London and much
of it is well known in the Army and both the Royal and
Merchant Navies, yet it has spread to parts of Australia and is
firmly established there. Doubtless it was introduced there
long ago by Cockney seamen and emigrants, just as Cockney
volunteers introduced it to the Armed Services.
r~ , , . ,, ^ (Cont'd on
From Australia it spread by sea to San Fran- paee 33)
29

London's own language
(Cont'd from p. 29)
cisco and parts of the Pacific coast of U.S.A. Here, however,
it has largely dropped back into the underworld, and is still in
use among the criminal fringe there to this day. This degene¬
ration is interesting, since it shows that rhyming slang must have
some particular attraction for those whose ways are not all that
they might be!
There is, as yet, no complete and authoritative dictionary of
this slang, which is a serious sociological and etymological lack.
The scope for such a work of reference is obvious, and it would
be a volume of unique value. One or two small collections of the
commoner terms have been made, but they make no pretence to
completeness, and contain glaring errors. Such a dictionary ought
to be compiled, before some of the less-used die out.
When a Londoner calls his glass a Khyber pass, he is (probably
quite unconsciously) commemorating an otherwise long-forgotten
British Army defeat in Afghanistan in 1842! Such strange facts
ought not to be lost to posterity. When he calls the modern
police Flying Squad the Sweeney Todd, he is referring to the 1829
melodrama of that name about the Demon Barber of Fleet
Street, who shaved his clients too closely and disposed of their
bodies to an old woman who sold cooked meat pies !
Fancy calling your sister skin-and-blister, or your son your Bath
bun! Cherry ripe has nothing to do with fruit or the old cries of
London Town, but is a pipe. You might, perhaps, be justified in
calling your lodger artful dodger if he decided to half-inch (pinch,
steal) your tit-fer, (tit-fer-tat, hat), but that would be better than if
he took your rounds round the houses, trousers.
As might be expected, food and drink provide many an amusing
example of Cockney humour and ingenuity. Some bowl my hoop
would be a recognizable start to a good Jim Skinner, especially
if it were described on the me and you (menu) and a nice Joe
Blake is clear enough, but you might fight shy of a clothes peg,
although it would be merely an egg. A piece of stand at ease
would turn out to be cheese, nicer with some Harvey Nichol to
go with it, so long as it were accompanied by a slice of Uncle
Fred well spread with stammer and stutter !
As for drinks, pig's ear is the Englishman's usual choice, but
there is generally a choice of needle and pin, gay and frisky, finger
and thumb, Rosy Lee, Jack the Dandy, or just plain didn't oughter,
sometimes known as rat-catcher's daughter! Even a single drink
would be a tumble down the sink, but that would not make you
elephant's trunk. If it did, a policeman, originally a copper and
now successfully disguised as a grasshopper, might take you away
to lock you up for the night in a flowery dell. To pay the fine
you would need some bees and honey, and it would have to be
ready sausage and mash, which would be a nuisance if all you
had was a Lord of the Manor (tanner, sixpence) although even
half an Oxford (Oxford scholar, dollar) would probably not be
enough.
Some of the slang words are startling, like a butcher's hook,
which merely means a look, and a dig in the grave, which is what
men do every morning with some Cape of Good Hope and a
razor. If someone said he had something in his steak-and-kidney
pie, you would have to look in his eye, not in the pantry. Left
in the lurch, meaning church, and Westminster (Abbey) for
shabby, bring you back once again to the Cockney's forthright
type of fun.
There is no sign yet that this grotesque yet irresistible slang is
dying out at all, and long may it remain. Visitors to Britain
may start off by being confused and startled by it, but if they
listen carefully, and get the hang of it, they will end by being
fascinated by it. Fortunately, it is not very hard on one's down
the drains!
33
