:?f¿ IVY* IW Fs*TT^* ***íf<^
'f in»; *
Art travelled the Silk Route to China
Buddhism appeared in China for the first time about 65 A. D.
when Indian monks were travelling northwards across the
mountain passes as missionaries and Chinese pilgrims
went to India to learn about the new religion of enlightenment.
When Buddhism came to China over trade routes like the
famous Silk Route through Central Asia, it had already developed
a ritual with definite needs temples, monasteries, statues and
paintings. It therefore brought with it a new idea about the
function of art; namely that art had to serve the divinity.
One of the effects of the new religion was greatly to increase
foreign contacts. One great Buddhist pilgrim, Fa-Hsien left China
for India in 399 A.D. and returned in 414 after spending 15 years
compiling an eye-witness account of the country. Another scholar
monk, Hsuan-Tsang, went to India in 629 A.D., staying 16 years.
Between the 4th and 6th centuries Buddhist art experienced
a great period of expansion especially in northern China under
the Wei dynasty. The Chinese artist was by now altering
according to his own' ideal the forms he had received from the
west. This development continued under the Sui dynasty (581-
36
618), one of whose emperors ordered the making of over 105,000
statues and statuettes of the Buddha in gold, silver, wood, dried
lacquer, ivory and stone.
The richest period of Chinese Buddhist art came in the years of
the T'ang dynasty (618 to 906 A.D.). After initial setbacks at the
beginning of the dynasty, Buddhism again expanded and flourished
in close association with the best artists of the period. In the
T'ang capital (modern Sian) a great Buddhist monument, The
Grey Goose Pagoda, was raised and in all parts of the newly-
expanded Empire temples were built and richly decorated
with carvings, sculptures and frescoes.
In the llth and 12th centuries the quality of Buddhist painting
was still high, but . sculpture was already in a state of decline.
While many sculptured works were still being produced, they
lacked the inspiration and the religious fervour which the Wei
period six centuries earlier, for example, had provided. The same
is true, though at a much later date, of Buddhist painting,
which never again reached the heights it had achieved under the
great artists of the T'ang dynasty.

The Unesco Courier
TEMPLES IN LIVING ROCK
were excavated by Chinese Bud¬
dhists to whom the idea came from
India via Afghanistan. Some of the
most impressive Buddhist rock tem¬
ples in China are those hewn out
of the cliff face at Lung Men in the
north, about 5 I 0 A.D. At that time,
the Wei dynasty, which controlled
nearly all the north of China, estab¬
lished Its capital close to Lung Men,
near the Yellow River. The grottos
were enriched with hundreds of
¡mages and stelae by the Wei kings
and later by those of the T'ang
dynasty which held sway until 759
A.D. Among Lung Men's celebrated
works are giant Buddhas (one is
nearly 50 feet in height) and count¬
less smaller Buddha figures which
are placed in the minor shrines.
I
Photos by Hélène Hoppenot, re-
. produced from "Extrême-Orient",
copyright by Editions Ides et
Calendes, Neuchâtel, Switzerland.
Chinese Buddhist
Association, Peking
INNUMERABLE IMAGES of Buddha adorn the entrances and inside walls of the
grottos and shrines cut into the rock face at Yun Kang, near Ta tung, the first capital
of the Wei kings in Shansi Province, northern China. Of earlier date (around 414 A.D.)
than the Lung Men temples (opposite page), those at Yun Kang have some of the
finest existing examples of Wei period reliefs. The beauty and number of the carvings
reflect the enthusiasm with which Buddhism was taken up by the Wei people. At
this period, Northern Chinese Buddhist sculptors took as models the clay and mud
statues of Buddha from Kucha in Central Asia, and tried to copy them as faithfully
as possible. By the end of the same century, Chinese artists had begun to alter,
according to their own ideals, the forms they had received from the West. Photos
show, top: Facade of weatherworn Buddha images flanking the entrance to the Yun
Kang grottos; bottom: Imagesand paintings on the wall of the I 3th grotto at Yun Kang.
37

CHINA (Cont'd)
The Cave of the
Some of the finest treasures of Chinese
Buddhist painting and sculpture are preserv¬
ed In three great "art galleries" hewn out
of the cliff sides of northern China. These
are the Buddhist cave temples and shrines
at Lung Men in Shansi Province and those at
Tun Huang and Maichishan in Kansu province.
Though many paintings have been damaged
by time and weather, thousands of others,
still in remarkably good condition, offer a
panorama of Chinese Buddhist art from the
3rd to the 13th century A.D.
Portraits of merchants and princes, whose
donations helped to build and decorate the
shrines and temples, are often found on the
walls. Group of nobles (I) were benefactors
of Lung Men temples where this stone relief
was carved and painted during the sixth
century A. D.
Fragment of a painting on silk showing
the head of a temple benefactor (2) isa I 0 th
century work found in the Caves of the Thou¬
sand Buddhas at Tun Huang. Two thousand
years ago, caravans travelling on the Great
Silk Road from China to Persia and India,
halted at Tun Huang to rest and replenish
their food and water supplies before crossing
the Gobi or Lop Nor deserts. Before facing
the perils of the journey, many merchants
and travellers visited the great temple
which Buddhist monks had established in a
cave outside the city to pray for safety and
38

The Unesco Courier
1,000 Buddhas
success and to give donations. During the
thousand years that this practice continued
hundreds of temples were dug out of the
rock and richly decorated with paintings,
frescoes and images of the Buddha. The
dry desert air has helped to preserve many
of the paintings which are still exquisitely
coloured, even though some of them date
back some 1,400 years.
In one of the Tun Huang caves there is a
remarkable painted panel whose centrepiece
depicts a scene from the Buddhist paradise.
Fragment of this panel (3) reveals skill and
imagination of ancient Chinese artists in
executing delicately frescoed figures.
More than 180 Buddhist shrines and
grottos cut into a sheer cliff-face at Maichishan
were found during investigations in 1941
and 1953. Here, not all the frescoes are
of religious subjects. Many present a vivid
picture of everyday life in past centuries,
showing costumes, carriages, ceremonies
and hunting and battle scenes. Painting
from Maichishan (4) is thought to date from
the end of the 4th century A.D.
In a different style but equally remarkable
is the detail of a painting on silk (5) dating
from the 9th century A.D., and found in
one of the Caves of the Thousand Buddhas
at Tun Huang.
Photos : (I) Musée Guimet Archives, Paris ; (2 and 4)
Courtesy A. Vigier ; (3 and 5) Copyright Skeel-
British Museum.
39

CHINA (Cont'd)
IN A SMALL STREET just inside one of the city gates of Peking is
a Buddhist nunnery. Here, some 40 nuns of all ages live a cloistared
existence in pious search for Nirvana, rarely leaving the confines of
the nunnery except to go on pilgrimages. Their life is purely devotional,
prayers and meditation taking upmost of the day. They have shaven.
Photos by Hedda Morrisson, copyright Camera Press.
heads and wear dark red or purple robes. Each morning they hold
a service in the main temple building where prayers are said and Buddhist
scriptures read to the accompaniment of percussion instruments.
Above, left: A shaven-headed nun beats a wooden tablet to announce
the arrival of visitors for the Abbess. Right: A nun at prayer.
ABOUT 65 A.D. the emperor Ming-ti of the Chinese Han dynasty
is said to have dreamed that a golden image of the Buddha appeared
from out of the west, and to have sent messengers over the Himalayas
to find out the source of the dream. In 67 A.D. the mission returned
to the emperor's capital, Loyang, bringing the first Buddhist images
and scriptures to China. They later arrived in China by sea and
/
'JEJí
over Asia's trade routes. In 68, A.D. the emperor built a monastery,
known as the White Horse Temple (because the sacred images and
books had been brought on a white horse). Belon, left: The Chi Yun
Pagoda in the White Horse Temple; Right: The Wuta Temple (Five
Pagoda Temple) in the western suburbs of Peking. It was built in
1403 under the Ming dynasty, in the Indian architectural style.
Photos Chinese Buddhist Association. Peking.
40

The Unesco Courier
The lotus: a flower rich in symbolism
Photo Hedda Morrisson, copyright Camera Press.
RARE COPPER BASIN decorated all around with figures of Buddha
from the Buddhist nunnery, Peking. Each summer it is used to grow
lotus flowers. The lotus, or " padma ", is widely used in the art and
in the religious symbolism of Buddhism. Long regarded as a sacred
plant, the lotus and its flower aptly symbolise life's fulfilment. With
its roots in the earth, its stem in water, its blossom in the air, and
blooming in the rays of the sun, the lotus thus symbolises four
elements. It is also a symbol of rebirth ; its seeds pass from the air to
the water and then into the earth where they germinate. It also sym¬
bolizes purity as well as Nirvanathe spiritual goal of Buddhism.
41
