Copyright Meyer, Carpentras.
CRUMBLING WALLS were practically all that remained of La Roque-sur-Pernes, a tiny village
nestling on a sunny hillside in Southern France (above). Life was brought back to this decaying
hamlet by refugees from camps in Austria who set about building new homes for themselves.

EXODUS IN REVERSE
Refugee
a dying
farmers revive
French village
BLACKSMITH, MOTHER
AND SCHOOLGIRL
the newcomers to La Roque-sur-
Pernes have now become well
integrated into the local French
community.
»
23

THE PROVENCAL
VILLAGE THAT
ALMOST DIED
UNTIL a fev/ years ago, La Roque-
sur-Pernes was a dying village.
Abandoned houses and farms were
crumbling Into ruins, stables and barns
were empty and most of the fields lay
fallow. The exodus of farmers and agri¬
cultural workers to the towns of southern
France had. reduced the population from
400 to less than 80. It looked as If the
village would soon disappear from the
map of France.
But the exodus from this sunny Pro¬
vencal village went Into reverse In 1950
when ten families of refugees whose ances¬
tors originated from this part of France
arrived bringing new blood and new life
back to La Roque-sur-Pernes.
This first group of refugees had been
working as farm labourers in Alsace,
hoping some day they would once again
own small farms. Later, a second group
of eleven families came directly from
camps in Austria. A French voluntary
aid organization bought houses and land
for them, the cost to be repaid out of the
profits from their farming. Funds were
provided from a Ford Foundation grant
administered by the Office of the U.N,
High Commissioner for Refugees.
The French Government was especially
interested in the experiment because it
pointed the way to halting the exodus
to the towns- and restoring prosperity
to regions which had once been rich and
fertile. It gave funds and granted chil¬
dren's allowances and free medical care
to the settlers. The Vaucluse Depart¬
ment authorities loaned a truck, improved
the roads leading to the village and pro¬
vided a teacher for the village school.
Some farms were immediately habitable,
but others needed repair. Here the
refugees showed they were as good .
builders as they were skilled farmers.
One farmhouse was completely rebuilt
In two months without any outside help.
By the end of 1954, over 200 acres of
land had been brought back into cultiva¬
tion and fruit trees, vines, cereals, market
produce and beets planted. Direct grants
were made for the purchase of seeds, farm
tools, a tractor and building materials.
Titles to houses and land, at present vested
in the French voluntary authority super¬
vising the settlement, will finally revert
to the settlers on repayment of the origi¬
nal loans.
Today La Roque-sur-Pernes is a thriving
community and the former refugees are
firmly settled in their new homes. They
have received help, but their success in
bringing back prosperity to abandoned
lands is largely due to their own efforts.
Their example suggests a single, practical
solution for two serious problems how to
resettle refugee farming families and how
to combat the rural drift to the towns.
Copyright Meyer, Carpentras.
HARD-WORKING refugee families turned over long-fallow fields and planted fruit trees, vines,
cereals and beets. The new settlers will own land and buildings after repayment of initial loans.
UNATIONS.
APT FARMERS, the refugees soon brought land back into cultivation. Some even went on work¬
ing after sunset by the light of lanterns. Above, mid-day meal break during the cherry harvest.
UNATIONS.
VILLAGE SCHOOL was about to close in 1950there was not a single child of school age
in the community. Today 20 out of class of 25 are children who come from refugee families.
24
