Underground
workers round
the clock
1,750,000
ploughmen
per acre
by David Gunston
Turned up by your fork in the garden, or lying
shrivelled and stranded on a pathway or
road, a worm looks a helpless, insignificant
enough creature. The everyday epithet "worm"
seems well-chosen. Yet without him and his
kin, human civilization would not only be the
poorer: it would be impossible, at least as we
know it today.
Earthworms are nature's own cultivators of
the soil. Nothing lush can grow on rock or
chalk or gravel. There must be a 'fertile topsoil
in which to raise the world's crops. The solu¬
tion to the grave and little-realized world prob¬
lem of declining soil fertility may yet prove to
lie with that widely-despised creature, the
earthworm.
By ceasless boring and tunnelling earthworms
make and renew the vital layer of topsoil. They
keep it friable, transform animal and vegetable
waste, particularly dead leaves and plants, into
rich humus. They turn natural minerals in the
soil into soluble and easily assimilable plant food.
They break up and aerate the earth, allowing
rain to drain through. They bury stones and
rubbish, scavenging and cleansing. In short,
they are the first husbandmen, and still the most
important. What is more, they live extraordi¬
narily long lives for such lowly animals up to
15 years if unmolested and they never cease
working, night or day.
In an age that is speedily and terrifyingly
losing its natural soil fertility through over¬
cropping, mis-management and erosion, it is
high time to take stock of the worm's true
value. It can be said with some truth that after
centuries of mild interest and little knowledge,
the earthworm is at last coming to be 'fully
recognized as an important factor in human
affairs. Ever since Aristotle there has
been a good deal of legend about (Cont'd
worms, but ' little real information, on next
Naturalists and scientists of all ages page)
IS

THE EARTHWORM
(Continued)
^^A**'
Research work can of course only be
based upon a prolonged and detailed
study of the worms themselves.
What sort of a creature is an
earthworm ? Pick up a garden worm
and examine it closely, and you
will see that it consists of a closely-
linked series of rings. There may
be anything from 100 to 400 of these,
according to the size and kind ai the
worm, and they form a rr^uscular
chain from the elongated head
(without eyes, nose or ears), to the
tapering tail. For its size, one of
the strongest creatures on earth, the
worm is tough, flexible, wiry and
perfectly streamlined for its burrow¬
ing existence underground. A spe¬
cimen weighing, less than one-
thirtieth of an ounce can shift a
stone weighing two ounces, or over
sixty times its own weight.
By its very nature, a worm is
little more than a digestive organism,
perpetually feeding. Everything in
a worm's design is subserviated to
the endless processes of the alimen¬
tary canal which runs the length o'f
its elastic body. Blind and impe¬
tuous, questing and tireless, the
have been curious about them, but
few recognized their rightful place in
the scheme of things.
Gilbert White, of Selborne, the
English naturalist, had more than an
inkling of the true status of the little
wriggling creatures he watched in his
eighteenth-century Hampshire gar¬
den, yet his plea for what he called
"a good monograph of worms" was
not to be answered 'for something
like a hundred years, until Charles
Darwin published his great book,
"The Formation of Vegetable Mould
Through the Action of Earthworms,
with Observations on Their Habits",
at the end of his life, in 1881.
Darwin had studied earthworms all
his life, beginning in his college days,
45 years before, and he placed on
record his conclusions about the
power for world good that lay in
its worm population. -"Vegetable
mould" was his name for fertile
humus in the layers of topsoil, and,
he stated: "Worms have played a
more important part in the history
of the world than most persons would
at first suppose." He found that
"all the vegetable mould over the
whole world has passed many times
through, and will again pass many
times through, the intestinal canals
of worms". So when Aristotle had
spoken of worms as "the intestines of
the earth", he had not been 'far
wrong.
Much of Darwin's book was found
to be . true and helpful, but he was
factually wrong on several matters,
notably the numbers of worms in the
soil. He estimated that arable land
carries an average of some 53,000 to
the acre, but recent research at the
Rothamstead Experimental Station in
England, have shown that even poor
soil may support 250,000 worms to the
acre, while rich fertile 'farmland may
have up to 1,750,000.
More important still, recent work
tends to accept the conclusion that
the only way to restore soil ferti¬
lity before it is too late is to em-
16
ploy earthworms. By harnessing
them, in fact, mankind may yet save
its future food supplies. It is impera¬
tive to restore immediate fertility
to the earth's soil for maximum food
production. Normally, earthworms
would do this anyway, but such is the
rate of cropping nowadays, that
they would require 500 to 1,000 years
the task. Under artificially
controlled conditions, provided* other
circumstances were favourable, a
vast regulated "task force" of spe¬
cially-bred earthworms might be able
to do the job within 5 or 10 years.
Methods of cross-breeding worms
have been devised to produce the
most suitable types for use in farm¬
ing, and various techniques for
raising large numbers of healthy,
active worms in a limited space
under cover have already been per¬
fected. The present trend, although
still in the experimental stage, is
towards the setting-up of "earth¬
worm 'farms", where vast stocks of
worms can be raised in beds of
humus. These are in commercial
production in U.S.A. and Canada,
whilst amateur enthusiasts in Britain
and other lands are breeding their
own stocks from specially selected
strains in gardens and holdings.
Greedy soil swallower
IN ,all cases, the emphasis is on
worm topsoil the predigested,
pulverised humus after it has
passed through an earthworm's di¬
gestive organs. Scientific analyses
have shown that this topsoil happens
to be the richest medium in the world
for growing things in. It normally
contains five times as much nitrate
nitrogen, eleven times as much
potash, seven times as much phos¬
phorus, three times as much magne¬
sium and about 40 per cent more
humus than is found in the first six
inches depth of ordinary soil. All
these plant foods are also in a "far
more readily assimilated form than
those found in average topsoil.
worm seeks and disposes of food
without pause. It is endowed with
sufficient instinctive intelligence to
enable it to exist, satisfactorily wher¬
ever it happens to find itself.
If you run a finger along a worm's
body from tail to head, it feels rough.
It is not the smooth creature you
might expect. This roughness is
caused by tiny clusters, of erectile
bristles set at intervals along its
length. With these, and a self-
secreted slimy lubricating mucus, the
worm is able to burrow through all
types o'f soil sandy, rocky, heavy or
waterlogged. Cut a hapless worm
in two with your spade, and the
head end will usually grow a new
tail and live, but never vice-versa.
From the creature's own point of
view its most important feature is
its oval mouth, which is protected
by a long, overhanging lip. As it
tunnels its way along, this helps to
push aside most of the soil, while
the rest is swallowed greedily,
passing straight into a bird-like crop
in the neck, where minute 'fragments

The Unesco Courier. February 1956
of grit grind everything down into a
fine, moist paste. Leaves, grass, roots,
stems, rubbish all are reduced to a
smooth residue, which is then
swiftly digested in the threadlike
stomach, the worm extracting its own
nourishment from the bacteria in the
soil. Stones up to one-twentieth
of an inch across are swallowed and
incorporated in the gizzard, larger
ones are eaten around and thus
started on their slow sinking pro¬
cess which is finally completed by the
depositing of layers of worms-casts
on the surface.
Bracing its body for the effort, and
anchoring itself by its tail under¬
ground, a worm can grasp and pull
down beneath the surface quite large,
fragments of rotting vegetation and
animal matter all the dead and
dying refuse that litters the earth.
Tougher -food is first coated with a
kind of saliva to aid the digestive
processes. In Britain it has been
estimated that three inches of com¬
pletely new topsoil from worm-
castings or excrement is deposited
every fifteen years or so, and the
same is probably true of most lands.
Where the native earthworm popula¬
tion can be artificially increased, of
course, the rate of this vital work
can be stepped up.
Although blind, worms are sensitive
to light, and 'feed mostly at night,
rising to the surface after dusk and
burying themselves again before day¬
break. There are in fact a number
of different species of worms, includ¬
ing the brandling, found in manure-
heaps and beloved oí anglers for bait,
and the four-foot monsters which
gurgle their way into the squelchy
forest mud of parts of Australia.
Worms are found all over the globe,
except where it is too hot and dry
for them to exist, as in parched
deserts, but even in hot lands they
teem by the rivers and lakes. As
these untold myriads never rest or
hibernate, but dig and tunnel maybe
for years, constantly yielding this
incredibly fertile layer of cast soil, it
is small wonder that the earth has
been rich for so long.
So the vision of the lowly earth¬
worm as the key to the world's
deepest problem that of unfailing
food suplies for an ever-increasing
population may not prove to be as
fantastic as it first sounds. Cer¬
tainly nature is co-operative in the
way that these creatures respond to
artificial rearing.
When two meet, they clasp toge¬
ther in a strange, slimy embrace,
overlapping one another to about
one-third of their lengths, heads
facing opposite ways, and locked
together for all the world like a
Turk's head knot. Thus, each ferti¬
lizes the other's eggs, and these are
then passed over the body in a tube
which is eventually cast off in the
form of a yellow, lemon-shaped
cocoon. Each cocoon may contain
up to 20-odd tiny eggs, which hatch
out into minute, white, thread-like
worms in about ten days. But if
these cocoons are dried out, or kept
in a refrigerator, they may be pre¬
served for as long as eighteen
months, and may thus be sent all
over the world. Once placed in the
right conditions for hatching, the
eggs then yield healthy young worms
after the usual incubation period.
As all worms are male and female
in one body, only a single cocoon-full
of eggs is needed to start up a colony.
Worm harnessing crusade
The leading figure in the Ameri¬
can worm-harnessing movement
is a bespectacled physiothera¬
pist, Dr. Thomas J. Barrett, who first
became interested in worms when in
France in 1918. Noticing an aged
French peasant carefully sweeping up
some loose soil by a damp well near
the Argonne Forest, quite oblivious of
nearby gunfire, he asked him why
this particular earth should be so
precious. "Le Bon Dieu knows how
to build good earth and He has given
the secret to the earthworms", the
old man replied. Barrett was much
impressed, and began a long study o'f
the subject which convinced him of
the potential value of these creatures.
Eighteen years later, his business
a failure, and his assets only $9, he
decided to stake his future on
earth-worms and to press for their
scientific culture. In a few years he
had turned a barren Californian hill¬
side into a lush paradise of a garden,
full of outsize vegetables, fruit,
flowers and shrubsall thanks to the
rich cast-soil in which he had grown
them. He figured that a horse could
do only a limited amount of
ploughing, and then only on suitable
terrain, yet a million worms roughly
equal a horse in weight, are in the
aggregate much stronger and more
enduring, need only waste matter
and the existing soil for 'food, yet
deposit 100 tons of topsoil to the acre
every year without fail. His faith
was justified, and he now breeds
worms for sale in a dozen countries,
and leads the campaign, supported
by a growing body o'f disciples, not
for more soil under cultivation, but
for more worm soil in existing arable
areas.
"'Crowded on the face of the earth
are over two thousand million peo¬
ple", says Barrett, "depending on the
topsoil for food. There are on the
earth approximately four thousand
million acres of cultivable land two
acres per person. We barely feed
ourselves and our topsoil is dwindling.
It is time we harnessed the earth¬
worm to rebuild it."
It would indeed be remarkable if
man finally recognized the worm's
good turn to humanity by working
with him, cultivating him instead of
continually impoverishing the soil,
and relying upon nature to do the
rest. Remarkable, but by now means
impossible.
xsrssn
/^¿'/yg'O «g 0"2> ¿3 lS"cl>o g'pga -^
"-»i
17
