GARCIA LORCA
troubadour of Andalusia
Federico Garcia Lorca held poetry above all else, but
painting was his secret love to which he remained
Irresistibly attracted. All his works are marked by
the influence of his native soilthe countryside around
Granada in Andalusia, a land of orange groves and gui¬
tars, where a heritage of Arabic refinement mingles
with the joyous spirit of the gipsies.
As a youth Garcia Lorca learned to play the piano, to
sing, to act in plays and to decorate his writings and
letters with drawings of extraordinary fantasy. Is there
any well-known Spanish author who, between 1920 and
1935, did not receive letters with his signature and
flourishes which assumed a vegetation-like form, growing
stems, leaves and flowers ?
At 22 Garcia Lorca published his first Book of Poems
(1921) which he later illustrated for a friend with pano¬
ramic drawings of the city of Granada as seen from the
celebrated Alhambra. Seven years later came his master¬
piece, Romancero Gitano in which he revived the Spanish
ballad tradition enriched with the most brilliant colours.
To the Andalusian painter, Gregorio Prieto, he remarked
one day: "The poetry of your painting and the painting of
my poetry surge* forth from the same fount." Garcia
Lorca drew and coloured unreal and naive pictures which
he gave to his friends as gifts. In his drawings the figures
often evoke characters of his own theatrical works or of
the old folk songs of 14th and 15th century Spain which
he sang, accompanying himself on the piano.
In 1931, Federico as he was affectionately known in¬
stalled a puppet theatre in his family's house in Gra¬
nada. Here with two distinguished collaborators
Manuel de Falla to compose the music, and the painter
Manuel Angeles Ortiz to design the sets he produced
charming, witty puppet plays such as El Retablillo de
Don Cristobal (Don Cristobal Pulchinela is the Spanish
"Mr. Punch").
Shortly afterwards, he set off along the roads of Spain
as director of a travelling university theatre, La Barraca.
In village square and In the open countryside he presented
the magnificent but little-known works of the Spanish
theatre of the "The Golden Age".
From 1931 until his death in 1936 Garcia Lorca's work
as a poet grew in intensity. He came under the influence
of Surrealistic painting as is seen in the drawings (1,4,
5 and 6) reproduced here. At the foot of drawing 5 the
poet wrote "Solo el misterio nos hace vivir..." (Only
through mystery do we live.) In all his drawings Garcia
Lorca is haunted by obsessive memories: tears and flowers,
bells and curtains, the crescent moon and blood falling in
drops. The drawings of his early period (2 and 3) "have
a childish, primitive quality which delights in minute
detail and lively colour", as Gregorio Prieto has written In
his bilingualSpanish-Englishbook Dibujos de Garcia
Lorca ("Garcia Lorca as a Painter") published in Madrid
in 1949. -
38

The Unesco Courier. August 1957
A tACAy^t.tAAy.. I) AAaJa*^ -, « j ç-
,'f'
' , « '
. ' I \
0/*C ¿L I ' ' '
39
