THE WHALE'S EYE HAUNTED KIPLING
A striking picture of Kipling's inter¬
est in drawing and painting has
been left to us by his daughter, Elsie
(Mrs. George Bambridge). "My
father", she wrote, "inherited a
great deal of his own father's artistic
ability and was often busy with
pencil and paint-brush illuminating,
for instance, his various copies of
Horace's Odes with designs and
pictures. His knowledge of lettering
of all ages and his skill in reproducing it was great, and he took
infinite pleasure in the drawing of the delicate and fantastic
letters for 'How the Alphabet was made' in the Just So Stories.
Sometimes to amuse himself he would fake old documents, and
the results, having been 'aged' by careful rubbing with soot and
dust, were marvels of convincing antiquity. If painted masks or
gilded paper crowns with splendidly real-looking jewels were
wanted for theatricals or fancy-dress parties, he made them with
the greatest skill and endless trouble." (In Rudyard Kipling: His
Life & Work, by Ch. Carrington.)
Although the famous drawings published in the Jungle Book
were executed by Kipling's father, an art school and museum of
fine arts director in India where Kipling was born, the drawings
of the Just So Stories, (examples are published here) were Kipling's
original creations. "The Just So Stories", his daughter wrote,
"were first told to my brother and myself during those Cape
(South Africa) winters, and when written were read aloud to us
for such suggestions as could be expected from small children.
The illustrating of the stories gave their author immense pleasure.,
and he worked at them (mostly in Indian ink) with meticulous
care and was delighted when we approved the results."
The Nobel Prize winner for Literature (1907) recalls in his
autobiography Something of Myself, that "between '92 and '96 we
managed to pay two flying visits to England... and we learned to
loathe the cold North Atlantic more and more. On one trip
our steamer came almost atop of a whale, who submerged just in
time to clear us, and looked up into my face with an unforgettable
little eye the size of a bullock's... When I was illustrating the
Just So Stories, I remembered and strove after that eye." Captions
and drawings on these pages are Kipling's own.
OLD MAN KANGAROO: "This is... Old Man Kangaroo at
five in the afternoon, when he had got his beautiful hind
legs just as Big God Nqong had promised. You can see that
it is five o'clock, because Big God Nqong's pet tame clock
says so. That is Nqong, in his bath, sticking his feet out.
Old Man Kangaroo is being rude to Yellow-Dog Dingo. Yellow-
Dog Dingo has been trying to catch Kangaroo all across
Australia. You can see the marks of Kangaroo's' big new
feet running ever so far back over the bare hills. "
HOW THE WHALE GOT
HIS THROAT: "This is the
picture of the Whale swallowing
the Mariner with his infinite-
resource-and-sagacity, and the
raft and the jack-knife and his
suspenders, which you must not
forget. The buttony-things are
the Mariner's suspenders, and
you can see the knife close by
them. He is sitting on the raft,
but it has tilted up sideways, so
you don't see much of it. The
whity thing by the Mariner's
left hand Is a piece of wood
that he was trying to row the
raft with when the Whale came
along. The wood is called the
jaws-of-a-gaff. The mariner left
It outside when he went In."

The Unesco Courier. August 1957
mm
mm
mm
mm
iwidw
ahmt
mm:
mvvf
mm
Mm
mm
raw
ftp
U NU toh
i
mm
mam
mm
mm
itml
mm
mm
mm
mm.
ami
km
HOW THE ALPHABET WAS MADE: "This is the story of Taffimai
Metallumai carved on an old tusk a very long time ago by the Ancient
Peoples. If you read my story, or have It read to you, you can see how it
is all told out on the tusk. The tusk was part of an old tribal trumpet
that belonged to the Tribe of Tegumai. The pictures were scratched on it
with a nail or something, and then the scratches were filled up with black
wax, but all the dividing lines and the five little rounds at the bottom were
filled with red wax."
THE CAT THAT WALKED BY HIMSELF: This is the picture of the
Cat that Walked by Himself, walking by his wild lone through the Wet
Wild Woods and waving his wild tail. There Is nothing else In the picture
except some toadstools. They had to grow there because the woods were
so wet. The lumpy thing on the low branch isn't a bird. It is moss that
grew there because the Wild Woods were so wet."

