BRUSSELS 1 958
'BALANCE SHEET
FOR A MORE
HUMAN WORLD'
by D. de Wouters d'Oplinter
Next year Brussels -will become a -world in miniature as
Belgium welcomes some 50 nations and seven inter¬
national and supra-national organizations to the
first World's Fair of the atomic era as well as the millions
of people (an estimated thirty-five million, some 60%
from abroad) who are expected to visit this exhibition.
Three years ago Belgium invited all the nations to par-
ticipate in what it described as "The greatest world event
of 1958", and declared that the World's Fairthe biggest
since the one New York put on in 1939would be placed
under the sign of Humanism.
The fact that some 50 countries and seven international
organizations (the U.N. and its Specialized Agencies, the
Organization for European Economic Co-operation, the
Council of Europe, Benelux, the Customs Co-operation
Council, the Red Cross and a supra-national organization:
the European Coal and Steel Community) are preparing to
take part fully demonstrates the interest the entire world
is showing in this gigantic stocktaking of the material and
spiritual wealth of mankind.
All the international bodies will be grouped together in
a special section which will include a "Palace of World
Co-operation". Here, the great problems of our time will
be evoked: the world and social evolution, the increasing
tempo of technical development together with the greater
needs of an ever-expanding population. The Brussels
Exhibition, as a whole, can really be said to centre on these
three main themes.
On a site covering some 500 acres in Heysel Park, about
four and a half miles from the centre of Brussels, a veri¬
table town is rising today. About one-third of the area is
set aside for Belgium, a similar space is taken up by
foreign countries and the rest is divided between the inter¬
national organizations, the Belgian Congo and Ruanda
Urundi, the Amusement Park, and a folklore section in a
quaint village, standing amid the modern pavilions in
glass, steel and perspex, and known as "Belgium in 1900".
of tropical plants
The 40 or so large pavilions in the Belgian section will
not only offer an overall view of Belgian economic
and industrial life, but will embrace scientific, social,
intellectual, religious and many other fields. Furthermore,
the participation of the Belgian provinces with exhibitions
like Antwerp's "'The Boat, Key to the World", and Ghent's
exhibit dedicated to "The Communes", will bring out the
great diversity existing between the various regions.
Outside this section an area of some 20 acres will be
devoted to the Belgian Congo and Ruanda Urundi, taking
as its theme "Fifty years of social, economic and religious
work in the Congo". Below its seven large pavilions a
"tropical garden" will be laid out with Equatorial plants
growing in artificially heated beds.
This part of the Fair looks across the wooded slopes of
Heysel Park to the areas reserved for countries taking part.
As the aim has been to complete major construction work
by the end of June 1957 the great steel frames of the
future pavilions have already risen on every side.
Organized at the mid-point in a century which has seen
dazzling progress in technology, the World's Fair will be a
vast stage with as its scenery, buildings embodying the
very latest architectural designs and building techniques.
Just as the Eiffel Tower, built for the 1889 Exhibition in
Paris, marked the advent of the steel age, so at Brussels
the 360 feet high "Atomium" will be symbolic of the atomic
age, calling to mind the prodigious force of atomic energy
and the latest conquest of man over matter.
Built entirely of aluminium-clad steel, it consists of nine
spheres, each 59 feet in diameter connected to each other
by tubular structures 10 feet in diameter. The structure
represents the arrangement of atoms in an elementary
crystal of metal.
UNITED STATES PAVILION at Brussels Fair, 340 feet in
diameter and 95 feet high, will be world's largest circular building
without any interior columns. One of the remarkable features of
this building is its "bicycle wheel" suspension roof of plastic at¬
tached to an inner metallic rim with high tension steel cables.
The Atomium will actually appear as an Immense cube
resting on one of its- angles. Each of the spheres will be a
large sound-proofed hall, thermically insulated and air-
conditioned. Visitors will travel from sphere to sphere by
escalators in the tubes, while the central column will have
the fastest lift in Europe,0 whisking' sightseers to the
topmost sphere in less than 20 seconds, to a restaurant
where they can enjoy a meal along with a panoramic view
of the fair and the city of Brussels beyond.
The lower spheres will be exhibition halls for displaying
the results of research into the peaceful uses of atomic
energy in different countries. One will be occupied by the
Soviet Union, among whose exhibits will be the small
nuclear power station displayed at Geneva in 1955. Other
countries displaying the fruits of their atomic research at
the Fair will include England, France, the Federal Repub¬
lic of Germany, Norway and the United States.
Designed by the Belgian engineer, André Waterkeyn, the
Atomium will certainly be the most extraordinary of the
many architectural achievements of striking grandeur
which will rise into the sky from the grounds of the Fair.
After studying the plans which the architects of each of
the national pavilions had submitted to the Commissioner-
General of the World's Fair, the Chief Architect, Mr. Van
Goethem, stressed the amazing thoroughness of the
research that had gone into them, and declared: "This

will bring about a revolution in the traditional principles
of architecture, not only with regard to form but also
through the use of entirely new kinds of materials."
Quite independently, the architects had nearly all opted
for a form of architecture whose impact is made by
constructional techniques rather than by outward
appearance. As the great majority of pavilions will have
transparent façades, the visitor will be more likely to
admire the ingenuity of the exposed armature bearing the
weight of the building, rather than the actual walls, whose
role is now a secondary one.
The aim of the Exhibition is to provide a panorama of
twentieth-century human activities; it is, in fact, dedicat¬
ed to Man and his aspirations. Though Man's material
activities often enough provide the key to an understand¬
ing of his character, cultural achievements are obviously
the truest reflection of his inner urges, his aims and his
individuality.
For six months, therefore, from April to October 1958,
the Exhibition will be the scene of a continuous series of
international cultural events in different fields literature,
U.S.S.R. SECTION of the Fair is planned around a gigantic rectan¬
gular parthenon in whose centre will stand a statue of Lenin. Pavilion
will be built in the U.S.S.R. and transported in sections (1,500 tons
of steel structure, 200 tons of aluminium, 16,000 sq. metres of
mirrors) to Brussels. Plans also include a 1500-seat theatre.
theatre, films, opera, music, choreography, and others.
To honour each nation, "National Days" have been set
aside when individual countries will organize large-scale
cultural activities.
The Soviet Union will send io Brussels the famous corps
de ballet from Moscow. From the United States will come
theatre companies and orchestras. The Comédie-Fran¬
çaise will travel from Paris, and the leading London sym¬
phony orchestras will also be present. In short, every
country will be sending of its best.
Apart from these national activities, the Belgian Com¬
missioner-General will himself be organizing some large-
scale international cultural gatherings. For instance, a
World Film Festival will be held at Brussels from April 21
to June 13, 1958. It will include world-wide competitions
for experimental films, a "shorts" film festival, and also
one for feature-films. Another film event, to be held from
October 12 to 18, will be a world competition for the best
film of all times.
The Commissioner-General's programme also includes
an international gathering of young people's orchestras
(July 13-21), a university theatre week (August 2-9), a
competition in electronic music (August 15-19) and a world
festival of records (October 5-11).
Many other activities are being arranged but their dates
have not yet been fixed. Chief among them is a world
The Unesco Courier. July 1957
festival of choreography, open to all Belgians or nationals
of other countries taking part m the Fair. There will also
be a series of international dramatic performances, arrang¬
ed with the help of the Theatre of the Nations.
Another type of cultural activity at the Exhibition will
be a series of lectures, for which the Commissioner-
General has invited speakers of world repute.
Lastly, as the Fair seeks to encourage the most extensive
contacts between men and women from all over the world,
it will be an assembly point for congresses.
In order to be approved by the special selection com¬
mittee, such congresses must be planned as study groups
to deal, so far as possible, with some social problem.
Their opening meetings will be held in the Exhibition
grounds, and their subsequent meetings in large buildings
either in Brussels itself or in other Belgian cities. It is
hoped that they will devote at least one meeting to a dis¬
cussion of the Exhibition's theme.
For all these activities, whether purely intellectual or
purely artistic, a special theatre with a seating capacity of
2,000 is being built in the grounds of the Fair.
In the message he sent to all the countries invited to
take part in the Exhibition, the Commissioner-General
wrote: "the harnessing of the world's sources of energy
and other material resources for man's use means increas¬
ing reliance on science. We are planning to build a large
International Palace of Science, because we feel that it is
only on an international scale that science can expand
and bear fruit as it should."
This Palace will be divided into four sections, corres¬
ponding to the fundamental bases of modern science; the
Atom (atomic physics), the Molecule (chemistry), the
Crystal (solid state physics) and the Living Cell (biology),
and it will give the visitor notably through the medium
of the cinema a general view of science's development.
The fifteen countries which have agreed to take part in
this particular enterprise will not install any national
stand in the Palace, but will contribute to a general pro¬
gramme of a purely scientific nature, so planned as to
capture the interest of the average visitor. It will be pos¬
sible for those taking part to indicate on the apparatus
they exhibit, the name" of the country of origin.
An international science committee, consisting of the
world's leading scientists, met recently in Brussels and
drew up plans for the presentation of scientific research
and apparatus.
Art panorama: prehistory to present
The same international principles are being adopted
for the Palace of Fine Arts. An international com¬
mittee, similar to the science committee, has been set
up. Works of art will not be exhibited in national sec¬
tions, but will be arranged according to the schools to
which they belong or by which they have been influenced.
Two international exhibitions, each lasting three months,
will be held in this Palace. The first (from April 18 to
July 21) will show contemporary painting and sculpture
covering the first half of the 20th century, and the second
(August 8 to November 2) will be entitled "Man and Art"
(world masterpieces from the Stone Age to the present
day). Many countries have already planned to send their
rarest collections to Belgium.
The Brussels Exhibition will be the largest international
gathering organized since the end of the war, and
Belgium is therefore sparing no
efforts to make it a true reflec¬
tion of Humanism in 1958. But
Belgium will not be alone in
having helped, by this enterprise,
to bring about greater under¬
standing between all men. Every
country officially represented will
have made its contribution. They
are all convinced that the ideal
is worth a world-wide effort, made
without restriction or reservation.
