A WOMAN'S LIFE
IN AN AFRICAN VILLAGE
by Claudie
© 19
Hauferlin
frétillions of women in France's African territories
" ~ * went to the polls for the first time last year, thus
marking another important step forward in the progress
of women's rights. On November 18, 1956, nearly half
a century afterthe first women in Europe won the suffrage,
millions of those in Africa reached the same milestone on
the road to emancipation. Yet African women in these
territories are not newcomers to politics. Widows and
mothers of not less than two children have had the vote
for the past ten years. They made up about one-third of
the electorate at the previous elections in January 1956.
Then, on June 23, 1956, without any protest marches,
suffragettes in action or serious political discussions
disturbing the peace of African homes, the right to vote
was extended to all women in these African territories on
exactly the same basis as for women in France. This
right became a reality on November 18 when the women
cast their votes in elections for the municipal councils of
African communes, to which they themselves are
eligible for election.
It is still too early to analyse the results and to comment
57
on the response the women made to their first chance
of voting. One thing we do know is that the vast
majority were villagers and that most were illiterate.
Candidates met this problem by identifying their parties
with a colour or a picture. One party used an emblem;
another outlined its programme in picture words; people
voted "palm tree" or "elephant."
Even in a country like Dahomey where French has been
taught for many yearsthe first schools were opened by
missionaries as long ago as 1861there are still very few
educated women. In today's schools boys still far out¬
number the girls. Women, therefore, are the guardians of
traditions and cling, in far greater numbers than men,
to ancestral rites and customs. Only a small proportion
of women voters live in modern towns, lead the life of a
modern woman or experience her problems. What is
she like then, this African woman of tradition who is
typical of the vast majority? How does she live? The
author of the following article, who spent two years
among the women of Dahomey and came to know them
well, has attempted to answer these questions.

The Unesco Courier. March 1957
Until that warm January morning when I arrived
there, Dahomey to me was only a narrow pink
or mauve strip squeezed in between Nigeria and
Togoland on the patchwork that West Africa
makes on the map. Now I know it as a landscape of
alternate greens and reds, of green palm trees and fields
contrasting with the red tracks and mud villages through
which I drove from the coast to join my husband who was
on a two-year sociological mission for Unesco.
I expected a jungle; I found a garden. South
Dahomey is a vast palm grove shielding long, straight
rows of maize, bean, peanut and manioc fields.
"Dahomey", my travelling companion said to me, "has
something of Asia about it. Its population is as cramped
as in some of the delta regions of India." Then he added,
"Did you know that three to four hundred people are
crowded together into one square kilometre in some parts
of the country?"
I expressed surprise and asked, "How do they manage
to five?"
The answer came forth with a chuckle, "Everything
here runs on oil, palm oil. Dahomey's great wealth is its
palm trees. When the year is good there's prosperity: the
men buy bicycles, get married, have big ceremonies for the
dead; the women get new skirts and new jewellery. When
the year is bad, no tax money comes in and then there's
trouble. Everyone is tied to the palm grove: the men are
the owners, do the planting and transporting; the women
make the oil and sell it. The future of Dahomey depends
almost entirely on its palm trees. As soon as new trees
are planted in the bush up spring the country's only
factories its oil works."
Jeweller's window in
a Garden of Eden
And so I reached my new home. It was just over
30 miles from the coast, a little outside a village on
the edge of a plateau overlooking the immense
delta of the Ouémé, the great river .that cuts across Daho¬
mey from north to south for several hundred miles. On
one side was the palm grove, on the other, at the foot of
the cliff, six miles of swamp through which the river twists
and winds. During half the year it overflows its banks so
that the houses have to be built on stilts.
The house stood inside a circle of trees palm trees,
banana trees and papaw trees. There was even a
pineapple patch. And then I realized where I really was
in the middle of the Garden of Eden, exactly as I had
seen it depicted in so many old prints. "Nothing is
missing", said my husband pointing to a ditch. There,
lined up in a row, I saw 32 snakes' heads, a glitter of
green, yellow and black, like in a jeweller's window.
They had been killed the day before by the men clearing
underbrush around the house.
It was at Mitro, the nearest village, that I began my
career as an ethnologist's wife. Mitro lies at the foot of
the cliff bordering the marsh, and is reached by a red
earth track. African villages are often so well hidden
that it takes a stranger a long time to find
them. Mitro is at the junction of two I
tracks, one leading down to the swamp, the I
other skirting it. They link together all the I next°n
villages located at the foot of the hill, j

WOMAN'S
LIFE
(Continued)
A wife's household in Dahomey:
husband plus 20, 30 or 40 in-laws
Where the tracks meet, the market place is set up.
The thousand or so inhabitants of Mitro live hidden
away behind the thick screen of banana and palm trees,
coco-nut palms and silk-cotton trees that line all the paths.
There is nothing to guide the stranger except the rhythmic
tappings that can be heard through the greenery the
tapping of drums, gongs, bells, rattles and sometimes even
of pieces of broken pottery. The presence of a house is
revealed, not by a curl of smoke, hardly even by a path,
but by the noise of rhythmic tapping. The impact of
Africa is on the ears rather than the eyes.
Special veneration
for mothers of twins
My first visit to the village was paid to the wife of the
schoolteacher who had once been a teacher herself.
She spoke excellent French with just a slight
trace of what might easily pass for a southern French
accent. She wore a Dahoman dress a full, flowered
cotton skirt tied under the bosom, and a broad-sleeved,
round-necked jacket. Her hair was done up in little tight
coils drawn back over the nape of the neck with a thread.
She was an important figure at Mitro. In Dahomey,
the teacher and his wife command a good deal of respect,
exactly the same as they do in France. But there was
something even more important than that about her. The
year before she had given birth to twins, and in Dahomey
twins are an object of special veneration. Here, Madame
Dionne would have received the honours paid to a king!
"First, we must go and see the chief of the village", she
said to me. A few minutes' walk brought us to the mud
wall encircling the houses where the headman's family
lived. Nearly all families live in enclosures shut off from
prying eyes not only by the bush but also by a circle of
thick walls. This is the home of the ten, twenty, thirty
or more persons who make up a big African family. It
is called in Dahomey the houeta, but Europeans call it
simply the tata.
Discreetly informed of our arrival, Akadjamé, the
headman, was waiting for us. He sat in front of his mud
house surrounded by the village notables. They all rose
as we arrived and the headman welcomed us with the
traditional bowl of water. After making his introductions
the headman took me over his home. There were
separate houses for his six wives, and others for his mother,
his old uncle, his aunt and his brothers. They were all
built in the same style fed mud cabins roofed with dried
palm branches, clustered together in groups of three or
four and connected by paths where goats were frisking
about. A little to one side I noticed a building on stilts
the family store-house.
"There was a time", Akadjamé said, "when the fields
and palm groves were common property and all members
of the family tilled the earth together. Every day or
second day the head of the tata distributed to the women
the maize and yams needed by each household. But now
the men want to divide up the land as soon as their parents
have died. Nobody works together any more and if you
need help you've got to pay your neighbours and even your
friends. If the men have no more land or not enough
money to support their family they leave the village and
look for work at Cotonou and Porto-Novo. The country
is changing", the chief concluded rather heavily.
Sé Kandé, one of the headman's wives, no doubt sensed
my curiosity for she invited me into her house. It
consisted of a big room divided into two by a mud
partition. One side was the bedroom, furnished with a
bamboo bed which Sé Kandé shared with her two children,
and a wooden chest containing her clothes. The other
half of the room was a smoke-blackened kitchen, the
lower half of its walls painted with white kaolin. The
floor was strewn with dried cow-dung trampled down to
form a smooth, hard surface. A stew was simmering on
a hearth formed of four up-turned pots.
My greetings in Gun
raised a laugh
At the end of our visit, Akadjamé saw us to the gate
where a pile of corrugated zinc gleamed in the sun¬
light. "I am getting my roof redone", he remarked
in a feigned casual tone. I nodded gravely. Next to a
bicycle, a zinc roof is one of the most coveted signs of
wealth in Dahoman villages. It stands up to hurricanes
and, above all, puts an end to the irksome task of

The Unesco Courier. March 1957
repairing the thatch periodically. But
a zinc roof costs a small fortune and
only the well-to-do can afford one.
By now we were surrounded by the
villagers. They came from everywhere.
The schoolteacher's wife answered
their eager questions. No, I wasn't
the wife of the administrative officer.
I asked her to tell them that I would
like to visit the womenfolk. I read
their invitations in the expressions of
mingled amusement and surprise on
their faces which seemed to say, "Now
that's strange: we'll see if she really
comes. ':
After a few weeks I began to know
Mitro fairly well and greeted the
people in Gun, the local language,
which never failed to provoke mirth
and amazement. At first the women
regarded me with some suspicion.
But before long the village grew used
to my curiosity. After two or three
months some of the women were
openly jealous because I hadn't visited
them more often or because I had not
yet returned their call.
My days were usually spent with
three women: Bosi, a young Protes¬
tant, Vidéhou, the old fetish woman
and Henriette, who was soon to be
married. But it was Tavi, a follower
of the thunder cult, and a staunch
defender of tradition, who initiated me
into the joys of African family life.
Tavi was well known in the village
since she had had twins. Unfortu¬
nately one of them had died.
Tavi turned up at the market one
morning wearing a claret-coloured
skirt hemmed with cowries, the shells
which used to be brought by ship from
the Indian Ocean and were long used
as money in Africa. "This is the
special dress for mothers of twins and
for twin children", she explained.
"Women wear it on the days they go
to market to buy the food to be offered to the twin deities."
Curious to see what happened, I couldn't resist following
her home. She laid out a little food in front of a wooden
doll which she then washed and put to bed on a stool.
"This is my child who has gone to fetch wood", she said
(for you never say that a twin is dead). "I look after
(g Pierre Verger 19 57
SHELL-MONEY made from cowries was the most usual form of currency in Western Africa until
the middle of the 19th century. Particularly abundant in the Indian Ocean, cowrie shells were
first brought by traders to West Africa where they were fastened together in long strings of 40
or 50. Today, women of Dahomey use them for decorating head-dresses (above). A claret-coloured
skirt hemmed with cowries is a distinctive dress worn only by mothers of twins and the twin chil¬
dren. To be the mother of twins is considered a special honour in Dahomey, ensuring great respect.
him in the same way as I do his brother Maca, and when
Maca grows up he will look after him himself."
That is how I came to know Tavi's family. Like all
the women in the village, she came to live here after her
marriage. Seated in the courtyard, she pointed out her
husband's house, then her brother-in-law's, the two houses
of her mothers-in-law (those of the wives of her husband's
father), then the houses of two uncles, a widowed aunt
who had come back home to live with the family, and
finally, four brothers-in-law and their wives. I added them
all up; there were at least sixteen persons she couldn't
afford not to get along well with. ..not counting her hus¬
band's first wife.
I began to understand the meaning of the saying,
"Marriage is a family affair" and the wealth of diplomacy
that tradition sometimes attributes to African women.
Later, at Abomay, I even met a family in which the wives,
tired of the quarrels between their hus¬
bands, brothers-in-law, fathers-in-law and
uncles-in-law, had formed a small drum
orchestra to show the men that it was not
so difficult to get on together. To follow

WOMAN'S
LIFE
(Continued)
A hair-do that spelled a quarrel:
curls swept over the forehead
one's husband is nothing, but to marry a whole family of
in-laws that is a real art.
Tavi, like any new wife in a Dahoman family, was in a
way the "Cinderella" of the household. She it was her
father-in-law called on to draw the water, she it was her
mother-in-law asked to grind the pepper for dinner.
Whenever I visited her, I would find her either sweeping
her aunt's house or returning from an errand for her uncle
or another relation. So Tavi will certainly not object when
her husband takes a third wife since all the work to be
done for the in-laws will be passed on to the newcomer.
Now I understand why the women of Dahomey go to such
lengths to introduce their best friends to their husbands
"with a view to marriage".
Polygamy on the grand scale, however, is rare at Mitro.
Seventy-five per cent of the marriages are monogamous,
and in thirty-two out of forty-three polygamous ones, there
are only two wives. The headman alone, who is the
biggest landowner at Mitro, has six.
Bosi, the young Protestant, was her husband's only wife,
but she didn't find the work in the tata too trying. Unlike
most Mitro women, she would not have liked her husband
to take other wives even if it had meant their taking over
part of the household chores. "Women are jealous
creatures", she said to me, "and you seldom find two
wives of the same husband getting on well together." As
if to confirm what she had just said, a quarrel broke out
in the house next door. A woman began to sing:
A bird has fine feathers,
Feathers made for the bird.
A beast has but its hide,
And never can it wear the feathers made for the bird.
"That's the wife of my husband's younger brother", said
Bosi with a smile. "She's having a quarrel with her
husband's other wife." The other wife was sitting in front
of her house crushing palm nuts; without even raising
her head she immediately started to sing her reply :
She's got a big belly,
Big as a boat with too much cargo aboard,
Shoulders like bicycle handlebars,
And she has the nerve to insult me.
"You can say anything you like with a song", said Bosi.
She also explained to me that women once went in for a
"quarrel" hair-style known as "turn your back on the
other wife". It was the ordinary hair-do in curls, but the
curls were brought over the forehead instead of the neck!
In the United States you can buy postcards for all
likely and unlikely occasions, even the teething of a
red-haired baby. In Dahomey, they "say it with a song"
-and have a repertoire of allusive songs and couplets to fit
every event. In one, the family of a young man who has
just been married jeers at the parents of an unsuccessful
rival; another mocks a shy fiancée; and there is a song for
the reconciliation of two feuding families. This does not
mean that in Dahomey everything ends in a song. At
Porto-Novo songs once led to such violent incidents
between one quarter and another that they were prohibited.
Going back to father =
going home to mother
Bosi went on to tell me that she thought her sister-in-
law would go back to her father the African variant
of our, "it's all over between us and I'm going back
to Mother".
Although true polygamy is dying out, it is giving way to
what the Africans, with a wink, describe as successive
polygamy, which was much frowned on in the past.
ÍQ¡ C. Tardits 1957

The Unesco Courier. March 1957
DOUBLE -AXED
THUNDER GOD
Woman of Dahomey marching in
religious procession carries the dou¬
ble axe-head emblem of the Nige¬
rian god of thunder, Shango (3).
Emblem is mounted on head of
wooden statuette depicting a
woman leaning on heads of two
kneeling servants. Double axe-head,
anancient religious symbol of the
the thunder god, is also found in the
Minoan civilization of Crete and
Asia Minor. Greek god Zeus is
often represented with same double
axe-head. In traditional Dahomey
dance, gaily clad woman (I) bows to
partner (unseen in photo). Many
popular modern dances of West
Indies are partly derived from tribal
dances of Dahomey and Nigeria.
Dancers are watched by grave-faced
teen-age girls (2). In Dahomey,
girls usually marry at 1 6 or 17.
Bosi's husband had had three wives, and though it was
Bosi's first marriage, her friend, Tavi, had had two
husbands. Vidéhou, the old fetish woman, seemed to me
to be the champion of divorce; she was living with her
seventh husband. Husbands seldom repudiate their
wives. Usually it is the wife who leaves her husband. "He
didn't give me any children", one of the women told me.
Another complained that her husband didn't give her
enough to eat, and Tavi confided to me that her husband
spoke slightingly of her family.
Divorce is not a long-drawn-out process. The wife
goes back to her father's house until she remarries, which
usually does not take long. The new husband may be said
to pay for the divorce since he refunds to the first husband
the dowry he had originally provided.
"When I was young", an old woman said to me in a
those-were-the-good-old-days tone, "it was the family
that picked the husband and there were fewer divorces than
now." Today a girl marries at 16 or 17 and chooses the
husband she likes.
,<? Pierre Verger 19 57
In the past, Europeans who often did not hesitate to
criticize and denigrate African society, picked on one
shortcoming which seemed undeniable. African families
married off young people without their consent and often
against their will. They pointed to many cases of girls
promised in marriage from early childhood, or of widows
forced to marry one of the brothers of their deceased
husbands. Viewed in the light of European morals and
manners, the reproach was justified, but it was directed at
one of the bases of African family life, where women are
'the means for creating or renewing firm family alliances.
An agreement between families was regarded in the light
of African wisdom as far more important than transient
charms or a passing infatuation. The effect of this, there¬
fore, was that family considerations overruled all else.
For the women themselves, the para¬
mount aim of marriage was and still is
to have children. The Mitro women have
an average of four children, of which only
two usually survive. 1 met one old woman

WOMAN'S
LIFE
(Continued)
Hubby brings the bride her dowry;
it takes him six months to earn it
who was the mother of twelve. Childless women divorce
their husbands. Vidéhou, who had had seven husbands,
explained: "They didn't give me any children, so I left
them. Now I have a son." For a woman will always
blame her husband if she is childless. "A woman can
always have children", asserted one old woman, and the
opinion of elders is always treated with respect in Africa,
where old age and wisdom are practically synonymous.
It would however be quite wrong to imagine that the
feelings of the young people had no outlet. Bosi told me
tales of unhappy marriages and sensational abductions.
Of the hundred or so songs I collected only one is about
a lover's feelings in which the admirer avows his passion:
/ shall walk beside you
To see what you will say.
I shall walk beside you
To see what your father will say.
I shall take your pitcher of water
And place it on your head;
When lifting your pitcher of water
My hand will touch you.
A recent law that appeared to affect only a private
sphere of life was to shake traditional African society to
its very core. This was the Mandel Law of June 1939,
giving the African girl the right to refuse a husband she
did not wish to marry. Not only did it bring about the
rupture of old alliances between families in many different
walks of life; it also gave women an effective means of
resisting their parents' wishes. Aged fathers were hauled
one after another before the authorities by their children.
Cupid now had poisoned darts for those who crossed him.
The marriage system was changing, but the old forms
and procedures subsisted in their entirety.
Lovers clasp hands
¿-"i but never kiss
When Henriette and Paul found that they were in
love, Paul announced the news to his family.
Uncles and aunts of the young man went off one
morning to visit Henriette's family. A thousand and one
subjects were touched on news of the two families, the
state of the crops, the weather omens. A few allusions
were thrown out to a possible marriage. Henriette's
family had no objection and returned the visit a few days
later. Paul's uncles and aunts then came back with the
first presents, which make up the "little dowry" a few
bottles of gin, apéritifs and a little money to express their
gratitude to Henriette's family for giving its assent. The
figure of the "big dowry" was fought out by both parties
stubbornly but with imperturbable dignity. From that day
on, the young people were considered to be engaged; in
other words Paul was authorized to pay court to Henriette.
Courtship is always discreet and chaste. When Paul
wanted to give Henriette a little money for her to buy
something she wanted, he would never hand it to her
directly, but would slip it under a mat though he would
peep round to make sure that he had been noticed doing so.
Lovers in Africa clasp hands and engirdle each other's
waists, but they never kiss. The old fashioned type of
African never kisses on the mouth, and the big love scenes
in films never fail to provoke peals of laughter and derision
among the audience. Movie manners may be gradually
invading the town but have not yet reached the country.
Visits are always
£*7 a dressy occasion
Paul and Henriette's engagement lasted over a year
for they could not marry until Paul had got together
enough money for the "big dowry". It amounted to
quite a sum. At Mitro, where a farmer's average income
seldom comes to more than 3,000 francs a month, as much
as 15 to 20,000 francs is paid out as dowry in the form
of money, bottles of rum, gin, apéritifs, skirts, jewellery
and cooking utensils.
Quite apart from the question of the dowry, the period
of betrothal is very expensive. The fiancé is expected to
give presents on all occasions, and they are at least as
frequent as in France. Presents do not yet have to be
given for birthdays, namedays, Christmas and the New
Year, but there are ceremonies in honour of the dead or
the birth of a child in the fiancee's family (as African
families run to hundreds and even thousands of members,
births and deaths are pretty frequent occurrences),
ceremonies in honour of ancestors and vodun rites. On
all these occasions Paul had to remember not only his
fiancée but also, and more especially, his future in-laws.
Paul and Henriette were married while I was at Mitro.
He first let his fiancee's family know that the dowry was
ready. That evening the womenfolk of the family
conducted Henriette to Paul's tata. All present were
dressed up in their Sunday best. The richest women wore
skirts of satin brocade, nylon, broderie anglaise or velvet.
Paul, as a good host, saw that everyone had something to
drink, and when a drummer beat out a compliment, a sing¬
er sang his praises or a dancer performed some specially
brilliant feat, he rewarded the artist by sticking bank notes
on his forehead.
For ten or so days after the wedding I found Henriette
dressed in her best clothes, continuing to receive
congratulatory visits. When I called on her she set
before me, in accordance with Dahomey good manners, a
simple flower-patterned bowl with a lid, containing bananas
and a packet of cigarettes. People never forget to thank
their visitors for coming and present them with something
commensurate with the visitor's importance and the host's
means. Is this due to a desire not to be outdone, or not
to remain indebted to one's friends?
Some days later, Henriette came wearing her best
clothes to return my visit, and I thanked her with a gift of
money. Etiquette demands that the affection or esteem
that one has for persons be shown by the extent to which
one dresses up when visiting them. Whether the visit is
to a close friend or an important personage, formal dress
is always de rigueur. When we pay a visit to a close
friend, however, we are more likely to dress informally.
Article copyright. Reproduction in whole on in part prohibited.
