One man's meat
is another
man's... taboo
by Alfred Métraux
No civilization makes the best possible use of the food
resources at its disposal. Before any kind of fruit,
vegetable or meat is pronounced as fit to eat by a
particular people, it must first be approved for the pur¬
pose by that people's cultural traditions. These tastes
and distastes, which differ so widely among the various
civilizations, have always been a source of indignation,
contempt or sneering, and were almost certainly a prime
subject of conversation in the caves of Palaeolithic man.
Even in prehistoric times, peoples were undoubtedly
graded according to their eating habits. Poetically, the
best known instance of this is the Odyssey, where the
"bread-eaters" (the Greeks) were ranged against the
barbarians, who were "lotus-eaters," or even eaters of
human flesh.
Exotic peoples provide us with a wealth of examples
to illustrate the infinite diversity of human taste. To eat
a caterpillar, even if roasted, appears to us as the height
of perversion ; but in sub-tropical America the native
populations, and even visiting ethnographers, do not turn
up their noses at the grubs which they extract from the
trunks of palm trees. A village of Indians is overjoyed
at the arrival of a flight of ants which can be cooked in
the pot. And those who are nauseated by this human
consumption of insects would do well to remember that
these same Indians would be literally ill if they were
forced to eat a hen's egg, or even chicken. Rats, of course,
are "siege food" ; yet they were a delicacy for certain
Polynesians, though the latter, it is true, had no rabbits
to feed on. And we should not forget how fond the Aztecs
were of small dogs, which they fattened for banquets.
Even peoples who are neighbours and belong to the
same civilization can so differ, in their feeding habits,
as to cause mutual incomprehension and even disgust.
The appellation "frog-eaters," which the English have for
so long applied to the French, is an eloquent indication
of the formers' opinion of batracians as a source of food.
When Kamehameha I, King of Hawaii, broke with his
ancestors' feeding taboos in the presence of his Court,
he was only equalling, in courage and stark determination,
the present-day American who, in Paris, resolves to eat
his first plate of Burgundy snails.
Certain feeding taboos of a religious origin take the
form of an aversion which has all the strength and
spontaneity of an instinct. I have known anthropologists
who, though quite unprejudiced and aware of the histori¬
cal background involved, have never been able to over-
10
come the feeling of disgust created in them by some food
or other that was forbidden to their ancestors.
The classic example of the influence of cultural tradi¬
tion on feeding is the divergence in the attitudes of the
stock raising populations of Asia and Europe with regard
to the use of milk products. Whereas the peoples of
Central and South Asia, as well as the Indo-European
and Semitic groups, have always consumed the milk pro¬
duced by their flocks and herds, often as a basic source
of food, the Chinese, the Japanese and the peoples of
South East Asia who were formerly, likewise, stock rais¬
ers have always had the most violent aversion to milk
and its by-products.
This aversion cannot have stemmed from ignorance,
since the Chinese were long in contact with Mongol and
Turkish tribes for whom milk and milk foods were basic
forms of nourishment. The Tibetans even go so far as
to put rancid butter in their tea.
Various books published in recent years have revealed
to us the hunger that still "'stalks the world." We know
that vast areas lack adequate food, and that the general
health of their populations suffers in consequence. In¬
ternational bodies, such as the Food and Agriculture
Organization, are trying to increase the food resources of
regions whose inhabitants have not enough to eat.
Unfortunately, the introduction of new types of crops
does not always suffice to solve these problems. The im¬
portant thing is that the people should accept the new
dishes which are set before them, and rid themselves of
the emotional prejudices making for their rejection. Most
human beings "like what they eat" rather than "'eat what
they like." But how is one to break down this resistance
which, rooted in cultural tradition and developed in early
childhood, ends by acquiring the apparent strength of
an instinctive reaction?
This was exactly the problem which the United States
Government had to face during the last war. It had to
plan feeding, not only for an immense army, but for
millions of workers, as well as for the liberated peoples.
Farmers might produce a surplus, but it was important
to avoid waste and to pursuade a population, that had
always lived well, to change some of its habits.
The United States Government was wise enough to
consult social scientists before embarking on a propa¬
ganda campaign designed to win public opinion over to
the various measures which were required. It set up a

The Unesco Courier. April 1957
THE SUPERMARKET.
Food is piled high in the
great supermarkets of
America where customers
serve themselves and pay
(far left) on the way out.
The 18,000 fully-fledged
supermarkets in the U.S.A.
and the 70,000 smaller
stores known as " supe¬
rettes " now sell half the
country's groceries. Shop¬
ping in the supermarket
has become a weekly ritual
of American family life.
Many supermarkets buy
meats, vegetables, eggs and
other products directly
from farmers. Left, chick¬
ens being prepared in
supermarket warehouse.
In most parts of the world,
however, people still shop
in open-air markets like
the one at Bogota, capi¬
tal of Colombia, (below).
Usis photos
committee of ethnographers, psychologists and sociolo¬
gists, to study Americans' attitudes towards food and to
suggest methods whereby those attitudes could be modi¬
fied or even completely transformed. It was as part of
this Committee's activities that the American psycholo¬
gist Curt Lewin was able to carry out certain experiments
in influencing opinion, experiments which have often been
cited as a brilliant demonstration of the effectiveness of
these disciplines when applied in the practical field.
Curt Lewin proceeded from the principle that a "food
attitude" as simple as the American's aversion to certain
parts of meat the heart, the kidneys, the lungs, the en¬
trails could be quickly changed, once every implication
of the situation had been analysed accurately and in de¬
tail, provided that every factor directly or indirectly de¬
termining people's behaviour towards food was considered.
Having established beyond any doubt that in the matter
of food it was the housewives whose influence was para¬
mount and who had the last word, he selected two groups
of housewives as the voluntary "guinea-pigs" of the ex¬
periment. One group was indoctrinated by expert diet¬
icians who gave lectures in order to explain the nutritive
qualities of offal, its high vitamin content, and its good
effect on health. This was followed up by explanations
regarding the refined nature of the dishes that could be
prepared with such pieces of meat; and recipes for cook¬
ing and dressing offal were distributed to the housewives.
The method adopted with the other group was quite
different. A meeting was organized, at which one member
of the group explained to the others the difficulties of the
country's food situation, impressed upon them that by
serving offal to their husbands they would be performing
a patriotic service, and finally invited them to engage in
a free discussion of the problem of "taboo" meats and
their use. Care was taken to ensure that the discussion
was general and that each housewife was able to express
her doubts and ask questions. At the end of the debate,
the meeting took a collective decision: each housewife
undertook to try out the recipes suggested.
A few weeks later, an investigation revealed that only
10% of those present at the lectures had "'crossed this
cooking Rubicon." Of those, however, who had taken part
in the discussions and undertaken to prepare offal, 51 %
had duly fulfilled their undertaking. The same experi¬
ment was repeated several times, with regard to other
types of food "rejects." And the results, too, were the
same. Lectures and exhortations had therefore been of
little effect as compared with decisions freely taken by a
group, even a group as artificial as that constituted by
subjects in a psychological experiment.
This shows us that in our "'food attitudes," as indeed
in all our attitudes, reason combines with other emotional
factors to which the greatest regard must be paid if an
attitude is to be modified. The housewives who decided
to break with the "feeding taboos" agreed to do so purely
because they were influenced by considerations having but
a tenuous and indirect connexion with food itself.
For an attitude to be transformed, the values and
institutions that give it its stability must be kept in mind.
As was shown in the above example, it is by collective
decision that attitudes can most easily be changed.
FAO - Pat Morin
II
