THE 'PICSHUA'
DIARY OF
H.G. WELLS
.'^h^^ô^K
Ua¿ ¡Kin »mc. tji iL, mi JU~¡ t^jvrtr \ C*~¿ L' - 0_ ?
fr, _ u-i ^~ .yfl«* £^. H+ » s-:f\ tf~-3 IUa^aS. di cxi>
ijJlAaIa. ?-m~ it^vn^ i««t «. ?je c¿w tü (u^uz£a-, r¡A-A. >y^Y- **-~~ **
llcT""k->3 ^ C***"- ««- «-* ^ ^C ST/W« .
HG. Wells devoted his great talent to an exception¬
ally wide range of subjects. His work as a whole
* deals with practically every facet of modern life.
Such novels as Kipps, The History of Mr. Polly, are regard¬
ed as classics of English literature. Having had scientific
training, Wells also pioneered "science fiction" with his
Time Machine, The War of the Worlds, and The First Men
on the Moon.
Wells came from a family in very modest circumstances.
His parents were unable to afford a good education for
their son who was therefore largely self-taught until
scholarships took him to London University. He had to
contend with ill-health, undernourishment and poverty
before he was able to establish himself as an author.
Wells never took his artistic gifts very seriously but got
into the habit of making many little sketches which he
called "picshuas". He is probably the only famous author
who unconsciously at first kept a diary in the form of
humorous sketches. In his Experiment in Autobiography,
subtitled "Discoveries and Conclusions of a very ordinary
brain (since 1866)" he describes how "in the evening, with
my writing things before me I would break off work to do
'picshuas', these silly little sketches about this or that
incident which became at last a sort of burlesque diary of
our lives and accumulated in boxes until there were
hundreds of them. Many perhaps most are lost but
still there remain hundreds."
Years later Wells noted: "These may seem at first glance
to be the most idle of scribblings but in fact they are acute
statements in personal interpretation. Mostly they were
done on sheets of manuscript paper, so that they here
suffer considerable reduction and compression." The
"picshuas" are in fact a delightful and vivid record of
H.G. Wells's rise to fame. Six are reproduced here, giv¬
ing an intimate glimpse of a rich and varied life and
conveying a humorous detachment alike from misery and
good fortune.
"Picshua", above, illustrates a letter to Wells's brother
written in 1890 when H.G. was a young biological demon¬
strator in London. His legend reads: "What is this?
Why do the people in the tramcar shrink from his pre¬
sence? Why in this hot weather sit there in a heap
together? Can it be Satan? Or the Hangman? Or the
Whitechapel Murder (er) ? No it is none of these things.
It is simply a young biological demonstrator who has been
dissecting with a large class that particular form of life
known as the Dog Fish (scylla canícula). He STINKS."
Drawing, left, dated 1892, heads a letter to his mother
which opens with "You observe a doubtless familiar figure
above, keeping his 26th birthday. In the background are
bookshelves recently erect¬
ed by your eldest, who came
up here Thursday and has
been doing things like that
ever since." In the corner
of a drawing dated Septem¬
ber 8, 1897, Wells drew an
"Invisible Man", to indicate
the publication day of one
his most popular books.
Invisible Man is shown at
right with the words "Just
out" written alongside.
32

The Unesco Courier. August 1957
FD-!©
The above picshua was done in November 1895 when Wells had
become somewhat known and was living at Woking outside London.
He had withdrawn to "a little house in the country where I could
follow up with another book the success that I felt was coming to
The Time Machine and my short-story volume". It was here that he
planned and wrote the War of The Worlds, the Wheels of Chance
and The Invisible Man. "I wheeled about the district", he wrote,
"marking down suitable places and people for destruction by my
Martians." This picshua Wells said: "reeks with the 'shop' of
authorship; one observes also the pride of Jane [his second wife,
Amy Catherine Robbins], the author's family in a state of wonder,
the envious hostile reviewer with a forked tail... much sordid
exultation about royalties and cheques. But we were very young
still, we had hada hard and risky time and it was exciting to succeed."
In the summer of 1898, Wells went to the south coast to
recuperate from a kidney ailment. "All this," he wrote,
"is brought back to me by the hieroglyphics of the picshuas...
Before October I did some little drawings as I lay In bed, and
amused myself by colouring them and these I think prevented
the Immediate resumption of the picshua diary." On Octo¬
ber 5th the picshuas testify that he "hatched out a new pro¬
ject called K/pps, and completed Love and Mr. Lewisham.
And on October 8th (date of picshua below) "there seems
to have been a bout of drawing to put all the momentous
events of the previous months on record. The picshuas
recall a score of particulars that I should otherwise have for¬
gotten completely." The delightful drawing below depicts
the interruption of a picnic by Intrusive cows. Mrs. Wells,
he noted in his. Autobiography, "...was town bred and she did
not like cows. She distrusted these kind fragrant animals."
ÍA1 </
y<x-
*s-
j~í
<£m
Left, is an impression sketched by
H.G. Wells at the time of a Royal
Institution audience in 1902. "We were
"getting on", he wrote. "At first it was
very exciting and then it became less
marvellous. We still found ourselves
rising. I remember about this time to
be exact on January 24th, 1902 was
asked to read a paper to the Royal In¬
stitution and I wrote and read The Discov¬
ery of the Future... I sketched at the
time a Royal Institution audience... I
regard this picshua as a masterpiece only
to be compared to the Palaeolithic draw¬
ings in the Caves of Altimira. It marks
our steady invasion of the world of
influential and authoritative people."
33
