Ib^Ï**^'
THE TREASURES OF IRAN'S
IMPERIAL LIBRARY
«*#¿
IF
Geographically Persia was situated in the centre of
the ancient world. Historically, a distinctly Persian
civilization goes back as much as twenty five cen¬
turies when the great Persian Empire stretched westward
to the Danube and south to the Nile Valley. Culturally, it
is one of the few countries which can still claim a contin¬
uous tradition in literature, art and philosophy going far
back into the pre-Christian world.
It is almost as a direct outcome of Persia's geographical
situation that one of the chief characteristics of Persian
art was its extraordinary power of assimilating foreign
influences such as Greek, Egyptian, Islamic and Chinese,
and of combining them with others to create an original
and homogeneous style. This is especially true in
painting.
In the long history of Persia (the Iran of today) paint¬
ing developed at a comparatively late stage. Art under
the Achaemenid kings enhanced and adorned the public
life of the court from the 6th to the 4th centuries B.C.
The twin capitals of Susa and Persepolis were unmis-
takeably royal, with their friezes of attendants, guards
and tribute bearers sharply cut in stone, or brightly
coloured in the equally clear and hard tiled facings. This
was the art proper to an open-air court ceremonial.
The period of Hellenistic dominion, after the conquest
of the Persian Empire by Alexander the Great, saw the
introduction of a less priestly, more human art, followed
by a return to national ideals and a deliberate revival of
the monumental rock carving of earlier Achaemenid
times. Only when a site was unsuitable for carving was
there recourse to painting as a substitute.
Then, in 639 A.D. came the invasion of Islam, changing
the Persian mood and spirit. Islam had always had a
great respect for calligraphy, since it was a way of
preserving the inspired words of the Prophet. Such was
the prestige of calligraphy, that when painting was asso¬
ciated with it, it was only, so to speak, as a subordinate.
Followers of Islam considered the countries which
they conquered and ruled idolatrous, with their
temples and their gods almost always represented in
human form and therefore in conflict with the Semitic
sentiment expressed in the Book of Exodus: "...Thou shalt
not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of
anything that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth
beneath, or that is in the water under the earth."
Well before the rise of Islam, however, the Persians had
enjoyed depicting heroic scenes and pastimes of the nobles
such as hunting and feasting. The new Islamic rulers,
the Caliphs, revived the tradition, but for this work, which
Islam regarded as unorthodox, they employed foreign
artists. Such of these paintings as are known to us often
represent huntsmen on horseback pursuing wild animals,
36
or the king on his throne surrounded by courtiers, guards
and musicians. The decoration of religious works in this
way was forbidden, but nothing prevented rulers and
other dignitaries from employing painters to illustrate the
great works of Firdausi, Nizami, Jami and other authors.
The Mongols, who invaded Persia at the beginning of
the 13th century, paid no heed to the prohibitions of
Islam though they became Mohammedans later.
Worshippers of the Heavens and the infinity of Space,
they brought in their train painters and decorative artists
from China, and the Far Eastern influence became the
dominant one.
The earliest illuminated Iranian manuscripts which
survive are from this time. The Chinese influence
radically affected the whole conception. For the
moment colour almost disappeared. The drawing became
nervous and calligraphic; and above all, the attempt was
made to set the figures in a landscape. But the figures
of men or oí animals still dominated these compositions,
there was a vividness of presentation, a sense of action
and drama which were the heritage of the old Iran.
In the next generation this style seems to have been
further absorbed into the Iranian tradition. In the great
manuscript of the national epic, the Shahnameh or Book
of Kings completed by the poet Firdausi in the early Xlth
century, copied about 1330 and now divided between many
collections, figures and landscape are perfectly matched
in memorable compositions of powerful drama, or
romantic invention.
At the end of the 14th century Iran was once more
ravaged by a conqueror from the Steppe, Timur-leng,
the Lame" the world conqueror Tamerlane. Yet
despite these events, Iranian culture showed astonishing
vitality. Poetry, philosophy and history flourished;"
architecture put on the most splendid robe of brilliant
faience; and metalwork continued the great tradition of
bronze casting which had been one of the glories of Iran,
since the late 12th century.
In the arts of the book, the later 14th century saw the
birth of a new style that was to persist in its main charac¬
teristics for three hundred years, and is one of the great
gifts of Iran to the world. Of this period, Basil Gray,
Keeper of the Department of Oriental Antiquities at the
British Museum, has written, "Craftsmanship went hand-
in-hand with invention. Craftsmanship supplied super¬
lative materials: paper, mineral pigments, gilding, and the
skill to use them in calligraphy, illumination and painting.
"The splendours of carpet and tile revetment were
transferred to the page in these glowing miniatures and
in that setting stood the cyprus-like figures of lovers sung
by the poets, while overhead moved the birds pouring out
their song to the air scented by unfading blossoms. The

nearest that Western art has approached to this in feeling
and richness is in French tapestry of the 14th century;
and in pure colour in some Sienese panel-painting, nearly
contemporary with them.
"It was a golden moment which could not be prolonged.
But when it passed the art did not perish, but gave birth
to more numerous progeny in the next generation. The
conquests of Tamerlane uprooted this school of art from
Tabriz and Baghdad (then a Persian city) and spread it
all over the country. Shiraz in the south, the capital of
Fars, the heart of ancient Iran; and Herat in the far east,
capital of Khurasan, became the principal centres at the
courts of Timur's son and grandchildren."
Perhaps the most beautiful of Persia's miniatures are
in the remarkable collection preserved in the Gulistan
Imperial Library at Teheran. These were almost comple¬
tely unknown to the world until the Library sent them
for exhibition in London in 1931 and later in Leningrad.
They include those from the manuscript of the Iranian
epic, the Shahnameh, in which the romance of chivalry
and the exploits of heroes are given expression in the
setting of the Iranian Spring, when the bare hills are
dotted with flowers for a few weeks and the foliage is
Copyright Unesco Album, Iran
THE IMPERIAL LIBRARY of the Gulistan (Rose Garden) Palace at Teheran, where a remarkable
collection of Persian miniatures is preserved. This palace is used for official state receptions. It
contains the fabulous Peacock Throne of the Shahs of Iran which is studded with precious stones.
The Unesco Courier. January 1957
fresh. The Shahnameh contains 20 large miniatures and
a double-page frontispiece, and the name of Prince
Baysunqur, the greatest patron of art and poetry among
Timur's descendants, is found in various places throughout
the manuscript.
A second work from the Gulistan Library also a prod¬
uct of Prince Baysunqur's studio is Kalila and Dimna, a
collection of animal fables. These miniatures show a
sensibility and intimacy with the natural world missing
from the more formal epic scenes. These Indian fables
were also partially translated into French in the 17th
century. La Fontaine learned of them through François
Bernier, a French doctor who came across them while in
Asia, and used some of them in writing his own fables.
In addition to these important manuscripts the Gulistan
Library possesses an equally remarkable collection of
calligraphy and miniatures of different dates and origins
bound together in a luxurious volume by the Moghul
Emperor Jehangir, in the early 17th century. The most
famous miniature of this album, the Muraqqa Gulshan, or
Flower Garden Album, is by Bihzad, the foremost of the
few Persian painters whose names are known today. It
represents the garden of the art-loving Prince Husayn
Bayqara, at whose court in Herat,
Bihzad worked. This illustration,
signed by the artist, who is believed
to have been the first to have ever
mentioned his own name on an illu¬
minated manuscript, probably dates
from about 1480.
Bihzad has been hailed as the
greatest master of Persian painting.
He was a reformer in the treatment
of landscape, which appears more
realistically in his pages than in
those of his forerunners. Moreover
he revolted against the dictation of
the calligraphers and admitted, at
best, only a few lines of text in the
pages he illustrated.
At the end of the 16th century, all
the artistic forces in Persia were
being concentrated at the new
capital, Isfahan, under the impulse of
Shah Abbas the Great (see page 31).
Here arose a new and important
centre for the art of book production.
Parallel to this, a new development
was taking place at the court of the
Moghul emperors in India. One of
them, Humayun, who visited Persia
half way through the 16th century,
returned to India with two Iranian
painters who became heads of the
new painting workshop he established
in his royal library. This patronage
of the arts was continued by his
successor, Akbar the Great, and a new
style of painting was born, owing aca¬
demic discipline and technical know¬
ledge to the Iranian tradition, but in¬
formed with quite another spirit.
This Moghul art is at its most
characteristic in depicting historical
events and in portraiture. In their
wish to record, Akbar and his son and
successor, Jahangir, found the Euro¬
pean science of picture making with
perspective and chiaroscuro, interest¬
ing, and for a time the influence of
Flemish and German line engraving
is clearly visible in Moghul painting.
The Persian miniatures reproduced
in Unesco's Album are taken from
manuscripts which were prepared in
court workshops and which have
remained to this day in royal posses¬
sion. Now, knowledge of these mas¬
terpieces of Iranian and Moghul art
is being made available to an im¬
mensely wider public than has enjoy¬
ed them in the four or 'five hundred
years since they were produced.
37


The Unesco Courier. January 1957
THE SAD KING and the wonderful
bird. A king, distressed at the dis¬
cord he sees everywhere around
him, asks the bird if there is a place
anywhere in the world where every¬
one is good and harmony reigns. One
of the most beautiful 15th century
miniatures in Kalila and Dimna, the
book of animal fables executed in the
studios of Prince Baysunqur Mirza.
MIXED POLO MATCH. A scene
frequently reproduced by Iranian
painters: the game of polo, which
originated in Persia. A I 6th century
illustration of one of the stories in
the Khamseh of Nizami, a poet and
one of the great thinkers of ancient
Iran. Here, young men, led by Khus-
rau, play against young women
led by Khusrau's beloved, Shirin.
YOUNG NOBLEMAN carrying a
falcon. A work attributed to Far-
rukh Beg, a Kalmuk, and one of the
most gifted and original artists who
worked for the Great Moghul, Akbar,
and later for his son the Emperor
Jahangir, towards the end of the I 6th
century. Taken, as is our cover
illustration, from the Muraqqa Gul-
shan, or Flower Garden Album.
39

THE BOOK OF KINGS. Prince Baysunqur Mirza, a 15th century
descendant of the Mongol conqueror, Tamerlane, was an enthusiastic
admirer of the Shahnameh, or "Book of Kings", the epic history of
Persia written by the I Oth century poet, Firdausi. He ordered a copy
of it to be made and the result was one of the world's most magnificent
illuminated manuscriptsa gem of painting, calligraphy and book¬
binding. The calligraphist, Ja'far Baysunquiri, completed the copy in
I 430, but the work carries no other date and no painter's name. This
illustration from the Shahnameh depicts King Kaikus receiving a bard,
in reality a div (evil spirit of Persian mythology) come to deceive him.
40

The Unesco Courier. January 1957
EXPLOITS OF HEROES and the romance of Chivalry are given expression
in the Shahnameh in the setting of the Iranian Spring, when the bare hills are
dotted with flowers for a few weeks and the foliage is fresh. Here, one the
heroes of the Shahnameh, Isfandiyar, kills two wolvesone of a series of deeds
which he, and a rival hero, Rustam, must perform to prove their courage.
41

A GAME DRIVE in the presence of Prince Baysunqur Mirza, from the copy of the Shahnameh
executed in the studios of this Prince, a passionate book collector and a gifted calligraphist'
42
