GwTHE
CI paint as others smoke'
Gnthe was probably the last uotno uni¬
versale of Western civilization. Like
Faust, he desired all knowledge and
sought to squeeze the lemon of life dry.
To him, painting was a serious business
which exerted a tremendous influence upon
his aesthetic conceptions. "Since my early
childhood," GBthe wrote in Dichtung und
Wahrheit (Poetry and Truth), "I had been
surrounded by painters and had formed
the habit, like them, of seeing things in
their relation to art... Everywhere my eyes
passed, I saw a tableau, and began to draw
from nature in the most awkward fashion."
Gjthe flung himself into art with the
same intense zeal as he did into every other
subject which interested him, believing that
"one should be able to make oneself mas¬
ter of any subject." He tried everything :
drawing, water colours, oils, engraving,
frescoes; most of all he did landscapes.
Perhaps like many people today who
find themselves fragmented by the inces¬
sant wagging of the human tongue, Ghthe
once confided to a friend that we should
all speak less and draw more. "For my
part," he said, "I should like to disso¬
ciate myself from speech altogether and, in
imitation of nature, express my thoughts
only in design." '
Gsthe considered that he had a natural
talent for painting worthy of cultivation,
but he was his own harshest critic. After
his long stay in Italy between 1786 and
1788 he decided "to renounce the practice
of the plastic art." But nothing could stop
him from painting: "I lacked everything
Invocation to the Moon
needed to succeed" he wrote, "but 1 per¬
sisted stubbornly."
In one of his letters, written when he
was 60, he mentions that he is busy painting
landscapes "but always in the same style
which leads to nothing." He added philo¬
sophically, "since I practise in the same
way as others smoke tobacco, it does not
matter very much."
In 1821, twenty-two drawings executed
in 1810 were published in an album for
which G himself wrote the preface and
asked his readers to "judge my ability as
well as my shortcomings." The magnifi¬
cent drawing, (above left) "Evocation of
the Spirit of the Earth", which he did for
Faust, appeared in this album.
G later summed up his artistic deve¬
lopment and came to the following very
severe conclusions : "My tendency to prac¬
tise art was in reality a false tendency for
I had no natural aptitude, and hence
nothing touching art could develop spon¬
taneously in me. ...Despite all my efforts I
did not become an artist. But by practising
art I learned the value of every line and
learned to differentiate between what is
praiseworthy and what is inadequate. This
is no small advantage."
Perhaps it would be truer to say that
G failed to rise above the common¬
place when he adhered too closely to all
the rules and copied directly from nature.
But when he allowed his imagination free
rein (as in his Faust drawing) or worked
from memory (as in the "Invocation to the
Moon", left) his natural artistic talent
came into play, enabling him to produce
results of unquestionable originality.
Above, right, a water colour by G
in hommage to France after the battle
of Valmy in 1792. On a pole topped by a
Phrygian cap, G wrote: "Passers-by.
this land is free."
43
