PIONEERING WITH PEOPLE
How U.S. Children Are Helping Unicef
UNICEF
'HI NEIGHBOUR' programme of U.S. Committee for Unicef puts history and geography
in a new perspective for youngsters In schools, summer camps and youth organizations across
the U.S.A. while teaching them about Unicef's work. Each year the Committee prepares
a kit with the stories, games, songs, dances, crafts, recipes and sketches of Unicef's programmes
In five countries. Here, musical message of goodwill goes from New York to Belgian Congo.
Pioneering has taken many forms
throughout human history, and there
has been a fascinating story associat¬
ed with each effort of men and women to
accept the challenges of the new and un¬
charted. One such story is unfolding in
!>ur time. It hasn't yet been written in
part, because those who know much abouï
it are too busy living the story; in part,
because the ending is not yet known.
I refer to the efforts of millions of people
in many parts of the world to participate in
mankind's greatest effort to organize ra¬
tionally the international relationships
among our countries; I refer to the unoffi¬
cial, voluntary, non-governmental actions of
citizens, organized and otherwise, to estab¬
lish meaningful links with the United Na¬
tions and its family of associated organiza¬
tions. The United Nations Charter says,
"We the peoples of the United Nations...
have resolved to combine our efforts" to
accomplish the aims of the u.N. Many of
"We the peoples" are pot content to rely
on the indirect implementation of that
resolution provided by the fact that their
government is a member of the United Na¬
tions and various of the Specialized Agen¬
cies. They believe that the spirit and aims
of these organizations will be effective in
the progress of mankind only if and when
there is understanding and support in the
hearts and minds of the people.
There is nothing new in that philosophy,
but there are many new and uncharted
roads to be travelled in the process of
translating the philosophy into useful action.
Evolving relationships between non-govern-
14
by Norman Acton
mental and governmental institutions which
will strengthen the character of each,
planning activities Which Will be at once
meaningful to the individual citizen and
helpful to the international governmental
body, seeking a balance between the local
and national objectives of groups of citizens
and the international aims of the United
Nations family: these, to cite a few of the
most apparent problems, exemplify the lar¬
gely unexplored wilderness through which
new paths must be cut if "'We the people"
are to satisfy our responsibility for accom¬
plishing the objectives of the United Na¬
tions and its associated organizations.
All the world's work
Happily, the importance of citizen
participation has been accepted by
the governing bodies of most
members of the u.N. family and they have,
as a matter of principle, recognized the role
of non-governmental interests. Some, such
as the International Labour Organization,
have been exploring this area for much
longer than the u.N. has been alive.
unicef, the United Nations Children's
Fund, has worked closely with inter¬
national and national voluntary groups
since its inception. I think all would
agree, however, that much exploration re¬
mains to be done in perfecting patterns of
relationships and types of function.
Those of us associated with the United
States Committee for unicef enjoy the
exhilaration gained from our part in this
pioneering process, and we are honoured to
tell our story as one thread in the fabric of
the larger problem discussed above. We
know it is only one of the many stories
which might be told to demonstrate how
citizens and their organizations can partici¬
pate usefully in the work of the u.n.
The United States Committee for unicef
is a private, non-profit corporation. It is
governed by a group of leaders in the civic,
educational, religious, health and welfare
life of our country who serve as Members
of the Corporation, and by a Board of
Directors whom the Members elect. The
Committee employs a small staff at head¬
quarters, but no paid workers in the field.
The Committee was first organized in
1947 and was reconstituted in its present
form in 1953. Throughout its existence, it
has been devoted to three objectives: 1) To
tell the people of the United States about
the United Nations Children's Fund; 2) To
serve as the channel through which the peo¬
ple might support and participate in the
work of unicef; and 3) To provide com¬
munication between citizens and the U.S.
government concerning the participation of
the latter in the work of unicef.
The activities of the Committee may be
best understood in the light of two princi¬
ples which guide its policies and decisions.
While there is nothing earth-shaking about
either of them, it will be seen that they
have great significance in shaping the direc¬
tion of an organization's programme.

The Unesco Courier. October 1957
Our first principle is that passive partici¬
pation does not meet the hunger people
have to become a part of the u.N. family
and its work. In our case, this means that
people not only want to know what unicef
is doing to help the world's children, but
they also want to do something about it.
Carried one step further, it means that peo¬
ple who are given an opportunity to do
something about it earn the right to identify
themselves with the Children's Fund and,
having done so, become the devoted consti¬
tuents envisioned in the Charter's preamble.
Our second principle may be a result of
a particular situation in the United States
but it nevertheless has a broader validity.
It is that the best support we can gain for
unicef comes when the people see such
support as a logical and consistent expres¬
sion of their basic ideals. This means that
we do not seek to build a new and separate
organizational structure. Our goal is
rather to assist the many existing civic, reli¬
gious, educational, service and other orga¬
nizations who wish to include UNiCEF-relat-
ed activity in their work. The citizen
therefore comes to understand the Child¬
ren's Fund not as a new and unrelated
activity, but as what it really is an exten¬
sion of the objectives which he has long
endorsed through his church, parent-teacher
organization, service club, professional asso¬
ciation or other group affiliation.
'I brought Dad along'
The validity of these principles has, in
our judgment, been established by the
success which our efforts to carry
out the objectives of the Committee have
enjoyed. To cite a few examples:
On a hot mid-summer day Wayne trudg¬
ed into the offices of the U.S. Committee
for unicef. "I trick-or-treated for unicef
last Halloween," he said. "What did you do
with my money?" Amazing ten-year old
poise with a definite business-like air and
obvious determination to obtain answers.
He listened intently as he was told of the
milk and vitamins, vaccines and protective
medicines. "Good," he said, "Give me
some brochures to take home to Illinois.
My friends and I will do it again this
Halloween." After more discussion of the
plight of "all the world's children" we-
walked to the outer office with Wayne to
say goodbye. His father was patiently
waiting for him and we thanked him for
bringing Wayne to see us. Wayne's reply
was quicker than his father's: "Dad didn't
bring me, I brought him. I had business
with unicef!"
Indeed young Wayne did have business
with unicef, as do several million other
young Americans, and their interest is not
confined to Halloween but extends through¬
out the year. Of those who come to
New York there is a steady stream visiting
the offices of the U.S. Committee. Others
communicate their interest by letter some
laboriously pencilled with heart-tugging
messages: "I wanted to help cause once I
was a little poor too" or '"I have money for
the poor children. I love them. I love
you too."
The programme was started by one Sun¬
day School class back in 1950. Those
children wanted to share their typical
American holiday Halloween with less
fortunate children all over
the world. The idea spread Cont'd
and each year more and
more children take part.
The U.S. Committee pre- next page
pares a kit of planning
PENNIES AND DIMES being collected (above) by these gaily-garbed U.S. children at traditional
Halloween Festival will buy penicillin, vaccine and milk for sick and malnourished children all
over the world. 'Learning by doing' about life in other lands, U.S. campers (below) make Belgian
Congo masks, a project Inspired by "Hi Neighbour" programme of U.S. Committee for Unicef.
UNICEF photos

Spooks, Witches & GoblinsWith Collecting Tins
suggestions, posters and stickers for the
half-pint milk cartons, which symbolize
the purpose of the programme. Local or¬
ganizations civic, religious or fraternal-
sponsor Trick or Treat in each of the more
than 7,500 communities that participate.
In many cases interest is so widespread
that a unicef committee is formed with
representation of all the major organiza¬
tions in the community.
A unicef Halloween is traditional with
children costumed as spooks, witches and
gobîins; it retains all the fun of ringing
doorbells, parties, apple-bobbing and the
collecting of treats. The "treats" are the
difference. These are "'treats" for others
pennies, nickels and dimes which, through
unicef, become life-saving penicillin, pro¬
tective vaccine and health-giving milk and
vitamins for ill or malnourished children.
These children have become Good Ghosts
of unicef and they share because they care.
They know that unicef, representing the
co-operative effort and support of more
than 85 countries and territories, cares for
all children for them too if ever there'
should be need.
Swahili 'Hi' in Guatemala
Imagine little girls in Guatemala City
calling "Jambo" the Swahili greeting
comparable to "hi" or learning how
to make "Palm Oil Chop" (Nigerian stew)
in cooking class. A young school teacher
helped gather authentic material on
Guatemalan children's fun activities for
this programme of the U.S. Committee for
unicef and then introduced "Hi Neighbour''
to her own pupils. And in Lagos, Nigeria,
a programme director for Nigerian Broad¬
casting is putting on a series of radio shows
from the music on the "Hi Neighbour"
record and the activities from the Kit.
Concurrently across the United States,
youngsters little and big in schools, in
summer camps, in many organizations
are using this same material. One town
had a Games of Many Nations Spring
Festival in which every youth club had a
share. History, geography and unicef-
aided projects take on new importance
when a youngster knows through fun
the daily activities of his contemporaries in
these countries.
This U.S. Committee programme is
three years old. Each year a kit is prepar¬
ed with the stories, games, songs, dances,
crafts, recipes, Fun-Facts-to-Know, and
sketches of unicef programmes in each of
five countries. There is also a record of
the music from the five 1957 countries
Guatemala, Iraq, Nigeria, Philippines and
Yugoslavia. From the gathering of the
material to its dissemination, "Hi Neigh¬
bour" depends on the co-operation, interest
and time of many adults around the world.
The material itself must be authentic and it
must give as broad a picture as possible of
the varied cultures that make up each
country. Its value to children lies in the
hands of adult leaders, adults who believe
that fun and beauty are clues to understand¬
ing individuals and groups of people and
that, through understanding, today's child¬
ren will be better prepared to meet the
challenges that their world does and will
present.
And so, the purpose of the U.S. Commit¬
tee's ""Hi Neighbour" programme is three¬
fold: to strengthen better understanding
between people; to stimulate the interest of
United States youth in the people of other
countries; and to broaden understanding of
unicef's aims and achievements around the
world. Other national committees for
unicef in different parts of the world and
other organizations working for the United
UNICEF
FESTIVAL OF NATIONS grows out of "Hi Neighbour" programme in a camp in New York
State. Here, young people learn to share fun and folkways of children in Unicef-aided countries.
16
Nations and its specialized agencies have
found this project a valuable tool. With
their help, the U.S. Committee seeks to
broaden this happy bridge to friendship
and understanding. In 1958, the program¬
me will be devoted to Indonesia, Italy,
Lebanon, Paraguay and Uganda.
Unicef Greeting Cards sold by local
unicef committees last year represented
almost 20 per cent of the total sold in the
U.S.A.
Then there is the unicef counter in the
General Assembly Building of the United
Nations. Here again, volunteer support
plays a tremendously important role.
Twelve months a year this counter is
manned by volunteers and their efforts re¬
sult in more than 15 per cent of U.S. na¬
tional sales.
The U.S. Committee, as is implicit in
what has been said, assists other organiza¬
tions and individuals sharing its interest in
unicef and in international co-operation.
Speakers, films, literature, national publi¬
city and programme assistance are among
the added facilities offered. The results
are seen both in more adequately informed
participation in such projects as those men¬
tioned above, and in the development of an
organized constituency which gives expres¬
sion to the enthusiasm with which many
citizens view United States support of the
Children's Fund.
Millions want to help
Among the more specific patterns of
liaison encouraged by the Committee
are such activities as joint planning
with the National Citizens Committee for
the World Health Organization in connexion
with the World Health Assembly which will
be held in the United States in 1958. The
Committee also works closely with the
National Social Welfare Assembly and
recent discussions have explored the
possibility of establishing a group within
the Assembly's Committee on International
Social Welfare to assist the U.S. Committee
for unicef in defining the welfare aspects
of the policy recommendations it makes to
the United States representative on the
unicef Executive Board and to the U.S.
government agencies which participate in
the formulation of this country's positions.
The U.S. Committee for unicef is one
of a number of national committees work¬
ing to support the Children's Fund in vari¬
ous countries. On the international level,
the Non-Governmental Organizations Com¬
mittee on unicef serves as a co-ordinating
body for more than 50 international volun¬
tary organizations in consultative relation¬
ship with the unicef Board. In their work
with the Children's Fund, these internation¬
al and national organizations, together with
their constituent organizations and indivi¬
duals, provide a dramatic expression of the
desire of the world's people to associate
themselves with unicef and its work. No
one claims that final answers have been
found to the questions of what techniques
and relationships will best carry this asso¬
ciation into a successful future. But, with
determination, vision and co-operation, it is
certain that such efforts will do much to
apply the vast reservoir of human goodwill
to support of the important undertakings of
the United Nations family to meet the needs
of mankind.
