CHILDREN JUDGED BY
THE LAWS OF MEN
Society has always faced the problem of juvenile
delinquency. Even in the dimmest eras of the past,
an effort was made to understand the child who
unconsciously committed a crime. Only near the end of
the last century, however, was this common-sense
approach written into law with the creation of special
statutes for minors in penal codes. Action by legislators
was as necessary for juvenile delinquency as it had been
for the protection of child labour, for common sense had
often disappeared in the past. There was many a trial
of children in which the judge was guiltier than the
unfortunate defendant.
In the Law of the Twelve Tablesthe first law of the
Romans, dating back to 306 B.C. there were already
special provisions concerning thefts committed by
children whose responsibility for such crimes was
recognized as limited. Under the reign of Hadrian,
Pomponius declared that neither an insane person nor a
child could suffer capital punishment for a crime. It
was during this same period (2nd century A.D.) that
Roman jurists made an attempt at establishing different
degrees of responsibility according to the age of the
defendant. They set up three categories: 1. "Infans;" 2.
"Admodum impubes;" and 3. "Proximus pubertati." They
defined the "infans" as someone who was still not able
to distinguish between right and wrong and therefore
completely irresponsible for his actions. Certain punish¬
ments were laid down for the "amodum impubes" category
but infinitely less severe than those meted out to adults
for the same crimes. The sanctions permitted for the
"proximus pubertati" were much sterner.
Peoples much less civilized than the Romans also
admitted the principle of the irresponsibility of the child
in their legal procedure. The Saxons and the Salic
Franks considered the child to be irresponsible up to the
age of twelve. The Swabians and the Bretons were more
tolerant they granted children immunity until the age
of fourteen. The Burgundians and the Visigoths inflicted
no severe punishments upon children under fifteen. The
Lombards even went so far as to declare all persons under
eighteen irresponsible. Practically speaking, one might
well wonder how these rules could have been enforced
since no official birth records existed before the 19th
century and the exact age of a person was never really
known. One must presume that the judges
decided on the basis of the defendant's
physical appearance.
Beginning in the middle of the Middle
Ages and continuing to the end of the 18th
century, common sense lost ground steadily
27
Cont'd

BY THE LAWS OF MEN (Continued)
U.N. TEN-POINT CHARTER FOR YOUTH
and judges displayed unbelievable intolerance toward
juvenile offenders. In the Holy Roman Empire, children
were often executed on the same grounds as adults.
During the 17th century, the Paris Parliament pronounced
a certain number of verdicts which show a total absence
of logic. Thus on August 17, 1617, a young man of
seventeen wilfully killed one of his friends by hurling a
stone at his head. The verdict: punishment by his father.
A few years later, the same court but probably made up
of different judges tried a youngster of thirteen who,
obeying his father's commands, had put poison into a
neighbour's beef stew. The verdict: the child was to be
hung by the arms for two hours and whipped. A century
later, in 1765, a boy of sixteen was condemned under a
royal decree to three years in the galleys for vagrancy.
The Court of the City of London made the following
proclamation at the beginning of the 12th century: "A
thief may escape immediate execution only if he is under
twelve years of age and if the value of the stolen object
is less than 12 pence."
Outside Europe, peoples of the most varied civilizations
recognized the irresponsibility of children before the law.
In India, one law dating back to the 15th century deser¬
ves to be quoted as a humanitarian example (and even,
perhaps, as a pedagogical one) ; "Tf a child under the age
of five commits a forbidden deed, no matter how serious,
not only must he not be placed on trial but his parents
themselves should not inflict any punishment upon him.
Human beings of so tender an age can be educated only
by kindness and love."
Modern legislation reflects the tremendous variety of
educational methods now in use. To some authorities, an
offence committed by a minor should not be judged as
a crime but as the symptom of a dangerous state of mind.
To others, the personality of the child accused of a crime
is more important than the nature of the act he commit¬
ted. As far as the problems of delinquent youth are
concerned, modern jurisprudence is dominated by psy¬
chological, medical, social and educational factors. This
explains why laws and procedures differ so greatly from
one country to another.
In most countries the upper age limit for juvenile offen¬
ders varies from 16 to 19 years (16 in Belgium, Burma,
Ceylon, some regions of India and Pakistan, the Phi¬
lippines and Israel; 17 in Great Britain, Greece, Poland
and Egypt; 19 in many other countries). Norway and
Sweden have set up a special category known as "young
adults." In Norway, this includes persons between 18 and
23 years; in Sweden, between 21 and 25. For this special
category legislators recognize attenuating circumstances,
justified by age considerations, and have set up a deten¬
tion system different from that for adults.
Code of the Netherlands; for small children only protec¬
tive measures can be ordered by the authorities.
While children are today punished less severely than
adults, in most jurisdictions, the delinquency statute
includes a wide variety of acts or courses of conduct that
are not punishable if committed by an adult. Thus in
the United States, children and often, adolescents are
considered delinquent if they smoke cigarettes or use
tobacco in any form, or are beyond the control of their
parents or their guardians, or are "incorrigible", if they
associate with immoral persons, drink intoxicating liquor,
beg, use vile, obscene or vulgar language in public, or act
in a way which is dangerous or injurious to themselves
or others. In Jordan, any young person under 15 who.
lives in a house with a prostitute (not his mother) or in
a house that is used for prostitution, is considered a
vagrant minor. In several Middle Eastern countries, a
In the United States there is no nation-wide upper age
limit for a juvenile offender. The age varies in each
State ranging from 16 years in Oklahoma to 21 in
Arkansas. The upper age limit is also different for boys
and girls. In Wyoming, for example, a boy is legally an
adult at the age of 19 while a girl benefits from the pri¬
vileges granted minors until she is 21.
Many countries today recognize different degrees of
responsibility for children depending upon their age. A
distinction is often made between children, adolescents
and young adults. Children in the first category are
considered to be exempt from criminal responsibility and,
as a rule, cannot be punished by the courts. Nevertheless,
in certain cases where the court ascertains that the child
acted "with discernment", he can- be punished.
The minimum age at which a child can be held respon¬
sible for his acts and brought before a special court varies
widely from country to country. It is fixed at seven in
the United States, at eight in Great Britain, nine in
Israel, twelve in Greece, thirteen in France and Poland,
fourteen in the Federal Republic of Germany, Austria,
Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Italy, Norway, Switzerland and
Yugoslavia ; fifteen in Denmark and Sweden; and sixteen
in Finland. No minimum age is specified in the Penal
28
THE OLD WAY to deal with the juvenile offender was to send him
to an institution in which harsh punitive methods and strict discipline
were the accepted forms of "corrective" treatment. Today most
"approved" schools, reformatories, and "model" training schools take
child under 18 can be brought to court if he is of bad
conduct and refractory . to the control of his father, guar¬
dian and, under certain circumstances, his mother.
Egyptian law forbids children to collect cigarette ends.
Punishments laid down by the law and penal methods
vary greatly from one country to another. In Europe, the
first complete legislative reform in this field was made in
Belgium in 1912. Previously, there were only unco¬
ordinated laws and ordinances. The same held true for
other countries. As early as 1908, Orlando, the Italian
Minister of Justice at the time, urged judges to treat
minors with understanding, but a complete body of
legislation concerning juvenile delinquents was adopted
in Italy only in 1930.
Above all, the most urgent need was for special chil¬
dren's courts with judges who were more than mere
magistratesthat is, where they were both jurists and
educators. In 1877 in the United States, the State of New
York set up not only separate court hearings for minors

but ordered the segregation of children from adults in
institutions, courts and vehicles for transporting prison¬
ers. These steps were far in advance of any taken by
European countries. In May 1911, a children's court held
its first session in. Portugal. In Switzerland, the Canton
of St. Gall created a "Jugendgericht" (children's court)
in 1912 and the Canton of Geneva followed suit in 1913
with a "Chambre Pénale de l'Enfance." The first German
"Jugendgericht" dates back to 1914. In Asia, Japan
created the first two courts for children in July, 1923.
It is interesting to note that in the United States,
where the first children's courts were introduced, crimes
of murder are tried in half of the States by ordinary cri¬
minal courts, irrespective of the age of the defendant.
In the States of Indiana and Rhode Island, juveniles
accused of murder are tried in children's courts ; on the
other hand, traffic offences committed by minors are tried
in ordinary courts.'
From the educational point of view, the philosophy of
justice and the procedure followed in dealing with juve-
Paul Almasy 1957
a very different view of their reforming role. Inthe past half century it
has been increasingly recognized that the problem of delinquency
is part of a much .wider one of mental and emotional ill-health.
Causes and background of anti-social behaviourare now closely studied.
nile delinquency are basic problems, on which depends
the extent to which the mentality of a delinquent child
can be changed. Intelligent treatment can, in most cases,
transform a juvenile delinquent into a good citizen. But
there are times when the child is lost to society on release
from an institution.
The view has become very common today that the
nature of the child's delinquent behaviour is unimportant
except as a symptom of his underlying emotional prob¬
lems and that jurisdiction should be predicated upon
"the child's need for help." Among educationists and
child-welfare authorities, it is now the generally accepted
view that the official and authoritarian agencies should
be used only rarely ; that the function of the court is to
protect and "save the child" rather than to correct or
recondition him.
A wide range of measures is at the disposal of judges
in different countries in dealing with children's cases :
reprimands which can be either punitive or educational,
The Unesco Courier. October 1957
school-prisons, probation, supervision, reform schools and
observation homes.
Corporal punishment was once accepted by a large
number of countries. Today, a judge can still order it in
Burma, Ceylon, India (with the exception of the Bombay
region), Iran, Iraq and Thailand. It is also accepted in
Pakistan but only for boys (this is also true in Burma,
India and Ceylon).
In Asia, with the exception of Japan, children can be
placed in prisons for adults, for lack of special institu¬
tions. In most countries of Asia and the Far East the
arrest procedures of children are usually carried out by
the ordinary police, on a similar basis as in the case of
adults. In Burma, the Philippines and Bombay, however,
special officers other than members of the police exist
to carry out these functions.
In the countries of the Middle East, parents or guar¬
dians can be held responsible for acts committed by chil¬
dren and ordered to pay a fine which, in Turkey, can be
as high as 200 pounds, in Egypt 50 piastres, and in
Iraq, Lebanon and Syria, 50 pounds. In Jordan, the fine
is unlimited but it can be levied only if the child's act is
attributable to parental negligence.
"Prevention is better than cure", the old proverb
reminds us. Thus, along with enlightened measures
which they have introduced to check juvenile delin¬
quency, society and its lawmakers have undertaken the
task of child welfare. In many countries specialist orga¬
nizations have been set up to safeguard the physical and
mental health of children and to assist their parents in
educating them.
Drawing inspiration from the "Universal Declaration
of Human Rights" of 1948, the United Nations Social
Affairs Commission drew up in May, 1950, a draft for
a "Declaration of Children's Rights" which will be sub¬
mitted to the U.N. General Assembly for adoption and
eventual application in all of the U.N.'s Member States.
This Declaration consists of ten points:
1. The child shall- be given the means necessary to
enable him to develop physically, mentally, morally, spiri¬
tually and socially in a healthy and normal manner and
in conditions of freedom and dignity.
2. The child shall be entitled from his birth to a name
and a nationality.
3. The child shall enjoy the benefits of social security.
He shall be entitled even from before birth to grow and
develop in health. He shall have the right to adequate
nutrition, housing, recreation and free medical services.
4.- The child shall be given opportunity to grow up in
economic security, in the care of his own parents when¬
ever possible, and in a family atmosphere of affection
and understanding favourable to the full and harmonious
development of his personality.
5. The child shall be given an education . which will
bestow upon him general culture and enable him to de¬
velop his abilities and individual judgment and to become
a useful member of society. Such education shall be free.
6. The child shall in all circumstances be amongst the
first to receive protection and relief.
7. The child shall be protected against all forms of
neglect, cruelty and exploitation. He shall in no case be
caused to engage in any occupation or employment which
would prejudice his health or education or interfere with
his development.
8. The child shall be protected against any practice
which may foster racial or national discrimination or
hatred. He shall be brought up in the consciousness that
he will achieve his fullest development and derive greatest
satisfaction through devoting his energy and talents to
the service of his fellow men, in a spirit of universal
brotherhood and peace.
9. The child who is physically, mentally or socially han¬
dicapped shall be given the special treatment, education
and care required by his particular condition.
10. The child shall enjoy all the rights set forth above,
irrespective of any consideration of race, colour, sex, lan¬
guage, caste, religion, political or other opinion, national
or social origin, property, birth, legitimacy or other status.
29
