HIGH
The Unesco Courier. October 1957
ASSET
by W.D. Wall
Director, National Foundation for Educational Research
in England & Wales
Any community is likely to stand or fall by the use it
makes of the ability inherent in its citizens. This is
particularly true when we think of the most able
five or ten per cent of its population from which
leadership in science, the arts, industry, professional and
administrative life will be drawn. The researches of men
like Havelock Ellis, Terman and Burt have taught us
that the social output of highly talented individuals is not
in direct but in geometric proportion to their higher
ability and at the top end of the scale apparently small
increases in power may make enormous qualitative and
quantitative differences in the contribution made to the
life of a community.
High intelligence is a complex aspect of the human
mind. Partly it is innate, dependent upon the play of
genes in our inheritance; but, as we are coming more and
more clearly to see, cultural factors, experiences In early
childhood, the kind, length and effectiveness of school and
higher education, inhibit or facilitate growth in this as in
other respects.
What is more, the nature of this broad educational
experience structures the mind in a qualitative way. A
technological society tends to produce technologists as
much by informal contacts with applied science in its
everyday manifestations as it does through its direct
scientific and technical training. Indeed we may say that
the genius of an age or culture is both a reflection of its
social climate and in many ways determines what can be
achieved in its schools, and the forms in which its ablest
men will express themselves.
This leads us to another point which, though much may
be made of it in pronouncements about education, is rarely
fully realised in practice. Education, training, instruction
is never solely nor even principally a matter of shaping
and informing the intelligence. Human learning is as
much an emotional and social, as it is an intellectual,
process. Children, adolescents and adults learn in
function of their prior emotional growth and of the
immediate situation.
& 'egg-heads'
But it is more than this. As they learn at home, in the
streets or fields, or in school, children are developing
their intelligence in the context of attitudes to
themselves and others, of the satisfaction or frustration of
their basic psychological needs, in short within a
personality. This personality and their ideas of themselves
are formed by contacts with other children, their parents
and relatives, other adults, and their teachers. Children
rarely learn precisely or only what adults set out to
teach; usually they learn much more, often quite the
opposite of what is intended.
This applies to all children, but the highly intelligent
ones present certain additional problems. It is not
unusual for brilliant boys and girls to be in advance of
their contemporaries at, say, the age of ten by as much
as four or five years of intellectual maturity. This
discrepancy increases with every year of growth. At the
same time, physically, socially and even emotionally they
may be only a little, if any, in advance of the average.
Thus the question arises of whether such children should
be kept with their chronological contemporaries whose
interests and abilities they have left behind or whether
they should be taught with older children who are more
mature physically and socially. In either case, the super¬
normal child may easily feel somewhat of the ugly
duckling and find it difficult to adjust.
Another problem arises from the ambivalent attitude
of society towards high intellectual ability, an attitude
mixed of envy and fear on the one hand and of honour
and favour on the other. Just because they are more
rapid and penetrating in their thinking than others and
because they solve educational problems better, bright
children like intellectual adults, are often mistrusted.
School-fellows equal matters up by such terms as "swot"
and "blue-stocking" and adults apply the derisory epithets
of "high-brow" or "egg-head". On the other hand the
prizes in school and many of the prizes and honours of
life go to sheer intelligence. It almost looks sometimes as
though we wish to teach our ablest children that ability
is a strictly personal asset, to be exploited as a means of
triumphing at the expense of others, while at the same
time we suggest that it should be hidden because it makes
them different from the rest.
Trahison des clercs starts in schools
The results we so often see in the highly intelligent
maladjusted adult who does not fully exploit his
ability or whose intelligence, allied to egocentriclty
and neurosis, brings him to a position where his influence
is exerted negatively. It is this which is the real
trahison des clercs and it begins in our schools.
What then is the solution? In most countries of Europe
at all events and in many elsewhere, children at the
threshold of adolescence are segregated in some way more
or less according to academic ability. A small group of
the supposedly most able go on to a form of education
(Lycée, Gymnasium, Grammar School) which prepares
them for entry to the University or the professions. The
rest either continue in their elementary school or attend
technical, commercial or modern courses.
The result is that all our most able children tend to
receive the same kind of education a verbal academic
one. Moreover when, as in many countries, selection is
made by examinations of attainment and depends at least
in part also upon parents' ability to pay fees and to
support a child in school well beyond the compulsory age,
this education tends to have a marked social bias. The
able child from a working class family is less likely either
to enter or to succeed than a less able one from a middle
class or professional family.
Even where, as in England and in the Scandinavian
countries, selection is made on the basis of objective tests
and secondary education is free, it has been shown that
this social bias is by no means absent. Equality of
educational opportunity is only partly a matter of
adequate educational provision and fairness in the
allocation of places in different types of course. The able
child's own family and the immediate community within
which he lives have themselves from his earliest days
conditioned his ability sometimes in the
wrong directions so that he may be unable Cont'd
to show his true prowess.
Even when a child from a poor family
wins his way, the discrepancy between the next page
values and motives of his home and i
21

ELEPHANTS INVITED
TO THE CLASSROOM
H ( "^äfeii
.vi
HIGH INTELLIGENCE
(Continued)
community and those embodied in the school and held
by most of his contemporaries may be too great. He
may then either leave prematurely or conform against the
grain only to find later that he belongs neither to the
group from which he comes nor to that towards which his
education has thrust him. Writ large this is the problem
of able members of a developing but still primitive
community educated abroad; but it is also a daily problem
in societies where academic education is historically based
on a particular social tradition.
Such segregation presents other dangers. The first is
that, however we may recruit them, abler pupils in the
academic school who go thence to the University and into
professional life are cut off from three-quarters or more
of their fellows at a time when social, political and
humanitarian attitudes are likely to be formed. An élite
is educated out of touch with the bulk of humanity. What
is more, because of the prestige of academic courses, able
children are implicitly taught tq believe themselves
superior to the rest and to despise much of the work
of the world to which they could make a peculiar
contribution. This may be particularly true in a country
in course of development which produces a surplus of the
academically trained who are unwilling to soil their hands
in the essential tasks. Such attitudes are intensified by
curricula which are often remarkable for valuing studies
in proportion to their uselessness rather than for truly
training the minds and personalities of the ablest for
the" responsibility and self-sacrifice imposed by their
superior gifts.
Because of this, many educationists have held that all
children should be educated together in the same schools
and classes, at least until the end of compulsory schooling.
The common school is held to be "more democratic". This
attractive idea needs close examination however lest we
confound equality of human value and human rights with
equality in ability and identic in social contribution
22
vastly different things. All men should certainly be born
free and equal; but it is quite certain that such equality
is a political and ethical concept not a psychological one.
Children differ ineluctably in their needs and abilities and
therefore in the kind and pace of education appropriate
to the full flowering of their personalities. Nothing could
be more profoundly undemocratic than educating all
children in the same way and at the same level.
This fortunately has never seriously been tried. Many
school systems have, however, attempted to keep a
considerable range of ability in the same class and an
even wider one in the same school, and then to
differentiate curricula through optional courses and
through individual and group assignments, to meet
differing needs. Some of the comprehensive schools in
England and the Junior and Senior High Schools of the
United States do this. The advantage is that, at least
until mid-adolescence, children of all levels of ability mix
in their daily lives. Many activities, social, artistic,
sporting, can be carried on together irrespective of
differences in sheer capacity to learn. Pupils can find out
that intellect is only one dimension of personality and
that there are other forms of excellence and other
instruments of service.
The practical danger, and one which is making many
educators, particularly in the United States, uneasy, is
that the abler children may be insufficiently stimulated.
They may tend to hide their light under the bushel of
conformity to the mean. We know too that able children
and adolescents gain from each other and from the
stimulus of emulation much that would not arise
spontaneously.
What then is the solution? There are probably many
solutions to the problem but their implementation depends
upon factors not all fully understood and some outside the
control of educationists. An educational system is the
product of a society and it is only by thoroughly under¬
standing that society that one can begin to change
education, and through education to improve society.
Hence lightning solutions and universal prescriptions are
impossible.
Perhaps the most valuable human attitude is a sense of
disinterested personal and social responsibility. Such an

The Unesco Courier. October 1957
There really were two elephants between the blackboard and
the class. And even the Thai children who are used to seeing
elephants were a little apprehensive as the animals swished
their tails and broke off nearby tree branches with their trunks.
Soon the elephants began to show the class of six-year-olds
what they could do: how they help their drivers to mount,
how they obey steering instructions, how they give themselves
a cool, refreshing shower with a bucket of water. Soon the
boys and girls were going off themselves, six at a time, for a
ride on the elephants. All this took place at a demonstration
school In Thailand, which is part of the rural teacher training
centre set up in 1954 by the Thai Government and Unesco at
Ubol. Here Unesco experts are working with Thai educationists
to develop new methods of teaching suited to rural areas, and
to breach old conventional teaching habits. A dozen head¬
masters in a group of schools near Ubol have said: "Let us take
a fresh look at our village and base our new work on what we
find here". When other teachers In Thai villages decide to
do the same, a great problem will have been solved.
Photos UNESCO-Gillett.
attitude, coupled with harmonious personal development,
puts high ability at the service of humanity without too
much thought of personal gain or prestige. It has marked
the truly great men of all times and nations. It has by
no means always marked the bulk of leaders in art, science
and politics in all countries. Genuine humility and under¬
standing of others are equally important if leadership is
to be acceptable within a democratic framework.
Government by consent does not necessarily imply
government by mediocrity. It should imply that those
who have deep insight use their minds to help others see;
neither impose a solution nor withdraw aid in disgust.
Such attitudes and such personal balance do not come
to the able child or to the rest of us suddenly or by chance.
They have to be produced by education, and are unlikely
to be produced otherwise. They must be implicit and
explicit at least in school and preferably in the home too.
Differences between children and adults in all the
dimensions of personality and particularly in sheer
intelligence will however always exist and it is stimulat¬
ing that this should be so. Hence a rich and highly
stimulating educational environment, within which pupils
can choose the nurture of which they have need, is
essential for all children and for the able most of all.
This must mean that traditional curricula and methods,
many of them based upon outmoded concepts of social
and pedagogic aims,' should be closely scrutinised and that
while certainly the strenuousness of academic demands for
the able should be maintained, the fields of study might
be greatly broadened, particularly during adolescence.
The teacher of the highly able child then becomes the
guide, philosopher and friend rather than the instructor
he so often is at present; and the standards he maintains
are those of scholarship shown in all, and not merely the
traditional academic, fields. More even than with most
children and adolescents, with the able he stresses the
ideas of responsibility and service and provides real
opportunities of every kind for strenuous endeavour for
the benefit of others. Thus the educational catch-word
of "learning by doing" may acquire a real meaning. The
able will only be trained for disinterested social leadership
and responsibility by exercising it throughout the period
of their growth and education.
GREECE COMES ALIVE
BESIDE A SWISS LAKE
This year some 30 twelve and thirteen-year-olds of Neu-
chatel (Switzerland) Girls High School have been spending
a few hours each week in Greece. Of course it is an
imaginary trip, but it is one which has brought the country,
its art and people alive for these youngsters who live
beside a Swiss lake as no textbooks could possibly have
done. They know all about the geography of Greece, its
frontiers, mountains, towns and islands and what a day's
work means for the peasant ¡n the olive groves or the
fisherman casting his nets in the Aegean. They have studied
Homer and Sophocles and they have given performances
of Greek songs and dances. What is happening in
Neuchatel Is also happening in more than 100 schools
In 33 countries which participate in a special Unesco
programme of education for international understanding.
Not only different countries are studied; a school
in Ecuador may study Human Rights and another in
India, the work of the United Nations. The problem
which this Unesco programme is helping to solve is the
adaptation of education as a whole to the needs and
to the Interests of children living In a new kind of world.
Photos UNESCO-Will Gloor
23
