A LEGENDARY
CITY IS ABOUT
TO DIE
FOR THE
SECOND TIME
by A.D. Tavares Bastos
FALL OF CANUDOS. Historic photo on right is one
of the rare documents available today of the great
"Rebellion in the Backlands". It was taken almost
immediately after the fall of Canudos on October 5,
A legendary city is about to die.
The scene of an incredible drama of violence, fana¬
ticism and misery, of indomitable courage and
endurance that took place some sixty years ago, it was
born condemned and has lived condemned. In a few
months' time it will disappear forever, submerged under
millions of tons of water. In this supreme sacrifice it
will serve to redeem one of the most parched and dis¬
inherited regions of northeastern Brazil's "Polygon of
Drought".
The town is named Canudos. Though it is almost totally
unknown outside of Brazil, there is hardly a Brazilian for
whom it does not evoke deep stirrings and recall one of
the great epics of Brazil's past.
Canudos lies in the far interior of the arid sertao in the
state of Bahia, where a backland people have lived for
centuries practically isolated from the life of the seaboard
and the rest of the country. Year after year they have
waged a terribly unequal struggle against a hostile environ¬
ment, against the double spectre of drought and famine.
This is the region of the caatinga, the gnarled dwarf
bushes bristling with spiny thorns, the no-man's-land of
xique-xique and mandacaru cactuses, of parched earth
and sun-baked rock hills, of leather-clad vaqueiros (cow¬
boys), one-time jagungos (outlaws) and former religious
fanatics.
It was a religious visionary, Antonio Conselheiro (the
"Counsellor") who in 1893, with a handful of miserable,
ragged followers, founded the tiny citadel of Canudos in
Antonio Dias Tavares Bastos, Brazilian poet and man of letters, has been
a member of the Permanent Delegation of Brazil to Unesco since 1947.
His major works have been written in French and have helped to make
Brazilian poetry better known to the French-speaking world. They include :
Introduction â la poésie ibéro-américaine, published in 1947 in collaboration
with Pierre Darmangeat, and Anthologie de la poésie brésilienne contempo¬
raine (1954).
26
the wilderness, defied the Federal government, and
touched off the biggest war of the sertao Brazil has known.
It was Canudos that for one full year (from 1896 to 1897)
held out against four fully equipped military expeditions
sent to subdue it, refused to surrender, and fought on
to the last man until the whole town was no more than
a heap of ruins. It was Canudos that shook the young
Republic of Brazil to its moral foundations, its very name
provoking terror throughout the country. It was Canudos
that inspired what is commonly regarded as the greatest
of Brazilian classics, Os Sertoes by Euclides da Cunha.
Rebellion in the Backlands, as the work is known in
English translation, has been described as "one of the
most remarkable books ever written," and "the Bible
of Brazilian nationality." The late Stefan Zweig termed
it "a great national epic... a complete psychological pic¬
ture of the Brazilian soil, the people, and the country
such as has never been achieved with equal insight and
psychological comprehension."
In his history of Brazilian literature entitled Marvellous
Journey, Samuel Putnam (translator of Os Sertoes)
writes : "In the place that it holds in the esteem and
affections of an entire people, it can only be compared
to the Divine Comedy or Don Quixote. Like these great
classics it is the expression of the very soul of a race in
all its strength and all its unconcealed weakness... No
other book ever laid hold of a nation in the same way
and to the same degree as this one." And the Brazilian
novelist Erico Verissimo has written : "If I had to choose
just one book in Brazilian literature to be translated into
other languages as representative of my country and of
my people, I would certainly pick Os Sertoes."
The story of Canudos begins north of the states of
Bahia and Pernambuco, in Ceará, a vast tract of land
scourged by periodic drought and famine. Antonio Mendes
Maciel the Counsellor came from Ceará. His family
were farmers and cattle grazers, copper-skinned sertanejos

The Unesco Courier. March 1957
1897 and shows Federal troops occupying the devas¬
tated town. It took four Brazilian military expedi¬
tions one full year to defeat a bearded mystic surround¬
ed by a horde of fanatic believers and fugitives from
justice. Final expedition comprising 5,000 men re¬
duced fortress-town to rubble. These troops had to
traverse a great wasteland, bristling with spiny
thorns and cactuses (left) before reaching the citadel.
(inhabitants of the sertao), proud, courageous and inde¬
pendent. They got on well with their neighbours except
for the Araujos, a rich landowner with powerful family
connexions in the Nordeste, with whom they had been
feuding fiercely for years. Murder and cruel vendettas
marked their relations, decimated the two families, and
left an imprint of tragedy on Antonio Maciel's childhood.
Later, an unhappy marriage added a further note of calam¬
ity to his life, and his true vocation began to take shape.
One day, he set out on foot across the land. His wan¬
derings took him over enormous stretches of territory. He
crossed the whole state of Pernambuco, the state of
Sergipe, then Bahia where we find traces of him as early
as 1876. During these endless peregrinations he endured
every hardship hunger, thirst, exhaustion but remained
imperturbable and remote. He seemed to float above such
material contingencies. He addressed his listeners with
the announcement of the end of the world, promising a
better life in heaven and preaching contempt 'for this
wicked earthly existence. Soon he was being credited
with miracles and people began to call him "Counsellor".
A document published in Rio de Janeiro describes him
during this period as "having a great influence on the
minds of the ordinary people, using his strange appearance
and his austere, ascetic habits to impress the simple and
the ignorant. He looks almost like a mummy. Under the
cloak of religious sentiment, he gathers the people around
him and leads them where he lists. He appears intelligent,
though lacking in culture."
Then the number of his disciples began to grow, and
more people began to flock around him. For ten years
they went from village to village, from town to hamlet,
erecting chapels wherever they went. And the people
from the surrounding countryside who came to listen to
the Conselheiro preach, begged him to perform miracles.
In 1882, however, the Archbishop of Bahia, alarmed at
reports about this independent and superstitious lay
prophet who was troubling people's minds, asked the
clergymen in his diocese to forbid him to preach. His
efforts were of no avail.
Five years later the same archbishop appealed to the
President of the Province to take steps against the Consel¬
heiro. The president wrote to the Minister of the Empire
(Brazil did not become a republic until two years after¬
wards, in 1889) requesting that the mystic be placed in an
insane asylum in Rio de Janeiro. The reply came that
there was no room available at the asylum. This simple
refusal by the authorities was to open the way to the
tragedy of Canudos.
In 1893 the Counsellor found himself in the community
of Bom Conselho (state of Bahia). It was there that for
the first time he preached open rebellion against the law,
haranguing the crowds to refuse to pay the taxes then
being collected, and ordering a bonfire built of tax forms.
Realizing the gravity of his act, he assembled his fol¬
lowers and headed north into the wild sertao desert which
he knew like a book having crossed it in every direction
on foot. He had good reason to be uneasy, for a posse
of 200 police was on his trail. Yet, incredible though it
may seem, the police force was thrown back and complete¬
ly put to rout by the Conselheiro's band of fanatics.
The rebels continued their advance deep into the rugged
sertao until they came to Canudos where they established
themselves. The year was 1893. At the time, Canudos
consisted of nothing more than a few wretched, tumble¬
down shacks housing a collection of rough, gun-toting
frontiersmen who spent their time drinking
and smoking curious-looking pipes. These
pipes gave Canudos its name, for their
stems, about a yard long, were made from
sturdy reeds (called canudos de pito) which
are found growing along the river banks.
Cont'd
next page
27

LEGENDARY
CITY (Cont'd)
ore than the outlaws, it is the desert
that must be vanquished'
The Counsellor had picked his hide-away well. Canudos
was a natural stronghold. It was deeply ensconced within
an elliptical circle of mountains (one had the fitting name,
Monte Santo) and it was almost entirely surrounded by
the river Vasa-Barris which made two hairpin twists before
it (see the map on opposite page). Its southern edge
was backed by a steep slope; its western flank protected by
a sharp, towering escarpment. All the trails leading to
Canudos passed through narrow gorges and defiles or over
rough, spiny cactus-ridden terrain. It was miles from the
nearest settlement. Canudos was safe from surprise attack.
Conselheiro and his followers set about building their
town. In a few weeks houses had been constructed, not
in simple rows along straight streets "but in a jumbled
labyrinth of closely packed, narrow tortuous alleys. In
the central square, a church was built. At amazing speed,
the village grew and expanded as new followers abandoned
their distant homesteads, and made their way to Canudos.
Soon outlaws and ex-convicts joined their ranks.
Feeding this growing population soon became an alarm¬
ing problem that inevitably led to foraging expeditions
and even to murder. Ranches and villages were plundered
for food as well as other materials. The Conselheiro, his
head more than ever in the clouds, appeared to ignore
such details and busied himself with the celebration of
marriages and baptisms, and matters of government.
In November 1896, the first army troops were dispatched
from the state capital of Bahia to "polish off" the outlaw-
fanatics, or jagungos as they were now commonly called.
After a long and weary trek inland, suffering all the way
from thirst and heat, a hundred soldiers and three offi¬
cers of this expedition were surprised by the Conselheiro's
men at a town called Uauá some 20 miles from Canudos.
Though armed only with old rifles, scythes and clubs, the
jagungos took advantage of their knowledge of the back-
land country and its ambush possibilities. They attacked
at dawn in superior numbers, contented themselves with
a partial victory and withdrew. The survivors of the army
force retreated in such disorder that the people of Uauá
started to panic and began a mass exodus from the town.
The war of the sertao had begun in earnest.
The news of the defeat spread across all of Brazil like
wildfire. The most fantastic rumours passed 'from mouth
to mouth. Almost overnight Antonio Conselheiro had
become Brazil's Public Enemy Number One.
A better organized expedition of 500 men now took the
road for Canudos. The battle was soon joined and quickly
developed into a series of confused encounters. At one
point the jagungos were certain they were on the verge of
defeat, but in the turmoil of battle the government troops
failed to grasp the fact that victory was theirs and instead
withdrew. This sudden change of fortune was hailed at
Canudos as a new miracle of the Prophet.
After this, the population of Canudos continued to grow.
Newcomers included the blind, the paralyzed and lepers,
who all hoped for a miracle. Canudos was now an
organized military camp under the command of the Coun¬
sellor's chief bodyguard.
On February 8, 1897, a 'full colonel of the Brazilian
Army, Antonio Moreira Cesar, set sail from Rio de Janeiro
for Bahia to lead an expedition of three armies against
the small collection of jagungos at Canudos. The main
corps of the expedition included an infantry battalion, a
regiment of artillery and a squadron of cavalry. A few
days after Moreira Cesar's arrival at Bahia, 1,300 'fighting
men, armed with fifteen million rounds of ammunition
and seventy shells for their artillery, had been assembled.
To the music of an army band they marched off in full
regalia into the wilderness.
On February 20th the expedition reached Monte Santo,
south of the Conselheiro's stronghold. With not even the
inkling of a doubt about his victory, Moreira Cesar spoke
of "having lunch at Canudos". His forces were actually
the first to reach the citadel, but the commanding officer
committed one serious military blunder after another.
NO
COMBATTANT
SURVIVED
This poignant document
shows the only survi¬
vors of the bitter drama
of Canudos: a handful
of gaunt, derelict wom¬
en and a few children.
In the final stages of
the siege of Canudos
they were allowed to
leave the town along
with one or two old
men who could not
bear arms. No able-
bodied man ever sur¬
rendered. The citadel
had to be conquered
inch by inch until the
last defender was dead.
28

The Unesco Courier. March 1957
(I.ÉAOU1
MOUNTAIN STRONGHOLD
Large-scale map (left) of area around
Canudos shows mountainous nature of
terrain and hairpin twists of River Vasa-
Barris which served as a "moat" to protect
it. Dotted and other lines indicate routes
of various military expeditions which
attempted to assault stronghold. Map
(above) shows northeastern region of
Brazil, with Canudos some 280 miles north
of Bahia and to the west of Pernambuco.
Map left, from Os Sertoes by Euclides da Cunha.
1945 edition, Livraria Francisco Alves, Rio.
Map above, from A Brazilian Mystic by R.B. Cun-
ninghame-Graham. London, Heinemann, 192 0.
Instead of reducing Canudos with his artillery, he ordered
a series of direct assaults cavalry charges, infantry
charges, bayonet attacks. His forces were cut to ribbons.
On March 3, Moreira Cesar, severely wounded the previous
day, died along with two of his staff officers. The attack
collapsed, and the army now completely disorganized
began a retreat which quickly became a rout.
This utter defeat left the nation dumbfounded.
Consternation gripped the people; the government was vio¬
lently attacked by the opposition and the Republic itself
tottered. "Save the Republic !" became the anguished cry
in the face of the growing despondency and despair, and
a multiplicity of legends about Canudos which were
sprouting up from every side.
The government had to act promptly. Mobilization was
ordered of battalions from each of the States of the Union.
The commander of Brazil's second military district, Gen¬
eral Arthur Oscar de Andrade Guimaraes, was placed in
charge of the Fourth Expedition comprising six army bri¬
gades forming two columns, each headed by a general.
Though this force was much stronger than all previous
expeditions, the plan of operations was no different. It
was essentially, as before, a frontal attack by marching
columns (two this time instead of one) instead of a plan
to encircle Canudos from a distance to prevent all escape,
and then to tighten the circle, bring artillery into firing
range and destroy the citadel by bombardment.
The expedition had been formed in April of 1897, but
it was only on June 16 that the first division got under
way. The first communiques announcing victory were
quickly followed by the news oí unexpected reverses and
heavy casualties. Canudos still held out. The arrival of
the first survivors soon confirmed the real truth: the
column had met with total disaster. The ferociousness of
the jagungos, their sniping attacks and raids, the diffi¬
culty of the desert terrain, the lack of water, the intricate
trenchwork defenses constructed around Canudos, and the
impossibility of determining even roughly how many men
the "Prophet of the Backlands" had at his disposal to
defend the citadel, all went to swell the stories that were
told to explain away the latest catastrophe.
Marshal Carlos Machado de Bittencourt, the Secretary
of State at the War Office himself, now took over
command. "More than the jagungos," he declared, "it is
the desert that we must conquer." This time Canudos was
to be crushed. Additional troops were poured into the
area and soon columns were converging on Canudos from
every direction with plenty of artillery and shells.
On August 24, a heavy mortar weighing over a ton and
a half opened fire on the church tower and toppled it.
The artillery pounding continued during the entire month
of September. On October 1 the 'final assault was sounded
and what little remained standing was dynamited.
Then all was still.
Canudos never surrendered. It held out to the very last
man. Conquered, literally, inch by inch it fell on October 5,
toward dusk, when its last four defenders died facing a
furiously raging army of thousands of soldiers. The four
defenders were an old man, two younger men and a child.
A number of women and children and a few old men
had been permitted to leave the citadel during the siege.
They were the only survivors. Over 5,000 destroyed houses
were counted at Canudos. Among them lay the body of
the "Prophet of the Backlands".
Of old Canudos nothing remains today except a collec¬
tion of bullet-marked ruins, and a cross bearing the in¬
scription "Erected in 1893 by A.M.M.C."
(Antonio Mendes Maciel Conselheiro). New
houses were built there in 1909 and a few
thousand inhabitants still live there. Today,
they are preparing for the day when
Canudos will vanish.
29
Cont'd

LEGENDARY CITY (Continued)
Canudos is located in the heart of Brazil's Polygon of
Drought300,000 square miles of dust bowl ranging
over eight states.
Because they obstinately remain on this hostile land,
the people have been called os flagelados (scourged ones).
Periodically terrible droughts descend upon the region.
When they are so severe that neither man nor beast can
live, the "scourged ones" reluctantly pack their few belong¬
ings and abandon their homes. Then sad processions of
retirantes (the Oakies of Brazil) can be seen making for
the coast or the south or even the Amazon region in search
of a more hospitable climate. Over 1,500,000 retirantes
abandoned the region between 1940 and 1950. Some
return once the rains come, most never do.
To halt this mass exodus, the National Anti-Drought
Department and other government agencies have em¬
barked on an ambitious programme of dam construction
and water development with the aid of Unesco experts.
Rain water and flood waters are now being stored pains¬
takingly behind dams throughout the area (some 600 have
been built so far). The country is studded with reservoirs,
large and small, and at many points they have enabled
the sertanejo to raise crops on irrigated land.
Early in 1955, government engineers began construction
of a new dam in the canton of Euclides da Cunha (so
named in honour of the author of Os Sertoes). Canudos,
located in a valley surrounded by a chain of mountains
EUCLIDES
DA CUNHA
When the campaign
against Canudos was
undertaken, Euclides da
Cunha accompanied the
Sao Paulo battalion to
the front to cover the
expedition for a news¬
paper. His work is thus
a superb piece of
journalism, though he
wrote it some years later at his leisure. Da Cunha
has become a cult in Brazil. Each year the nation
pays homage to him during "Euclides .week", and
its leading men of letters make a pilgrimage to the
little town of Sao José do Rio Pardo in the state
of Sao Paulo where the book was written. The
shack in which da Cunha laboured on the manu¬
script after his day's work as a civil engineer has
b.en preserved as a shrine. In 1909, at the age
of 43 he was killed by an assassin's bullet in Rio.
Many readers skip the first two chapters of Os
Sertoes because it is rather overloaded with
technical terms, and start with the third chapter
where "The Rebellion" takes on the flavour of an
exciting novel, full of plots, pathos and drama. The
book was recently included in a list of 100 of the
world's best novels. English readers may also wish
to read R.B. Cunninghame-Graham's account ot
Antonio Conselheiro, entitled A Brazilian Mystic.
finds itself in the centre of the future reservoir. The bar¬
rage itself is being built seven miles 'from Canudos on the
Rio Vasa Barris at a village named Cocorobó.
A Unesco mission, headed by a French hydrogeologist,
Pierre Taltasse, surveyed the area in July 1955 at the
request of the Brazilian Government, and has been ad¬
vising Brazilian engineers on various technical problems
since then. The barrage will collect all the water accu¬
mulated during the rainy period in an area extending
over 180,000 square yards. The dam will have a height of
32 metres and a length of 1,200 metres. Near Cocorobó, a
new modern city is being constructed for the present
inhabitants of Canudos who will be among the first to
benefit from the newly-created irrigation zone.
When the Cocorobó dam is completed next year, Canu¬
dos will be submerged under 250 million cubic metres of
water. But as the legendary city disappears forever,
37,000 acres of now barren land will help to prove that
man can turn the sertao green.
BATTLE AGAINST
THE DUST BOWL
SINCE June 1953, a Unesco technical assistance mission has
been in northeastern Brazil working closely with the Brazilian
Government in a vast battle against the greatest dust bowl of
the nation. (View of arid sertao or bushland is shown above.) Two
Unesco hydrogeologists, Pierre Taltasse and Etienne Stretta, have
been working not only at the dam going up near Canudos but at
several others: a 500 million cubic metre barrage at Poco da Cruz
in the state of Pernambuco (photo below), due for completion this
year; a 1,000 million cubic metre reservoir at Bico de Pedra in the
state of Minas Gerais; another of the same capacity at Vereda Grande
(state of Piaui); and a dam at Santa Lucia, to be inaugurated this
month near Beto Horizonte, capital of Minas Gerais. On all these
sites the Unesco mission has made soil and water studies and given
advice on dam construction and other problems.
The mission's important training programme includes special courses
for local engineers and technicians both in the field and in the class¬
room; and the selection of promising candidates for Unesco
fellowships (several have now returned from their study abroad and
are at work in the region). As a result of the Unesco team's
efforts, geology has now been accepted as a recognized profession
for the first time in Brazil, and schools of applied geology are
to open shortly in Recife, Sao Paulo, Belo Horizonte and Porto Alegre.
A Hydrogeological Research and Documentation Centre is also
being set up at Recife, at Unesco's instigation. Working under
the auspices of the National Anti-Drought Department, it will
undertake field and laboratory research on soil and rock structure
of the Polygon of Drought, make an inventory of water resources,
and will serve as a clearing house for hydrogeological documentation.
Pho;o> UnescoYvonne Tabbush
30
