Zoos through
the ages
by David Gunston
Since early times men have kept wild animals in
captivity, although not always for the same
reasons. Animals have been kept as objects of
curiosity, wonder and amusement as well as 'for
observation and profitable study. At various times
they have been used for thrills in sport and specta¬
cles.
Today, apart from travelling menageries and the
captive performing animals of the circus, all the older
forms of the practice have been superseded by
zoological gardens a comparatively recent develop¬
ment. The one thing that has not changed is the
curiosity excited by the spectacle of wild creatures in
captivity which is as strong today as ever before.
Nowadays, however, the aspect of sensationalism has
been more usefully turned in an educational direction,
as exemplified by the zoological garden, or the "zoo"
as people have been calling it for the past century.
As far as we can tell the very earliest zoo existed in
the advanced civilization of Ancient China. There
the first emperor of the famous Chou dynasty founded
a collection of animals about 1100 B.C. We have no
record of what creatures it contained, but 'from its
title, "a park of intelligence", we gather that its
objects were obviously educational and scientific and
probably corresponded to those of modern zoos. This
is all the more remarkable because at that time very
often the only reason for keeping animals was for
their religious associations which gave them elevated
rank among the denizens of the earth.
This was an attitude widely prevalent in Egypt,
where the cat was reverenced as also were calves,
baboons, crocodiles and many other creatures regarded
as animal deities.
Ancient Egyptian drawings and designs abound in
animals and birds. But the Egyptian practice was
one of pet-keeping rather than the assembling of
caged collections a pet-keeping carried to excess.
Many o'f these creatures lacked for nothing and had
picked slaves to look after them. From the many
mummified remains discovered in tombs we know
that after their death such animals were buried with
ceremony and ritual.
The peoples of Ancient Greece and Rome were well
accustomed to seeing a variety of wild animals, but
these were nearly always brought to Europe and
maintained with care solely for the role they were to
play in the arenas, to be slaughtered either by other
beasts or in combat with gladiators. Thus, the people
of Rome saw camels, elephants, leopards, lions,
antelopes, rhinoceroses, crocodiles, hippopotamuses
and ostriches, and even the giraffe, which was after¬
wards not to be seen again in Europe until 1827.
Paul Almasy 19 57
The Roman Emperors could always maintain large
collections of wild beasts. As these animals existed
in far greater numbers than they do today, there was
little difficulty in restocking the collections after the
bloody combats attended by thousands of citizens.
Vast quarters were built for the beasts within the
precincts of the Coliseum, often only a few yards from
the prisons oí the Christians and others who had
incurred disfavour. These hapless victims were
thrown to the lions regularly, the beasts having been
kept hungry to ensure lively "sport". Fights between
gladiators and lions were a favourite spectacle; we
read of Commodus who slew more than a hundred
lions in as many single struggles. Sometimes certain
animals leopards, lions and tigers apparently tame
and pampered with food and attention, wandered
freely amid the palaces and garders. It is said that
Nero had a pet tigress called Phoebe which sat with
him at banquets and was occasionally used to rid the
court of unwanted guests or those who displeased the
Emperor. It is also recorded that Heliogabalus
entered Rome in a chariot drawn by four panthers
and four tigers later set loose in the palace.
Thus throughout the Roman era animals provided
entertainment for people and nobles alike. Towards
the Middle Ages, however, animal collections were to
be found only in the entourage oí feudal potentates,
princes, dukes and barons, for they alone could afford
to maintain the animals in proper quarters. The
keeping of animals was often a form of hobby among
the rich from whose collections our own zoos of today
directly derive.
Throughout Europe the rare visit of some cheap
travelling menagerie of the lowest form, or perhaps
some unusual pet, a showman's monkey or a
performing bear, were the only chances the average
poor person had of seeing wild creatures from
different lands. The pandering to empty sen¬
sationalism only began to disappear when the
collections of the privileged grew both in numbers
and in scientific status, and were thrown open to the
public ior its edification and amusement.
Kings had the most extensive collections for they
were often presented with live captive animals ty
rulers of other lands, explorers and the captains of
ships visiting strange parts. The first zoo in England
seems to have been founded by Henry I at Woodstock
early in the 12th century. It included lions and
leopards. This collection was later transferred to the
Tower of London where it formed the basis of the
menagerie which in its turn was to be the
original nucleus of the present Regent's Park.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
I I

ZOOS (.Continued) The keeper of the lions: a court gentleman
This transfer of the first English collection to the
Tower of London, where there was ample room and
safe accommodation for the increasing numbers of
wild animals being presented by foreign rulers, took
place in the reign of Henry III, in the early thirteenth
century. The collection was presided' over by an
official of the Crown and it seems the Sheriffs of the
City of London and of the counties of Bedford and
Buckingham were ordered to finance the complete
menagerie, including the keepers. Henry III added
an elephant and a white bear to his collection, as well
as three leopards symbolizing those on the royal
coat of arms which he had received from the Em¬
peror Frederick as a token of friendship. In 1252 it
is recorded that the sheriffs of London were ordered
to pay fourpence a day for the maintenance of the
white bear and its keeper. A year later it was deemed
advisable to provide a muzzle and a chain for this
animal while it was washing or fishing in the Thames!
The menagerie at the Tower grew throughout the
reigns of the next three sovereigns, and orders still
preserved show that sixpence a day was the usual
allowance for each leopard or lion, with three-half¬
pence as the keeper's wages.
We know very little of the actual conditions under
which these collections were housed, but they do not
appear to have been at all bad; and the animals
thrived as a rule. By the time oí Henry VI the
menagerie had risen in official status, for the keeper
of the lions was a rank held by a gentleman of the
court, with a iee of sixpence a day and as much again
for the maintenance of every lion or leopard in his
charge. It is obvious that the royal menagerie was
held in high esteem, for the corresponding allowance
for human prisoners in the Tower was a penny a day.
Henry Ill's elephant was a gift from the King of
France about the year 1255. It was the first live
elephant to be seen in England and accordingly
attracted vast crowds of sightseers on its arrival. A
document still extant describes how the Sheriff oí
Kent was ordered to proceed to Dover in person in
order to see how the animal might most conveniently
be brought to London, and if necessary to arrange for
a ship to convey it in. Shortly afterwards the
Sheriffs of London were commanded to erect with
all speed, in the Tower, an elephant's house, forty feet
in length and twenty ieet wide, strongly built, but
adaptable to other uses should the need arise. This
prudent touch is typical of the age when the keeping
of wild animals was still very much a novelty.
Similar collections were being built up in Europe.
In France, Phillip VI had a fine collection by 1333,
and Charles V maintained menageries at Couflans,
and at the Tournelles in Paris. Later, Louis XI
formed a zoo at Plessis-les-Tours in Touraine and
after his death this was re-established at the Louvre
in Paris and enlarged with a number of animals
brought specially from North Africa. This establish¬
ment was done away with by Henry III but in due
course a collection was built up again, first by
Henry IV, then by Louis XIII at Versailles where the
Menagerie du Parc was ultimately founded by
Louis XIV. This collection was quite a good one and
received many different species from Cairo. It was
kept in order for more than a century, affording
much scope for naturalists and anatomists until its
eventual decay and final destruction during the
Revolution in 1789.
In Germany, the Elector Augustus I started a zoo
at Dresden in 1554; one of the lion keepers was killed
there by a particularly savage beast.
Outside Europe zoological collections were being
formed in South America, although nothing oí their
existence was known until centuries later. In the
middle of the fifteenth century, King Nezalhualcoyotl
had zoological gardens in Mexico. At the beginning
of the next century the Aztec ruler Moctezuma II
kept large collections of wild creatures, including
serpents, fish, jaguars and ocelots, feeding the
carnivorous animals on the plentiful wild turkeys of
that part oí the world. Cortez reported finding
extensive aviaries and fishponds at Iztapalapan.
From now on the keeping of menageries and zoo¬
logical collections became more widespread. Much
of the initiative came from monarchs who vied with
one another for the interest or rarity of their
collections. Charles II of England kept a large
assortment of birds in cages at Birdcage Walk (as it
is still known) in London. After the menagerie in
the Tower was opened to the public," James I started
a small private one in St. James's Park. Here, away
from the eyes of his subjects, he kept 'flying squirrels
brought back from Virginia by Sir Thomas Dale,
sables from Russia, gyrfalcons from Iceland, five
camels, an elephant from the King of Spain (which
had four attendants and was given six bottles erf wine
daily in winter), and strangest of all, a cream fawn,
for which a woman was hired as a wet nurse.
The collection at the Tower became a centre of
great attraction, wild animals still being considerable
rarities for the populace. In his Diary, Pepys records
a visit in the 17th century there "to see the lions".
Not long afterwards a separate, privately-owned
collection of animals was kept in the Strand. This
was Pipcock's menagerie, later taken over by Cross,
who founded his own zoo in Surrey. One of the in¬
mates was Jack, a trained mandrill which smoked a
pipe and drank spirits. Cross's collections were
housed under a glass dome, and he studied the
longevity of captive carnivores. In 1731, the news
12

The Unesco Courier. May 1957
?
;
1 h
^ '- .
*
mfc
A ZOO BORN OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION
Mid-nineteenth century engravings show monkey house (opposite page) and two views of bear pit at the Museum of Natural History, Paris.
Before the French Revolution this "King's Garden", founded by Louis XIII, was already being widely used for studies of the natural sciences,
and in particular of botany. Buffon, the famous 1 8th century naturalist, worked there for half a century. A menagerie was added in I 793
when Bernardin de St. Pierre, the famous author, managed to prevent the destruction of the animals in the royal menagerie at Versailles. From
that once magnificent collection there remained only a handful of beasts, including a kind of African antelope, a crested pigeon, an Indian rhino¬
ceros and an African lion. These five survivors of the revolutionary upheavel were the first boarders at the Museum of Natural History, as the
former King's Garden was named. The present Paris Zoo was opened at Vincennes on the eastern edge of the French capital in 1935.
that a litter of lion cubs had been born at the Tower
created a great sensation.
In 1735 an elaborate plan for a zoo for the Duke of
Savoy and Piedmont was drawn up, idealistically
indicating seven enclosures in a fan-shaped pattern,
laid out artistically with avenues of trees and with
only low walls separating the groups of bison, lions,
ostriches, wild goats and so on. . This does anticipate
much of the modern zop lay-out, and the Mappin
Terraces in Regent's Park, London, are not very
remote from this early idea.
By 1793 the French established a Museum of
Natural History in Paris, and Buifon's idea of having
a menagerie attached took shape in what still sur¬
vives as the Jardin des Plantes. The original
collection contained many valuable species and
boasted a lion and a dog living amicably together.
Although a great number of travelling and well-
patronized menageries were coming into vogue the
trend was towards the scientific keeping of wild crea¬
tures under more natural conditions, supported and
encouraged by the growing interest in natural history
museums and zoological societies.
Thus it was that Regent's Park gardens were
founded by the Zoological Society of London in 1826.
The collection from the royal menageries at the
Tower, together with certain deer, emus and ostriches
from Windsor Great Park were transferred to modern
conditions in London. Here were installed some 297
mammals, 637 birds and 18 reptilesnearly a
thousand creatures. By 1839 there were more than
twice as many.
The serious modern zoo had been born, and its like
appeared all over the world. The Phoenix Park Zoo
in Dublin was formed in 1830, and almost from the
start it achieved a reputation for the successful
breeding of lions. Bristol followed with the 'formation
of the Clifton Zoo in 1835, Manchester with its
privately-owned Belle Vue Zoo in 1836, Amsterdam
Zoo, owned by the Society Natura Artis Maglstra, in
1838; a large menagerie at Antwerp in 1843; the
famous and also privately-owned Tiergarten of Berlin,
1844 ; and some years later the gardens at Edinburgh.
Within the next twenty years or so, first-class zoo¬
logical gardens sprang up throughout the world. We
find zoos being established in such widely separated
places as Melbourne, 1857; Philadelphia, 1859; Co¬
logne, 1860; Hamburg, 1863; Copenhagen, 1859; Mos¬
cow, 1864; Calcutta, 1875; Cincinatti, 1875; and New
York, 1889 and 1890. In addition zoos were laid out
in Vienna, Rio de Janeiro, Hanover, Bombay, Tokyo,
Chicago, Detroit, San Francisco, Brussels, Buenos
Aires and countless other places, and the growth has
continued right up to the present.
By 1886, Regent's Park was a favourite and
fashionable London resort. Its population has not
diminished. It pioneered the use of radiant heat,
artificial sunlight and modern ventilation, amenities
now found in almost every large zoo. Almost all of
the zoos established in the nineteenth century sur¬
vive and flourish today, although several in Europe
were devastated during the war.
After a long and arduous history, zoos have now
come fully into their proper role which is to educate
the public, and especially young people, by inculcating
a love of and a kinship with natural creatures. This
is probably their greatest achievement.
_l ;
13
