Anywhere else but in India, where present history is
boundlessly rich in the unexpected, it would be unbelievable
to imagine that the father of modern prose in the Tamil
language is... an 18th Century Italian priest.
Costanzo Giuseppe Beschi was born in 1680 near Mantua and
educated in Rome where his aptitude for languages and his
interest in India soon destined him for missionary work. He
became a member of the Society of Jesus in 1698 and, ten years
later, landed in Goa. There he learned Indian languages and
he was trained in his duties before being sent to the Madura
Mission.
The Madura Mission had been the subject of bitter debate in
the hierarchy of 'the Church for nearly a century, for Roberto de
Nobili, an Italian-born noble, a relative of two popes and a
nephew of a cardinal, had established this mission on rather
unorthodox lines. He claimed to be a Brahmin from Rome,
where Brahma the God of Creation had appeared to the Pope,
chief of the Roman Brahmins, to order the sending of
missionaries to work in the Tamil country and save the high caste
Brahmins. Two native Brahmins were won over by him, taught
him his Tamil and Hindu manners and presented him to the
Queen Regent of Madura. He was received as a Brahmin and
allowed to preach.
De Nobili took the Indian name of Tatwa Bodhaka Swamiyar
the Teacher who Teaches the Truth and darkened his skin.
Clad in robes of ochre, he wore sandalwood ash on his forehead
in true Hindu tradition and wound the sacred thread of the
Brahmins around his chest.
He was full of missionary
zeal and he spoke the Tamil
language fluently. Though he
converted hundreds of high-
caste Hindus to Christianity,
the Church protested against
his "going native1'. But he
persisted and Rome finally
recognized his orthodoxy. He
died in South India in 1648
at the age of 76, honoured
and revered as a saint.
Sixty years later, the newly-
arrived Beschi decided to
follow in his footsteps, In
Goa, he learned the Tamil
language and developed a
passion for it which was to
become overriding in his
later life. When he arrived
in Madura in 1714, he studied
further under a great teacher,
Supradipakkavirayar.
Beschi, too, determinedly
followed in the path of his
predecessor, but he was
never reprimanded. He was
respected greatly by the
Indians of Madura, both as
a spiritual leader and as a
man of the world. Beschi, at
one time, served as minister
to Chundah Saheb at Trichy the Chundah Saheb whom the
French had named Nawab of Arcot in their struggle against the
British for control of South India. Beschi had to flee Trichy in
1740 when the Maharattahs defeated Chundah Saheb, but he
enjoyed until his death a 12,000 rupee annual income from the
four villages given to him by this prince.
But his honours did not stop there. Chundah Saheb gave him
the name of a Moslem saint, Ismatti Sanyasi, and accorded him
all the privileges of a noble of his court. Beschi was even
presented with the ivory palanquin of Chundah Saheb's grand¬
father.
Beschi lived like a Hindu religious leader. Everyone respected
him as a Sanyasi of the higher caste, and few, if any, knew
him as a foreigner during his lifetime. His skill in languages
was phenomenal. In addition to Italian, his mother tongue, he
acquired Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Portuguese, Spanish and French.
In India had learned Sanskrit, Tamil, Telugu, Hindustani and
Persian, the last two being the court languages of Chundah Saheb,
Tamil and Telugu being the spoken languages of the land of
his missionary activity. In all of them he was equally at home,
fluent and scholarly.
Supradipakkavirayar, who taught Beschi the intricacies of Tamil
grammar, also gave him a love of literature and a mastery of the
written and the spoken tongues. Beschi's work in Tamil prose
and verse proves he knew Tamil forms of literature perfectly.
"In 1724", writes a modern historian of Tamil literature, "there

ITALIAN PRIEST &
INDIAN MAN^OF
LETTERS:
COSTANZO
BESCHI
by Srimati S. Rajee
The Unesco Courier. June 1957
appeared Beschi's great work Thembavani, a work of considerable
merit in verse vying with the five epics of yore. It is in thirty
cantos, relating the inciuents historical and traditional connec¬
ted with the Old and New Testaments. In beauty of diction, in
sweep of imagination, and in intensity of religious faith, it is
usually compared with the Ramayana."
In honour of the Madonna, Beschi wrote three long poems
in traditional Tamil form which are listed even today in Tamil
literary histories as models of expression. A poem of the
Sorrowing Mother is in 100 stanzas and is also considered a great
poem of its kind. One other long poem in ballad folksong
metre celebrates "the martyrdom of the holy virgin Kitteri,
daughter of Sinayaken, King of Lusistan who suffered martyrdom
with her eight sisters on the mountain of Bomber in 130 A.D."
This is a poem of 1,100 couplets. It probably refers to Quin¬
tería or Citheia, a holy virgin and martyr of Portugal. (Martyrolo-
gium Romonum P. U0. Calendar 22 May).
Beschi's books on Tamil written and spoken grammar are
extremely useful and practical, for he cleared Tamil of many
redundancies and absurdities. I, as a practising writer of prose
in Tamil, find his grammar of the Tamil tongue useful even today.
It was Beschi who compiled the Chatur Akarathi the first
alphabetical lists in Tamil and paved the way for modern
lexicons. He was also responsible for a series of dictionaries
from Tamil into French, Latin and Portuguese and he is even
credited with an anthology of old Tamil verse which, unfortu¬
nately, has not survived. He translated two-thirds of a Tamil
classic, the Kural, into Latin.
Beschi's prose works are in
a class by themselves. Most
of his writings were necessa¬
rily on Christian doctrines to
inaoctrinate recent converts
with Christian principles or
sometimes to fight against
Lutheran missionaries. Ano¬
ther prose work of Beschi
deals with the science of as¬
tronomy with Christian appli¬
cations.
The Tamil language has a
verse tradition of nearly two
thousand years as is shown
by great epics such as the
Shilappadikaram which is to
be published in French in the
unesco Collection of Repre¬
sentative works. Yet Tamil
had scarcely any independent
prose tradition. Prose was
not known in the past except
to link two long poems or
often as commentary on
verse. Independent prose in
Tamil was used for the first
time by Costanzo Beschi in
his Paramartha Guru Katha
(the story of the Guru who
was a simpleton). This is a
. prose classic in the form of
a series of tales making fun of the Gurus or spiritual teachers of
India and their idiot disciples. It is all in good fun with no
offence meant to anyone, and the Tamils took to the book from
the very first. The stories of Beschi have gone into the folktales
of India and have even been translated into many other Indian
languages over the past 200 years. Subtle references to these
satires can be found in every turn of speech in Tamil even today.
Here is an episode from Beschi's tales. It tells of a Guru who
needs a needle. He tells his disciples to buy him a needle and
four of them go to the bazaar to buy it. All four want the
honour of carrying the needle to their revered master but the
needle is too small for four pairs of hands. So they stick
it into a long palm tree trunk and carry the trunk together to
their Guru. But when they place the trunk before the Guru
the needle is lost in the trunk and they are still looking for it.
Perhaps these were not original stories by Beschi but, with this
collection of tales, he initiated the tradition of Tamil prose,
and, as far as Tamil literature is concerned, that is his most
important contribution. Unesco is to make a new translation into
English of the Kural, one of the books which Father Beschi trans¬
lated into English in the early 18th century.
Beschi died in 1746 and was buried in a village where he had
been teaching Christianity to his flock. Like the Sanyasi of
Indian tradition, even his grave bore no name and, today, it
cannot be identified. But his contribution to Tamil literature is
still very much alive, and he needs no other monument or
memorial.
17
FATHER BESCHI
