'WALKABOUT' IN AUSTRALIA'S
"*«?V*'itÄ.
~*
All photos pages 4 to 1 0
(Ç Axel Poignant 1957
A BEDTIME STORY THAT
REALLY HAPPENED
On Millingimbi Island off the
coast of Arnhem Land in north¬
ern Australia live groups of
aborigines, tall and slender people
who are great hunters and fishermen.
Especially indulgent towards their
children (piccaninnies, as they are
called in Australia), the aborigines
delight in telling them stories around
the camp fire at night. They tell
of their ancestors, of how the world
was made, and of all the legends
associated with their culture.
The youngsters listen wide-eyed to
the stories and, like children all over
the world, quickly identify them¬
selves with the heroes and heroines.
Children on Millingimbi Island like
Nullagundi and his sister Rikili,
really re-live the adventure of two
children lost in the bush. The story,
set in their own familiar surround¬
ings may be intended to interest and
amuse them but it is also teaching
some of the hard facts of life, show¬
ing them how to stay alive in country

The Unesco Courier. May 1957
BUSH
by Axel Poignant
fe
In Arnhem Land on the North Coast of Australia, there live two aboriginal children, Nullagundi and his sister Rikili. One day while
their parents were away hunting, the children decided to go off into the bush by themselves. When night came they were lost, but
with the resourcefulness of aboriginal children they found food and water and built themselves a shelter for the night. Next day
their parents set out to look for them and the family was soon reunited. Here is their adventurea bedtime story told to aboriginal
children around the campfire, but one that really happenednow recounted by a photographer.
where an inexperienced white man
would perish in a few days.
The lessons are driven home in a
practical way when the children go
"walkabout" (long trips across
country) with their parents. On
these walkabouts the children are
taught all the skills necessary for a
life in the bush : how to find food
and water, how to hunt and fish, how
to build a bark canoe, how to weave
a basket and make a spear. Younger
children go food gathering with the
womenfolk who teach them how to
track animals and to read the signs
of the bush. Sometimes, as in the
photo story on these pages, the chil¬
dren decide to take off on a minor
walkabout of their own.
The boy in the story, Nullagundi,
is tall for his ten years. He has
already learned most of these things
and soon he will undergo the initia¬
tion rites which will make him a
man. As soon as these ceremonies
begin life becomes very different for
a boy. He may no longer speak to
his sister or many other women who
are closeley related to him. Taboos
are imposed on him. There are foods
he may not eat and his whole beha¬
viour is strictly controlled. His nine
year-old sister Rikili, on the other
hand, just goes on growing up. Rikili
has already been promised in mar¬
riage and she will be claimed by her
husband as soon as she is old enough.
The aborigines of Arnhem Land are
among those peoples whose lives and
cultures have remained the most
primitive, the closest to those of
their far-off ancestors. These bush-
men, as they are called, depend solely
for their living on hunting, fishing
(where possible) and food gathering.
Until 1788 aborigines had been
occupying the entire continent of
Australia undisturbed for many cen¬
turies. They are thought to have
numbered some 300,000 at the time of
the first white settlement in Austra¬
lia. Today there are some 60,000 full-
blood aborigines and about 25,000 of
mixed blood. They are mostly
nomads found in tribes scattered over
the Northern Territory, the north of
Western Australia and northern
Queensland. Many roam vast reser¬
vations. Others, no longer tribal, live
in organized camps where medical
services and schools are provided by
the Australian Government. Others
live in normal contact with the white
man and work at various trades.
Aborigines have contributed in no
small measure towards Australian
life. Pastoral industries could not
have developed without their help.
One of the most remarkable aspects
of the aboriginal is his art, a truly
primitive and still living art. Unesco
devoted an album in its World Art
Series, "Aboriginal Paintings-Arnhem
Land" to this art on bark and stone.
(See THE UNESCO courier, N° 11, 1954).
Today the Australian aborigines are
not only diminishing in numbers but
are also losing their primitive beliefs
and customs because of their greater
contacts with Western civilization.

AUSTRALIAN «WALKABOUT* (Cont'd)
, LET'S HAVE A
SPEAR FIGHT'
Nullagundi and Rikili met their
friends on the beach and decided to
play the "spearfight" game. The
boys tied soft bark round the
points of their spears, and as they
threw them at each other, the
girls stood between them as "peace¬
makers" and tried to deflect
the flying spears. (The aboriginals
use spears for hunting and at the
peace-making ceremonies which
often precede the corroborées, or
big feasts). The game ended as
one of the boys pretended to be
killed, and the girls wept over him.
WHAT ABOUT
A WALK?
Rikili got tired of playing games
and suggested a walk in the forest.
The two children sneaked off into
the bush, taking care that their
grandmother didn't see them.
Soon Rikili was thirsty, but all
the water holes were dried up so
Nullagundi "tapped" a paperbark
tree. He cut into the tree with
his spear and soon water was
dripping into the bark cup they
had made. It tasted slightly brack¬
ish, but they were too thirsty to
notice. (When these photographs
were taken there had been no rain
for a good two years and water
was. very hard to find anywhere).

The Unesco Courier. May 1957
*
-.

AUSTRALIAN «WALKABOUT* (Cont'd)
CATCH
A GOANNA
BY ITS TAIL...
Goanna (lizard) meat is an abori¬
ginal delicacy. But these lizards
dart into rocks or hollow logs the
moment they hear humans around.
By pulling hard on the goanna's
tail Nullagundi drew it from its
hiding place and quickly killed it.
Rikili proudly held the trophy of
the chase. Rubbing two sticks to¬
gether until they smouldered, her
brother made a fire with dried
grass and branches. The goanna
was soon cooked and in no time
the children had gobbled it down.

The Unesco Courier. May 1957
LOST IN THE FOREST The long walk, the hunt, the meal... all that took some time, and suddenly. the
sun was setting. Nullagundi and Rikili had first of all wandered aimlessly, then
they had hunted for something to eat and a place to cook it. When it began to
get dark they had no idea how far they had come or where they were. Rikili was frightened and began to cry. But her
brother was not dismayed. He built a shelter of sticks and bark and made a small fire to keep them warm during the night.

'WALKABOUT'
AUSTRALIAN
(Continued)
STORY WITH A
HAPPY ENDING
When the mother and father return¬
ed from their hunt they were very
worried by the two children's dis¬
appearance. Early next morning they
set out in search of them and soon
found the trail the children had made
a footprint, sometimes a
broken branch or grasses bent back.
From time to time they stopped to
call out... and finally Nullagundi heard
them. That evening a big corroborée
was held in the camp to celebrate the
children's return. The story had a
happy ending and the children's
"walkabout" taught them still another
lesson about aboriginal skills and lore.
10
