Agréât name has been added to the art lover's vocabulary
within the past ten years Bonampak, home of the most
important vestige of Maya painting yet discovered.
Bonampak, meaning "painted walls", is the name given a
unique temple in the heart of the Mexican jungle by the late
Dr. Sylvanus G. Morley, authority on Maya culture. The
murals," which cover the walls of three rooms making up the
temple, have been hailed as the finest pre-Conquest paintings
on the American continent and are considered to rival in
brilliance the famous. wall decorations of the early Egyptians
or the cave paintings of Ajanta in India. Done during the
earliest Maya empire (317 to 978 A.D.) the paintings
constitute one of the most significant discoveries in the long
history of Maya research.
Like many archaeological finds in the past, Bonampak owes
its recent discovery to an accident.
In the spring of 1946 a photographer named Giles
G. Healey was commissioned to make a documentary film on
"The Mayas through the Ages" to include both Maya
antiquities and the living descendants of the ancient Mayas.
Healey went to Yucatan and the Guatemalan highlands where
\_/~~\ / " ^v__s-i
\j \ \ «=*!,
) GOLFO DE M \
\ ( MEXICO
\ v
v ° \ n
J^^Z
^^*ON*MPAK kr~]j
^
OCÉANO ^"^V/ *~
PACIFICO ^	CrU7Ï
he filmed Indians still speaking Maya languages and dialects
but all of whom have absorbed Occidental culture in varying
degrees. He then decided to penetrate the virtually unexplored
Chiapas jungle near the Guatemalan border of southeastern
Mexico to secure motion pictures of a rapidly vanishing tribe
of Indians, known as the Lacandons, purported to be the last
pagan descendants of the great Maya civilization of twelve
centuries ago, and who had had practically no contact with
the outside world.
In the dense tropical forest of Chiapas, Healey encountered
a group of the long-haired, white-robed Lacandons. He soon
observed that at recurring intervals the men vanished into
the bush and remained absent for several days. He believed
that they were practising an attenuated form of the ancient
Maya religion as described by historians at the time of the
Spanish Conquest, and that they made periodic pilgrimages
to worship in ancient temples of their ancestors. He
persuaded two of the Lacandons whose friendship he had
won to lead him to this, area deep in their country.
On May 13, 1946, he reached a group of ancient Maya
temples hidden in the jungle. As he entered one temple,
virtually buried in the trees and thickets that had grown
through its crumbling masonry, he suddenly came face to
face with an extraordinary sight: a series of painted murals
covering the walls of three narrow high-vaulted rooms from
floor to ceiling. Despite the layer of lime, deposited by
moisture which had trickled down from the limestone roof for
centuries, the paintings were amazingly preserved.
Healey realized that he had made a spectacular discovery
for never before had a structure with rooms entirely covered
with murals been found in the Maya area. He immediately
reported his discovery to the authorities in Mexico City and to
the Carnegie Institution of Washington. Just four months
before him, two Americans, John Bourne and Carl Frey, had
been guided to Bonampak by chicle gatherers working in the
region, but though they had visited the ruins
of the ancient Maya site and examined several c ,,
temples and carved stone slabs strewn on the
ground they had missed the building with the
magnificient murals. Though only a hundred

The Unesco Courier. December 1957
UNESCO Album "Mexico"
DETAIL OF A FIGURE painted in the second room of the Bonampak temple. This same figure can be identified in the section of the mural
reproduced on page 7, second to right of the reclining Indian immediately above the doorway. Note the hieroglyphics over the figure's right arm.

BONAMPAK
(Continued)
What the Mayas really looked like
revealed by first true picture in colour
yards away, it was buried by so much foliage and underbrush
that it had completely escaped their notice.
This is how Healey described his great discovery:
"These temples were beyond anything an archaeologist or
explorer could have imagined. It took days to get to these
ruins on foot through rivers, jungles, and over hills where
one climbs until absolutely exhausted. Sometimes I became
so utterly worn out in following the Lacandons that I thought
I would collapse.
"The greatest thrill of all came when the Lacandon Indians
led me into a temple made up of three rooms. Each room

was painted with frescoes from the floor to the ceiling. A
parade of Maya priests or chieftains is painted on the wall,
flanked by their attendants holding fans and umbrellas, and
with their musical attendants blowing on long horns, beating
drums, and playing flutes.
"The more important
personages are painted in
their full regalia, show¬
ing great detail of em¬
broidery, jewel insets,
feathered headdresses,
and so on. The fabric
designs show great skill
both in weaving and in
the use of native dyes.
"Handsome feather
plumes are worn by the
notables. For the first
time we had a true
picture in colour of what
the ancient Mayas actual¬
ly looked like. Books and
books have been written '
about them with only a
slight indication of what
they looked like and
wore... and here on this
wall was revealed for the
first time authentic evid¬
ence of the glorious
Mayas of the first em¬
pire period... Here is the work of the great, almost incre¬
dibly skilful mural painters, who lived and worked centuries
before Michelangelo...'"
Painting was a fine art among the ancient Mayas and
reached a high degree of excellence. Like the Greeks and
the Egyptians, the Mayas painted their stone monuments and
stone sculpture. Many vestiges of colour on stone still exist in
Mexico and Guatemala.
Painting was also used in the decoration of ceramics and
in illustrating codices, and frescoes in wall decoration. But
until the discovery of Bonampak very little was known of
early Maya wall painting. Except for the traces of a fourth-
century fresco found at Uaxactun, Guatemala (the oldest
known Maya monument) only a few fragments of Late Period
Maya wall paintings have been found at religious centres
such as Chichen Itza, Palengue, Tulum, Yaxchilan, Chac-
multun and Santa Rita Corozal.
When the world heard of the discovery of the Early Period
Bonampak paintings the news, therefore, electrified archaeolo¬
gists and art historians.
Unesco photo by Mario Dolfi
FRONT ENTRANCE of Bonampak temple after the jungle trees and thickets
had been partially cleared, shows the doorways of three rooms containing
the murals. The façade of the building reveals stuccowork and niches above
the entrances, of the temple; the central one contains fragments of a statue.
Expeditions were dispatched to Bonampak to survey the
site, the most important members being artists whose task it
was to make copies of the' originals. During 1947 and 1948
the slow work of copying the murals in colour proceeded.
Two artists, Antonio Tejeda of Guatemala and Agustín
Villagra of Mexico, working under the auspices of the Car¬
negie Institution and the National Institute of Anthropology
and History of Mexico, each made a set of copies. It is
chiefly through these copies that until now the treasures of
Bonampak have been known to art lovers and the public
generally.
Last year, Unesco and the Mexican Government organized
a special expedition to Bonampak to take full colour
photographs of the murals. These colour photographs will
shortly appear in the unesco world art series in an album
entitled Mexico : Pre-
Hispanic Paintings, pub¬
lished by the New
York Graphic Society
in collaboration with
Unesco.
One colour photo¬
graph from this forth¬
coming album publish¬
ed for the first time,
appears on the back
cover of this issue.
After a tour of the
country's chief archaeo¬
logical centres, including
Chichen-Itza where they
photographed the frag¬
mentary murals in the
Temple of the Warriors
and the Temple of the
Jaguars, and Teotihuacan
near Mexico City where
they took colour photos
of the existing paintings,
the members of the
Unesco expedition set
out for Bonampak from
Tenosique, the last main outpost. A government plane set
them down on a small clearing in the forest originally built
for chicle prospectors, about 20 miles from Bonampak. Seven
guides with 17 mules loaded with electric generators for their
floodlights, medical supplies, food end hammocks had left
Tenosique 15 days earlier. The expedition then made the
rough two-day trek through the jungle to the land of the
"painted walls".
Previous expeditions had found that the application of
kerosene to the calcite layer covering the murals rendered it
temporarily transparent. This discovery was of great aid to
the Unesco photographic team. But since the transparent
effect lasted only a few hours work proceeded slowly and with
difficulty under the trying humid tropical climate.
Bonampak is located near the Lacanjá River, a tributary of
the Usumacinta River which forms the boundary between
Mexico and Guatemala. Nine temples rest on
the terraced slopes of a hill. Long staircases
lead to the entrance of the buildings which face
a large square surrounded by platforms.
r page 10
There is no evidence that Bonampak is the

The Unesco Courier. December 1957
^*J \gy ;
"The Ancient Maya" by Sylvanus G. Morley. I 9 56 edition
Arraignment
of prisoners
Drawing, left, shows view from back of second room of the
Temple of the Murals looking toward entrance. Room Is
covered with paintings from base of a platform to top of
sloping ceiling. Detail is reproduced below from copy painted
by Guatemalan artist Antonio Tejeda. Scene has been Inter¬
preted by Maya experts as showing the arraignment of prisoners
on a step-terraced structure. Most Important personages
are grouped on upper part of structure. In centre Is a per¬
sonage clad in a jaguar jerkin and wearing a large jade pectoral.
A sweeping panache of long quetzal feathers attached to his
headdress attests to his high rank. Flanking him are person¬
ages wearing jaguar skins and jaguar or other animal heads
as helmets. Two women are also present on right. Seated
on the steps are nine men, apparently captives, awaiting
decision concerning their fate. At foot of reclining figure Is a
human head, but paint of mural Immediately to right has
scaled off and this area may originally have shown the body.
Carnegie Institution of Washington

BONAMPAK (Continued)
POMP AND CEREMONY, occupying all four walls of the first room
of the Bonampak temple, reveals Maya pomp and pageantry. Irregular
shape of mural is due to the fact that the room is vaulted, the triangular
and quadrangular pieces joining together at the top of the vault as
shown in drawing, above left. Upper portion shows preparations
for ceremony. To left are 14 persons, all clad in long white cloaks,
against a red background. Two of them in the centre address the
group while an attendant, holding a child, turns to receive instructions
Painting copied by Agustín Villagra, Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia, Mexico
TRUMPETS AND MASKED MEN, detail from lower left strip at
top of the page, which has been copied by the Mexican artist Agustín
Villagra. It shows part of the twelve-man orchestra. "Trumpets like
8
those on left were probably of wood and rotted away long'ago for never
have any been unearthed In Maya excavations. Scholars believe the ma¬
sked figures with alligator heads, crab claws, etc. represent Maya deities.

The Unesco Courier. December 1957
**fc
Ml i
1 J£& Êk Ê.
A. IjL...XI_JL AJÍ	á-ü JB Jf JL
Painting copied by Antonio Tejeda
Carnegie Institution of Washington
from a figure seated crosslegged in triangular section. In far right
panel, three personages are being robed. One on right is nearly ready
and has on his jaguar skin, bracelets, ear-plugs, anklets, all coloured
green to represent jade or quetzal feathers. His great, inverted U
m eer^ES
quetzal-feather backpiece Is In position. In lower strip the three
men are fully dressed and stand In the centre of the scene as the pro¬
cession advances towards them with blowing of trumpets, beating of
drums and shaking of rattles. Scene has a striking blue background.
f.r./-'!- ?£-
MAYA BATTLE SCENE, from a mural In the second room, indicates
that the warriors of Bonampak used the spear as their principal weapon.
Here the men, arrayed in magnificent costumes, jewellery and paint,
Painting copied by Antonio Tejeda, Carnegie Institution of Washington
are apparently carrying out a raid on an enemy camp. Combat scenes
such as this one occupy three walls of this room and have led experts
to revise the old conception that the Mayas never engaged in warfare.

BONAMPAK
(Cont'd from p. 6)
Strikingly carved
stone reliefs and
a stele weighing four tons
ruin of an ancient town or city. Like other Maya
archaeological sites it was probably a religious centre to
which the Maya resorted only for ceremonies, the inhabitants
living in small groups, probably only of family size, scattered
over the countryside.
Although famous for its murals, Bonampak is also
remarkable for its well preserved and finely carved stone
reliefs. The site contains significant carved lintels and three
highly revealing carved record stones or. stelae one of which
bears the Maya hieroglyphic date 9.17.15.00 (785 A.D.). In
the centre of the square is a great stele, unfortunately broken,
16 feet high, 8 feet wide (5 by 2i metres) and weighing at
least four tons.
The three rooms containing the murals appear to depict
the holding of a religious ceremonial, the robing of priests or
personages of high rank, an orchestra procession, a raid to
obtain victims for a sacrifice on the stairs of a temple, a
dance in magnificent costumes, and a bloodletting ceremony
by a high priest accompanied by a woman and a child.
Headdresses of dazzling colour
tall as the men who wore them
Much of» the painting is on the sloping overhead stone
surfaces of the roofing and shows remarkable skill in
perspective on the part of the Maya mural artists. The
paintings are executed with extreme realism. The faces of
certain of the figures can be recognized from room to room
as they recur in different parts of the story. The artist has
skilfully conveyed different moods for different scenes: bodies
and facial expressions are relaxed during the. preparation of the
ceremony; they seem ferocious during the raid; during the
sacrifice one can almost feel the cold, forbidding atmosphere.
Sylvanus Morley has said, "some of the figures in the
Bonampak murals exhibit a degree of naturalism which
Western European art did not achieve until several centuries
later."
Probably the most overpowering effect of the murals is the
magnificence of costuming and colour. Healey's first
description was hardly exaggerated. One is dazzled by the
colourful headdresses of delicate featherwork as tall as the
principle figures wearing them, and by the variety of materials
used: featherwork, cut stones, furs, intricate woven fabrics.
In delicacy of execution and in sensitivity and purity of line
these paintings are truly remarkable.
The murals also offer us one of the most detailed sources
of information on the pattern of Maya life. Better than ever
before they reveal the musical instruments, dances, costumes,
weapons and family groupings of the early Mayas. They
seem to contradict the old conception that the Mayas nevei
engaged in warfare or resorted to human sacrifice since scenes
of both are found at Bonampak. The murals also indicate
that the position of women in the life of the community was
more important than had generally been supposed. As Maya
authorities point out, probably no other site has added so
much to our general knowledge of the Maya people. With
the publication by Unesco of the full colour photographs of
the Bonampak murals, art historians will no doubt give an
even higher place in the history of art to the great civilization
of the Mayas.
10
Carlos Prieto, from "Bonampak"
by Agustin Villagra, 1949
ONE OF THREE LINTELS with hieroglyphic blocks found over the
doorways of the Temple of Murals. AM three of them show, the
capturing of prisoners and are thought to date from about 790 A.D.
Giles G. Healey, from "Cités
Maya" by Paul Rivet 19 54
GREAT SCULPTURED STELE, measuring five by two-and-a-half
metres, found broken In several pieces in the plaza of the Bonampak
acropolis. Detail of the head is reproduced on the inside front cover.

The Unesco Courier. December 1957
Maya acropolis
on terraced hill
Right, a map of Bonampak, surveyed
and prepared by K. Ruppert and
G. Stromsvik, members of the
second Carnegie Institution expe¬
dition in the winter of 1947. Bo¬
nampak is a small, carefully laid
out, compact site, with a plaza
measuring about 90 by 110 metres.
Surrounding it on three sides are
low mounds, the remains of terraces
and small structures. The fourth
(south) side is delimited by a hill
43 metres high, artificially terraced.
Here the nine temples of Bonampak
are located. Temple of the Murals
is encircled. Below, a sculptured
stone, with delicately incised relief
figures, which was found nearby.
From "Bonampak" by Rupert Thompson &
Proskouriakoff, Publication 602, Carnegie
Institution, Washington, 19 55
II
