POCKET BOOKS
A coin in the
slot and out
pops Plato
by Bertha Gaster
0jSJ#j$^
Any Londoner passing the Holy Trinity Church in the
Euston Road early in 1935 might well have been
taken aback on observing a steady stream of
packages disappearing down a mysterious chute in the
graveyard, apparently into the bowels of the church.
Venturing inside, he would have been still more disconcert¬
ed to hear sounds of sinister activity coming from the
crypt. There, against walls panelled with marble slabs
giving the names and "in memorium" inscriptions of long
defunct parishioners, he would have found bales piled
ceiling-high, and discovered a man busily checking invoice
books in a disused family vault, with piles of money being
counted in another.
If half-forgotten tales of smuggling, body-snatching
and counterfeiting dens flashed across his mind, he could
hardly be blamed. He was not to know that Trinity
Church was being used as the improvised headquarters of
:a new experiment in publishing which would help to
change the face of book buying and selling over the
greater part of the English-speaking world in the course
of the next twenty years, and make a small black and
white penguin the symbol of this revolution.
The idea of cheap reprints of more expensive editions
was by no means new in 1935 when the Penguin Series
was first planned. Something of the sort had existed as
far back as the period of ancient Rome. According to
Martial, the Roman satirist, who lived in the first century
A.D., a copy of his epigrams was selling for five denarii
at Atrectur's, while round the corner it could be got at
Tryphon's for only half a denarius. And Tryphon was
making a good thing out of it too, Martial
assures us.
Not very long alter the arrival of printing
in England came cheap books "chapbooks"
for the masses, badly printed little pamphlets
of popular stories and farces, sold by wander¬
ing pedlars, such as Aytolycus sold to the
eager villagers in Shakespeare's Winter's
Tale. The Puritan masterpiece of John
Bunyan Pilgrim's Progress in the seven¬
teenth century was not only the first
European best seller, but perhaps the only
work of great literature that began as cheap
reading for the cottage and the servants'
hall, and ended in de luxe bindings 'for the
connoisseur.
The first great era of cheap reprints,
however, came into being in the nineteenth
century with the industrial revolution. There
22
was a fresh reading public In the rising middle class, and
later, as popular education spread, in a newly-literate
working class. There were also the technical means of
-satisfying their demands through the recently-invented,
machine-made paper in which wood pulp replaced the less
abundant and more expensive rags, as well as through
cheaper railway and canal transport.
Two tendencies can be discerned from the very begin¬
ning in the first cheap editions that came off the press in
the eighteen-twenties. The first in England, such ' as
Constable's '"Miscellany," Murray's "'Family Library" and
Colburn and Bentley's "Novels", were followed a few years
later by the parchment-coloured Tauchnitz reprints of
English-language fiction from Germany, now familiar all
over Europe for well over a century. They may be roughly
divided into the educational and the ephemeral.
Constable the publisher, summed up the ideal of the
educational In his phrase "literature for the million". It
is no accident, for instance, that in that development
period of working-men's colleges and evening schools
there was close co-operation between the famous cheap
reprint firm of Reclam in Germany with its Universal
Bibliothek, selling over 31 million copies of classics and
philosophy, at approximately ten cents a volume, between
1867 and 1917, and the German Society for Popular Educa¬
tion (Gesellschaft für Volksbildung) , which set up 137,000
libraries in the same time; nor that the first paperbound
books in the United States were sponsored by the Boston
Society for the Diffusion of Knowledge.
And the ephemeral? The book that was meant to be
read and chucked away; the type of light
fiction sold in the 1840's on the newly-open¬
ed bookstalls in the newly-opened railway
stations for a new type of journeysitting
in comfort in a railway compartment.
Note the distinction. It is still valid
today, in a world-wide paperbook industry
running into hundreds of millions of copies
annually. The two types of reading overlap
and merge at the edges, but the difference is
still there classics, fine literature, informa¬
tive and cultural books this way; sensational
fiction, thrillers, westerns, that. "Heavy
going" snorts one set of readers; "trash"
retorts the other. But the pocket book has
provided a bridge.
The real revolution came in two stages.
The paperback as we know itpocket book
is the more exact descriptionbegan in 1935

when the three Lane brothers in England, on a nominal
capital of £100, took a gamble with cheap reprints of good
modern books. Their attractive format was something
new the publishers were determined to illustrate that
good printing and attractive lay-out cost no more than
bad. The striking covers in two-colour horizontal bands
not forgetting the little black and white penguin were
new, and easily recognisable; the size was new, and has
become the standard size for nearly all its successors.
And newest of all was the price 6d, the price of a packet
of cigarettes.
The booksellers shook their heads, but the gamble came
off. By 1937 Penguin titles had reached the hundred mark,
and the subsidiary ventures began original commissioned
'work, like the Pelican Specials on Spain, and Germany
and Mussolini and so forth, which exercised a political
influence comparable to Gollancz's Left Book Club; the
children's Puffins, the books on modern art, archaeology,
literary criticism, as well as the Penguin Classics, which
sold three quarters of a million copies of their translation
of the Odyssey.
In 1935 most of the Penguin titles were fiction; in 1956
less than half the ten million sold were fiction; the
others of all sorts were published with the "explicit
intention of providing the public with the varied pleasures
and discoveries of the mind". And of the ten million
copies sold in 1955, as many as five million went to the
overseas market.
A certain number of Penguins were in fact exported to
the United States before the war, and it is generally
agreed that they gave the first impetus to that country's
now colossal industry. For the second and determining
stage in the revolution which
made the cheap paperback a
new and dynamic phenome¬
non in U.S. publishing, and
also spread to many countries
of the world, began in 1939
when Robert F. de Graff start¬
ed the first, mass production
of modern U.S. paperbacks.
Immense thought went into
selecting a suitable name; the
one finally chosen was sim¬
plicity itself "Pocket Books
Inc."; and pocket books has
become the generic name by
which all types of cheap pa¬
perbacks are known in the
United States. Most of these
pocket books are unabridged
reproductions of copyrighted
books originally sold at two
and a half to three dollars. They run from 25 to 75 cents,
generally much the same in format and size, the covers
of lacquered paper nearly always carrying a garish illus¬
tration designed to catch the passing eye. America is
flooded. with them.
Consider some of the figures. In 1939 Pocket Books
produced 34 titles and over a million and a half copies.
For 1953, estimates for sixteen publishing firms indicated
1,061 titles and no less than 292 million copies. Over
5,000 titles, both reprints and originals, covering the clas¬
sics, fiction, science, travel, philosophy, crafts, etc., are
now available. In 1949 about the same number of paper¬
backed books and hard cover books were published; in
1953 the pocket books outstripped the hard cover books by
about 100 million copies.
The size of each edition is equally something new in
the publishing world. An average edition of an ordinary
thriller or western runs to something between 150,000 and
200,000 copies; best sellers may reach several million.
Pocket Books, for instance, recently announced that by
the end of 1957 they expect to have sold 75 million copies
of Erie Gardner's mystery novels; the stories of Luke
Short, a popular writer of Westerns, amount already to
8 million copies. More serious writers also run into fan¬
tastic figures; reprints of Erskine Caldwell's novels top the
37 million mark, and one of the latest best sellers, Bonjour
.Tristesse by the young French writer Françoise Sagan,
has already sold one million six hundred thousand copies.
The total amount paid for reprint rights in 1954 has been
estimated at between five and six million dollars.
Pocket books are Big Business to-day. And this is
largely due to two new factors technical advances in
printing, and mass methods in sale and distribution.
Enormous book presses have been evolved for pocket
The Unesco Courier. February 1957
books, rolling them off from
rubber plates at the rate of
12.000 copies for a 192-page
book every hour. Special bind¬
ing methods eliminate the
expensive sewing process, new
glues give added strength to
the spine.
The second factor, however,
is more important. Instead of
being sold like other books,
through bookshops and book¬
stalls, pocket books were treat¬
ed as merchandise, and are
sold like magazines through a
network of wholesalers to any
unspeciallzed outlet that pre¬
sents itself news-stands, drug
stores, stationery shops, supermarkets, chain stores, big
department stores, hotels, airports, railway stations, as
well as the conventional bookshops 100,000 outlets
instead of 1,500.
Between 30 to 50 million pocket books all over the
country are constantly on display in racks supplied by the
publishers, jostling for space in the 10-cent stores, or
among the ice-cream and coca-colas, cigarettes, watches
and what have you of the small town store, changed
every so often as new titles come in, and picked up by the
passing customer with his cigarettes or his newspaper.
A 25 cent piece popped into a slot machine at an airport
will produce a pocket book; bookshops devote special
space to them or set up branches on the university campus
to sell the text pocket books and "recommended reading"
that are being produced every day in ever greater quan¬
tity; public libraries are beginning to use them, with
"Put N'Take" shelves where the reader puts a pocket book
in for every one he takes out; the army and navy buy
large quantities, and in some of the big towns special all-
pocket-books shops have been set up for the discriminat¬
ing reader unable to find exactly what he wants in the
mass displays on drug store racks.
The vast size of the industry brings its own problems.
Some are on the way to being solved. Booksellers no
longer fear their competition; nor, on the whole, do
publishers of hard cover books. They no longer believe,
with Dr. Johnson, who had little faith in cheap editions,
that such publishers are "Robin Hoods, who rob the rich
in order to give to the poor".
Nowadays, indeed, the reprint
rights on a serious book first
commissioned and published
by a pocket book publisher
may well be secured by a hard
cover publisher for later repro¬
duction, thus reversing the
usual process. Not long ago in
England, the experiment was
tried of bringing out hard
cover and pocket book editions
simultaneously. It was not a
success, but "don't ask me
why" said one O'f the publish¬
ers. "Covers dull? Book¬
sellers didn't like the idea?
Paperbacks anyway taking a
dive just then? You could
take your pick".
But competition grows as more firms come into the
market, the supply of suitable new books is after all limit¬
ed, and the get-rich-qulck publisher is not after quality.
"'A good book is one thing, a quick seller another" said a
cynical publisher, and many claim that serious literature
tends to be swamped in the flood of mysteries with a
quick turnover, and lost In the ever more sensational
covers which are used even for serious fiction. Some
jackets certainly distort the contents. A publisher at an
American book trade meeting recalled that a book
presented at a recent House of Representatives enquiry
into pornography had the following line on the jacket
'"Take me, take me' she said". "Actually" he explained,
"what she wanted was to be taken of Philadelphia. That
was distortion."
In 1953 it was estimated that the total
production of pocket books in the United
States included 51.3 per cent general fiction, .
18 per ce nt mysteries, slightly over 18 per cent |

Pocket books (Cont'd from page 23)
westerns, 6 per cent non-fiction, and about 7 per cent
miscellaneous. Practically every type of book is reflected
in pocket books to-day; science and technology; literature,
from Chaucer to the latest avant-garde writers; transla¬
tions of the great classics and modern best sellers of
Europe and elsewhere; "Do It Yourself" manuals, cook¬
books, and reference books; here classics re-issued with
screaming "skylines" to tie up with the latest movie
releases, there a new Dictionary advertising itself as "not
made into a movie"; all of them opening up new worlds
for a whole new world of readers.
The Midwestern housewife in a small town with no
library writes: "If you knew how bored I get looking after
two small children, doing housework and seeing the same
old neighbours day after day, you'd understand what a
godsend your inexpensive books have been". A man wrote
to the publisher of the 35-cent edition of the Odyssey
"Just read the Odyssey! Boy, that guy Homer sure can
write! Do you have any other books by him?"
Pocket books are published now in every corner of the
world, many of them indistinguishable
from their American prototype save in
their language. In England Penguins
have been followed by a number of
others in the same field. In France,
though the booksellers are still wary, the
pocket book reprint of classic authors
has reached out to a new public, the
student, the little midinette, the working
man from St. Denis and Roanne. Zola,
for instance, is one of the authors who
continue to enjoy great popularity.
34
In Germany, where some 25 million copies of pocket
books have been sold between 1951 and 1955, various com-,
munity groups have also organized the publication of"
selected paperbacks, sometimes in superior format and
binding, just as in Israel the only successful attempt to
publish general pocket books was that organized by the big
labour union of the country, the Histraduth with volun¬
tary committees formed in factories, business firms and
collective farms to push the sale. Both in Israel and
Norway books are taken so seriously that the average
reader prefers the hard cover to add to his library.
In some countries, like Belgium and Spain, the experi¬
ment has not succeeded; in Italy, on the other hand, half
the books published annually are paperback. The Soviet
Union, the only country to compare with the United
States in the size of its literate population, has no pocket
books; there the average hard cover book sells cheaply at
6 or 7 roubles. And though the spread of pocket books
has reached around the world, no country has attacked
the question with the mass methods of the U.S., nor
invested the same sums of moneys in expensive machinery
and marketing networks.
No one can foretell the future ; it may well be that
with the gradual spread of literacy to
the vast populations of India, Africa
and the Far East, the future of the cheap
pocket book as a cultural weapon of the
first order may well outstrip any posi¬
tion it has achieved today. But what it
has done today is to make the literature
and wisdom of the world available to
millions of men and women ignorant
before of its pleasures and possibilities.
It is -now there for them to takefor the
price of a packet of cigarettes.
z
13
od
o
