STEINBECK AND HEMINGWAY FAVOURITE
AUTHORS OF NORWEGIAN YOUTH
Steinbeck and Hemingway are the favourite Amer¬
ican novelists among Norwegian youth, accord¬
ing to a survey made recently by an American
educator visiting that country on a Unesco grant.
East of Eden, Steinbeck's allegorical novel of a few
years ago, appears as top choice among a group of
selected 18 to 19-year-old readers. The Old Man
and the Sea, Hemingway's most recent major effort,
headed the list of the Nobel Prize winner's works
currently being read.
The survey conducted on a Unesco Regional
Cultural Studies Grant was made by Mildred Wilsey,
an Associate Professor of English at Wilson College,
in Chambersburg, Pennsylvania. Miss Wilsey made
these observations on American writers in a report
written upon her return to the United States in May
of this year. The six-month grant to Miss Wilsey
was made last August for study "in the field of the
literary background and literary taste of college-age
people in Norway."
Miss Wilsey's work was principally devoted to
reading trends, both fiction and non-fiction, in Nor¬
wegian literature. On literary tastes in general,
however she notes:
"The general feeling is that the level of reading
taste for fiction, at least, is down. Books of fact or
experience, the world and its personalities, are the
preference not creative writing. The reasons for
this are interesting to discuss: fiction may have
reached its zenith and be on its way out, or our need
to know about world activity has become too pressing
for reading of an imaginary sort. There is great
Interest in the actual world.
"This trend towards the practical in the end may
not be practical if it defeats other values.
"The new spread of culture since the war",
Miss Wilsey suggests, "'has meant that certain refine¬
ments of taste have been lost. When the ferment
has settled, perhaps new refinement will arise.
"But Norway reads. It has no distractions such as
TV. And Norway buys. It has never been much of
a country for circulating libraries. The accumula¬
tion of one's own library is a growing trend and
reaches deep into the country. And there is an
increasing sale of English and American books at all
levels."
Other American authors whose novels were cited
as prominent in the reading habits of Norway's
youth were Sinclair Lewis, Pearl Buck and Jack
London. Among some of the others noted were
Louis Bromfleld, Margaret Mitchell, Lloyd Douglas,
Erskine Caldwell and Warwick Deeping.
The most widely read Norwegian authors, accord¬
ing to Miss Wilsey's report, are Henrik Ibsen, B.
Bjornson, Arne Garborg, Alex Kiellard, Tarjei Vesaas
and Knut Hamsun. The outstanding choices in
English literature are Shakespeare and Dickens.
Among modern authors the following rank high:
Aldous Huxley, CS. Forester, Somerset Maugham,
John Galsworthy, A.J. Cronin, Daphne du Maurier
and Neville Shute.
In languages other than English and Norwegian,
Alexandre Dumas and Victor Hugo (French), Eric-
Maria Remarque (German), Leo Tolstoy (Russian)
and the Dutchman, Hans Martin, are chiefly read.
As a by-product of her visit to Norway, Miss Wilsey
established a list of titles of modern Norwegian
literature offering attractive reading to the non-
Norwegian reader. This was in fact no digression
from the main project of which the underlying pur¬
pose was to draw people of different countries closer
together through a shared experience in literature.
