THE WHY ÄND HOW OF I.G.Y.
Life Magazine 1957
INTERNATIONAL HEADQUARTERS for the I.G.Y. is situated at Uccle, Belgium. Here, Special I.G.Y. Committee
of eminent scientists meets frequently, sends out its suggestions and progress reports. Members of Special Committee
shown here are, from left Vladimir Beloussov of U.S.S.R.., Lloyd V. Berkner of the U.S. (Vice-president of committee);
Marcel Nicolet of Belgium (Secretary General); Jean Coulomb of France, Sidney Chapman of Great Britain (President).
Twice before this Year there were
limited programmes of interna¬
tional co-operation to study
geophysical phenomena. Both were
known as Polar Years because their
primary purpose was the understand¬
ing of Arctic weather. The first was
75 years ago, from August 1882 to
August 1883; the second fifty years
later, during the same months of 1932
and 1933.
Twelve nations maintained fourteen
observation posts in the Arctic area
during the First Polar Year and 34
farther south at which hourly records
of the meteorological and magnetic
conditions were made and the North¬
ern Lights, the aurora borealis, were
systematically observed.
The Second Polar Year included
observations in the Antarctic, and its
scope was extended to include the
study of ionization in the upper
atmosphere and its effects on radio
communication over most of the earth.
Both poles had then been reached by
explorers and the scientific equipment
available was far superior to that of
fifty years earlier.
In the years since then both the
need for geophysical knowledge and
the means for acquiring it have grown
mightily. Planes, radar, radio-tele¬
scopes, sound-wave reflection and
remote-control electronic systems, to
say nothing of high-altitude rockets,
are among the new tools for research
that have been perfected during the
course of the past two decades.
This led Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, presi¬
dent of the Associated (American)
Universities, Inc. and a former presi¬
dent of the American Geophysical
Union, to propose in April, 1950, that
the interval between Years be cut
from 50 years to 25 and that the Third
Polar Year be planned for 1957-58.
In October 1951, the proposal was
referred to the International Council
of Scientific Unions, the logical organ¬
ization to launch the entire project
since it is the central body that
comprises nearly all the individual
international scientific unions, thus
represents all the sciences as well as
the interested nations.
In 1952 the International Council
broadened the scope of the project by
giving it its present name and estab¬
lished the Special Committee for
the International Geophysical Year.
When the Committee was assured of
financial support for its initial ope¬
rations by unesco it proceeded to
organize the ambitious project and
established a permanent Bureau to
act as executive headquarters. It
is located in Belgium at Uccle, a
suburb of Brussels, and is headed by
Prof. Sydney Chapman of Queen's
College, Oxford, as President, Dr. Lloyd
V. Berkner of the United States as
Vice-President, and Prof. Marcel Nico¬
let of Belgium as General Secretary.
They were later joined by Prof. V. V.
Beloussov of the U.S.S.R. and Prof. J.
Coulomb of France. Vice-Admiral Sir
Archibald Day has been appointed as
Co-ordinator of I.G.Y. Operations.
However, most of the costs of the
actual researches are borne by the
co-operating governments and in part
by the various national and inter¬
national scientific societies and by
individual universities and research
institutions. The amounts of the
national expenditures are not gener¬
ally available but an instance is the
planned expenditure of $80,000 to
$90,000 by Iran on geophysical data in
the Near East. The U.S. Congress has
appropriated $39,000,000 to the Nation¬
al Academy of Sciences for the expen¬
ses of the U.S. programme. This is
apart from the additional expenses
involved in the exploration of the
Antarctic Continent and in the
launching of an artificial earth-satel¬
lite for high-altitude observations.
The magnitude of the programme in
each country depends on its own
financial support, and is supervised by
a national committee. The chairmen
of these committees are organized as
an Advisory Council for the planning
of the world programme. An official
Reporter has also been appointed, one
for each of the thirteen major fields
of study, to co-ordinate the work
within each specialty but on a world
basis. Finally, an Advisory Committee
on Publications will supervise the pre¬
paration of the "Annals of the Geo¬
physical Year" which will be publish¬
ed by the Pergamon Press after the
close of the Year.. Sir Harold Spencer-
Jones, Britain's former Astronomer
Royal, is to be Editor-in-Chief.
Articles in this issue on the International Geophysical Year were written by Dr. Gerald Wendt, science consultant
to the Editor of The Unesco Courier and Special Editor of the present issue. Formerly a professor of chemistry
at the University of Chicago and Dean at the Pennsylvania State College, Dr. Wendt has devoted recent years to
the interpretation of science and its social consequences In public lectures, on the radio and by television. He
has been Director of Education at the World's Fair in New York, Science Editor of the American weekly, Time,
and Editorial Director of the monthly, Science Illustrated. For three years (January I 952 to December 1954) he
was Head of the Division of Teaching and Dissemination in Unesco's Department of Natural Sciences. His articles
on science in The Unesco Courier and Unesco Features have been translated into many languages and reprinted
all over the world, in particular those he wrote for the special Issue of The Unesco Courier, "The Promise of
Atomic Power", dated December 1954. He is now president of the Unesco Publications Center in New York.
GERALD WEIMDT

The Unesco Courier. September 1957
MEASURING
THE EARTH
FROM THE MOON
AND STARS
During the International Geo¬
physical Year teams of spe¬
cialists will be exploring the earth
on every level, from the upper
atmosphere to the groundand
below its surface. Art of photo¬
graphing the earth from rockets
has now been developed to a
high degree. Photo (I) was taken
from a height of 101 miles. It
reveals about 300,000 square
miles of New Mexico, Arizona,
California and the Mexican pro¬
vince of Sonora. To clear up
doubts about the exact size and
shape of the earth, scientists will
be using a remarkable instrument,
the Markowitz Moon Camera (2)
which takes photographs of the
moon against a background of
.fixed stars (3). These cameras
will be operating from twenty
stations during I.G.Y. Results will
enable points on earth's surface
to be fixed with a higher preci¬
sion than ever before. From
Moon Camera photographs, dis¬
tances between continents, now
known to within 100 to 130
metres, can be calculated with an
average error of only 30 to
35 metres. Still more accurate
measurements are expected from
observations of the artificial sa¬
tellites. (See page 32)
USIS photos
