Photos UNESCO-Eric Schwab
SPARKING COMMUNITY EDUCATION in Liberia's bush country villages is now the job of this young man (above, left) and scores like him
from the National Fundamental Education Centre at Klay, near Monrovia, the capital. Graduates from training courses at Klay, where a joint Liberia-
Unesco project works to improve living standards through community education, go to work in villages throughout the Republic. Above all they
learn how to approach the villagers, who have been encouraged to tackle community problems and to build schools and clinics, like the model
one at Amina where Dr. P.P. Mayer, of Germany (above, right) examines one of the 3,500 patients who have registered there in the past two years.

TALE OF FOUR VILLAGES
by Alexander Shaw
Mr. Alexander Shaw, a British film¬
maker who has worked six years for
Unesco in Africa and the Middle East,
is now developing audio-visual aids
to teaching in Liberia. Here, he tells
the story of the establishment of
a national fundamental education
centre in the West African Republic.
The village of Be-Sao is all that
the romantic traveller could
wish for. You leave the main
road and take a minor one leading to
one of the new rubber developments
and then you leave that and follow a
track through the bush and then you
walk. You come to a swamp which
you cross precariously on a very long
bridge made of two narrow tree stems
and you pass through a grove made by
an enormous, soaring cotton tree.
While travelling this path no woman
may speak. And then you come to
the village with its round mud houses
and its good-looking people and its
feeling of remoteness from the world
and its cares.
Yet the village has its problems. A
woman has a swollen and infected leg
from a scratch on a nail, a baby is
slowly dying because its mother is
giving it the wrong food, and a man
has been unconscious for two days
and no one knows what is wrong.
Three months ago the villagers would
have begged a lift to the distant
clinic for their sick and they would
have got it, but it would only have
helped the individuals and not the
community. Now, in this first week
of February 1957, they have begged
that two of their women be sent away
for training in first-aid and midwifery.
This request came from
women who would ne¬
ver normally leave their
homes for more than
twenty-four hours.
Cont'd
on
next page
27

FOUR
VILLAGES
(Continued)
Planning & patience work wonders
in changing the age-old ways
The village of Weiawolo is much
further. You leave your transport
and you walk. You cross swamps on
logs half sunk in the mud or on
rickety bridges six feet above a river.
Perhaps you swim if there has been
rain further up and the river is ten
times its normal width. You walk
until the heat blinds you and you are
but a pair of legs plodding along a
trail on which you hope there is not
a bush cow, the most feared of
all the fauna of Liberia. You get to
Weiawolo and they squeeze pineapples
for you and you are happy that you
made the journey.
Angry villagers and
a closed school door
But on one visit the village was very
angry. The school-master had
not appeared for two weeks.
One old and important man was very
vexed indeed. Every day for two
weeks he had walked three miles from
a nearby village to accompany his
grand-daughters to school only to find
it closed.
A pointless story? Only three
years ago Weiawolo had to be
persuaded to build a school and
persuaded with hard argument over
many days. Of course, it was a
school for boys and the villagers never
dreamed that a girl could possibly
attend. Now they are angry because
the teacher has had to go to a funeral
and the school is shut.
The third village is. the last of a
series of villages connected to the
main road by a track. You pass
Vazalon and Baaja on the way to it.
All the villagers grow something that
they would like to send to market in
Monrovia. From the point where
their track joins the main road it is
only one hour by truck to the capital,
but it is three hours' walk to the main
road and even then they may have to
wait a day for a truck that can carry
them and their load of cassava or
coffee or fruit. Sometimes in the dry
season a truck will manage to get
through and buy the produce on the
spot and more would come regularly
if they could get there. But the
bridges get broken and the rain makes .
swamps and for the most part the
villagers either walk and chance a lift
on the main road or they let the fields
run down as being not worth the
trouble. But this is how it was
28
yesterday. Today trucks can run all
the way in any weather. All the
villagers needed was the idea that it
was possible and a little practical help
and encouragement.
These three villages are typical of
thirty or forty in the Lofa-Gola-Vei
territory of Liberia. Soon they will
be typical of villages all over the
country and this perhaps more quickly
than we now suspect.
In 1949 the Liberian Government,
aware that one part of the country
was forging ahead of the rest, that
their ever-growing rubber and mining
industries needed skilled workers, that
their plans for the development of the
country needed educated people and
that this meant teachers and that this
in its turn meant educated villagers,
embarked on a bold plan for funda¬
mental education in rural areas.
Happily they started slowly. With
Unesco's aid they sent one man on an
exploratory mission then another
and another. Here was wisdom, for
no great onslaught is going to
persuade a peasant in any country in
the world that other ways may be
better, that other attitudes may bring
a richer life. The peasant way is a
slow way and is not measured by hours
or days but by crops and seasons and
realities.
Gradually this pioneering work
resulted in the setting up of a National
Fundamental Education Centre at
Klay. Again, many people from
Unesco and the Liberian Government
worked hard and how hard they
worked can only be understood if you
try and do something in a land where
Nature fights against you with her
timeless weapons of heat and rain and
ever-attacking vegetation and they
built slowly but surely.
Needlework, housekeeping &
ideas on women's rights
Today the Centre takes forty-
two students from all over
the country. They must have
reached a certain standard at school
not necessarily a very high one they
must come from villages, and most
important of all they must return to
villages to work when they have
graduated. This year the Centre has
four women students and next year
it is hoped to increase this number.
There is one important factor: the
students are not boys, they are young
men and they bring their wives with
them. They too receive training
training in child care, in needlework,
in housekeeping and in nutrition.
Perhaps, too, they unconsciously
acquire a certain idea about the rights
of women.
The men receive training as primary
school teachers so that, if it is
required of them when they go to their
future stations, they can open a school.
They learn all aspects of fundamental
education as well. Road-building,
sanitation, agriculture, hygiene and
first-aid go side by side with arith¬
metic and English and geography.
Finally, they learn how to teach other
people to be literate.
But perhaps the most important
thing that they learn is how to
approach the villagers. The dual
approach to fundamental education is
soundly taught: learn from the villagers
things that you can take to other
places, give to the villagers that which
you have learned in other places.
Moses had great charm
Siafe was good-humoured
When the present batch of
students has graduated there
will be about 100 fundamental
education workers spread across the
country (it is not a very big country),
and they will be followed every year
by an increasing number of men and
women who have learned simple
things that could transform the whole
land.
Now let us take a look at our fourth
village Ghangbanma. A surprise visit
was paid to this village recently.
There were two ex-students working
there. At the Centre neither was
particularly good, neither particularly
bad. Moses had a great deal of
charm. Siafe was good-humoured.
Moses did indeed have a very bright
wife, Fata. Siafe had no wife, at
least not officially.
They had both been in Ghangbanma
for four months. First of all, the
villagers, although looking upon them
as strangers, found them agreeable
strangers. This was the important
first step. Moses and Siafe had not
sat down and spent a lot of time
finding out the real needs of the
villagers which is one approach to
the problem. They had simply put

The Unesco Courier. November 1957
UNESCO-Eric Schwab
ROUGH TRACK becomes an all-weather road as villagers of Dimeh, a Liberian bush village apply "self-help" with some aid and encouragement
from trainees and instructors of the fundamental education centre. Previously villagers carried their produce for three hours to reach main road
and then often waited an entire day for a truck going to Monrovia. Now trucks come directly from market to collect fruit and vegetables.
into practice everything they had
learned at the Centre.
First of all they had transformed
their own ordinary homes provided by
the villagers, into reasonable models
of what homes should be. Not ideal
homes, of course, but the sort of home
that any village women could achieve.
Fata's children were always reasonably
clean and neatly dressed, her house
was clean, bedding was put out to air,
food was covered and so was the
water pot. Simple things about which
they did not boast but just did them
every day quite naturally. Then
Moses built his wife a high stove and
every day when she cooked the open
windows were lined with people
watching and commenting.
Moses and Siafe started a school.
It was not a great success for a week
or two; then, suddenly, the idea caught
on and they had to turn away pupils
from other villages. The village
caught on too and cut sticks, promised
labour and gave land. Very soon
there will be a new school with
dormitories for those children from far
away. Nobody knows how the two
men will run a boarding school, but
they will manage.
They built soak pits for the place
where their washing is done so that
they do not make a small swamp every
time they wash their clothes. And
they built pit latrines and bath houses.
They were rather clever about this as
they built two types of bath houses
one for the richer people and one for
the poorer. All the prosperous people
built the better ones so that they could
prove they were important and all the
others built the other type because it
was the thing to 'do.
'Do it yourself teachers
made education work
The important point was that
everyone used them when they
were built. Moses and Siafe
helped one man with his coffee
pruning and everyone wanted to learn
the new method. They said that the
nearby bridge was a disgrace and
started to repair it themselves and
everyone joined in. In fact, funda¬
mental education worked.
It is no good pretending that
everyone in the village has rushed to
do all these things but some have.
And some will lead to many.
The Centre has been handed over
to Liberian direction but Unesco has
its heart in the affair and will continue
to support it by sending specialists
when they are required. Indeed, two
will continue to work there under the
directorship of the already legendary
Miss Wilhelmina Bryant. Under a
Unesco . fellowship, New Zealand,
Samoa, India and Egypt were visited
by Miss Bryant and happily gave up
the deepest secrets of their funda¬
mental education techniques. She has
taken them all, added them to Liberian
methods and out of this mixture will
develop still newer and more suitable
approaches to the task of raising the
level of understanding of her country
people.
This is a chronicle of small events
and you may have read it all before in
a different setting. But it is the total
of these small events that could
change the world change it quickly
and for the better.
29
