WHAT HAS TV DONE
TO BOOK READING?
by Henry Cassirer
c "New York Times
What is television doing to the reading of books? The
head of the Detroit Public Library's home-read¬
ing service put it this way in an address to the
American Library Association: "When TV was new, li¬
braries noted a falling off of readers but as the novelty
wore off, people began to return to the library to ask for
books on subjects brought to their attention on the TV
screen." Or as a woman said apologetically to a librarian
at Cleveland, "I remember reading it years ago but it never
meant as much as seeing it last night. Now I want to
read it again."
This double effect of television, first replacing book-
reading and then drawing attention to specific books
through dramatic or literary programmes, is noted also in
England. "Undoubtedly reading is the chief sufferer of
television," said a speaker at the 1956 conference of the
British Library Association. An estimated British televi¬
sion public of 16
million had to be
compared with
about 13 million
registered bor¬
rowers at public
libraries. Less
than a third of
the people with
television sets
were estimated
to read to any
extent and the
remainder read
few books or
none at all. But
con currently,
issues of .books
from a large
number of Brit¬
ish public and
county libra¬
ries continue to
rise year after
year, reported
the same
speaker, and the
tastes of the
reading public
have changed.
Fiction had suf¬
fered, but non-
fiction had benefitted. Other librarians confirmed that
television was freeing them from the obligation to cater
for the light entertainment reader and opening the way
for them to serve readers with more serious tastes as well
as to win new readers.
A certain decline in book reading is noted in the United
States. It is not clear whether this is exclusively due to
television. Nevertheless it is significant that in 1954,
Americans spent about 500 million dollars for books,
13 million less than in 1953, though the population increas¬
ed by about 2.8 million people in the same period. During
the same year, Americans spent 600 million dollars just to
get their radio and television sets repaired. An article in
"U.S. News and World Report" of September 1955 noted:
"There are more people, and particularly children, in the
United States than there were 10 years ago. They have
more money to spend yet they are spending less for books
and little more for other reading material than they used
to spend."
This sombre trend is offset by indications that television
is stimulating the reading of significant books. Perhaps
there is here, too, a change in reading habits as in the
United Kingdom, with television supplying the feature and
fiction entertainment formerly sought in books, and mak¬
ing such entertainment available to large sections of the
population who never read books before, while at the same
time drawing attention to literature which formerly had
only a very small audience.
When the American writer and biographer, Carl
Sandburg, was portrayed in a special nation-wide pro¬
gramme, booksellers and librarians throughout the coun¬
try reported such a run on Sandburg books during the
next week that all their stocks were exhausted. In Los
Angeles, Professor Baxter, professor of literature at the
University of South California, broadcast a weekly talk on
Shakespeare which was viewed by an estimated 400,000
persons and later rebroadcast in other parts of the coun¬
try. These programmes, as well as numerous dramatic
presentations of Shakespeare on American TV, have
created a vast new audience and reading public for the
Bard. The in¬
fluence of televi¬
sion on book-
reading is not a
static phenomen¬
on. Television
can replace book
reading but it
can also be used
to promote It ac¬
tively. A 19 55
report from the
Cleveland public
library notes an
increase in bor¬
rowings and adds
significantly,
"While a reading
boom traceable
to TV influence
is not peculiar to
Cleveland, nei¬
ther is it a na¬
tional phenomen¬
on. It seems to
occur chiefly in
cities where a
well-directed li¬
brary staff with a
far-seeing plan
in mind actively
does something
to capitalize on
TV-prompted interest." The library, for instance, promi¬
nently displays inside its main lobby and in display
windows outside, information regarding outstanding future
TV programmes.
The presentation of recent books through interviews
with their authors and visualization by means of films,
photographs and other applicable pictures, is the feature
of one of the most important weekly television programmes
in France, Lecture Pour Tous. Regular interviews with
authors figure on TV in Germany, Italy and elsewhere.
Thanks to this stimulating power of television, British
librarians took a rather cheerful view about TV's influence
at their recent conference. As The Times reported, "It
was felt that TV is managing to create both among adults
and children a lively new reading public. There are those
whose interest in more or less serious subjects has been
aroused and who have gone almost straight from their sets
to their libraries in search of books on subjects like
archaeology. And it is a common experience that televi¬
sion serial broadcasts set strong temporary fashions for
such writers as Jane Austen, Galsworthy and Dickens.
All in all, so far the librarians seem to think that the
good byproducts of TV outweigh what harm it may do."
31
