THE UNUSUAL WHISTLE LANGUA6E
OF THE CANARY ISLANDERS
by André Classe
Lecturer on Phonetics, University of Glasgow
The word "Speech" for most of us means a method of
communication based on a system of sounds produced
by the action of the throat, tongue, lips, etc. We know
of course that there are other processes used for special pur¬
poses : writing, for instance, is a useful substitute in certain
cases, and gestures can adequately replace vocal noises when
some physical defect of the ear impedes sound-perception.
What is less well-known is that there exist in the world a
number of languages which have an acoustic basis but never¬
theless do not use the normal sound material of speech, that
is to say vowels and consonants as we usually understand
these terms. For example, in La Gomera (one of the smaller
and less-developed islands of the Canary Archipelago) the
inhabitants can converse by means of articulated whistles. For
ordinary conversation they use normal
spoken Spanish, but whenever distance
makes speech inconvenient or impossible,
they resort to the silbo, as this whistled
form of speech is called.
The configuration of the island is such
that walking from one point to another,
not necessarily distant, may be an ar¬
duous and slow process. Gomera is of
volcanic origin and exceedingly moun¬
tainous. It is almost circular in shape,
with a high peak in the centre, the Alto
of Garajonay. From Garajonay deep
and narrow gorges separated by rocky
ridges reach down to the coast like the
spokes of a wheel. There are no plains.
Moving over such ground involves the
expenditure of much time and energy.
This is why the silbo is of such cons¬
tant utility to Gomeros : a message can
be whistled effortlessly over a couple of
miles which it might take an hour to
cover on foot. And two miles is by
no means an exceptional figure. A good
whistler (silbador) will be heard and
understood five miles away or more when conditions are
favourable, that is to say if there is little or no wind. I was
informed that the record was fourteen kilometres, about nine
miles, and any one who has heard a first-class silbador will
realize that there is no inherent improbability in this figure.
The point is that a whistle is practically a pure tone of un¬
changing quality and the only significant variables are pitch
and duration, so that there are no weak overtones and tran¬
sients to be lost, and if the tone is perceived at all it will be
intelligible. So the silbo scores over shouted speech in two
major respects: articulation does not suffer in any way when
an effort is made to increase loudness, and sounds which in
speech have a low level of audibility, as most consonants
have, are as easily heard a thousand yards away as at close
quarters; and it is superior to visual "codes" in that it is as
rapid as spoken Spanish.
30
There are a good many methods of whistle emission in use
at Gomera. The only one never employed is the common
lip-whistle which is insufficiently loud for the purpose. Nor¬
mally one inserts one or two fingers, or a bent knuckle, into
the mouth, the front of the tongue being immobilized, and
the lips kept spread and rigid. With some practice it is
possible by these means to produce a tone of astonishing
loudness, purity and carrying power over a compass of some
three octaves.
Not that this range is ever used by any one silbador; the
limits are invariably a couple of octaves. In the east, the
tendency is to whistle in the upper range, elsewhere in the
lower. Some practitioners do not use the fingers at all but
form a groove in the front part of the tongue which is in
contact with the upper incisors, and they
use the hands to form a kind of mega¬
phone. The volume of tone thus pro¬
duced is comparable to that obtained by
other methods.
'There is nothing very striking about
all this and anyone with a sound set of
teeth can learn in a couple of days to
produce a sound reminiscent of a steam-
whistle. What is more extraordinary is
that this simple noise can be modulated
in such a way as to fulfil all the func¬
tions of the spoken language, although
it lacks all the variations of tone quality
which one has come to regard as the
very essence of speech. And this is
achieved by the simplest of means.
Briefly, the silbador, while producing
the whistled tone, attempts to perform
exactly the same movements with his
speech-organs as if he were actually
talking.
Of course his articulation is bound to
differ in several respects from the nor¬
mal one. In the first place the lips cannot move, so that
two vowels like ee and oo, which in speech are pronounced
with spread and rounded lips respectively, will have identical
labial articulations; in the second place the front part of the
tongue cannot move because of the insertion of the fingers,
and the tongue movements are performed exclusively by the
two posterior thirds of the tongue; in the third place, the
glottis remains open as there is no "voicing" (some whistlers
do produce a laryngeal grunt but this is inaudible a few
yards away, and without significance); finally, movements
of the soft palate, although they do take place, have no effect
on the tone.
Normal articulation is aimed at but only a
rough approximation is achieved. This is,
however, quite sufficient for the purpose of
complete intelligibility, and anything that can
Cont'd
on

The Unesco Courier. — November 1957

‘BRING ME TWO HORSES’,
HE WHISTLED

On La Gomera, one of the Canary Islands, a really first-class silbador
(whistler) can send a message that will be heard and understood five miles
away when conditions are good: (the record is said to be about nine miles).
He (or she, as in photo on opposite page) normally whistles with one or two
fingers or a bent knuckle in the mouth, immobilizing the front of the tongue.
Position of the fingers does not affect the sound of the whistled language,
whose articulation is provided by the tongue, as in ordinary speech. X-ray
photograph, above, illustrates this. Whistler depresses tip of tongue whose
back is raised for articulation of the vowel ‘‘u". To whistle the group of
sounds ,‘‘oto’’, (see pitch contours in graph, left) tongue starts from a low
position, rises to touch the palate for the ‘‘t"’ and finally goes back to the ‘‘o"
position. Below, electronic transcription of whistled sentence in Spanish
(given in phonetic spelling) whose meaning is ‘‘Bring me two horses".

Photos André Classe


WHISTLE LANGUAGE (Continued)
CONVERSING ACROSS
MILES Or TERRAIN
The people of La Gomera, in the Canary Islands, con¬
trived a whistled language so they could speak to each
other across their steep hills and ravines. The island has
the general shape of a large tent, sloping down from a .
central peak to sheer cliffs at the sea's edge. Deep gorges
radiating from the centre cut up the terrain like the
spokes of a wheel. In this difficult mountainous country
two points only 500 yards apart as the crow flies may be
as much as an hour apart in walking time. That is why
the si/6o, as the whistled form of speech is called, is of
constant utility, enabling the ¡slanders to converse quite
easily and distinctly across several miles of terrain.
\jimf*
be said in Spanish can be whistled and understood perfectly.
Without giving a complete description of the phonetic structure
of the silbo (1) we can see how this works if we consider one
or two elementary cases.
If we whistle a few notes, say doh, mi, soh, we notice that
as the pitch goes up the tongue rises in the mouth. This is
because the pitch of a whistle depends on the volume of air
in the mouth cavity, and tongue movements cause this volume
to vary. So if we attempt to pronounce the vowel ee (as in
beat) the free part of the tongue rises towards the palate,
reducing the size of the mouth-cavity, and the pitch of our
whistle will be high. If we repeat the performance with ah
(as in psalm) the tongue will go down, the cavity will become
larger, and our whistle-pitch will be much lower than in the
first case. Thus the tongue position associated with a given
vowel will be associated with a certain pitch instead of a
certain tone-quality for the spoken vowel.
Psalm-whistling shepherds
locked out of church
The case of consonants is somewhat more complex but
fundamentally identical. One example will make this
clear. If we attempt to whistle the group oto, the ton¬
gue starts from the o position, which is low, then rises until it
touches the palate for the /, and finally goes back to the o
(1) Such a description will be found in my article "The Phonetics of
the Silbo Gomero," in Archivum Linguisticum, Glasgow, September,
1957.
position. In terms of mouth-cavity volume, this varies pro¬
gressively from a maximum to zero and back to maximum. In
terms of pitch we start at a low level which rises abruptly for
the first part of the t articulaion, then the tone is interrupted
by the contact tongue-palate, and finally we have an abrupt
glide down to the o level. (See graph on page 31). In point of
fact, some onsonants produce very similar sound-patterns, but
because of ihe phonetic structure of Spanish, ambiguities could
only occur in isolated words. In a complete sentence the
context makes everything clear, and when recordings were
played back to them silbadores were invariably accurate in
their translations.
However unlike ordinary speech the silbo may sound, it has
in fact many of the characteristics of. the spoken word. For
example each silbador has his own individual style, as when
he speaks: you can recognize him by his manner of whistling
as you would from his speech peculiarities. For the Gomero,
the silbo is clearly a perfectly natural mode of expression. It
is even on record that on Christmas Day, 1862, the Alcalde of
San Sebastian (the capital of Gomera) had the doors of the
church locked to keep the shepherds out because they persis¬
ted in ignoring his injunction not to whistle the words of the
Psalms during mass.
So the silbo is not purely utilitarian or useful only for
transmission of elementary messages. Anything that is speak-
able is also "whistlable". That this should be possible,
given the poverty of the material of the silbo, is due to the
simplicity of the sound-system of Spanish, the preponderance
of vowels over consonants, and the relative rarity and simpli¬
city of consonantal groups. It would not work nearly so
weir with a language like English.
32
