AL HOME
The U.N. Declaration of the Rights of the Child pro¬
claims that a child should be given the opportunity
to grow up "in the care of his own parents whenever
possible, and in a family atmosphere of affection and
understanding..." It would be a serious encroachment
on this right, which is based on the most deep-rooted of
human feelings, if the State considered "child care" as
meaning direct interference in the child's upbringing in
the home, except in special cases where parents or guardi¬
ans are unable to provide the physical and moral securi-.
ty essential for the child. As a general rule, State-care
is of an indirect nature, aimed at enabling parents to
raise their children under the best possible conditions.
In many countries philanthropic organizations opened
creches and day-nurseries for children of needy families
and established institutes for the crippled and handi¬
capped. These efforts greatly assisted many families but
they could not replace action by the State for the good
of the country as a whole.
Today, in most countries irrespective of political systems,
family allowances have become one of the basic measures
adopted by the State to help children, though the meth¬
ods used vary widely. In certain countries the State
pays a family allowance to all persons with dependent
children, regardless of social or financial status. This
applies to Great Britain, Norway, Sweden, Australia and
Canada. Brazil and the Union of South Africa restrict
the allowances to families in low-income brackets. In
France, Belgium and Czechoslovakia they are only avail¬
able to persons who pay social insurance.
France, Belgium, Czechoslovakia and . Chile have pro¬
gressive rates for family allowances, the State paying
more for the second child ,than for the first, more for the
third than for the second,' and so on. In general, allow¬
ances are exempt from taxation. Two exceptions are
Great Britain and Norway whose governments consider
them taxable since all families receive them, irrespective
of means. A special factor, related to the relative costs
of living in town and rural areas, . is applied in France
where a family with* three children living in a town, for
example, receives more than a similar sized family whose
home is in the country. In Switzerland, only the families
of civil servants and farm workers receive allowances.
Many other variations exist. France, Sweden, Greece,
Czechoslovakia, Chile and Uruguay all pay allowances for
a single child: other countries provide them only for fami¬
lies with several children. An extreme example is
Brazil where the allowance (abono familiar) is paid only
to families with not less than eight children. In the
U.S.S.R. a minimum of four children is required to qualify.
However, unmarried mothers are entitled to a special
30
allowance from the time of. birth of each child until it-
is 12. They may also draw an allowance for large families
if they have more than four children. If an unmarried
. mother marries, she retains the right to this special allow¬
ance. The U.S.S.R. and Great Britain fix the age limit
for children's allowances at 15. In several Latin American
countries (Argentina, Brazil and Chile) the age limit is 18.
Most countries have recently made great efforts to help
children in the field of public health. The Popular Demo¬
cracies, for example, provide free medical aid for all
children. In the U.S.S.R., factories and collective farms
have creches in proportion to the number of families.
Five per cent of housing areas must be given over to
children's playgrounds and /kindergartens.
Great Britain, the Scandinavian countries and the Popu¬
lar Democracies offer free maternity facilities and
treatment. In Finland and Sweden the State grants two
weeks' paid holidays to mothers with more than four chil¬
dren. Finland, Great Britain, Sweden, the Netherlands
and Mexico provide free classroom materials for children.
In France this is done by the municipal authorities. School
meals are provided for children in Denmark, Sweden,
Great Britain, the Netherlands, France, Czechoslovakia
and the United States, to name only a few countries.
Passport to patrician's rank
Many countries (among them Belgium, France, Den¬
mark, the U.S.A., Norway, Sweden, Australia and
the U.S.S.R.) make housing allowances, and some,
including Brazil, France, Sweden and Czechoslovakia,
grant loans for buying furniture; Norway has a system
of bonuses for this purpose.
The Netherlands is one of the countries where private
philanthropic groups working for the care of children are
most numerous. Special attention is given to crippled and
weakly children. Tiny Netherlands today boasts some 150
special schools for physically or mentally handicapped
children, with a total of 18,000 pupils. In Great Britain
the State offers free accident insurance to all children
under the age of 15.
Today throughout the world there are hundreds of
thousands of childless couples who eagerly desire to have
children. There are also hundreds of thousands of chil¬
dren of all ages, orphaned or abandoned, who are deprived
of a home life and the affection of parents. Society has
therefore instituted the procedure known as adoption, an
institution dating back to antiquity in some countries,
though in the past it did not apply to children. Thus in
certain civilizations an individual (of either sex), or a

The Unesco Courier. October 1957
couple could show friendship or admiration for an adult
person by asking him or her. to join their family and be
considered exactly like a son or daughter. Naturally only
unmarried persons could be adopted. Sometimes the
adoption was made for social or material reasons or for
dynastic ones. In his new family the adopted person
assumed the role and the rights of a direct descendant.
He could thus ensure the transmission of the family name
in the absence of a natural heir.
In ancient times and among primitive peoples adoption
followed a ritual. When the adoptive parent was a
woman, she (or in the case of a couple, the wife) made a
pretence of being in labour and of giving birth in a pub¬
licly-held ceremony. She clasped the person to be
adopted to her bosom after which she pushed him away
and let him fall to the ground.
Adoption was commonplace among the Hebrews, the
Egyptians, the Greeks and especially the Romans. Prob¬
ably the most famous example in Roman history is that
of Octavianus. He was adopted by Julius Caesar and later
became the Emperor Augustus Caesar. In Roman law
the act of adoption enabled a citizen of Latium to become
a citizen of Rome, a plebeian to rise to patrician's rank.
In France the adoption of children became legal only
in 1923 by an Act which made it possible to adopt orphan¬
ed or deserted minors. There had previously been some
exceptions, as in the case of the adoption by the nation
of children orphaned in the 1914-18 war. Switzerland
was one of the first European countries to pass adoption
legislation at the beginning of the century. Before the
Federal Civil Code of 1907, adoption existed in only eight
cantons. Legal adoption was introduced in England only
in 1926; in Northern Ireland in 1929; and in Scotland in
1930. Denmark's first Adoption Act was passed in 1923.
The principles applied in the matter of adoption reflect
the varying philosophical, religious, moral and social ideas
of different peoples. The law-makers of France, Italy,
Bulgaria and Venezuela forbid a man to adopt his illegi¬
timate child in order to legitimize it, but those of Greece,
England and Belgium encourage the adoption of illegiti
mate children by their fathers. In Spain, Cuba and Uru¬
guay members of the clergy are not allowed to adopt
anyone. In Colombia, Panama and in the Canadian Pro¬
vince of Quebec a couple can adopt a child of either sex,
but a single man can only adopt a boy, and, similarly, a
single woman can only adopt a girl. In contrast to the
customs of other times, many countries today forbid the
adoption of adults.
I'll take a 'problem* child
In most countries the law lays down strict conditions
about the age of the child and of its adoptive parent.
In Brazil and in Greece the adopter must be at least
50 years of age; in the U.S.S.R. anyone who has reached
his majority, in this case 18 years of age, can adopt a
child. In other countries the minimum age for adoptive
parents varies between 25 and 45 (Norway, Sweden, Great
Britain 25; Belgium 35 ; France and Switzerland 40). In
Great Britain the adopted "child" must be over three
months old, but not over 21 years. In Bolivia a child
under the age of 14 cannot be adopted, unless the adoptee
has saved the adopter's life.
In the United States adoption has always been widely
practised. Nowadays about 80,000 children are adopted
each year. On birth certificates no mention is made of
adoption and only the names of the adoptive parents are
given. This is also the practice in Germany.
Couples in the United States who are seeking to adopt
a child are often interested in "problem" children. From
humanitarian motives these couples undertake to bring up
a child who is handicapped in some way, either mentally
or physically, or who presents a difficult psychological
problem. Thus they provide for him the
kind of life of which he would otherwise Cont'd
be deprived. The laws of the United States
allow the annual entry into the country,
outside the normal immigration quota, of next page
4,000 children under the age of ten who
A BETTER START is assured for children In
most countries today because of improvements
made in public health services in the past few years.
Guatemala, for example, now has excellent ser¬
vices providing treatment and vocational training
for those who are physically disabled. Photos show
MissSaara Kontio, a physiotherapist from Finland,
demonstrating corrective exercises to a student
at the Children's Rehabilitation Centre in Guate¬
mala City. Miss Kontio was sent by the U.N.
Technical Assistance Administration to the Centre
in Guatemala at the request of the Government.
UNATIONS photos
31

LOVE & A REAL HOME (Continued)
UNESCO
LIFE BEGINS AGAIN for Rachamin Hamdani, as he slowly recovers from polio in a hospital near Tel Aviv. He contracted the disease on his first
birthday and suffered paralysis of his body and limbs. Until he was two and a half years old Rachamin was unable to sit or even lift his head. A year
later with the help of a World Health Organization physiotherapist in the Tel Aviv hospital he was making good progress and could feed himself.
have been adopted by citizens of the United States.
A minimum difference of age between the child and its
adoptive parent is a frequent requirement. If the adoptee
is a minor this difference must be ten years in the State
of California. In France it must be 30 years. Belgium
and Spain require a difference of 15 years, and Switzer¬
land, Greece and Hungary, 18 years. In New Zealand
there must be a difference of 18 years if the child and
adoptive parent are of the same sex and of 40 years if
they are of different sexes.
In France, Bolivia, Argentina, Denmark, Greece, Peru,'
Belgium and Switzerland, among other countries, people
who already have a child of their own, are not allowed to
adopt another one. In Greece it is possible to adopt
several children at the same time, but not successively.
Israel applies individually the laws of adoption of the
country from which the child originated. Switzerland, the
State of New York, Argentina, Denmark and Yugoslavia
allow an adoption to be revoked by mutual consent, but
such cases are rare. Seven countries have no laws what¬
ever on the question of adoption.
If the child is over a certain age, all legal systems
maintain that, independently of consent by his legal re¬
presentative, the child himself must be heard with regard
to adoption. This age ranges from ten years in Argentina,
the U.S.S.R., Yugoslavia, Quebec and Michigan, to 12 years
in California, 13 years in Poland, 14 years in Bolivia,
Denmark, New York State and Peru, and 16 years
in France and Greece. In Japan the adopter himself must
obtain the consent of his own parents. In the Republic
of Ireland only orphans and illegitimate children between
the ages of six months and seven years can be adopted.
Both parties must be of the same religion.
Adoption is an ancient tradition among the Eskimos.
In certain communities of Greenland, 25% of the couples
have adopted children even those who have children of
their own. If the eldest child is an adopted one he takes
priority in matters of inheritance over all younger chil¬
dren in the family even if these are direct descendants.
In Venezuela the State reserves the right to nullify an
adoption at any time if it considers this to be in the
child's interest. Cuban law specifies that adoptive parents
can under no circumstances be the heirs of a child they
adopt. In Peru, Colombia and Panama it is forbidden to
adopt a minor if he or she owns more than a certain
amount of money.
The laws of most countries show a tendency to offer
more and more protection to an adopted child in matters
of inheritance. Legislators have always been mindful of
this question and extremely explicit laws were passed to
settle the formalities of inheritance in times when no
care of any other sort was extended to children by the
State. In very ancient times parents could decide them¬
selves whether their children should inherit their posses¬
sions. It was the Roman emperor Justinian who, in 543
A.D., promulgated the first law instituting the portio
legitima, or compulsory share which parents had to leave
to their direct descendants. In the Middle Ages, the Ger¬
manic countries adopted the system of the Pflichtteil (the
reserved portion), but for centuries, inheritance was a
question that was settled in many countries according to
common law. Parents could dispose of their riches as
they pleased, although the handing down of titles of no¬
bility and of privileges was decided by royal decree.
The care extended to children by the State today em¬
braces this question. The principle of portio legitima is
widely accepted. Where differences do exist they simply
concern the proportions and the relationship between
legitimate and illegitimate children. The U.S.S.R. and
the other Popular Democracies allow inheritances, and a
Soviet law of 1928 fixes the obligatory share of children in
their parents' possessions at 75% providing the total value
does not exceed 10,000 rubles. In France an only child is
entitled to at least 50% of his parents' wealth. If there
are two children each must receive one-third, three chil¬
dren at least one-quarter each, four children a fifth each
and so on.
While the care of the State in the social and juridical
fields is indispensable for the sound development of future
generations, paternal and maternal affection remains the
prerequisite of happiness for all children. Only a child
who is reared in a home where a harmonious atmosphere
prevails can hope to develop a proper moral and emotion¬
al equilibrium.
32
