'A certain Thackeray', caricaturist
William Makepeace Thackeray first won fame a century
ago as a writer. Yet, looking over the shoulder of
Thackeray the novelist and satirical humorist, there
was always Thackeray the artist and caricaturist, ever ready
with pencil and sketch book to reinforce the wit and satire
of his pen.
Like one of his own characters, Clive, in The Newcomes,
Thackeray had shown early talent as a caricaturist and in
1834 (at the age of 23), deciding that he could draw better
than he could do anything else, he determined to qualify as
an artist and went to study in Paris. There he worked in
an atelier and afterwards copied pictures industriously at the
Louvre.
He pursued this ambition to be a professional painter for
a number of years yet though we find him in 1836 applying
to Charles Dickens to take over the illustrations of the
Pickwick Papers (Dickens turned him down) he was already
beginning to direct a part of his efforts towards literature.
The following year, Thomas Carlyle, whose History of the
Ui*j^ 2 -i s«is
A um«! wd\\exd LX U-UVÛ
J! Y
WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THAfKEHAT
French Revolution Thackeray had reviewed in the Times,
wrote of him as "one Thackeray, a half monstrous Cornish
giant, kind of painter, Cambridge man and Paris newspaper
correspondent who is now writing for his life in London."
Soon Thackeray was invited to write for the newly-started
Punch, and though he contributed to many periodicals
during his life, it was to Punch that he gave his best criticism,
satire, parody, versifying, caricatures, political comment and
drawing. Altogether he contributed 380 sketches to the
magazine.
Thackeray's Vanity Fair appearing
in monthly instalments during 1847
and '48 established him as one of the
first of English novelists. He received
50 guineas a number, including
illustrations. He supplied the illus¬
trations for many more of his own
works, including Comic Tales and
Sketches, The Irish Sketch Book,
Memoirs of Mr. Char¬
les Yellowplush, and
The Book of Snobs.
At all times in his
life he delighted in
drawing caricatures to
amuse children and
some of them which he
made in Rome in 1853 '
were expanded into the
delightful burlesque The Rose and the Ring,
written under his favourite pen name of
"M.A. (Michael Angelo) Titmarsh" which
Îhe took because his own nose had been
broken by a schoolmate just as Michel¬
angelo's had been broken more than three
centuries before.
Today many of Thackeray's drawings are
preserved in three London museums the
British Museum, the Victoria and Albert and
the South' Kensington reminders of the
artistic talent of a great author of whom one
critic has said: "Had he finally chosen draw¬
ing as his preferred medium he would have
belonged to the Hogarth school."
All the drawings shown here were done
by Thackeray for Vanity Fair except for the
sketch of a page of the "time of Mary,
Queen of Scots". This was drawn by
Thackeray while with an American family
in New York in 1852. In Thackeray's Letters
to an American Family (1904), it is noted
that he took great interest in the plans and
amusements of this family and on one
occasion when the costume for a juvenile
fancy dress ball was under discussion "he
took pen and paper as he sat chatting... and
drew little sketches of the proper dress for a
page of various periods, being well-versed in
all the details belonging to each costume."
45

The Unesco Courier. August 1957
/,
~%x
47
