MARK TWAIN'S MAP
OF THE
FORTIFICATIONS OF PARIS.
azuiwMTuafÖ ¡¡AH1**
We reproduce here a burlesque map of the fortifications
of Paris drawn by Mark Twain and published in the "New
York Herald" of Sunday, October 2, 1870. At this time,
the siege of Paris during the Franco-Prussian war had
just begun and newspapers the world over were filled
with maps of Paris as is journalistic practice. Below we
publish the text written by Mark Twain for his map.
TO THE READER
The above map explains itself.
The idea of this map is not original with me, but is
borrowed from the Tribune and the other great metro¬
politan journals.
I claim no other merit for this production (if I may so
call it) than that it is accurate. The main blemish of
the city paper maps, of which it is an imitation, is that
in them more attention seems paid to artistic pictur-
esqueness than geographical reliability.
Inasmuch as this is the first time I ever tried to draft
and engrave a map, or attempt anything in the line of
art at all, the commendations the work has received and
the admiration it has excited among the people have been
very grateful to my feelings. And it is touching to reflect
that by far the most enthusiastic of these praises have
come from people who know nothing at all about art.
By an unimportant oversight I have engraved the map
so that it reads wrong-end first, except to left-handed
people. I forgot that in order to make it right in print
it should be drawn and engraved upside down. However,
let the student who desires to contemplate the map standr
on his head or hold it before her looking-glass. That will
bring it right.
The reader will comprehend at a glance that that piece
of river with the "High Bridge" over it got left out to one
side by reason of a slip of the graving-tool which rendered
SO
it necessary to change the entire course of the River
Rhine or else spoil the map. After having spent two days
in digging and gouging at the map, I would have changed
the course of the Atlantic Ocean before I would have lost
so much work.
I have never had so much trouble with anything in my
life as I did with this map. I had heaps of little fortifi¬
cations scattered all around Paris, at first, but every now
and then my instruments would slip and fetch away
whole miles of batteries, and leave the vicinity as clean
as if the Prussians had been there.
The reader will find it well to frame this map for future
reference, so that it may aid in extending popular intelli¬
gence and dispelling the widespread ignorance of the day.
MARK TWAIN.
OFFICIAL COMMENDATIONS
It is the only map of the kind I ever saw. (U.S. Grant.)
It places the situation in an entirely new light. (Bis¬
marck.)
I cannot look upon it .without shedding tears. (Brigham
Young.)
My wife was for years afflicted with freckles, and
though everything was done for her relief that could be
done, all was in vain. But, sir, since her first glance at
your map, they have entirely left her. She has nothing
but convulsions now. (J. Smith.)
If I had had this map I could have got out of Metz
without any trouble. (Bazaine.)
It is very nice, large print. (Napoleon.)
I have seen a great many maps in my time, but none
that this one reminds me of. (Trochu.)
It is but fair to say that in some respects it is a truly
remarkable map. (W.T. Sherman.)
I said to my son, Frederic William, "If you could only
make a map like that, I would be perfectly willing to see
you dieeven anxious." (William III.)
