Pen drawings for his children
ROUND THE WORLD
IN EIGHTY DAYS
WITH LEO TOLSTOY
by A. Chifman
Leo Tolstoy Museum, Moscow
ALL DRAWINGS COURTESY L. TOLSTOY MUSEUM. MOSCOW
ifcii*
TT, 2om
, ^ftíjm meó*
LEO TOLSTOY added some expressive strokes to the vast panorama
of the Caucasus that unfolds in his written works with drawings (top of
these pages) he made as a young officer stationed In this part of Russia.
Later In life he compiled a merry reading book in which he drew men,
animals or objects familiar to children to correspond to each
letter. Thus he made the study of the alphabet easy and amusing.
12
Among the 160,000 pages of the precious manuscripts
of Leo Tolstoy, which are carefully preserved in a
specially equipped "steel room" in the Moscow
museum, are a number oí drawing by the great writer
rapid sketches in ordinary pencil or ink that stir the heart
and fire the imagination.
Leo Tolstoy had a very lofty conception of the visual
arts, claiming that they were capable of uniting all men
in the bonds of love and friendship. He counted many
painters among his friends and encouraged their work.
He himself drew but seldom, being convinced that he had
no artistic talent. The few drawings which have been
handed down to us among his manuscripts and papers are
therefore all the more precious.
The first series ai Tolstoy's drawings dates from the
middle of the last century, when, as a young officer, he
was doing his military service in the Russian army in the
Caucasus. The iwild beauty of the Caucasian landscape,
the men of the Caucasus, strong and free as the wind, the
romantic ruggedness of the mountains all captivated him.
Of his literary masterpieces, the tales: The Invasion, A
Wood Felling, The Cossacks and, later, his unrivalled
Hadji Murat, reveal the young writer's admiration for the
Caucasus and its people. Tolstoy's drawings of that period
add some expressive strokes to his vast panorama of the
Caucasus.
One of them (drawing 1) is the figure of an old man.

The Unesco Courler. August 1)57
?^«1tii
©
The proud poise of his head, the steady gaze of his eyes,
show that he has a proper self-respect. He is obviously
poor, for his shirt is in tatters and, through the holes,
his broad bare chest can be seen; but he will never bend
the knee to any man. Who is he? Probably a simple
Cossack, dwelling in one of the Russian villages of the
North Caucasian plain. Tolstoy met many such men, and
it is they who subsequently became the heroes of his
wonderful tale, The Cossacks.
There is another head of an old man (drawing 2) ;
something in this face also must have attracted the writer.
What is it? Let us cast our minds back to the picturesque
figure of Uncle Erochka in The Cossacks. He was a huge
Cossack, with a thick mop of tangled hair, bristling eye¬
brows and penetrating eyes. A free son of the steppes,
he personified the rugged beauty and courageous spirit of
the peasants of the Caucasian foot-hills. It can hardly
be claimed that this is a drawing oí Erochka himself; it
may represent another of the author's friends at that
time. Yet this old man undoubtedly reminds us of the
hero of Tolstoy's tale.
The head of. an old man with a fur cap (drawing 3)
belongs this time to one of another type. He is certainly
a highlander, a warlike inhabitant of one of the Cauca¬
sian mountain hamlets which are always on bad terms
with the Russian villages. Did that proud bearing and
the steady and resolute gaze, fixed on some distant hori
zon, perhaps suggest to the author the -future hero of one
of his stories, the legendary figure of Hadji Murat? In
this tale, written towards the end of his life, Tolstoy
extolled the courage, pride and inflexible will of a free
man. At the same time, in Hadji Murat, he expressed his
hatred of war and his longing to see peace and friendship
reign among the nations.
The second series of Tolstoy's drawings consists oí 17
illustrations of Jules Verne's novel: Around the World in
Eighty Days. Tolstoy loved Jules Verne for his intelli¬
gence and unquenchable thirst for knowledge, his consum¬
mate skill in winding up a story, and the boldness of his
heroes. Tolstoy read Jules Verne's novels aloud to his
children during the long winter evenings at Yasnaya
Polyana. In order to impress the episodes of the novel
with greater vividness and clarity on the minds of his
young listeners, he produced these simple and amusing
drawings (drawings 5 to 7, next page).
Tolstoy's son, Ilya, tells in his memoirs how this remark¬
able series came into being: "At this point in our child¬
hood, we were tremendously keen on Jules Verne's novels.
Father used to bring us these books from
Moscow and, every evening, we gathered
round to hear him read The Adventures of
Captain Grant's Children, Twenty Thous¬
and Leagueß under the Sea, From the
Earth to the Moon, Meridiana; or the
13
Cont'd
on

ROUND THE WORLD
WITH LEO TOLSTOY
(Continued)
Adventures of Three Englishmen and
Three Russians in South Africa and
Around the World in Eighty Days.
"As this last novel was not illustrat¬
ed, Father set about Illustrating it
himself. Every day, he prepared pen
drawings for the evening and they
were so attractive that we liked them
far better than the illustrations in
the other books.
"I remember, as though it were still
before my eyes, one of his drawings of
a Buddhist goddess, with several heads
adorned with serpents she was fan¬
tastic and terrible. My father had
never learned to draw, but he could
turn his hand to anything, and we
were all delighted.
"We looked forward impatiently to
the evening. We scrambled over the
round table towards him every time
he came to an episode which he had
illustrated, when he would stop read¬
ing and pull out his drawing from
under the book."
Tolstoy produced his third and
last series of drawings in the
eighteen-seventies, when he was
working on his famous Reading-book.
Not satisfied with those in existence,
the author invented one of his own a
merry reading-book, to be used, he
hoped, by all Russian children, from
those of the Czar of those of the
humblest peasant. In this book, each
letter had a corresponding drawing of
a man, animal or object familiar to
children (drawing 4). The vivid draw¬
ing was intended to help the child to
learn the necessary letter and then
the whole word. In this way Tolstoy
linked up reading with real life and
made the study of the alphabet easy
and amusing.
Tolstoy's desire to express his ideas
not only in words but also in drawings
persisted throughout his life. Spe¬
cialists who study War and Peace are
familiar with his pencil sketches of
the battlefield of Borodino, for exam¬
ple, which he made when he visited
that spot for the purposes of his novel.
Later, Tolstoy often made drawings
in his diary and notebooks when he
felt the need to give visual expression
to a particularly difficult and compli¬
cated idea.
Tolstoy's genius is not to be sought
in his drawings. It lay in his extra¬
ordinary ability to convey images in
words. We nevertheless prize these
drawings, which have fortunately
been preserved; in a way, they help
us to a -fuller understanding and ap¬
preciation of this great man.
14
0
/ ,
l/'/¿C/J 'S*f¿t'(í.}¿ :r rW<* V-l^y.. ,-;/>- '
&
GREAT ADMIRER OF JULES VERNE, Tolstoy read the French writer's novels
aloud to his children. Each evening they gathered around him to listen to these
prophetic stories of submarines, airplanes and other inventions which then had the
quality of dreams. As one of the books, Around the World in 80 Days was not illustrated,
Tolstoy set about making drawings for it himself, including the three shown here.
