ï: Tal WHERE DID THEY COME FROM?
The migration of birds and animals is regarded as one
of nature's great wonders. Less well known, but
equally fascinating, are the facts of plant migration.
Plants "'nature's paralytics", as one botanist has called
them have managed to girdle the globe, using the winds
and the waters and sometimes travelling as "'stowaways"
on men and animals. Innumerable kinds of grains from
different lands have crossed the oceans, some of them
carried by birds, as was the pimento, which found a home
in Jamaica. There have been organized plant migrations
too, when nomad peoples, scientific missions, merchants
and colonists took seeds with them to ensure their
food supplies or to start new industries.
Today, we can almost speak of a "'universalization" of
cultivation as more and more plants are made to grow
fruitfully far from their lands of origin. The ancient and
historical associations of globetrotting plants are revealed
in this Alphabet of some of the more common foodstuffs,
showing their places of origin and the areas where they
are widely produced today.
AUBERGINE (egg
plant) India. During
the Middle Ages the
plant was brought from
India to Africa, from
where it reached Spain.
Today cultivated in the
warmer parts of Europe
and the U.S.A.
BARLEY Arabia,
Mount Sinai, Caucasus.
It was from the Cau¬
casus that the cultivation
of barley spread
throughout Central Eur¬
ope. In the 16th cen¬
tury it was still Europe's
chief bread material.
COCOA Mexico.
The beans of the cacao
tree were originally used
to make an aromatic
drink called xocoatl and
were also employed as
currency by the Aztecs.
In the early 16th century
the Spaniards introduced
it into their country,
launching, around 1520,
the fashion of drinking
"chocolate", a practice
which spread to France
in the following century.
Until the First World
War, Europe received most of its supplies from Venezuela
and Ecuador. Today, the main cocoa producing countries
are Ghana and the Ivory Coast.
COFFEE Ethiopia. The coffee tree was introduced
into Arabia from Ethiopia about the 14th century. Coffee
was known in Venice around 1570 and in Marseilles in
1660. The first establishment "'for the drinking of coffee"
the famous Cafe Procopio which later became a fav¬
ourite meeting place for Fontenelle, Voltaire and Diderot
was opened in Paris in 1672. From France, coffee
travelled to the West Indies in 1716. The Dutch
introduced it into South America, and Brazil became the
chief producer of coffee. The great city of Sao Paulo
owes its development to this fact, and its port, Santos, is
now the "coffee capital" of the world.
CORN (Maize) South America. According to the Swiss
botanist, De Candolle, Indian corn, or maize, originated in
the region which today includes Ecuador and Columbia.
It is also said to have come from Florida. Whatever the
truth of the matter, Spain and England were the first
European countries to use it as a food, early in the six¬
teenth century.
HARICOTS (French beans) Mexico, Central and
South America. From these places, Italian navigators
COCOA BEANS from the cacao trees grown on the coastal lowlands are
the major crop of Ecuador, one of the world's principal producer countries.
Some years ago it was still the practice to dry the beans on the streets of Gua¬
yaquil, Ecuador's chief port (above). Today there is far too much traffic.
carried the plant to Rome where Pope Clement VII
blessed it and gave it his special protection. In 1556 it
was being grown in pots in several parts of Italy, and in
the same century it was introduced to France by Catherine
de Medici, wife of the French King Henry II.
MANIOC (Cassava) Amazon Region. The Indians of
South America found they could eliminate the hydrocyanic
(prussic) acid in this root plant by boiling it, thus making
it completely edible. Today's largest producer is Mada¬
gascar which exports large quantities in its commercial
form as tapioca.
OLIVES. Greece and Asia Minor. Cultivated since
pre-historic times in Asia Minor, the olive spread very
early to all Mediterranean countries. The olive branch
has been a symbol of peace since before Christian times
(oil can cure human ills and calm troubled waters).
PEANUT (groundnut). Brazil, and the West Indies
(where it is called mani) and Peru (where it was given
the name inchic). The Spaniards who reached Mexico
in the 15th century con¬
fused the peanut with
the beans of the cacao
tree (cacahuatl). The
plant soon reached Asia
and Africa. It was first
used as a food in France
after 1801, thanks to the
efforts of Louis Bona¬
parte who learned to
appreciate its qualities
while he was ambassador
in Madrid. Today India
heads world production
and cultivates a total of
2,050,000 acres.
POTATO. South
American Andes regions
(Columbia, Ecuador,
Peru, Chili). The Span¬
iards introduced the
plant into Galacia in the
16th century, while
Francis Drake did the
same in England. Sir
Walter Raleigh had it
planted in Virginia and
in Ireland. The French
were slow to adopt it as
a food, preferring the
Jerusalem artichoke
(still called topinambour
in France from the
Topinambou Indians of
Brazil where the plants
where first discovered). Two centuries later the efforts
of Parmentier to develop potatoes as a staple food in
France were successful.
SPINACH. Persia. Long used as a potherb, it was
introduced into Europe in the 15th century. Today one
of the largest producers is the U.S.A.
SUGAR CANE. Bengal, Siam, Indonesia. India was
already producing cane sugar 600 years before the Christ¬
ian era. In the 7th century the sugar cane was imported
into North Africa, then, in 996 A.D., into Venetia, which
obtained a monopoly of the product. Spain developed
sugar plantations in its New World territories, and by
the 18th century, Cuba, the West Indies and Santo
Domingo became the leading producers of sugar cane.
After the First World War, Cuba and the West Indies were
producing 4,000,000 tons a year.
TOMATO. Mexico. This plant, known in Mexico as
the tomaltl, began to be grown in Spain, Portugal and
Italy in the 16th century. It was not cultivated in France
and North Africa (leading grower today) until 1785.
WHEAT. Mesopotamia. From here this grain tra¬
velled throughout the ancient world, and reached America
with the caravels of Columbus. Today the greatest pro¬
ducers are the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. (See page 32).
Shell
