ONE IN THREE. Unusual example of the bookbinder's art, this
French 19th century Book of Hours(the part of a breviary contain
ing offices to be said during the day) was divided in three and given
a triple binding. Now in a Harvard College collection, U.S.A.

They mass-produced
books long before
printing presses
by Jorge
Carrera Andrade BLACK ROBES
Some thirty-five years before the start of the Christian
era, Latin philosophers gathered in the shade of the
columns of the Asinus Pollio public library the first
in Rome to discuss the fruits of Greek thought as record¬
ed in the library's voluminous papyrus scrolls. These were
the troubled times of the Second Triumvirate, the govern¬
ing coalition of Mark Antony, Octavian and Lepidus, and
young Romans, unsettled by the changes which they
sensed were imminent, turned with enthusiasm to studies
of literature and the arts.
Asinus Pollio, formerly a people's tribune, had retired
from politics, but wishing to continue to serve his fellow
citizens, he opened an "Academy of Eloquence" in his villa
at Tusculum. Here, over the entrance to its library he
caused the inscription Atrium libertatis ("sanctuary of
freedom") to be engraved. Pollio, a great orator, poet,
historian and critic, was a widely travelled man having
journeyed through North Africa, Spain, Gaul and Mace¬
donia. From one of his moving speeches, Pliny records
these famous words: "The fruits of man's intellect are the
common heritage."" Were there any translations of
foreign authors among the Greek books in this first Roman
public library? We know of none, probably because Greek
writers, satisfied with the glories of their own civilization,
considered all the other peoples as barbarians and were
not interested either in their language or their literature.
They were blind to the brilliance of Hebrew and Egyptian
intellectual achievements, and while this may have helped
to preserve the originality of Greek thought, it also
explained why Greece was surpassed by the Latin world
in universality.
All well-educated Romans knew Greek and read the
works of Aristotle, Plato and the epic or bucolic poets in
the original. Pollio was the first to entrust to his protégés,
Horace and Virgil, the task of translating Greek works
into Latin. Naturally Virgil, with his love of rural life,
chose Theocritus's poems in praise of the countryside,
while the peaceful Horace, perhaps out of sheer contrari¬
ness, translated the resonant Odes of Pindar. Apart from
these works, there were few translations in Pollio's library.
The Odyssey, translated much earlier by Livius Andro-
nicus, some comedies adapted by Plautus, and the trage¬
dies in which Naevius the Roman poet and dramatist,
attacked the Roman aristocracy more than two centuries
before Christ.
Not until the advent of Christianity and the great
days of Roman Africa, in the first centuries of the Christ¬
ian Era, did Latin begin to be used more widely, with the
resultant need to include among the treasures
of that language the essential works enshrin- I
ing religious thought, which had hitherto been I
written in the Hebrew language. Amid the next page

BLACK ROBES
(Continued) Pride of monks & princes: translating
sands of Carthage, Tertullian composed his Apologeticus.
Cyprian, Arnobius, St. Augustine and Ruflnus all from
North Africa undertook the task of translating passages
from the books of the Bible into Latin. "The fire of
impatience" of which Tertullian spoke seemed to devour
the religious writers of the African continent. At the end
of the 4th century, North Africa was considered as the
true home of Latin-Christian literature and Latin reigned
supreme as the language of learning.
In this same century, Pope Damasus whose library in
Rome was a centre of learning asked the Dalmatian
monk, Sophorius Hieronymus (St. Jerome) to translate
the Bible into Latin. After 23 years of work, during which
the good monk, although beset by every kind of tribulation,
never failed to write 1,000 lines a day (including his
famous letters and commentaries), the task was complet¬
ed. This translation, which testifies to astonishing lin¬
guistic ability, is still known as the Vulgate. The Dal¬
matian scholar, who was canonized, went down to posterity
as "the patron saint of translators".
At the beginning of the 6th century, an Italian monk,
wearing a simple black habit, symbolical of his austere life,
founded the Monte Cassino monastery on the site of an
old fortified castle and set up the Benedictine Order; this
event, of such importance in the history of human culture,
was as significant for the Middle Ages as was the invention
of printing for the modern world.
The Benedictines were, in fact, Europe's first "mass
production" publishers, for these thousands of monks.
From "Bookmen's Bedlam", © W. H. Blumenthal 19 55
BOOKS IN CHAINS. Famous old library at Hereford Cathedra],
England, dating from the days when librarians chained their books
to the shelves. An ancient monastic library, it still retains several
rare manuscripts and relics. At one time parts of the book stacks were
dismantled and used elsewhere in the cathedral, but in recent years
the original old woodwork has been restored to its proper place. (See
also Unesco Courier, June 1953, " Books without chains ")
working as copyists and illuminators, made the reproduc¬
tion of manuscripts the core of their monastic activities.
Eight centuries after the foundation of the Benedictine
Order, there were 17,000 Benedictine monasteries in
Europe in other words, 17,000 workshops for the pro¬
duction of books.
From the cells of Cluny, Citeaux or Subiaco, flowed
countless volumes of beautiful manuscripts each chapter
beginning with a large capital letter, ornamented with
miniatures and flowers, and the whole luxuriously bound
which filled the libraries of convents, palaces and the
"cathedral schools", the precursors of universities. One of
the most extraordinary phenomena in the history of the
Middle Ages, was the speed with which books spread from
one end of Europe to the other.
Among the "best sellers" of the early Middle Ages was
the Latin translation of Aristotle's works by Boethius,
28
Minister of Theodoric the Great, King of the Ostrogoths.
The VTIth century had a superb translator in Isidore of
Seville, regarded as the man who continued the work of
Saint Jerome, and whose Etymologies one of the 'first
encyclopaedias of the Christian world was widely distri¬
buted through the "editions" issued, one after the other,
by the Benedictine monks.
The great cultural movement of the 8th, 9th and
10th centuries swept like a fertile tide over the lands of
France and on to the island kingdom of Alfred the Great.
That learned monarch, once he was able to sheathe the
sword with which he had expelled the Danes from his
shores, not only founded Oxford University and extended
his protection to men of letters, but also himself undertook
to translate St. Augustine and Orosio and prepared an
Anglo-Saxon version of Bede's Ecclesiastical History and
of several parts of Boethius's Consolation of Philosophy.
Finally, in the 10th century a new France stirred to life
in the apartments of southern castles, surrounded by
grapevines and lulled by the music of Latin cicadas.
France became a great cultural centre, where the influ¬
ences of East and West were blended and the most illus¬
trious schools of art inspired the whole of Europe.
Then, in the 11th century, came the great cultural
awakening in Spain. Cordova and Toledo were the two
intellectual poles of the period: Cordova the refuge of
Eastern scholars was the farthest bastion of Islamic
culture, while Toledo was recognized as the highest citadel
of Western thought. Cordova, in succession to Baghdad
and Cairo, became the "capital of books". Abderraman III
sponsored the production of paper books, while at the
same time enacting laws on literacy teaching for the poor.
The great linguists of Toledo
Never had a people displayed such a taste for reading.
Under the protection of the Caliph, thousands of
copyists and booksellers prospered. Bibliophiles,
bookbinders, illuminators and illustrators were welcomed
at the Court. Scholarly translators, who usually spoke
four languages Arabic, Greek, Hebrew and Latin, enjoyed
the sovereign's special favour. The library oí Alhacam II
was the pride and glory of those days; it contained 400,000
books.
The imperial city of Toledo, crowned by rocky heights
and encircled by the blue ribbon of the Tagus, became a
hive of culture when King Alfonso VI retook it from the
Moors. Toledo collected the Arab texts and made them
known to the West. Thus the Moslem occupation of the
peninsula bore its fruits, and world culture was enriched
by the contribution of Islamic thought. Here, in Toledo
in the 12th century, was founded, for the first time in
European history, an international institute of translators,
for the purpose of spreading knowledge of the most
v important works of the age.
The "Toledo College of Translators" was composed of
learned men from various countries: Gerard of Cremona,
an Italian philologist; Daniel de Morlay, an English
gentleman attached to the court of Richard Coeur de Lion,
Domingo Gundisalvo, a Spanish archdeacon; Hermann, a
German monk who enjoyed the patronage of King Man-
fredo of Sicily, and who, despite his foreign origin, became
Bishop of Astorga.
The learned men belonging to this illustrious school
of translation also included Juan Hispalense, a converted
Jew who translated Ptolemy, another Englishman, Michael
Scott, who introduced Averroism into southern Europe and
who won a mysterious reputation for necromancy at the
court of Frederick II and, lastly, Juan de Toledo, the
Benedictine monk, alchemist, poet and prophet, who
became a Cardinal and was even on the point of acceding
to the pontifical throne in Rome.
Gundisalvo's most famous translation was of a work
in Arabic, the Fountain of Life a monument of Judaic
philosophy and an encyclopedia of a system j
of science based on metaphysics written by I
Salomon Ben Gabirol, a native of Malaga.
This scholar and philosopher, whom the page 30

BLACK ROBES (Continued)
BRAILLE BIBLE for blind fills these 21 huge
volumes produced in 1923 and occupies over
two yards of shelf space. New era for blind opened
when recording of entire books was initiated in
1934 in U.S.A., Talking Books of the Bible now
exist on I 69 discs each playing for a half hour or
a total of just over 84 hours. The longest novel re¬
corded, Tolstoy's " War and Peace " needs I 19
records and a total listening time of nearly 60 hours
as against 9 hours for a book of average length.
© W. H. Blumenthal 1955
Spaniards called Avicebron, wrote his philosophical doc¬
trines in Arabic and his poetry in Hebrew. From the pens
of the Toledo translators, there emerged, in Latin garb,
the works of Euclid, Avicenna, Algazel, Aristotle and others
who contributed to the flowering of Western learning.
The whole of the 13th century resounds with the echoes
of a book which was translated in all the countries of
Europe, and which could be called one of the "best sellers"
of the Middle Ages: the Canticle of Brother Sun, written
by St. Francis of Assist, shortly before his death. In
Umbria, central Italy, arose a new vision of the world, a
philosophy o'f humility and meekness.
The gracious landscapes of Italy left their mark on this
new intellectual trend, which set out to discover man the
man of flesh and blood, as opposed to the metaphysical
being concerned solely with the after-world. It was a
search conducted through letters and the visual arts.
While the scholar Leo Pilatus was teaching Greek to the
Italians and translating Homer, the artist Giotto di Bon-
done was painting figures of intense realism, and giving
lifelike expression to the characters of his frescoes in the
Basilica at Assis!. The shades of Dante and Boccaccio,
strolling through the Florentine arcades, seemed to meet
Geoffrey Chaucer, the first great English poet, who was
visiting the cities of Italy as the envoy of the King of
England. The English writer and traveller subsequently
won a reputation as a great translator of the Italians.
The age of humanism and the Renaissance opened
gloriously with the appearance of the printed book which,
though regarded askance by the bibliophiles, was to
transform the face of the world by bringing into the
humblest home knowledge which had hitherto been
restricted to the palace and the monastery, and reserved
for the enjoyment of princes, scholars and prelates.
The Benedictine monks, who in earlier centuries had
spread learning by means of illuminated manuscripts,
were the first to recognize the importance of Gutenberg's
invention and they installed the first printing press after
Gutenberg in the monastery at Subiaco, near Rome.
At all events, the translation of books was regarded
until the 15th century, as valuable literary work, compar¬
able to the writing of the originals and many famous men
chose to work as simple translators. One wonders for
what obscure reasons translating was reduced to its
present estate as the "Cinderella of Literature".
CHINESE SYNAGOGUE MANUSCRIPTS. The city of Kai-fung,
on the Yellow River about 350 miles south of Peking, is one of the
most historic of the early settlement sites of China. It was long the
centre of the main Jewish colony in China, a few remnants of which
still exist today. Records show that a synagogue was built there In 1190
A.D. from which the ancient Hebrew manuscripts shown above origi-
© W. H. Blumenthal 1955
nated. Fifty-nine of these unique manuscripts, composed of several
folds of thin Chinese paper pasted together, are now preserved In the
library of the Hebrew University of Cincinnati (U.S.A.). Photo shows
various prayers with a Memorial Book In Chinese characters, hymns
in Hebrew and Jewish-Persian, New Year prayers folded in shape of a
fan, a book of morning and Sabbath prayers damaged by flood waters.
30
