Japan's sausage stove'
for mountain climbers
by Mafsukata Saburo
The daily press recently reported the tragic
story of two young alpinists trapped on Mt.
Blanc in the French Alps, who froze to death
despite all efforts to rescue them. The article
below, reproduced from Japan Quarterly (Vol. Ill
No. 4, 1956) tells of a simple body-warming
apparatus used last May by a Japanese expedi¬
tion which for the first time scaled Mt. Manaslu
(26,658 ft.) in the Nepalese Himalayas. The
apparatus dates back some 300 years and was
described by one of Japan's greatest authors, lhara Saikaku (1642-1693) a
number of whose works are now being translated into English and French for
the first time as part of the UNESCO Collection of Representative Works.
Together with their modern scien¬
tific equipment the Japanese
expedition which made the as¬
cent of Mt. Manaslu carried along a
very old and simple apparatus that
performed an important function and
performed it well. The device in ques¬
tion is a little heater called a kairo,
or literally "'chest-warmer". It is so
small and simple that one hesitates-to
speak of it as an "apparatus", though
it protected the climbers from tempera¬
tures as low as thirty degrees below
zero while they were camped at an
altitude of 23,600 feet.
The kairo consists of nothing more
than powdered charcoal wrapped in
paper and placed in a simple metal
container. The charcoal itself is made
by baking waste hemp reeds in the
earth. It is packed, rather like a
sausage, into a paper tube about three
quarters of an inch in diameter and
four inches long, which is then tied
at the ends. All one has to do to use
the "sausage" is to light one end of
it and place it in the metal container.
A child can do this with no trouble.
When the fire is lit, the container,
which is about the size of a small
sardine tin, can be wrapped in cloth
and put inside one's clothing next to
any part of the body one wishes to
keep warm. The charcoal burns
several hours, but the temperature is
not high enough even to scorch the
cloth around the container, and one
can sleep with the device in one's
clothing with perfect safety.
The kairo heaters carried by the
Manaslu expeditioners were of a very
ordinary type often used by modern
city dwellers. A newer type of kairo,
containing platinum wires which are
oxidized with benzine fumes, threat¬
ens to drive the old-fashioned type
out of common use, but it would have
been useless to the Manaslu climbers
since it does not work when the sur¬
rounding temperature and air pressure
are exceedingly low, as in the lofty
Himalayas.
So far science does not seem to
have offered an explanation for the
effectiveness of the charcoal kairo at
great heights, where oxygen is thin.
Presumably the secret is that, since
the charcoal is powdered, the surface
area (that is, the area absorbing
oxygen) is relatively large. At the
same time the fact that the fuel is
composed of many small particles pre¬
vents the heat from permeating ra¬
pidly. When the tube of charcoal is
lit at one end, the fire first moves
down the centre and then spreads out¬
ward.
Aside from small kairo carried in
stomach wrappers, the Manaslu climb¬
ers also used larger ones in their
sleeping bags to keep their feet warm.
In this case too the simple heater
proved effective.
As is true of so many of the fur¬
nishings and implements that we use
all the time, the history of the kairo
has not been adequately studied.
Mr. T. Yamamoto, himself a manu¬
facturer of charcoal for kairo, once
contributed an essay on the subject in
a magazine devoted primarily to Japa¬
nese poetry. Mr. Yamamoto points
out that the kairo was mentioned by
the great Edo-period novelist lhara
Saikaku in his Oritome, a series of
stories published in 1694. Saikaku 's
kairo apparently differed little in form
from the type we have been discussing.
In those times, however, the container
was made of copper rather than tin,
and the charcoal from knotgrass or
the stems of eggplants.
No mention of the kairo has been
found in sources earlier than 1690,
nor is there any information as to the
stages through which it has evolved
since. One reason for the modern use
of hemp reed charcoal is simply that
hemp reed is plentiful and cheap, but
it is uncertain when this material was
adopted. Aside from posing a rather
quaint problem to scientists, this little
tube of charcoal packed in paper
presents questions of interest to histor¬
ians and particularly those who are
concerned with life among the com¬
mon people.
DR. Alfred North Whitehead,
the distinguished British-
American philosopher and
educationist, once remarked
that "Every major advance
in civilization all but wrecks the
society in which it takes place." I
suggest this to be no academic
truism, but a truth we see in
operation before our very eyes.
Many countries in the world today
have an age-old culture of their own
which is suffering severe strains and
maladjustments because of their
need to fit an alien element into
their own cultural patterns. That
alien element is, in brie'i, the tech¬
nological culture of the Atlantic
countries. Every society into which
it has been introduced has suffered
radical change. The society of
Western Europe, in the century
following the Industrial Revolution,
changed almost out of recognition, as
the forms and patterns of thought
and behaviour were swept away or
were deeply modified.
Yet, in Western Europe the new
element grew slowly and the process
of adjustment was gradual so that
in time those societies came to realize
that Mankind was in the presence of
a tremendous problem and began to
grope towards some solutions to it.
What are these solutions whereby
men and women in the Western
countries sought to make Technology
their servant instead of their master?
One of them is Education the need
for a high level of public knowledge.
Another is a wide diffusion of tech¬
nical skill and expertise, so that every
schoolchild knows something of the
workings of the machine-made tra¬
ditions in which he is being brought
up. Another is the gradual develop¬
ment o'f social institutions, the Trade
Union, the professional association,
and so on all operating within a
framework which still embodies a
traditional culture.
But what of the societies where
this Technology which originat¬
ed in the West has been intro¬
duced as an alien element? Such a
society may have none of the antidotes
I have just described and so the
results of an industrial revolution may
be terrible. Slums grow up, workers
are ruthlessly exploited, the checks
and safeguards of the old culture no
longer operate and soon the peasant
who at least had a place in the old
culture and could share in its cha¬
racteristic ways of thought and
feeling, finds himself a dispossessed
proletarian, dismayed and bewildered
in the grip of a ruthless system over
which he has no control.
Knowing there has come to his
country a power which can perform
miracles of production, which can
create wealth where once there was
but swamp and jungle, he may yet
be unready to absorb its spiritual
implications. The West has had
decades to adjust itself to the new
way of life. Today the processes of
technological infiltration are being
A former British member of Parliament, David
Hardman was a United Kingdom delegale to
Unesco's Preparatory Conference in London in
1945, and has served on the British delegation at
many of Unesco's subsequent Conferences.
16
