GEORGE SAND
and her entourage
AN entry in George Sand's private diary dated
25 November 1834 reads thus: "Delacroix showed
me a collection of drawings by Goya, at the same
time mentioning Alfred's name and saying that he
would have made a fine painter if he had wished which I
can well believe ! He intends to copy the sketches in
Alfred's album..."
This praise throws fresh light on the great romantic
poet, Alfred de Musset, the centenary of whose death is
being celebrated this year. Musset did not paint, but
his drawings and pen-and-ink sketches, often pungent and
witty, enable us to appreciate his real talent.
As a young man he hesitated between taking up law,
medicine, music or art before choosing poetry. In those
days he spent many mornings in the Louvre copying Old
Masters. But pretty soon he destroyed all these efforts.
With the exception of a few fashionable portraits and
sketches inspired by Goya, to which George Sand refers
in her diary, this mournful poet tried mainly to draw cari¬
catures and humorous cartoons.
GEORGIA S. is a poor disguise for George Sand who appears
partly hidden by her fan. This drawing by Alfred de Musset is
included in a sketch book which Musset kept during a trip to
Italy with her. The sketch above, right, is a caricature of George
Sand done by Mérimée in 1854. She was then a middle-aged
lady with "beautiful black eyes." Twenty years separate the two
drawings. George Sand was herself an artist and tried to make a
living from her painting when she separated from her husband.
Whether as artist or writer, the best period of
Musset's life was spent during his friendship
with George Sand, who also painted. Of her
own pencil and water colour portraits she said. "My
little heads were not too bad, but they lacked originality."
When she separated from her husband she tried to live
by painting flowers and birds on snuff-boxes and on
other little Spa-wood boxes. Later, with her son Maurice,
who was a painter, designer and sculptor, she helped
decorate the theatre, and a marionette theatre in her
native town of Nohant. Towards the end of her life
she painted water-colours in order to build up a dowry
for her granddaughters.
George Sand was the centre of attraction of a large
circle of artists and writers. One of these was Prosper
Mérimée, the great short-story writer. He, too, was
fond of drawing. During the trips he had to make as
inspector of historic monuments, he filled notebooks with
sketches of the country through which he passed. Draw¬
ing caricatures came easily to him and he "scattered
sketches around him like cigar butts", according to
Sainte-Beuve who also said of him: "But it is pleasant
enough for each of us to recognize himself uglier than he
really is." To a woman he loved for more than twenty
years, Mérimée dedicated a series of water colours and
drawings which have not yet been published.
48
