^CRED WRITINGS
F A WARRIOR RACE
© Magnum by Marc Riboud
IN THE GOLDEN TEMPLE of Amritsar, a holy place of the Sikhs in the Punjab, a follower of the faith says his
prayers. In foreground are two temple musicians. Sikh sacred writings, the Granth, are set to musical measure
14

by
Khushwant Singh
People have the habit of labelling everything these
days. When such labels are attached to races or
peoples, instead of being a convenient means of
identification, they often give a very one-sided and
inaccurate description.
One of the victims of this label habit are the Sikhs,
whq are known only as a martial race. People get a mild
surprise when they hear of an eminent Sikh scientist,
surgeon or engineer, or that the Sikhs have produced a
body of religious literature which is amongst the best in
India.
The world knows something of the Sanskrit classics
because it was ready to believe that the Hindus were cap¬
able of doing something in the realm of literature and
philosophy. But Sikh prowess on the field of battle pre¬
judiced all chances of their being taken seriously in the
field of learning.
This state of neglect continued until 1954 when Unesco
undertook to translate selections from the Sikh sacred
writings, the Granth, for the benefit of the English-
speaking world. The decision came as the culmination of
a long period of agitation and pressure on the Govern¬
ment of India by groups representing six million Sikhs.
Reading marathon : 5,000 verses in 48 hours
The compilation of the Granth was largely the work
of Arjun (1563-1606), the fifth of the ten Sikh Gurus
or Teacher-Prophets. He collected the writings of
the four preceding Gurus and the writings of Hindu and
Muslim Divines from all over India. A few additions were
made to the Granth by Arjun's successors and finally, the
tenth Guru, Govind (1666-1708) pronounced that after him
there would be no more Gurus, and that the Granth was
to be regarded as the living symbol of all ten Prophets.
Today the Granth is the object of worship in all Sikh
homes and temples. It is usually draped in richly em¬
broidered cloth and worshippers have to approach it
barefooted and with their heads covered. They make
obeisance by rubbing their foreheads on the ground
before it and place offerings of money, flowers or food on
the cloth draping it.
The Granth forms an integral part of Sikh life. Pas¬
sages from it are read every day and, on special occasions,
it is read non-stop from cover to cover by a relay of
worshippers. (It takes two days and nights to recite its
5,000 verses.) It is used in naming children, for baptisms,
for weddings and funerals. It is an essential part of the
Sikh creed which involves an affirmation of belief in the
ten Gurus and the Granth.
Oil lamps & incense for sky, stars & winds
Apart from the sanctity accorded to it by more than
six million people, there are other things which make
the Granth a very remarkable piece of work. It is
perhaps the only scripture in the world which could
be described as truly secular in the sense that it does not
propagate the tenets of any one creed. It contains the
writings of all religious groups in India at the time and of
all castes including the so-called "untouchable." It is in
the nature of an anthology of religious poetry representing
the blending of Hinduism and Islam. This makes it a
unique historical document as well. It has preserved the
writings of mediaeval saints, some of which describe events
of the time, such as conquests, social conditions and reli¬
gious controversies.
The Granth has also saved the traditional forms of
Indian music from corruption. Its 5,000 verses are set
The Unesco Courier. June 1957
to measure according to 31 ragas or modes of Indian
music, for all the hymns of the Granth are meant to be
sung and professional singers render them today as they
were rendered 300 years ago. Above all, it is the poetry
if the Granth which has aided its popularity amongst the
Sikhs and millions of others in Northern India.
Poetry loses much of its charm in translation parti¬
cularly the oriental where alliteration and onomatopoeia
are liberally employed to create a music by the jingling
of words. Besides, oriental symbolism is so different that
those not familiar with it rarely get the spontaneous
thrill which goes with its appreciation. A few samples,
however, may give a glimmer of the original.
Nanak (1469-1539) was not only the founder of the Sikh
religion, he was also a prolific versifier. Amongst popu¬
lar pieces of his is one composed in a Hindu temple
when a salver full of small oil lamps and incense (re¬
presenting the sky, stars and winds) was being waved in
front of an idol before it was laid to rest. He wrote:
"The firmament is Thy salver
The sun and moon Thy lamps,
The galaxy of stars
Are as pearls scattered.
The woods of sandal are Thine incense,
The forest Thy flowers,
But what worship is this
O Destroyer of Fear?"
Nanak's most celebrated composition is Japji now the
morning prayer of the Sikhs. In this he has also pro¬
pounded his philosophy and, in the last few verses, let
himself go in a frenzy of religious ecstasy:
"Were I given a hundred thousand tongues Instead of one,
And the hundred thousand multiplied twenty-fold,
A hundred thousand times would I say, and say again.
The Lord of all the world is one,
That is the path that leads,
These the steps that mount,
Ascend thus to the Lord's mansion
And with Him be joined in unison.
The sound of the songs of heaven thrills
The like of us who crawl, but desire to fly,
O Nanak, His grace alone it is that fulfils.
The rest mere prattle, and a lie.
Ye have no power to speak or in silence listen.
To grant or give away,
Ye have no power to live or die.
Ye have no power to acquire wealth and dominion,
To compel the mind to thought or reason,
To escape the world and fly.
He who hath the pride of power, let him try and see.
O Nanak, before the Lord there is no low or high degree."
Nanak was a staunch believer in the "middle path" and
severely criticized penance and seclusion practised by
ascetics:
"Religion lieth not in the patched coat the yogi wears,
Not in the staff he bears,
Nor in the ashes on his body.
Religion lieth not in rings in the ears,
Not in a shaven head,
Nor in the blowing of the conch shell.
If thou must the path of true religion see
Amongst the world's impurities, be of impurities free."
Guru Govind, who turned the Sikhs from a pacifist to a
militarist sect, composed verses in three languages, Pun¬
jabi, Sanskrit and Persian. His writings
form a separate collection by themselves.
His militant conception of God is revealed next
in these stirring lines in Sanskrit:
15

SACRED WRITINGS (Continued)
"Eternal God, Thou art our shield,
The dagger, knife, the sword we wield.
To us protector there is given
The timeless, deathless, Lord of Heaven,
To us all-steel's unvanquished might.
To us all-time's resistless flight,
But chiefly Thou, protector brave,
All-steel, wilt Thine own servant save."
The translation of the Granth is a truly monumental
task. The language In which it is written is mostly old
Punjabi which is not, readily understood. It is (not ar¬
ranged in chronological or alphabetical order, nor strictly
logical as a book propounding a thesis. The division, as
already explained, is according to the ragas of Indian
music. Moreover, in the old, authentic copies, all the
words in a line are strung together as 'beads in a rosary,
and, it is frequently difficult to tell whether there is one
word or two. There are consequently several interpreta¬
tions of each text. Several attempts have already been
made to translate the Granth, but' no one has hitherto
succeeded in combining accuracy with poetic excellence.
This is the task the Sikhs expect Unesco to accomplish
and the translation committee set up by the Indian Aca¬
demy of Letters, at the Organization's behest, includes
scholars of the highest repute who have agreed to work
without remuneration or recognition. The outstanding
figure in the translation committee is the 84-year-old poet
and Divine, Bhal Vir Singh, who lives a life of scholarly
seclusion in the foothills of the Himalayas. Working with
him are two well-known theologians, Jodh Singh and
Harkishan Singh, and a younger man, Dr. Trilochan Singh,
who has made a name for himself by his translations.
When the initial translation is completed it will be
submitted for English stylistic revision to the well-known
Scottish poet G.S. Fraser and to the author of the present
article. Its publication will make it possible for English-
speaking readers to know something of one of the master¬
pieces of the world's religious literature.
© Magnum by Marc Riboud
SIKH CONGREGATION (women on the right and men on
the left) listens to reading of the Granth, the collection of sacred
Sikh writings, by a priest- (in background surrounded by other
priests and musicians) in the Golden Temple of Amritsar.
This temple is situated in the middle of the artificial lake con¬
structed in 1581 by Ram Das, the fourth spiritual leader of the
Sikhs who gave it the name of Amrita Saras ("fount of immor¬
tality"). Each year enormous numbers of pilgrims go there.
16
