Istituto di Patologia del Libro photos

Story of Rome's Book Hospital
The Unesco Courier. February 1957
Scrolls from the ashes of Pompeii,
ancient Egyptian papyri, Indian
tablets, books and manuscripts
from every country and every century
all rest side by side in a remarkable
Institution in the heart of Rome, al¬
most unknown to the general public.
The scrolls and books all have one
thing in common. They have been
victims of a variety of afflictions.
They have survived fire, floods,
bullets, bombs, chemical attack, des¬
tructive insects or just plain old age.
Their rescuers: a group of scientists
in Rome's unique "Book Hospital"
(officially the Institute of Book Pa¬
thology) headed by Professor Gio¬
vanni Muzzloli.
On display at the "hospital's" mu¬
seum are parchments burned to a
crisp, volumes buried for years in the
sea, books attacked by mould or eaten
away by tiny insects. One heap of
documents, reduced to a mass of
pulp, was recovered from a sunken
submarine; others were plucked from
blazing buildings. Restoring these
objects seemed almost Impossible but
the Book Hospital took on the job and
in each case succeeded.
Books are the prey not only of
external factors such as insects,
mould or fire. Some ancient books
were doomed from the day they were
printed. Thus in Sicily long' ago,
book publishers and paper makers
were proud of the beautiful volumes
they produced on what they thought
SAVED FROM
FIRE & WATER
INSECT VANDALS which have feasted
on the pages of valuable books get
short shrift In "gas chamber" of Rome's
Institute of Book Pathology. Protected
by respirator, a specialist (above) carries
out book disinfection. This book hos¬
pital has a microbiological laboratory
entirely devoted to the study of bacteria
and mould damage. Below, taking a
sample of micro-organisms from a dam¬
aged book. Studies of these organisms
will establish the exact reasons for the
damage, will help scientists to devise
methods of protection and restoration.
was top-quality paper. What they
didn't know was that the paper was
manufactured with water which came
from a stream extremely rich in
copper. The copper penetrated the
paper, and with time all the pages
turned black and brittle. The Book
Hospital has devised a chemical treat¬
ment which whitens the paper and
revives paper texture.
Many old books were once printed
with inks containing acids which
slowly destroyed the pages. The
process can now be arrested by the
use of chemical baths which have the
effect of neutralizing the acid.
In one room of the Book Hospital
museum stands an apparatus invent¬
ed by Antonio Piaggio in 1773 which
can accomplish the apparently im¬
possible task of restoring a book
which has been completely burned.
The pages, reduced to
curled ashes, are flattened
piece by piece and rein¬
forced with silk threads. next Pa8e
17
Cont'd
on

SAVED FROM
FIRE & WATER
(Continued)
This work, requiring inexhaustible
patience, has given astonishing re¬
sults. In Italy, where the loss of
priceless documents by fire has not
been an infrequent occurrence, the
woik is considered of the utmost
importance. In 1904, fire destroyed
the Library of Turin; in 1908 it gutted
the University Library of Messina; and
during the two world wars losses were
particularly heavy. Thousands of
volumes were burned or cut to pieces
by shrapnel during the last war
alone, among them treasures from'
the National Library of Naples and
the archives of Monte Cassino mo¬
nastery which were reduced to rubble.
Many of these incalculable treasures,
transformed into shapeless tatters,
have now been rescued and restored
by the Book Hospital.
Most of the delicate work is carried
out in the Institute's special labora¬
tories. Here craftsmen unsew the
pages from their ancient bindings,
place them in separate frames and
slide them carefully into chemical
solutions for bleaching and whitening.
Other chemical baths give the paper
new life and flexibility. Torn pages
are carefully pasted together and
covered with a clear varnish. Every
chemical or other type of material
used is specially prepared according
to the nature and state of the object
treated. When required, damaged
pages are consolidated with a piece
of gossamer-thin silk fabric. After
each part of the book has received ap¬
propriate treatment all the elements
are re-assembled, re-sewn and re¬
bound, the bindings too having been
carefully repaired.
Often, a particularly fragile speci¬
men is photographed. The original
document is then carefully stored to
protect it from further deterioration
and full-sized replicas or microfilm
reproductions made available for con¬
sultation. The Institute possesses a
highly specialized photo laboratory
equipped to bring out faded or va¬
nished writing, reveal ancient texts
overlaid by others on parchments, or
verify the authenticity of seals and
stamps on bocks and documents.
A microbiological laboratory is en¬
tirely reserved for the study of the
depradatioiis caused by bacteria and
mould, another to that of insect dam¬
age. Chemical and physical labo¬
ratories study paper resistance, and
tensile strength, paper bleaching and
washing, and are continually analyz¬
ing and experimenting with various
printing inks.
The Institute of Book Pathology
possesses a library containing an im¬
portant collection of specialized books
on the graphic arts, paper (some
manuscripts date back to the 13th
century), and on the art of preserving
and "healing" documents. It pub¬
lishes a regular information bulletin
describing experiments in process and
research carried out both at the
Institute and other centres.
18
stituto di Patología del Libro photos
BOOK SURGEONS in Rome Institute accomplish some seemingly impossible feats of restoration.
They can transform a torn and warped piece of leather into a handsome binding (above), exactly as it
appeared when new. Under delicate treatment, the charred and tattered pages of a burned book.
once again become legible (below, right). Even a document completely blacked out by long immer¬
sion in sea water can be restored to some semblance of its former self (below, left). Many valuable
volumes reduced to tatters during the last war have been restored by the Rome Book Hospital.
1"V>
" -C, <}-~/V -*-^**rf .'it^, id, fir*- [
frr-r- > h- f fy
CI -M^^TaW J- 4~aJI
¿V»^^Sff A& f~AAÍ,
«V, %~*r- >
A-- ll^-l	A-'
Ihf-i	A ' *^&A*n4f r\ (* A~~ri	 W .
^ =j$T V^. -»- * -Jj3 ', Ja-ïj
f~r4- aG>^ J* Ife- *- *L-r fa
Ô j."ÎW^-r-_*(-+ **-»- f - Í-? f-A-,r
' ?*-» f-tí a*1
P-*- Jf für C*y+<A0y+, «*-#»
IK«
2
19

