Photos by Lotte Meitner-Graf, "
Maurice Dandelot Collection
The Asian Music Circle was or¬
ganized some three years ago
by a few Indian people, notab¬
ly Mr. Angadi, in London, who
knew of my trip to India and my
great interest in Indian music and,
of course, my interest in the music
of the other countries of the East.
They felt this great need of the
people in London and the people in
the West in general, to become ac¬
quainted with the music and the
dance of the East and asked me if
I would be President in New York
of this organization and lend not only
my name but also such good advice
and help as I could to further this
project. And the Asian Music Cir¬
cle has been, I must say, eminently
successful and proved to be an insti¬
tution which responded to. a general
need.
I had not anticipated a response as
great as it actually evoked, which
proves that the people of England and
the people of the West in general, as
I had experienced in New York pre¬
viously, are ready and eager for any
opportunity to become acquainted
with what is happening on the other
side of the globe. I feel that the
Asian Music Circle is a natural res¬
ponse to human curiosity curiosity
about people living beyond our reach,

THE MUSIC OF THE ORIENT
IN REACH OF WESTERN EARS
by Yehudi Menuhin
One of Unesco's major undertakings is to encourage a better mutual
understanding between Asian countries and those of the Occident through
cultural exchanges. This is a question which concerns the International
Music Council and also one of the world's great violinists, Yehudi Menu¬
hin, who is President of the Asian Music Circle. While in Paris recently
for a concert engagement, Yehudi Menuhin discussed these questions
with representatives of Unesco and the International Music Council
in an interview which has been broadcast in many parts of the world
through Unesco's radio services. We reproduce below some of the
points which were made by Yehudi Menuhin during this interview.
about the civilizations they have
achieved, the ways of life, of music,
of literature, of dance, they have de¬
veloped on their own.
Unesco has said there are no peo¬
ples "beyond our reach". That is
theoretically true, but nonetheless,
for the inhabitant of Paris or Lon¬
don or New York, Indian musicians
(I mention India simply because I
have had personal relations with In¬
dia and its musicians whom I have
helped to bring to New York) are
normally beyond the reach of the or¬
dinary person who is interested in
music in New York or in any of the
other large cities of the Western
world. I have seen such wonderful
response based largely on curiosity
and the desire just to know what
extraordinary shapes and forms
sound has evolved in the course of
thousands of years in the absence of
our own scales and our own instru¬
ments and our own thoughts.
I am sure radio and film are im¬
portant, and recordings as well, but
primarily the initial impact should be,
in my opinion, with the living person.
In the experience of the Asian Music
Circle those artists who have been
brought over from the various East¬
ern countries have found understand¬
ing and response in England and,
from my own personal experience, in
New York as well.
I feel that music, too, offers almost
the best means and road to the un¬
derstanding of other people, precisely
because one is not side-tracked by
misleading words or symbols which
have already acquired so many mean¬
ings. I have seen, for instance, the
American audiences go mad with the
rhythm of the Indian drummers
and that has done more to establish
contact with India among those peo¬
ple who experience the performance
than all the words that might be said
or the books distributed which peo¬
ple might, or might not read.
There is something compelling
about the music once the people
are there they have to listen and if
the personality of the performer is
sufficiently strong and his dedication
as is the case with the great Indian
musicians is persuasive and
compelling, the audience never fails
to respond. The Asian Music Circle
has achieved quite a considerable .
gain with each year over the preced¬
ing year in numbers of performances,
numbers in attendance. The ambition
now is to have permanent headquar¬
ters in London, because it is a func¬
tion which is bound to continue and
to increase regardless of who will
take it over. It is a function which
in the world we live in today is
part of the very essence of the
twentieth century that we get to
know each other.
16
