Persepolis : fabulous capital of an empire
Splendour and magnificence of Persepolis, capital of the ancient Persian
Empire, astounded Alexander the Great and the victorious Greeks
who captured and burned it about 331 B.C. The regal city with its
portals, royal quarters and audience halls, was built some 40 miles
north east of present-day Shiraz by Darius, third ruler of the Achaemenid
dynasty, who came to the throne in 521 B.C., and by his son, Xerxes I.
It was constructed on a great, rectangular terrace, jutting out from
Copyright CG. Troeller-C. Deffarge
cliffs, on which remain the ruins of colossal buildings of dark grey marble
from the nearby mountain, and hundreds of bas-reliefs executed for the
Achaemenid kings and later dynasties. Above, bas-relief on cliff face
north of Persepolis, showing a Sasanian ruler. King Shapur I (241-271
A.D.), receiving homage of the Roman emperor Valerian, whom he
captured in battle. Below, two bas-reliefs from Persepolis Itself:
King Darius enthroned, holding royal audience, and slaying a lion.
43

44

The Unesco Courier. January 1957
Processions in stone
The Great Apadana, or audience hall, built by Xerxes I in Persepolis,
is approached by a double stair whose sides are lined with two groups
of figures cut in low relief on the stone masonry. One of them (below)
shows a long procession of subject peoples of the empire bringing
tribute offerings for the annual spring festival held at Persepolis. The
other (left) depicts the Persian, Median and Susian members of the
royal guard. The vast interior hall of the Apadana, about 200 feet
on each side, contained six rows of six columns, 65 feet in height. The
most striking of the audience halls at Persepolis was the famous "Hall
of a hundred columns", several of which still remain standing. Workmen
and materials were brought to the site of the new Persian capital from
all over the empire, and the style of the architectural details and the
carved reliefs is a composite of the art of Egypt, Babylonia and Asia Minor.
Copyright CG. Troeller - C. DefTarge
-:S
The ghost city of Bam
Until the latter part of the 18th century, the city of Bam,
guarded by its citadel and secure within its 100 feet high
walls, was a thriving centre of trade set in an oasis in the
salt desert of southeast Iran. Then, Agha Muhammad Khan,
leader of the Qajar tribes attacked the forces of the Shah
of Iran. He besieged the city of Bam, and ordered the eyes
of 10,000 people to be put out. The city was taken and
destroyed and the remaining inhabitants made their homes in
the nearby oasis. Today, the streets of this ghost city are
empty except for jackals and porcupines and occasional
groups of nomads who camp in the ruins of former mosques.
Copyright C.G. Troeller - C. Deffarge
45
