THE O L
by Carlo Levi
I have always admired, and perhaps loved, nocturnal birds
of every kind; the numerous and solitary family of
tawny owls, screech owls, hoopoes, wonderful animals
which, more than any other, resemble gods, very ancient
gods which, as is but natural, can only be hairy or feathered.
This attachment of mine or attraction, passion, sympa¬
thy or love is certainly not strange, since from the earliest
times the round eye of the owl and its cry have struck the
imagination of men with strange mystical force. As classi¬
cal and romantic emblems they have accompanied men
across the centuries, from the wise old owls of Athens to
the funereal nightbirds of the poems of Ossian. I cannot
state with certainty whether they appeared to me in either
classical or romantic form; they have always seemed to me
like heraldic angels of the Last Judgment, eye-witnesses of
time eternal, beings who have "always existed since the birth
of time . . . Thus I have always associated the image of the
26
owl with that of time, with that of the origin of time in its
unlimited antiquity; with that of the end of time and its
character of the Last Judgment. That is why my book The
Clock was born under the nocturnal image of the owl,
eternal like the city of Rome, eternal like poverty, like the
courage to live, like saints, brigands and gods.
Of all the owls I have ever seen or imagined, the most
beautiful is the owl Graziadio: the most heraldic, the most
ancient, the most timeless, the most divine. I saw him for
the first time in a travelling collection of rare animals
touring the cities of Italy. In the cages near the birds there
were vampires, little crocodiles, iguanas, and above all, ser¬
pents. And I could not help thinking that if in ancient
mythology the serpent is at the beginning of time, then
the owl Graziadio was its "angel-equivalent" if what the
great Italian poet Umberto Saba has said is true that birds
are "... the sublimation of the reptile in nature."

The Unesco Courier. August 1957
I saw Graziadio from time to time in one city or another.
His cage was usually lit up and this gave his countenance
an angry appearance. It was as ri his head were engulfed
in pain or anguish by the light that fell upon it, so that
when he moved or shifted his position he often appeared
fierce and ferocious, and his claws would tighten their grip
on a morsel of food or a stone with a primeval fury. Never¬
theless, his noble air never left him and he always main¬
tained that hoary, royal, detached, even moving and perhaps
grotesque, look about him (as had the gods and semi-gods O'f
Greece and the simulacra of phallic divinity). Nor did his
old face ever lose the marks of an all-embracing, incompre¬
hensible wisdom. Though he appeared severe and
inaccessible even when he seemed to be playing, shutting
one eye and describing a circle with his head, he never had
the obtuse and hysterical harshness of the eagle. For even
Photos David Seymour @ Magnum
while he played there remained about him an air of mytho¬
logical solitude.
I have seen owls flying through the woods, I have seen
them traverse the sky amongst the trees in the first glimmer
of daylight, like flying cats or witches surprised by the
coming of dawn. Everyone has seen the little owl perched
on the shoulder o'f Picasso and has seen owls, living or
stuffed, in the studios of painters and writers and some¬
times, perhaps, even on the hats women wear. So, this
terrible angel can indeed become an everyday subject, an
instrument, an extravagance.
But my owl, Graziadio, comes from the centre of Africa
and the savage deserts, and he is as great as the greatest of
birds or angels. With his huge black eye, like a Negro king
or a sorcerer or a cherub, he has seen all those things
which have come to pass, and who knows, perhaps too, things
which have never occurred.
27
