UNESCO-Eric Schwab
GYMNASTICS IN A MODERN PRIMARY SCHOOL, TREMBLEY PARK, GENEVA, SWITZERLAND.

UNESCO DEDICATES MAJOR
PROJECT TO CHILDREN
For every ten children in the 'world, five have no
schools and four complete only a few years of elemen¬
tary schooling, according to Unesco's 1955 "World Sur¬
vey of Education". The world's most formidable task
in education and the goal of both national and inter¬
national efforts is therefore free schooling for all chil¬
dren so as to give real significance to the right to
education proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. In education Unesco has three main
goals : the improvement of education through the
exchange of information, the extension of education
and the promotion of education for international
understanding. These three aims are reflected in the
Unesco activities, on behalf of children which are
reviewed briefly on the following pages. One of the
most significant and ambitious of Unesco's efforts to
aid the development of education is its ten-year
Major Project to extend primary education in Latin
America. An account of the work planned for the
first two years of this project is given on next page.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
17

UNESCO & CHILDREN (Continued;
Every country in Latin America
has compulsory education laws.
Between principle and practice,
however, there is often a wide gap. In
this Continent, as in many other parts
of the world, numerous obstacles have
so far prevented the full application of
the laws on education.
In two Latin American countries the
proportion of school-age children who
receive primary education is 80%, in
some others the percentage varies
between 60 and 80, and in 12 countries
it is less than 40 % (in six of them, less
than 30%). It has been estimated that
out of a total of 40 million Latin
American children aged between five
and 14 years, between 14 and 17 million
do not go to school. Even if there
were enough schools, 400,000 more
teachers would be needed.
The shortage of teachers is therefore
just as serious a problem as that of
school buildings. With three exceptions,
all Latin American countries are forced
to make use of teachers who have had
no professional training (about 36% of
primary school staffs). The provision
of teacher training schools is thus high
on the list of urgent needs.
Latin America's population (170
million today) is increasing rapidly
(between 1% and 2.7% according to
country) so that the number of children
of school age will have been swollen by
several million in ten year's time. To
meet this problem the countries of this
Continent are planning a long-term,
large-scale development of education.
About 18 months ago a regional
conference on free and compulsory
education in Latin America meeting in
Lima, Peru, under the auspices of
Unesco and the Organization of Ameri¬
can States, noted "the intense desire of
the people in both urban and rural areas
to improve their living conditions, and
to provide better education for their
children." The Conference hailed the
idea of a 10-year "Major Project" on
the extension of primary schooling in
Latin America one of three Major Pro¬
jects (a new feature in Unesco's pro¬
gramme, designed to concentrate its
efforts on important problems) which
Unesco was preparing to submit to its
General Conference meeting in New
Delhi in November 1956.
Two year programme
for teaching teachers
The Unesco General Conference
approved the Major Projects and
in March 1957, Unesco's Ex¬
ecutive Board fixed the budget of the
Latir American project at $600,000 for
the first two years. Under the approv¬
ed plan Unesco will concentrate during
the next two years on the improvement
of educational statistics, the training of
teachers and of teachers of normal
(teacher training) schools, the organi¬
zation of a system of "associated
universities" and the setting up of a
fellowship programme. Large-scale aid
is planned for four rural normal schools
and two universities.
During the next two years it is
proposed to award 80 fellowships for
educationists to carry out further studies
in the United States and in Europe; to
provide further training for inspectors of
primary schools and teachers of normal
schools and to enable school administra¬
tors to work at the inter-American rural
education centre at Rubio and to study
the operation of rural school systems.
Outside their own national program¬
mes, several countries have come
forward with offers of aid. Colombia
has suggested a regional educational
planning seminar be held at Bogota.
Bolivia has offered its teachers' training
school at Warisata as an "associated
normal school." As an "associated
university," Brazil has offered that of
Sao Paulo with its institute of educa¬
tional research. Similarly, Colombia
has put the Pedagogical University of
Tunja at Unesco's disposal; Chile, the
University of Santiago and its educa¬
tional research institutes ; and Mexico,
the Higher Normal School, the National
Institute of Education and its national
educational museum, and the Latin
American Institute of Educational Films.
Colombia has offered 16 fellowships
towards the Major Project; Chile, 20;
France, 18; Mexico, four (conditional on
the acceptance of its offer for associated
universities); and the Office of Ibero-
American Education, 15. Other fellow¬
ships will be forthcoming from Spain and
probably the United States. The
Unesco. National Commission for
Czechoslovakia has invited several Latin
American educationists to study its
country's teacher-training methods. Fi¬
nally, the Organization of American
States will co-operate with Unesco in
carrying out a vital project whose
problems, whether social, educational,
demographic or economic, are deeply
human ones.
THE LUCKY ONES. Smiling schoolgirls near Puebla, Mexico, are more fortunate than many children In Latin America. In some countries
less than 30% have schools to go to. Unesco's Latin American Project aims to aid national plans for making primary education available to all.
UNATIONS
13

\ 13k s ^*Sk
>*? ^fetev" B^,
UNESCO
WITH EYES BANDAGED a young
student learns touch typing at the
Clerical and Technical Training Centre
started In Libya by Unesco in 1950,
to aid the newly independent country
in producing the trained clerical and
technical staff it needed to man the
machinery of government. Its first
traineessons of taxi drivers, day
labourers, small shopkeepers and
farmers all found government jobs
waiting for them on graduating.
Unesco educational missions have
surveyed resources in many Member
States and have suggested how these
might best be used to lay the founda¬
tions of modern school systems.
Afghanistan, Burma, Korea, Libya,
the Philippines and Thailand are but
a few of the countries that have been
helped in this way. In answer to
requests from 22 countries and
territories Unesco has sent teams of
experts in the development of ele¬
mentary education to each of them.
It has convened regional conferences
for teachers and school administrators
to exchange experiences and discuss
common problems. It has published
studies on compulsory education in
many countries, on the extension of
schooling, the employment of child
labour, on teacher training, on the
language of instruction and. the
teaching of reading and writing.
During 1955-56 Unesco undertook
one of its largest technical assistance
projects in any Member State when it
provided fellowships for 83 primary
and secondary school teachers and
education officials from all over Yugo¬
slavia to study educational arrange¬
ments in 11 European countries and
the United States as a preliminary to
reforming Yugoslavia's entire edu¬
cational system. The fellowship hold¬
ers mostly senior teachers and
educational officials carried out
group or individual surveys whose
results are already proving to be use¬
ful in the planning stages of Yugo¬
slavia's educational reform.
Each year Unesco and the Interna¬
tional Bureau of Education sponsor
an international conference to discuss
major educational problems. Exam¬
ples : the financing of public educa¬
tion (1955) ; the problems of the
teacher shortage and the ways in
which teaching can be made more
attractive as a profession (1954). For
these meetings countries prepare re¬
ports on progress made over the past
year, thus providing a world-wide
picture of educational developments
and needs.
Unesco seminars and publications,
particularly those concerned with
the teaching of history and geogra¬
phy, have encouraged educators and
publishers in many countries to ana¬
lyse their textbooks and then ask
other countries to comment on ways
in which they feel they may have
been misrepresented in them.
Unesco's efforts to improve textbooks
and teaching materials for interna¬
tional understanding are based on its
belief that the only people who can
improve textbooks are those in the
country which uses them. On its
invitation 23 Western countries took
a look at their textbooks to see what
they say about Asiaand how they
say it. Eastern countries are to
study their textbooks to see what
kind of a picture these present of the
West.
The Unesco Courier. October 1957
Children are among the most pitiful
victims of war. About 30 million
homes were destroyed in the Second
World War and the number of chil¬
dren with no roof to shelter them
reached staggering figures: 1,300,000
in France, 8,000,000 in Germany,
6,500,000 in Russia, 2,000,000 in
Yugoslavia. By the end of the war
many communities to house orphans
had sprung up in all war-torn coun¬
tries. Unesco alerted public opinion
to the problems of these communities
and strengthened the ties between
them by setting up an International
Federation of Children's Communities.
Unesco carried out enquiries into
the problems of juvenile vagrancy
and published studies dealing with
its psychological causes. Fact-find¬
ing missions revealed the immensity
of this problem in Europe. In one
occupation zone of Germany alone
there were more than 40,000 young
vagrants, homeless and without iden¬
tity cards, living by black marketing,
theft and prostitution. In 1949
Unesco sponsored an international
conference of experts and directors
of children's communities to deal
especially with these problems.
War - devastated countries with
burned-out schools, battered univer¬
sities and ruined libraries were a
challenge which Unesco accepted. It
helped in the job of educational re¬
construction, of make-do and salva¬
ging. It launched appeals, m
collected and distributed I
donations. From Canada on
came books for the Far next page
East and from the United I
DESERT SCHOOLS. Since 1949,
Unesco and Unrwa (U.N. Relief and
Works Agency) have opened over
300 schools for about 100,000 of
the Arab refugee children from Pal¬
estine. Unesco has given aid in
teacher training, technical and handi¬
crafts training and fundamental edu¬
cation. This operation began as an
emergency measure... but for these
refugee children the emergency has
not yet ended. Here five-year-old
girl pupil, Karim Beshir, picks out
different letters of the Arabic alpha¬
bet for the teacher at one of the
Unrwa-Unesco schools in the Jordan.
UNRWA "
19

UNESCO & CHILDREN (Continued)
States tons of school equipment for
Europe. In one year alone over
$1,000,000 worth of books went to help
many countries.
Through Unesco children were able
to join in the job of post-war recons¬
truction, those in the more fortunate
countries helping the ones who had
suffered most. Aid came from hum¬
ble sources: the pockets of school¬
children who used their savings to
buy Unesco "Gift Coupons." Through
such anonymous generosity thousands
of dollars collected in 18 "donor"
countries enabled needy schools in 46
states or territories to buy books or
apparatus. Help of this kind has
since continued to flow across fron¬
tiers. Since 1951 more than 300 ins¬
titutions in 50 countries mainly in
Asia, Africa, and Latin America
have received equipment and other
aid to the value of $750,000 through
the Unesco Gift Coupon Programme.
Greece was another challenge to
Unesco. Nine years of continuous
warfare had orphaned 380,000 chil¬
dren and destroyed or badly damaged
7,625 out of 10,000 schools. Unesco
undertook educational reconstruction
and launched appeals. The refugee
children needed schools, teachers and
equipment. In 1947, scientific equip¬
ment and educational supplies worth
$300,000 were sent to Greece. Schools
were rebuilt and equipped with Unes¬
co's aid and with the funds it receiv¬
ed from many countries.
Restoration of educational facilities
has ranked high in the Korean re¬
construction programme in which
Unesco has taken part under the di¬
rection of Unkra (U.N. Korean Re¬
construction Agency). Unesco sought
"first aid" for 100 of the neediest
Korean primary schools through its
Gift Coupon Scheme. Together,
Unesco and Unkra set up a national
printing plant which now issues more
than 30 million textbooks a year.
Unesco has worked closely with the
World Health Organization and many
non-governmental organizations in
studying the relationship between
pre-school and early childhood edu¬
cation and the mental health of chil¬
dren. In 1955, Unesco and the Gov¬
ernment of Thailand opened an
International Institute for Child
Study in Bangkok. This is now the
centre of a network of research in
child development which is gradually
being extended to other Asian coun¬
tries and to the Arab states. The
important role of the police in the
protection of mental health of chil¬
dren was highlighted in 1954 at a
Unesco conference grouping police
officials from 17 countries.
Unesco has helped to set up "pilot"
libraries such as the Delhi Public
Library and Colombia's Model Library
at Medellin, stressing at all times the
need to provide better children's
library services. It has recently pub7
lished a book, "Public Library Servi¬
ces for Children", written from an
international viewpoint and particu¬
larly adapted for countries where
libraries are in an early stage of de¬
velopment.
Meeting in the Unesco Institute for
Education in Hamburg, Germany, last
March, educationists, research work¬
ers and psychologists from 12 coun¬
tries, studied reports from all over the
world on the working and effects of
national systems of examinations.
They discussed the causes of failure
in school and what might be done to
improve examination systems which,
reports showed, are being criticised
in more and more countries, even to
the extent of wishing to abolish them.
Unesco Travelling Science Exhibi¬
tions have helped to develop the
interest of young people in science
and technology. The first exhibition
(Recent Discoveries in Physics and
Astronomy) toured 13 Latin American
countries between 1950 and 1952.
Since then four more on subjects such
as "Energy and its Transformations"
and "Man Measures the Universe,"
have toured Europe, the Far East or
Latin America. About three million
people have visited the Unesco Tra¬
velling Exhibitions.
Unesco has supported the efforts of
many governments to improve science
teaching in schools. It has published
eight volumes dealing with science
instruction methods in different types
of schools, and it has published inven¬
tories of apparatus and materials to
help countries now in the midst of
educational development to solve
laboratory equipment problems. It
has issued sets of 156 drawings from
which schools in tropical countries
can build low-cost science teaching
laboratories and in "The Unesco
Source Book for Science Teaching",
it has combined the collective expe¬
rience of the experts it has sent into
regions where the need for the pro¬
duction and use of simple equipment
is greatest. Unesco co-operates with
the science club movement around
the world, recognizing that today's
children are tomorrow's science
teachers, scientists and community
leaders.
The aim of the International Union
for the Protection of Nature, founded
in 1948 under Unesco sponsorship, is
to spark an international effort to
assess and safeguard the sources of
our food, energy and material wealth.
It works to educate people, and espe¬
cially children, in all lands to under¬
stand the value of Nature and to
appreciate its beauty, and it has
stimulated the creation of nature
clubs in many countries.
UNESCO-P. Le Fauconnier
TV AND CINEMA INFLUENCE on young audiences is a special problem that has
been studied by Unesco. Through surveys, studies and meetings it has highlighted
such aspects as the production of entertainment films for juvenile audiences, the place
of TV in education, films and juvenile delinquency. It sponsored the creation of the
International Centre of Films for Children which was established in Brussels in March
1957 to distribute information on the production of films for children, to study the
needs of child audiences and to publicize films approved for them In various countries.
20
