THE UNKNOWN VICTOR HUGO
by Jean Sergent
Curator, Victor Hugo Museum, Paris
Despite the enormous array of books on Victor Hugo, a recent
biographer chose for his study the title "Victor Hugo the
Unknown."
Victor Hugo the artist is certainly unknown.
Hugo left 450 or so drawings, some larger in size than the
average easel painting. Despite his known aversion to wasting
time he devoted countless hours to these drawings. Only his most
treasured friends received them as gifts, often adorned with an
enormous signature added as a decorative element. And in a
score of ways, Hugo has left us proof that he considered his
drawings on an equal level with his poems. Yet despite all this,
little has been written on Hugo's drawings, and those art
historians who mention him at all dismiss him in a few lines.
How can we account for this lack of recognition ?
Undoubtedly, the fact that the bulk of his drawings is con¬
centrated in the Victor Hugo Museum, located in a less frequented
quarter of Paris, has not helped to make them easily accessible
and better known. But the real misfortune of Victor Hugo the
artist is the very fact that he is... Victor Hugo.
The Renaissance had its great universal
geniuses and recognized them. But our
age and Victor Hugo's as well have persist¬
ed in treating people outside their own
speciality as nothing more than amateurs
more or less gifted. No one, it would
seem, has the right any longer to be a
genius in two fields at the same time, and
Hugo was mistaken if he imagined himself
great enough to overthrow this rule.
He began to draw shortly after he
turned thirty, when he and Juliette Drouet
embarked on the travels which liberated
him from his toils and her from the
sequestered life she had been leading.
Like most people, he took drawing
lessons as a child and as a young man ;
his friends were painters : L. Boulanger,
the Deveria brothers, Célestin Nanteuil
and he often watched them at work. His
wife, a fairly gifted woman, had a society
woman-artist of some talent to advise
her, and Hugo looked on as they worked.
But neither this nor his visits to
museums, nor his familiarity with ancient
and contemporary engravings, can account
for his sudden emergence in 1838, after
three or four years' experimenting, as an
accomplished artist.
The fact is that Victor Hugo possessed
all kinds of latent gifts awaiting the
opportunity to burst forth. He had acute
vision ; a memory so retentive that he was
able to delineate clearly a certain house
he had seen in Blois forty years earlier ;
visual imagination (was he not always reproached for being unable
to think except in images?); and, in addition, a skill and readiness
of hand inherited from his humble social origins. His travels
provided the stimulus for bringing his artist's talent to fruition.
He began simply by taking careful notes of what his eye
perceived. Travelling in Normandy and Brittany in 1836 with
Juliette, . he made sketches barely distinguishable from those of
his other travelling companion, the lanky, kind-hearted Nanteuil,
whose album he borrowed. But by 1839 he was already going
beyond mere "recording", and was interpreting what he saw.
The. Rats' Tower, one of the five or six finished drawings
which Hugo brought back from his travels in the Rhineland in
1839-40, is remarkable both for its utter simplicity of composition
with the dominant lines leading the eye to the centres of
interest, as in the work of Poussin or Lorrain and for its
richness of texture and the evocative force of its luminous
shadows.
From this date onwards, these two styles are' combined in
Hugo's work. First there are the minute drawings from life,
22
" NUDE WEARING A COAT and a feather
In her hat." This picture, as well as those which
Illustrate the following two pages, has been
kindly made available by the Victor Hugo
Museum, housed In the author's former home.
tending, however, to become increasingly free and synthesized as
time goes on ; and then there are the "visionary compositions",
as Hugo himself called them.
As an artist, he was always scrupulously conscientious. He
had inherited from his carpenter-ancestors a love of "fine work"".
He had his own techniques, not to say "tricks". He was not
averse from adopting some rather unorthodox methods, such as
preparing his paper with a wash of black coffee which gave
a fine warm brown background ; or from using a scraper or hot
curling-tongs to put movement into his skies. At the same time,
he knew that fantasy must be kept within bounds and, above all,
that every art has its own needs and its own laws, transgression
of which impairs the strength and vitality of the work. Artists are
struck by the professional competence of this "amateur", the
vigour of his lines, and the solidity of his volumes. Hugo draws
like Delacroix, or like the sculptors Barye, or David d'Angers.
So much for the form. But what of the content ? The latter
is invariably governed, to a. great degree, by the former.
The fact that Hugo's drawing is based on contrasts of light and
shade violent contrasts, often makes it
tempting and easy to say that Hugo the
artist, like Hugo the poet, is interested only
in the beauty of contrasts, and to add at
once that the drawings are a recapitulation
of the poems; an expression, in another
medium, of the same over-simplified, super¬
ficial philosophy of life.
This is not the place to discuss whether
Hugo's philosophy is superficial or other¬
wise. What I mean is that his drawing is
never, or is only very rarely, a continuation
of his writing. It has a purpose of its
own: to enable Hugo to convey his
meaning more clearly, more fully and
very often more effectively as, for
instance, in his Landscape with Three
Trees, which has a sobriety and conciseness
seldom found in his poems. His drawings
certainly cannot be regarded as mere
appendages to his writings ; indeed, several
dominant themes are expressed in drawing
before they appear in a poem. This is
true, for instance, of the belief in the soul
passing from reign to reign in accordance
with its sins and deserts. Where Hugo
uses both media to assail the execution of
a criminal the hanging of John Brown in
particular and to protest once again
against the death penalty, his drawings
(Hugo repeats the drawing of the hanged
man four times) strike us more forcibly
than any words could do. (See photo
page 24.)
Unfortunately, Hugo started too early
having his drawing reproduced in the illu¬
strated journals before his talent had fully
ripened, with the result that they aroused nothing more than
sympathetic curiosity. The fact that so expert and reputed a
connoisseur of art as Gautier praised these drawings was of
no avail ; they were regarded as the chance success of a highly
gifted amateur. And it was perhaps a mistake on Theophile Gau-
tier's part, when in 1852 he compared Hugo to the foremost
living artists. In this there was a risk of Hugo not being placed
at the top of the list, as Gautier intended, but at the bottom.
When Castel, in 1863, collected together 80 reproductions of
his best work in an album, Hugo, who never much cared for
taking second place, enjoined his faithful and obedient friend
Gautier, who was writing the preface, to give him no rating
in relation to contemporary artists on the grounds that he was
merely an amateur who had no thought "of using his natural
painting gifts for any purpose beyond that of relaxation, knowing
full well that for one man, one art suffices." It looked, then, as
if the question had been settled. There are some of us now who
are trying to have the question re-opened, so that Hugo, the artist
may take his rightful place among his peers: Piranesi, Goya, Rem¬
brandt. ' .

The Unesco Courier. August 1957
MYSTERIOUS LIGHT AND
SHADE. Although Victor Hugo
did not take painting lessons during
his lifetime, there ¡s a mark of
genius in the works of art he pro¬
duced. Drawing and sketching were
no mere hobby or means of relax¬
ation for him. They were a more ra¬
pid and precise way than writing for
him to fix what he perceived or
was inspired by in nature. "How
often", wrote Théophile Gautier,
"did we not follow with amaze¬
ment the transformation of an ink
or coffee spot on the envelope of a
letter or on another odd peice of
paper, into a landscape, a castle, a
strangely original seascape, where
the contrast between light and shade
produced an unexpected effect both
striking and mysterious, which
astonished even professional pain¬
ters." Many of Hugo's sketches,
drawings and washes are an ink-
and-colour reflection of scenes
which he had described in his writ¬
ten works. Others, however, were
fixed in colour long before his
books were written and thus his
first inspiration found expression
not In words but in the form and
shape of a drawing or sketch.
Illustrations on this page show,
above, Hugo's "Town on a Hill¬
side", probably inspired by a visit
he made to the old towns along
the banks of the Rhine; and below,
one of his most famous works,
"Landscape with Three Trees".
23

Victor Hugo (Continued)
'HANGED.' For years Victor Hugo raised his voice against
the execution of criminals and assailed the death penalty as
a means of meting out justice. This subject aroused such
. deep emotions in him that he made at least four drawings
of a hanged man. The execution of the American abolition¬
ist, John Brown, in 1859, is believed to have inspired Hugo
to do these drawings, one of which is today In the Louvre.
EDDYSTONE LIGHTHOUSE. The date inscribed by
Victor Hugo on this work ( 1 866) shows that it was executed
during the author's exile In Guernsey, at a period when he
was "the savage old wanderer of the sea". This lighthouse
is situated in the English Channel off the Cornish coast.
24
