METEORS
Tiny wanderers
through space

The Unesco Courier. September 1957
Meteors, visible to the naked eye as shooting-stars,
blaze up and go out at a height of from 70 to
35 miles above the surface of the earth when iron
or stone particles meteoric bodies from interplanetary
space collide at a high velocity (from seven to 45 miles
per second) with the atmosphere. The meteoric body is
heated to a temperature of several thousand degrees
and becomes highly incandescent; a column of ionized
gas, the meteoric trail, is formed about it.
The diameter of the trail is several yards, and its
length is usually from 15 to 18 miles. As it gradually
disperses, the meteoric trail introduces electrically
charged particles into the E layer of the ionosphere,
thereby changing its composition. This trail can easily
be registered by radar. By eye observation, and also
with the help of radar, it is possible to follow the
displacement of the meteoric trail, and thus to deter¬
mine the direction and velocity of the wind at a height
of 60 miles. From the height and velocity of a meteor's
flight, and also the intensity of the light it emits, it is
possible to calculate the pressure, density and temper¬
ature of the upper layers of the air in the region of
its flight.
The programme for the observation of meteors in the
U.S.S.R. was drawn up at international scientific
the mechanics of the emission of energy by meteoric
bodies when they come into collision with the atmo¬
sphere. In order to do this, visual registration of the
meteors by unaided eye observation, and also with
short-focus binoculars of large field of view, will be
practised in conjunction with the radar observations of
meteors. Amateur astronomers who are interested in
astronomy but do not make a profession of it will thus
take part in scientific research.
Bright meteors will be photographed with cameras of
high light-gathering power. Photographic observation
of meteors can only be carried on when the sky is
dark and clear, best of all in the south. In the U.S.S.R.,
such observations have been carried on for a long time
now by the Astronomical Observatory of the Tadjik
Academy of Sciences in Stalinabad, and the Astro-
physical Laboratory of the Institute of Geophysics of
the Turkmen Academy of Sciences in Ashkhabad. By
the beginning of the Year these observatories will have
received more powerful meteoric photographic appar7
atus and set up observation points in the mountains
outside the cities mentioned above. The Astronomical
observatories of the Kiev and Odessa Universities in
the Ukraine have again organized the photographic
observation of meteors.
Hundreds of millions of meteors most of them mere
specks of dust enter the earth's atmosphere every day
and burn out in the ionosphere which acts as a shield
against this meteoric bombardment. They have had
relatively little scientific study except for the larger ones
that survive the fall through the atmosphere But scientists
of the Soviet Union have set up a comprehensive program¬
me for observing meteors during the I.G.Y. linked up
with similar studies in other countries. Opposite page,
(top photo) very bright meteor, visible to the naked eye as a
"shooting star", recorded by the Stalinabad Astronomical
Observatory. Snake-like form of a meteoric train seen at
Penza in. central Russia (bottom photo). The wind at the
height of 40 to 55 miles where it was observed varied in
direction at different levels, thus bending the train to form
a figure "3". Left, meteor "patrol" at Stalinabad with
cameras to photograph meteoric activity during the I.G.Y.
U.S.S.R. official photos
conferences in Leningrad and Manchester in 1954, at
which Czech and British scientists made suggestions
on the study of meteors during the International Geo¬
physical Year. The Soviet observations will be carried
on parallel with observations in Czechoslovakia, the
German Democratic Republic, Great Britain, the United
States, Canada and other countries.
First in importance is to keep a constant check on the
number of meteors and the nature of the ionized track
they leave behind them. This work is to be done by
radar installations in Kazan, Kharkov, Stalinabad, and
Tomsk. Meteoric activity is to be registered day and
night on all days set for universal geophysical
observation, that is : during the World Meteorological
Intervals, during the World Days, and on the Meteor
Days when the earth comes into collision with large
meteoric showers. Observations are also needed on such
ordinary days, immediately preceding or following these
intervals, as are required for comparison. In all, the
radar installations are to be working about 100 days a
year. This will provide sufficiently complete data on
the earth's collisions with meteoric matter in cosmic
space. It will give a clear enough idea of the nature
of the action of meteors on the ionosphere and on the
connexion between meteoric ionization and the anomal¬
ous audibility of radio broadcasts and visibility of
television broadcasts.
It is important to compare the intensity of ionization
with the luminosity of meteors in order to determine
In order to determine the altitude and velocity of a
meteor's flight, the meteor must be photographed with
two cameras set up from 12 to 25 miles apart. At one
of these points the apparent velocity of the meteor's
flight must be determined with the aid of a rotating
shutter of the "windmill" type. The obturator covers
the lens of the camera from 30 to 50, and even 100 times
a second. The trail of a meteor photographed through
an obturator shows as a broken line. A double photo¬
graph of a meteor (combined print of two photographs
of the same meteor taken from different places), makes
it possible to calculate the height, velocity and slowing
up or tne meteor, as well as its magnitude. Having all
these data, it is not difficult to determine the physical
properties of the upper layers of the atmosphere along
the path of the meteor the density, pressure and
temperature of the air.
The winds in the ionosphere can easily be observed
with the aid of radar. To do this, observations are
made of the shifting in the position of the meteoric
trail which produces radio echoes. The trains of very
bright meteors can also be observed visually through a
telescope, or successive photographs can be taken of
them which register their movement in space. Observa¬
tion of the movement of meteor trails is to be carried
out in Ashkhabad and Stalinabad.
The above article is based on a special report prepared for THE
UNESCO courier by Dr. V.V. Fedynsky, a member of the U.S.S.R.
National Committee for the I.G.Y.
29
