Hidden under a
THE VILLA OF
A ROMAN
HERCULES
by Lucio and Giuseppe
Attinelli
Soaring skywards like some Gothic cathedral, the small
village of Piazza Armerina crowns a hilltop in the inter¬
ior of Sicily. Clustered around the summit, the houses
seem to cling to the steep slopes like gnarled carob-trees
whose long, tenacious roots reach deeply into the soil. Here,
paradoxically, the green vegetation seems to harmonize with
the almost unbearable brilliance of a scorching sun. There
is not a breath of wind and the air, vibrating in the intense
heat, gives the little place an aspect of unreality.
In this setting, like a desert mirage, a magnificent Roman
villa has awoken from a long sleep and has stretched itself
in the sun like some fabled Sleeping Beauty. As it has been
freed from the earth accumulated through the centuries, little
by little new details of its construction have became apparent
and, though the main building has been completely revealed,
the annexes have yet to be uncovered.
Before the villa was discovered, placid cows wandered here
and ruminated to the sound of the carefree shepherd's flute,
while, only a few feet beneath the ground on which they
grazed, lay a wealth of treasures.
Archaeologists in charge of the excavations say that the
still-uncovered buildings are spread over a very wide area, as
well they may be, judging by other great houses like the villa
of Tiberius at Capri and the huge Villa of the Papyrus at
Herculaneum, the city which was destroyed by the eruption of
Vesuvius in 79 A.D.
The buildings at Piazza Armerina follow the natural curve
PIAZZA ARMERINA
an ancient hilltop Sici¬
lian village (top photo)
crowned by its domed
basilica. Underneath it
the remains of an Imper¬
ial Roman villa, built for
the Emperor Maximian,
have been unearthed.
On left, the peristyle
or colonnaded interior
court of the villa on
some of whose granite
pillars the Corinthian
capitals still remain.
Photos C Giuseppe Cappelani
Cont'd
on
next page

ROMAN
VILLA
(Continued)
Ten 'Bikini Girls' dancing
a graceful mosaic water ballet
villa is matched by the
of the hill and spread out in a series of terraces. Experts
say that the Roman Emperor Maximian, called "Hercules"
by his subjects, built the villa in the third century A.D. as a
hunting lodge and a comfortable "retreat" in which to prac¬
tise otiuin (the Latin word for "leisure" or "ease"). This
was the ancient form of "rest cure" which though later consi¬
dered as unfitting for a man, has today been reinstated under
the name of "relaxation" as a way of counteracting the wear
and tear of modern life. There seems to be nothing new in
this world as other features of the villa show. One of these
is a central heating system using the walls to radiate heat
often thought of as an achievement of modern technology
and there are two rooms for bathers a frigidarium (cooling
room) and a tepidarium (a warm room between the hot baths
and the cooling room).
The architectural beauty of t
richness of its interior decoration
. .both testifying to an art in full
flower. The splendid mosaics
reveal many aspects of Roman
life in the third century and illus¬
trate the new forms of artistic
expression of this period.
One of the mosaics shows ten
beautiful women wearing "bikinis"
similar in cut and size to the
modern two-piece bathing suits
which caused such an outcry when
they first appeared on European
beaches a few years ago.
These pretty bathers dance in a
circle shaking cymbals and other
musical instruments which strong¬
ly recall the picturesque rhythmic
equipment featured by South-
American bands. This mosaic is
the only existing example of this
particular type of entertainment
(of which the Romans were past
masters) which closely resembles
our modern revues.
A first impression had suggested
that these extremely modern-
looking girls were doing gym¬
nastics, Professor Biagio Pace
tells us in his study The Mosaics
of Piazza Armerina, published
in 1955, the year before his
death. But, he points out, apart
from the one certain element oí
water (depicted by blue mosaics)
at the feet of the girls, there is no other definite indication,
and their positions do not really fit a display of women's
gymnastics. Their actions can best be described as a
choreographic display, in which balls are thrown and palm
branches and tambourines waved to the accompaniment of
graceful movements. Professor Pace considers that the
mosaic represents a "water ballet" similar to our modern
aquacade revues.
Ignoring previously sacred laws of proportion and purity
of line, the artist deliberately distorts the hips of the dancers,
thus expressing most strikingly the movement. The choice
of colours and tones also adds to the expressive vitality of
the scene.
The techniques used by the artists immediately suggest
modern painting trends; we might well use the terms
"Primitive" and "Impressionist" in talking of these works.
In any case here we see a "dynamic" conception of mosaics
12
BIG GAME HUNTERS capturing
animals for the Roman arena are
depicted in the Imperial Villa mo¬
saics. Above, hunting the rhinoceros.
The Emperor Maximian, escorted by
two men with shields, is shown in same
mosaic (bottom of opposite page).
Sicilian Tourist Office
for the first time. Every previously known example had rein¬
forced the belief that the special techniques of this art pre¬
vented it from effectively portraying motion. In most mosaics
action only emerges symbolically, the figures always appear¬
ing to be in suspended animation, even where the artist wishes
to depict movement. In this respect, therefore, the many
mosaics of Piazza Armerina constitute a revolution in graphic
expression.
Inspired by the public games of the time the artist has
created a kaleidoscope of glittering pictures, superb pagan
songs of beauty, physical skill, strength and youth. Of these
one of the most significant represents a chariot race. Skil¬
fully caught in full élan, the athletes and horses come alive in
a pictorial composition of exceptional force.
At times this particular way of treating mosaics, this
strength of expression makes one
feel that the Roman artist was
more a sculptor than a painter.
This feeling is confirmed by the
large mosaic decorating the room
dedicated to the hunt. Between
two women's faces, one of
which symbolizes Africa, and the
other Armenia, the theme, de¬
veloped on a grand scale, illus¬
trates the different episodes of the
venationes, the great hunts or¬
ganized to track down and
capture wild animals destined for
the arena.
Outstanding effects of relief
and realism have been achieved
through a skilful choice of con¬
trasting colours. The bodies of
the wild animals seem to be
writhing in pain; one can sense
the straining muscles of the
hunters. Each episode is a separ¬
ate scene but the artist has
attained a unity and a harmony of
composition by a deft use of
proportions. These mosaics also
throw interesting light on the
ingenious methods used by the
hunter to get the wild animals on
board the boats which were to
take them to Rome, and also to
land them on arrival.
Capturing the wild beasts
without wounding them severely
was a hazardous business. So great was the demand for lions
that they eventually disappeared from North Africa. The
hunters were obliged to go further and further south for them.
In another room the decorative theme chosen by the artist
illustrates the legendary labours of Hercules, doubtless as a
tribute to the imperial owner of the villa. Here the sculptur¬
al quality of the mosaics is still more accentuated. The
extraordinary relief of certain scenes, the proportions of the
bodies and the great attention to detail recall the "monu¬
mental" technique of Michelangelo's famous paintings.
The discovery of the imperial residence of Piazza Arme¬
rina is of incalculable value for the study of Roman mosaics.
It is also a reminder to archaeologists throughout the world
of the extraordinary research possibilities offered by Sicily.
The many civilizations which followed one another have made
Sicily a veritable storehouse of archaeological treasures and
immense riches are still hidden in this "Island of the Sun".

The Unesco Courier. March 1957
