THE UNITED NATIONS PAVILION
* Mirror of the world at work
* A window on our planet's problems
by Henri Fast
Commissioner-General, U. N. and Specialized Agencies
Section, Brussels Exhibition, 1958.
CCrp he peoples of the world are soon to meet at a
I rfini-ioTvniK: with licht nnrl nfiar-.fi" These wererendezvous ith light and peace." These were
the words used by Baron Moens de Fernig, the
organizer of the 1958 International Exhibition of Brussels,
when he arrived in New York to invite the participation
of the United Nations.
Within the headquarters of the United Nations the
words rang a welcome bell for they echoed one of the
major aims of the world organization and one of the fun¬
damental goals of the Specialized Agencies which make
up the family of United Nations. Judging that the U.N.
family could not be absent from the "Balance Sheet for a
more human world" which is the theme of the Brussels
Exhibition nor from the spirit of international co-oper¬
ation that would prevail there, the United Nations has
accepted the offer to participate.
A major difficulty existed however. Although the efforts
of the United Nations family are directed toward one
common goal the ideal of world peace proclaimed in the
separate Charters of its international Agencies these
efforts embrace activities so diverse that their visual pre¬
sentation is often a complicated task.
It was therefore decided that the whole family of the
U.N. should be represented under a common theme, linked
both to the central subject of the
Brussels Exhibition, and to the
co-ordinated action of the United
Nations and its Specialized Agen¬
cies in fostering and developing
co-operation between peoples.
For no true solution, except on a
truly international level, can be
found to the problems which face
mankind today and block the
road to lasting world peace.
The work of the United Nations
and its Specialized Agencies will
be presented in a special U.N.
pavilion under three sections:
first, the challenge; second, the
results achieved so far; third, the
ultimate goal.
What is this challenge?
In the world of today the
tempo of political and technical
development is rapidly increasing.
With the widening of contacts
between peoples, brought about
chiefly by modern inventions such
as the radio, the cinema and
aviation, the benefits of civiliz¬
ation are being spread at a rate
undreamed of fifty years ago.
8
The present rapid tempo, however, is inevitably attended
by a thirst for new demands, further accentuated and
increased by the world's ever-expanding population (it
will be double today's figure by the year 2000) not to
speak of certain vital human requirements which we
cannot begin to satisfy with our present volume of human
productivity.
This situation raises many problems which are both
critical and urgent.
The problems relate to every factor conditioning the life
of men and the existence of nations. They relate to the
preservation of peaceful relations between nations and
the promotion of social and economic justice, the establish¬
ment of the rule of law between men and between nations.
They relate to economic development, to food, health,
welfare, education, culture and science. They are linked
with jobs and social security, with children's needs, with
resources, productivity and consumption, with communi¬
cations and transport, assistance to less-developed coun¬
tries, with help when disaster strikes.
The role of the United Nations and its Specialized
Agencies is to provoke, encourage and develop co¬
operation between men and nations in the search for
solutions to these problems and in realizing the promise
of the UJN. Charter for "social
progress and better standards of
life in larger freedom." The Unit¬
ed Nations family embraces in
its concern and interest men and
nations the world over and it
draws together the support and
allegiance of people of all cul¬
tures, of all religious and poli¬
tical allegiances.
But what is the action, the
concrete action taken under the
United Nations system to solve
these problems?
In the political field, first, what
are the international organiza¬
tions doing for the preservation
and development of peace?
The United Nations pavilion at
the Brussels Exhibition will show
how international co-operation
has been established through the
United Nations, through the U.N.
General Assembly and its Secu¬
rity Council. It will offer as
examples of positive results
achieved the ending of the war
in Korea, in Kashmir, in Pales¬
tine. It will outline the efforts

to secure world disarmament and the judicial procedure
for the peaceful settlement of conflicts, successfully
applied by the International Court of the Hague.
The U. N. pavilion will also illustrate the problems and
efforts connected with the establishment of a true com¬
munity of nations: economic development, particularly
through technical assistance ; technological exchanges
(including the peaceful uses of atomic energy); the trus¬
teeship system ; and the possibilities of advancement
given to non-self-governing territories.
A substantial portion of the U.N. pavilion will be devoted
to the measures taken to solve two problems of the utmost
importance both for the world of today and of tomorrow:
the development of the world's resources, and social deve¬
lopment. It is here that the predominant role of the
Specialized Agencies' activities will be emphasized.
The development of the world's resources concerns the
whole of the United Nations family in varying degrees.
But certain agencies have a specialized competence in
this sphere and their activities are particularly oriented
to aspects of the problem.
The development of the world's resources encompasses
three different fields. First, communications and trans¬
port, dealt with by the International Civil
Aviation Organization, the Universal
Postal Union, the World Meteorological
Organization and the International Tele¬
communication Union. Then, agricul¬
ture, resources of the sea, and forestry,
dealt with by the Food and Agriculture
Organization and by Unesco in its broad
Arid Lands programme. Finally, indus¬
trial development, water resources, electric
and hydraulic power production (includ¬
ing problems of financing) are dealt with
by several Specialized Agencies, particu¬
larly the International Bank for Recon¬
struction and Development whose invest¬
ments in dam construction now exceed
300 million dollars.
In the field of social development, the
action of the United Nations could be
divided, somewhat arbitrarily perhaps,
into four categories: Education, culture
and science are Unesco's prime interest;
health and welfare the World Health Orga¬
nization's; labour and social security the
International Labour Organization's; and
community development with which both
the United Nations and most of the
Specialized Agencies are concerned.
Other U.N. agencies are in search of solutions to one or
several of the problems indicated above. Thus the Inter¬
national Monetary Fund plays an important part in the
stabilization of currency; GATT (General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade) is working to reduce customs barriers;
and the new International Atomic Energy Agency will deal
with problems of the peaceful uses of atomic energy.
The purely humanitarian aspects of the work of the
U.N. family will of course not be overlooked, and the Office
of the High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations Children's Fund, and. the agency for Arab refu¬
gees from Palestine will all have their place in the U.N.
pavilion at Brussels.
In presenting all these activities in stressing all the
collective efforts made to solve the problems of the modern
world, in demonstrating international co-operation in
the family of the United Nations hopes to promote
action and the interdependence of all peoples and nations
and extend international co-operation and mutual under¬
standing between men ultimately leading to a greater
wellbeing of mankind and the safeguarding of peace itself.
Only in an atmosphere of peaceful relations among the
peoples and nations of the world can the ideals of the
United Nations Charter really be fulfilled. International
co-operation can establish that climate which is indis¬
pensable if mankind is to achieve the twin goals of moral
and material wellbeing which now lie within its grasp.
The Unesco Courier. July 1957
To demonstrate its activities the U.N. will avail itself of
the most varied and ultra-modern techniques for its
pavilion. Of course such old stand-bys as the photogra¬
phic display and panels will not be entirely discarded,
but visitors will be able to study a miniature dam in full
operation, a large model of the U.N. General Assembly
Hall, a special presentation of air traffic control across
the North Atlantic, an "Atlas" of the clouds showing how
they influence weather forecasts, an unusual represen¬
tation of the interaction and mutual influence of Oriental
and Occidental cultures, as well as a series of other
exhibits.
Perhaps one of the most striking exhibits will be the
one depicting the vast programme launched by the United
Nations, and especially the International Labour Orga¬
nization, to improve the conditions of the Indians living
on the high plateau of the South American Andes.
To mark the U.N.'s participation in the Brussels Exhi¬
bition, a special series of 15 or 16 stamps (total value:
equivalent of two dollars) will be placed on sale in
the United Nations pavilion. Under a special arrangement
with the Belgian Government and by courtesy of the
Belgian postal authorities, the stamps will be valid for
letters posted inside the pavilion where an official post-
office will be installed. Philatelists interested in these
stamps (the issue will be fairly small) will have an oppor¬
tunity to purchase them by mail probably from February
1958 onwards.
A non-profit association has been set up to handle all
material arrangements for the U.N. family pavilion. Its
chairman is the former director of the International
Monetary Fund, C. Gutt (now Minister of State in the
Belgian Government). The president of the Belgian
National Commission for Unesco, Jean Baugniet, and the
Belgian delegate to the World Bank, H. Ansiaux, are mem¬
bers of the directorial board.

ENTIRE 'UNITED
NATIONS FAMILY'
10
c" n ' ' .:' rjv- y ..¡VV.
fi}&¿ V *'.**,
\*$0. \ \
¿&M
: V*
?ii: ilia
"1

The Unesco Courier. July 1957
As visitors to the 1958 World's Fair in Brussels
enter the 500-acre international city by the
"World Gate" they will see, on the far side of
the group of buildings erected by International
organizations, the pavilion (a giant cupola) which
houses the United Nations "Family". Here under
one roof they will see how the U.N. and its Specia¬
lized Agencies are meeting the challenge of today's
world problems.
Plan of pavilion shows (2 to 12) the ramp which
runs around half the cupola with (4)ornamental pools.
Three stands (43,43b and 40) will present Unesco's
activities and in addition special emphasis will be
given to Unesco's Arid Lands Programme (31a
to 3 Id and 59): its world action for education (41)
and its Human Rights Programme (43a).
7, 8, 9 and I I: The United Nations
13 and 15: International Civil Aviation Organiza¬
tion (ICAO)
15b and 16: Universal Postal Union (UPU)
17, 17a and 17b: World Meteorological Organiza¬
tion (WMO), International Telecommunication Union
(ITU)
26 to 3 I : Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
32: Model of a dam financed by the Internation¬
al Bank for Reconstruction and Development;
International Finance Corporation
34: International Monetary Fund
34a: General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT)International Trade Organization (ITO)
33: Technical Assistance, the U. N. Economic
Commissions, International Atomic Energy Agency
35, 36, 37: Programme of the High Andean Plateau
42: World Health Organization (WHO)
23, 24, 25 and 33 adjoining: United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF); Office of the U.N. High
Commissioner for Refugees; U.N. Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA)
38 and 39: International Labour Org. (ILO)
43c: The United Nations Charter
44: The U.N. Post Office
51: Information Office for the "U.N. Family"
47, 48, 49 and 52: Sales of documents, books
and publications concerning the United Nations
All other numbers indicate information panels or
decorative motifs such as the atomic symbol (3 and 5).
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
II

U.N. PAVILION (Continued)
45 34 46 33 57.58 14 31) 31a 17 I
UNDER THE ROOF AN ATLAS 'OF THE CLOUDS'
47.48.49
Three architect's sketches showing how Interior of the U.N. Pavillion at the Brussel's World Fair will look wnen
completed. Display devices depicting varied activities of the U.N. and its Specialized Agencies will include a miniature
dam In full operation, an "Atlas of the Clouds " explaining how they influence weather forecasts, a presentation of air
traffic control across the North Atlantic and a large model of the U.N. Assembly Hall. Numbers on drawings cor¬
respond to those on plan published on previous pages, showing disposition of U.N. and Specialized Agencies'stands.
12
