UNESCO AND TECHNICAL CHANGE
vastly speeded up so that the impact
o'f increased material wealth and the
raising of standards of living bring
in their train urgent problems.
No one can stop this process. No
one should wish to stop it. It is a
world movement which historians
of to-morrow will discern as the
dominant feature of our age. It can
be described as Mankind's claim to
embrace the Rights of Man.
To meet the challenge, economic
by David Hardman
mentality." Societies, like individuals,
cannot live, cannot be happy, if
nurtured on the benefits of jet air¬
craft and television sets alone.
I suggest that the supreme res¬
ponsibility for performing the tasks
of social therapy lies with Unesco.
It is this task upon which Unesco
has been engaged since its founda¬
tion. The part the Organization has
played and is playing in Technical
Assistance is of profound importance
cational mission to a country that
asks for one, every time a regional
seminar is organized, every time a
demonstration project in fundamen¬
tal education or library services is set
on foot, every time a field science co¬
operation centre is opened, Unesco is
helping countries to develop new
social forms and to achieve a gradual
transition to a new pattern of society
which will embrace the new element
of technology without sacrificing
their cultures of the past.
James Cudney
FUTURE MECHANICS use Unesco-supplied equipment in automotive shop of Afghan Institute
of Technology, Kabul. Today, more than 200 scientists and educators are carrying out Unesco
technical assistance projects in nearly 50 countries. Projects range from scientific research and
technical training to fundamental education to eliminate illiteracy and raise living standards.
and technical assistance is being
given to under-developed countries
on a more systematic scale than ever
before. The United States Point Four
programme, the Colombo Plan, the
agreements made by the Government
of the U.S.S.R. with the governments
of the East, the United Nations
Technical Assistance schemes all
speak for themselves. They all
embody a bold and challenging plan
for economic development.
At the same time is there not an
urgent need to develop new social
forms, new institutions, new skills,
which will nurture and cherish the
best in age-long traditions and
cultures? To quote Alfred North
Whitehead again : "'The life of Man
is founded on technology, science, art
and religion. All four are inter¬
connected and issue from his total
in this respect : Its role in fun¬
damental education, in the great
variety of tasks undertaken by the
Social Sciences Department, In the
spread of accurate scientific data, in
being a great clearing house for facts
and ideas, in priming the pump for
worldwide interest in each nation's
arts and history, and above all in its
unremitting challenge to the nations
that all mankind is one and must
grow closer in oneness to survive.
These are all, in my view, the most
profound contributions to peace.
They are not the only ones, for the
other Specialized Agencies make
their contributions too, but they do
the most to prepare the spirit of
Man for the incalculable changes
which the world industrial revolution
is bringing about.
Every time Unesco sends an edu-
All the activities of Unesco can
be and should be related to this
great global responsibility. I
believe today that most of them are.
It is right that this should be so for
the re-adjustment of cultures is
the predominant feature of our time.
It will happen whether we like it or
not. It is Unesco's job to make sure
that It is a triumph and not a disaster
for Humanity.
Even in the so-called highly deve¬
loped countries Unesco is concerned
with the same question. Highly
developed countries have by no
means fully mastered applied science
or the machine. In these countries,
the problems are the same in prin¬
ciple but different in degree and
content. The effects of automation,
the as yet unrivalled power of atomic
energy to serve or obliterate the
peoples of the earth, human relations
in factory and workshop, the failure
of the industrial civilization to create
its own distinct culture these are all
pressing problems in the most
advanced industrial countries of the
world. Here Unesco's constant
reminder to governments of the
immense importance of the Rights of
Man even among nations with a high
standard of living is necessary and
indefatigable. Here Unesco's in¬
sistence upon the need for untiring
research, the keeping up of standards
in knowledge and its dissemination
among the technically under-deve¬
loped peoples is a contribution to the
common weal.
The highly developed countries are
thus subject to strains themselves.
At the same time, they must spare
some of their best minds and they
must divert some of their resources
to the job of helping those countries
which need help. This is a call they
cannot refuse. It is a call to rise
above their own national interests.
It is the call which Unesco has put
before them and which Unesco has
made easier for them to answer.
Unesco has grown in prestige be¬
cause it has shown how technology
can come to a nation as à blessing and
not as an evil; because it has ensured
that the developed countries play
their part in maintaining their own
social health, so that they may help
others. What Unesco's role in these
times of technical change has been is
international co-operation in practice
words and pious exhortations,
but action.
17
