Icon paintings:
THE TRIUMPH
OF ANCIENT
RUSSIAN ART
by Victor Lasaren
Corresponding Member of the Academy
of Sciences of the U.S.S.R.
ryiHE Russian icon ranks among the most
I remarkable artistic revelations of the
20th century. In the previous century
even those collectors who specialized in the
works of the mediaeval Russian school of
icon painting did not suspect what beauty
lay concealed in them. The old icons were
hidden under metal settings or under
numerous layers of overpainting, which
completely altered their original appearance.
When, in the 1900's, the cleaning of icons
was first undertaken, it was discovered that
the mediaeval paintwork had been
admirably preserved beneath the retouch¬
ings and the overpainting and had acquired
the firmness and close texture of bone. The
removal of the dark varnish and retouchings
from the large Novgorod icons resulted in
a veritable revelation, and this new and
magnificent branch of art, hitherto known
to few, soon found enthusiastic votaries
among collectors and artists alike.
The museums likewise began actively to
acquire icons, as a result of which the
Tretyakov Gallery in Moscow and the Rus¬
sian Museum in St. Petersburg rapidly be¬
came real treasure-houses of mediaeval Rus¬
sian painting. Unfortunately, galleries in
the West did not extend their collections to
include good Russian icons, and Russian
icon painting has thus remained unre¬
presented in them or is represented by
such inferior and fortuitous specimens
that they could perfectly well be dispensed
with.
The public at large did not come to
realize the aesthetic value of the icon until
12
UNESCO Album "U.S.S.R."
1913, following the Moscow Exhibition of
Mediaeval Russian Art, at which a
considerable number of first-class icons of
the 15th and 16th centuries were displayed.
For those who visited the exhibition it was
as though a bandage which had prevented
them from seeing the true face of Russian
painting had suddenly fallen from their
eyes. In place of dark, gloomy icons
coated with a thick layer of varnish they
beheld glorious works of art which would
do honour to any people in the world.
The cleaned icons were radiant with
colours as bright as precious stones ; they
blazed with the flame of cinnabar ; they
caressed the eye with their subtle shades
of pink, violet and golden yellow ; they
gripped the attention of the onlooker by
the rare beauty of their snowy white and
clear blue tones. And at once it became .
obvious to all that this was no ascetic, grim,
fanatical art-form ; that in it the living
creativeness of the people was vividly
reflected ; that its radiance and a certain
peculiar clarity of form related it to the
painting of classical antiquity ; and that it
deserved to be regarded as one of the
supreme manifestations of the Russian
national genius.
The most important discoveries in the
field of old Russian painting were made in
the years following the Soviet Revolution.
As early as October 5, 1918, a decree of
the Council of People's Commissars, "On
the Registration, Cataloguing and Protection
of Monuments of Art and Antiquity", was
published. The personal instructions of the
founder of the Soviet State, V.l. Lenin,
played an important part in this matter.
The great works of the mediaeval
masters, which had previously been
concealed in churches and monasteries,
where they had been repeatedly subjected
to alteration and repainting, became the
object of thorough scientific study and
restoration. Dozens of expeditions were
organized, to Novgorod, Pskov, Kiev,
Zvenigorod, Vologda, the Monastery of the
Trinity and St. Sergius, Tver and Yaroslavl,
to the North and to the cities of the Volga.
These expeditions were organized in
accordance with'a carefully worked out
plan ; highest priority was given to the
cleaning of works of outstanding impor¬
tance which might possibly throw light on
the central problems of the history of
mediaeval Russian painting.
It was now possible to replace the
dilettante concept of "manners" (i.e.,
different manners of painting) by the
scientific concept of '"schools". By follow¬
ing this course it became possible to
establish the dividing lines between the
Novgorod and Moscow schools, the pro¬
ductions of which had constantly been
confused by earlier investigators ; the
schools of Pskov and Tver arose again from
non-existence ; Theophanes the Greek,
Andrei Rublëv and Dionisius became
perfectly concrete figures. Of particular
importance was -the discovery of a series
of works of the 12th and
13th centuries, thanks to
which the earliest period of
Russian painting appeared
in a completely new light.
Cont'd
on
page 14

The Unesco Courier. December 1957
St. PETER LEADING
THE WAY TO PARADISE
The art of the icon is one of Russia's most significant contri¬
butions to the history of world art. For 800 yearsfrom
the I Ith to the 18th centurythis art-form preserved its
inherent vitality and energy. It began when ancient Russia
adopted Christianity and Kiev received her first Byzantine
artists, with whom local craftsmen collaborated. Icon
painting was thus the legitimate successor to Byzantine art
moulded in a new, national form, and once it attained full
maturity it became completely self-contained. Among the
earliest Russian icons known to us are those of the Novgorod
School such as the painting of St. George (opposite page)
dating from about I 170, and now in the Cathedral of the
Annunciation, in the Kremlin. St. George, one of the favour¬
ite subjects of the Novgorod ¡con painters, is depicted as
patron of Prince George Andreevich of Novgorod. Supreme
achievements in the field of icon painting were made by the
masters of the Moscow school, headed by the great Andrei
Rublëv (c. 1370-1430). In 1408 Rublëv and his friend,
Daniel Tchernyi, decorated the Cathedral of the Assumption
in Vladimir. They chose as their subject "The Day of Judg¬
ment", but unlike the treatment given to this theme by most
mediaeval artists, Rublëv's interpretation has nothing dread
or awesome about it. Left, a group from the fresco on the
south side of the Cathedral nave depicting St. Peter leading
the blessed to Paradise. Above, a detail from this group.
13

Icon paintings
(Continued)
In 1929-1930 an exhibition of Russian
icons was held in Germany, Britain and
America and attracted general attention.
It was this exhibition which first brought
mediaeval Russian painting to the notice
of western Europe. From that moment the
Russian icon, which Matisse had been one
of the first to appreciate in the West, had
entered the broad international arena.
The sources of Russian icon painting
date back to the 10th century, when ancient
Russia adopted Christianity and Kiev
received her first Byzantine artists, under
whom local craftsmen were trained. Thus
arose the Byzantino-Russian workshops
which adorned with mosaics, frescoes and
icons the celebrated Churches of Kiev,
including the Church of the Tithe (989-
996) and the Cathedral of St. Sofia (1037-
1067). These studios were centres not only
of Byzantine iconography but also of the
Byzantine manner of painting. However,
as always, the pupils very soon began to
diverge from their teachers and, under the
influence of the exigencies of Russian life,
to raise and to solve new problems.
In this way the national characteristics
of Russian painting began to take shape,
a process which we are able to follow only
through study of the frescoes, not the icons,
for no Russian icons of the 11th century
have come down to us. Nevertheless,
Kievan Russia already possessed its own
celebrated artists.
Fiery tastes of Novgorod
As centrifugal tendencies grew stronger
and the Kievan State declined, local
feudal centres began to arise, and,
along with them, local schools of painting.
With three of them, those of Novgorod,
Vladimir-Suzdal and Yaroslavl, are asso¬
ciated the oldest Russian icons known to us,
dating from the 12th and 13th centuries.
The most outstanding productions of the
Novgorod school of icon painting were
created towards the end of the 14th and in
the 15th century. The Novgorod artists
avoid the complicated, intricate symbolic
subjects which are so widespread in later
Russian icon painting. The themes treated
by them are simple and lucid ; their
lightly constructed compositions are clear
and easily comprehended, and the main
outlines of the subject. are not obscured by
obtrusion of secondary episodes. The
Novgorod icon is distinguished above all by
its colouring, in which the predominant
element is fiery cinnabar. It is these
colours, unforgettable in their brilliance
and chromatic tension, which reflect prob¬
ably more fully than anything else the
taste of the people of Novgorod.
The supreme achievements in the field
of icon painting were made by the masters
of the Moscow school, headed by the great
Andrei Rublëv (c. 1370-1430). As from
the 14th century, Moscow began rapidly to
move forward to the front place among
the Russian states, taking the lead in the
struggle against the Tartars. After the
famous battle of Kulikovo (1380), at which
the Russians dealt the Golden Horde a
crushing blow, the political importance of
the Moscow principality was vastly increas¬
ed. This 'battle, which demonstrated to
the Russian people the importance of their
national unity, contributed to the awakening
of their national consciousness. So were
14
m
THE VIRGIN OF THE DON, a work of the Novgorod school of icon painters in the late 1 4th cen¬
tury, is said to have accompanied the great Prince of Moscow, Dimitri Ivanovich of the Don, in the
battle of Kulikovo in 1380 when the Russians dealt the Golden Horde a crushing blow. It also
figured in other Russian campaigns against the Tartars in 1552 and 1591. Authorities in the past
ascribed the work (now in the Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow) to Theophanes the Greek (one of the
most outstanding artists in Russia during the late 14th and early 15th centuries) but following
more recent research it is now believed to have been painted by a Novgorod follower of Theophanes.
created the necessary conditions for a gene¬
ral flowering of culture.
Moscow painting made full sense of the
artistic heritage of Byzantium. In 1344 the
Metropolitan Theognostus invited Greek
masters to decorate with murals the walls
of his cathedral ; in 1395 at the latest the
celebrated Theophanes the Greek arrived
in Moscow, where he was to remain until
his death. In Moscow, finally, there were
Greek icons and much church plate of
Byzantine origin. In the works of Andrei
Rublëv the aesthetic ideals of the Moscow
school received their most complete
expression. For the loftiness of his human
ideal, for the moral purity and profound
poetry of the figures, for delicacy of purely
musical rhythm, for perfection of chromatic
relations, Rublëv has no equals. His icons
are full of an irresistible charm, and his
painting of The Trinity (see page 17) is
one of the great masterpieces of the world.
The golden age of Russian icon painting
was the 15th century, which constitutes a
clearly marked historical stage. For this
reason the monuments of this period may
serve as the basis for a characterization of
Russian icon painting as a whole.
Some students of mediaeval art are still
inclined even today to regard Russian icon
painting as a mere branch of Byzantine. It
would of course be naive to deny the
derivation of the Russian icon from the
Byzantine. Iconography and all the basic
technique of painting were inherited by
Russian artists from their Greek compeers.
But very soon, and that at the early stages
of development when survivals of the
joyous pagan attitude to life were still
strong, profound changes took place in
Russian painting, leading to the birth of a
new art which diverged more and more

decidedly from that of Byzantium. This
evolution first became apparent in an.
attenuation of Byzantine asceticism, as well
as in the creation of completely original
iconographie types. It showed itself also
in the growth of the cult of local saints,
which absorbed many elements of
Russian life, and in the continuous
intrusion of national ethnic types into icon
painting. It showed itself finally in the
brightening of the palette, which acquired
extraordinary brilliance and joyousness as
well as in the steady growth of the impor¬
tance of line, notably of the outline, so
highly valued by the Russian icon painters.
Then, gradually, the Russian icon became
the great national art-form of mediaeval
Russia. It was in the 15th century that
this lengthy process attained, so to speak,
its logical culmination.
In the Russian icon one is struck by the
peculiar combination of abstract conception
with intense emotional quality. It might
have been expected that, given a strongly
abstract approach, there would be no
possibility of creating a joyous emotion¬
al art capable of arousing ordinary
human feelings. In fact, however, Russian
15th-century icon painting is radiant and
lighthearted. It is equally removed from
gloomy Byzantine contemplativeness and
from the exaggerated expressiveness of
Gothic art.
When the modern spectator looks at old
icons, they usually seem to him to be so like
one another that he is unable to see much
difference between them, especially in the
case of icons which depict the same subject.
This is due to the extraordinary persistence
of the majority of iconographie types in
Byzantine and old Russian art. These
types were hallowed by ancient tradition.
They were regarded as historically true
renderings of the events with which they
dealt. Moreover, many of these iconogra¬
phie types were attributed to the brush of
this or that saint or hermit. It was to this
that they owed their persistence.
For the men of the past all these re¬
presentations of the Annunciation, the
Nativity, the Crucifixion, and so forth,
were exact representations of sacred
events. For this reason, the more care¬
fully such a scene was copied from
existing representations, the greater was
its value in the eyes both of the artist
and of the contemporary spectator.
The consequence was that copies of certain
miraculous icons held their ground for
more than a thousand years. Despite
similarity, at times extraordinarily close,
no single icon is an exact copy of another.
Dozens of representations of St. George,
of the Pokrov and of various Gospel
scenes have come down to us ; but
to look for two absolutely identical
pictures would be wasted effort. Of
course, the Russian master followed tradi-
The Unesco Courier. December 1957
tion. He was bound by it to no small
extent. But in the 15th century it was
never felt to be a fetter on his creative
powers. He operated fairly freely with the
iconographie types inherited from earlier
generations. By altering the rhythm of the
composition, the outlines, the distribution
of colour and the psychological nuances, he
succeeded without difficulty in giving a new
note to each of the works which he created.
It was probably in the colouring that the
Russian icon painter revealed most clearly
his individual tastes. Colour is the real
soul of 15th-century Russian icon painting.
For the Russian, as for the Netherlands'
artist, paint was a precious material, no less
precious than smalt. He revelled in the
beauty of its pure, simple colours, which he
applied in combinations of astonishing
resonance. When he carried colour to its
extreme degree of tension, he achieved a
quite unique colour system, strong, bright
and confident, unlike the severe and much
darker colour range of the Byzantine icons.
No less essential as a means of expression
in the hands of the Russian icon painter
was line. His mastery of line was com¬
plete. He could render it soft, clastic,
flowing, angular, monumental and calligra-
phically precise. He attributed particular
importance to the outline, which in Russian
icons is characterized by such great terse¬
ness that it recalls the concise outlines of
the figures on Greek vases.
UNESCO Album "U.S.S.R."
THE SAVIOUR is part of the deesis (set of ¡cons
representingjesus, the Virgin and St. John the Baptist)
painting by Andrei Rublëv. An icon painting on wood
dating from about 1400 and previously in the cath¬
edral of the Dormition at Zvenigorod, it is now part
of the collection in the Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow.
fa-5*i&;
UNESCO Album "U.S.S.R."
ARCHANGEL, a late I 2th-century wooden ¡con, formed
part of a half figure deesis from an altar screen. Stylisti¬
cally it is closely related to a group of works which has
been associated with the workshop of the "Greek Petro-
vich" (one of the artists who brought Byzantine art to
Russia). It is now in the Russian Museum, Leningrad.
15
