METEOROLOGY IN THE ATOMIC AGE
TWO PROBLEMS :
* Protection against
radio - active contamination
of the air
* Using atomic tracers
to study atmospheric
phenomena
There are certain aspects of the
utilization of atomic energy
which recently have received in¬
creasing public attention: firstly to
what extent the use of radio-active
substances can contribute towards the
solution of certain fundamental prob¬
lems in meteorology and secondly
the role which the meteorologist can
play in the "atomic age", for instance
in connexion with the work of safe¬
guarding the public against dangerous
contamination of the atmosphere due
to radio-active substances produced
by atomic plants.
It should be pointed out in the first
instance that the possibility of using
certain radio-active substances (iso¬
topes) in meteorological research, and
also in the closely related hydrological
research, is still in its experimental
stage. The research-projects men¬
tioned below should therefore not be
regarded as exhaustive, but rather as
examples of those possibilities which
at present look most promising.
One of the research projects which
particularly appeals to people's imagi¬
nation is the possible use oí a radio¬
active substance as a tracer to study
air currents in the atmosphere. The
main idea is to give the air current
a strong "injection" with a suitable
16
harmless radio-active substance, pre¬
ferably a gas, and subsequently study
the transport and dilution of the
radio-active gas in the atmosphere.
It has been suggested that this
method would be useful for the study
of the remarkably strong jet stream
which frequently exists at a height
oí 8 to 12 kilometres and which has
considerable importance in connexion
with the safety and economy of air¬
craft operation.
A large-scale experiment of this
type would require considerable pre¬
paration, not only to determine where
in the atmosphere it would be most
advantageous to release the radio¬
active gas, and at what time, but also
with regard to the choice of a radio¬
active tracer. This should have a
hali-life (1) of several years and it
should not be liable to be washed out
by precipitation.
Furthermore a world-wide network
of observing stations would have to be
organized and these should be in op¬
eration over a period of some years.
The first attempt would need to be
successful, for if it iailed, a second
trial could only take place after sever¬
al years, when the radio-activity of
(1) The time In which radlo-actlvlty Is
reduced to half.
the introduced tracer had diminished
sufficiently unless other and equally
good tracers were available.
Other possible uses of isotopes exist
due to the fact that radio-active
tritium can be used to "mark" water
vapour molecules without changing
their characteristics. Since water
vapour is an important link in the
hydrological cycle, there are reasons
to believe that the use of such tech¬
niques may be of importance, parti¬
cularly in hydrology. A similar me¬
thod has been employed in studying
the source of origin and movements
aï various types of surface water.
A third example is the use of radio¬
active measuring techniques to deter¬
mine the water equivalent of snow.
For various purposes, e.g. in con¬
nexion with the forecasting of river
floods and runoff, it is necessary to
know as accurately as possible the
water equivalent of the snow accu¬
mulated in a certain area in winter.
It has been suggested that the water
equivalent oí snow can be measured
with considerably greater ease than
with the present methods, by placing
a suitable radio-active substance at
the earth's surface below the snow,
and measuring the attenuation of the
radiation passing through the snow

layer. This method has already been
introduced on a trial basis at several
stations in the United States.
With regard to the second aspect of
the peaceful uses of atomic energy
the contamination of the atmosphere
is a field where the advice and
assistance of meteorologists would
be very useful indeed. Fortunately,
one of the characteristics of the
atmosphere is its ability to clean
itself, but this ability to dilute or
disperse "foreign" gases or particles is
limited, and varies with the season,
the time and geographical position.
The winter fog over London for in¬
stance or the common smoke-layer
over a great number of cities in the
morning always appears when the
conditions and movement of the
atmosphere are such that it does not
succeed in dispersing the contaminat¬
ing particles sufficiently rapidly.
The "waste-products" which certain
atomic plants are releasing into the
atmosphere may be several tens of
times more toxic than the waste-pro¬
ducts released from chimneys belong¬
ing to ordinary industry. It is there¬
fore of vital importance to find quan¬
titative expression for the relationship
between changes in the diluting abi¬
lity of the atmosphere and the result¬
ing concentration of radio-activity in
the air and on the ground.
This is a complicated problem, the
solution of which is mainly dependent
on accurate knowledge of wind and
temperature gradients and their
variations, horizontally, vertically and
with time. The topographical condi¬
tions around the atomic plant may
also play an important role in these
calculations.
The scope and type of assistance to
be given by the meteorologists in con¬
nexion with the establishment and
operation of industries based on atom¬
ic energy will naturally depend on
the site and size of the plant, and par
ticularly on the extent to which its
radio-active waste-products are ex¬
pected to contaminate the atmosphere.
It seems superfluous to point out that
the advice of the meteorologist should
preferably be obtained before the final
site for the atomic plant has been
agreed upon, unless other factors are
of greater importance.
Certain atomic plants may require a
permanent network of meteorological
stations which will have to undertake
frequent and regular observations.
These observations will be of impor¬
tance in ensuring that the operation
of the atomic plant at no time consti¬
tutes a risk for the population.
Neither the meteorologist nor the
atom-physicist should work indepen¬
dently on these problems. The nu¬
clear-physicists, chemists or engineers
will provide all information about the
source of the problems; amount, na¬
ture and properties of the radio-active
waste-products. The health physicist
will determine the permissible concen¬
tration of radio-activity in the air and
on the ground, and also the maximum
permissible doses of radiation. Taking
this information as a basis, the meteo¬
rologist will advise on the meteorolo¬
gical conditions which may lead to
concentrations of radiation exceeding
the permissible limits.
Both the health physicist and the
meteorologist will require a network
of observing stations to solve his part
of the task. As mentioned earlier, cer¬
tain meteorological research projects
are also dependent on a world-wide
network of observing stations. There
seems, therefore, to be some merit in
ensuring that the various measure¬
ments required for different purposes
are made at the same stations.
For health purposes, it is of the
greatest importance to measure the
total radio-activity due to air-borne
radio-active particles deposited on the
ground.
Tho Unesco Courier. July 1957
The meteorologist will, however, re¬
quire the following two types of radio¬
activity measurement: (a) at the
earth's surface; (b) in the free atmo¬
sphere.
The first of these will consist of
samples of radio-activity of rain water
and of measurements of radio-activity
of the air at the earth's surface by
means of a suitable filter (2). The se¬
cond type of observation is designed to
permit study of the vertical distribu¬
tion of radio-activity in the atmo¬
sphere, and requires relatively expen¬
sive equipment. Such observations
may consist of "filter" measurements
from aircraft or measurements made
by means of sounding balloons. The
latter method is still in an experimen¬
tal stage and is not considered as
sufficiently reliable.
It should be emphasized that the
establishment of stations for the
observation of radio-activity is closely
related to the peaceful uses of atomic
energy and a number of countries
have already set up such stations or
are in the course of doing so.
Steps to improve the world network
of stations for measuring radio-acti¬
vity to organize their programme of
observation and the collection of the
data are being taken in connexion with
the forthcoming International Geo¬
physical Year and it is believed that
this initiative will lead to a still closer
scientific co-operation between na¬
tions in this important field.
Whether we approve of the use of
atomic energy or not, the only course
open to us seems to be to prepare
ourselves in the best possible way to
use this new form of energy. In this
connexion the meteorologist should
accept his share of the work and of
the responsibility.
(2) The radio-activity of the filter Is mea¬
sured after a known amount of air has been
drawn through it.
RADIO-ACTIVE ISOTOPES are
today being considered for use in
meteorological research as "tracers'*
to study air currents in the atmo¬
sphere. Such substances are already
widely employed in medicine, agri¬
culture, industry and other fields.
Here, an industrial hygiene specialist
studies harmful airborne particles
in a factory. He counts the concen¬
tration of dust particles by coating
them with a radio-active substance
(metallic selenium). This research,
which includes testing the toxicity
of dusts on animals, is one type of
work performed by the Atomic
Energy Project at the University
of Rochester, in the United States.
SMOKE PLUMES coming from a
tower at U.S. laboratory, (opposite
page) enable meteorologists to
dermine the right weather condi¬
tions for releasing into the atmo¬
sphere air which has been used to
cool the laboratory's atomic reactor.
USIS Photos
17
