ZERO HOUR (MIDNIGHT)
FOR THE WEATHERMAN
WMO/OMM
T 1.12.001
Nothing is so effective in creating the fascinating
human diversity of races, cultures and ways of life
as the infinite range of local weather that is called
climate, irom that of the frozen Arctic tundra to the
tropics, from the rain forest to the desert. So the geo¬
physical sciences that touch us most closely are those that
study the weather and the climate.
Yet few people are aware that meteorology is not the
science of meteors but of weather. It seems a misnomer.
However, the word "meteor" comes from the ancient
Greek and means "high in the air" and originally included
all phenomena above the earth's surface, clouds as well as
the aurora and the "shooting stars" to which the word is now
limited. And what is more,
"climate" has changed its
meaning too, for originally it
referred only to the incline
(which has the same Latin
root) of the sun's rays at
various locations, whereas
now it refers to the relation
of the long-range weather
to the ground beneath. Me¬
teorology and climatology
are the geophysical sciences
with direct human appeal,
as distinct from the scien¬
tific and scholarly.
They are primarily con¬
cerned with the lowest layer
of air called the tropo¬
sphere which is close to
the earth and extends
upwards perhaps ten miles.
It is warmed by heat
radiated from the ground
and is compressed by the
weight of the air above
it which is about a ton
per square foot at sea
level. Here and there it is
saturated with water evapo¬
rated from the ocean which
condenses to form visible
clouds. It is in constant
turmoil, rising upward as it
is heated, dropping its moi¬
sture as rain when it is
cooled, flowing in swift
winds where differences of
pressure develop, swirling in
vast storms a thousand mi¬
les in diameter or whistling in violent whirling tornadoes,
hurricanes and typhoons when its energy is concentrated.
Man has always been at the mercy of the weather and
cannot control it. Indeed, it is beyond his understanding
because, as has been learned only recently, the circulation
of the lower atmosphere is partly dependent on the great
winds of the layer above, the cold stratosphere where the
air is too thin to support life or even the burning of a
candle. Meteorological researches of the Year will thus
include conditions in the stratosphere to a height of about
20 miles, as high as weather ballons can rise without burst¬
ing. But above that lies the ionosphere, the study of which
requires quite different devices and methods, a different
committee of the Year, and another article in this issue.
Adequate weather forecasts for a day or two into the
future have long been based on measurements and records
of the temperature, pressure, humidity, rainfall and the
direction and velocity of the wind, taken at weather sta¬
tions on the land and on ships at sea. The location of
existing storm centres was thus established and the direc¬
tion and speed of their movement could be predicted. But
predictions based only on the lowest layer of air, in contact
16
with the ground or sea, were not wholly reliable nor could
they extend more than a few days into the future. In
recent years weather analyses and 'forecasts have been
based on the movement of major air masses at high alti¬
tudes which profoundly influence air circulation at the
surface.
For this reason the weather balloon has become an im¬
portant observing instrument. Many are released as pilot
balloons to reach altitudes of five to ten miles where tha
direction and speed of their drift can be followed optically
from the ground stations. Others, called radio-sondes, carry
instruments to measure temperature, pressure and humidi¬
ty which are recorded or reported to ground by radio. A
third type is designed to
measure wind velocity. These
balloons are made of natu¬
ral or synthetic rubber, and
when properly handled and
inflated with hydrogen or
helium can climb to an alti¬
tude approaching 20 miles,
where the air pressure is
only one fiftieth that at sea
level and the balloon ex¬
pands under its own pres¬
sure until it bursts. Low
temperature is a major
cause of bursting, as the
rubber becomes less plastic.
Temperatures of -40°F and
even of -110°F are encoun¬
tered at such altitudes,
especially in the Arctic and
Formulaire N» 1 : Observations synoptiques en surface IQY/AGI
Région I : Afrique. StaUons : 64 400 - 65 592
6-10 JAN. 1957
MILLIONS OF OBSERVATIONS will be recorded at the Special
Meteorological Data Centre set up by the World Meteorological Orga¬
nization in Geneva during the I.G.Y. To publish them would require
about 1,000 volumes of 1,000 pages each. A cheaper and simple
solution has been found in the microcard (above) of less than postcard
size on which nearly 50 of the original report forms can be reproduced
photographically. Complete collection of meteorological reports
received during the I.G.Y. will be compressed into 20,000 microcards.
Antarctic, where special
weather stations are estab¬
lished for operation during
the Year.
Obviously data obtained
at any one station, no mat¬
ter how accurate or complete
are of little significance
until they are combined with data from the entire globe,
all of them taken at the same hours and taken every day.
Only in this way can the large air masses be identified
and their movements followed. Essential to the weather
studies of the Year, therefore, is the Meteorological Data
Centre operated by the World Meteorological Organization
(wmo) at Geneva, Switzerland, wmo is a specialized
agency of the United Nations as Unesco is which was
established with the purpose of co-ordinating, standardiz¬
ing and improving meteorological observations throughout
the world. It regularly publishes the quarterly wmo Bul¬
letin and for the purposes of the Year has published two
authoritative books, one a general survey of the meteoro¬
logical programme and the other a complete list of the
several thousand weather stations of the world that will
take part in it. The books can be obtained at wmo head¬
quarters, Campagne Rigot, Avenue de la
Paix, Geneva, for 10 and 8 Swiss francs, res¬
pectively.
The number of stations that will make
weather observations daily at six-hour in¬
tervals, beginning at O hours (midnight),

The Unesco Courier. Seotcmber 1957
AT WORK ON THE WEATHER. For many years meteorologists have been trying to obtain an ever
more complete picture of the global circulation of the atmosphereknowledge on which really reliable long-
range weather forecasting must depend. Much light has been thrown on this problem in recent years through
soundings of the upper atmosphere by the radio-sonde a small radio transmitter which signals atmospheric
pressure, temperature and humidity as it is carried aloft by a hydrogen-filled balloon (right). Three hundred
additional radio-sonde soundings will be made daily during I.G.Y. Above, observations of extraordinary meteo¬
rological phenomena, like this lenticular cloud formation on a storm-swept Antarctic island, help in valuable
long-range weather forecasting. Below, left and right, meteorologist analyses weather chart and a radar operator
picks up a far distant swirling hurricane on the scope of his set. This new radar equipment will enable meteo¬
rologists to study an entire weather front or to magnify and analyse a small portion of an approaching storm.
Meteorologie Nationale. Paris
WMO USIS

ZERO HOUR (Continued)
THE WORLD-WIDE EXTENT OF I.G.Y.- THOU
UNITED -¿,
KINGDOM^a^
Map courtesy of "New York Times" © 1957
Greenwich Mean Time, is now over 2,100, selected from a
much larger number of available stations in order to repre¬
sent as evenly as possible all areas of the earth. They are
located from pole to pole in 93 different countries, and in¬
clude remote islands in the oceans and ships at sea. There
is an especial concentration of stations in five north-south
or meridional bands, as shown on world map above.
In addition, some 650 stations are equipped with radio¬
sonde and radio-wind equipment for study of the upper
atmosphere. They are expected to carry out two radio-sound¬
ings (for temperature, pressure and humidity) and four
radio-wind observations daily. A total of 700 stations will
also measure the intensity of the radiation received from the
sun in terms of direct sunshine, diffuse skylight, long-wave
and short-wave (ultra-violet) radiation. Finally, about 100
stations will make frequent measurements of the ozone in
the atmosphere at various levels.
This is obviously the most extensive of all the programmes
to be undertaken during the Year. It involves many
thousands of technical experts and will grind out many
millions of individual measurements. These will all be sent
to Geneva and coded for reproduction on microcards which
can later be studied. It will be some years before the analysis
of the cards can distill from them the useful information
that may well revolutionize present concepts of atmospheric
18
energy and circulation and may permit more precise long-
range weather forecasts .
In scholarly terms the Special Committee for the Inter¬
national Geophysical Year has listed the following major
problems to be solved by this study: Redistribution in the
atmosphere on a planetary scale of momentum, absolute vor-
ticity, entropy and the various forms of energy.
Large-scale influence of friction and surface topography
on the balance of these factors.
Heat and momentum exchanges between the atmosphere
on the one hand and the continents and oceans on the other.
Flow patterns in the lower latitudes, including the inter¬
actions between the circulations of the two hemispheres and
between the tropical and extratropical circulations.
Distribution of precipitation, especially over the oceans
and distribution of evaporation at the earth's surface in
relation to large-scale world situations.
Horizontal and vertical distribution of ozone and of water-
vapour.
Heát balance and the radiation balance of the atmosphere
in relation to the general circulation.
The electric field in the atmosphere on a planetary scale
and its variations in terms of weather systems.
In plainer language, what is involved here is not merely
the mapping of the air movements but the transport by the

SANDS OF STATIONS WILL DOT THE GLOBE
The Unesco Courier. September 1957
air of heat, water, electricity and other forms of energy from
place to place on earth, from the hot tropics to the temperate
and polar zones, from the upper layers, where sunshine
strikes, to the lower, from the oceans to the land. Weather
is the result of such transportation and the winds that bring
the weather are themselves impelled by air pressure, which
represents energy.
In still plainer language, what is sought is the answer to
such questions as: Where and how are the winds generated?
What is the origin of the great vortex movements, from
rainstorms to hurricanes and typhoons? Are periods of warm
and of cold weather related to the energy received from the
sun or are they variations in the local energy balance cold
at one point being balanced by heat at another? What is
the effect on the atmospheric energy of the vast Antarctic
cold area? What is the effect of the temperature of the ocean
and of ocean currents? What is the weather map in the
stratosphere, where there is no water and no clouds but the
winds blow strong, and what is the effect of stratospheric
winds on the weather below? Does the earth radiate as much
energy into space as it receives from the sun, thus maintain¬
ing a balance, or is the earth slowly warming so that the gla¬
ciers are melting and the climate all over the earth is chang¬
ing slowly?
Many of these questions cannot be answered by meteorology
alone but involve observations in glaciology and oceanography
and especially the phenomena of the upper atmosphere that
will be separately studied by means of rockets and the physics
of the ionosphere, as detailed in a later article.
In order to tie together the lower and upper atmosphere
observations and to obtain a simultaneous report from diffe¬
rent sciences, the Special Committee has established a special
calendar for the 18 months of the Year which sets individual
days and ten-day periods, known as World Days and World
Meteorological Intervals, during which all observations will
be increased in number and special tests, such as rocket
launchings, will be made. (See pages 20 and 21).
If the occurence of spots on the sun i.e. electrical and mag¬
netic storms, could be predicted, a World Interval would
certainly be scheduled for that period because the electrical
conditions in the upper atmosphere are then profoundly
changed. Sunspots and electrical storms will very probably
increase during the Year, however, and provision has been
made for a Special World Interval whenever they do appear.
A short article can do no more than sketch the meteorolo¬
gical activities during the Year. Enough has been said to
show that the complexity of the investigations will match
the complexity of the causes of weather. They are hidden
today and as turbulently mixed as the storm winds them¬
selves. This geophysical year promises to unravel most oí
the confusion and permit much better weather forecasts.
19
