The Unesco Courier. January 1957
UNESCO-Marc Riboud
SHAFTS OF SUNLIGHT PIERCE THE GLOOM OF THE COVERED BAZAAR IN THE ANCIENT IRANIAN CITY OF ISFAHAN.
31


ISFAHAN
IS HALF OF
THE WORLD
The 16th century was a wonderful
epoch alike in Europe and Asia. It
was an epoch of great rulers like
Charles V, Elizabeth of England, Suleiman
the Great of Turkey and the Great Moghul
Akbar a remarkable group in which an
Iranian monarch, Shah Abbas I, can fit¬
tingly take his place. Shah Abbas came
to the throne in 1587. Sir Anthony Sher-
ley, an English soldier of fortune in his
service, wrote of him: "His furniture of
mind infinitely royal, wise, valiant, liberal,
temperate, merciful, and an exceeding lover
of Justice..." In 1598 he made his capital
at Isfahan where, on almost the only river
on a plateau over 5,300 feet above sea level,
a superb city grew up, approached by sta¬
tely bridges which led past the luxurious
gardens of courtiers to the Royal Square,
the Maidan-i-Shah. Favoured with royal
concern, Isfahan soon hummed with acti¬
vity in the arts and crafts and the new
Imperial City was filled with the splendid
monuments which still exist in good condi¬
tion today. Early in the 17th century it
had a population of over 600,000 whence
the Iranian saying Isfahan nisf-i-jahan
(Isfahan is half the world). Enclosed
within mud brick walls the city had 162
mosques, 48 religious colleges, 1,802 cara¬
vanserais and 273 public baths. Isfahan's
epoch of splendour lasted nearly a century
and a half until it was partially destroyed
when Iran was invaded in the 18th century.
In 1788 the capital was moved to Teheran.
**&W&
-"*. '
UNESCO - Marc Riboud
HALL OF FORTY COLUMNS, or Chehel Sutun
(left and opposite page) is so named for its 20 real
columns and their 20 reflections in the lake fronting it.
Famous as the throne room of Shah Abbas in Isfahan,
it is one of the courts and pavilions with which he
filled the gardens of his palace in the early 17th
century. Shah Abbas, who made Isfahan one of the
architectural wonders of the world, built several
magnificent palaces, planted gardens and avenues, and
distributed amongst them the waters of the Zendeh-
rud, on whose bank the city is built, in an endless series
of reservoirs, fountains and cascades. Above, the
magnificently decorated dome of the Madrasseh
Chahar-Bagh, one of the religious colleges of which
there were once over 50 in the city. Enamelled
tiles like those on archway make geometric and
floral patterns on city walls, domes and minarets.
33

ISFAHAN (Continuée.)
INTERLACED DESIGNS in Intricate
patterns sculptured in plaster decorate
this prayer niche or mehrab at the Djuma
Mosque, the oldest of Isfahan's mosques.
BHbbbbb
UNESCO-Marc Riboud.
VEILED SILHOUETTES of women in black
robes are a familiar sight in Isfahan. Those above
are In the courtyard of the Masjld-Shah or
Royal Mosque, which Is completely covered with
enamelled bricks of great brilliancy. Built by
Shah Abbas I and completed in 1612, it is still
one of the most beautiful buildings In the world.
Left, one of the particular features of the landscape
around Isfahan and elsewhere In Iran are the
constructions used to collect rain water. Water
drains through the ground Into the domes and is
cooled by air which enters shafts In the chimneys
from whatever direction the wind may blow.
34

The Unesco Courier. January 1957
UNESCO-Marc Riboud
HEART OF ISFAHAN and central point of interest in the city is the Maldan-I-Shah, the great Imperial Square (below), an immense and imposing
space 560 yards long by 174 yards wide, bordered by buildings of recessed arches or arcades. On the far side of square is the Royal Mosque; at
right, the ancient Mongol palace rebuilt by Shah Abbas. Viewed from the air, Isfahan presents an immense expanse of mingled buildings and gardens.
Above, graceful tiled arches of Isfahan's Royal Mosque reflect their colours In the clear waters of the basin where the faithful perform their ablutions.
