Harmful Animals
Are They Not
Hidden Friends?
by Jean-Paul Harroy
Governor of Ruanda-Urundi
Former Secretary-General, International Union for
the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources
"J*
Persfoto, Amsterdam by Lynwood M. Chace
Since prehistoric times certain animals have been
regarded as "harmful" and as such condemned to
relentless extermination by every possible means.
Sometimes the death sentence was justified on practical
grounds. Beasts of prey were hunted down because they
directly threatened man and his domestic animals. No
one could blame our Neolithic ancestors for their
determined and systematic war against the wild beasts
which menaced their existence. Yet, until recently, some
very different reasons have been invoked in condemning
to death animals which in no way represented a threat
to man. Superstitious beliefs which grew up concerning
them or simply their physical appearance repulsive to
men's eyes were sufficient to make them hated and to
provoke the utmost cruelty towards them.
The most obvious example, of course, is that of the
screech owl. Even today it strikes us as an uncanny bird
with its muted flight, night-prowling habits and to our
ears dismal, haunting cries, not to mention those sounds
it emits which are said to resemble the death-rattle. It
has long been regarded as a bird "'of ill omen", and
throughout the Middle Ages, and even up to the end of
the last century in some places, these owls were crucified
on barn-doors in Central and Western Europe as a pro¬
tection against the Evil One.
Yet the screech owl and other members of the owl family
though the chief victims of such superstitions, were also
the first to win rehabilitation. Peasants are shrewd obser¬
vers of the workings of nature. What they saw of the
owl gradually convinced them that whatever its supposed
guilt in the realm of sorcery, it was more than making
up for it in the more practical sphere of agriculture, by
destroying rats, mice and other rodent-ravagers of the
crops.
Thus was born the idea that even where an animal has
been judged as harmful to human interests universally,
there may have been a miscarriage of justice; that a
fuller investigation may reveal it to be a friend of man.
People were beginning to see that judgement should not
be pronounced too hastily.
But this first rehabilitation did not immediately open
the way to the modern theory of natural balance which
maintains that every living creature has its part to play
in the biological complexes biocenoses, as ecologists call
them in which the removal of a single link produces
14

The Unesco Courier. January' 1958
National Farks Board by W. F. Schack
effects which are nearly always unpredictable and in the
long run harmful.
Until very recently game-laws of nearly all countries
made wide use of such terms as "noxious" or "harmful ani¬
mals", "'vermin!" and "pests". Laws of this kind still exist
in some parts of the world, for instance in Africa, where
beasts of prey, snakes, crocodiles and a few luckless birds
and mammals can be destroyed by any means whatever,
without possession of a licence. Fortunately, however,
the idea is now growing that the vast majority of such
judgments on animals should be reviewed because they
have been based on superficial evidence.
In this respect, Africa itself has just provided a classic
example of a complete reversal of policy. Until recently
the leopard figured here on the "black list" of harmful
animals and its destruction was encouraged by the au¬
thorities and actively pursued by all those who were able
to do so.
The result was soon felt. Over, vast areas the leopard
became practically extinct. At the same time, wild pigs
and baboons, whose young had previously been decimated
by the leopard, increased so greatly that farmers found
the destruction of their crops by these animals far more
THE OTTERAND THE FISHERMAN
Man frequently seeks to destroy a particular form of wildlife that
he believes to be harmful to his interests, without thinking of conse¬
quences that may arise. In doing so he risks upsetting the delicate
balance which exists between the four essential elements of his life
and nourishment: water, soil, flora and fauna. The otter, for
example, had a bad reputation as a fish robber (1) and in some
countries fishermen began to destroy their rival (2). At first after
the otter had gone there was fishing in plenty (3), but suddenly the
fish started to vanish (4). Why ? The otter had been catching
mostly sick fish which had less chance to escape him. When the
otter disappeared, sickness spread among the fish and destroyed
many. (These drawings are taken from "Precarious Balance", a
film strip prepared by the I.U.C.N. with Unesco's assistance.)
disastrous than the damage previously done in poultry-
yards and sheepfolds by the leopards. Several govern¬
ments, including that of British East Africa, have openly
admitted their mistake and have transferred the leopard
from the category of harmful animals to the list of pro¬
tected ones yet another convincing lesson, encouraging
us to think twice before condemning.
In general, and for good or bad, sentiment still
influences man's attitude to and treatment of animals.
Public feeling aroused all over the world by the fate or a
dog involved in the experiments conducted with an arti¬
ficial satellite is a recent and striking example of this.
Another example is the basic difference of the reaction
to the destruction of what are regarded as predatory
creatures, according to Whether they are vertebrates or
invertebrates. In West Africa the crops are ravaged, to
an extent which is catastrophic for the population, by
flocks of birds, the Quelea Quelea or weaver bird, and
by swarms of locusts. Faced with the famines caused by
this repeated devastation, the authorities have resorted
to measures which unfortunately must be brutal to be
effective for the destruction of Quelea and locusts alike.
Associations and individuals protested strongly against
the mass killing of the birds but no one deprecated the
slaughter of the locusts, probably because people still
think of them as "'the plague of Egypt".
Even so, in the twentieth century, with its rational
outlook and increasingly planned and controlled econo¬
mies, action taken on utilitarian grounds is yearly increas¬
ing at the expense of purely emotional behaviour.
The problem therefore is to determine the pertinence of
these utilitarian aims and strike a balance between them.
When, the original reason for the verdict of destruction
ceases to be the only factor under consideration, it may
be found to be offset; or even more than offset, as in the
case of the owl and the leopardby other factors, favour¬
able to human interests, but previously underestimated
or unrecognized. Unfortunately, the precise importance
of these factors is often revealed only when
the species has been wiped out and the loss
of its activity begins to be felt. Cont'd
A practical illustration of this idea of 0n
striking a balance is given in an excellent next page
pamphlet, "Predator Control. Why and
25

HARMFUL ANIMALS?
(Continued) THINK BEFORE YOU STRIKE TO KILL
How", published by the Conservation Commission of the
State of Missouri, U.S.A., in 1955 (Jefferson City; I. T. Bode,
Director). "For instance," it says, "we might study the
food-intake of a number of coyotes and find that of their
total foods, they killed about $500 worth of poultry and
livestock. But most of the rest of the food was mice
and rats which, if predators hadn't eaten them, would
have ruined $700 worth of crops. The answer seems clear:
we have a $200 profit in those coyotes..."
This theoretical example, incidently, is based on a
proven fact. In 1953 the ranchers of the Toponas district
of Colorado, U.S.A. embarked on a campaign for the
extermination of coyotes. They abandoned it on discover¬
ing that the value of the lambs and calves Whose lives
were thus saved was less than that of the increasing
. damage inflicted on crops
and grazing grounds by the
rabbits and rats which now
began to swarm over the
district.
Which is the best policy:
complete non-intervention,
leaving carnivorous ani¬
mals to do the useful ser¬
vice of killing off sick or
crippled herbivora, or, on
the contrary, the organized
slaughter of a certain num¬
ber of beasts of prey, to
help hoofed animals to
increase in number? So
far, the . biologists working
in national parks and na¬
ture reserves have not yet
agreed which is the best
course to follow.
The otter is considered as
an enemy by most fisher¬
men. Yet in pools where
otters were exterminated
in Poland, for instance
there was a decrease in the
number of fish. Disease now
spread more rapidly since
the disappearance of the
sharp-fanged beasts which
had formerly caught and
devoured any fish weaken¬
ed and slowed down by
infection. In Switzerland,
where the otter had been
classed among the so-called
harmful animals which could be killed during part of the
"close season" for other animals, there was a change of
view and it was proposed to make the otter a "Federally
protected" animal as had been done with the leopard in
Africa.
In Africa, the crocodile is universally detested, but its
status has still not been established to the satisfaction of
ecologists. A recent report of the East African Fisheries
Research Organization listed the useful work done by
crocodiles (destruction of insects, shell-fish, predatory
crustaceans, diseased fish etc.), though it concluded: "It
is a great pity that they also sometimes attack human
beings."
Science is putting more and more effort into weighing
up these pros and cons. On Valcour Island, in Lake
Champlain, U.S.A., a study following a costly operation
to reduce the number of predators, showed that for the
first four years the birds and small mammals increased
in number. So did the popular "game" grouse and hares.
But once this period was at an end, disease became
26
Taken from the film strip "Precarious Balance"
THE RAT AND THE MONGOOSE. In Jamaica, in 1872, the mon¬
goose was brought into the island to kill off the rats which were causing
serious damage to sugar cane plantations. Ten years later the mongoose
had killed off nearly all the rats and, looking for new food supplies, it
started to destroy lambs, kids, pigs, poultry, kittens and puppies. Then
wildlife also began to suffer: the greater part of the island's fauna vanished
into the hungry stomach of the mongoose. Eventually the mongoose
killed so much that its own food supply was scarce and its numbers
declined. The rat, meanwhile, had become a tree dweller and raised
its families in safety. Thus a new balance was established in the midst
of the destruction. And the rats were still there, for in three years
a couple of rats may produce as many as 257,762 descendants.
rampant and the numbers of animals declined rapidly.
Other research has little by little revealed the unsus¬
pected usefulness of some much-abused species. The
black cockatoo, hunted down in Australia because of the
harm it does to shrubs, has recently been recognized for
its value in keeping down' the beetle known as the dendro-
phagous longicorn. This year the shark has been revealed
as a prolific source of batylic alcohol, valuable in the
treatment of certain pathogenic effects of radio-activity.
The porcupine, another enemy of trees with a price on
his head, is now said to be less of a criminal than was
previously thought. The extenuating circumstances in
his favour are that by stripping off the bark of young trees
he carries out a process of "'selection felling" and that in
wintertime he is unintentionally useful to the deer by
scattering the ground with
vegetable refuse which
would otherwise be out of
their reach.
Finally, I should like to
mention two aspects of the
campaigns or policies for
the extermination of
"harmful" species which
may have greater conse¬
quences than the promotors
intend.
One concerns the method
of extermination. In many
cases this is not specific
enough so that in trying to
get rid of real or imaginary
predators, we also destroy
species which are definitely
useful, or seriously disturb
some important natural
balance. Traps and poison
do not discriminate between
harmless species and those
they are intended to kill.
The best-known instance
of this is the large-scale
spraying of chemical in¬
secticides, which sometimes
exterminate an entire en¬
tomological species
leading to the starvation
of insectivorus animals
and are also harmful to
crustaceans, fish, batrachia,
birds and even mammals.
Thus great damage can be
done when only one '"harmful" insect species is attacked.
The other aspect which I feel should be mentioned
relates to those campaigns to eliminate predators as a
protective measure which are over-successful. After the
predator has been eliminated from the biological cycle the
numerical increase which was sought after for certain
species is achieved. But in some cases proliferation is not
impeded by disease. Is success necessarily a good thing?
There is the example of the Kaibab plateau in
north-western Arizona, where, following the extermination
of wolves and pumas, the deer of the plains have increased
to such an extent that hundreds of them are now starving
for lack of pasture. And without becoming involved in
polemics, we might also remind ourselves that our mastery
of the microscopic predators on the human race, since
the time of Pasteur, is now resulting in a staggering and
in many ways alarming increase in the world's population.
Is mankind preparing for itself the fate of the Kaibab
deer? Make no mistake about it, the question "Friend
or enemy?" deserves some serious thought.
