The Unesco Courier. January 1958
The roof over our head, whether
made of brick, slate or straw, is
an offering of Nature, and so are
the walls that shelter us, and even
the windows that let in the light.
Whether we travel by stage coach or
carriage as in the past, whether by the
"iron horse" or whether in modern
cars, now as then the materials are
furnished by Nature, source of the
iron, and the stone, the coal and the
spark, the sand and the water. But
Nature is a whole, a sum total of self-
adjusting elements that intersect and
depend on one another like the com¬
plicated wheels of a chronometer.
These elements are held in a delicate
balance, more or less unstable, each
factor being linked with all the others.
All that is required to destroy that
balance is one element, one disturbing
agent, one blundering interference.
One fillip is enough to bring the card-
castle toppling and to start a chain of
repercussions that involve a series of
unexpected catastrophes. The com-
I.U.C.N.
FLOURISHING FEATHER TRADE in the early years of this century led to millions of seabirds
being killed in the volcanic and coral islets to the north-west of the main Hawaiian Archipelago.
Since then many varieties of birdspetrels, terns, albatrosseshave been given protection in the
Hawaiian Islands National Wildlife Refuge. Above, a fairy tern on its nest in the National Refuge.
position of a landscape, for example,
is not a matter of chance. It is
decided by the nature of the soil and
the climatic conditions. These con¬
ditions, in their turn, bring about the
appearance of whatever plant, what¬
ever tree and as a result, whatever
animal may find the environment
there suitable for its needs. It all
adds up to form an association in
which the elements are intimately
intricate.
Hippos raise fish crops
The interrelationship of natural
elements is illustrated strikingly
by the role played by insects in
pollination of plants. Certain in¬
dustrial crops are entirely dependent
on this. Without bees, our orchards
would bear no fruit. The olive groves
of Sardinia were sterile for an entire
season after insecticides, spread to
exterminate malaria mosquitos, had
destroyed the bees in the region as
well. The relations between living
beings cannot always be foreseen, they
are often linked in most unexpected
ways. Who, for instance, would think
of linking hippopotami, that live part
of their mysterious existence in African
waters, with fish farming? But they
are valuable auxiliaries, especially in
the case of East African lakes that are
fed a relatively small quantity of
water by their tributaries, where
every plant and animal plays the role
of a regulator. The excrements of the
hippopotami fertilize the water
depths, favouring the formation of
phytoplankton which, for its part,
nourishes the tilapias. These indigen¬
ous fish are widely used by large fish
farming enterprises and supplement
the protein so essential to the peoples
of the African Continent.
Plundering and blundering
Man himself is an element of
Nature. It is normal that he
should draw his own subsistence
from the natural world. The complex
mechanism that is called "natural ba¬
lance" will be seriously
hampered only when Cont'd
human levies on on
natural resources are
mismanaged and
next page
27

THE GOLDEN
EGG (Continued)
MAN THE SORCERER'S APPRENTICE
immoderate. The coexistence of living
beings in a natural state takes place
in accordance with biological laws
governed by their vital needs. But
man, through his ingenuity, dispens¬
ed with the rules that limited his
population. He discovered hygiene
and developed antibiotics, comfort
and means of achieving it. He found
ways of preventing infant mortality
and of prolonging life for the aged.
Consequently, the human population
is growing at a fantastic rate: two
and half billion today, four billion by
the end of this century. It is hardly
surprising that this rising figure
should have serious repercussions
on natural associations.
Dwindling fossil fuels
Among those resources which are
indispensable to man, certain of
them are net renewable. The
exploitation of coal and oil and other
products furnished by the mineral
kingdom cannot be continued indef¬
initely without risking the exhaustion
of the source. On the other hand, ve¬
getable and animal living resources on
which our lives are dependent, will
renew themselves indefinitely on the
condition that moderation and good
sense govern their use. They must be
used as shares and not as the appro¬
priation of capital. The soil is our
basic capital. The well-being of a
country is linked with the few inches
of arable land, formed of decomposed
organic matter, and of soil nutrients.
The farm produce which forms a large
part of our economy depends on the
thickness of this fertile layer, and so
does the food for the livestock which
is also part of the human diet.
Green anchors of the soil
Where man has inherited the
land intact, it is the vegeta¬
tion forests or prairies that
anchors the arable layer to the base
soil. This plant life has protected it
against the violence of the elements
in such a way as to balance the
inevitable losses against the rate of
renewal. . Vegetation also contributes
to the formation of the organic
matter that nourishes the soil and
helps the circulation of water and
nutritive salts. It shelters the earth,
especially in tropical regions, from the
burning force of the sun which would
oxidize organic matter, and render
the top layers sterile. All forests con¬
tribute to the formation and renewal
of humus. Trees hold the hillside
soils and protect the shallow leached
mould from the torrential tropical
eroding rains. One of the most im¬
portant roles played by forests is
in stabilizing the water cycle.
Vegetation facilitates evaporation.
28
The roots then absorb precipitation
moisture, allowing it to filter slow¬
ly through the soil feeding the
underground water tables, and
maintaining them at a high level.
This process of percolation, aided by
the vegetation which keeps the soil
porous and permeable, takes place
gradually. Thus, the forest earth
becomes a reservoir in anticipation of
dry spells. On the other hand, rain
and snow held by vegetation and
filtered through the soil will not swell
floods by their volume, but, purified by
their passage through dead leaves and
humus, will flow crystal-clear into
streams. The trees are thus one of
the surest stabilizers of natural balan¬
ce, controlling the supply of water
under the ground surface as well as
above it, channelling it to rivers and
torrents. They are bulwarks against
spring floods and summer droughts.
Science seeks living relics
Fauna, too, is a valuable resource.
Wild game has played a part in
human economy since ancient
times, and numerous peoples are still
entirely dependent on it for food and
clothing. Our own domestic livestock
can be traced to certain wild species.
In the isolated habitat provided by
certain islands, ancient forms of vege¬
table or animal life have been able to
survive, cut off and safe from the
threat of large types of aggressive
fauna and the competition of intro¬
duced species. These living relics
offer remarkable testimonies to scien¬
ce and have formed a basis for
studies in evolution. Darwin's obser¬
vations on the finches of the Galapa¬
gos Islands inspired him in his
revolutionary deductions. Australian
marsupials have provided a curious
phenomenon of evolution by conver¬
gence, and there is much that remains
to be learned through their study.
The Koala is among these marsupials.
Hunters in pursuit of their fur have
destroyed ten million on these bears
in the short space of half a century.
The loss of such subjects of research
would be an irrevocable mistake.
Death of the land
To increase his crops and acquire
more land to meet the ever in¬
creasing demands of a rapidly
growing population, man clears new
land, denudes it and exposes it to the
intemperate elements, to heat, wind
and storm. Rains wash the soil and
rob it of mineral salts. The terrible
process of erosion sets in. Erosion
costs the United States alone around
four thousand million dollars a year;
in Northern China, vast territories,
formerly forested, have been victimiz¬
ed by its destructive force. They have
become useless expanses of dust and
rock. The inhabitants of these areas
find their only firewood by uprooting
. stumps left in the ground after it has
been cleared. Nevertheless, in the
6th century A.D. the great philosopher
Lâo-tseu had already warned his peo¬
ple against the tragic consequences
that would arise from a policy of
deforestation.
Deserts on the march
Paying no heed to the inevitable
consequences of their actions, the
agriculturist and the herdsman
push ever farther, one seeking fresh
fields, the other new pastures. They
burn the forest for it is the quickest
and most destructive method. They
leave behind exhausted and sterile soil
and desolate landscapes, and they will
push yet farther. This is one of the
causes for the advance of desert land.
Certain writers hold that the Sahara
has encroached upon 300 kilometres
of African land during the past three
centuries. Once the forest has gone
and the earth's green mantle brutally
torn away, the soil is at the mercy of
winds that carry off the valuable top
soil. In the United States, this wind
erosion carved out the "Dust Bowl".
The exodus during the ensuing years
is well remembered. The farmers
were forced to leave the forbidding
regions where there was no longer any
land that would yield crops. Europe
itself, though favoured by a mild
climate, is now beginning to know the
consequences of deforestation. Dust
storms have occurred, notably in the
vicinity of Hanover (Germany) where
30 per-cent of the surface of fields was
carried off by the wind to such an
extent that the roads were sometimes
covered with about 15 inches of
humus and sand. For the same
reasons, other Eastern European
countries are threatened with gradual
transformation into steppes.
Incas' forbidden islands
The old tale of the goose that laid
the golden egg is still to the
point. Peru's chief source of
wealth is guano, a manure deposited
by certain birds on Peruvian islands.
Of these birds, the Cormorant is the
foremost producer of this valuable
resource. Guano Was so important
that even the Incas were Well aware
of its value, and punished by death
any intruder who ventured to these
protected islands without permission.
Virtually abandoned for many years,
the supply of guano replenished itself
until a considerable stock had
accumulated. Finally, in the middle
of the last century, exploitation
started on a large scale. The birds
themselves were looked upon as harm¬
ful to crops and were driven from
their nests by boys specially hired for

The Unesco Courier. January 1958
rCLASS VII LAND
USIS
TREAT THE LAND RIGHT. The U.S. Soil Conservation Service's formula for sound land treatment and use is: Treat the different kinds of land
on a farm according to their individual need or condition; use each kind according to its capability for continued safe and economical production.
Each conservation measure is specifically designed to fit the land on which it is used. Taken on a South Carolina Farm, this photograph, shows eight
different classes of land, each differing from the others in soil or slope, or both. The first four are those suitable for cultivation: (I) Requires good
soil management practices only. (2) Moderate conservation practices necessary. (3) Intensive conservation practices necessary. (4) Perennial vegeta¬
tion-infrequent cultivation. The second four classes of land shown here are those not intended for cultivation, but for pasture, hay, woodland and
wildlife: (5) No restrictions in use. (6) Moderate restrictions in use. (7) Severe restrictions in use. (8) Best suited for wildlife and recreation.
the job. Tne supply was rapidly
exhausted until at last, in 1909, the
Peruvians decided to create a con¬
servation society, "Compania Admi¬
nistradora des Guano", which is now
a member of the I.U.C.N. Among the
typical cases where the natural ba¬
lance is destroyed, those involving the
introduction of a foreign species info
a new environment seem to react in
the most unpredictable ways. In
these cases too, man is the sorcerer's
apprentice. Although often uninten¬
tionally, he introduces a plant or an
animal into an environment where it
is freed from whatever natural enemy
controlled it in its original habitat
and prevented it from reaching
excessive numbers. The first step to
avoid such dangers is to see that the
general public understands the
problems. An enlightened citizen
will more readily respect regu¬
lations when the authorities impose
them and will even encourage them
when necessary. The I.U.C.N. has
assumed this role of educator and
informer as one of its primary func¬
tions. The message must be address¬
ed above all to the young. Towards
this end, the I.U.C.N. organizes or
sponsors international camps for the
study and protection of nature where
young people of diverse nationalities
can exchange ideas and share their
experiences. The first of these camps
was held at Houyet, Belgium, in the
summer of 1952, and it has since
become an annual event, held each
year in a different part of the world.
Nature ignores frontiers
It is essential that the youth of the
universe should realize that all
nations aspiring to prosperity
must recognize the great importance
of conserving their natural resources.
The International Union for the Con¬
servation of Nature has spoken in the
interests of a progressive transition
towards new knowledge and new
understanding for children in primary
scnools, in their relations with their
physical and natural environment.
It has strongly urged that the simple
principles of the conservation of
nature and natural resources be in¬
corporated in primary school pro¬
grammes in urban as well as rural
areas. Nature ignores the political
boundaries set by man. Regulations,
if they are to be effective, often call
for concerted efforts on an inter¬
national scale. This applies, for
instance, to the conservation of marine
species, migratory birds, and to the
prevention of pollution of the seas by
oil residue, a practice that results in
general pollution of coasts and
coastal waters. Bathers complain of
the black sticky residue that spoils the
beaches and clings to the rocks, robb¬
ing much of the charm from their
summer pastime. The fish suffer,
the owners of pleasure-boats are
dissatisfied and the sea birds perish
by the hundreds of thousands.
Unable to fly or to seek food, they are
doomed to die from cold and hunger.
29
