J Ph. Charbonnier © Realities
In the mountain-rimmed, open spaces of Mongolia, children learn to ride when they are four or five years old on ponies which
are famed for their speed and hardiness. Automobiles can be used, even without roads, over great stretches of the flat dry
country, but the people rely mostly on horses for transportation and the mail is usually carried by men on relays of horses.
by K. D. Erdmann
Professor of Modern History, University of Kiel, Federal Republic of Germany
Since the middle of the 18th century, Europeans
have become accustomed to arranging the history
of civilizations in a series which, while chrono¬
logical, also signifies a grading of values. Tbe 18th
century French statesman and economist, Turgot,
himself visualized the evolution of history in three stages,
namely, the theological, metaphysical and empirical eras.
As empirical knowledge developed in Europe, Europeans
felt justified in considering themselves in the forefront
of progress and looking down on other civilizations as
backward.
This outlook is aptly described in the following terms
by Paul Hazard in his book on La pensée européenne au
XVIII' siècle : "'The virtuous Chinese and the wise
Egyptians were for ever being praised; but it had to be
admitted that neither China nor Egypt had fulfilled the
promises of early days. They had remained sunk in iner¬
tia, while the West had displayed tireless intellectual
curiosity. It had never ceased to do so, so that the
Greeks and Romans themselves were surpassed by the
present... and thus the new Europe was better than the
old... Not that its sons were without faults. Restless
and excitable, their history was one of incessant revolu¬
tions and their annals a tissue of misfortunes, follies and
crimes. Corrupted by luxury, they cruelly exploited the
inhabitants of the colonies they had conquered. Yet they
retained the right to be proud of themselves. Why had
the Asians and Africans not anchored in their harbours,
conquered their territories and imposed their authority
on the local princes? Because the Europeans were
stronger and they were stronger because they were wiser;
being wiser, they represented a more advanced state of
civilization."
This conviction of the superiority of the progressive
European spirit over people of other civilizations has been
very forcibly expressed in Hegel's Philosophy of History.
26

The Unesco Courier. December 1958
He took freedom as the central theme of history. The
essence of world history was, according to his famous defi¬
nition, progress in consciousness' of freedom. He consi¬
dered that history began in the Far East and then advan¬
ced through the Near East, Greece and Rqme, to culminate
in European civilization. He did not see cultures on the
same level as different possibilities inherent in Man's na¬
ture of representing himself and interpreting his position
in the world; on the contrary, looking back from the cul¬
tural heights of 19th century Europe, the old civilizations
of Asia and ancient European cultures appear as histori¬
cal stages which have been left behind.
All of us have had numerous occasions to realize that
the end of European colonialism does not mean the end
of the process of Europeanization which began to spread
through the World a century ago. On the contrary, this
process has been accelerated since the freed peoples of
Asia have themselves taken over, with all their energy,
the rebuilding and modernization of their economies,
States, and societies. No one can foretell the fate
of these ' peoples' ancient philosophical, religious and
artistic inheritance or foresee, whether a civilization,
forming a new chapter in human history, will
emerge from this confrontation.
In order to see the relationship between East and West
in proper historical perspective, however, it must be rea¬
lized that the development of modern technology means
a profound incision, not to say a break, even in Europe
itself. The life of a modern European is further removed
from the life of a townsman or countryman of Goethe's
day, some 150 years' ago, than the life of the latter was
'from that of a European in the early Middle Ages, a
thousand years ago. It is becoming increasingly clear
from historical research that the real turning point in
European' 'history was not in 1500, between the Middle
Ages and modern times, but at the time of the great
industrial, political and social revolution of the 18th and
19th centuries.
Man has taken it upon himself to burst his natural
bonds and to conquer time and space. Like technology,
economics and society have been drawn into the sphere
of planning and calculation. Our age is dominated by
technical considerations of a utilitarian nature and not
by respect for inherited values and traditions. For a
thousand years; the basic element of the European social
system was seignorial right and the privileged urban
community. This system, on which the old European
culture was based, has vanished. A propertied and edu¬
cated middle class and after that the working class, have
come to the fore as the determining factors in history,
and the process of social revolution, which began
150 years ago, has not yet come to an end. Educators
throughout the Western world are wondering what will
become of Europe's cultural and educational inheritance
and whether, for example, a classical education has any
real chance of survival in the present-day World.
In this uncertainty about its present-day civilization,
Europe is in a position which, despite all differences, is in
a sense comparable with that of the peoples of Asia, with
their ancient civilizations, who are in process of becoming
Europeanized. All civilizations are today facing the same
problem, namely, how to preserve an old and hallowed
cultural heritage, handed down through the ages, in our
modern world of technology and bureaucracy, and whe¬
ther it is even possible or desirable to preserve it. Do the
peoples of East and West realize that they are in the
throes of the same cultural crisis?
For the Westerner, it may be said that the fascination
of Asia lies in its traditional culture its old religions, phi¬
losophy, wisdom and art in comparison with which
modern Asian culture and Asian present-day problems
are unfortunately given less weight. Conversely, is it not
true that the attraction of Western civilization for the
A^ian peoples is to be attributed almost entirely to modern
scientific and technological progress, which has made
them forget the old European values?
Here, it appears necessary to establish a balance and
this might be a special task for Unesco under its East-
West Project. The Westerner, who looks upon free Asia
as an area where a great and immensely important move¬
ment is going on, must recognize that the attempt of the
Asian peoples to reconcile their venerable cultural tradi¬
tion with present-day industrial and technological needs
is a matter which concerns him also. Whether this
reconciliation is everywhere desired and whether, where
it is desired, it will succeed, is another question.
This aspect of the Asian situation is important to the
modern Westerner, concious of his Own cultural problems.
On the other hand, I wonder how far the Asian peoples
in process of adopting Western industrial practices and
technology are aware that this is only one aspect of
Western civilization. Industry and technology are the
offshoots of science and the latter is deeply rooted in the
intellectual, and I might even say spiritual, heritage of
Europe. A gulf divides the new Europe from the old and
yet modern Europe draws its life-blood from its intellec¬
tual past and its historical legacy.
J. Ph. Chardonmer © Realities
Chemistry class in a laboratory at the Uni¬
versity of Ulan Bator, formerly Urga, the
capital of the Mongolian People's Republic.
Werner Bischof© Magnum photos
Rubber latex being graded after cleaning ¡n
Cambodia. In north-west Cambodia is Angkor
Wat, capital of the once mighty Khmer Empire.
High Commissioner for Ceylon, London
Papaw growing in Ceylon Is tapped for the
latex that is used ¡n the manufacture of
papain, a ferment which decomposes proteins.
27
