THE LION OF ASIA once roamed over the southern part
of the continent from Asia Minor to India. Darius, Xerxes
and other rulers of the Persian Empire caused the image
of the largest of great cats to be carved in the decorations
of the mighty cities they built. Today there are perhaps 250
surviving under protection in the Gyr Forest to the north¬
west of Bombay. Elsewhere they have been wiped out.
THE MOUNTAIN ZEBRA today maintains a precarious foothold
in the mountainous region of Cape Colony, South Africa, where a
hundred or so live in reservations. A century ago they were num¬
bered in millions until they began to be relentlessly hunted down
for their skins. Their low birthrate a female gives birth once
every two yearshas made it impossible for them to recover
from the effects of the wholesale killings which were done.
Drawings taken from Derniers Refuges (Last Refuges), an annotated Atlas of the world's nature reserves prepared by the International Union for the Conservation of
Nature. (I.U.C.N.). © 1956 by Editions Elsevier, Amsterdam and Brussels, and by the I.U.C.N.

FOSSILS OF TOMORROW
by Marguerite Caram and JJ. Petfer
International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources
Hunted to excess, victims of Man's expansion and
struggle for more living space, prey to epidemics,
prejudices and other destructives forces, wild creatures
are diminishing in numbers. Entire species are disappearing
from the face of the earth. In the 19th century alone 70
species became extinct and in the past 50 years a further 40
have died out. Today the existences of a further 600 are
threatened. One after another they seem destined to join
the long list of animals each of whose names is now no
more than a scientific appelation used by the palaeontologist
and whose only relics are skeletons, reconstituted with
varying success in museums. It is true that in recent years
there has been some heartening progress in wildlife protection
in some countries, where governments have set up conserva¬
tion departments. But, on the whole, if it were not for the
few scientists, nature lovers and economists, who are trying to
save them, realizing their importance in nature's
biological pattern, many animals would quickly Cont'd
be doomed to extinction, and would be fated
to become the fossils of tomorrow.
on
page 8
THE RIGHT WHALE, which
measures between 70 and I 00 feet,
has been almost completly exter¬
minated, although since I 944 (whal¬
ing was reduced during the Second
World War) some increase in its
numbers has been noted in the
Beaufort Sea (northern Canada).
Today the killing of whales is res¬
tricted by international conven¬
tions which fix the maximum catch
in "whale units" for any season.

The Unesco Courier. January 1958
THE ONE-HORNED RHINOCEROS from
India, a survivor of prehistoric times, was once
found in all parts of the ancient Indian Empire.
One of the reasons for its progressive exter¬
mination Is the superstition surrounding its
horn which, when ground to powder, is said to
have therapeutic properties. Several hundred
of these beasts still live in the animal sanctuary
at Kasiranga, Assam. Like its Javan relative
the one-horned rhinoceros of the Sunda it
is counted among the world's rarest animals.
© L. Talbot
THE ADDO ELEPHANT whose mighty
herds once roamed the plains of Africa is now
restricted to a special reserve, the Addo
Elephant National Park, to the north of Port
Elizabeth. Elephants are the biggest animals
that walk on four legs, but the Addo elephant
is one of the smaller of the species. Although
there are only about a score of these elephants
in the South African reserve, they did so much
damage "raiding" local farms for food that
the authorities were finally obliged to ring
the elephant park with an electrified fence.
Taken from Derniers Refuges 1956
ï&m*-'
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service photo by E.H. Haddon
THE WILD BISON of North America, inescapably linked with that adventurous character of our
childhood, Buffalo Bill, barely escaped extinction. Immense herds, millions strong, once grazed
on the great North American Prairie. Despite trading in the hides of these animals, the herds
remained practically intact until about 1870. The building of the trans-continental railway was
like the signing of their death warrant. The story is told in records of the Northern Pacific
Railway: In 1882 this company transported 200,000 buffalo hides; in 1883, 40,000; in 1884,
300; in 1885none! The main industrial value of these victims of the steam engine lay in the
use of their carcasses for making fertilizer. Skeletons were collected along the prairie by hundreds
of tons. Today the American bison lives protected in United States National Parks where there
are about 30,000 head. (Photo above was taken on the National Bison Range, Moiese, Montana).
Across the Atlantic, the European bison, still lives on Soviet and Polish reservations and a recently
noted increase in numbers gives hope that efforts made for its preservation may also be successful.

Fossils of tomorrow
(Continued)
IN the Arabian desert there lives an animal which is believed
to have given rise to a famous legend. It is the handsome
white desert antelope. The smallest representative of
the Oryx group, it is becoming increasingly rare. It has dark
haunches and nearly black legs. Its high, straight, closely set,
parallel horns blend into one when seen in profile; they thus
may have given rise to the unicorn myth. Like the Bedouin,
the animal has become accustomed to an austere existence and
it shares the nomad's waterless
lands which are barely covered
by scant vegetation.
In former times the animal
was found in the whole of the
Arabian peninsula and the re¬
gions north of the Syrian and
Mesopotamian deserts. But it
has always been hunted, pursued
to the accessible limits of its fa¬
miliar haunts. The Arabs of
yesterday hunted it on camels;
those of today pursue it in jeeps
and automobiles. The area fre¬
quented by the Oryx has shrunk
alarmingly since 1884 when
these animals were still to be
found in northern Arabia. Now¬
adays the only known specimens
are in the Rub el Khali desert.
According to some accounts,
only about 100 of these magnifi¬
cent antelopes still exist; other
estimates place their number at
no more than 40. In any case
their chances of surviving are
slim indeed.
The Caribbean monk seal is
about 8 feet long and its
colour shades from grey to
dark brown. It inhabits the
Gulf of Mexico from the coast
of Honduras to that of Jamaica
or Cuba. Already observed by
Christopher Columbus in 1494,
it continued to thrive until about
the beginning of the 18th cen¬
tury.
At that time it began to be
exploited systematically for its
oil. Fishermen were able to take as many as 100 in a single
night and at this rate the "gold mine" gradually became
worked out. The species became rare, and although a few
sporadic killings on a large scale on various Caribbean coasts
were reported between 1875 and 1911, the animal was seen
but fleetingly after 1922. Its very existence is problematical
today, although reports that individual animals or isolated
groups have been sighted by ships are received from time
to time.
There is a group of animals in the highest order of mam¬
mals whose members have a strangely attractive and
rather mysterious appearance. Their large, round eyes,
frequently nocturnal habits and almost exclusively tree-dwell-
8
J.J. Petter.
'GHOSTS OF THE DEAD'. The group of mysterious-looking
animals called lemurs takes its name from the Latin word lémures,
as the Romans called the ghosts of the dead. More or less the
link between insectivores and monkeys, these curious animals
livein theforestsof Madagascar. Above and below, two species of
lemurs, one of them small enough to be h eld in the palm of the hand.
ing existence all add to their mystery. These are the lemurs,
named from the Latin word lémures, as the Romans called
the ghosts of the dead.
This species is more or less the link between insectivores
and monkeys. Ancient writers believed that lemurs had
inhabited a lost continent, Lemuria, which had joined India to
Madagascar and East Africa; their general distribution about
the Indian Ocean could be explained in this way. But the
hypothesis has now been disproved by palaeontological dis¬
coveries. Fossil lemurs have been found in western Europe
and even in North America. The group probably scattered
from a Eurasian centre and reached Africa and Indonesia,
Europe and America.
Today, six genera and some
ten species are found in Indo¬
China, Malaya, Ceylon, southern
India and the African forests.
But the majority of the whole
group ten genera and about
40 species, with many sub-spe¬
cies are strictly confined to
Madagascar. In size, they vary
from that of a mouse to that of
a ten-year-old child. They feed
on insects, small animals and
fruit; their different types of
colouring are often striking; they
have long noses and thin fingers.
Their habitat is the forest
and that is the principal reason
for the danger threatening them.
During the past five centuries,
the forests have disappeared
from nine-tenths of the great
island of Madagascar, and the
rate of destruction is increasing.
The Malagasy burn immense
stretches of brush so that their
livestock may graze on the
young grass that grows up out
of the ashes. People living at
the edge of the forest cut and
burn the trees to plant rice.
Lemurs, despite protective laws,
also become food for a poverty-
stricken population whose diet
lacks proteins.
One of the most remarkable
members of the Lemur fa¬
mily is the aye-aye. It is
as big as a large cat, with dark
brown fur, an almost black tail
and exceptionally long fingers.
As regards classification, it is perhaps the rarest, most extra¬
ordinary member of the group. Zoologists have alloted to it a
family of its own, the Daubentoniidae. It lives in the eastern
coastal forest of the island, and the only threat to its survival
is the disappearance of the forest itself for the people of
Madagascar do not hunt the aye-aye and even dread meeting
one. The animal's rarity and the superstitions attached to
it by the indigenous people have handicapped scientific
expeditions which have tried to obtain specimens.
The only chance for the aye-aye's survival is the establish¬
ment of a reservation on the last remaining stretches of this
eastern forest and the enlarging of the twelve existing reserved
areas. These were set up to preserve some trace of the
island's primitive, natural appearance and are being maintained
only with great effort.
