ONE PERSON OUT
OF 44 IS A TWIN
by David Gunston
ODILE AND GENEVIEVE, daughters of a French art critic, are iden¬
tical twins. As a result only their parents and a few close friends
are able to distinguish between them. Their tastes, interests and acti¬
vities are also identical. As students at the School of Decorative,Arts
in Paris they achieved an equal measure of success. Later they took up
theatrical careers and have since appeared in several Paris productions.
Photos © Paul Almasy
Are you a married woman between
35 and 39 with a family of
eight? If so, then you are the
most likely mother in the world to
have twins! The next most likely
mother of twins is the woman bet¬
ween 35 and 39 who already has seven
children, then the woman of the
same age who has six children, and
so on. The woman between 30 and
35 who has eight children comes next,
then those of that age with seven, six,
five children, and so on. If you are
outside the 30-39 age group, or have
more than eight single children al¬
ready, then your chances of having
twins decrease considerably.
These facts emerge from a recent
close study of some 3,000 twin cases
and birth statistics over the past ten
years. The findings apply only to
fraternal, or dissimilar twins, how¬
ever. Identical twins occur about
once in every three sets of twins, and
most mothers have a roughly equal
chance of having them at any child-
bearing age.
It has long been known that the
ratio of the occurrence of twins to
single children is the same as the
ratio of triplets to twins. Quadruplets,
in turn, appear in the same ratio to
triplets as triplets to twins, and so on.
At the end of the last century, the
French genetecist, Hellin, discovered
the proportion of these ratios, and
the biological law now known as
"Hellin's laW" summarizes his find¬
ings. Twins of either kind, fraternal
or identical, occur about once in every
87 normal births. Triplets arrive
24

The Unesco Courier. July 1958
about once every 87 x 87 births,
quadruplets once every 87 x 87 X 87,
and so on. Hellin's useful calculations
are proved to be approximately cor¬
rect from a wide range of birth regis¬
tration statistics, although there are
some variations in the frequency of
twins among races and countries.
American Negroes seem to have the
highest twin-birth rate of any civili¬
zed racial group, and the . Japanese
the lowest, at only 35 pairs of twins,
on average, to every 10,000 single
births. In the United States twins
are born once in every 86 to 88 deli¬
veries, and one out of every 44 Ame¬
ricans is a twin. In very hot coun¬
tries the twin rate tends to be lower
than the average, and in colder
northern lands the number of twins
becomes greater the further north,
with peoples like the Eskimoes and
the Lapps, the higher the percentage.
This would seem to be nature's way
of safeguarding the populations of
the arctic regions, where conditions
of survival are less favourable than
elsewhere. *
There are normally two ways in
which twins may be born, and they
represent the two distinct types of
twins universally recognized. If two
separately-produced eggs are fertili¬
zed together, they may develop side
by side in the mother's incredibly
elastic womb and be born as two or¬
dinary children. This is the common¬
est kind of twinning, when fraternal
twins result. Identical twins, on the
other hand, are the result of a single
egg dividing, or being split, into two
embryos after fertilization.
It is not known just how often this
strange division occurs, since we only
become aware that it has happened
when the surviving embryos are born
together as twins. It may be the
case that such a division takes place
more often than is supposed, and
that the stronger of the twins sup¬
presses the life in its fellow-embryo,
which eventually vanishes, absorbed
by the blood-stream. We know that
this phenomenon does occur, as occa¬
sionally the suppressed twin is not
absorbed but is found on delivery of
the live child, a strange, paper-thin
mummy.
Nature's tragic freaks
When this splitting is incomplete,
which happens perhaps once
in ten million births, the two
babies are born as Siamese twins
joined together at the trunk. Of
these fewer than one set in five sur¬
vive, and even today fewer still can
be surgically separated and live.
Occasionally, too, twins are produced
as a result of incomplete splitting of
the egg that have large parts of their
bodies unseparated sometimes with
two heads on a single trunk, or one
trunk having four arms and legs.
These unhappy freaks rarely survive
birth or a few days, and are nowa¬
days so rare as not to cause any
expectant mothers anxiety.
As is well known, twins are not
always born very close together.
There are many instances of one or
two whole days separating the birth
of twins, and several (most excep¬
tional) cases of as much as a month
intervening. The longest proved
time-lapse between the arrival of
twins was that of a Bengali woman
in India some years ago, whose babies
were born 45 days apart.
Fraternal twins can usually be told
at a glance from the always uncan¬
nily similar identical twins. Two-egg
twins are invariably two completely
independent individuals whose only
common endowment is that they had
the same mother and developed at
the same time in her womb. They
may be, and frequently are, of diffe¬
rent sexes, and as we have just seen,
their birthdays may not be on the
same days. Theoretically, too, they
could have different fathers.
Much research is still going on into
the question of fraternal twinning,
but there now seems to be no doubt
that the tendency towards it is di¬
rectly inherited solely through wom¬
en, and never through men. It is,
after all, a wholly feminine pheno¬
menon. A woman who is herself a
fraternal twin is much more likely
to have fraternal twin babies than
other mothers who are not twins.
But a man who is such a twin is no
more likely to father such a pair than
any other man.
Many women have
had three sets of fra¬
ternal twins, and not
long ago an Italian mo¬
ther gave birth to her

TWINS
(Continued)
STRANGE KINSHIP OF 'PEOPLE IN DUPLICATE'
sixth set. Many years ago a Sicilian
woman made obstetric history by
producing 11 sets of fraternal twins
in the same number of years. In 1929
an American mother set up a record
of another kind by having two sets
of fraternal twins in that year. An¬
other woman, with no other children,
had two sets of these twins in fifteen
months, while an English mother has
had three sets in just over three years.
All these cases show that in some
women there is a marked predilection
for producing two-egg twins.
In contrast, one-egg twins are basi¬
cally different from the ordinary
brother-and-sister type fraternals.
They are really people in duplicate
duplicate creations of one and the
same person. It is on identical
twins that most of the fascination
and most of the age-old lore of this
subject is centred. A newly-fertilized
egg, or an embryo not more than a
few days old, splits itself into two
halves, and these halves then re-form
themselves as complete, if closely-re¬
lated, persons. Identical twins must
therefore be of the same sex, and
although they may not invariably
look alike at birth, they always
develop along parallel lines and are
usually so alike that strangers and
sometimes even their own friends,
find difficulty in telling them apart.
At this point we arrive at the one
sure test for distinguishing from out¬
side the two types of twins. Identical
twins can exchange roles or places
without others being aware of it,
whereas fraternal twins can never
boast sufficient similarity to do this.
Therefore, when Shakespeare in
Twelfth Night made Viola masque¬
rade as her twin brother Sebastian,
he erred, for identicals are invariably
of the same sex. The strange kinship
that keeps them together does not
usually weaken as they grow older.
She talked to a mirror
Sir Francis Galton, the famous
heredity expert, who founded
the modern science of eugenics,
and who made a lifelong study of
twins, confirmed that it is not
uncommon to find sets of identical
twins practically impossible to tell
apart. But it is not often that
the twins themselves get confused.
Yet Galton cited an instance where
a girl identical twin had actually
spoken to her own reflection in a
mirror, thinking she was address¬
ing her twin sister! No matter how
closely allied identical twins may be,
physically and mentally, they possess
different finger-prints and, in most
cases, easily distinguishable hand¬
writing. Galton found only one pair
of twins among 85 whose case-his¬
tories he studied in detail who
themselves could not tell their hand¬
writing apart.
The remarkable affinity between
identical twins has been proved time
and again. One of the most interest¬
ing cases was that of a pair of iden
tical boy twins in America who were
adopted as very young babies by two
different, unconnected families. At
the age of eight, one of the foster
families moved from the town where
both boys had been living so that
they were then separated by over
1,000 miles. They did not in fact see
each other again until they had
reached their early twenties. Yet the
following characteristics were then
found to be the same in each case;
they had both married girls of a very
similar type of the same age; they
had both become electricians and
were actually working for different
branches of the same large firm; and,
coincidence or not, they both had pet
terriers with the same name !
Identical twins often contract the
same illnesses at the same time, even
when separated, and sometimes their
teeth decay at the same time. A
Paris doctor, Dr. J. Moreau, tells of an
extreme case of male twins who
although not living .together were
both certified for monomania at the
same time. They both had the same
persecution mania, the same hallu¬
cinations and other symptoms,
although they never communicated
during this time.
This affinity rarely lessens
throughout life, even in old age. One
of the many facts that emerged from
Dr. F.J. Kallman's study of over 1,000
New York identical twins aged 60 or
more was that even when the pairs
had lived most of their lives under
totally different circumstances and
surroundings, they continued to be
closely alike in the physical and psy¬
chological changes that accompanied
their growing old. Some, indeed,
tended to become even more alike in
old age, which showed that some
genetical similarities between twins
do not manifest themselves until ad¬
vanced years are reached.
Whilst there may be minor psycho¬
logical differences and dissimilar in¬
terests between identical twins, they
invariably tally in their outstanding
personality characteristics. Thus a
neurotic, an artistic, or a mentally
immature identical twin (will be
found to have a partner with similar
traits of character and make-up.
Observations On twins seem to bear
out the suggestion that our psycholo¬
gical make-up is in many important
respects geneticaly determined.
Chang, Eng & Barnum
The type of twins who are,
literally, closest together are
those luckily rare unfortunates,
Siamese twins, whose horrible fate
seems to catch popular fancy most.
The name was originally given to
the male twins born of a Chinese
mother in Siam in 1811, Chang
and Eng. They Were joined, a
little obliquely, by a thick fleshy
band extending between their breast¬
bones and their hip. Their mother
sold them as freaks to a showman,
who exhibited them in Europe.
They eventually passed into the
hands of Phineas T. Barnum, and
travelled in his shows for many years.
They settled down in North Carolina,
married two sisters, and between
them had 22 children, all normal,
save that two were deaf and dumb.
They lost their property in the Civil
War, and died in 1874. One died
from the effects of drink, and the
other expired, apparently from shock,
2 i hours later. When they were about
to be exhibited in France, the autho¬
rities refused, believing that any
expectant mothers Who saw them
might have similar babies!
A later pair of female Siamese
twins, the English Hilton sisters, were
refused permission by the authorities
to marry when they wanted to. But
neither of these pairs were the first
twins to be so joined. There is plenty
of evidence to show that in the
Middle Ages, in the tiny village of
Biddenden, Kent, England, Eliza and
Mary Chulkhurst, were born joined
together at the hips. They lived
until their thirties, and did good
works about the place, leaving lands
and accruing income for an annual
gift of cakes to the poor, a ceremony
still observed.
Twins are not always regarded as
a blessing. Many primitive tribes
have never been able to understand
the phenomenon of multiple births.
In some communities a mother of
twins is branded as unfaithful and
the babies may be put to death, since
it is believed that the husband cannot
have fathered two children at the
same time. Other races refuse to let
the mother keep both her twin babies.
Australian aborigines still do this,
handing over the . other child to
another family.
Many and horrible are the strange
rites and practices connected with
twin births in unenlightened coun¬
tries, all bound up with the supersti¬
tion that twins are wrong, magical
26

The Unesco Courier. July 1958
INTERCHANGEABLE ACTRESSES, Odile and Geneviève study
their parts for a play in which both will appear. When one of the twins
replaces the other on the stage neither the audience nor the theatre
staff is any the wiser. Once, when Odile was ill, the producer asked
Geneviève to step into her sister's shoes for 12 days. The audience
Photos © Paul Almasy
never suspected there had been a replacement in the cast. When
Odile had recovered, the girls decided to go one better. One evening
they took it in turns to play the same roleOdile appeared in the first
and third acts and Geneviève in the second and fourth. Once again the
theatre audience was duped by the interchangeable actress twins.
and unlucky. In several East African
tribes various weird purification rites
have to be endured by every mother
of twins before she can be accepted
back as a respected and healthy
member of the tribe. There have
been cases where a mother has been
killed as a Witch for producing
duplicate babies. It is a happier
thought that impels some other races
to bury twins, when they die, where
two paths cross. On the other hand,
history is ifull of examples where
other, more intelligent peoples have
regarded twins with wonderment and
awe, admired especially * for their
great similarity. The mythology of
many races is rich in tales of won¬
derful, heroic and revered twins.
Some members of the medical pro¬
fession believe that the grafting of
quite new and separate bodily tissues,
such as the transfer of glands and
other organs from one person to
another, which so far has not met
with much success in the majority of
cases tried, would be a much simpler
matter with identical twins. How¬
ever, many experiments are needed
before this can be proved correct.
Mankind has always found a pecu¬
liar fascination in twins, particularly
identical twins, and indeed, the idea
of human beings in duplicate, as it
were, does stir the imagination. For
centuries this interest has operated
on two levels: the popular and the
scientific; and nowadays the two use¬
fully converge. Thus twin associa¬
tions help in medical investigations
by offering abundant material in all
age groups and walks of life. The
Soviet Government runs a Twins
Institute in Moscow for research into
the genetic and eugenic problems
raised by the incidence of twins, and
in the United States is a National
Twins Association, which holds an
annual rally of twins from all over
the country, awarding prizes for the
oldest and the youngest sets, the
most attractive and the most alike,
and so forth.
The study of twins indicates that
we owe more to heredity and the cir¬
cumstances of birth than to any ex¬
ternal conditions later in life. Whilst
we cannot, on any balanced view,
afford to neglect environment, here¬
dity holds the key to our earthly fates.
Another striking fact that is confirm¬
ed by every investigator is that twins
very rarely, if ever, achieve any great
eminence or distinction in life. This
is largely because, it is thought, the
presence of a twin brother or sister
makes each over-dependant upon the
other. A twin partner would there¬
fore seem to be rather a handicap to
great success in any sphere. Indivi¬
dual initiative tends to be lacking
among twins: by their very existence
they rely upon and support each other
too much for one to be personally
well above average.
27
