ARE WE HEADED FOR
CATASTROPHE ?
C*\ HARLEs Richet, French physiologist and Nobel Prize
winner, once published a tiny book called L'Homme
stupide (The Stupidity of Man) the caustic title of
which might well give us cause for reflexion. Those of us
to whom it was addressed could still find therein reasons
for humility and a chance for improvement. For the fact
is that mankind is brilliant and yet so stupid.
Brilliant, in being able to produce a number of
exceptional individuals endowed with the spark of creation
and whose genius has made possible the astounding pro¬
gress of today, particularly in the field of science. Stupid,
in being incapable of forethought, except where immediate
and selfish interests are involved, and almost inept in
avoiding major catastrophes. Today, enchained by the
swarm of increasing populations, our planet is being
plundered on an unimaginable scale while mankind races
toward a destiny which it refuses to envisage.
It is not intended here to formulate a one-sided or
philosophical critique of our era or of technical progress,
but rather to look squarely at the things being done
around us, at the facts and figures, on the one hand re¬
calling the chain of causes, and on the other, their
resounding repercussions.
The erosion of the soil has been going on for a long
long time: and yet, relatively speaking, it is a much more
serious threat today than ever before. The ravages of
the goat go back thousands of years: yet the tank and
the bulldozer cause greater destruction and do so with
greater swiftness. The clearing of land by fire has always
been practised in cultivation: yet the introduction of Eu¬
ropean methods of intensive farming has, in some cases,
been even more harmful. Pollution has been a scourge
for aeons: yet the atomic era is bringing it to us in
another form. The stripping of our planet's top-soil, the
deterioration of our capital of renewable resources, the
shattering of the delicate balance of nature... all these
are brutal events of weighty importance which, since they
are all occurring at the same time, are the cause of the
deepest concern.
The notion of the protection of nature has now given
way to that of the conservation of renewable resources.
The earlier notion contained an emotional, sentimental
significance and its goals were disinterested, purely aes¬
thetic, scientific and moral in nature. These are no
longer priority considerations, for today our overpopulated
world is hungry. What is of the utmost importance is no
longer merely the knowledge and study of living species
their surroundings and habitat, or the respect which they
should inspire, or the interest they might arouse, or even
the protection which these species deserve, but rather the
food supply of our rising generations.
The statistics stare us in the face: we must produce
and produce more. Yet the gap between this accelerated
production and world consumption widens every year.
What a terrible price we must pay for this economic
failure... the price of the destruction of what was once
one of life's most beautiful mirages.
Are we then headed for catastrophe?
We have one last chance if the power of education can
overcome the power of ignorance. A rational population
policy, a stop-and-arrest stand against the cancer of
erosion, the adaptation of cultivation to climate and soil,
the preservation of renewable resources all these depend
upon education. It is our sincere hope that this issue
will help Unesco to defend the great cause of the conser¬
vation of nature which it has espoused.
Roger HEIM
Member of the French Institute,
President, International Union
for the Conservation of Nature
and Natural Resources
