The Unesco Courier. May 1958
by Jean Manevy
Snuffling like a seal, "'Doctor Malaria" emerges from the
ice-cold water of a mountain stream, with the gills of a
four-pound trout between his finger-tips.
"'There's our dinner. All it needs is a few minutes in the pan."
In the heart of Kurdistan, in the rocky wilderness of the Gorges
of Prince Ali, on the boundaries of Iraq, Turkey and Persia, the
world is still in its Old Testament stage. If a man wants to eat,
he must know how to catch a fish and snare a wild-fowl. If he
wants to get any sleep, he must know exactly how to pick a safe
camping site, and he mustn't be afraid of scorpions or snakes.
'"In India", says Dr. Malaria, "I had to do away with a leopard
which seemed to want to make a meal of my wife, and I had my
car smashed to smithereens by elephants. In Dankala, a herd
of wild donkeys ran amok in my camp, and three of my camels
died of thirst. A bunch of bandits took me prisoner so that
they could use me as their family doctor. We've pitched camp in
all sorts of deserts and forests even voléanos. My daughter
narrowly escaped being born in a tent. One fine day, my eldest
Forbidden
to wear blue
In the territory covered
by Dr. Malaria lives
a strange religious sect
of people who are Inacces¬
sible to most foreigners.
They are called Yezidis,
number about 70,000,
and are led by the tribal
chief, Sheik Thassyn
(shown here in conver¬
sation with Dr. Malaria).
The Yezidis wear bright
colours, such as red which
they incorporate in their
intricate turbans. Unlike
most of their neighbours
they consider blue as an
evil colour. Their women¬
folk (never veiled) wear
brightly coloured robes,
but never blue ones.
WHO
son fell into the camp fire. That's been the daily ritual for the
last fifteen years."
For the last fifteen years, Doctor Malaria has gone on his
rounds in Eritrea, India, Switzerland, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Gam¬
bia, the Sudan, Iraq first for Italy's health authorities, and more
recently as a technical expert of the World Health Organization.
Doctor Malaria was born, an Italian national, in Tunis. His
father came from Sardinia. His real name is Luigi Mara. But
that name can sound so like the word "'malaria'" that, throughout
the whole length and breadth of Kurdistan and Iraq, where he
directs the struggle against the marshland plagues, he has been
christened "'Doctor Malaria", or, alternatively, "'El Mudie Malaria"
(Big Chief Malaria) which makes things simpler all round. In
the same way, when the people of those parts talk about his
family, they refer to "'The Malaria Tribe", since most of the
doctor's trips are made with the whole family in tow. The
family consists of Tina, his wife, Gian Paolo and Enrico, his
two sons, aged fifteen and thirteen (who are at present at school
and temporarily parted from rest of the family) and lordana,
his daughter, aged eight.
It was six years ago that Iraq, worried because her economic
development was threatened by the presence of malaria on the
largest stretch of her territory, applied to the World Health
Organization for help?- And it was to Doctor Malaria that there
was entrusted the most seriously threatened part of the country,
Kurdistan, which stretches east of the Tigris to the Zagros
Mountains and Anatolia.
The Kurds are mostly nomads, rough mountain folk who haunt
the valleys of Anatolia and the Zagros Mountains. You can tell
them by their heavy black woollen turbans, their caftans of bright
cotton, their baggy trousers fastened at the ankle and kept up
by thick waistbands, and their green and red and black cotton
robes. You can also tell them by their women-folk, who are
adorned with trinkets made up 01 gold and silver coins, and
who wear rings in their ears and sometimes in their noses.
How many of them are there ? Three million, say some. But
who can really take a census of tribes which drift about between
Turkey, Iraq, Persia and Syria? Who can say for sure how
many Kurds there are who have decided to stop roaming and
settle down in mud-hut villages which are evacuated whenever
the landowner decides not to go on cultivating his land, or
whenever something which looks to the Kurds like Authority
tries to count heads?
The doctor first tackled the problem of the non-nomadic clans;
his team, which consists of an entomologist (a man who spies
upon the secret life of mosquitoes), a sanitary inspector (who was
responsible for the spraying, in 1955, of twenty-five tons of DDT),
and eight other colleagues, established the
campaign's first bridgehead by covering an area
which contained five thousand villages and
245,000 miles of tracks and goat-paths.
The basic strategy of the struggle against
malaria is simple: because it is established that
Cont'd
on
next page
15

WHO
FRONTIER BRIDGE over the Prince Ali Gorge is the traditional crossing place for the Kurds at the time of their mass-migrations between Iraq and
Northern Persia. The Kurds migrate twice a year: in the Spring they cross to Persia to escape the extreme heat of the Iraqi plains ( I 20 degrees F. in
the shade); and in the Autumn they return to escape the bitter cold of the Iranian plateaux. The nomadic Kurds take shelter in mountain caves around
the gorges. Those who have settled in one place live In huts of dried mud while the local sheik has the right to a stone house such as the ones in the
photo. At the mouth of this gorge Dr. Malaria waits for nightfall and the coming of the nomadic tribes who are not allowed to cross until after
darktheir numbers make the route impassable for all other traffic. Photo shows Kurds who have settled nearby, using the bridge during the day.
the parasite resides in the blood of the infected person, that the
female mosquito of certain species feeds upon human blood (the
males have a quaint preference for the pollen of flowers) and so
transmits the malaria bug from a sick person to a healthy one.
Mosquitoes work at night, and they lie up for the day on the
inside walls and surfaces of houses. DDT, sprayed on the mos¬
quitoes during their daytime sleep, poisons them in the same
sort of way as mosquitoes poison human beings during their sleep
at night. Malaria can often be fatal in the case of very young
children, but otherwise it usually clears up itself within three
years, where there is no re-infection. So all efforts are directed
to this target: to prevent the mosquitoes themselves from being
infected during that three-year period at the end of which,
malaria itself will disappear.
For instance, if, by mischance, a traveller who has got malaria
in his bloodstream turns up in a village from which the disease
has previously been successfully eliminated, but to which
mosquitoes have returned (for it is scarcely possible to wipe out
an entire species) then there is bound to be an outbreak of fresh
cases. And, this time, the infection will be spectacular in its
severity, and may well lead to the deaths both of children and
grown-ups.
That's why Doctor Malaria was obliged to extend his field
of activity to the nomadic tribes, who carry the disease around
with them in their blood and who, in the course of their
wanderings may easily re-infect villages which have managed to
get rid of the scourge. But the time available to him for such
an operation was very limited indeed. For the Kurds wander
around the uplands of Persia throughout the whole summer, and
it is only in autumn that they come back down into the heat-
cracked lowlands of Iraq. So you have to catch them at the
exact moment when they cross the frontier passes, and before
they spill out and scatter over the whole vast plain.
This "nomad hunt" lasts nearly a fortnight. The chase takes
the pursuers over 1,400 miles of rough tracks in the dust and
debris of the mountains. Doctor Malaria, accompanied by his
wife and daughter, is at the wheel of his jeep, for several
hundreds of hours on end. A ten-man team follows along in a
truck. The stake in this race with the evasive Kurds is an
opportunity to take their blood tests and to spray the insides of
their tents with DDT.
At the mouth of the Gorges of Prince Ali, Doctor Malaria waits
for nightfall and the coming of the tribes. The latter are not
allowed to cross the gorges until after dusk, because their numbers
make the route impassable for all other traffic. The Oriental night
comes down, a purely theatrical blue, and at a single stroke.
Suddenly, there's a hubbub of whispering.
"'Doctor Malaria, they're coming!"
Already you can smell, floating abroad in the night, the sour
and suffocating stench of sickly dust, of greasy wool and rancid
animal sweat, which is seeping into the dainty freshness of the
Gorge of Prince Ali. The partridges have fallen silent. It's now
that a deep rumble of noise starts to come out of the east. The
nomads have reached the last bend in the road, heralded by a din
like that of a mountain torrent and by their shepherd with the
bird's head and the cattle-hide coat, which makes him look rather
like a huge performing nanny-goat. Behind the shepherd follow
all the cattle and stock belonging to the whole tribe.
After the cattle, the women appear, walking with a long tireless

The Unesco Courier. May 1958
stride or rather, first comes the most beautiful woman of each
tribe, wearing her state of motherhood with the pride of an
empress. On her back, trussed up in a shawl, rides a sleeping
new-born baby, and her head rocks to the rhythm of her gait.
At the mouth of the Gorges of Prince Ali, the campfires of the
various tribes light up under the dying night, the black tents
are erected, the flocks disperse between the bushes and the rocks,
the women come back from fetching water, and the men,
squatting round the samovars, smoke their long pipes, with their
hands lying lax on their knees.
Doctor Malaria doesn't give Sheik Salim time to turn in and
recover from the night crossing of the Gorges of Prince Ali, nor
from the cumulative exhaustion of the twenty days' forced march
which has brought him to this place. He doesn't want to let
him slip for fear that tomorrow, or even this very evening, he
will vanish forever into the vast plains of Iraq. For the Sheik
Salim, crouching there in his tent, surrounded by his two wives,
his fifteen sons, his fifteen daughters-in-law and their children
fifty souls, in all, existing under one roof of woven goat's hair
represents a serious danger, not only to the villages of Kurdistan,
but also to Iraq, and to the Middle East as a whole.
Sheik Salim and his entire family have the malaria bug in their
blood. At more or less regular intervals they go down with
fevers and are knocked out for a day or two with ferocious fits
of shivering. In their particular case, it doesn't matter all that
much, because while they themselves are shaking with fever, their
flocks just go on grazing. Where it starts to become serious is
when two of the four children that the wife of the Sheik's eldest
son has brought into the world die before they are twelve months
old, when the peasants of the nearby villages and the labourers
who build the roads and the dams are away from work on the
sick list for three days out of every month, their systems under¬
mined by the mosquitoes' wicked bite.
It is true that in saying "yes" to Doctor Malaria's request, old
Sheik Salim is only thinking about his own comfort, for he knows
by common hearsay that Doctor Malaria is going to rid him of a
most irritating annoyance the mosquitoes that prevent him from
sleeping properly at night.
But, for Doctor Malaria, Sheik Salim's "yes" is the last
remaining facility that he needs in order to put in a general
attack on the disease: it gives him the control of the nomads.
This is the decisive step towards victory. For the first time DDT,
which kills mosquitoes, fleas, lice and other verminous insects,
is sprayed on to the insides of the tents; and its effect will last
for months, however many times they are folded and unfolded.
For the first time in their history, a doctor is looking after the
wild Kurd nomads. Sheik Salim grins. Tonight, he'll be sleeping
well. Without being aware of it, he, too, is one of the architects
of his country's resurrection.
In the six years in Kurdistan, Doctor Malaria has seen the
territory covered by his operations increase from an area the
size of a large city to one the size of Corsica, and then to
one the size of Switzerland (16,000 square miles). At the end of
1956, the territory liberated from malaria by him covered an
area the same as those of Belgium, the Sarre and Switzerland
combined (about 30,000 square miles). In 1960, when his anti¬
malaria campaign will have been completed, it is to a country
larger than France, populated by a mere five million inhabitants,
that he will have dedicated his vitality.
Making light
of 70 lb. loads
Kurd women are used to
doing the heavier ma¬
nual jobs. Water-duty
means carrying filled
goat-skin bags weighing
about 70 lbs. for several
miles. This water is often
extremely dangerous
because of the serious
diseases typhoid, amoe¬
bic dysentery and cholera
It can transmit.
WHO
Using drugs
& spray-guns
in a fight
against time
Pierre-André Pittet
Malaria, must be wiped from the face of the earth!
When the World Health Assembly took this
decision in 1955, it was no longer a pious inten¬
tion but an imperative necessity. Within a few years,
mosquitoes, defying all insecticide, would multiply all
over the world. Malaria would again be out of control;
eradication was the only answer. With modern drugs
and methods that has become possible. Malaria can be
attacked in two ways: by destroying the mosquitoes which
transmit it, and by fighting the parasites in the blood
of its victims. Malaria cases can thus be reduced to
numbers which can be individually treated. Thus when
resistant mosquitoes emerge in force there should be no
infection to transmit.
In the world wide strategy against malaria, Africa is
a major battle-ground. The disease is probably more
common there than in any other continent, but an adult
African appears to have a remarkable degree of immu¬
nity. When malaria control was accepted by the Who
Conference at Kampala in 1950 it was recognized that
in spite of such natural immunity in the adults, large
numbers of children were always dying of malaria.
It was therefore necessary to prosecute the campaign
most vigorously indeed. In Yaounde, the capital of the
Cameroon, there is a map spattered with multi-colour¬
ed stars. Each represents a village or a hamlet that must
be sprayed with insecticides. Among the white-robed
nomads, the naked animistic bush tribes and the village
tillers, the age-old scourge of malaria was accepted with
fatalism. Today the hopelessness has gone. The tribes
have become the doctors' willing allies.
In Mexico war has been declared. But this is a war
to save lives, not to sacrifice them. It calls for thorough¬
ness of military organization in planning and logistics.
Mexico has decided to eradicate malaria, and to deliver
its 30,000,000 citizens from the disease which has crippl¬
ed empires and destroyed civilizations. High-ranking
military officers direct the campaign from an operational
headquarters, from which they deploy their spray-teams
as though they were combat troops. "Supreme Head¬
quarters" is Who's Regional Office, the Pan American
Sanitary Bureau, which sees Mexico as a sector of the
wider battlefront of all Latin America. The U.N.
Children's Fund has provided equipment. There are
motorised columns and the "Malarial Cavalry" with
mounted spraymen and packhorses to climb the rough
paths into the High Sierras. Khaki-clad men, in para-
troop boots and helmets, boast the badges and flags of
"CNEP" (National Commission for Eradication).
When the mosquito gorges itself with blood it can
only fly so far before it has to "touch down" usually
on the walls or hangings of the room or tent where it
has bitten someone. One of the most important aspects
of any anti-malarial campaign therefore is the spraying
of insecticides on these surfaces so that mosquitoes land¬
ing on them will die before they can transmit malaria.
The killing effect of the insecticides can last for several
months, but respraying must be carried out for several
years the time needed to treat and cure people with
modern anti-malarial drugs.
17
