WHAT IS IT AND
WHAT DOES IT DO?
Unesco seeks "to contribute to peace and security by
promoting collaboration among the nations through
education, science and culture, in order to further
universal respect for justice, for the rule of law and
for the human rights and fundamental freedoms which
are affirmed for the peoples of the world, without
distinction of race, sex, language or religion, by the
Charter of the United Nations."
The Constitution of Unesco was drawn up in London by
representatives of 44 countries attending a conference
convened by France and the United Kingdom in
November 1945. The Organization came officially into
existence on November 4 1946. By November 1958, Unesco .
had 81 Member States. The Organization has three
principal organs:
The General Conference, consisting of delegates of
Member States, chooses the Executive Board, elects
the Director-General, passes the financial and staff
regulations, admits new Member States, determines the
policies of the Organization, decides upon the programme
for a two-year period and votes the corresponding budget,
to which all Member States contribute in proportion to
their population and their national income. The spending
level for Unesco's operations in the two-year period
1957-58 was set at $22,679,638.
More schools for Latin America
The Executive Board (24 members) meets at least
twice a year. It supervises .the execution of the pro¬
gramme and advises the Director-General on many
matters, including the preparation of proposed pro¬
grammes and budgets for consideration by the General
Conference.
The Secretariat, with. headquarters in Paris,. consists of
about 1,000 international civil servants recruited from
more than 50 Member States. It is headed by a Director-
General, Who holds . office íor six years and can be
re-elected for a second term.
The Secretariat is composed of several programme
departments and services: Education, Natural Sciences,
Social Sciences, Cultural Activities, Mass Communication,
and Exchange of Persons. In addition, there are
administrative bureaux such as: the Bureau of Member
States, the Legal Bureau, the Bureau of Programme and
Budget, the Documents 'and Publications Service, and the
Bureau of Conference Planning and General Services.
An innovation in the 1957-58 programme was the launch¬
ing of three major projects designed to concentrate the
resources of both Member States and the Secretariat on
work of major significance in the three fields of educa¬
tion, science and culture. They deal with the extension of
primary education in Latin America, scientific research
on arid lands, and the promotion of mutual appreciation
of Eastern and Western cultural values.
Forty-five per cent of all the adults in the world are
unable to read and write. Over 250 million children have
no schooling at all. Unesco is therefore concerned with
the teaching of illiterates, in addition to dealing with many
other problems of education, including those arising in
the most highly specialized fields. In every instance, the
aim remains the sameto improve education through
international action and to increase international under¬
standing through education. For the present, Unesco's
Department of Education is concentrating on two types
of work.
One is Fundamental Education, which is designed to
help uneducated people, often living in abject poverty, to
solve the problems of their immediate environment by
giving them the knowledge and skills necessary for good
use of their natural resources, for health, for home-
making, for literacy and for the development of their
community life, and so helping them to improve their
standard of living and to realize their potentialities more
fully as individuals and as members of society. Two
Unesco regional centres for training future fundamental
education leaders and producing teaching materials have
been established, one in Patzcuaro, Mexico, for Latin
America, and the other in Sirs-el-Layyan, Egypt, for the
Arab States. National fundamental education centres are
also in operation in Ethiopia, Cambodia, Indonesia,
Jordan, Korea, Liberia, the Sudan and Thailand.
The other main concept is free and compulsory educa¬
tion, which must eventually be accessible to all children
throughout the world, as stated in Article 26 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Unesco seeks to
make the experience of countries which have realized free
and compulsory education available to governments that
are now introducing it, or broadening its present scope,
so that decades of trial and error may be avoided.
The major project for the extension of primary educa¬
tion in Latin America, for example, aims at putting
every Latin American child into school within the next
10 years. At present about 17 million children in that
area do not attend school and it is estimated that some
400,000 more teachers would be required to teach then.i
if sufficient buildings Were available-
In both fundamental education and school educati'on,
the present need is for quick results in quantity more
school buildings and more teachers. But the question of
quality is quite as important. Hence Unesco's programme
includes work in the organization of school systems,
teacher training, curriculum reform and. the improvement
of textbooks.
Unesco's work in out-of-school education is concen¬
trated on youth groups and adult education activities.
Recognizing that study and travel abroad can be one of
the most effective means of transmitting knowledge and
skills between nations and of encouraging international
understanding, Unesco actively promotes the Exchange of
Persons, whether as students, professors, teachers, workers
or youth leaders.
Better living in the 'dry belt'
Since Unesco works more to encourage than to itself
finance such exchanges, it concentrates mainly on
collecting and distributing information about oppor¬
tunities for educational travel abroad. For this purpose
an annual handbook, Study Abroad, is published. But
Unesco does itself award a certain number of fellowships-
as a means of giving international training and experience
to persons who are helping to carry out its programme.
In 10 years, about 1,500 awards, have been made. Unesco
also administers fellowships awarded by governments and
other organizations, and gives active assistance to inter¬
national exchanges between particular groups.
Unesco promotes international co-operation by bring¬
ing scientists together, individually and through their
international organizations. It brings science to the
public by helping to improve science teaching in the
schools, by circulating information through articles in
specialized journals, and by organizing travelling exhibi¬
tions. It also helps to promote research for raising the
living standards of mankind.
For example, the major project in science seeks, through
co-ordinated research, to improve living conditions in 16
countries situated in the dry belt that runs from North
Africa, through the Middle East to South Asia. The aim
of the project is to develop and assemble all experience
and research in aridity problems. Spe¬
cialists are being trained; desert research
institutions strengthened or created; the
interchange of scientists facilitated through
fellowships. An international Advisory
Committee on Arid Zone Research set up
Cont'd
next page
37

UNESCO (Continued)
by Unesco, will be at the centre of a network of natio¬
nal and local committees engaged not only on the
scientific aspect of the problem but also conducting a
broad education programme to inform the public on the
scope of the project which covers such subjects as water
prospecting, irrigation, use of dew, purification of saline
water, wind and solar energy, and adaptation of human,
animal and plant life to desert conditions.
Since economic development depends in large measure
upon science, Unesco has opened four science offices
whose activities cover large regions deficient in scientific
knowledge: in Uruguay for Latin America; in Egypt
for the Middle East; and in India and Indonesia for
South Asia. These offices encourage scientific research
work, assist in improving science teaching, help local
scientists to keep in touch with developments in other
parts of the world, and organize lecture tours, visits by
outside experts and refresher seminars in special fields of
scientific research.
Unesco is seeking to organize international co-opera¬
tion between relatively new branches of study, in which
there are not always enough specialists to deal with the
work waiting to be done. It is encouraging new studies
which must be pressed on rapidly if the problems of our
time are to be solved. If it is true that "all tensions can be
resolved by peaceful means," it is the role of the social
sciences the sciences concerned With people and their
relationships to each other as groups and individuals to
discover causes of tensions and the means of resolving
them. In the underdeveloped countries, new tensions are
liable to be created by industrialization and the shift of
population from rural areas. Unesco considers that, by
utilizing the expert knowledge and methods of social
science, governments can greatly ameliorate the conditions
.under which their peoples adjust themselves to the often
far-reaching changes brought about by current pro¬
grammes of economic development.
Unesco's role is to make available to governments all
the knowledge which has resulted from research on the
causes of these problems in human relationships, as well
as to report methods Which have been used to deal with
them successfully in various parts of the world. It supports
an International Research Office on this subject located
in Paris and a regional office which opened in Calcutta
in 1956.
Spotlight on the facts of race
Some 22 countries have asked Unesco for expert help
in social science teaching and several missions have
been dispatched in response to these requests.
The question of race prejudice has been studied in
detail by Unesco. As part of its programme to promote
human rights for all peoples, the United Nations re¬
quested Unesco to undertake a scientific investigation of
this question by bringing together experts in all the social
sciences concerned.
Such meetings in 1949 and again in 1951 led to a general
statement of scientific facts concerning race. The state¬
ment showed that from all the evidence available today,
there is no justification for the contention that one race
is inherently superior to another.
It is generally accepted that there is an urgent need for
greater understanding between peoples and it is agreed
that knowledge of, and respect for, the outstanding
features of various cultures can contribute greatly to better
understanding. Unesco's cultural programme, therefore,
seeks to spread this knowledge and respect through a
broader use of museum and library facilities; through
exhibitions, art reproductions and translations; through
promotion of the arts in school curricula, and through the
establishment of professional societies.
Within this general framework, the major project pro¬
moting the mutual appreciation of Eastern and Western
cultural values was started in 1957 as a vital effort to
increase understanding between these two vast regions.
Accelerated exchange of persons, ideas, information,
literature and art is to be emphasized in the first stages of
this programme.
In recent years Unesco has published catalogues of the
best available colour reproductions of the world's greatest
38
paintings, and albums of significant but little known art
in various Member States, such as medieval frescoes in
Yugoslavia and Norwegian Stave Churches. It has begun
a programme of translations from Arabic, Persian, the
Indian languages, Japanese, Chinese, Italian, Spanish and
Portuguese in order to make world masterpieces better
known in major languages. It has organized travelling
exhibitions of colour reproductions which are sent to
Member States on extensive tours of towns and villages.
It has introduced public library systems into South Asia
and Latin America, It has initiated the establishment of
10 professional societies in art, music, theatre, architecture
and philosophy.
Down with barriers to knowledge
To increase international protection of the rights of
those who produce the World's books as well as its
art and entertainment, Unesco sponsored the
Universal Copyright Convention. At the beginning of
1958 it had been ratified by 29 countries.
The press, films, radio and television can and should be
a principal means of producing an intelligent, informed
body of opinion. Since they are a powerful force in
creating understanding between peoples and nations, it is
vital that they should be put to their fullest use for the
advancement of education, science and culture.
Unesco seeks, therefore, through publications, seminars
and professional meetings to promote the interchange of
experience in these fields in order that techniques which
have proved successful in one country may be equally
applied in others.
Unesco's world-wide reports and surveys on com¬
munication facilities show the great inequalities existing
in large areas of the World. To help alleviate the
poverty in communication facilities, expert missions are
dispatched to advise on the expansion of the existing
facilities and the construction of new ones.
There are many obstacles to the free flow of information
between countries. Some of them can be removed by
international agreements, and Unesco is striving to secure
the adoption of such instruments as the Agreement for
facilitating the international circulation of visual and
auditory materials of an educational, scientific and
cultural character, which eliminates customs duties on
books, periodicals and newspapers. By January 1958, 26
countries had ratified this Agreement.
Again, the Unesco Coupon Schemes enable persons in
soft-currency areas to buy books, films and scientific
equipment from hard-currency countries, and help reduce
foreign exchange restrictions on educational travel.
Gift Coupons offer people all over the world a simple
means of taking a direct and active part in Unesco's
programme by making voluntary contributions for
equipping educational * establishments in countries in
special need of this type of help.
Unesco's broad public information task of telling as
many people as possible about the aims and activities of
the Organization and promoting human rights, better
international understanding and teaching about the work
of the United Nations in general, is carried out through
direct contacts With press, film, radio and television
organizations and through co-operation with Unesco
National Commissions and international and national
non-governmental organizations.
Unesco is annually allocated a share of the Special
United Nations Fund for Technical Assistance. In 1957,
this share was approximately $5 million. In 1957, 246
Unesco experts were on mission operating 122 technical
assistance projects in 53 countries. In addition, more
than $500,000 worth of equipment Was found for these
projects and more than 150 fellowships were provided.
To help Unesco carry out its world-wide programme,
which here can merely be outlined, most Member States
have set up National Commissions, which link the Secre¬
tariat with government departments as well as with
national groups. Unesco maintains constant contact
with the United Nations and the .other U.N. Specialized
Agencies and also co-operates closely. With some four
hundred international non-governmental organizations.
In short, Unesco is striving, in all countries, to co¬
ordinate the efforts of all people who are working offi¬
cially or voluntarily, for the progress of learning, culture
and research and are seeking to lay the foundations of a
peaceful, abundant future for the World.
