ÏÏÎWSAUSTRAIESÎTANTAPQIÏS
fRÂNÇAISfS
Crested penguins are among the wildlife
depicted on the stamps of French Austral
and Antarctic Territories (Crozet Islands).
Penguins are protected in several reserves,
in particular those of the Kerguelen Islands.
cz.BoaowczvK B.BHANDT
European bison, now greatly reduced in
numbers, is shown with its calf on this Polish
stamp. Now protected in Polish and Russian
reserves, they are showing signs of recovery,
Yugoslavia, where these three
stamps were issued, has done much

AFRIQUE EQUATORIALE FRANÇAISE
Three stamps issued in France in connexion with the opening
of a travelling exhibition, "Man Against Nature'.', organized by
the Museum d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris with aid from Unesco
and the International Union for the Conservation of Nature.
CQR-R10
RDELKUADOR
m* s/ioo
'^Js^mÉti h
:\ |i6u*NA(.Jt^"i". Y
ISLAS GALÁPAGO S
. Three animals from the Galapagos Islands the sea-lion, a
giant tortoise and an iguanafigure on three of these four
stamps Issued by the Republic of Ecuador to commemorate the
I. U.C.N. -Unesco mission -which visited the islands in 1957.
CfWUSEWHUS, MONTANOS T: <»'. Z
FNR JUGOSL.AVI I A
to protect its wildlife by a special
conservation law passed in 1946
©HP J Y [OC A ABÜ-J. A
and also by the setting up of
national parks and local reserves.

STAMP COLLECTORS'
WILDLIFE ALBUM
by CIV. Hill
The value of postage stamps as vehicles . for all
kinds of campaigns has long been recognized by
both governments and stamp collectors, and one
of the most worthwhile purposes for which special
stamps have been issued is the protection of the world's
living creatures.
As long ago as 1851, the Canadian Post Office issued
a stamp whose design featured a Canadian beaver and
since then hundreds of stamps of many countries have
depicted animals, birds, fish, flowers and insects.
Improved methods of production and the strong
preference shown by modern stamp collectors for
pictorial designs have led certain enterprising postal
authorities, including those of Switzerland, Roumania
and the Soviet Union, to issue stamps on which animals
and flowers are depicted in their natural colours.
Among the most striking of these have been the Yugo¬
slav series which in recent years have shown animals,
flowers and herbs, and fauna of the Adriatic Sea, all
in accurate colour.
Both the United States of America and Canada have
been taking urgent steps to conserve their wildlife and
as part of their campaign several attractive stamps
have been issued. The whooping crane, one of the
rarest birds in the world, is paradoxically one of those
best known to stamp collectors, for a Canadian stamp
of 1955 and an American stamp of 1957 both featured
whooping cranes in their designs. The king salmon
and the pronghorn antelope have also appeared on
American wildlife conservation stamps, while the sad-
looking countenance of a mountain goat and the hard¬
ly less solemn-looking ones of a musk-ox, a walrus
and a moose, are among the animal portraits which
have appeared on the. stamps issued by the Canadian
Post Office each year to mark National Wildlife Week.
Another country which is alive to the necessity for
preserving its wildlife is the German Federal Republic.
Only recently to support International Animal Protec¬
tion Day, the Post Office of the Federal Republic placed
on sale two special stamps. One, bearing the inscription
"Protect the Birds", portrayed a robin, and the other,
inscribed "Protect the Flowers", showed a water-lily in
natural colours.
Real educational value is to be found in the beautiful
stamps of the Portuguese colonies of Angola and
Mozambique, . on which are depicted the exotic birds,
fish and butterflies to be found there. Equally beautiful
are the tropical flowers shown on many stamps of the
Belgian Congo.
Many collectors have forsaken the old method of
collecting the issues of a certain country or group of
colonies. Instead they collect stamps whose designs
illustrate a favourite theme, regardless of the country
of origin or the date of issue. The stamps which depict
the wildlife of the world form one of the most interest¬
ing and attractive themes and the world will be so
much the richer if the message conveyed by such
stamps is studied and accepted by stamp collectors and
non-collectors alike.
33
