The Unesco Courier. August 1958
-#*
Oliver G. Wackernagel, Basel
DELICATE TRACERY OF SNOW adds to the incomparable beauty and serenity of this landscape-painting view taken from the I 5th-century
Silver Pavilion Monastery (Gin-kaku) at Kyoto. One of the best preserved of its period the garden is noted for its remarkable stone groupings,
its stone bridges and waterfall each known by a special name such as dragon-back-bridge, moon-view-terrace, silver-sand-beach, moon-wash-fountain.
SOUL OF THE ORIENT:
FLOWERS AND GARDENS
by Baldoon Dhingra

MOUNTAIN
ISLES
IN A SEA
OF SAND
.
- j - .
: ."
-.
. .
O"-1-- ..-,-: SfößSgg* ' '- 'v -"' --'^v
In this, remarkable garden of the Ryoan-ji
Tempie (ISth century) at Kyoto there is
not a tree or a clump of grass; simply an
expanse of white sand in which carefully
selected rocks ,,ave been arranged in
groups of two, three or five. The sand,
supposed to represent the surface of
water (pond, stream or ocean), has been
lightly scratched with a bamboo rake to
imitate the gentle ripple of waves; the
stones appear like mountain isles rising
from a sea of sand. According to connois¬
seurs, not one of the rocks can be moved
without breaking the spell created by the
perfect design. The tranquillity of the
garden is intensified by the bare earth¬
work walls surrounding it. The Ryoan-ji
has been called "the highest form of beauty
in this type of Japanese garden art."
Above, an array of stone lanterns provides
a note of added grace along the main
garden walk of the Kasuga Shrine at Nara.
© Oliver G. Wackemajel, Basel
28

Every description of Oriental customs, past or present,
shows the close relation of man to the appurtenances
of daily life. Be they clothes, furniture, paintings,
flowers or gardens, they are regarded and esteemed as
friends more than as inanimate means to practical pur¬
poses. While all Orientals love and revere flowers, they
look upon them in different ways, depending upon their
national character and temperament. Let us take three
countries Japan, India and Persia and see what flowers
or gardens mean to the peoples of these lands.
Flower are almost a religion with the Japanese; they
worship them with sacrificial fervour. They watch for
the blossoms appropriate to each season, and when for a
week or two in early April the cherry-tree blooms, all
Japan seems to leave its work to gaze at the blossoms
or even to make pilgrimages to where the trees are most
abundant and complete. The cherry-tree is cultivated
not for its fruit but for its blossoms. "The heart of
man", says the poet Tsurayuki, "can never be understood;
but in my native village the flowers give forth their per¬
fumes as before."' This love of nature is one of Japan's
great cultural values. Few people have shown so much
love for cultivating flowers and gardens, or nourishing
plants and cultivating plants at home.
The Unesco Courier. August 1958
selves, ever though this involves the utmost care and skill.
In fact the gardener never ceases to prune, clip, weed
but he does so in the spirit of being part of the garden
himself rather than a directing agent standing outside.
He is not interfering with Nature, because he is Nature,
and he cultivates as if not cultivating. Thus the garden
is at once highly artificial and extremely natural.
In India and in many countries of South and East Asia
flowers are looked upon as the glorious creations of divi¬
nity. They are used for ritual and prayer. No worship
is complete without an offering of flowers to the temple.
Some deities, like Vishnu and Lakshmi, have special
flowers assigned to them. But of all flowers the lotus is
held most sacred. It is recognized as pure and chaste for,
while it springs from muddy water, it is unsullied by dust
and dirt. The lotus is the symbol of the Hindu and Bud¬
dhist ideals to live in the world among the things of the
world, yet to be untouched by them.
Seasonal flowers for favourite deities
a branch bearing only
MORE
THAN A
A single spray of plum blossoms;
a few red leaves; a polished
stone shining with the
clearness of water and dec¬
orated only by a wisp of
seaweed these small and
simple things can convey
meanings of spring, of au¬
tumn, of thankfulness for a
storm subsided. Many have
a deeper significance.
The art of flower-arrange¬
ment taught men and women
how flowers should be grown
in the garden and placed in
the home; it was not enough,
they said, to admire the
blossoms, "but one must
learn to see as much loveli¬
ness in the leaf, bough or
stalk as in the flower, as
much beauty in a flower as
in a thousand, and one must
arrange them not merely to colour but to grouping and
line."
Ever pruning clipping and weeding
Perhaps no other art, except painting, expresses the
Japanese temperament as flower arrangement. The
principle is one of suggestion. The word "flower" is us¬
ed in a broad sense, to cover not only flowering plants, but
also blossoming and even flowerless trees and shrubs.
Whether the material for an arrangement consists of
several flowers, a single branch of a flowering shrub, or a
handful of grasses, it should be so disposed in the contain¬
er that it symbolizes Heaven, Earth and Man. In the
case of a plant or miniature tree, the main stem represents
Heaven, a short branch growing (or bent) upwards on
one side of the main stem signifies Man, while a third
still lower and shorter branch on the opposite side de¬
notes Earth.
The intention of the best Japanese gardens according
to Alan Watts, a Zen scholar is not to make a realistic
illusion of landscape, but simply to suggest the general
atmosphere of "mountain and water" in a small space,
"so arranging the design of the garden that it seems to
have been helped rather than governed by the hand of
man." The Zen gardener has no mind to foist his own
intention upon natural forms, but is careful rather to
follow the "intentionless intention" of the forms them-
D
POEM
PICTURE
No effort to create an impossible or purely ideal landscape
is made in the Japanese garden. Its artistic purpose is to
copy faithfully the attractions of a veritable landscape, and
to convey the real impression that a real landscape com¬
municates. It is therefore at once a picture and a poem ;
perhaps even more a poem than a picture. For as nature's
scenery, in its varying aspects affects us with sensations of
joy or of solemnity, of grimness or of sweetness, of force
or of peace, so must the true reflection of it in the labour
of the landscape gardener create not merely an impression
of beauty, but a mood in the soul. .
Lafcadio Hearn in " Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan "
EVOTEES offer seasonal flowers to their favourite dei¬
ties. Garlands are placed round their necks and
flowers fall like rain upon them. Guests and friends
are garlanded and fragrant
flowers are used at all cere¬
monies and festive occasions.
Buddhists offer sprays of
white flowers upon the altar
with the prayer: "These
flowers so full of beauty and
sweet scents I place in
offering at the feet of the
Lord. May my spirit be
fragrant as this flower.
May I never forget that, as
the flower fades, so will my
body die; may my life be
more than the body."
In daily life, women, young
and old, use flowers to braid
their hair, and string them
for necklaces, bracelets and
anklets. Many Orientals
identify themselves with na¬
ture in every form.
Trees, shade and water constitute the Persian garden.
The Persian paradise (the word itself is derived from the
Persian language) speaks of flowers and gardens. This
is to be expected since the Muslim paradise, as revealed
in the holy Koran, is a promise of gardens and flowers.
Sir Edwin Arnold renders one passage thus:
Never in that garden hear they speech of folly, sin
[or dread,
Only peace: Solaman only; that one word for ever
[said.
Peace peace peace and the companions of the
[Right Hand (ah, those bowers!)
They shall lodge 'mid thornless lote-groves, under
[mawz-trees thick with flowers.
All that a Persian, that dweller on a high, rocky pla¬
teau, demands is coolness, greenness and the sound of
trickling water. Traditionally a garden was used for
discussion, poetry recitals and conversation.
Great poets like Omar Kahyyam and Firdausi asked to
be buried in a garden. Speaking of Omar's tomb a twelfth
century poet said, "his tomb lay at the foot of a garden
wall over which pear-trees and peach-trees thrust their
heads, and on his grave had fallen so many blossoms
that his dust was hidden beneath the flowers."
Of all flowers, the Persian prefers the rose. The lyrics
of the great poets describe endlessly the beauties and
perfumes of the wondrous rose.
29
