Mapping Milestone
THE NEW
ATLAS OF
THE SKIES
by A.J. Branston
THE 'BIG SCHMIDT' TELESCOPE (left)
was used by scientists at Mount' Palomar
Observatory, U.S.A., to map the universe.
This remarkable camera can reach out some
600 million light-years into space to take
photographs of a hitherto unknown sharpness
and clarity. Top photos, an exploding star
or nova caught by the Sky Survey flares in
space. These stars suddenly and inexplicably
explode and swiftly burn themselves out amid
a brightness estimated to be millions of times
greater than that which emanates from the sun.
USIS Phocos
30

n observatories all over
the world astronomers
are examining excit¬
edly the "pages" of a
new sky atlas such as
the world has never
seen before a superb
map of the heavens
which is already revealing secrets of
the universe. Undertaken by the Na¬
tional Geographic Society (U.S.A.)
and the California Institute of Tech¬
nology, the atlas is-*the first section
of a giant map of the universe, the
result of some seven years of intensive
work.
It was in 1949 that astronomers at
Palomar Observatory (operated by the
California Institute of Technology)
began work on this Sky Surveythe
most ambitious project of its its kind
ever undertaken which, if successful,
would answer problems and mysteries
of the universe transcending anything
man has ever imagined.
Intriguingly, the results of this in¬
tensive study are already posing new
queries, while the answers to others
seem tantalisingly close. "We regard
the Sky Atlas as a mapping milestone",
stated Dr. John Oliver La Gorce,
president of the National Geographic
Society. "It will yield inestimable
advances in astronomical knowledge."
Among the famous astronomers who
have worked on the atlas are Dr. Al¬
bert H. Wilson, formerly of Mount
Palomar and now Director of the
Lowell Observatory at Flagstaff, Ari¬
zona; Dr. Lyman J. Briggs, Chairman
of the research committee of the Na¬
tional Geographic Society; and Dr.
Ira S. Bowen, Director of Palomar and
Mount Wilson Observatories.
Portrait of creation
by a telescopic 'eye'
Above all else one special piece of
optical equipment the "Big
Schmidt" telescopehas brought
reality to the astronomers' dreams by
making it possible to photograph the
heavens to a hitherto unprecedented
depth in space 600 million light
years. In reality Big Schmidt is a
huge camera, named after its designer
Dr. Bernhard Schmidt, a German
optical specialist. It has a wide-
aperture lens measuring 48-inches
across and a reflecting mirror of
72-inches. It is a superb camera,
penetrating with high fidelity ten
times deeper into the heavens and
covering a space volume a thousand
times greater than any ever touched
in previous attempts to chart the
skies photographically. These quali¬
ties enable it to take pictures of
hitherto unknown sharpness and cla¬
rity at enormous distances. A "light-
year" is the distance light travels in
one year roughly six million million
miles. The Big Schmidt can reach
out some 600 million light-years to
obtain its pictures.
Yet, originally, this wonderful tele¬
scope was not designed specifically as
a '"camera" but rather as a "scouting
instrument" for the mighty 200-inch
Hale telescope at Palomar Observa¬
tory. But in the Sky Survey it was
soon found that the 48-inch Big
Schmidt was of paramount impor¬
tance. With its wide-angle reflector,
its telescopic "eye" recorded on
supersensitive film all visible objects
in great cone-shaped slices of space,
reaching out to an average distance
of 2,000 billion billion miles. It
accomplished in a few years a task
for which the "mightier" 200-inch
Hale telescope would have needed
10,000 years or so, though the latter
"sees" about three times as far.
Exploding stars far
brighter than the sun
Yet the Hale is vital too, for when
the Big Schmidt discovers some
unusual phenomena they are
studied intensively by the Hale tele¬
scope. The immense scope of the
work may be better visualized when it
is known that the new sky atlas will
keep astronomers all over the world
busy studying the results for an
estimated 50 to 100 years.
The work undertaken with the aid
of the Big Schmidt would have been
completed sooner but for the limita¬
tions imposed by weather conditions.
It is, naturally, impossible to photo¬
graph the skies on overcast or moon¬
lit nights, or when there is a good
deal of cloud interference. When
conditions are suitable the Big
Schmidt goes into action, but even
then it is possible to obtain (usually)
only four matching pairs of red and
blue photographic plates a night.
Each section of the sky is photo¬
graphed on 14-inch photographic pla¬
tes through red and blue filters. For a
blue exposure about 30 minutes are
needed, for a red approximately an
hour. This "'double" exposure re¬
veals more clearly the colour, tempe¬
rature and brilliance of distant stars,
and moreover will enable astronomers
to learn more about the "'novae" and
"supernovae" those stars that sud¬
denly and inexplicably explode and
swiftly burn themselves out amid a
brightness estimated to be millions of
times greater than that of the sun.
In all, nearly three-quarters of the
sky visible from Palomar have been
photographed and recorded.
What mysteries and secrets of the
universe will this new atlas help our
astronomers to solve? It is difficult
to say, of course, but among mysteries
which have long excited the earth's
astronomers are these:
How old are the stars? Are they
ageless, or are some continually being
born while others die?
How old is the universe and how
big?
The Unesco Courier. April 1958
Do celestial systems hurtling out¬
ward eventually reach the speed of
light and disappear from view for
ever?
Does space curve somewhere out on
the edge of the vast stretches of the
universe or is it boundless?
What is the power which operates
the universe?
What causes those gigantic explo¬
sions that astronomers have seen
from time to time both in the Milky
Way and in the nebulae millions of
miles further into space?
What is the true source of cosmic
rays?
How many suns are there in the
heavens? One expert put forward
the theory that all the grains of sand
on every beach in the world would
not equal the number of suns in the
heavens!
Almost from the beginning of the
survey astounding discoveries have
been made. In 1950, for instance,
the discovery of two new dwarf
stellar systems in the Constellation of
Leo was announced. The importance
of a discovery of this nature is best
understood by an astronomer, but in
simplest terms such a find will (it is
expected) help to throw new light on
the stability, and perhaps even the
evolution of nebulae (cloud-like
clusters of far-distant stars). Up to
this time, the smallest known galaxies
were estimated to possess a diameter
of about 3,000 light-years; the smaller
of the new discoveries is estimated to
have a diameter of only 1,500 light-
years, which suggests that perhaps
even smaller stellar systems exist.
Galaxies two billion
light-years away
Then, in 1951, came the announce¬
ment of a much more startling
discovery, namely, that there are
at least 800 (later amended to over
1,000) clusters of nebulae in the
heavens, as compared with the twenty
known prior to the survey. These
clusters are great masses of stars and
gas, some as far as 350 million light-
years away, which are dotted about
space. The existence of most of them
was only suspected until revealed by
the survey.
But the most revolutionary discov¬
ery of all was made by Dr. Walter
Baade, early in 1953. Working at
Palomar, Dr. Baade found that,
contrary to scientific belief, all stellar
systems beyond the earth's own
galaxy (the Milky Way) are twice as
far away as previously believed. The
most distant galaxies visible through
the 200-inch Hale teles¬
cope, Dr. Baade disco¬
vered, are two billion
light-years away, and
not one billion as
hitherto thought.
Cont'd
on
next page

THE NEW ATLAS
OF THE SKIES
(Continued)
What is the significance of this
discovery? The observable universe
has a volume eight times as great as
believed, while its age is put at four
billion years rather than two billion.
In turn this means that the Sky
Survey is exploring a volume of space
eight times greater than planned!
Many other discoveries have been,
and will continue to be, made. New
aggregations of stars and systems of
stars, nebulae like the Milky Way,
are almost a daily discovery. Of the
Milky Way itself much new informa¬
tion has been added. In shape it is
now seen as a great flat wheel of stars,
slowly spinning in space, with "arms"
of stars, gas and dust spiralling off
its rim.
Vast dust clouds afloat
in the Milky Way
Dr. Baade believes stars may be
separated into two classes, of
which one class (which he calls
Population I) is being found in the
regions of vast dust clouds floating in
the Milky Way. The other class (Popu¬
lation II) is, he says, concentrated
heavily in the hub of the galaxy's
giant wheel, and probably consists of
old, stable Buns, while those of the
first class are comparatively young.
In all, millions of new stars in
the Milky Way estimated at about
200,000,000,000have already been
revealed by the sky atlas.
The foregoing is but a microscopic
fragment of new knowledge about
the universe which the sky atlas has
already revealed. Equivalent in size
to about 20 very fat volumes, the
completed sky atlas will comprise
1,758 photomaps. The first section
of the atlas is in the form of 14-inch
unbound prints, totalling about 200
sky charts. Overall cost of one
printing and handling only, and
omitting all other expenses involved,
will be about £712 ($2,000) per copy-
clearly one of the most expensive
atlases ever produced. By 1959, it is
planned, all sections of the atlas will
have been printed and despatched to
the hundred or so observatories which
have ordered it.
With its aid, perhaps we shall
learn how large creation really is.
We may even learn whether the
universe is of uniform structure, and
whether it had a definite beginning;
in space and time? Perhaps, also, we
may discover whether the universe
will end one day, or simply go on.
extending outward endlessly into
space.
32
USIS
REVOLUTIONARY DISCOVERIES were made with the Big Schmidt telescope during the
Sky Survey. One scientist, Dr. Walter Baade, found that contrary to previous scientific belief, all
stellar systems beyond the earth's own galaxy (The Milky Way) are twice as far away as previously
believed. Above, Dr. Baade examines negatives taken by the Big Schmidt. With him is Dr. Albert
G. Wilson, formerly of Palomar and now Director of the Lowell Observatory, at Flagstaff, Arizona.
USIS
ANDROMEDA NEBULA, photographed with the Schmidt telescope, ¡s a great spiral nebula
and one of the nearest neighbours in space to the earth's galaxy. Even so it is barely visible to
the naked eye, being some 820,000 light-years from the earth. It is a giant among galaxies and
contains stars, dust, gas clouds and numerous star clusters. The two diffused spots, one above the
centre of the spiral (round) and one below (elongated) are companions of the Andromeda Nebula.
