THE SUN AT
WORK ROUND
THE WORLD
The Unesco Courier. September 1958
by Daniel Behrman
USIS photos
In 19 54 the United States produced a tiny solar battery which
could operate a pocket-size transmitter containing transistors.
Here an engineer (with solar battery in hand) demonstrates that
his voice can be clearly heard at a receiver some distance away.
Top photo shows details of a larger solar battery. (See p. 17 for
facts about the use of these batteries in artificial satellites.)
IN lands scattered around the world, solar energy is
coming out of research laboratories and into daily life
at a price which the average man or his national
economy can afford to pay.
Today in Africa, Europe or the United States, you can
buy a solar-operated apparatus to heat the water in your home.
In France and in other countries, solar furnaces are opening
up new fields in metallurgical research and in the production
of refractory materials capable of standing the increasingly
high temperatures demanded by modern metallurgy. In the
Soviet Union, costs of operating a sun-powered refrigerator
have been brought down to the point of competing with
classical methods of refrigeration. In Israel, the world's first
factory making use of "solar steam" to produce chemical
products is under construction in the Negev.
These are only a few of the highlights of the applications
of solar energy in the modern world which were revealed at
a recent symposium conducted by the French National Cen¬
tre of Scientific Research. The symposium drew more than
fifty scientists and engineers to Mont-Louis, a citadel built
in the 17th century under Louis XIV in the eastern Pyrenees
and now the home of the world's biggest solar furnace,
designed and operated by Prof. Felix Trombe and a team
of French research workers.
By the end of the week-long symposium, a clear picture
had been drawn of the applications of solar energy in France,
Great Britain, the Federal Republic of Germany, Spain, the
United States, Israel, the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia. As
is often the case in such international meetings, it served to
pull loose threads together and to bring into focus the status
of a vital field of scientific research.
Both during and in between the meetings of the symposium,
it was possible to take a trip around the world of solar energy.
The results of this trip show a tremendous range in the use
now being made of the sun: it runs from cookers which can
fry an egg or grill a steak to laboratory research aimed at
improving turbo-reactors and space-conquering rockets.
Most important of all, this progress offers new hope to those
regions which are the richest in sunshine and, through some
quirk of nature, usually the poorest in other power resources:
the countries in the arid lands covering one-third of the
earth's surface.
Here is what this trip around the world has shown.
The Unesco Courier last month sent its special correspondent, Daniel
Behrman, to the international symposium on solar energy held at Mont-Louis,
in the French Pyrenees. There he Interviewed some of the world's leading
scientists now engaged in solar energy research. His reports on the work
now going on in this field in several countries are published on pages 9, 10,
11 and 16.

SOLAR FURNACES IN THE PYRENEES
FRESH WATER IN THE SAHARA
Photos courtesy Solar Energy Laboratory, Mont-Louis
STUDY OF METALS capable of resisting working temperatures of today's
jet engines, rocket motors or nuclear reactors calls for furnaces lined with
special heat-resisting materials. One of these materials, zirconium, is produced
on a commercial scale in the world's biggest solar furnace (above) at Mont-
Loüís in the French Pyrenees. Photo shows parabolic mirror (left) which con¬
centrates sun's rays into orifice of solar furnace (centre), creating temperatures
of 3,000° C. Photo, left, shows sun-catcher mirror (40 feet across; 520 indi¬
vidual mirrors) which pivots automatically, when sun acts on photo-electric
cells, to pick up sun at any angle and then reflects rays to parabolic mirror.

FRANCE
Slowly, almost imperceptibly,
the platform bearing a hand¬
ful of white powder rose until
it reached the focal point of
the parabolic mirror overhead.
Then, before the eyes of
scientists and engineers at the recent Mont-Louis solar
energy symposium, the powder suddenly burst into white
heat brighter than any diamond.
The powder was zirconium oxide with a melting point
of 2,700 degrees Centigrade, and it could not stand up to
the 3,000 degree heat of concentrated sunshine focussed
on it. Nor could the naked eye witness its smelting ; the
onlookers had to use special plates of black glass.
Through these plates, the small heap of powder looked
like a young volcano from another geological era.
"I remember a conference of industrial ceramics
manufacturers in France about ten years ago," said one
of the onlookers, a French manufacturer, as the platform
moved away again to allow the powder to cool. "When
Felix Trombe told that conference he could use solar
energy to produce refractory materials for furnaces, those
present treated it as a joke."
Today, no one is laughing. There is a steady demand
for "solar zircon" produced by the Mont-Louis Solar
Energy Laboratory founded by Prof. Trombe and his
assistant director, Marc
Foex. The mirror used
in the demonstration
was one of a battery of
small solar furnaces
flanking a huge para¬
bolic mirror 30 feet in
diameter and generating
the equivalent of 75
kilowatts.
One firm in Paris has
already purchased seve¬
ral tons of zirconia for
use in manufacturing
furnaces in which spe¬
cial metals are treated,
With this product of
solar energy, one mem¬
ber of the firm explain¬
ed, operating tempera¬
tures of electric furnaces
can now be safely raised
from 2,000 to 2,300
degrees Centigrade.
But this is only. one
aspect of the applica¬
tions of the Mont-Louis
furnace, which can
create a temperature of
3,000 degrees within a
split second. It is now
being used to penetrate
unexplored realms of
metallurgical research.
In the words of General Paul Bergeron, former director
of the French National Defense Scientific Activities'
Committee and one of the founding fathers of the
laboratory, "the solar furnace is invaluable in any field
where purity of materials and resistance to heat is an
important factor." One example is the study of metals
capable of resisting the tremendous working temperatures
of jet engines, rocket motors or nuclear reactors.
Mirror eleven storeys high
Fantastic though it seems set within the walls of a
17th century citadel built 5,000 feet high in the Pyre¬
nees, the Mont-Louis furnace is only a beginning.
This autumn, work will start on a new furnace six miles
away at Odeillo.
Here, solar energy will enter a new phase. The Odeillo
furnace will be operated by a mirror measuring 115 ft.
by 165 ft. thus having an area of 1,793 square yards. Its
size can be visualized more clearly with the help of
another fact: it will form one side of the solar energy
laboratory's new buildings standing eleven stories high.
With this mirror, production of zirconia will go up from
60 kilogrammes a day at Mont-Louis to 2,400 kilogrammes.
Odeillo will be able to produce from ten to twenty tons of
The Unesco Courier. September. 1958
steel daily for it will turn solar heat into the equivalent
of 1,000 kilowatts of electrical energy.
Prof. Trombe, who gave these facts in an interview, is
a tall, lean man in his forties and far more at home tink¬
ering with a parabolic mirror than presiding over an
international symposium. This probably explained the
success of the symposium where tea was brewed in
laboratory beakers and the future of solar energy discus¬
sed in a handsome 17th century room heated by the
crackling logs of a huge fireplace.
Hot water costing nothing
Felix Trombe is interested in the sun as a way of
developing arid lands from every angle, human as
well as economic. Mineral deposits in the Sahara,
for example, could be treated on the spot in solar furnaces.
Workers at these plants would live in houses air-con¬
ditioned by the sun and would raise their own food in
greenhouses. Even lettuce can be grown in the Sahara
in greenhouses, explained Prof. Trombe, because it requires
only one quarter of the water used in normal cultivation.
The solar furnaces in the Pyrenees are only one aspect
of how the French are harnessing the sun. Solar-operated
hot-water heaters are a common sight both in North
"Africa and on the Medi¬
terranean coast of
France. One French firm
manufacturing heaters
in Beziers uses as its
advertising slogan: "Hot
water for nothing." It
produces units which
provide hot water for
homes, hotels, laundries
and even shower-rooms
in factories.
One Paris firm now
has even more ambitious
plans. After installing
individual' hot-water
heaters in France,
Africa, Australia, the
West Indies and various
other parts of the globe,
it has begun to work
on large-scale instal¬
lations. It has already
installed a 1,500-litre
(327 gallon) heater in
the Moroccan national
tobacco factory at Casa¬
blanca.
SOLAR PRINTING PRESS: In 1884 a paraboloid mirror (above) was used
in Paris to print a newspaper by means of solar energy alone. About 1670, a
French scientist, François Bernière, built a solar furnace using huge lenses
mounted on a carriage. Lavoisier later used this same machine to obtain a
temperature capable of melting platinum. For a time in I 9 I 3, a 20-horsepower
"sun engine" was used in Egypt to pump water from the River Nile.
It is now working on
plans for a huge solar
energy unit designed to
supply hot water to 205
apartments in a new
housing development at
Koubra, near Algiers. With solar energy collectors set
on the roof and tanks in the basement, this plant will
have a capacity of 50,000 litres (11,000 gallons) if present
plans are adopted. On sunless Winter days additional hot
water will be provided by normal central heating systems.
Finally, the French are looking into the problem of
distilling saline water for drinking and other purposes
(truck drivers in the Sahara often pay $.25 a quart for
distilled water for their radiators because ordinary Sahara
water contains too many minerals).
What are probably the world's first solar stills manu¬
factured on a commercial basis have been developed by
a firm in Algiers and tested by a French engineer, Cyril
Gomella. One hundred and fifty of these stills, made
of asbestos concrete to stand up to Saharan conditions,
are now in service, producing a total of 1,000 litres (220
gallons) daily. They have brought the price of distilled
water in the Sahara down to one franc per litre a figure
which Mr. Gomella emphasizes is "honest" because it
included the high cost of transporting the prefabricated
elements of the still out into the desert.
From the solar furnaces in the Pyrenees smelting the
metals of the future to a life-giving fresh water supply at
"Bidon V" in the Sahara, the French are making solar
energy an economic reality.

1,300 MIRRORS
TO OPERATE
POWER PLANT
USSR.
The sun is being put to work in
the Soviet Union to do everything
from producing ice by the
hundredweight to the generation
of electric power both on a scale
suitable for the isolated farmer
and for a major attack against the problems facing dry
regions.
This was disclosed by Professor Valentin Baum, director
of the Heliotechnical Department of the Power. Institute
of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, during an interview
at Mont-Louis.
Here are some of the latest results described by
Professor Baum :
Production of 350 kilogrammes (771 pounds) of ice
daily by a solar refrigerator operating at a cost "com¬
parable to that of other methods."
Widespread use of solar cooking stoves an estimated
600 are now in service which produce the equivalent in
energy of a 600-watt electric hot-plate. A collapsible
solar cooker, used to free scientific expeditions from
dependence upon fuel, has also been developed.
Experimentation and planning for a gigantic 1,200-
kilowatt solar energy plant for use in irrigation and
electric power production.
Development of a new method for converting the
sun's heat directly into electrical energy by eliminating
the inefficient steam boiler and engine.
In an interview, Professor Baum pointed out that
research in the Soviet Union has paid particular attention
to the need for putting dry regions to work. The so-called
arid zones would no longer be arid if we could bring up
fresh water from the soil and this could be done with
the help of solar energy, he said.
There are two sides to the problem. The first is symbol¬
ized by the farmer who needs power to pump water from
his Well and into the irrigation canals of his fields.
Here, Professor Baum's laboratory at Tashkent has
developed the technique of the "thermo-electric
generator." The principle of the thermo-couple is well-
known when two different metals are heated, an electric
current is produced and it is widely-used in measuring
high temperatures.
Soviet scientists took a parabolic mirror measuring two
metres (6* ft.) in diameter and heated a specially-design¬
ed thermo-couple. Despite the relatively small area of
the mirror, it produced 40 watts in electric energy.
"Our experiments have shown that, with the use of
semi-conductors, we can create a one-horsepower thermo¬
electric generator," said Professor Baum. "This would be
much more efficient than a steam engine of the same
power operating on solar energy."
On a far greater scale are the solar power stations
which Professor Baum believes could be used feasibly to
create oases in the desert. One such power station has
been planned at Tashkent and its components have
already been tested.
It consists of a boiler on top of a tower 40 metres (131
feet) high and heated by the sun's rays focussed on-to
it by 1,300 mirrors on concentric railway tracks at the
base of the tower. The mirrors with a total of 19,500
square metres (five acres) would generate 1,200 kilowatts
of high . pressure steam.
Prof. Baum designed this plant for use in a valley
near Erivan, the capital of Armenia, where it could be
put to work with extreme efficiency. One-third of the
valley is swamp, one-third is dry and, finally, one-third
consists of farms requiring power. The solar power station
could be used to drain the swamps, irrigate the dry land
and feed power to the rest of the valley.
10
Official Soviet photos
SOVIET SCIENTISTS are putting the sun to work in dozens of ways
from the production of ice by the hundredweight to the generation of
electric power in installations designed for individual consumption and
larger ones for public use. Above, bar. held at focal point of a Soviet
solar parabolic reflector melts away in the intense heat. Below, experi¬
mental model of mobile reflector. When batteries of these are used,
sufficient concentrated heat is generated to produce high pressure steam.

THE WORLD'S FIRST SUN-
OPERATED INDUSTRIAL PLANT
ISRAEL
The world's
first industrial
plant operat¬
ing on solar
energy is now
under cons¬
truction in Israel at ancient Beershe¬
ba, the home of the Negev Institute
for Arid Zone Research.
This is one of the applications of
the solar energy programme which
Israel is now carrying out on a broad
front described by Dr. Harry Tabor,
director of the National Physical
Laboratory in Jerusalem and one of
the fifty scientists and engineers who
participated in the Mont-Louis Solar
Energy Symposium.
A lean, alert man who obviously has
little use for the "science fiction"
approach to solar energy, Dr. Tabor
methodically traced, in an interview,
the practical steps which his sun¬
baked country is taking to put the
sun to work.
"We are trying to answer four ques¬
tions at the Negev Institute", he stat¬
ed, and then he ticked them off :
Can we use solar energy to cool
houses ?
Can we use solar energy to gene¬
rate steam for a factory ?
Can we use it to run a small
power unit for farmers ?
What are the long-term pros¬
pects of building a solar power sta¬
tion ?
These immediate economic concerns
have led Israeli scientists to concen¬
trate on the most efficient ways of
collecting the sun. In this respect,
other participants at the Mont-Louis
symposium agreed, they are among
the world's pioneers, while Dr. Tabor
himself is one of the men responsible
for developing a new type of collector
which doubles the solar energy col¬
lected for a given surface.
Here, a word of explanation is need¬
ed. The world's solar energy specia¬
lists can be divided into two groups :
men working in high temperatures
who use parabolic mirrors to focus the
sun in the same way as a burning
glass, and scientists interested in
using the sun's heat for low-tempe¬
rature applications such as the
heating of water. In this second
category, the "powerhouse" is a col¬
lector and consists basically of a
black plate which absorbs the sun's
rays and pipes which carry away
water heated beneath the plate.
What Dr. Tabor has done is to
develop a plate which is both "black
and white". That is, it absorbs the
sun's heat as effectively as an ordi¬
nary black plate, but its wasteful
emission of energy is almost as low
as if it had been a perfect reflector.
This new type of collector is capa¬
ble of producing low-pressure steam
without the use of mirrors. It is to be
used in a chemical factory now under
construction at Beersheba which will
Israel National Research Council
FUEL-POOR BUT SUN-RICH, Israel has embarked on a broad programme of solar energy
research including the development of steam for industries and the production of small power
units. At the Negev Research Institute, Israeli scientists have built the new type of solar energy
collector unit shown above. This consists of simple curved mirrors which reflect heat upwards to
collectors fixed overhead. Use of black surfaces cuts heat losses by about four fifths, enabling unit to
compete with more expensive systems. Five hundred units will save about 500 tons of fuel oil a year.
produce fertilizer and insecticides
with ths help of steam provided by
300 square metres of roof collectors.
Refrigeration and air-conditioning
are other tempting goals for the
scientists working in solar energy.
They do not offer the same problem
presented by solar heating, which is
that the least amount of sun is avail¬
able when you need it most.
Packaged power
for the farmer
Here, stated Dr. Tabor, the Negev
Institute has managed to bring
the price of solar cooling down
to the point where it is only twice as
expensive as electric refrigeration.
The "running costs" of a solar refri¬
gerator or heater consists of paying
off its original price and that is why
the scientist in this field is forced to
think as a businessman. In 1959, he
said, Israel hopes to test more econo¬
mical systems of running a' solar
cooler.
One of the most tempting prospects
of all in the uses of solar energy is
the small power plant which could
bring the machine age to the aid of
farmers living in regions where the
cost of fuel has kept machine power
away. Unfortunately, the problem is
not as simple as it sounds.
There are two stumbling blocks.
The first one is the tremendous loss
of efficiency which always occurs when
you convert heat into mechanical
energy with a steam engine. The
second is the problem of moving the
collector so that it can track the sun
all day long. This involves either a
photo - electric device known as a
"heliostat", or constant supervision
and both are expensive.
A new mirror-type collector deve¬
loped at Beersheba is so efficient
that it has to be moved only once a
week to catch the sun properly.
Thus, one stumbling block has been
removed.
"What we are looking into now is
a small turbine operating at 150
degrees centigrade and using not
steam but a heavy fluid of high mole¬
cular weight", Dr. Tabor added.
The Negev Institute is now aiming
at a 10-H. P. solar "power package"
which Dr. Tabor believes may be able
to compete with Diesel plants par¬
ticularly in maintenance costs.
Regarding the prospects of large-
scale power installations, Dr. Tabor's
attitude is one of "reserved optimism".
"Any large solar power installation
means an extensive site", he explain¬
ed, "but we have huge chunks of the
Negev which are not good for any¬
thing else."
II

POWER FROM SOLAR BATTERIES
AND DRAWBACKS
USIS photos
MULTIPLE LENSES (left) concentrate
sunlight to "feed" a solar furnace at the
California Institute of Technology. Fur¬
nace Is used for high temperature tests of
Jet Age materials, those, for example,
required for rockets and earth satellites.
Right, forty-eight cells on the lid provide
current for world's first sun-powered
radio-phonograph which was demonstrated
in New York last year. The 48-cell solar
battery for this portable transistor unit
will operate on artificial light when the
sun is not shining. Standby batteries pro¬
vide current when no light is available.
U.S.A.
Only a few years ago, solar
energy was the pampered, spoon¬
fed darling of scientists working in
laboratories behind closed doors
closed not so much for the sake
of secrecy but for protection
against the usual form of humour reserved for research
off the beaten track. Today, it is a healthy child doing
very well in the hard-headed world of industry in the
United States.
This was brought out by American participants at the
Mont-Louis symposium. Dr. Frank Edlin, a consulting
engineer in the engineering department of Du Pont de
Nemours at Wilmington, Delaware, reported, in an inter¬
view, on the results of a Du Pont survey of the uses of
solar energy in the United States. No less than 5,000 solar
hot-water heaters have been sold in the United States,
mainly in Florida, Texas, Arizona and California.
An even more spectacular illustration of the market
for solar energy is the "silicon photovoltaic cell" developed
by the Bell Telephone Company several years ago. At
present, thousands of cells a month are being produced
in the United States. Their two main uses are in powering
transistor radio sets and in lighting beacons, buoys and
other aids to navigation. In some cases, up to 3,600 cells
are used.
They are popularly known as "solar batteries". Each cell
consists of a slice of single crystal of silicon. When the
sun shines, it converts from 8 to 14 per cent of the sun's
energy into electricity a much higher efficiency rate than
in other methods. This electricity is fed into an ordinary
storage battery to run the beacon or the radio at night.
The solar-powered silicon cell has one main advantage:
it requires very little maintenance. No one knows as yet
how long it will last but the estimate is "'dozens of
years." Its main disadvantage high cost is disappear-
16
ing rapidly. At present, the price of a cell measuring one
square inch has been brought down to S 3.
Why is Du Pont interested in hot water heaters and
silicon cells to the point of carrying out a survey of the
use of solar energy in the United States ?
"We don't sell solar energy appliances, but we are
interested as suppliers of material," explained Dr. Edlin.
"It's the same with nylons we manufacture the yarn
and we've made thousands of experimental stockings but
we've never sold a pair."
Plastic panes for the greenhouse
Du Pont is almost synonymous with plastics and
plastics have a tremendous future in solar energy,
Dr. Edlin pointed out. One of the biggest economic
question marks in the use of solar energy is the cost of
the glass in an appliance's collector. Plastics, Dr. Edlin
explained, have several advantages: they are cheaper,
they can be more easily shaped for special requirements
(such as parabolic mirrors) and they are less fragile.
Du Pont is now manufacturing one weather-resistant
clear plastic known as mylar and is experimenting with
another. This material is already used for greenhouses,
but it will open up new vistas in solar energy and that
is why Du Pont sent Dr. Edlin and its chief consulting
engineer, Mr. R.C. Ficke, to Mont-Louis.
The use of the sun to "weather-condition" homes has
been developed to such a point that, today at Lexington
in the U.S.A. there is a solar house for sale. The house
was developed by Prof. H.C. Hottel of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology at Cambridge. It is a two-story
home with one-half of its roof the south side covered
with solar-energy collectors which take care of its heating

The Unesco Courier. September 1958
and hot water requirements. It has an auxiliary oil fur¬
nace for emergencies. (See page 14).
Dr. Thomas A. Unfer, a young scientist who has been
working with Prof. Hottel, told the symposium at Mont-
Louis of research in "selective surfaces" for solar energy
collectors. By coating an aluminium plate with copper
oxide, losses from emission are reduced from 95 % to 10 %
and twice as much water can be heated with the same
collector surface.
Another centre of solar energy research in the United
States is the University of Wisconsin at Madison, repres¬
ented at Mont-Louis by Prof. Farrington Daniels and
Prof. John A. Duffie. Prof. Duffie has been working on
solar refrigeration and air-conditioning and, he declared
in an interview, it appears "reasonably attractive1' when
combined with a space heating system (in order to
amortize the original investment in collectors as much as
possible).
Prof. Daniels has been working for the past decade to
bring the costs of a solar power unit down to the point
where it can be used to help non-industrial countries. His
research, financed with a grant from the Rockefeller
Foundation, has led him to look into all low-cost
possibilities and plastics are one of them.
Prof. Daniels, who has worked extensively in India, does
not think in terms of bath heaters or refrigerators but
of bullocks. "I've seen bullocks raising water to irrigate
land and then eating up most of the crops they had
irrigated," he pointed out. He has conducted extensive
experiments with small steam engines and, he admitted
frankly, he is still looking for one efficient and simple
enough to meet his requirements.
Prof. Daniels is basically a chemist, and is also conduct¬
ing research on chemical ways of storing the energy
of sunlight which would not be limited by the laws of
thermodynamics governing steam engines. "Nature does
it with plant synthesis," he said, "so we know that it
can be done."

