THE CHALLENGE OF
HUMAN RIGHTS TODAY
The United Nations was established in 1945 not only
to prevent war, but also to promote conditions of
international well-being and progress essential to
the maintenance of peace. Since its establishment it has
endeavoured to advance, through international co¬
operation, the material and social well-being of peoples
throughout the world. It has sought to promote human
dignity and equality and to make effective the right of
everyone to lead a free life in a free society. Thus, from
its very beginning the United Nations has been actively
concerned with the problem of human rights.
By the time the Conference of San Francisco met in the
spring of 1945 to draw up the Charter of the United
Nations, there was a strong public demand for broad
guarantees of human rights. A number of non-govern¬
mental organizations sent their representatives to the
conference and succeeded in convincing the official rep¬
resentatives of governments of the necessity of expanding
the original provisions of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals
concerning human rights. As a result, the promotion
of human rights was given much more emphasis under
the Charter of the United Nations.
The Commission on Human Rights, composed of eigh¬
teen members, came into existence early in 1946. For eight
years the Commission devoted itself mainly to preparing
an. international bill of human rights. In the beginning
there was much discussion of the form which the bill of
rights should take. Some thought that a declaration of
principle, or manifesto, was most appropriate, while others
favoured a convention. It was finally decided that the
international bill should be in three parts: a "declaration"
which would lay down general standards of human rights;
a "covenant or covenants" which would be legally binding
on states becoming parties thereto; and "measures of
implementation" which would establish international
machinery to exercise general supervision over the enfor¬
cement of the covenants.
Unanimous vote by
forty-eight nations
The Commission began its work in January 1947 with
Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt as its chairman. Almost
two years later, on December 10, 1948, the General
Assembly of the United Nations adopted the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights at the Palais de Chaillot in
Paris. Out of the fifty-eight nations represented there,
forty-eight voted their approval of the Declaration, none
voted against, eight abstained, and two were absent. The
first international declaration of human rights was
therefore adopted without a single dissenting vote.
It was not an easy task for so many countries to come
together and draft a declaration recognizing human rights
and fundamental freedoms in terms which all could accept
and understand. It was hailed by the President of the
1948 General Assembly, H.V. Evatt of Australia, on its
adoption, as a document to which "millions of people,
men, women and children all over the world, many miles
from Paris and New York, will turn for help, guidance
and inspiration."
In the nine years since it was adopted, knowledge of the
Declaration has been spread far and wide. It has been
translated into all the main languages of the world. The
date of its adoption, December 10, was proclaimed as
Human Rights Day by the General Assembly in 1950 and
it is celebrated every year in most countries. The
Declaration, or individual articles from it, are frequently
quoted in United Nations resolutions as setting the stand¬
ard which should be applied. The constitutions of various
countries drafted since 1948, such as those of Costa Rica,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Haiti, Indonesia, Jordan, Libya,
Pakistan and Syria, have taken many of their provisions
from it.
The thorniest issue:
self- determination
Many international conventions and agreements, even
those not drawn up under United Nations auspices,
also show the effect of the Declaration. In the
Peace Treaty concluded at San Francisco in 1951, Japan
declares its intention to strive to realize the objectives of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In the Trus¬
teeship Agreement for Somaliland, Italy accepts the Dec¬
laration as a standard of achievement in its administra¬
tion of the Territory. The European convention for the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
not only invokes the Declaration in its preamble; its subs¬
tantive provisions are based on an earlier version of the
United Nations draft convenant on human rights.
In the agreement relating to the Free Territory of
Trieste, the Italian and Yugoslav authorities undertake
to act in accordance with the principles of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights in the administration of
their respective areas. The agreement between France
and Tunisia concluded in June 1955 contains a provision
whereby Tunisia recognizes that all persons living in its
territory are entitled to the enjoyment of the rights and
guarantees enunciated in the Universal Declaration.
Once the Declaration was completed in 1948, the Com¬
mission on Human Rights was able to concentrate on the
draft covenants, but only in 1954 did it finish the prelimin¬
ary texts of a draft covenant on civil and political rights
and a draft covenant on economic, social and cultural
rights. These were transmitted, through the Economic
and Social Council, to the General Assembly. They are
still before that body for final drafting and adoption.
One of the most controversial issues raised in connexion
with the draft covenants is the inclusion of an article
on the right of peoples to self-determination. A majority
of the Member States are in favour of including an article,
but there is strong opposition to it. Some have even indic¬
ated that they may be unable to become parties to the
covenants if an article on self-determination is included.
Another question that has come up is whether there
should be one or two covenants, that is, whether civil and
political and economic, social and cultural rights should
be included in a single instrument or in separate
conventions. In 1951 the General Assembly, reversing its
previous stand on the question, decided that two covenants
should be adopted and opened for signature simultane¬
ously and should contain as many similar provisions as
possible.
The very slow progress made in complet¬
ing and adopting the covenants in no
way means that the human rights pro¬
gramme is coming to a dead end. Three
years ago the Commission on Human Rights
Cont'd
on
next page

HUMAN RIGHTS
(Continued)
U. N. global survey on discrimination
engaged in a new programme which sometimes is referred
to as a programme of concrete action. In developing this
programme, the Commission changed the emphasis of its
work. The first years, during the preparation of the
Universal Declaration and the draft covenants, the Com¬
mission was concerned primarily with defining human
rights and laying down general standards. Now the
emphasis is oh the application of these standards.
The new programme has three aspects. First, govern¬
ments are being asked to report periodically to the United
Nations on developments in their respective countries in
the matter of human rights, including progress achieved
and difficulties encountered. On the basis of these reports,
the Commission on Human Rights will consider the
"general developments and progress achieved in the field
of human rights." It is not intended that the Commission
will sit in judgment and assess the successes and failures
of individual governments, but it will present to the Eco¬
nomic and Social Council "objective and general" com¬
ments, conclusions and recommendations on the status
of human rights in the world.
Dramatic progress in
women's emancipation
Secondly, the United Nations is maiking a series of global
studies or surveys on particular rights or groups of
rights. One of these studies, namely, a study on
discrimination in education has been completed; and
studies are now pending on discrimination in the matter
of religious rights and practices, on discrimination in the
exercise of political rights, and on the right of everyone
to be free from arbitrary arrest, detention and exile.
Finally this new programme authorizes the Secretary-
General to render, at the request of governments, advisory
services in the field of human rights. Three forms of
assistance are authorized: (1) advisory services; (2)
fellowships and scholarships; and (3) seminars. Under
this programme a series of regional seminars or confer¬
ences have been organized. The purpose of these
seminars is to bring together key people from various
countries and to give them an opportunity to exchange
their views and experiences and through their leadership
to encourage greater awareness of problems of human
rights within official circles.
Seminars were held in 1957 and 1958 in Bangkok, in
Baguio City, Philippines, and in Santiago, Chile. Particip¬
ants at these conferences included supreme court justices
and other senior judges, solicitors-general, deputy
ministers of justice, eminent professors, commissioners
of police and other ranking government officials.
The work of the United Nations in the field of human
rights has not, of course, been limited to preparing the
international bill of rights and implementing the new
programme developed by the Commission on Human
Rights. The United Nations has, over the years, dealt
with a number of special problems. One of these is the
promotion of Women's rights.
It is probably in the political field that the most dram¬
atic progress has been achieved. At the time of the
signature of the United Nations Charter, women had no
political rights in some forty sovereign countries of the
world. Since then, thirty-five countries have given
women political rights. These rights are particularly
valuable for women because only through participation
in the legislative, executive and judicial organs of
government can women obtain equality in the other
fields. In December 1952, a Convention on the Political
Rights of Women was adopted by the General Assembly
of the United Nations, ensuring to women the right to
vote, to be elected and to hold public office on equal terms
with men. It has been signed by forty-one countries and
ratified and acceded to by twenty-nine.
Other specific problems in the field of human rights
with which the United Nations has been concerned are,
inter alia, the prevention of discrimination and pro¬
tection of minorities, the right of peoples and nations to
self-determination, freedom of information, forced
labour, slavery, genocide, protection of refugees and
stateless persons, repatriation of prisoners of war, the
racial situation in South Africa. Several important
studies have been made and recommendations and
international conventions adopted by the various organs
of the United Nations on these questions. The prepara¬
tion, adoption and publication of these studies, recom¬
mendations and agreements have thrown the full light
of day on some of the great moral, social and political
issues of our time.
It is difficult, of course, to evaluate the progress
achieved on a day-to-day basis. One can judge progress
in this field only by looking at it in historical perspective.
As recently as 1920, no one would have dared to think
that an international organization would have as one
of its major concerns the international protection of
human rights. Human Rights Was considered a matter
exclusively within the domestic jurisdiction of States.
Indeed, it will be recalled that when, at the Peace
Conference at the close of the World War I, the Japanese
delegation suggested that the Covenant of the League of
Nations should proclaim the principle of racial equality,
the proposal was opposed by some of the great Powers
and was not adopted. When one compares this event,
which happened barely a generation ago, with .what has
been said above about the work of the United Nations in
the field of human rights, he will agree that, in spite of
all the difficulties, some progress has been made.
Action needed at
grass-roots level
Yet it would be wrong to believe that the most
important work in the field of human rights is
confined to the large arena of international discus¬
sion and decision. After all, human rights are enjoyed and
exercised only in actual human relationships, in actual
communities. The advances made at the international
level in the promotion of human rights become real only
when they are reflected in action at the local level.
For responsible community leaders, much of this local
action will be of a co-operative and educational char¬
acter education in what the United Nations is doing,
education in the basic attitudes and social concepts which
our times call for. Fundamentally, the task of promot¬
ing human rights is an educational one. It is a task of
educating public opinion, changing basic attitudes and
behaviour, eliminating outmoded concepts and implanting
in the minds of men, women and children those concepts
which reflect the realities of an inter-related and inter¬
dependent world society.
The above article is adapted from a chapter of "Teaching
Human Rights: A Handbook for Teachers", which is shortly
to be published by the U.N. in New York to mark the 10th
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
