International News Photo
Nigeria's
young
ambassador-
in-art
Sport and Genera!, London
30

The Unesco Courier. August 1958
Keystone
EBONY DRUMMER (opposite page) is a carving by Felix Idubor, a young Nigerian sculptor whose work has won high praise
from European art critics. A leading artist in his own country, he came to Europe last year on a Unesco fellowship and
studied in London where he held a one-man exhibition at the Imperial Institute. Examples of his work are shown here. As a
result of his voyage, Idubor has learned new methods of bronze casting and expects to open a foundry in his African studio.
Early last year, a young Nigerian sculptor named
Felix Idubor, dressed in his colourful native clothes,
arrived in London to begin a special course of study
at the Royal College of Art. A well-known artist in his
own country, Idubor Iwas making his first trip outside of
Africa as the result of an international fellowship grant
accorded to him by Unesco (1).
When Felix Idubor paid a visit to Unesco House in Paris
recently, he had not only enriched his knowledge and
techniques through studies in the United Kingdom, Bel¬
gium and France, but had also become something of an
"Ambassador" for West African art, through a highly
successful one-man exhibition at London's Imperial Insti¬
tute. Several thousand visitors attended this exhibition
and art critics from several countries warmly praised the
works he had carved in ebony and other African woods.
Felix Idubor was born 30 years ago in Benin City, in
Southern Nigeria, a traditional art centre of West Africa.
Negro art is predominantly plastic and the classical art
of Africa, in the purest sense of the word, is wood sculp¬
ture. There are several centres of Negro sculpture on the
Continent, but most are in the Western half and one of
the most prolific is Benin. Some art critics consider that
(1) Some 2,000 fellowships and travel grants have been made by
Unesco in the past 10 years to experienced men and women in fields
ranging from oceanography to nuclear physics and from, teaching
to journalism. Twelve art fellowships have been granted by Unesco
in the past four years. Unesco fellowships are not usualy granted to
undergraduate students but to professionnal men and women . who
are already established in their fields.
at Benin itself and at lie, in the Yoruba country to the
north, African sculpture reached its highest level.
The 41 pieces of sculpture, all of West African motif,
which Felix Idubor exhibited in London revealed him as
a worthy 20th-century heir to this art tradition whose
history has been traced back at least 600 years. The
exhibition also gave a European public the chance to see
figures and forms of Nigerian history and legend created
by a self-taught youth who, at 28, had already become
one of the foremost artists in his country.
Felix Idubor began carving at the age of eight, and he
was earning a living at his craft only four years later.
His reputation was quickly established at Benin City and,
before long, he moved to Lagos, the capital of Nigeria,
where he became known to a much wider public.
His first one-man exhibition Was held at Lagos in 1953
under the auspices of the British Council. Other exhibi¬
tions followed and in 1956 he was appointed instructor in
sculpture at the Yaba Technical Institute of Lagos.
At the Royal College of Art in London, Where he went
in 1957, Idubor soon became noted among the students
for his speed and skill in executing the West African
forms on which he continued to work. For on this point
he has very definite ideas. "From my experience in
Europe," he says, "I feel it is tremendously
valuable for artists to come from Africa to
study Western art, but I have one reserva¬
tion: I hope that African artists will not
be overwhelmed and lose their own tradi¬
tional forms and inspirations."
Cont'd
next page
31

ART
AMBASSADOR
(Continued)
MEMORIES OF TRADITIONAL HEROES
He points out that most of the arts of Africa were
inspired by ancient secret cults like the "Ju-ju", and as
such they depicted the spirits of ancestors. "'Until the
last century," he says, "wealthy people supported artists
in Africa. They bought works of art for their secret cults
and to keep alive the memory of traditional heroes.
Artists in African communities were kept busy; they were
honoured and respected by all. Art in Africa is based
on the inspiration of the artist at the time of creation.
He expresses his feeling and his interpretation of an
object spontaneously."
Perhaps the most striking of the ancient works of art
produced in Benin are the bronzes, either life-size human
heads or complete models of animals and human beings, or
again, reliefs of complete scenes, animals, humans and
mythological or magical symbols. The existence of these
bronzes only became generally known in Europe towards
the end of the 19th century, although brass casting was
introduced into Benin in about 1280 A.D.
The ruler of Benin at that time, Oba (King) Oguola
sent to the Yaruba city of Ife for a brass-smith as he
wished to produce bronzes himself instead of importing
them from Ife. (See The 'Unesco Courier, July 1957,
page 18.) The craftsman who came to Benin was named
Iguo-igha. He was a very skilful worker and left many
designs to his successors. As a result he was deified and
is worshipped to this day by brass-smiths.
A later ruler, Esigue (c.1504) is said to have encouraged
and improved brass working until the art of Benin
reached its prime in the 16th century. Ivory and wood
carving had already been introduced by an earlier king.
Benin was visited in the 15th century by a Portuguese
navigator, Alfonso d'Aveiro and later by other European
voyagers. At one time it was thought that the brass
casting had actually been introduced by Europeans, and
there was also a theory that it had come by a roundabout
route from India. But dating of the earlier Benin bronzes
shows that the people of Benin (the Bini) practised this
art before the arrival of the Portuguese.
This is another aspect of Nigeria's art tradition that
fascinates Felix Idubor. As Well as teaching young
Nigerian artists something of what he has learned in
England and on the Continent, he now wants to set up
a bronze foundry in his Lagos studio. "I have now
learned new methods of bronze casting which will enable
me to work faster and compete with established foun¬
dries," he says.
AFRICAN FIGURE
takes shape as Felix
Idubor works in a studio
at the Royal College of
Art in London. While
studying in Europe, he
continued to draw on
traditional Nigerian
forms and subjects. Most
of the materials he uses
are woods from his own
countryi.e. ebony, ope-
pe, obeche and iroko.
32
