MODERN
PYRAMIDS
The ancients created their great wonders of the worldthe Pyramids of Egypt, the Hanging
Gardens of Babylon, the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, the Statue of Zeus at Olympia, the
Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, the Lighthouse at Alexandria, and the Colossus at Rhodes.
Amazing as were these wonders of antiquity, they pale before the wonders of modern times.
The Hanging Gardens and the Pharos at Alexandria sink into insignificance before the skyscra¬
pers, span bridges and public buildings of today. The Pyramids, mighty as they are, are
equalled by the "pyramids" of our own century, the towering dams and barrages which are
harnessing rivers for the benefit of millions of common people and opening up unsuspected
perspectives of economic and social development for vast regions of the earth still little deve¬
loped. These great feats of engineering and architectural skill, however, usually require
fabulous sums of money which many States are unable to provide by themselves, and it is in
part through international co-operation and the help accorded, by a Specialized Agency of the
United Nations, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, that many of
the "modern pyramids" are being built today. Below, a "modern pyramid" rises in Austria.
Photo by Franz Hubmann, reproduced from "Wasserkraft", publish¬
ed by "Zeitschriftenverlag Austria International Gesseischaft", Vienna
WATER FOR
ITALY'S
PARCHED
LANDS

The Unesco Courier. August 1958
Ten million acres of land put to work for men, crops and livestock.
This is the goal that the Cassa per il Mezzogiorno, an Italian government
agency, has set itself as part of a massive fifteen-year development
programme under way since 19 50 in the nation's southern provinces
and islands. Italy's greatest economic problem for many years has been
the poverty and backwardness of this region, supporting a third of the
Italian people, where flash floods in winter and droughts in summer have
long been the rule. A total of $3,200 million has been allotted the
Cassa mainly for irrigation, transportation and sanitation, and additional
sums are being used for industrial and electric power development.
The World Bank is helping the Italian Government in this huge
project and has made five important loans totalling S240 million.
Pipes are being laid across miles of countryside, and carried by tunnels
World Bank photo by Vecchio Vega, Catania
through the hills. Forty-four aqueducts are either completed or under
construction. In the outskirts of Naples, Italian engineers are cons¬
tructing a reservoir (to be ready this year) with a capacity of I 8 million
gallons. Irrigation canals are being built to bring water to the dry
farmlands. In Sicily, particularly in the Catania plain, where the
problems are similar to those on the southern mainland, what the
land needs most is water. In the hills behind the plain water is
plentiful and the Italians have already built one dam for producing
electricity and as a water-store for irrigation. A second reservoir and
a new dam are under construction (the Pozzillo Dam shown in photo
above) and will store enough water to feed I 500 farms. From the
start of operations in I 950 to end I 9 57 farm output in southern region
has increased by some 40% and industrial production by about 50%.
