GYPSY CHILDREN,
in the city of Granada,
Spain, have special educa¬
tional facilities in the Sacro-
monte Settlement Area in
which they live. In the school
modern in conception and
methodsattended by gypsy
children most lessons are
given outdoors. Geography
classes, for example, are
held in front of a giant
(45 feet square) concrete
relief map of Spain. Right,
learning the alphabet, young
pupils begin by forming the
letters with their fingers.
© Paul Almasy
SCHOOLS FOR GYPSIES
ENGLAND. Assimilation in State
and Church Primary Schools since 1908.
Some absenteeism especially in the Spring.
Small percentage continue to secondary
schools.
FRANCE. Small mobile school ex¬
periment under Church auspices. No formal
State educational facilities exist as yet.
SPAIN. Special educational facilities
provided in the Sacromonte Settlement
Area, under the jurisdiction of the Gover¬
nor of Granada.
U.S.S.R. Special Gypsy Schools
adapted to particular needs already exist in
large urban centres. Widespread effort in
rural areas being made, with mobile instruc¬
tors. Elementary teaching is given in both
Romane and Russian. Classes in Technical
schools are also adapted to their particular
aptitudes.
MOROCCO. Nomad Mobile schools
have been organized under the direction of
a religious order, with centre in Casablanca.
GERMANY. Attempted assimilation
in State Schools has been made. The prob¬
lem is at present under government scru¬
tiny.
SWEDEN. In 1954, the Swedish
Government appointed a Gypsy Commis¬
sion. The investigation embraced practically
the entire Swedish Gypsy population. Exis¬
tent experiment with Mobile Schools found
not entirely satisfactory. It is now proposed
to maintain Mobile Schools during the
8
summer, and during the winter months
to assimilate the Gypsy children in ordinary
State Schools, but to create special classes
such as exist for foreigners. It is proposed
to maintain a Permanent Consultant on
Gypsy Affairs under the Social Welfare
Board.
FINLAND. In 1954, there were
3,569 Gypsies in Finland. The Social
Research Bureau of the Ministry for Social
Affairs found that one-fifth of the total
population had gone to Primary Schools
while one-quarter had been to school for
some time, but later had given up atten¬
dance. It was found that one-third of the
adult Gypsies were illiterate and more than
half the rest could not write. Urgent consi¬
deration is now being given to implement
the recommendations of the Bureau.
These countries have been drawn at
random, showing a growing interest in
the problems involved in providing
necessary education for the children of the
Rom. There is a general realization among
nearly all governments that this is one of
the many educational challenges which must
be met. Social workers who have already
been appointed by their governments to
tackle the difficulties involved, have found
their work rewarding and satisfying.
Among the many who have devoted
untiring efforts on behalf of these peoples,
are numbered the names of Walter Starkie
of Trinity College, Dublin, and for many
years head of the British Institute in Ma¬
drid ; the Abbé Fleury, S.J. of Poitiers ; the
Abbé Barthélémy of Verdun, who has the
advantage of a perfect knowledge of Ro¬
mane; C.H. Tellhagen of the Nordiska
Museum of Stockholm, Ivar Lo-Johannson,
one of Sweden's most popular writers
to mention just a few.
All are agreed on one point : that even
when the Gypsy children attend the nor¬
mal State Schools it is absolutely essential
to make provision for their special needs.
There must be a wider disciplinary toler¬
ance and relaxation of strict time-tables to
avoid any sense of confinement. This is
particularly true of the Primary Grades. If
this is done it should then be possible to
assimilate the age groups 10 to 15 into the
normal classes.
A serious suggestion comes from a
French writer on Gypsy lore, Jean-Louis
Febvre. He proposes that social workers
on Gypsy problems from all countries
should take advantage of the yearly gather¬
ing of the Rom at Stes-Maries-de-la-Mer to
discuss with the Elders of all the
different tribes, these pertinent questions
which require so urgent an answer. It has
happened before in history, this calling
together of an immense Romani Kriss or
Court of Gypsies. Their Elders are often
very wise in the ways of the different tribes
and as M. Febvre says in his book, Les
Fils du vent (1) "their help would undoubt¬
edly be of the greatest assistance to all."
(1) " Les Fils du Vent " (The Children of the
Wind) published by " La Toison d'Or ", París.
