14

Machines, technology and clock-regulated working
hours have invaded our world but they have not
diminished the prestige of the artist in modern
society. They seem in fact to have achieved just the con¬
trary. An explanation for the mounting prestige of the
artist today was recently voiced by a sculptor in Paris.
"Most people," he said, "'now go through life doing pretty
much the same thing day after day and their existence
can be compared to the humdrum recitation of a lesson
learned at school. We artists are privileged people. All
our lives we are engaged in doing something new and dif¬
ferent. We live by creating."
There is no denying that creative art appeals to the
popular imagination today as much as ever it did before.
But it is a pity that so many people, including art lovers,
continue to cling to the old romantic stereotype of the
artist as a person living either a life of glory or a life
of misery, but never anything in between.
The paintings of Van Gogh and Toulouse-Lautrec are
unquestionably admired for their intrinsic merits. But
is it idle to wonder Whether their works would arouse
as much interest and enthusiasm with the vast general
public if Van Gogh, for example, had died peacefully in
his bed instead of tragically by his own hand, and if
Toulouse-Lautrec had been a tall, well-built man of sober
habits? According to the stereotype, the artist is a lonely
figure rejected by' society, and is at one and the same
time a pariah and a god. Poverty, alcoholism and near
madness (sometimes total insanity) are directly respon¬
sible for the masterpieces the artist produces and lead
him to a death which is seen as a triumphant and highly
original exit from our world.
If this conception of the artist is
accepted it would seem pointless and
even improper to discuss the living
conditions of painters and sculptors.
Yet who can seriously accept such a
picture of the artist today? The
average artist's life is, in fact, hum¬
bler, simpler and more taken up with
day-to-day cares.
We have tried to give an account
of this, the real life of the artist, .
against the background of Paris in
1957, especially the Paris of the Left
Bank, ready as always, to recognize
talent from every corner of the world,
but with no time for those who lack
purpose or for failures. Purely aesthe¬
tic problems have been left aside for
they do not enter into the scope or
purpose of this inquiry. An artist
does not change from representation¬
al to abstract art, or vice versa,
solely with an eye to material gain,
or if he does, it is because his talent
and vocation are so slight that his
interest is centered exclusively on
"market fluctuations". We had many
long and friendly talks with artists
and during the course of them we
met very few who were not suf¬
ficiently devoted to their work to re¬
fuse to make any serious concessions.
The first surprising thing one dis¬
covers about the world of artists is
the ease with which one has access
to it. Even the most famous acade¬
mies and studios give visitors a cor¬
dial welcome. Though we met some
of the best-known contemporary
painters and sculptors, we concen¬
trated our attention on the younger
artists whose problems, hopes and
ambitions form the central theme of
this inquiry.
What do |we mean by the "'young
The Unesco Courier. April 1958
artist?" One academy teacher gave the following terse
definition: "A painter is young at 60, if he has not yet
made his name". There are many artists whose talent
develops late and others who, undaunted by constant
failure, nevertheless persevere. One woman pupil, full of
enthusiasm, admitted to being ninety-one.
The Annual Exhibition of Paintings by Young Artists
(Salon annuel de la Jeune Peinture) used to accept only
works by people under thirty years of age. In 1956, that
age-limit was raised to thirty-five, and it may perhaps
soon be raised to forty. Many of our interviews suggest¬
ed the likelihood of this development.
It is impossible to say exactly how many painters and
sculptors there are, for these are not organized profes¬
sions. As a frame-maker said to us, with a sigh of relief:
"They escape the clutches of the statisticians". In theory,
a professional artist lives by his painting that is what
distinguishes him from the amateur. But many profession¬
als sell very little or nothing at all for years on end. Esti¬
mates by painters and sculptors themselves about the num¬
ber of their fellow-artists vary greatly. One will tell you
that there are scarcely more than a thousand profession¬
al artists in the Paris area but in any case, no one
places the total number of painters in Paris at more
than 30,000, and there appears to be only twice that
number in the whole of France, counting both profession¬
als and amateurs. Whether that is a high figure compar¬
ed with other European countries and
the world in general is difficult to
say. What is certain, however, is that
there are far fewer sculptors: in the
whole country, perhaps two thousand
Cont'd
next page
CITY OF PRESTIGE in the world of
art, Paris attracts a high proportion of
young foreign students to its academies
and art schools. To eke out their
resources, some make sketches of the
Paris scene which they sell to visiting
tourists. In a city of high prices and
little accoomodation, many (like the stu¬
dent of sculpture, opposite page) have to
make dowith a dilapidated attic-bedroom.
. Photos © Paul Almasy
15

YOUNG
ARTISTS
(Continued)
la Vie de Bohème' - A thing of the past
and, in the capital itself, only a few hundred.
Painters are increasing in number; sculptors are becom¬
ing fewer. This again is easily accounted for: sculptors'
materials are very costly and for their work they need
large studios, and if the sculptors wish to execute large-
sized works, these should be on the ground floor. Again,
sculpture is difficult to sell. It is probably easier to find
a market for statuettes, but then there is the problem
of protecting them against copying. In the world to¬
day, growing importance is attached to what can be seen
and less and less to what can be touched. Painting is
not out of its element in an essentially two-dimensional
world, whereas sculpture is to a greater extent.
Young French artists come from all over the country
to work in Paris. The South seems to contribute a larger
contingent judging by many of the voices we heard with
the sing-song accents of Languedoc or Provence! It could
hardly have been by chance that during three months
we met hardly any young artists from Northern France.
Paris is above all cosmopolitan, and foreigners often
make up between a third and a half of academy
students. The length of their stay in Paris varies greatly;
some settle there for good, while others the majority
only remain for a few months. The English-speaking
world, and particularly America, has been well represent¬
ed since the last war. Young Americans have developed
a taste for France, thanks to the generous fellowships
granted by their Government to veterans. Many Spani¬
ards found refuge in France after the Civil War and
some of them have become naturalized. Today young
artists continue to come from Spain. Paris has always
attracted people from the East, and especially from the
Far East, and its popularity is also still as great as ever
among the Germans, the Scandinavians and France's
Benelux neighbours. As varied as the representation in
this Parisian Tower of Babel are the financial resources
of its inhabitants. Some enjoy comfortable maintenance
grants; oters are hard up and, like those of their
French companions in similar circumstances, make both
ends meet as best they can.
Even Parisians, convinced as they are of the perennial
charm and greatness of their city, marvel at the extra¬
ordinary and universal prestige which it enjoys. Success
in Paris ensures world-wide recognition, and many
foreign artists find it worth while to visit or revisit it,
simply to exhibit their works. Rich foreign buyers
especially Americans and South Americans or their
agents do the round of the exhibitions.
In the past Montparnasse vied with Montmartre for
ARTISTS' CLUB, the Foyer des Artistes, in the Montparnasse area
of Paris provides artists and students with low-priced meals and serves
them as a meeting place where they can discuss their work. The
16
Foyer was founded by a well-known local man, Marc Vaux, and is run
privately by a committee. The value of its work is recognized by the
artists of Paris, and this year, 73 well-known painters have donated

the honour of being the most flourishing artists' quarter
of Paris. They still hold the same enchantment for the
French; many would like to live there, but that is a
dream beyond the reach of many a purse. Here, most
of them feel at home, chatting on the café terraces or
taking their meals in the small restaurants frequented
by a regular clientele. Here, too; good painting mat¬
erials are easily accessible. In Montparnasse there are
plenty of shops selling artists' materials, paints, can¬
vases, etc, and there is no lack of art galleries.
Nevertheless, young artists from abroad are quite often
disappointed. They have so often heard their elders sing¬
ing the praises of these Bohemian neighbourhoods where
credit is easy to come by, that they are often cruelly
disillusioned when they find themselves facing the harsh
realities of a Paris which no longer knows the carefree
days of the past.
We found a certain similarity in the social background
of painters and sculptors; practically none belong to the
working classes and very few are of peasant origin. On
the contrary, all sections of the middle class produce
their artists, from the industrialist's wife, who finds
pleasure in painting or does it simply to pass the time,
to, for example, the son of an industrial draughtsman
who is often a bit of a puzzle to his family.
But how their educational levels vary ! Although some
of the artists we met in academies and studios were Sor¬
bonne graduates or former students of schools of fine arts
or of decorative art, others had never gone beyond a
rather sketchy primary education. However, all painters
and sculptors, without exception, are keenly interested
Photos © Paul Almasy
works whose sale will 'provide it with funds. The feeling of unity
among painters is coming, more and more, to resemble the collective
spirit of workers' trade unions. They no longer hold aloof from society.
The Unesco Courier. April 1958
in literature and other arts which they realize, to a greater
or lesser degree, are akin to their own work. A young
painter who left school at an early age, told us that his
favourite pastime was going to the Comédie-Française.
We know him well enough to be sure that this was no
mere intellectual snobbery; intellectuals and authors
enjoy amazing prestige as much as great actors among
these young artists.
A great deal of variation can be seen in the means of
subsistence, and consequently the social status, of young
painters and sculptors who have not yet met with success.
Parents who are more or less well-off encourage their
children's vocation, even if they have no understanding
of modern art or are fully aware of the hazards of such
a career. They may continue their financial support for
years. Yet it is more common for a family to lose interest
at a fairly early stage, or to show downright hostility.
The arguments put forward are generally hackneyed:
painting and sculpture do not provide a living, are
scarcely compatible with middle class morality, threaten
mental stability (in point of fact, statistics show that
there is a high percentage of neurotics among painters)
and, above all, are useless to society. If the clash becomes
sharper, the young man with monied parents finds him¬
self in exactly the same situation as a companion with
a humbler background.
Painter by day: porter by night
Most young artists in Paris. have also to look to other
fields in order to earn a living. Some prefer to
take up an entirely différent occupation; young men,
for instance, can be seen at night working at Les Halles
(the Central Paris Market), while girls may look after
children. Others seek work more closely related to their
chosen profession, for example, doing sketches for restau¬
rants and night-clubs or window-dressing for shops or
large stores. Others again work as drawing teachers for a
few hours each day. Their main idea, of course, is to keep
as much time as possible for their own creative work.
Many young writers today are also going through the
same difficulties.
To achieve success while still very young is very excep¬
tional. Is it even desirable? Painters and sculptors even
more so believe that their art requires maturity and full
development of the personality, and they readily endorse
the view that "'Genius is but an infinite capacity for tak¬
ing pains".
While lack of security and erratic meals do not unduly
depress young people of twenty, anxiety to make a decent
living begins to worry those who have reached thirty.
Driven by want, those without a very strong vocation
very often abandon their art at that age, when absolute
values seem less Important particularly as the second
occupation is likely to be more remunerative.
It is also between twenty and thirty that the problem
of marriage arises for artists, as it does for most other
people. Although there are always some bachelors ready
to emphasize the disadvantages of a home-life it in¬
trudes on working time, especially if a child is born too
soon the artists whom we interviewed repeatedly stressed
how important a happy married life is to mental stjbi-
lity and conscientious work.
Here was a subject on which we particularly felt we
should have the views of women painters, who, at least
in the academies, are almost as numerous as the men.
For women, marriage implies far greater changes in their
way of life and far more serious hindrances to the con¬
tinuation of their creative work. A 22-year old girl from
Luxembourg told us: '"It is very difficult to continue
painting if one marries, unless of course one marries a
painter", and this seems to be a general opinion among
her sister artists. Without wishing to lay down any gen¬
eral rule, it must be admitted that a woman
painter or sculptor who marries and has
children is obliged to relinquish many, if
not all, of her ambitions, if only because of
the cramped quarters in which she has to
17


YOUNG
ARTISTS
(Continued)
Adventure
into art
There are several choices before the young artist seeking
to develop his skill and knowledge. He can study and work
on his own, visit a private art teacher, enrol in the official
school, the Ecole des Beaux Arts, or attend one of the many
academies and art schools. Left, a class in one of the oldest
and best known of the Paris art schools, La Grande Chau¬
mière which, for 1,000 francs a week, offers artists a daily
session with a model. Below, students in the engraving and
lithography class at thé Ecole des Beaux Arts gather round
Professor Jandon while he analyses and criticises their work.
Photos © Paul Almasy
19

ART GALLERIES', like this exhibition on the Boulevard St. Michel, Latin Quarter, Paris, are often used by artists to display
their works to the public. It Is every painter's dream to show his works In a private gallery, but the cost of renting one is often beyond his means.
live even when her home is something better than an
attic room on the sixth floor.
To marry an unknown painter or sculptor is a proof
of courage looked at from the viewpoint of material ad¬
vantages; it means taking a gamble where the chances of
an easy, comfortable life are slight. In addition, the
"creator" may lose himself in work for hours, days or even
weeks. We have, nevertheless, met successful couples. In
one case, for example, the wife continues with her sculp¬
ture and looks after the children, while the husband works
at painting and also at engraving which sells very well.
In order to become known, a painter can, of course,
rely on luck, on connexions he may have, or he may
get help from friends who are already well-established.
Picture dealers, on the look out for works, may some¬
times decide to buy one or several or even an artists'
entire output. These dealers know exactly what their
customers want and at the same time they influence
these tastes with skill. There are some in Paris who
search for works by young painters and dispatch them
all over the world. One artist in his thirties and already
on the road to success, told us that he had sold three
of his works in one week for 360,000 francs, all of them
to customers in America. The Benelux and Swiss markets
also offer good outlets, but French customers are less
numerous. The realistic outlook of certain artists in
business dealings would surprise' those who insist that
artists always live with their heads in the clouds.
All artists make use of the open exhibitions ("salons")
to bring their works before the public, but without being
over-optimistic about the results. Among dozens or even
hundreds of works, it can hardly be hoped that one or
two paintings will attract notice. The position allotted
to the works is all important, because the effect produc¬
ed by a picture depends so much on the light. But much
depends toó on the visual fatigue of the visitor, who
will really only see about a dozen out of a hundred works;
it is then that the influence of a patron can work wonders.
But, in fact, no more favouritism exists here than in
other spheres.
It is every painter's dream to be able to show his works
20
in a private gallery. But the cost of hiring premises is
generally over 100,000 francs (£85) for a fortnight, and of
course, it is more than this for the largest and best known
galleries. In addition, the picture-dealer will take 20%
to 30% on any sale. Painters often think these charges
exorbitant, but it must be admitted that intermediaries
run risks. We met a former painter who runs a small,
attractively arranged, gallery where works can be shown
free of charge. This, of course, is a real godsend.
Lean years for the young sculptor
A painter enjoys security, at least from year to year,
when he is bound by a contract with a picture-
dealer. It starts with a small contract, and then, if
both sides are satisfied, the amount is increased. A thirty-
five-year-old painter told us about his contract, which, sub¬
ject to the production of an average of three pictures a
month, brings him in an income of 100.000 francs a
sum which will soon be doubled.
Yet this system also has its disadvantages. Is not the
painter likely to become the dealer's employee, turning
out works to order? And may not the dealer oblige the
artist to increase his output to satisfy the customers?
If abstract Works sell better, the artist has to give up
representational painting. Some artists therefore prefer
to put up with difficult conditions for a few years rather
than be bound by a contract while still quite young.
After the age of thirty, a painter is far less liable to
be influenced, because he has mastered his craft. At this
stage, a contract gives him a chance to work in peace,
without jeopardizing his integrity as an artist.
A young sculptor has greater difficulties to overcome,
since it will be many years before he can hope to make
a living by his work. All those galleries dealing
exclusively in sculpture are in difficulties or have closed
down, and it is quite exceptional for a dealer to offer a
contract to a sculptor. While there is an astonishing
amount of speculation in paintings, there is no competi¬
tion among private buyers for bronze or marble. Re¬
cently, at the Charpentier Gallery, a Vlaminck painting

Photos © Paul Almasy
IN CREATIVE ACTION, sculptor has a male model, of whom there are only a few in Paris, posing for him. Sculptors are also fewer todaythere
are only a few hundred In the capital and perhaps 2,000 throughout France. Materials are costly, and just now there is little demand for sculpture.
was sold for 1,500,000 francs, while a Maillol sculpture
only just fetched 300,000 francs.
A sculptor may receive a commission from a local
authority a municipal monument, for instance. He
benefits mainly in this case from the law which stipulates
that one per cent of the cost of any public building shall
be allocated to the work of sculptors.
General conditions, which are not very propitious for
sculptors, explain why they also turn to the more profitable
art of painting, whereas well-known painters often try
their hand at sculpture fairly late in life.
A young artist cannot avoid quite high professional
expenses. Only rarely is painting or sculpture done
without a model. The cheapest solution is, of course,
found in the academies, which for a femall fee provide
the artist with models. But he is not free to choose aU
the poses that he might like to study. If he has the
means, therefore, he employs a model in his own studio
when he is lucky enough to have one. The average
charge for three hours is 1,000 francs (just under £1). It
is not too difficult to find models in Paris, but professional
models are fast disappearing. We met a male model, who
told us proudly that he had only three or four professional
rivals in the whole of Paris.
The material with which an artist has to equip himself
tends to become increasingly expensive as he grows more
proficient in his craft. Raw materials have been affected
by the general rise in prices. A cotton canvas costs 650
francs (about 10/-) a metre. A linen canvas, of far
better quality, may cost as much as 2,000 francs (nearly
£2). We have ourselves seen young painters in the
academies painting on anything they could find. Any
old thing will do as a palette. Tubes of paint of standard
size cost anything from 80 to 900 francs (1/6 to 17/-) each.
Rich cadmium colours are very popular but, owing to the
needs of the electronic and nuclear industries, cadmium
has become scarce and therefore expensive.
Generally speaking, a young artist rarely spends more
than 10,000 francs a month on his materials. If he
becomes known, his expenses Increase and may come to
more than 50,000 francs a month.
Talking with painters, we were surprised to discover
how little most of them knew about the chemistry of
colours. Our impression was confirmed by shopkeepers
and art teachers, the pessimists explaining that young
painters, out for quick success, attach no importance to
the lasting quality of their works. The optimists simply
say that a painter cannot be a chemist too and should
therefore trust his usual supplier.
Not enough studios for everyone
The housing shortage, more than any other difficulty,
hits young painters and sculptors very hard. For
them, a studio with a wide view, light, and space is
not a luxury but a professional necessity. Despite the
efforts of various committees, the generally sympathetic
attitude of the Municipality of Paris, and the goodwill of
the public authorities, there are countless young artists in
Paris without a studio. To buy one in the centre of the
capital, at Montparnasse for instance, is naturally
beyond the means of a beginner with no private income.
The average price even of something quite modest is 2
or 3 million francs.
Those who have been renting studios for some years
are the best off in this respect. In one artists' colony,
the rent is not more than 25,000 francs (£25) a year, but
what discomfort, to say the least: no running water,
erratic heating, a leaking roof and cracked walls. These
studios, known to be unhealthy, are to be knocked down
by an estate agency which plans to build flats on
the site. Where and how can the present occupants be
rehoused? Rents today, if one happens to find a studio,
are as high as 40,000 francs a month in one street in the
Montparnasse district!
Painters and sculptors who are obliged to live in a hotel,
a furnished room or an attic, can no longer hope to live
on credit for weeks or months, as artists were once able
to do in the years preceding the great slump
of 1930. In the world today, people have
scant admiration for the Bohemian Ufe. In
restaurants, the artist pays his bill like
everyone else. If he is not a student, or
21

SECOND STRINGS TO THEIR BOWS.
PAINTER-MUSICIAN, Robert Abadie is equally at home with violin bow and paint brush. Like many artists he has "a second string
to his bow"he gives music lessons and directs a small orchestra. To make ends meet, younger artists resort to all kinds of part-time jobs.
SCULPTOR-SHOPKEEPER Henri Colomb. His works include a large monument to French Resistance Fighters killed during the
war, which was commissioned by the Government. To supplement his income from art he also has a bookselling and stationery shop.
ARTIST-MILLINER, Jean Louis Vergne makes a speciality of landscape painting, also designs hats in a small workroom which he
inherited from his father. Many artists turn to work in which they can apply artistic talentinterior decorating, teaching, window-dressing.
Photos © Paul Aim asy
22

The Unesco Courier. April 1958
Leo Markus
PARIS IS RECOGNIZED at the capital of the world of art. That is why successful foreign artists consider it important to exhibit their works
there. The majority of artists who come to study only remain for a few months, and few actually settle. One who has done so Is Reginald Weston,
(above) a Londoner, who, though he has been painting since he was a child, has never had any formal art training. A former waiter, sailor and
journalist, Weston became a professional painter when he arrived in Paris in 1947. Since then he has employed a new art technique : mural dec¬
orations on laminated plastic. The artist paints directly on to a sheet of paper which Is subjected to high pressure and becomes part of the plastic.
23

COURTYARD CONCERT
in the snow is given at
Montmartre by brass band
of art student musicians
heavily disguised in bowler
hats. Founded by a Mont¬
martre painter, Gen-Paul,
the band ¡s a regular feature
of art-studio parties, and
near Christmas time it makes
the rounds of this Paris
"village," raising money for
charities. The romantic
stereotype of the artist as
a Bohemian character no
longer fits in with the life
of the average artist today.
But if the modern young
artist is perhaps more reflec¬
tive than his predecessors
he has not on this account
lost anything of their gaiety
and their good humour.
© Paul Almasy
is no longer a student, he can count only on a few hostels,
which are almost always, private benevolent institutions.
In any case, the artist no longer tries to appear as a figure
apart. Eccentric clothing is no longer the fashion. In the
streets or in cafés, it may be possible to recognize painters
and sculptors by a particular style, a free and easy
manner or a certain unconventionality, but they are
generally dressed like everyone else.
The attitude of young artists today is in fact more
positive than that of the previous generation. They talk
readily about social security, from which they would like
to benefit, and about the comfort and healthy conditions
at which they are aiming. They are capable of tackling
technical problems, such as the building of a studio or
the planning of an artists' colony. They are competent
in defending their rights and those of their squatter
friends, and can carry on a well-informed discussion
about the clauses of a contract. They are very eager for
material success, which is more attractive to them than
the romantic picture of poverty-stricken genius resorting
to the bottle.
Their psychological and mental balance is a matter of
concern to them and they fully realize that alcohol and
drugs are not necessary to the development of their art.
There are definite reasons for their anxiety and nervous
tension. Probably their difficulties are not much greater
24
than those of their predecessorsfor never has there been
such a demand for paintings as today (for once, specula¬
tion has had a salutary effect!)since they know that
they have a good chance of making a living by their art
at the age of about thirty-five, providing that they work
hard. But they are more alive to the difficulties than
artists used to be, precisely because they feel that theirs
is a real career and because they wish to have the rights
and responsibilities of citizenship.
The feeling of unity among painters is coming, more
and more, to resemble the collective spirit of workers'
trade unions. The modern artist, who is. more serious-
minded than his predecessors, is far less addicted to
rowdyism; his spare time is devoted more often to cultural
pursuits than to roistering. But precisely because he no
longer holds aloof from society, he is subject to social
pressures and to the idea of social standing. He wants to
succeed, hut fortunately without losing all his good
humour and gaiety; he is often more reflective than his
predecessors and sometimes suffers from loneliness.
In short, the young artist, whether he be a bachelor or a
married man with a family, unknown or already enjoy¬
ing a reputation, has definitely adopted a more bourgeois
way of life, and ambitions and reactions which conform
to it. Nor does he seem to have escaped the general pro¬
cess which is "uniformizing" men almost everywhere.
