iela m
IN WORLD HISTORY
by Marshall G.S. Hodgson
Lecturer and Research Associate in the Committee on
Social Thought, University of Chicago
When Mohammed first preached Islam, in a rather
Obscure part of the Arabian peninsula in the
seventh century C.E., the other major religions had
already penetrated, among them, most of the civilized
lands of the Eastern Hemisphere. Christianity prevailed
in the Mediterranean Basin, Zoroastrianism in Iran,
Hinduism in India and the southeast, Buddhism and
Taoism in the Far East. There seemed little room for a
new religion; and indeed Mohammed did not claim that
Islam was new. He believed he was bringing the same
message from God that Moses and Jesus had brought to
the Jews and the Christians of old: that God alone was to
be worshipped, that His will was to be obeyed as made
known through His prophets, and that at the Last Judg¬
ment the disobedient would be punished and the be¬
lievers rewarded in Paradise.
The Jews and Christians, Mohammed believed, had
corrupted this simple message, and in Islam the purity
of God's truth was restored. In contrast to the na¬
tions around them, the Arabians, pagans till then, were
now offered the uncorrupted truth in their own language
in the Koran. Within Mohammed's lifetime the greater
part of Arabia offered him its obedience as God's Prophet,
and the formerly feuding Arabians were forged into a
strong new society on the basis of Islam.
At its beginning, then, Islam had the appearance of a
reformed version of the Jewish-Christian faith, adapted
to the local needs of the Arabian tribes. It would have
been hard to guess, then, that it was to play so great a
role in the world: first in the creation of a great Middle
Eastern empire, the Caliphate; then, when the Caliphate
broke up, as basis for the most powerful international
civilization of the mediaeval world; and finally in our time
as a world religion which is by some standards the most
widely distributed of all faiths. In the Middle Ages
Muslims believed themselves to be on the way to taking
over the whole world and turning it into a single divinely
guided society. They came nearer to uniting the world
than we usually realize; and the brotherhood of Islam
still provides one of the most active ideals at work among
mankind.
When the Arabian tribes were brought together by
Islam into a single state, they quickly burst the bounds of
Arabia, and within decades found themselves masters of
the Middle East, heirs to half the Roman Empire and the.
whole of the Persian. At first Islam was the badge of
the ruling Arabs; but the subject peoples Christians,
Jews, Zoroastrians, Buddhists were not slow in adopting
the new and dynamic creed, sometimes despite the
objections of the Arabs, many of whom preferred to keep
their privileged faith for themselves.
Within two centuries Islam had become the predominant
religion in most of the lands ruled by the Arab Caliphate,
while the Arabic language had become the common vehicle
of its burgeoning cultural and commercial life. In this
way a great civilization, with its own literary, artistic, and
intellectual traditions, was built around the Muslim faith.
When the Caliphate broke up in the tenth century the
civilization remained, to be carried round the world and
enriched by the various Islamic peoples.
This civilization was now given its social unity no longer
by a single state and a single language Persian soon
became an international cultural language rivalling
Arabic, and in time many other languages became
important locally but by a single system of sacred law.
18
This law covered in principle
every aspect of personal life
etiquette and ritual and be¬
lief as well as points of contract
or of inheritance. Though not
all parts of the sacred law were
equally applied among all
Muslim peoples, it produced
enough uniformity in essentials
to make it possible for a Muslim
from any country to have
citizenship rights throughout
the Dâr al-Islâm, the territory
under Muslim rule.
A learned man from Morocco,
travelling to see the world,
might be made a judge when
he lived for a time in India as
easily as if he were in his own
country thousands of miles
away. At the yearly pilgrimage
to Mecca, Muslims from the
most distant lands met and
might share their concerns.
With such relatively free inter¬
change, Islamic culture, though
it was diverse from country to
country, maintained a common
heritage in all its forms. Thus
in its exquisite grace the Taj
Mahal reflects Indian traditions
differing widely from those of
the Balkans or of North Africa;
but it was as obviously built for
Muslims as any mosque in
Istanbul or Tunis.
The culture which such ef¬
fectively flexible institutions
fostered was worthy of them.
Straddling the crossroads of the
world, the Islamic society was
in a position to gather its in¬
spiration from most of the ci¬
vilizations that had arisen be¬
fore it. It did not fail to do so;
but whatever it learned from the past it made its own,
and generally improved.
Apart from the grand simplicity of the religion itself,
its glory was in its literature, especially its poetry. This
grew out of the classical genius of pre-Islamic Arabia,
which Muslims never ceased to respect, but which in
Islamic times achieved far greater amplitude and variety.
The untranslatable subtlety of Arabic verse and the
versatile sweetness of the Persian poets have inspired local
literatures wherever Islam has gone.
More accessible to outsiders have been the splendours
of its visual arts. In painting and architecture were
mingled the traditions of pre-Islamic Iran going back to
ancient Mesopotamia and those of the Graeco-Roman
world. The lovely miniatures of Persia and India owe
much of their grace to the further addition of a Chinese
influence; the architecture has owed much, here or there,
to Byzantine or Hindu examples. But, above all in
architecture, the strength and precision of Islamic art,
its delicacy combined with uncompromising orderliness,
are fully its own.
\
Projection by A.K. Philbrick,
copyright 1951

The Unesco Courier. February 1958
APPROXIMATE SCALE ON THE HORIZONTAL AXIS
Muslims proved industrious scholars, and notably
indefatigable historians. Above all must be mentioned
their natural science. The Muslims inherited a formidable
body of learning from the classical Greeks philosophy
and logic from Plato and Aristotle, mathematics,
astronomy, and medicine from Euclid and Ptolemy,
Hippocrates and Galen, and the rest. To this inheritance
they joined much of the results of Sanskrit learning
including the use of the zero. They then accumulated
a wealth of further data: astronomical observations which
helped prepare the way for the acceptance of the
Copernican theory, alchemical experiments which much
enlarged the realm of chemistry, algebraic solutions,
geographical data, philosophical problems, botanical
discoveries, medical techniques. The age of creative
Islamic science did not last so long as that of creative art;
.after five or six centuries the Muslim peoples ceased to
produce much that was new. Yet the scientific heritage
did not cease to discipline the minds of cultivated Muslims
everywhere.
In the course of the centuries the Muslim faith, and
with it the Islamic culture, was spread far beyond the old
limits of the Caliphate by the preaching of merchants
and mystics, or by the prestige or force of conquering
monarchs. In some areas, as in China, though many
were converted to Islam the Muslims never gained power.
In most parts Muslim rule spread at least as fast as the
Muslim faith. Islam had been first established in the
Middle East, and Muslim rulers there long made it a point
to carry Islam into the two great populous regions on
each side, Europe and India. India proved the more
vulnerable and by 1300 Muslim rule had been momentarily
extended almost to its southern tip; on the other hand,
by 1529 and again in 1683 the Ottoman Turks were
besieging Vienna in the heart of Europe. In other
directions Islamization was perhaps less romantic, but
more lasting. As can be seen from the map (see page 20),
by 1500 Islam dominated much of northern Africa and of
Central Eurasia, and the coastlines around
the Indian Ocean.
Even where they did not convert or
conquer, the Muslims had an important
cultural influence. Thus in Africa, peoples
which had not yet accepted Islam often
Cont'd
on
next page
19

ISLAM
(Continued) One-sixth of mankind
adapted elements of Muslim practice to their own
cultures. In most parts of India even Hindu courts
recognized the excellence of Indo-Muslim culture. Islamic
handicrafts and art objects were eagerly received
everywhere; and in lands as far apart as Western Europe
and China, till the end of the Middle Ages astronomy and
the other sciences were studied in large part from Muslim
masters. It might easily have been supposed that Islam,
from its central position, was destined to unite the Old
World under its own leadership.
In the midst of this expansion the West Europeans,
emerging from relative obscurity, upset all expectations.
In the generation of about 1500 the Europeans proved
themselves masters of the oceans: of the Atlantic and
Pacific, together with a New World which lay between
them; and even of the Indian Ocean, the great highway
of Islamic trade, after a sharp struggle with the Muslims
concerned. During the following centuries, while some
khanates fell before the advancing Russians, elsewhere
the Dâr al-Islâm continued to gain ground in the Sudan
and Turkestan, in India and Malaysia, and even in Europe.
But within the West radical transformations were taking
place, intellectual, social, and economic, which were to
mark an epoch for all mankind. The Europeans, the first
to undergo the effects of these transformations, came to
have a greatly disproportionate power as compared with
other peoples, and especially in the generation of about
1800 this new Western power manifested itself throughout
the world. From the time of Napoleon's expedition to
Egypt the Muslims of the Middle East were faced with the
fact that they would have to go to the European schools
if they were to maintain even a degree of independence;
while at the same time divided India, once a great Islamic
empire, was conquered outright by the British. The
Islamic peoples everywhere found themselves on the
defensive before the once-despised Christians.
During the nineteenth century, Western domination, in
one form or another, spread over the whole world, and
ended by altering radically the circumstances in which
henceforth all peoples must live. The Muslim peoples,
either under direct European rule or under constant
interference by European powers, had to adapt themselves
per force to the European world order, adopting Western
rules of commerce and of citizenship, the new Western
means of transportation and communication, Western
military methods and scientific discoveries.
Gradually they began to undergo like transformations
to those which had already affected the West; and in the
twentieth century, as Western power has receded, they
have taken up (in common with the rest of the world)
the task of forging new destinies for themselves in the
new age, on an equal basis 'with the Western peoples. In
20

The Unesco Courier. February 1958
country after country new national institutions have been
built up to replace the mediaeval social patterns, and these
new nations have been integrated into a world order
which, in the day of the United Nations, the Islamic
peoples have had a share in forming.
The unity of Islam can therefore no longer be built on
the same basis as in the later Middle Ages; but as a
continuing faith Islam can perhaps find a greater unity
and strength than before. Thus it can be claimed that
when the Caliphate broke up, Islam as an international
civilization became stronger, freed from political
limitations, and expanded more than before; so also it
may be that, now that the particular juridical forms which
tied together the Islamic civilization of the later Middle
Ages have ceased to play their former role, Islam will find
even more effective means of embodying itself.
National diversities can be frankly faced without the
demand for rigid uniformity that sometimes seemed
necessary in the Middle Ages; and with modern methods
of communication Muslims from the farthest parts of the
world, even living in the midst of non-Muslim majorities,
can share together their search for a divinely ordered life.
However this may be, certainly the dignity of membership
in the world-wide brotherhood of Islam is still so
appealing that Islam is actively growing in many areas,
more often as a result of personal contacts than through
the efforts of the missionaries that have been sent out in
recent decades by several Muslim bodies.
Though Muslims Will not play just the same role in the
world's future as they have in its past, their role is bound
to be of great importance if only because they are
established so widely and strategically among mankind.
There are not many more than 350 million Muslims not
more than a sixth of mankind, fewer than Christians and
possibly than Buddhists but they are distributed among
many areas rather than being massed in a single part of
the world. Islam was founded by Arabs, and many of the
lands conquered by the Arab Caliphate came in time to
speak Arabic, which as the language of the Koran
continues to be revered by Muslims everywhere. But
today only a fraction of the whole body of Muslims is
found among the Arabic-speaking peoples.
As can be seen on the map (page 19), there are about as
many Muslims in Indonesia alone as in all the Arabic
countries put together; more than a quarter of the
Muslims of the world are in India and Pakistan and use
the various languages of that subcontinent. Only about
two thirds of the Muslims live in countries where they
form a majority, and these countries are widely scattered;
for instance, Senegal (70 %), Albania (68 %), Egypt (91 %),
Zanzibar (100%), Uzbekistan (80%), Pakistan (86%),
Indonesia (93 %). About a third live in countries where
a strong minority is Muslim, and these countries are even
more widely scattered; for instance, Dutch Guiana (25 %),
Nigeria (33%), Yugoslavia (11%), Lebanon (46%),
Tanganyika (19%), India (11%), Thailand (4%), Fiji
Islands (7 % ) . Sometimes these minorities are of great
importance. Eleven per cent of the population of India
amounts to forty millions, who play a significant part in
Indian life and in the Indian Government; and there are
estimated to be ten million Muslims in China, more than
in all the Arab "Fertile Crescent".
Among the religions, Christianity alone is more
universally found; but the great bulk of Christians is
restricted to Europe and the relatively new and sparsely
settled lands of European speech; Christianity has made
comparatively less progress in regions of other major
heritages. Islam not only dominates the geographically
pivotal Middle East, but has strong footholds in most of
Africa, throughout the Indian subcontinent, in large parts
of the Soviet Union and parts of China, in Malaysia, and
in southeastern Europe.
Thus in the Old World, where the overwhelming
majority of mankind still live, Islam is of major
importance in almost every region; and even in the
Americas there are some Caribbean lands where it forms
an important minority. Where it is not strong, either
migration or missionary work as in America has often
had some effect, so that it is at least represented in small
numbers almost everywhere.

