THE LANGUAGE OF
ABSTRACT ART
by Roque Javier Laurenza
Among the many people who have visited Unesco's
new headquarters on Place de Fontenoy in Paris,
d there are some who have made unfavourable
comments about the predominating abstract style of the
works of art which decorate the Organization's new
home.
Such criticisms are not new, nor are the arguments
in favour. But perhaps a further comment will not be
out of place.
For anyone who does not have frequent contact with
works of art, abstract art like so-called pure poetry
and musicdoes not reflect human interests or
conflicts. It is an impenetrable phenomenon, gratuitous
and incomprehensible. Basically, this criticism is
founded on the debatable premise of the antagonism
between form and content, the old belief that the
aesthetic value of a work lies in its meaning, in
something anecdotal, logical and discursive. But in
reality a work of art is an autonomous universe, a
world in itself.
A story is told which gives point to this argument.
A distinguished lady, on meeting Delacroix, said to
him: "Oh what a pity that you were not at the British
Embassy ball! Just imagine, the Duke of Wellington
was talking to Prince Metternich in a corner for ages
what a subject for a painter!" And Delacroix, bowing
to the lady, replied: "Madam, for a true painter there
was only a blue spot beside a red spot..."
It is difficult to reproach abstract art with being
completely estranged from life. What could be more
expressive of human feeling than the intimate landscapes
and the secret perspectives of the soul of an artist?
Of course, abstract painting is not a definitive style, nor
an example for all time. But it is an undeniable fact
that it represents one of man's artistic expressions
through the ages, and that it reappears with a strangely
cyclical regularity.
Nor is it necessary to take a stand and say, cate¬
gorically, that abstract art is the only valid art form
of our time. It is better to adopt a long view and to
consider it as a very generalized expression of this
century's culture. Artistic phenomena do not spring
up like mushrooms. It is a historical fact that abstract
art forms have appeared simultaneously in the United
States and in France, in Brazil and Greece, in Peru
and India.
TN the case of abstract or non-figurative art, the
first thing that strikes us is that wherever it
appears, it seems as if it were emerging from deep
historical strata and not simply from the whim of an
isolated group of artists. A second look will show
that the tendency towards the purely abstract is not
new and that it has a special significance. And lastly,
it does not indicate the absence or decadence of a
technical ability to reproduce reality in its precise
details. On the contrary it responds to an express
will of art, or Kunstwollen, as the Germans say.
One of the principal characteristics of abstract art
(as of all art) lies in the free and autonomous use of
artistic elements: lines and colours in the case of
painting; sounds in certain classical musical composi¬
tions, as for example in a Bach fugue, and the
pleasures produced by them do not have a pathetic
relationship with the private feelings of one person
or another, as Ortega y Gasset once pointed out.
A factor which has played an important part in the
evolution of abstract art is the development of
photography. The faithful eye of the camera has
liberated the arts from their servitude to concrete
reality. For deep down in human consciousness there
is always the desire to perpetuate one's memory on
earth. The custom of erecting monuments and painting
pictures to record the profiles and acts of men whether
it be a Caesar or just an ordinary man arises from
this psychological need.
There is another factor to be taken into account
when considering abstract art. Art historians
J have pointed out that the existence of natural¬
istic and antinaturalistic styles through the centuries
are an echo of different spiritual realities. Naturalistic
tendencies generally appear in times of stability, when
man is content with his lot and when violent anta¬
gonisms do not exist. The trend towards abstrac¬
tionism, on the other hand, generally appears in times
when this happy relationship between man and his
environment does not exist. In this case, since the
artist reflects his time, it often happens that he creates
abstract forms because he can introduce in them a har¬
mony that responds to a basic human desire for
balance and concord.
We live in a time of vital change, when men are
wrestling with vast problems to which they cannot yet
find the answers. This may explain the retreat of the
artist from reality. Then there is also the impact of
science. The world is full of mathematical formulas
and abstract forms of scientific discoveries charted in
laboratories. It may toe that the artist, influenced by
these factors, is trying to translate such mathematical
images into the algebra of an artistic style.
All this goes to show that, after all, abstract art does
mean something. In fact, each form of art has its own
particular language and those who study it must know
or at least understand this language. It is by no means
certain that all classical forms are understood at first
glance, for the work of art speaks only to sympathetic
ears.
In any case, the works of art exhibited in the new
Unesco headquarters are in harmony with the
architecture. They are the creations of artists of
international repute and are examples of contemporary
art. The saying: "I do not propose anything, I do not
impose anything, I expose" would be a very apt motto
for any collection of modern works of art.
The rest is a debate for tomorrow. Time will show
whether these particular works are Horace's "eternal
monument" or Malraux's "scar on the earth". But
they are the products of our time, and as such they
may have many meanings and bring further proof that
the twentieth century is striving for unity and order
among the diversity and chaos of our time.
18
