At the start of this century 75% of the Russian people were illiterate.
To have banished illiteracy from its vast territories within the space of
40 years is an achievement of which the Soviet Government is rightly
proud. Today more than 2,000,000 students attend institutes of
During the past 40 years, the Soviet Union has been
the scene of the largest literacy campaign carried
on in all history. In 1917, Russia was a poor, back¬
ward country. She was behind in many respects, but
worst of all in the matter of literacy. A census taken in
1897 revealed that 76 per cent of the population above
the age of nine was unable to read or write. Illiteracy
among women was three times as high as that among
men. Literacy varied sharply with nationality and region.
V.l. Lenin wrote in 1913: "No other country in Europe re¬
mains as wild as Russia, the masses of which have been
so despoiled of education, light and knowledge."
As long as illiteracy and ignorance prevailed, the people
could not be expected to participate effectively in the
building of a new life, in restoring the nation's economy,
developing science and raising technical standards. That
is why the wiping out of illiteracy became such a press¬
ing problem after the October Revolution. A Soviet
Government decision of December 26, 1919 "On the
Liquidation of Illiteracy Among the Population..."
started a country-wide literacy campaign to teach the
three R's to the entire illiterate population from 8 to 50
years of age.
During the first years of the Revolution (1917-1920) the
task of fighting illiteracy was no easy matter. The civil
war was in progress, but even then an important step
was taken to eliminate illiteracy. The army became a
huge school for the many millions of illiterate peasants
in uniform. Compulsory schooling was introduced in
every company, squadron, battery and detachment in Sep¬
tember 1919. When the war ended, the demobilized sol¬
diers returned to their native villages as literate men
and assumed the initiative in spreading knowledge in the
countryside.
From 1920, the fight against illiteracy began to be waged
on a tremendous scale. Government institutions, trade
unions, youth organizations, and various . voluntary
societies, such as the "Down with Illiteracy" organization,
all engaged in the work of teaching millions of workers
10

The Unesco Courier. March 19S8
«I > i i I *»
" * -- -- - - r
A rf r+ * , ^ $
- - '
Soviet Information Bureau
higher education compared with 127,000 in 1914. Left, the early
years of the drive for literacyan elementary class for women at Tash
kent, capital of Uzbekistan, a Soviet Republic in Central Asia, in 1925.
Above, a present-day anatomy class at the Medical Institute in Baku.
and peasants to read and write. An all-Russian Emergency
Commission for the Abolition of Illiteracy was set up by
the People's Commissariat of Education (now the Ministry
of Education) in July 1920 to co-ordinate the efforts of
all the different bodies combating illiteracy.
Despite its meagre resources, the war-ravaged country
allocated thousands of tons of paper for notebooks and
textbooks, firewood and kerosene for heating schools,
warm clothing and boots for travelling instructors.
Literacy students had their workday cut by two hours
without loss of pay. Special anti-illiteracy departments
were set up under town and village auspices. Educational
authorities were allowed to use not only the schools but
other government and public premises to teach illiterates.
Teachers, doctors, agronomists, librarians, engineers,
government clerks and all college and senior high school
students were enlisted in the fight. Every literate person
felt it his patriotic duty to join in the growing national
drive against illiteracy.
Illiteracy fighters displayed the greatest ingenuity in
overcoming obstacles. Where ink was lacking they made
it from beetroot; if there were no notebooks they wrote
on wrapping paper or boards.
Local conditions determined the manner in which the
work was carried on. Instruction was conducted in the
language native to the student. In the East, where the
ancient, customs humiliating to the women continued to
hold sway in the early years of Soviet power, separate
schools were established for women. Nomads driving
their cattle from one grazing ground to another had
literacy schools follow in their wake. Special forms
and methods of instruction were devised for transport
workers, lumbermen and others engaged in seasonal
occupations. Nor were mothers forgotten,
rooms were provided where mothers could
leave their children while studying.
Children's
The vast scale on which the work was
conducted necessitated not only a variety
Cont'd
on
next page
II

LARGEST
CAMPAIGN
(Continued)
One library to every 500 persons
R hy». tu n,, ta« io t. nn it*.
Ooa mu tpfAOti »il»
Ott partie» n cuutu ,101e.
C -»on »a-MMi u>ir ttptw.
of approaches but a thorough revision of existing text¬
books and teaching aids.
The first Soviet primer for grown-ups was published in
1918. It was followed by scores of similar books issued
in millions of copies. Attempts to use children's primers
to teach adults failed. The elementary sentences used
in books for children brought smiles and laughter from
the grown-up students, so special books had to be written,
adjusted to the mentality of the new "pupils", who were
then able to make more rapid progress.
Different primers were also found necessary for urban
and rural schools as well as for the schools in the North.
Readers for adults contained poems
and stories on topics of the day as
well as practical articles on how to
combat drought, how to take care of
gardens, etc. At Russian language
classes, students were taught the art
of writing business letters. In teach¬
ing arithmetic attention was also
given to the interests of the pupils
who were shown how to figure up the
crops, production time and other
practical measures.
The literacy school curriculum
called for 330 hours of study, includ¬
ing 200 hours for the native tongue
and 130 hours for arithmetic, in the
case of total illiterates. For groups
just able to read and write, hours of
study were distributed as follows: the
native tongue 145, arithmetic 125,
geography 60. Simple reading ma¬
terial was recommended to those
finishing the literacy schools. A
special magazine, Down with Illiteracy
was published in large type, while a
peasant newspaper Bednota (The
Poor Peasant) produced a special
supplement for beginners. A series
of easy readers was also published.
Every effort was made by the State
and public organizations to develop a
wide network of libraries, clubs and
educational institutions to meet the
growing cultural requirements of the
newly-taught people; the publishing
business was also extended.
Since most of those engaged in
teaching illiterates were not pro¬
fessional teachers, it was highly
important to provide them with
guidance and proper methods. School teachers and
instructors of the teachers' training colleges proved very
helpful in this respect.
The public schools served as teacher-guidance centres
in the districts. They gave consultations, arranged
conferences which permitted an exchange of experiences,
and organized short-term courses. Advice and assistance
were given to all applicants.
The People's Commissariat of Education published
various teaching aids and magazines, recorded local
experience, and sent trained technicians to the provinces,
to provide advice in the field.
12
i ff! 35. im : I
atrtctoiMn 1»]nni>>!i Hmi:»i u iraiiuu tunuagiucn ng> 'iíimhujockii
Hy c iodée poaiwe fipaiar:
fl pacota«, tu aaraaa.
Hawa apenaae ooaua
CaepTe a raoeaa Aaa tuaAata!
.lipa ycAaaace rpnnaxaoi-tl paaopeara erpaau aar fropeacrj
WM TpyARoe; aa fyTuaaevr ACTicmntMiaio cogjijUBCTa-
BKMeantKa aa npauuiAifi Tvaapooekeea Meatxy opo-
** VI ataraam
a acaucACaaea-.
Coioï pa6oqH¡< h Kpecibsm Heno6e«M«!
'Down with Illiteracy'
It was from 1920 onwards that the fight
against illiteracy began to be waged on a tre¬
mendous scale in Russia. Government insti¬
tutions, trade unions, youth organizations and
many voluntary societies all joined in the work
of teaching millions of workers and peasants
to read and write. Teachers, doctors, agrono¬
mists, librarians, engineers, government clerks
and all college and senior high school students
were enlisted in the fight. One of the leading
groups in the campaign, the "Down with
Illiteracy" organization, published a special
magazine, printed in large type, a cover of
whichNo 3 5 of 1924 is reproduced above.
remember it with a
By 1926, the number of literates In the country had
more than doubled. In 1932, the "cultural army" of
literacy fighters comprised about 1,200,000 recruits, while
the "Down with Illiteracy" society had more than 50,000
local branches with a membership exceeding five million.
Upwards of 32,000,000 persons were taught to read and
write by the illiteracy elimination schools during 1929-1932
alone.
The campaign had been built up with astonishing speed
and results: 1,300,000 persons were taught to read and
write between 1927-28; 2,700,000 between 1928-29; 10,500,000
between 1929-1930 and 22,000,000 between 1930-31.
By 1939, no less than 95.1 per cent
of the men and 83.4 per cent of the
women in the U.S.S.R. were literate.
Even more striking were the results
achieved in the non-Russian republics
of the Soviet Union. During the
13 years from 1926 to 1939, literacy
showed the following advances: in the
Tadjik Republic, from 3.7 to 71.7 per
cent; in the Uzbek Republic, from
10.6 to 67.8 per cent; in the Turk-
menian Republic, from 12.5 to 67.2 per
cent; in the Kirghizian Republic, from
15.1 to 70.0 per cent; in the Kazakh
Republic, from 22.8 to 76.3 per cent.
Since the war, illiteracy has been
wiped out completely in the Union of
Socialist Soviet Republics.
Universal elementary and junior
high-school education has long been
established in the Soviet Union and
universal high-school education is
being introduced. Today, 50,400,000
people in the U.S.S.R., or one person
out of every four inhabitants, is
engaged in study of one kind or
another. The number of schools,
colleges and libraries is steadily
growing. The number of libraries has
increased by 147,400 during the past
10 years and now exceeds 400,000 so
that there is today an average of one
library to every 500 citizens in the
Soviet Union.
II ceepara leaKue HeApa.
Aoöumjo ciaaa a ueAi..
Hsrpajay Teöa a moApo
3a Teoa TpyAw a caeAa.
.H-J.Z.
11. fair ..,,.,..
Soviet Information Bureau
The first step in this gigantic
advance of culture was the arduous
struggle against illiteracy. Many
thousands of Soviet people, for whom
the illiteracy elimination schools
were the first step to education,
feeling of gratitude.
Further information on this subject is to be found in a booklet
"Forty Years of Public Education in the U.S.S.R.", by M. Deineko,
published in Moscow in 1957 by the Foreign Languages Publishing
House.
Serafima Liubimova began to work in schools for adults in 1917,
first in Moscow artd later in Central Asia. She has been active
in promoting public education in Moscow and other Soviet towns.
At the end of the 1930'.f she was a leading official of the Adult
School Department.
