v i -t^tí
EDE AND THE MOON FESTIVAL
Afew months ago 5-year-old Ede
Nwaebgo was a very unhappy little
boy. For Ede, who lives with his
father and mother in a bush village known
as Owo, in the Udi Division of Eastern
Nigeria, suffered from the painful and un¬
sightly disease of yaws.
Few outsiders ever take the narrow dirt
road that branches off the main highway
from Enugu to Bamenda, winding through
dense jungle and across streams straddled
only by rough logs, to the huddle of
forty-odd conical-shaped clay huts with
thatched roofs that make up Owo village.
Ede's parents have a small yam field
and a few chickens. Ede is their remaining
child: they had previously lost four prob¬
ably through nutritional disease. When
Ede fell ill with yaws the family, disheart¬
ened, took less and less interest in village
life. His mother rarely went to market as
she did not like leaving Ede alone. Village
children rarely play together: from their
earliest years they are too busy helping
their parents. Chasing the few mongrel
dogs, pushing wooden carts or trailing tin
cans comprise the rare childish games.
Little Ede was too sick even to play at
anything. He just sadly sat and watched.
24
He was not the only one. Many of the
villagers, children and grownups, were
suffering from the same disease, their
bodies covered in the painful lesions. Little
work was done: what was more, the
monthly moon festival had not been cele¬
brated for some time.
One day a messenger arrived and an¬
nounced that a doctor would visit the vil¬
lage and cure the villagers of their crippling
disease. The villagers were not impressed.
They had never seen a doctor in their lives
and nobody imagined that any great change
would take place if one were to come. Five
days later, Dr. Oboiha, a Nigerian working
with the World Health Organization's yaws
team in the Enugu area, found no crowds
awaiting his arrival. Patiently he explained
the purpose of his visit and of the help he
could bring to the suffering people of Owo.
One or two of the more adventurous
villagers volunteered for treatment. Little
Ede, accompanied by his mother, was
among them. Those suffering from yaws
were given a shot of long-acting penicillin
which clears up the disease within eight to
ten days. After two days, when the lesions
of the first patients treated had started
healing, the number of villagers presenting
themselves for treatment increased. Eight
days later, when Ede and his little friend
Igwe were shown to the assembled villa¬
gers their skins clear but for a few small
scars everybody in Owo queued for ex¬
amination. Dr. Oboiha had won. Every
yaws case in the village was treated.
The next moon feast was celebrated with
gay abandon. But as it had always been a
tradition among the villagers long before
the village was stricken by yaws to
paint their bodies with red and black spots
for each moon festival, young Ede was
painted with nut juice by his mother.
When the make-up job was finished, little
Ede was just as spotty as he had been
before the yaws team arrived the only
difference being that these spots did not
hurt.
Yaws is widespread throughout Nigeria
in some areas the prevalence is as high as
20%. But, like little Ede, thousands of
Nigerians have been freed from the disease
by penicillin injections. In 1954 a mass
campaign began with the aid of Who and
Unicef, and by the middle of 1955,
1,107,000 people had been examined and
237,000 active cases as well as many con¬
tacts and latent cases had been treated.

'THE NIGHTMARE OF THE TROPICS'
Yaws begins as a small insignificant sore on the foot
or leg, a sore which grows, and as the disease
develops fresh sores break out anew elsewhere.
The disease attacks the bones and eats away the tissues
like termites, undermining the strongest physiques. The
face may lose all human aspect and become nothing more
than a nightmarish mask worthy of the legends of the
Middle Ages.
These are the effects of yaws (also known as fram-
boesia) which ravages the tropical regions of Africa,
America, Oceania and Asia.
The contagious disease of yaws has for a long time
been confused with syphilis. Both diseases are caused
by identical micro-organisms, or tréponèmes, i.e. T. palli¬
dum in the case of syphilis and T. pertenue in that of
yaws. Bejel, another treponemal disease, is prevalent
above all in the Eastern Mediterranean area. The
climate most favourable to yaws is a humid tropical one,
where intense heat alternating with heavy rain, falls
on a soil which is not very porous and gives rise to a
luxuriant vegetation. It has been found that yaws tends
to decrease during the dry season and to increase during
the wet season. Primarily a rural disease, yaws is
transmitted by human contact as well as by contact with
dirty linen or clothing and other articles of everyday use.
No decision has yet been reached as to whether insects
act as vectors of the disease (flies, mosquitoes, etc.).
Undernourished individuals living in overpopulated areas
are much more receptive than others.
It is extremely difficult to discover, before the charac¬
teristic lesions appear, whether a patient is suffering
from syphilis or from yaws. Yaws itself is not hereditary,
but a child born healthy to infected parents will in
turn be infected by contact with them during infancy.
One of the main obstacles confronting doctors combat¬
ing the disease is superstition. In fact, in some regions
there is a popular belief that the men will not be strong
and able to face life successfully unless they have
contracted some very spectacular form of yaws.
Not only do those infected adopt completely inadequate
measures to check the disease (e.g. by swallowing a
decoction made from snakes with a skin showing patterns
similar to those left by yaws on the human skin), but
children may even be deliberately infected from earliest
youth, with the possible resultant mutilation of their
bodies by the age of 12.
Doctors often need much ingenuity to coax patients
to come for treatment. For example, a Who physician
has related how he lured sufferers in Haiti by giving them
a cake of soap and then, at the end of the consultation,
a red ticket with the promise of a second piece of soap
some days later on presentation of the ticket... and a
second treatment. Unfortunately, the doctor did not
foresee that the ticket might be given away or... sold.
This is what happened. The patients who attended
the second time were not always those whom he had
treated on the first occasion.
It should be noted that the majority of patients prefer
to undergo injections, sometimes painful ones, rather than
swallow other remedies, such as pills, etc., perhaps in
accordance with the theory that "something that doesn't
hurt cannot do any good". Nowadays the disastrous
consequences of yaws can be prevented: a single shot
of penicillin will cure it in about nine cases out of ten;
a second shot will usually cure the tenth. The effects
are rapid: the worst skin lesions clear up in about ten
days, and the average cost of each cure, including exami¬
nations and other expenses, is about $1 per person.
Mass campaigns to treat yaws with penicillin are being
carried out by national health authorities in many parts
of the world with the aid of the World Health Organi¬
zation. To treat the 20 million or so Africans who are
affected by it will take an estimated ten years, but already
remarkable results have been achieved. The job of
curing the 15 million cases in Asia was begun eight years
ago and is already half accomplished. Campaigns are
also being waged in the Pacific. Thus are men stamping
out the disease that has been called "'The Nightmare of
the Tropics".
WHO photos by Eric Schwab
Photos show: Opposite page, "three faces of Ede"before he had received a shot of penicillin; five days later and, finally, after ten days, when his
sores had almost disappeared and he was able to smile again. His happiness had cost about SI. Right, on the day of the Moon Festival, Ede's mother
paints spots on his skin with nut juice. Above, after they have seen effects of penicillin, villagers of Owo come for examination and treatment.
25
