THE ORIENT
TODAY AND
YESTERDAY
Some plain speaking
by an Asian statesman
Right, Bagobo chieftain, from the Philippines;
left, a man of Bihar in north-east India.
WHO Photos
by Charles Ammoun
Minister Plenipotentiary, Permanent Delegate of the Lebanon to Unesco
History is not simply the mirror of the past: it often
influences our actions in the present and to a large
extent governs our behaviour in the future. The
world of yesterday is reflected in the virgin mind of the
schoolchild or student by his textbooks, and what he
learns from them will be projected by him onto the world
of tomorrow.
What the International Advisory Committee on the
Major Project is interested in is not pure historical
Research, but the translation of history and historical
writing into action, the extent to which acquired ideas
will be practically expressed by an increase or a lessening
of international understanding. What interests us, above
all, is contemporary history, history in the making.
The teachings of ancient or modern history undoubtedly
help to mould men's minds and deeds, but their effect is
usually confined to mental attitudes. They provide no
spur to direct action but leave in the subconscious mind
a strange amalgam of sympathy or aversion. They are
not decisive in producing definite immediate action.
Our object is to calm men's minds and ensure peace in
our time, which means that our activities should be essen¬
tially focussed on contemporary history.
Not, of course, that we shall ignore ancient or modern
history altogether especially We Orientals, for whom to
speak with brutal frankness the past was the time when
most of us were strong and powerful, with the world at
our feet. We, too, had our heyday, when our civilization,
our culture and our arms were without peer.
From our history, We can take hope for the future. I,
a Lebanese, an Asian by geographical definition, find two
grounds for pride in my country's history. Every man
who reads a book or sails the seas owes something to
the Phoenicians; arid we have our share in the fame
and splendour of Arab culture and civilization which
spread from the desert to the Pyrenees in a glorious
Unesco has set up an international advisory committee of experts
from over 20 nations to assist it in carrying out its 10-year Major
Project to promote better mutual appreciation of the cultural
values of ihe Orient arid the Occident. The article on this page
and that on page 26 are based on papers which were presented to a
recent meeting of this advisory committee.
22
flowering of art and science. Forerunners of the
Renaissance, ancestors in their way of Leonardo da Vinci
and Christopher Colombus, custodians of the heritage of
Greece which they reverently transmitted to Europe and,
indirectly, discoverers of the New World and fathers of
algebra, chemistry and the pointed arch, the Arabs
contributed as much as any other people to the World's
progress.
The exploitation of coal marked the beginning of a de¬
cline for them. There was none in their territory (or they
were unable to find any). In general, they lacked a
source of energy, and when one was discovered deep be¬
neath the desert they no longer had the means of exploit¬
ing it.
There is a lesson to be learnt here. All this power and
glory, culture and civilization, which once had the mastery
and were the envy of the world, has shrunk in a bare two
or three centuries, to a few pages in the Encyclopaedia
Britannica! Nor is there any civilization or country which
can be sure of escaping such a twist of fate.
But we Orientals, reviewing this history, must set our¬
selves firmly against basking in our past glory, using it
as an excuse for living in a dream-world of yesterday,
and justifying our inactivity, divisions and vanity, as we
squander the noble heritage of our ancestors, by flaunting
the golden pages written by them in the face of the
marvelling West. What we need is just sufficient history
to avoid becoming exclusively concerned with the present
but not too much to lull us to sleep in a Capuan paradise
of the past. '
Passions are still hot so far as contemporary history
is concerned and many of the actors are still living. The
wounds have not yet healed, and conflicts of interests are
still unresolved.
World developments since 1914 have moved apace. All
We need do is to consider the facts, look at the map and
study the statistics. There has been a tremendous uphea¬
val, and this is especially true as regards the relations
between, the Orient and the Occident.
The post- 1914 period has been marked by the accession
of a whole host of States to independence. The influence
of the West or perhaps, to be more exact, one should
say. of Europe in particular (and, still more precisely, its

The Unesco Courier. December 1958
military and political presence or entrenchment) has
undergone an amazing decline. The contraction of this
Balzacian "'wild ass's skin" sums up the whole.drama of
modern times.
In What way can the history of these developments pro¬
mote better appreciation of mutual values? It is history
in the making, and, in some cases, still to make. To,
complete it, two lines of action would today have to be
contemplated, designed for different sets of school¬
children or students and based on two equally vital prin¬
ciples.
The first is oblivion. Our memories may be a millstone
round our necks. It is good now and then to deposit
them in the cloakroom of modern times and let them
stay there.
The new conception of history should be based on total
oblivion of one particular aspect of the past. People
must forget that they once occupied a country and had
to govern it by main force, that they exploited it econo¬
mically, humiliated it by all sorts of legal or devious
discriminatory practices, disparaged its culture and lan¬
guage and cast scorn on its institutions and faith; and
that it emerges from these passages in its history still
bruised in body and still suffering from the indignities to
its pride and self-respect. With all this over and done
with, there must be no hankering after the past: the
only possible reconquest is a cultural one.
What must be consigned to oblivion, above all, is the
concept of racial superiority, and those red, green and
blue patches which pictorially symbolized servitude or
domination, the relationship of the lord to his serfs or
slaves, on yesterday's atlases and Wall maps. I do not
think I am being over-paradoxical in stressing this seem
ingly trivial aspect; but who can say how much harm
has been done to the world by this insidious colour-mania
a symbol of possession for the one and a badge of shame
for the other? Our eyes must be trained to see With a
new vision.
History textbooks more than any others, reflect the
spirit behind them. We can count on the full support
and honest co-operation of all governments in the Orient
or the Occident in inculcating this spirit in their schools,
colleges and universities; and the rising generations,
having unlearned hatred or contempt, will extend the
hand of the friendship to each other across the seas. We
shall have restored the bridge of love and friendship.
I note with alarm, however, that so far I have mainly
expressed the Oriental point of view, much as I wanted
to slough off my old self: I Would be setting a bad
example, if I did not manage to shed that skin.
We are asking the Occident to forget; but We shall ask
the Orient to remember. That is the second principle.
We shall ask it to remember all the benefits conferred by
hygiene, science and education; the roads, ports and
hospitals that have been built and the modern techniques
which have been thrown open to it and on which its
salvation' depends; and to cherish the memory of the
devoted service given by teachers, doctors and missiona¬
ries, or even by soldiers Who Were all three in one. Nor
should it forgethowever paradoxical this may seem that
from its struggles as well as from the
example set it has often acquired a sense
of dignity and an understanding of
freedom, and become conscious, through its
tribulations of its historical, political or
national personality.
Cont'd
next page
GREAT BRONZE BUDDHA of Kamakura, near Yokohama, dwarfs class ofJapanese schoolchildren out for a day's sightseeing,
as they pose for the photographer. This giant bronze Amitabha Buddha, now sitting under the open sky, was once enshrined
in a majestic structure which was repeatedly struck by natural disasters until it was finally carried away by a tidal wave in 1495.
Oliver G. Wackernagel, Basel
23

THE ORIENT TODAY
AND YESTERDAY
(Continued)
Let the
and the
The Occident never succeeded in hiding its true face
behind the mask it presented to us, and it reassumed its
true character whenever it dropped that mask in moments
of relaxation. These brief moments of truth enabled us to
model some of our oWn features on those of the Occident,
or rather to rediscover them, buried as they were under
centuries of servitude and oppression.
Especially must We not forget the language which was
brought to us, and through which we have made contact
With the new era; there is not one of us who does not
owe something in his educational make-up to that contri¬
bution. For myself, it is so much part and parcel of me
that I cannot speak of an outside contribution to designate
that language which has put us into touch with all the
technical and humanistic sciences and glorious new fields
of intellectual activity and enabled us to profit by the
fruits of world endeavour, to assimilate the achievements
of mankind as a whole and to merge them With our own.
Certain considerations should be singled out for special
study. In particular, action must be taken to combat dis¬
crimination. This new word for a very old phenomenon
still awaits precise definition. In essence, it covers in¬
equality of treatment based on prejudice, the prejudice
often being nothing more than a philosophical cloak
masking concrete material interests. Anything done in
this field will have a very beneficial effect.
Injured pride is at the root of very many of the mis¬
understandings existing between Orient and Occident.
Until recently, the Westerner, and more particularly the
European, was the master of the World, and the fount of
all power. That situation lasted for two or three gene¬
rations. How could it fail to produce a certain sense of
superiority, conscious or unconscious, which Was bound to
be reflected in action, Whether in a crude, concealed or
even in a courteous manner. It is this feeling which must
be overcome on the part of the Occident, and the Way
to do it is by explaining the historical facts.
We Easterners, too, are very sensitive on this point. We
often all too often give the impression of having been
flayed alive: the slightest remark upsets and irritates us.
Years and sometimes centuries of contempt or insult have
left us With hypersensitive skins. We are no longer
content with anything less than superlative praise. Our
accession to independence has transformed us neither
into States nor nations, nor into perfect beings.
It is understandable, after all, that in the first flush
of our recovered freedom, we should have let ourselves
become intoxicated by the magic of the word and the
reality of what it stood for. But today, one of the condi¬
tions for our survival and salvation is that we should see
ourselves more clearly, and expose and fight against our
failings, Weaknesses and indeed faults, accepting and in¬
viting criticism, comment and even friendly raillery.
I have referred particularly to action among school¬
children and students. This must be supplemented
by another form of action relating to another gen¬
eration entirely. Here We come up against a new pro¬
blem: that of the discontinuity of history.
The world does not stay still between the time We leave
the schoolroom or the university and the time when we
play an active part in life. The fact that the historical
process has quickened is now generally accepted. By a
sort of process of osmosis or contagion which can be
traced back to modern techniques, history has been shar¬
ing in the effects of the acceleration of means of commu¬
nication and information media.
Modern man has little time for reflexion, and the states¬
man is no exception to the rule. It needs a prodigious
effort of energy and Will on his part to turn inwards and
make a calm, careful and objective study of the facts. It
is even more difficult to look beyond national boundaries
and draw overall conclusions from unco-ordinated events
taking place in the four corners of the earth.
There is a Wide gulf between what the student has
learnt and What the man of action has failed to learn
and assimilate in a world which is in rapid and perpetual
24
Occident forget
Orient remember
motion. All this is even truer of the relations between
the Orient and the Occident.
We must think in terms of a revision of modern history
in respect of Orient-Occident relations, for the use of
adults. Let us be bold innovators in this respect.
What I have in mind would be the selection of a group
of Easterners, a body of travelling professors or lecturers,
as it Were, Who |would give courses at universities but
whose main rôle Would be primarily that of missionaries.
They Would act in a missionary spirit, and their courses
Would have to be -fairly Widely publicized. They would
spend a year in each country giving their audiences an
accurate picture of developments in their native lands.
There remains one final aspect: future prospects. What
we have to do, I suggest, is to write the history of future
relations between the Orient and the Occident and this
Without having recourse to fortune-tellers, seers or pro¬
phets!
Not that We can work out this history of tomorrow in
detail, but its main lines of development can be foreseen.
Once We have forgotten or unlearnt hatred, we shall have
to build anew; and, in that connexion, We shall have to
demonstrate, by suitable examples, the impossibility of
nationalistic isolation.
This brings us to a delicate point. There can be no
denying that there is a rising tide of nationalism
over a large part of the globe. It cannot be turned
back, and it is useless to oppose it: it must be harnessed.
Nationalism is out of date. It has come too làte in a
world Which is too old. It is, in any case, a necessary
stage, and the wise course might be to shorten that tran¬
sition from one state to another as far as possible. But
it Would be futile to ignore it, and even more so to
discount it.
Nationalism has not always been solely a reaction
against the Occident. The Arab countries, for example,
languished for centuries under Oriental oppression. Their
nationalism is a phenomenon which retains its purity just
because it is not channelled in a single direction.
It has to be accepted, as a necessary good or evil. And
I really mean "necessary": even if it is an outmoded
concept made obsolete by the advance of modern thought
and science, a dose or fit; of nationalism enables coun¬
tries Which have just achieved independence to gain a
clearer knowledge of themselves in all fields, and espe¬
cially in the cultural field. They rediscover their lan¬
guage, their literature, their poets, their historians and
(more rarely) their scientists.
This reawakening sometimes has its childish aspects.
Let us see to it that there is nothing repugnant about
it and that it is free from the excesses which sometimes
result in condemning the use of Arabic figures in the name
of Arab nationalism, or others of the same kind which
incidentally, are now on the wane, even Where they have
been found.
Once this outburst is over, another aspect of the prob¬
lem arises: the need for close collaboration in all. fields
and especially in that of culture, for exchanges in all
forms, for interpretation and interdependence, for action
directed along two distinct but not contradictory lines.
Such is the first task in Which a little nationalism does
not come amiss, to bring about the revival of a country's
culture and restore to it its former glory (for all cultures
are glorious), to invigorate and foster it, making it dyn¬
amic, modern and inspiring through contact with other
cultures in our case, the Western cultures or culture. And
this must be done straightforwardly and candidly with¬
out ulterior motives, and with that feeling of respect
Which is essential in any task. True there must be no
imitation, but neither must there be any hesitation in
learning.
What we have to do, above all, is to drive home the need
for human fellowship. That is yet another elementary
truth, but it seems essential today to repeat such truths
continually. They are accepted in principle but ignored
in practice.

Werner Bischof© Magnum Photos

The world over, the family circle offers an image of warmth and security. Around cooking pots in Assam (below) or reunited
at the day's end, talking and sipping tea in Tokyo (above) the family symbolizes unmistakeably the essential oneness of mankind.
© Suntl Janah, Calcutta
25
