THE ROOTS
OF PREJUDICE
by Arnold M. Rose
With this issue, THE UNESCO COURIER begins the presentation in serial form of The Roots
of Prejudice, by Arnold Rose, Professor of Sociology at the University of Minnesota, U.S.A.
Published by Unesco in its series The Race Question in Modern Science, The Roots of Preju¬
dice is one of Unesco's most popular and provoking studies. It can be obtained from Unesco's
National Distributors (see list, page 35), price: 30 cents ; 1/6 ; 100 fr. In this first article, Pro¬
fessor Rose discusses personal advantage as one of the important causes of prejudice. In future
issues he will show how ignorance of other groups of people and racism, or the "superiority
complex" are the profound roots of prejudice. Professor Rose will also deal with the important
problems of transmission of prejudice to children, the psychology of prejudice and prejudice
as a warping of the personality. © by UNESCO. Unauthorized reproduction prohibited.
Prejudice of one group of people against another
group has existed in most parts of the 'world and
at all periods of history. It has not been
universal, in the sense that all cultures or all people
have displayed it; but it has been prevalent enough
to serve as a basis for conflict between nations and
between groups within a nation. It practically always
involves discrimination, which means mistreatment of
people without their having done anything to merit
such mistreatment (1). It has thus been a source of
human unhappiness and misunderstanding wherever
and whenever it has arisen. Although certain in¬
dividuals have exploited prejudice to gain political
power or economic advantage for themselves, there is
no example of a whole people advancing themselves
or their civilization on the basis of it. It has been,
rather, a blight from almost every standpoint.
Yet there is still relatively little understanding of
the causes or even of the effects of prejudice, except on
the superficial, obvious level. It has not even been
studied by scientists sufficiently to make them certain
of its causes, although there have been some startling
(1) We use the term prejudice to refer to a set of atti¬
tudes which causes, supports or justifies discrimination.
Since discrimination itself consists of observable behaviour,
it is a more useful subject for study. But since in this
study, we are searching for causes of behaviour, we
must direct our attention to the mind of the person who
practises discrimination. Prejudice is taken as the mental
state corresponding to the practice of discrimination.
discoveries and stimulating suggestions. Outside the
ranks of social science, most people hold quite
erroneous ideas about it^ideas which themselves are
sometimes born of prejudice and which are sometimes
even detrimental to those holding them. We shall
now proceed to consider the varied sources of pre¬
judice, moving from the more obvious and rational
causes to the less apparent and unconscious ones.
Excuse for economic or
political exploitation
Perhaps the most obvious cause of prejudice is that
it creates advantages and material benefits for
those who are prejudiced. Prejudice can provide
an excuse or rationalization for economic exploitation
or political domination. It can enable a man to
justify to himself acts that he would ordinarily be
unwilling to engage in. It can be exploited by
shrewd, self-seeking manipulators when it occurs in
other people. It can offer opportunities for taking
sexual advantage of minority group women, and it
may give people at the bottom of the social ladder
an apparent superiority over the minority group. The
fact that individuals and groups can and do gain
advantages for themselves out of prejudice, becomes
a cause of prejudice.
Imperialism has frequently been attended by pre¬
judice. Even when there has been no noteworthy
12

The Unesco Courier. June 1958
development of prejudice in the home country, those
who go forth as colonial administrators, traders, or
extractors of the natural resources of undeveloped
lands learn that callousness toward subject peoples,
and an attitude of racial superiority will aid
them in their venture. Within limits, a harsh manner
and exacting demands will gain a large output from
workers who have no means of defence or retaliation.
Payment of low wages and provision of only a mini¬
mum of life needs to these workers will mean larger
profits.
Maxim for dictators :
and conquer
Racial, national, or religious antagonisms can be
built up to deflect class antagonisms. A relati¬
vely small number of exploiters can maintain
their dominant position by dividing their subordinates
and encouraging them to be hostile to one another.
One group may be given the sergeant's role of keep¬
ing all other groups in line by force. In return for
this they have the satisfaction of being regarded as
belonging to the superior group, even though they are
themselves exploited. This procedure may be used in
a perfectly "'natural" way, so that it is obvious to no
one.
Techniques akin to those of imperialism may be
employed within an independent nation. Prices or
rents of houses can be kept at a high level by obliging
people to live within certain small, segregated areas.
Wages can be kept low for people who are not allowed
to work in any but certain exploited jobs. Public
facilities and benefits may be kept at a minimum for
people who are segregated to the greatest extent.
It is difficult to tell how much of this use of pre¬
judice and discrimination for purposes of exploitation
is conscious and how much unconscious. Some that
appears unplanned and unconscious is occasionally
revealed to be quite deliberate. One young man who
had just answered a questionnaire designed to test for
anti-Semitism made a revealing remark in this
connexion. He said, "I have no strong feelings about
Jews either way" (the test did not show him to be
anti-Semitic). "'But I am studying to be a banker,
and if my employers are anti-Semitic, I'm going to be
anti-Semitic too, as I want to get ahead/'
Perhaps we shall never discover for certain how
much of prejudice is deliberate and how much
unconscious. But that is of little consequence, as the
effects and the underlying causes are always the same.
Deliberate use of prejudice to exploit a group of people
is hardly different from the unplanned and non-
directed utilization of group differences to gain every
possible advantage from the situation. Both can be
considered together as a cause of prejudice.
The gains to be secured may be political as well as
economic. Group differences can be fostered to keep
a certain party in political power. Modern dictators
have been experts in the technique of "divide and
conquer" both to retain power in their own country
and to extend their conquests abroad. Studies have
been conducted in several countries which show how
Hitler secured supporters now called fifth columnists
offering them the positions and property then
held by Jews and by appealing to a latent feeling of
racial superiority. In democratic countries where
prejudice is prevalent, some politicians successfully
base their campaign for office on theories of racial
supremacy. Most of the organizations formed for the
apparent purpose of fostering race hatred have been
shown to have political domination as their ultimate
aim.
Economic or political exploitation as a cause of pre¬
judice has definite limitations. In the first place, it
must be balanced against the costs of prejudice. It is
probable that in the long run imperialistic countries
could have gained even greater economic advantages
if they had not employed prejudice, discrimination
and violence. Individuals who exploit prejudice be¬
come extreme victims of the psychological costs of
prejudice. Another burden they lay upon themselves
is the realization that they are exploiting and cheat¬
ing. Most people dislike thinking of themselves as
unfair and dishonest, or without ideals. Even the
building up of a psychological defence to rationalize
unfairness and dishonesty may be only partially
successful; it certainly creates rigidities in the
personality. Thus, the advantages of prejudice do not
seem great when balanced against its cost. Moreover,
there are progressively fewer opportunities for
exploitation through prejudice as hitherto subordinat¬
ed peoples have now organized themselves to stop it.
Throughout the world
imperialism is in retreat
"T HROUGHouT the world, imperialism is retreating.
Exploited minority groups within nations have
also made great strides towards improving their
position and reducing victimization. They have had
active support from many members of the majority
group who have realized the costs and dangers of pre¬
judice. Thus, exploitation and domination are de¬
creasing, at least in so far as they stem from pre¬
judice, and they are thus less effective as causes of
prejudice.
There are other apparent advantages of prejudice.
We can only refer briefly to the difficult subject of
men of the dominant group taking sexual advantage
of minority group women. "Gains" of this sort are
obviously balanced by social losses for the dominant
group as a whole. A society in which there are fre¬
quent demands for casual and loveless sexual inter¬
course is not a well-organized or satisfying society,
either to its men or to its women.
Finally there are some prestige gains in a society
based on prejudice. If people have no other basis of
prestige, they get a certain satisfaction simply out of
being members of the dominant group. Although
they are at the bottom of their own racial, national,
or religious group, they can feel superior to the mi¬
nority groups.
The weakness of this kind of gain is surely obvious ;
the prejudiced person who gains a prestige satisfac¬
tion out of feeling superior to a minority group is
diverted from other, more important, kinds of prestige
satisfaction. He loses ambition, and allows himself
to be manipulated by those higher on the prestige
scale in his own dominant group. People who live
under such unfavourable circumstances that they
might be expected to join reform or revolutionary
movements are sometimes kept from doing so by re¬
luctance to lose the trivial prestige that raises them
above the minority group.
(To be continued next month)
13
