U.N. photo

Science has the answer
THE ENIGMA OF SLEEP
by Gerald Wendt
In this issue we present the first of a series of science columns in which matters
of general interest will be dealt with by Dr Gerald Wendt, Science Consul¬
tant of The Unesco Courier in the form of questions and answers. This
month Dr Wendt writes about some of the things people sometimes want
to know about sleep. This science column will appear from time to time.
No. The clock and the
time of night or day, as
such, have nothing to do
with the restfulness of
sleep. But it is true that
the deepest sleep and
the fullest rest come early in the sleeping period. This
has been proved by many experiments involving the
measurement of "brain waves" in an instrument called
Is it true that the
best sleep comes
before midnight ?
an encephalograph, which detects the small electric
currents that are set up by the activity of the brain. .
During the first hour after falling asleep these waves die
down to almost nothing but after two hours they stir again
and gradually come back to normal by the time the sleeper
wakes. Falling asleep has therefore been shown to be a
fast process, but most of an eight-hour sleep is
really a very slow awakening. Normally, of course, this
process of slow awakening takes place after midnight.
Since the exact nature
of the restorative process
in sleep is not understood,
it is also not ¡known
why about eight hours
is usually required to
complete it. At present
this is only an observed fact of nature, though the time
required is somewhat different for different people. It is
well known that Napoleon slept only a few hours at night
6
If Napoleon slept
only four hours a
night, why do most
people need eight ?
during periods of stress or crisis, but it is often suspected
and cannot be denied that he may have taken several
short "naps" by day to bring his total sleep up to perhaps
six hours. Each time he slept he took full advantage of
the first hour or two of sleep, then awakened rapidly and
did not waste his time in the slow process of gradual
awakening. But such a habit-pattern must be acquired
early in life. Any person who has already established an
eight-hour sleep pattern would find it very difficult to
convert his sleeping habits .to .the Napoleonic model.

Do elderly people This is true in tne sense
that older people are not
need less sleep than so active when awake, do
, not tire themselves so
young people do? muCh, and therefore
recover their strength
with less sleep. But the general impression, that older
people do not sleep much has a different cause and is
related to the legend about Napoleon's sleep. They do not
sleep very long at any one time but they sleep more often.
This has been explained by some authorities as a reversion
to the pattern of childhood, or even of infancy. A very
young infant has a rapid alternation of sleeping and
waking. He may wake after only two hours of sleep, then
The Unesco Courier. February 1958
has his milk and goes to sleep again. As he gets older the
periods grow longer and he has only four, two, and finally
only one sleeping period per day. With old age the process
is reversed, the periods grow shorter and very old people
may take four or even six short periods of sleep every
day. Thus it is quite natural that when an elderly person
says he is tired, he means that he wants to sleep soon
but does not mean that he wants to sleep a long time.
In fact, the same is true of eating. Old people cannot
eat much at one time but like to eat often. When an
old man says he is hungry, he wants to eat quickly but
he does not want a big meal. It is a good thing for the
family to understand that with the advance of old age
the life-pattern goes back to that of the early years.
What happens when
a person goes to sleep
slowly and gradually?
Different parts of the
body relax, one after
another, in a definite
pattern, but the process
may be fast or slow
in different people and
at different times. The first step must be the relaxing
of the intellect, the thinking process. After that the
large muscles of the legs and arms relax, then the
smaller ones of the hands and feet, finally the
very small muscles of the face and even the eyelids. This
is followed by a gradual relaxation of the senses. The
first to fade is the sense of sight, then hearing, then the
sense of touch and finally the internal nerves that feel
pain or discomfort. By that time the person is fully
unconscious and so asleep. The sequence is much the
same when a person becomes unconscious through the
action of drugs, including alcohol. The process is reversed
during awakening. Pain is both the most effective pre¬
ventative of sleep and the quickest awakener. It is easier
to awaken a sleeper by touching him than by talking to
him also more of a shock. It is easier to awaken him by
an unaccustomed or sudden noise than by shining a light
on him. But the gentlest awakening is by light, as by
letting in the daylight to a darkened room. After the eyes
are open there is often a short period before the large
muscles are revived and clear thinking does not usually
come until muscles are normal and the sleeper can stand.
If I move about in
my sleep, does it mean
I am not resting well ?
No. Occasional muscu¬
lar movements are normal
during sleep and do not
disturb the sleep pattern
as revealed by the ence-
phalograph. In fact, it has been found that muscles seem
to relax better if they change their position several times
during the eight or so hours of sleep. Sleep without any
movement whatever often results in a "stiff neck" or some
other sign of cramping or muscular fatigue, on waking.
Anyone who has had a
late dinner, or a large one
after the Continental
fashion, with a relaxed
evening following it, sel¬
dom has trouble going to
sleep. But those who
spend an active evening,
or an exciting one, or who
have been mentally active
after their meal, often
find it difficult to relax.
Their first need is to slow down the over-active
brain. This can be done by eating a light meal.
The reason is that the human body does not have enough
Some people seem to
fall asleep better if
they eat before going
to bed ; others say this
causes bad dreams.
Which is correct?
blood to keep all parts in full action at once. There are
three major areas to be nourished by the blood: the brain,
the digestive system, and the working muscles. It is
seldom possible, for anyone, to make good use of any two
of them at the same time. Thus putting a little food
into the stomach sends the blood there and takes it
away from the brain. So thinking or worrying are reduc¬
ed and the relaxed intellect helps in falling asleep.
However, if a heavy meal is eaten at bedtime, the sto¬
mach and digestive muscles have a period of hard work
to do. The sleeper cannot sleep comfortably because the
internal sensory nerves feel this muscle action and do
not relax. In this stage of partial sleep dreams are
common. The result is a nightmare. So a light meal
can induce sleep while a heavy one can disturb it.
In one series of tests,
made at the University of
Chicago, the movements
of the eyeballs were auto¬
matically recorded during
sleep and the sleepers
were occasionally awakened to tell of their dreams, if they
had any. Thus it was shown that eye movements, under
the closed lids, usually accompany dreams. When the
Does one dream all
night or only just
before awakening?
sleepers were awakened during a period of rapid eye move¬
ments they almost always remembered dreaming, but
when the eyes did not move there were no dreams. Judg¬
ing by this test, dreams occur at fairly regular intervals of
about an hour and a half, except during the first few
hours of deep sleep. Dreams are not instantaneous, as is
so often supposed, but dream-action goes on at about the
same rate as normal waking action. The dream is
remembered, only when it occurs just before awakening.
