THE WANDERING DOCTOR
OF DEVIL'S MOUNTAIN
ALONG A STONY TRACK,
Dr. Hugh Russell's mobile health
team sets out (left) to visit an
Ethiopian mountain village. Armed
guard on right Is to protect party
against bandits. At the village the
first patients wait for attention
(right) even before the camp is
ready. Woman on ground has
collapsed In front of Dr. Russell's
tent. Her husband watches over
her. Below, the doctor examines
a village woman. He found many
of the people suffering from tuber¬
culosis due to undernourishment.
WHO photos
Few physicians have ever been given so difficult a task
as that assigned to New Zealander Dr. Hugh Russell
by the Ethiopian Government and the World Health
Organization. His two-year mission is to discover
from which diseases Ethiopians suffer and die. From his
report the Government will be able to organize health ser¬
vices on a practical basis among some 15 million people
who so far have never received any kind of medical care.
For staff he has a British male nurse, Robert Ousby (a
much-travelled ex-member of the Royal Navy), a French
administrator named Mr. Schilling (the right name for the man
who holds the purse strings), two Ethiopian male nurses
and a Somali cook. He is always escorted by an armed
guard to protect him against the shiftas (the bandits who
sometimes roam the mountains). And he takes with him
thousands of doses of penicillin, vaccines against smallpox,
typhus and rabies, ampules of vitamins, pills against malaria
and intestinal worms, aspirins and powdered milk.
Journeying by Land Rover, by truck and by mule but
often on foot among some of the world's most magnificent
scenery the rugged Devil's Mountain region bordering Ethio¬
pia's northern frontier with Sudan "The Quiet Doctor", as
the members of his team call him, invites sick people to
his camp. Often it is the whole village which arrives they
are all sick in one way or another with malaria, syphilis,
tuberculosis, anaemia, typhus, leprosy and a whole gamut of
intestinal diseases.
Bending over to listen to the chest of a child he detects
a shrill note. He shakes his head. The father of the
child leans towards the interpreter who translates the blunt
verdict: "Double pneumonia. It's too late. I can do
nothing for him; the child will die." The doctor neverthe¬
less orders a pencillin injection so that the parents, who have
tramped all night and morning to reach him, may not feel
they have come for nothing. Dr. Russell has to pass on
without waiting to find out what happens to his patients.
He must fold his tent and move on to the next village for
his survey will only be of value if it covers a sufficiently
large number of people.
32
The result of his work will be of paramount importance
for Ethiopia which has today only seven national and about
150 foreign physicians the latter being of 15 different
nationalities and, as a rule, not speaking any of the country's
ten dialects. Later this year his report will enable the
Ethiopean Government to organize, on a firm and permanent
basis, the health services of which these rural areas are in
such urgent need.
