'AS DEAD AS THE DODO'
The Unesco Courier. January 1958
All too often, it is only when- a
species is in an almost hopeless
state, when there is barely a
handful of survivors, that measures are
taken to save it from extinction, through
the creation of reserves and the strict
control of hunting. Sometimes it is
already too late, and Nature has suffered
another irreparable loss.
There are plenty of examples of
animals, known to our not so distant
ancestors, which disappeared before any
measures were taken to protect them.
One of these was the dronte, or dodo, of
Mauritius, a large, heavy bird as big as
a swan, whose main handicap was its
inability to fly and escape from pursuers.
The dodo was a strange-looking bird
with a kind of hood of bare skin partly
covering its broad head; in place of
wings it had only a few blackish
feathers, and its tail was simply a tuft
of grey feathers. It laid a single white
egg on a clump of grass in the forest. It
was not considered edible by the first
men to explore the island, but those" who
followed were less fastidious, and from
1601 to 1644 dodos were slaughtered
wholesale by passing mariners in search
of food, and were eaten fresh or salted.
When the island was colonized, im¬
ported domestic animals completed the
destruction of young birds. By 1712
the people of the island had almost
forgotten that the dodo had ever existed.
Today the only relics of the bird are the
head and foot of a stuffed specimen at
Oxford, a few drawings preserved in
museums and some skeletons. But the
bird has not been entirely forgotten,
for it is still common to say that
something is "as dead as the dodo".
A companion in misfortune to the
dodo was the great auk, also a
large bird much bigger than the
surviving species of auk. Its wings were
only short stumps', it was dark-backed,
white-bellied, brown-throated and it had
a black beak and feet and white circles
around the eyes. Its undoing was partly
due to the fact that it only laid one egg
a year: a greenish-grey egg covered by
an irregular pattern of black and brown
blotches. Even so, it could have sur¬
vived if it had been exploited with some
restraint, but it had already become rare
by the beginning of the 19th century.
Nesting on cliffs in Iceland, the
Faroes and the Hebrides, the great auk
. was hunted for its oil and fat. The de¬
mand for its eggs made its decimation
The Dodo
The Great Auk
inevitable. The last survivors were
killed off in 1844. A few skins have
been preserved along with several ske¬
letons and a limited number of eggs, for
which collectors will pay as much as
£600 apiece.
Until the early years of this century,
the lovely passenger pigeon, native of
the American continent, was famous for
its migrations. The flocks were so
dense that they darkened the sky; birds
alighted in such numbers that tree
branches collapsed under their weight.
Between 16 and 21 inches long, the bird
had grey colouring with a red lustre and
varying shades of blue on its back. The
last passenger pigeon died in the Cincin¬
nati Zoological Gardens in 1914.
Some people blamed its disappearance
on excessive hunting; others claimed a
virulent disease was the cause.
An animal which undoubtedly was a
victim of the hunters was the quagga, a
kind of brown and dark red zebra, with
I. U.C.N, photos
The Quagga
a striped head and neck and white legs
and tail. It lived in the south-eastern
part of Cape province in South Africa,
where the naturalist Burchell came
across great herds in 1812. The Boers
hunted it for sport and also for food.
Between 1858 and 1878 the animals
prized for their meat, and, after 1865,
for their skins became increasingly
rare. By the end of the 19th century
not one was left alive. A few stuffed
specimens still exist in museums.
Down the centuries belief in the
existence of mermaids has been so
strong that instances of their cap¬
ture have been recorded as fact. As we
know, mermaids or sirens only lived in
legend or the imagination of poets.
There were and are, however, various
kinds of aquatic mammals which might
have been mistaken for the semi-human
beings of folklore. One of these was
Steller's rhytina, belonging to the order
of the Sirenia and called, unromantically,
"Steller's Sea Cow".
As much as 24 feet in length, with a
small head on a rather heavy, dark
brown, sometimes white-spotted or
whiti-striped body, it made its home in
the islands along the east coast of Kam¬
chatka, Bering Island and Copper Island.
Slow, defenceless, trusting and edi¬
ble it represented an ideal prey! Two
naturalists, Bering and Steiler, (1741)
discovered it and then in their wake came
sailors, who landed in the islands
slaughtering and exterminating the ani¬
mals with incredible rapidity. Some
men spent eight or nine months on these
shores collecting provisions for the rest
of their voyage.
Within nine years not a single rhytina
remained in Copper Island. After 1763
ships came more rarely to Bering Island,
no doubt because the stock of meat was
running out; the few animals left were
not worth the voyage. The species
became extinct at the end of the
eighteenth or the beginning of the 19th
century.
15
