CENTENARIAN CHOIR, formed by the oldest members of the Abkhazian Folk Art Club in the Soviet Republic of Georgia, gives many
concerts. Members wear Georgian national costume. Out of Georgia's total population of four million, well over 1,000 people are known to
have reached the age of ninety or more. Of these, two-thirds are women. Some of Georgia's many patriarchs are shown on opposite page.

MAN'S LIFESPAN:
A ROUND CENTURY
Every man wants to live a long
and fruitful life. To put off old
age, to live "forever", has been
man's dream all through history.
Many a myth and tale of yore tells
us of his search for the "fountain of
eternal youth." In our day the prob¬
lem of longevity has attracted the
attention of science, too, and a whole
new branch of science, called geron¬
tology, has arisen. The International
Association of Gerontology formed
after World War II has already held
four international congresses to dis¬
cuss metabolism, the changes caus¬
ed by senescence, and regimes of
work for persons of advanced age.
The last of these conferences took
place in Italy last year.
The first theory of senescence to
be based on scientific experiment was
advanced in the last century by the
Russian scientist Ivan Mechnikov,
who showed that the prolongation of
life was possible and indicated prac¬
tical ways of influencing individual
28
by Professor
G. Z. Pitskhelauri
development in order to prevent
premature senility and death.
In the Soviet republic of Georgia
alone (population 4,000,000) there live
1,060 persons of 90 and over. Of
these, two-thirds are women. The
higher death rate among men is
apparently due to arterio-sclerosis,
heart diseases, a greater proneness to
accidental injuries, and so on.
Recently the Georgian Institute of
Industrial Hygiene and Occupational
Diseases carried out a detailed study
of one thousand long-lived persons in
the Soviet republic of Georgia. The
results are revealing.
Georgia is a country richly endow¬
ed by nature. The humid sub-tropi
cal area along the picturesque Black
Sea Coast gives way in the central
and eastern parts of the republic to
fertile plains. Dotting the Caucasian
mountains are sub-alpine and alpine
meadows and dense forests. The
pleasant climate, the great number
of health resorts and mineral springs
of medicinal value, tend to favour
longevity.
Of no less importance as a factor
making for longevity is work. It is
naive to think that the best way to
keep healthy is to do no work; the
facts prove that idle men never live
to a ripe old age. Besides giving a
sense of vitality, work helps to pre¬
serve a man's strength and his lively
interest in things. This is strikingly
apparent in the old men and women
still working on collective farms or
elsewhere, tending orchards, livestock
or poultry.
One of the most curious features
brought out by the investigation is
that nearly all of the thousand aged

The Unesco Courier October 1958
persons studied have been long marri¬
ed 50 to 80 years. Family life
apparently is conducive to health and
longevity. Most of the members of
the group have numerous progeny.
Only 24 of the thousand have never
had any children. 'About 200 have
had up to 10 children, and 35 up to
15 and over.
A tranquil life among the members
of their own family, good care and
normal hygienic conditions help these
people to preserve their mental and
physical strength.
None of the group suffers from
physical ailments. Most of them were
never sick in their lives; quite a few
never underwent medical examination
before this study was made.
More than 300 of the old people
studied look much younger than their
age. Many have retained good eye¬
sight. Only two old men were found
to have cataracts, 72 wear glasses.
Only 36 complained of deafness; the
rest have normal or only slightly
impaired hearing.
Most were found to have healthy
nervous systems and a good memory,
especially of events long past. Poor
memory was found only in 40 cases.
Honey and beans
for longer life ?
Another point of interest is diet.
As a- rule, the old folk studied
have three or four meals a day,
and at regular hours. They rarely
overeat. No special diet is observed:
meat, vegetables and dairy foods are
all included, as well as the bean called
"lobio" and hominy, cheese and
yoghourt. No more than 25 restricted
themselves to a dairy and vegetable
diet.« Some of them consider that
plentiful quantities of fruit, grapes
and honey account for their health
and long life. Most of them show
great moderation in drinking and"
smoking.
Study of the working and living
conditions of the long-lived citizens
of Georgia suggests the conclusion
that any man can postpone old age
by regulating his life sensibly.
The immediate task of public
health services in all countries, I
would say, is to register all their long-
lived citizens and keep them under
medical observation. Periodic medi¬
cal examinations of the aged is
important and should include exami¬
nation of their mental powers, analy¬
sis of their habits and interests and
of their experience. Such a study
would make it possible to outline
comprehensive medical and prophy¬
lactic measures calculated to prolong
the life and physical activity of the
aged.
A lifespan of a round century is
not a dream; it is a practical pos¬
sibility.
Aged 94 and formerly an expert hunter
and horse trainer, he now poses as model
for artists working in the Academy of Arts.
Though he is now aged 125, this ex-
forester from a collective farm can usually
be found hard at work in his garden.
Nearing his 1 00th birthday, this former
shepherd has many stories to tell of fights
with wild beasts which menaced his flocks.
At 124 years of age he still has all his
teeth. Former shepherd and blacksmith,
he has now a new occupation : gardening.
Georgians are great horsemen and horse
trainers. This is the job to which this
92 year-old has devoted nearly all his life.
For ail his 93 years, this surgeon still
works in a hospital. He receives a govern¬
ment pension, but prefers to keep active.
29
