THRIVING INDUSTRY in Neve Avot, an
Israeli village for the aged, is carpet weaving.
For most of the weavers this is a skill
they learned since coming to the village.

Israel
A NEW TREND
AWAY FRO
OLD-AGE HOMES
When Israel became an independent
nation ten years ago, it had no old
age problem. The average age of
the Jewish population was low, for it was
a pioneering country and those who flocked
to it were mostly young people who came
to study and train. Those who had come
in the early stages of the Zionist movement
and had grown old in the country were
well integrated either they continued to
work or else they were well taken care of
by their children or the settlements they
had helped to found. The handful of
destitute Jews who were drawn to the Holy
Land by their religious fervour and had
neither the physical ability nor the inclin¬
ation to earn their bread, were maintained
to a large extent by orthodox religious
groups from abroad individually or in
institutions which respected and admired
them; for were they not praying daily by
the Wailing Wall for the redemption of all
the world's Jewry?
Then with the tidal wave of immigration
that marked Israel's first years of state-
26

The Unesco Courier October 1958
hood, the picture changed. Jews streamed
to the State of their Fathers that received
them so joyously in their hundreds of
thousands. These were not hand-picked
pioneers, but entire Jewish communities.
In the displaced person's camps of Europe,
in the slums of Near and Middle Eastern
cities and in the far-off farming villages of
Afghanistan, Yemen, Morocco and Turkey,
Jews roused themselves and applied to be
taken to Israel.
It was only natural that such unrestricted
immigration should include a dispro¬
portionate percentage of destitute, aged
and sick or a combination of all three.
For those who had been a burden to their
families and communities sought the
economic and physical safety which seemed
to be offered by the Promised Land. The
demographic composition of the population
changed drastically: the proportion of the
very young and the very old grew, and
that of the working age-groups shrank,
which means that less people had to
produce for a larger number of dependents.
The demographic composition of the
population of Israel has only changed to
resemble that of many well-established
Western countries (Holland, Italy, Canada
for instance); but the period in which this
took place was so short that often it gave
the authorities no breathing space.
More often than not immigrants could
neither accomodate nor support the aging
parents they brought along with them. The
majority of them were unskilled in any
trades or professions and also lacked work
discipline. But to help the young take
root in their new country, care had to be
provided for their aged relations.
The first . solution proposed and also
the most costly was the establishment of
homes for the aged. The American Joint
Distribution Committee, (the world-wide
Jewish rescue and support organization),
came to Israel to help absorb the needy,
sick and aged immigrants. It established
a wide network of institutions for new¬
comers above the age of 65 (60 in the case
Rudi Weissenstein
TRAINED PHARMACIST, but unable
to obtain a post because of his age, this
immigrant ¡s now able to do a useful job in a
pharmacy attached to an old folks' home.
of women) where, entirely free of charge,
they could live out their lives carefree and
productively, sheltered from all physical or
mental worries. Various other semi-official
and private organizations also established
homes for those aged who did not qualify
for '"Joint" care veteran residents and
those who could not be 'classified as needy.
Moreover, the Organization of Central
European Immigrants has established a
novel apartment block for elderly working
persons, where they find independent life
in self-contained modern flats but where,
if needs be, they are taken care of by a
house-mother. There, even an ailing octa-
genarian can live on his own since he
knows that if he needs help he has only
to press a bellpush.
However, with the continued growth of
the higher age groups by immigration as
well as the natural growth of a people
with a high life expectancy (Israel's is
among the highest in the world) removal
to old age homes was not the solution,
especially so as in all advanced countries
there is a movement away from institution¬
alizing and towards the maintenance of a
closely-knit community in which the elder
citizens find their place.
National Old Age insurance, legislated
in 1953, which began supporting the aged
in 1957 with monthly cash allowances,
provides a very minimum subsistence for
old people of pensionable age who were
born after September, 1866. Immigrants of
a higher age, who do not qualify under
this insurance project, are supported by a
fund, contributed to in equal proportions,
by the Welfare Ministry, the Jewish Agency
for Israel which brought them to the
country, and the '"Joint" on the justified
assumption that thus, the demands for beds
in homes for aged would shrink.
Statistics show that of Israel's 140,000
citizens aged 60 or above, 35,000 (including
members of the Arab minorities) draw
insurance pensions; another 7,000 get
special support from the three agencies,
and 6,500 are accommodated in old age
homes (over 71% in "Joint" centres).
In addition an organization sponsored by
the government has set up workshops for
people above the age at which labour
exchanges would assign them to jobs. In
carpentry, cobbling and other shops for
men and handicraft and sewing workshops
for women, about 3,000 elderly persons
earn their keep. ..But because of the diffi¬
culties of marketing the products, this
scheme has to be ¡heavily subsidized.
A new project designed to restore the
aged to their communities concerns able-
bodied couples of a higher age group, who
are provided with small furnished apart¬
ments, together with, tools to enable them
to work at their trades. They are housed
on the ground floors of large apartment
blocks where they can live out their lives
normally in a normal neighborhood, and
where they take an active part in com¬
munity life instead of reminiscing with
their contemporaries in old age homes
about times long gone. Here, the burden
falls on the municipality. It grants this
new kind of citizen free services and utilities
and helps find work. Its welfare worker
has to be their constant guide.
The municipality is also responsible
though other authorities, also extend
material help and guidance in the very
new and successful project that has helped
enormously in integrating elder citizens:
clubs. Together with the old age pensions
which provide security from want, clubs
have made the decisive difference for
Paul Goldman
PROFESSIONAL TAILOR from Poland is
82, but still puts in a full day's work In the
sewing room at Neve Avot, either repairing
clothes or making new suits to measure.
thousands of aged between uselessly whiling
away long days and getting an enormous
amount of pleasure out of the last years of
otherwise often joyless lives. At daily get-
togethers, aged men and women spend
several interesting and productive hours
which on the one hand stimulate them into,
active community life and on the other
provide them with a small additional rev¬
enue in work projects handicrafts, garden¬
ing and the like. These neighborhood
clubs bring people together, and, where
they are attached to old age homes, they
tear down the invisible walls that had arisen
between the institutions and the communi¬
ties around them.
In clubs, the aged have found a kind
of raison d'être. They make friends; they
get a decent meal; for a while they are
away from the overcrowded home and
nagging children and grand-children; they
have a share in cultural life, are shown
movies and are taken on short trips; they
have counsellors with whom to discuss
their particular problems.
Clubs are not restricted to any particular
stratum of Israel's diversified community:
well-established "old-timers" from Central
Europe have a club in Haifa in which the
men play chess, read the daily papers (in
their German mother-tongue) and have a
big library; and the old ladies exchange
cooking recipes and shopping tips. Arab
residents of Acre were provided with a
club, next to the centre for aged Jews,
and it did not take long before members
went visiting each other and organizing
joint activities for both clubs.
What is needed is yet more clubs, in
city, town and village, for they have provid¬
ed proof if ever there was a doubt that
this is the kind of project that makes life
worth living at the "golden age." Cancella¬
tion letters regularly reach the "Joint"
from former applicants for places in homes
for aged. They explain that in the clubs
they have found what they had searched
for, thus confirming that what the old man
and the old women need is company in
their normal community, rather than a
sheltered existence.
27
