A SMOOTHER WAY FOR BRITAIN'S
COLOURED IMMIGRANTS
by Hebe Spaull
Visitors paying their first visit to London
after an interval of several years are often
asked what differences they note. Almost
invariably they refer to the great numbers of
coloured workers to be seen in the streets. It is
possible that the porter who carries their luggage,
the 'bus conductor who collects the fares and the
station attendant who signals the departure of the
underground train are all coloured. This strik¬
ing development has taken place during the past
few years. The British Transport Commission
alone is now employing tens of thousands oi
coloured workers.
How have the new arrivals fitted into the
pattern of British life? In view of recent racial
conflicts the answer to' this question has more than
academic interest.
It would be idle to pretend that the mass
immigration of so many coloured workers, nearly
all from the West Indies, has not been accompanied
by serious problems and complexities. As their
arrival has coincided with a period of full em¬
ployment there has not been the resentment that
their presence might otherwise have encountered.
On the other hand, their arrival has also coincided
with an unprecedented shortage of housing
accommodation and this has undoubtedly been a
complicating feature in the process of integration.
The Trade Union most affected by the employ¬
ment of coloured workers in the United Kingdom is
the National Union of Railwaymen. The Union's
policy is, of course, opposed to discrimination in
any shape or form and their aim is to see these
workers fully integrated into the British Trade
Union movement. Aware that some prejudice
based on misunderstanding was bound to exist on
either side, the London District Council of the
N.U.R. recently held a "get-together" of members,
to which coloured railwaymen were especially invit¬
ed to thrash out some of the misunderstandings.
About two hundred railwaymen responded to the
invitation, of which number about fifty Were white.
Some illuminating facts were brought to light in¬
dicating as the coloured workers were the
first to emphasize that not all the causes of
misunderstanding were on one side.
One of the things complained of by the coloured
workers was the situation in regard to housing.
They claimed that as soon as it was known that
accommodation was required for coloured tenants
prices tended to rise fantastically. But and here
the coloured workers were very fair this exploita¬
tion was not only carried on by some white
landlords. Coloured owners of property were
often just as bad.
One complaint was that although Jamaica !
from which the majority come is a British
territory, very few of their fellow-workers in Britain
seemed to have any idea of the difficulties that had
forced them to leave their sunny land. Few
people, they claimed, knew of the conditions in
which they were now living. They were frequently
compelled to crowd into single rooms because of
the excessive rents, with the result that the beds
were seldom empty, those on night duty occupying
them during the day.
Having few social contacts, street corners and
the windows of gaily lit shops were often their main
attractions. This, they stated, sometimes led to
complaints from white people that coloured men
were loitering intent on mischief. Their sense oí
homelessness and herding together was something
they often felt deeply and they thought they were
entitled to a little patience while they got adjusted
to new circumstances.
One of the striking things that emerged from the
conference was the fact that some of the grievances
brought forward by the coloured workers as
examples of colour prejudice proved to be due to
other causes. Sometimes people showed stupid
prejudice against the newcomers, but the prejudice
turned out to be identical with a general suspicion
of all "foreigners," white and English-speaking ones
as well. In fact a lot of their problems were those
which confronted any newcomers and had nothing
to do with colour.
When one coloured worker gave as an example
of colour prejudice the fact that his foreman had
shouted at him: "Get on with it, you lazy bligh¬
ter!," he was immediately assured by white
workers present that they were frequently bawled
at in similar if not stronger terms. This was but
one of a number of -minor grievances which
proved to be much less serious than had been
supposed.
An N.U.R. official said it would be good for
coloured workers to stand for some of the jobs in
their Union branches, so emphasizing their solidar¬
ity of interests with the other members as well as
extending their "off duty" contacts.
The London rail-workers proved what sociologists
have long claimed namely, that prejudice in social
relationships is usually based on ignorance and that,
given the will on either side to consider each
others' problems, prejudice can give way to
understanding, and suspicion to sympathy.
30
