'DO IT YOURSELF'
SCIENCE BOOK
"H ow can I teach science?" asked the
young teacher in an Australian Bush
school. "'There's nothing here to teach
with; no test tubes, no balances, no glass tubes,
neither acids nor alkalis, no material whatever!"
"Quite right,1' agreed the visiting school inspector,
"and there's no air, no soil, no sky, no water, no
rocks, no light, no heat, no sound' and no
energy."
The young teacher was reminded of his
"innocent ex-studentship" experience after read¬
ing the Unesco Source Book for Science Teaching
recently published by Unesco (1). As he put it,
"this book leaves the teacher without any alibi or
any excuse [for not teaching science] except lack
of energy."
It does so by offering practical proof that no
teacher anywhere in the world need be
handicapped because he lacks the "proper"
equipment for presenting science to his class.
Material for making laboratory equipment exists
everywherein the home, around , the school
itself, in the junkyard, at the food market, in the
garage and in the countryside, to mention but a
few sources. Science teaching facilities and
resources are all around us and just waiting to be
made use of. Some examples: gravel pits and
stone quarries (evolution of the earth's surface)
woods (animal and plant life, climate and
seasons); buildings under construction (how
materials are used, technical installations) to
name only a few. Then there are easily-arrang¬
ed school facilities: science corners, aquaria,
animal cages, weather stations and museum
shelves. '
Into 220 pages the Unesco Source Book for
Science Teaching has managed to cram enough
material to satisfy the tastes and needs of
(1) Obtainable through Unesco's National Distribu¬
tors listed on page 25. Price: S2.50; 12/6 stg; 600 frs.
!M^^"'
$m Unesco
Iff source book
mm for science
^ teaching
"z~
vBhhb.
ÈÊUsMtmÊmW^M
«y-« b|k JK
CONTINUED ON NEXT PACE
21

'DO IT YOURSELF' SCIENCE BOOK (Continued)
teachers all over the world who clamour for ways to plan
and carry out science programmes in which the subject
is experienced and not just learned.
The greater part is taken up with suggestions for
making science equipment and science experiments with
the simplest of materials from pegs and cotton reels to
bottles and saucepans, from nails and needles, to tooth¬
brushes and vinegar.
There are directions for making general pieces of
equipment such as balances, heat sources, filters, pumps,
tweezers, ring stands. Experiments and material for the
study of plants are described. Directions for the study of
animals tell how to make a collecting cage, a wormery,
homes for spiders and ants, aquariums. Astronomy,
meteorology, hydrology, machines, mass and force, heat,
sound, light, electricity and magnetism are covered by a
wide range of simple, inexpensive apparatus and revealing
experiments. Every item is clearly illustrated.
The prototype for this publication was a small volume,
Suggestions for Science Teachers in Devastated Countries,
written by Professor J.P. Stephenson of the City of London
School, and sponsored by Unesco to meet the needs of
teachers in places where science teaching equipment was
in short supply.
While it proved useful in devastated areas, this book
had an even greater success in regions where there had
previously been little or no equipment, particularly in parts
of Asia and Latin America. Unesco science-teaching
experts sent on missions to these areas were able to make
and to try out the materials and experiments suggested in
the Stephenson book. It was like a snowball of ideas
which rolled around the world gathering new substance on
the way. From Peru to Thailand, experts and local
teachers set to work to find other materials and devise
experiments more suitable for tropical regions.
The work of these field experts, together with the
Stephenson book, has produced an array of simple
equipment and science experiments which has now been
assembled in the present Unesco Source Book for Science
Teaching. The original book of suggestions for science
teachers went through several editions and was translated
into French, Spanish, Chinese, Thai and Arabic. The
new volume has already appeared in English and French
and arrangements are being made for its translation into
Spanish, German, Turkish, Thai, Hindi, Singhalese, Tamil
and Indonesian. This would seem to justify the U.S. re¬
view, Scientific American, in its contention that "Unesco's
little guide will make conscientious science teachers from
Ghana to Georgia happier, and their students more
knowledgeable."
We publish on these pages a few of the 700 or so
experiments made with "'junk shop" laboratory material
which are described in the Unesco Source Book.
How to prove that metals
conduct heat at different rates
Obtain 6 in. lengths of several metals.
The bars should be of approximately
the same diameter. Punch holes in the
side of a tripod that has been made
from a tin can. Insert the metal bars so
that they touch at the centre of the can.
Attach a tack or nail to the outside end
of each bar with some paraffin. Place
an alcohol flame under the tripod so that
it touches the inner edge of each bar
equally. Observe the order in which
the tacks fall from the outer end of the
bars.
How to make projector for
coloured pictures
A projector for coloured pictures can be
made from simple materials as shown in
the diagram. Use a box slightly longer
than the focal length of the lens to be
used. For most lenses the box should
be between 12 and 24 in. Jong- Use a
small candy box as a light shield for the
lens as shown. Connect two lamp
sockets in parallel and put one on either
side of the shield. Use gummed tape to
fasten down the front portion of the top
of the larger box and hinge the rear
portion.
22
Hold picture
upside down
and brinq ir
in ho focus
Place a picture upside down in the
back of the box, focusing by moving it
back and forth until a clear image
appears on the wall or screen in front
of the projector.
Dancing figures with static
electricity
Secure an aluminium soup plate, about
1 in. deep, and a glass plate to cover
Fur or toft leather Glan plate
Aluminium
plate '
Cut figuret
from rmue paper
it. Cut some little doll figures from
thin tissue paper, as shown in the
drawing. You may also cut out some
other figures like boxers. The figures
should be just a little shorter than the
depth of the pan. Put the figures on
the bottom of the pan, cover with the
glass. Rub the top surface of 1116 glass
with a piece of fur or soft leather and
watch the dance.
A static horse race
Cut small horses from a piece of folded
paper so that they will stand on a table.
Fountain pen
Pencil
Paper P"1 out
chips of bolonce
by the pen
Rub a hard plastic comb or fountain pen
with fur and notice that you can pull the
paper horses along the table. With
several horses, you can have a horse race.
A trick with surface tension
Secure a used tin can and make five
holes in it with a nail. The holes should
be very near the bottom of the can and
about one-fifth of an inch apart. Now
fill the can with water and observe that
the water comes from the can in five
streams. Pinch the jets of water to¬
gether with your thumb and forefinger
and you can make one stream from five.
If you brush your hand across the holes

in the can the water will again flow in
five separate streams.
should cause the one on the table to
break in two parts.
The Unesco Courier. February 1958
heart while another holds the ends of
the long tubes in his ears. Heart sounds
will be heard very clearly though, of
Y
Making a simple reflecting
telescope
A simple reflecting telescope can be
made from a concave mirror obtained
either from an automobile headlight or a
shaving mirror. The mirror is arranged
in a wooden box of suitable size in such
a way that it can be tilted at different
angles. An upright made of wood is
attached to the box so that its angle may
also be varied. Two short focus lenses
are fixed in corks which are then placed
in a short length of mailing tube as an
eye-piece and attached to the wood
upright exactly at the focal distance
away from the mirror.
Break a stick with inertia
Secure a small stick 7 to 8 in. in
length. If no other stick is available a
lead pencil will do. Fold a newspaper
and place it near the edge of a table.
Place the stick under the newspaper on
the table and let about half the stick
extend over the edge. Strike the stick
a sharp blow with another. Inertia
Some simple experiments on
balance
With a sharp knife cut a slice of some
raw vegetable or modelling clay about
Table
Raw vegetable
or
modelling ctay Pencil
one inch thick. Punch the point of a
lead pencil through the slice until it
protrudes about one inch on the other
side. Insert a dinner fork in the slice
of vegetable as shown in the diagram.
Now place the pencil point on the edge
of a table and adjust the parts until
balance is obtained; then give the long
end of the pencil a little tap.
A simple microscope
Make a single turn of copper wire
around a nail to form a loop. Dip the
loop into water and look through it.
You will have a microscope like the
earliest ones used. Often such a lens
will magnify four or five times. ;
Making a simple device for
listening to the heart beat
Make a stethoscope and have pupils
use it to listen to the heart action. .
A very satisfactory demonstration
stethoscope can be made from a small
funnel, . a glass T-tube or Y-tube, and
some rubber tubing. Slip a piece of
rubber tubing about 8 in. long over the
tip of the funnel. (Any kind of small
funnel will do, such as a glass labora¬
tory funnel or the kind used to ^ fill
babies' milk bottles.) Insert the T-tube
into the other end of the short piece
of rubber tubing, and attach longer
pieces of tubing to both arms of the
T-tube
To use the stethoscope, have one
pupil hold the funnel firmly over his
Funnel
course, pupils will not be able to inter¬
pret them. A physician uses a stetho¬
scope to see if heart action is normal.
This experiment will naturally lead
into a discussion of the heart and its
importance in maintaining good health.
Apparatus to study lenses
All that is needed for an optical bench
is a firm surface, a method of holding
mirrors and lenses, and a convenient
way of measuring distances.
A metre scale laid flat on the bench
serves as the basis of this simple appa¬
ratus. Wooden blocks, with grooves that
just fit over the scale can be adapted
as holders. A layer of cork or soft
cardboard glued on the top makes it
easy to stick pins, such as object and
search" pins, into each block; strips of ,
tin screwed to the side make convenient
lens holders. A groove in the top of
a block helps to keep the lens in
position, and rubber tubing over the tin
increases the grip.
Light sources and screens can be
improvised with card and torch bulbs
fastened to the blocks. It is worthwhile,
to make complete sets of this apparatus
so that individual work on lenses can
be attempted. The groove is easily
made with a chisel after two sawcuts
have been made. Other experiments,
for instance on interference and diffrac¬
tion, can be attempted.
23
