When can they
get married ?
A U.N. inquiry
In Japan, as in a great many other countries, the
free consent of both intending spouses is
necessary for the validity of the marriage. A
Japanese man can take a wife when he has reached
the age of 18, and a Japanese woman can get
married at the age of 16, but Japan's Civil Code lays
down that a minor having limited civil capacity
may contract marriage only with the consent of the
person who exercises parental authority over him
(father or mother as the case may be), or of the
person who is his guardian or trustee.
The minimum age of marriage varies widely in
different parts of the world. A young girl living in
Ireland, Bolivia or Swaziland may legally marry at
the age of twelve; in Denmark, Czechoslovakia or
Ethiopia she must wait until she is 18. Boys in
Burma, Chile and Spain may marry at fourteen,
but in the German Federal Republic, Peru and
Sweden they may not marry before they are 21.
In some countries, particularly in Asia and Africa,
there are no restrictions and young people are al¬
lowed to marry as soon as they reach the age of
puberty, according to traditional or religious prac¬
tice. Even in some of the more socially and econo¬
mically advanced nations, girls may marry at the
age of twelve and boys at fourteen.
' Preferably not under
fourteen years of age '
A study on the subject made by the United
Nations was discussed recently in Geneva by
the U.N. Commission on the Status of Women.
The meeting had before it a recommendation on
"the desirability of free consent of both parties, and
the establishment of a minimum age for marriage,
preferably not less than fourteen years."
According to the U.N. study, differences exist not
only between one country and another but also
within certain countries with a federal system of
government. In Australia, for instance, legislation
in some states sets the marriageable age of a girl
at sixteen, while in others the age is twelve. Similar
variations are found between the provinces of
Canada and the states of the United States.
A number of countries, among them the U.S.S.R.
and Yugoslavia, require only the consent of the
parties to be married, assuming they have reached
the legal age. Young people in most of Western
Europe, Latin America, the British Commonwealth
and the United States may marry before the speci¬
fied age with the consent of their parents or guar¬
dians. In some areas, parents or guardians of the
prospective bride must give their consent but this
is not required for the groom. In yet others, the
consent of parents or guardians is considered a
major requirement for marriage.
The Unesco Courier. July 1958
CEREMONIAL COSTUME worn by Noriko Kamimura at her marriage calls
for dressing session which is almost a ceremony in itself. Above, expert cos-
turner ties a pink naga-jiban, or long under kimono with a stiff ribbon sash.
Bride's mother, wearing a ceremonial kimono, looks on proudly. After Noriko
has donned bridal costume an obi, or embroidered sash, is wound twice over
the costume and tied in the back (below) with an immense butterfly knot.
photos by Takamasa Inamura. © Camera Press Ltd.
