GARDEN OF PEACE
Keystone
STRANGELY - SHAPED ROCKS, a brook, green hummocks, waterfalls, fruit trees and pineswith these elements Isamu
Noguchi has shaped a Japanese garden of distinctive character with a reverie-provoking landscape for the headquarters of Unesco.
The visitor to Unesco House who leaves the Conference
building and follows the long gallery leading to the dele¬
gates' patio enters a new hemisphere and emerges into
the Orient. Here ¡s a Japanese garden with its invitation to
meditation. This is the work of Isamu Noguchi, the American
sculptor and landscape gardener (born in Los Angeles of a Japa¬
nese father and an American mother).
Though designed in the traditional Japanese manner by
Noguchi, the garden is entirely modern in inspiration, and
bears the original stamp of the sculptor's own Ingenuity. Dwarf
trees and 80 tons of rocks, great and small (selected for
32
their sculptural beauty and shipped directly from Japan as
a gift from the Japanese government) a brook, a pond, a
bridge, green hummocks all these form a reverie- provoking
landscape.
From Japan too came three gardeners to help Noguchi in
laying out the garden. One of them brought with him trees
to decorate itmagnolia, cherry, plum, bamboowhich were
a gift from UNESCO well-wishers in Japan.
For .this souvenir Issue of The Unesco Courier, Isamu
Noguchi explains the ideas which have given such a distinctive
character to his garden :

© Paul Almasy, Paris
PEACE is engraved in Japanese on a giant rock weighing
eight tons from which water cascades into a series of falls.
My original commission was to design the upper patio. The lower
garden came about following my suggestion that this area would be
enhanced by the inclusion of greenery which could be gained by including
the adjoining sunken area as a part of a general plan. This is how the
roadway came into being as a means of achieving this interrelation
of great changes in level.
It serves the same purpose as the Japanese veranda (roka) for viewing
the garden. In theatrical terms, it is like the "flowery path" or
bridge of entry (hanamichi).
The lower garden is often referred to as the "Japanese garden".
In my estimation, it would be almost more correct to say that the
truly Japanese part is that which is least obviously so.
It is true that I have paid a more obvious homage to the Japanese
garden In the lower area. This follows the nature of the commission,
and because of the very generous gift of all the stones from Japan.
To learn but still to control, not to be overwhelmed by so strong a
tradition, ¡s a challenge. My effort was to find a way to link that ritual
of rocks which comes down to us through the Japanese from the dawn
of history to our modern times and needs. In Japan the worship of
stones changed into an appreciation of nature. The search for the
essence of sculpture seems to carry me to the same end.
This is an ambulatory garden, the enjoyment of which is enhanced
by walking In it whereby one perceives the relative value of all things.
The raised paved area in the centre of the lower garden recalls the
upper patio. One arrives on it and departs from it againwith time
barriers of stepping stones betweenit is the land of voyage, the place
for dancing and music which may be viewed from all around the garden
and from all levels of the surrounding buildings.
I have included two very old chosubachi or water basins In deference
to the quality of age (shibui) which is so much a part of the Japanese
garden. Everything else was both designed and executed by me.
The UNESCO garden does not attempt to reproduce the old or the
traditional, excepting In allusion and as a point of departure. A con¬
sideration of the tea ceremony resulted in one arrangement of seats
on the upper level.
Paul Almasy, Paris
DELEGATES' PATIO between the Conference and Secret¬


ariat buildings forms the upper level of the Japanese garden.
l/^ev V%%. *»/ AsC<r~VK «sAv
UNESCO - Berretty
TREE-PLANTING operations in the garden being super¬
vised by Isamu Noguchi (pointing, with his back to camera).
33
